C7475 R38835 18176928 106894
THE Loyalists Reasons FOR His giving OBEDIENCE, and Swearing ALLEGIANCE, to the PRESENT GOVERNMENT: As being Oblieged thereto; by, (it being Foun∣ded on) the Laws of GOD, Nature, Nations, and Civil: And seing, hereby, Justice preceeds Advantage, and Right Possession, and Rule Precedents. WHEREIN Are Answered (by Prevention) all the Objections of Dissenters, according to their own uncontrovertible Principles. Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee. Luke 19.22. Nihil affirmo, nihilque ab ullo credi velim, nisi quod, ipsi, evidens & invicta ratio persuadebit. Cartes: Prin: in fiu. By F: G: Gent. Edinburgh, Printed by J: Reid: Anno 1689.
THE PUBLISHER to the Unbyassed DISSENTER. THere have appeared many Pieces, of late, but none of this Theme; which viz. de∣monstrates, that no Arguments, moved against any Revolution that hath ever hapned in the World, militate against the present Government: for, where, the least scruple might occur, Provi∣dence hath ordered such Singularity of Right and Fact, that each particular Man must find his own Opinion (as to Conscience of Obedience) whether subtilly speculative, or solidly practical, in its Establishment. So you (if Pious or Wise) are put to a necessity of making a new Enquiry; since your pre-conceived Informations from Sal∣masius, &c. touch not the point, à disparatis enim, nulla est illatio. In this, Law must determine your incertainty: for, Divines, con∣tending, have, as their Canon, the Law of GOD and Nature; Princes have, moreover, the Law of Nations; and Subjects, besides these three, their Civil Laws: whence, all Mortals, have no other Rule of their Opinions and Actions. I fear, by your Actions, you have not had leisure to dive accurately in your own Principles: For there can be no RefinedThis word comes from Loy i.e. Law: Hence Loyaute, i.e. Lega∣lity, and disloyal, i.e. illegal: So Al∣legi-ance is an O∣bedience accord∣ing to Law; and goes not a foot farther; fit vessal∣lus lgus nihil de∣be Domi∣no Ligo ultra id quod us Feudale injungit. Loyalist, (i.e. who conforms Will and Actions to the Laws) un∣less he be a polite Lawyer, (i.e. who exactly knows them) all others (tho blindly zealous) are but dull and Bastard Ones. Therefore, I
have published this Essay (though destinate, by the Author, only for some private Friends, whereby you're assured of ingenuity) since, there∣in, you have an elaborate Illustration of all, even remotest, difficulties in this matter. POSTULATA. 1. ALL you can require, is that James 7:2: ceased to be King; without be∣ing De-posed by his Subjects. Then 2. The Law of Nations is the sole Judge, (who hath Right, or not?) betwixt Sove∣raign Princes. Because 3. They all have agreed that it should be the Polemon of their Differences, as a Common pre-Contract, and res hactenus judicata. Hence 4. K: J: (By that antecedent Consent in it) hath voluntarly renounced his Right (posito¦co casu in which it transferred Right from him) and conferred the same on K: W: and Q: M: Consequently 5. No Municipal Law could impede (as to that case) its Effect and Decision: since the Laws of the great Society of Mankind are unalterable by any lesser part of that Society; especially when the Body politick consents that it should be soAll La∣wyersare express in this, when the question is betwixt two, ot subjectio the same Authori∣ty: parti∣cularly of Scot∣land, jus Gentium cum exte∣ n nino servand̄u non obstan te quocun∣que Regni Statuto: Craig: de Feud: pag: 58. For the Law or Nations, (as Supe∣riour) can no more be changed by Muni∣cipal Law (being inferior) than Man can change the Law of God; or private Subjects publick Statutes.. Finally, 6. In explication of these, please, to ponder maturely the Marginal Notes and Citations: and even then, ne Judices, nisi tota lege perspecta.
INTRODUCTION. ALL that can render a Government Sacred nd Im∣moveable, viz. Birth-right of Succession as to the rsons, Election of the people as to the time, and Con∣uest of the late K. J's. Right making way for both; con∣enter in the present Establishment. Wherefore the sub∣quent Essay does Demonstrate the manner how Dissn∣ must (even in their own principles) perceive these ree to concurr, and so be obliged in Obedience, there∣to, by the Laws of GOD, Nature, Nations, and Civil. As to the Birth-right in the Persons, and the Peoples oer in Electing, the time of declaring it, take this brief trspect. The Powers are of GodThe Powers are the same (i.e. still of GOD) when in the whole Body, & when con∣tracted (tho with a greater Lustre, as the disper∣sed light to the ) in the Head: just as the hand is the same when. Extended and Folded., (for none other could enserr jus vitae & necis) and were given, first, to Fathers re Families; but since they had Right (for there was o Precept as o the Persons) to transmit, and so amitt, e by consent, there were two (yet subsisting) Funda∣tal Contracts (nam fuit durum pluriumve in idem placi  cnsensus, qui initur tam re quam verbis) in our King∣oms; viz. One PopularThis Centract is distinct and separate from the Rectoral, not only in  and Time, but also in Signal Effects: For by it, (in Elective ngdoms;) after death of the King the People reman Ʋnite, and the asi hath Lawful Authority ver the Minr part in all minations: in a Successive Kingdom, if the Rol  fail, the Kingdom is not dissolved, but the Major part may over∣ the Minr (which would not be without this Ʋnion) in Electing a new yal Family; as also, if the King be Pupil Fatuous or urous, in n∣ting a Tutor or Protector. Where there is no Iopotion of King∣ (as among the Kingdoms of Spain, Germany, Bri ain, &c. watch nsubrdinate) the Right, in these cases, belongs to each: and where etis no Ʋnion of many Families (the whole being one great Family of es, and so no proper Commn wealth) as in the Otom Empe, ce failing this Family would fall to pieces, ut moeme atrea∣, quisque fit capunovae Familiae. and Anterior (for there must  Chapter, e're they can Elect a Bishop) amongst the Fa∣ of Families (Singulorum cum Singulis & Ʋniversis) iging to mutual Union, Comerce, and Defence, ueby they became a Body Politick: another Rectoral  Posterior betwixt that body Politick Qua tale, or is
Major part (SingulosHence also, is the tacit Con∣tract of Protecti∣on & Sub¦jection in Incolis, who are not Born. Subjects. & Ʋniverses) and one Soveraign as Head thereof; whereby it was obliged and the Crown was provided to him, and as immediatly to the person should be (eo deficiente) next of his Blood and habile, is to himself; as to so many Heirs of Entail. We had many Enemies about, and contentions, within us, and the stron∣ger bore down the weak; wherefore the cause, end, mean∣ing, and tenor (Taciti & expressi eadem vis est) of this last Contract must have been to protect us from Abroad, and distribute right Impartially to all at Home; in fulfilling of both which (and so the King's part of this Contract) the Laws were necessarly intended to be the Standard and Rule (for there is no other just Norma Agendorum, erge quod inesse debet, praesumitur) but to put that beyond doubt, Free Immemorial Consuetude (optima Interpres) and the Laws for the Coronation Oaths (by which the King is so∣lemnly married to his Kingdoms) declare and prove the governing us by Law to be our Constitution; yea, if for∣merly otherwayes, in so far, innovate it; as being a new Contract of King and People (Lex est communis Reipublica sponsio) and posteriora derogant prioribusSo all other con∣tracts may be entred in, explai∣ned, yea altered, &  pro¦ven, ∣o by Word and write but Fact and Deed, for Acts are no less evidence of consent then express paction. Hence, who can deny b our first, or last, Agreement was, that our K's should make, (and cons∣quently unmake) no Laws and impose no Taxes but in Parliament; a should Govern according to these Laws made in parliament. Whence th is the Essential form and kind, and so the Fundamental Law and Constit∣tion, (as to the King's part of the Rectoral Contract) of our Government Hence if a King emitt and execute Edicts, which (in effect) annul th Constitution, and so the contract (as K.J. did) he annuls thereby his rig therein, Nh enim nullae sunt affectiones. This is clearly decided by  Sctch parliament, and that when it had the effect of changing Fundam∣tals under consideration: V: Acts fer the Ʋnion of both Kingdoms.. Hence tho a King break (by Notorious injuries) entire∣ly his part of this Rectoral Contract with one or the Mi∣nor part of his Subjects; (tho they be, in Conscience, freed from their's, and so may withdraw, and subject themselves to another Soveraign, who, Jure Belli & pro∣prio may vindicateHence appears, that Neighbouring Princes have right to vindicate  injuries done to the persecuted flying to them. their right if hindred to dispose o their Estates) yet the Popular Contract with the Major-par (who cannot Rebel [by assisting the Minor] in that case since the Rectoral Contract, with them ut cum toto, re∣mains entire) makes it High Treason against the State (and consequently the King who is its chief Member) to ruin its Peace, or the Order of publick Judgments, by Resist¦ance: Yea, moreover, if after a total breach of his par even with the whole or Major part; it be known to them and they be in Capacity, safely to declare the breaker ex¦cluded;
yet do it not; but freely continue in Social Acts (and so renew Society) with him, they can never de∣clare this newSo the Soveraign cannot pu∣nish the Rebellion (or breach) of Sub∣jects; if he know it, could safely pu∣nish them, yet treats them as Subjects: for that Liberals, as effectually, as the most ample Indemnity; Qui enim vult conse∣quens, vult antecedens sine quo ad consequens pervenirn quit. Contract broken on Violations of the An∣teriour, since Divine and Humane Laws obliges us morally, to keep Sacredly a Valid Contract, Tam re, quam verbis initum. But if a King break his whole part of this Rectoral Con∣tract, with allSo a Prisoner, is not de jure, in the power of his Creditor after Dissolu∣tion of the debt; tho he be forcibly retained, de facto, therein: And a Wife forced to Bed with her Husband (after his Adultery) may pursue Declarator of Divorce; notwithstanding that injurious communion. or the Major part of the Body Politick, (viz. he [tho having power as to the matter, and the Laws determine the manner] Negatively, does not protect from, but positively expose them, to, their most Mortal Enemies Abroad; and does not Justice, but the greatest Injustice to them at Home; and to enervate all Laws which lye in the Road of effectuating both, alters the Con∣stitution it self [by Word, Write, and Deed] from Legal according to, to Despotical above and against, all these Laws) then he ipso facto, loses his right; and they are eo momento, free of their part also; tho metuK. J. Did this most evidently. 1. As to Abroad; exposed us to Forreign Enemies, (Popish Prelates, Jesuits, Priests, French, Irish, Pa∣pists) and so to Forreign Jurisdiction and Powers; which invaded all. 2. At Home; for not complying to Popery and Slavery, all Ranks of Subjects (Clergy, Nob. Gent. Com.) were Racked; all that was dear to them (Relig. Lives, Fort. Libert.) being Attacked: for putting in fit Instruments to that end, all the parts of Government (Eccles. Civil, Mili.) were illegally Administrated; and so, all methods taken (in judge∣ment by unjustice, out with the same by Force) to Consummate our Ʋni∣versal Ruine. 3. K. J perceiving, that Limitted Power and Parliaments (while Existing) were insurmountable Barrs; did Abdicate his Legal Power (as useless to introduce popery and Slavery, and to justifie these Acts preliminarie thereto,) and usurped in its vacant place, an boundless power above Law (which alone, ke knew, was sufficient and so altogether ne∣cessary) whence (Law being the Great Civil Charter, of our Reli. Liv. Fort. & Libert.) be, at one blow destroyed our All. This power, he told his Parliament he would stand by, owned in his Declarations for Suspen∣ding our Laws, and would not govern by any other all the last part of his Reign: But since Britain was too strong to suffer the Execution of that pow∣er in all particulars at once; he proceeded piece male, especially in the important Generals; and so st. annuled (in effect, tho cloked with the Word, Suspended,) the Laws for Religion, and consequently the Grad Propertie of all. 2. Subverted the Constitution of Parliaments (in exclud∣ing in effect the Burrows, and corrupting [by Money, Threats, and Fa∣vours other Members, to gain the major part) because they are the ence of the happiness and safety of all. But finding this would not do the Work (when once the Signal of what was to follow would appear) He 3. keeped up Armies in time of peace, which by the Sword, bore down all, &c. mjori (for
it can neither prejudge them, nor [ex proprio delicto] pro∣fite him) they stop a small time from declaring it. In a word, such Veneration is due to the very shew of Ma∣esty; even in private Contracts; that they have only right to Petition (in the first place) which failing, to Demand by Arms (it all or most concurractively or passively) un∣der the next in Blood; which also failing to declare Quid in re est ab initio For As to the Rectoral Contract; whether the Regal Right, arising from it, was Donatio mera or Donatio sub mode of that mighty Power and prerogative; it ceasethNec va∣let pac∣tum in contrari∣um, quia invitatal delinquen dum, & dolus su∣turus non poest re∣mui. D.D by signal Ingratitude or neglecting the modus: or if a Contract of Society with the Body Politick (whereof that King is intrust∣ed.The nature of Trust or Mandate is in so farr changable as to be Irrevoca¦ble (as in offices he∣retable or ad vitam) yet it cannot admit, that when it is not performed ac∣cording to the Instructions agreed on, betwixt Mandant and Mandatar, (much less when contrary thereto) it should not cease ob Culpam & Do∣lum. Post Deum, nemo arctius ex contractu, praecipue jurato, Rex subditis (quo major sides, eo, arctius vinculum) ac proinde obligatur ad omnia ex ejus essentia ab ipso inseparabile) profluentia, Bruitem: ad l. 31. ss: de Loy: Argt: Heb: c: 1: v: 2: 4: ut: c: 11.9.7. jus enim Dei, Nat: & Gent: cum ob∣stringit. the great Director and Head) total breach of his part, Laberites them from the necessity of persisting therein: Or if a Com-promiss to an Supreme Arbiter's Determinati∣ons; Notorious unexpected Injurie annuls the Submit∣ens Obligation: or which of all these; Allegiance was first given for our Protection (not Destruction,) and so, Cessante causà cessat effectus, causà datà non secuta. Hence, tho all the most Sacred Obstrictions (enjoyned by Laws Di∣vine and Humane, and sworn in Oaths, without any expli∣cite exception) of Inferiour to Superiour be conglomerate in that King: Yet he, as Liege-Lord loses his Superiority by hainous Feudal Delicts against his Vassls; as Father, Si ad Patriam delendam venerit, may be be resistedVid. Cit. Brun. L. 35. Relig. & Sumpt. Fun. ff. by his Sons; as Husband, by Adulterating and Deserting his, frees his Wife from her, Bond and Oath: as Patron amius jus patronatus, by not alimenting his solemnly confirmed Libertins; as Pope ad extra, by enormous Crimes, gives free scope to a General Council; or, Finally, as Master, opens door (at least) to the Altar for his oppressed and almost destroyed Slaves.
As to his Un-kingingThere are two fundamen¦tal hinges of our Go∣vernment and con∣sequent∣ly the King's Right. viz. that all the Laws be made in parlia∣ment and that the King admin∣strate ac∣cording to these laws But K. J. after assuming Despotick power, did exert the same in making (V. G. nothing but a Law could qualifie Papists) and unmaking. (By annuling the Laws Incapacitating Papists: V. G.) Laws without Parliament; and Administrated against all the Laws; and so broke off the two Fundamental Supports of our Government and his own Right: Whence of necessity Subversa basi both fell, (for how could the Government subsist when destroyed; and how could his Power remain after quite Annihilating that by which, and in which, he enjoyed it) and so he Ʋnkinged himself, ipso suo facto. himself ipso jure, & so being felo dese. 1. his entire breaking his part of the Rectoral Con∣tract by changing (quantum in so) tho Form of our Con∣stitution (from Legal to Illegal, Limitted to Ʋnlimitted, the Fist to a Second, juxta Leges to supra & contra Leges, and so Antiqua to Nova) cannot but Annihilate (as to him) its Essence: For Inclusio unius (of these) est exclusio alterius they being Inconsistent (contraria, sinail subsistere non possunt) in eodem individue; Forma dicitur quae Essemiam rei praestatFor the power of the Governors is more important then what persons shall Govern. Forma, ergo, mutata, prope interit rei Substantia; imme, ab esse res videntur quarum corpus manet Forma mutata est, ideo si corruptae redditae sunt vel transfiguratae videntur ab∣esse.L. Julianus Sect. si quis rem ff ad Exhib. Hence, he investing himself with the one (as dif∣ferent from our Constitution as Demecraty, and more important then subjecting us to a Forreign PrinceL. 13. Sect. 1. L. 14. ff de V. S.) Di∣vests himself of the other; and so, 2do. ipso factoAbdicate (inquit Nonius) est abjicere; rem (certis de cansis se removere, nec deinceps agnoscere velle. Abdicare se turela i.e. nolle esse Tuitorem. Abdicatio Unius opponitur Adoptioni al∣terius, Plin. L. 7. C. 45. Hinc Abdicare se Magistratu, est, ante tem∣pus Magistratum deponere; se privatum reddere; L. 2. Sect 13. ff. Or. Jur. unde Senatus de P. Lentulo; cum se praeturà Abdicasset, in Custodiam traderetur. Hence appears how K. J. did Abdicate his only Right, as clearly, as by a writen Renounciation under the great Seal; and it was declared so, by the States accordingly. Ab∣dicats his sole Legal Right, (i.e. voluntarly Rejects and Renounces it) and Deserts the same, (i. e. Rem abticit, eo animo ut eam amplius Agnoscere noluerit) and consequently Forefaults that Right, (i. e. Exauctorats and Denuds him∣self thereof) so that the King and Right dies, and is gone (tho the Person, and Possession remain) and that ipso jure: For, Amittitur, ipso jure, potestas Dominica in Servum quem gravimorbe Decumbentem Dominus neglexitL. 2. ff qui sin: Manumiss. Which Law is called Magna Charta Libertatis Belguae.; Patria po∣testas,
ipso jure, interit Patri filium exponenti, aut expositum scienti; Mater (Tutrix) ad secunda vota transi∣ens, perdit, ipso jure, Tutelam, & omnia privilegia, prioris Matrimonii; quivis Tutor post Cognitionem de suspecto incho∣atam, amittit, ipso jure, jus Administrandipacius cent. 5. Q. 79., idem in quo∣cunque Officiali, pendente quaestione delicti (de quo per Infor∣mationem Praparatoriam constat) in officio commissi eique ContrariiBrun. ad L. 14. ff. de So lut .ibi. Cit.; Dominium redit, ipso jure, ad cum qui rem tertio dedit ut se aleret, si altor fidem frangatL. 1. C. don. sub. mod. ibi. DD. Hinc Jurisdictio & Majestatis jura, ipso jure, adimuntur Imperatori, Papa, Episcopo, &c. Monasterium ingredientibus, aut quod aqui∣pollens est FacientibusLimn. de jur. pub. Lib. 2. C. 11. Even so our engagements be∣ing Correlats (thoFor one Treason (or breach) of a Subject puts him out of his Kings protection; but a tract of Tyrannies, against the major part of Subjects, is necessary to discharge Allegiance. unequal) stand and fall together ipso jure. This Ruption of the Rectoral Contract, and irritancy of that Kings Power, and so Interitus of his King ship thereonSic Testamentum dicitur Ruptum, & Irritum fieri, cum ip∣so jure concidit., ipso suo facto & ipso jure; does not dissolveHence the Votes declaring the Throne Vacant, implyed and supposed a Throne, and so a Crown, and consequently the existence of a Kingdom: and thereon the Conventions of both Kingdoms did agree that the Monar∣chies remain Successive. Vid. Journ. & Rosenth. c. 11. con. 22. our Engagements to the next in Blood then Extant (for the next's Right, is as immediatly from [by the first Contract with] the People as the preceedings was) but makes way for, and devolves the Regal Right on, that Per∣son (juro proprio) as Heir to the late KingK. J's. Resolutions and practice thereon, demonstrate that the Laws were not intended to be the Rule of his Government (but his own Will and Il∣legal Counsellours advice) whence, Non est Rex ubi dominatur volun∣tas & non Lex as Bracton testifieth; And Rex ad hoc est constitutus ut populum Domini—regat, & ab injuriosis defendat—quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit. Laws of K. Edw. the Confess. Sect. 17. Mors Civilis est, cum juris Civilis ratione aliquis pro mortuo numeratur; intereunt enim homines capitis Dimi∣nutione (L. 64. Sect. ult pro Socio. ff.) Res dicitur Mortua qua quis Locupletior non est. (V. ll. in Lex. jur.) Sic Plautus, tem mortuam & occisam, dixit, pro fracta & perdita. Hence, Jacobus Rex, est Mortuus as to his King ship & patrimonium Coronae (and that Concret∣ly; for Abstractly, Rex non moritur) and consequently his Heir succeed∣ed thereto, and is obstricted for his Debts Regali & publico nomine contracta. But Jacobus as to his person & patrimonium privatum Lives; And consequently that Heir cannot (as yet) be, Haeres viventis quatenus est vivens, and so obliged for his Debts personali & privato nomine suscepta. So it is in other Heirs of Entail: as all Lawiers agree. This only per indicem. Only remember; that by the Roman Law Bona Damnati ad ultimum supplicium (& sic, civiliter mortui) aut de∣portati (& sic naturaliter viventis) transibant in Haeredes usque in tertium gradum: sic habemus haeredes viventis, (Naturaliter.) Nov. 134. C. ult. auth. bona. C. de bonis Damnat. Civily dead.
So jus Patronatus, ipso jure, acquiritur Haeredi Patroni (non Fisco) perduell: onis, aut alterius Criminis, etiam damnatiL. 4. ff jur. pat. L, 5. C. eod.; Operae servorum deportati transmittuntur ipso jure in ejus Haere∣demL. 2. sin. ff. us∣uf. leg. 161. DD.; Jus Familia Filio accrescit ipso jure, quam primum avus, (qui Nepotes habuit in Potestate) illud amiserit; jus Im∣perii devolvitur ipso jure in Regem Romanum, Imperatore Re∣mote: sicut, in Naturalibus, Corruptio unius est Generatio al∣terius. Yet that Heir cannot Exerce Actiones Hereditarias before Solemn Entry or Adition; and the Throne can∣not be entered by one till it be declared Vacant of any o∣ther (nam non esse & non apparre paria sunt;) therefore Hareditas Jacens (quae interim Nullius videretur) interim vi∣cem defuncti sustinet in necessariis; And so necessary Legal (not voluntary, Illegal) Acts (quatenus sunt ob interesse tertii non in favorem Civiliter Mortui) after his Forfeiture and before Declaration thereof, are valid, as Founded on (still standing) Laws, ex Tacito, consensu Haredis & Populi, & compromisso partiumAll this is largely treated by DD. ad L. Parbari∣us ff. off prae.. Finally, the Heirs right appearing also, by Declarati∣on, and its Exercise being accepted eo nomine: Aditio re∣tro-trahitur ad mortem defuncti; and so excindes all others born, or to be born, to him after his Civil Death: For an After-Birth (tho never so certain) comes too late, to overtake any Right, aut tollere jus Quaesitum tertio: Since, tho it pretend to be Filius Jacobi, it can never pretend to be Filius Regis; nam non est Rex ubi dominatur voluntas, & non lex; Bracton. Et Rex ad hoc constitutus ut Populum do∣mini regat, & ab injuriosis defendat— quod nisi fecerit, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, Laws of K: Edward, confes: sect: 17. So in the former instances, the Right is acquired ipso jure, to the Child born before, not after, the Father's amitting it; & dominium ex prior matrimonio patri qucesitum, acquiri∣tur, ipso jure Liberis istius Matrimonii (eô ad secunda vota transeunte) exclusis Laberis ex secundo Matrimonio Procrean∣dis; & Dignitas acquiritur liberis ante Patri dignitatem, non post eam amissam, susceptis. Horam: 2: illust. The matter of Right betwixt the Autcessor and Succes∣sor being thus Naturally stated; the Question is, who shall declare what is dubious therein, and witness the truth of the matter of Fact. None of the Parties singly can do this, the maiter being propria causa: Therefore theIt is the law of Nature, that, when there is no judge, licet uni cunque sine ju∣dice se vindc∣re. tit. c. People
(as equally interessed in both) with consent of the Suc∣cessor (at least) in a Convention have right to do it; since it is impossible that the GOD of Order, Peace, and Government, should not allow this only mean (their be∣ing no other under Heaven) of eviting Confusion, War and Anarchy: Especially when the Antecessor hath thrown up the reins of Government, and so given a full Career to their Liberty, by burning the Parliament in Essigie, throwing the Great Seal in Thames, and then an in∣controvertible final Desertion. The ConventionsThey were the freest that ever was in Electi∣on and sit∣ting: For K. W. ne∣ver ex∣pressed by Word, counte∣nance, or Deed, what he would have done, or in what manner. then, being called (with advice of some, and Homologation of the whole body Politick) by the next Prince of the Blood (or Princess's Husband jure Marits) are founded on both the Fundamental Laws of the Rectoral and Popular Contracts, and so both Obliege all to Submission in their Determinations. On the Re∣ctoral; for the Regal Right (tho lurking unproclaimed) is really in that Prince as Head. On the Popular; for Conventions may, have, and must eonveen by War∣rant thereof and Custome, in case of failure of the Royal Race, Infancy, Fatuity, Desertion, or writen Renoun∣ciation of a King, to choice a King, make a Protector, or declare the next Successor (when dubious;) much more in our case, which is Equivalent to, if not more im∣portant, than any of those. Tho they have no Authorita∣tive Power (to make Laws) nor Judicative (and so could never take the Late King's, yet remaining, Natural life for any Actings while their Soveraign) yet they have with consent foresaid a Power DeclarativeDeclarare est clarum facere, unde declaratio est testimonium perhibitum de vetusta consuetudine; aut praeteritis factis. Valla. Demonstrat: lib: 1. Hence Declarations imply no Authority or Jurisdiction over the per∣son, in relation to whom, standing custom and past facts are declared: for Responsa prudentum (Romanorum) did bind the Parties over whom they had no power, and parium curiae, the Superior, in dominio directo. Consequently, the Body Politick declaring the Lae K. James to have Abdicated and Forfeited his Right, and the same to be in K. W. and Q. M. imported no Authority or Jurisdiction over either. For Infe∣rior Courts have power of declaring Right betwixt the K. & an ordinary sub∣ject, much more a Supreme Convention betwixt him and the next Prince, when otherwayes, all the Subjects would be ruined: Especially, seeing the Rectoral Contract is in Nature, Prior to Soveraignity and Subjection (for these aro its consequences and Effects;) Whence (as to it) the preceeding So∣veraign, and the Succeeding together with the Subjects, are unsubordi∣nate, and so may force performance thereof, or declare free, as other unsub∣ordinate States do in their Contracts with a Neighbouring Prince. The Effect of Declaration, is (not only from the time thereof, but also) rom th time of the Right or Deed declared (Leges Declaratoriae V. G. exten∣dunt ad praeterita) and so; 1. The deeds, by which the late K. J. annul∣led his right, beign before the Conception of the (pretended) Prince of Wales; he (tho true) can have no right, no more then if born 20 years af∣ter Declaration of them. 2. Tho Piae. Declaration were necessary to ex∣clude him? yet since K. J. surprest that, metu Majori (of the French Allie, standing Armies, and our Enemies possessing the Civil and Mili∣tary Trusts) and otherwayes, the People would certainly have made it when K. J. set up (openly) his Power of Enervating all Laws, and so mak∣ing all Religious and Civil Rights Precarious (as is evident, by some of all Rankt inviting, as the Sense of the whole, the (then) Prince and the whole's (Actively or Passively] therefore rising with, and declaring for, him in all Corners; and that before any Act of Hostility by him in the Respective places.) their Post Declaration how soon the Impediment was removed must be equally Effectual. Nemo debet Lucrari ex alieno delicto.; (For it. suâ natu∣rà, imports no Superiority) of what already was Law;
and what was the Rectoral Contract; & the late K's break∣ing his part thereof; and the ipsum jus of his Abdicating, Deserting, and so Forefaulting his Right, thereon: and consequently the Throne's being vacant as to him, and all born after (but not before) that amission; and (if the next in blood be Maritata) her Husband, and her, to be King and Queen, and the sole, Administration and Survivancy to the Husband: For, the Law al∣lows all this to the meanest private Subject (being an heir in Remainder, after Wasts made by his Father on the en∣tailed Estate; and being an Husband, Jure Mariti & jure Curtesiae) much more to a Soveraign PrinceIisdem successio∣nis legi∣bus Regna subjecta quibus & Feuds, renent, omnes; sayes Craig: p: 128: disp. Feud: 1: 6: 21. Schon. where the publick welfare of all Subjects is concerned. Hence, since no such Change can be made but by the whole Body (against which, at the dying gasp, its impos∣sible, by any Doctrine, to ensure the Head) and that to the next of the Royal Familie (the Laws for Coronation Oaths precluding Papists) whereby the veneration to it (beyond any upstart) is preserved, and no Forreign Suc∣cessive Princes engaged against (yea they are deeply con∣cerned [since the questioning the Peoples Power were, the shaking all their Thrones, and making the World a field of Blood] for asserting) the Preparative of such a Serle∣ment: This great and sure Title, so declared by the de∣termined Body Politick, is not only founded on Justice (that they may Bolt the Door on one [not thrust out by them] rather then Multitudes should be destroyed) but also on the Common Interest of all Mankind both Princes and People (therefore engaged to maintain it) as the con∣trary Doctrine (by encouraging Princes to Tyranny, then exposing Subjects to Misery, yea, at last, bringing Infamy on dejected Majesty it self) ruines both. None of the very Words (much less the Legal sense)
of our Municipal Laws strick against this Doctrine. For, tho that King was Absolute (Solutus) i. e. a free Prince, whose Person was Subject to none, Pope, Emperor, or People; yet no valid Act ever declared his power Absolute (i. e. Solutam Legibus) or tho it had, yet, by leaving unde, terminedQuod non ex∣presse mutatū est, cur stre pro hibebi∣tur? So a Minor hath Absolute dominion of his estate, but cannot Exercise it with∣out consent of Curators. The Athenians could not determine unless advis∣ed by their Prae Consultores; nor Romans, Nisi Senacorio aut ple∣beio Magistratu Interrogante; nor Dominus Feudalis sine paribus curiae? tho all of them had Absolute power and Right. From which Ex∣amples came Parliaments, because Kings might err in Lawfulness or Ex∣pediency. Hence, seeing the Rectoral Contract was not with, (and so could not be changed by) these Parliaments (but the whole Body Politick) the Commssioners thereto had not power (mandati fines excedens nihil agit) nor, tho they had, can be presumed (Donatio nunquam praesumitur nisi in quantum est necessaria) to render that whole Body-politick Slave, (quae dominio alieno contra Naturam subjceretur) by one word: in giving or declaring (which is equivalent and one, as to the constituents) to that K; jus vitae & necis, over all though innocent; Right to demand all our Charters, Dignities, Estates, Goods, and Services (as Pharaoh) yea the parliament it self to resign its power; by declaring an Active Obedi∣ence in all things lawful (these being incommoda non illicita) without Reserve. In oblieging the whole body — (headed by the next in blood) not to controule, though he made and unmade all our Laws; imposed Taxes on us all; rescinded our Religion; took to himself all our Properties; de∣stroyed all our Lives when not complying to those things (for which Papists would rejoyce to be commissionated by him, that they might gain their own Souls and our Estates) for the outmost extent of passive Obedience without Reserve would comprehend all this. But general Declarations (taken in such sense) are null without a special Mandat (mandatum generile ordnrium non comprehendit donationem inusitatam) for none will say that, without that, terrified or packed Commissioners could resign in the K's hands immediately (mediatly is the same inessect) all the Lands of, or with his assent (altenate) the Kingdom; or subjugate it, at a Province, to another, argumento à minori ad majus; Neither could they redact us to the foresaid case. Such Declarations, therefore, are like other general Rules and Maxims of Law which have their inherent exceptions, Et vix est ut aliquo casu subverti non possint. Jur, enim, loquuntur de his quae frequenter fiunt, (non quae rarò, quod enim semel aut bis accidit praerereunt legislatores) ergo non de∣bent ad casum qui raro contingit adaptari. Semper interpretanda Lex ne sequatur absurdum; & in dubio quod minus est sequimur, raesertim cum materia est Favorabilis, Religio. sciz. Vita, Liber∣tis res inaestimabiles. Priores, denique leges trahuntur ad enu∣cleandas posteriores (mutatio non praesumitur) nee quae salubri∣ter, de novo, introductae sunt, duriori interpretatione ad severita∣tem producendae: ultimo, necessitas, nullâ coercetur lege; de∣ficit enim culpa, de ficit dolus. Lege: & DD: in tit. ff. de Legibus. Modum Administrandi (which is res diversa ab ipsa potestate) referred the same to other Laws requiring, in that, advice and consent of Parliament. Hence; tho
in so farr, and so long, as he had Regal Right he derived it originaly (by the channel of the People) from, and held the same (in Tenure) of, GOD alone, (the People being divested) that did not impede his Voluntar Renouncing itThe holding a Right from GOD im∣pedes not the decla∣ring it Forefal∣ted, (v:g: the power of spiritu∣al Office-bearers, & Divine jus ma∣riti) when they in∣vert the ends of their in∣stituti∣on. Ubi cadem est ratio, cadem est juris disposi∣tio. go.. Subjects did not depose their King, but after his Spontaneous Abdicating, Deserting, and Forfeiting that Post, declared it to be so. Whence the Conventions mett with the King's Licence (whether Antecessor's King nomine, or Successor's, re) and we did not resist these Com∣missioned by the King but private Men [their Commissi∣ons being Null] or at most, his Un-kinged Person, and so in his Natural (not Civil) Private (not Publick) Extra∣judicial (not Judicial) Capacity. Finally our Oaths were Declarative of old, (and not Constitutive [as to the matter] of new) Right; and so as Accessories to, did fall with, that right, their Principal: just as the Debitors Ob∣ligation falls, when the Creditor cancells the Bond to which alone he had sworn to. Nothing in the Old Testament impunges this Doctrine; for (not only the Powers, but) the Persons of Kings, in the Jews Theocracy, were immediatly of GOD; which Coelestial Designation few now can produce. Nor in the New; for the Apostles speak, either of the Powers (not the Persons) that are (in the next of Blood and the People in our case) or of the persons, but to the Christi∣ans, who were then the farr 3d: Minor part: And so a Disparatis nulla est illatio. Nor in Examples of Primitive Martyrs, for the Law and so the Contract was (not for, but) against them; and they were not near the Major part of the Empire. Nor in Elogies of the Ancients, for they are (not of Tyrants, but) Kings; then whom there is no∣thing so transcendent in this inferiour Orb; while they remain the Vicegerents and Images of GOD's Power and Majesty. As to Conquest making way for both. I know no solid Objection against such captivating Light, but one, viz. There was a necessity that these Conventions should have had (not only this Inherent Power of their own, and the next Princes Co-incident consent: but also) all power K. J. could, as yet, pretend; joyned to, and consolidate with, theirs: that so, there being concursus plenit udinis om∣nim potestatum in them, their Declaratorie-Statutorie
Power (as Lawiers speak) might unappealably and un∣controvertibly determine the foresaid matters. Resp. The Estates had (by an admirable Providence in the Right, as well as Fact, of this Revolution; to stop the scruples of all) such an Extraordinary Power, which the following Discourse does demonstrate by this Deduction. All K. J's. yet remaining, right and power did accrue to the (then) Prince as the Effect of K. J's being Conquered in a Just and Solemn War, and thereafter was transferred by the Conqueror to the People; so that they were (pro tempore and as to K. J.) free and Independent States: Whereupon, having Paramount and (to K. J.) unsubor∣dinate power, they declared the Throne's Vacancy of him, and W. and M. King and Queen: which (since they [if anxious of final Ruine] might have Re-entred under K. J.) is, what we understand by Right of choicing the time of the Heirs succeeding. The Honour assigned a Superiour, Patron, and Judge, even after Refutation of their Rights, requires a greater Respect to the Sublimer Character of an once Crowned Head from the worst bred Pen: Wherefore nothing shall be Remembranced of the late K. J. but Notorious and un∣concealable Fact; which himself esteemed and esteems (as in Bonum Ecclesiae) his greatest Glory; and in which, we have the deepest sorrow, he was, and is, misled. The Jesuits being of such Admirable Wit; and great power in all Corners (by the Art [in once enslaving the Souls] of being Masters of the Bodies and Estates of Sub∣jects) and knowing the reclusest Secrets (because Con∣fessors also) of Neighbouring Princes: it is no wonder that they became the Poles whereon, the Cruel Zeal and boundless Ambition of aspiring Monarchs, should turn over their Subjects, and (once possessing that Strength) their Neighbours. Hence, by their Execrable Counsels, Religion and Liberty lost, since the last Age, more then half ground and so became Northern indeed (being utter∣ly destroyed in Hungaria, Bohemia, Austria, Silesia, Styria, &c. Polonia, France, the New Conquests; and Piedmont) before Popery and Slavery durst advance bare-facedly (knowing, the difficulty, of old) to attacque Britain, as the Bulwark of what remained unconquered. These Mon∣sters (having first ruined the two branches of Austria, and then, almost that of Bourbone, in pursure of bringing an universal thraldom on Europe) pitched on the late K: J: as the Riseing Sun of their Hopes to (in conjunction with France, from whom Civil Interest had broke off all others) repair their former Credit in policie, and perfect the
great Work in Religion. Brittain, therefore, must be first won; and the Stratagems were really exquisite. For, It is well known how powerful a party the vast riches of the (then) D: of Y: and his Religion; and the French gold, had purchassed to him; whereby he became (pr∣vento termine) Author of the Actings; in the end of Ch: 2ds Reign. Protestant plots were forged, to drown the noise of the Popish, and cut off the most eminent Heads, who refused to bowe to Baal; Parliaments dissolved, that Court-criminals might escape Justice: Penal Laws against Protestants, even, stretched, that we, being set against, might destroy, one another, and the next Reign appear auspicious: Protestants abroad endeavoured (in combi∣nation with France) to be ruined; that our assistance from thence, and the Northern Heresie, might be cut off at one stroke: to that effect, Divisions at home and abroad cun∣ningly fomented, that, dum singuli pugnarent, omnes victi; And mercenary pens set at work to prepare our minds for that Non-resistance so necessary for subverting all Reli∣gious and Civil Rights here and elsewhere, &c. Such was the preparative Prologue of K: J's. reign. The French Original necessarly required to, throw off his Le∣gal power (as altogether useless) and usurp, in its vacant place, an Arbitrary power (as Absolutely necessary) to in∣troduce popery and Slavery: The Actual Exercise and Effects of which power to the destruction of our Souls, Bodies, Lives, and Estates, (good patriots being cut of for opposing it, and their goods necessary for maintain∣ing it) is the only Scene we shall view in this Tragedie. Our Souls were ensnared; by the vigilant Siege of priests and Jesuits let loose on our unfenced and exposed Religion: by illegal Oaths: by Denunciations, not on∣ly to be turned out of all trusts if we betrayed not our Conscience and Countrey; but also (Intimation) by cer∣tain Experience that we should lose Lives and Fortunes if (remaining Protestants) we had any Action Criminal or Civil with a Popith Adversary: by Ecclesiastical Commis∣sioners enforcing the reading K. J's. Declaration against duty and perswasion: by sending young Noblemen and Gentlemen Abroad to be bred Pap sts; and perverting all Ranks with the baits of Countenance, Preferments, and pensions, &c. Our Bodies were inled and Lives exposed, by Arbitrary Requisition of Obedience without Reserve: by an encroaching Privy Council: by Illegal Imprisonments: by standing Forces in time of Peace, who acted the greatest Barbarities, without any Legal Warrant by (at the same time,) disarming Protstants; and Summar illegal Tryals; and illegal Torres; and
by inspireing, (even Legal) Criminal Judicatures to give the horridest Sentences, &c. Our Estates were Invaded: by subverting the Charters of Burrows: by Free Quarters; by illegal Taxes; personal protections; and exorbitant Fines: by Dispensing with our Laws (our great property and Birth-right:) by Ecclesiastical Commissions, whose Effect and Design we saw in the Bishop of London and Mag∣dalen Collegde (turned out of their Free-holds) and might have seen in all the not complying Clergy of Eng∣land: by over-ruleing Civil Judges (ad Bene placitum) with the uncontrolable Authority of great Ministers, or private Letters, &c. All directly contrary, and in open Hostility, to most clear and known Laws. It had been a hard pull to have come this length, if the two remaining parts of the Example had not been copied, vz As to Parl aments, and Dissimulation. Therefore Parliaments (the great Fence of all that is Ours) were broke down (y being discontinued; and at last [by, in effect, excluding the Burrows and corrupting and terrifieing o∣ther Members, yea making Legal Elections impossible] to be totally Subverted) and we were soothed by the So∣lemnest Oaths' and Declarations for Religious and Civil Liberty; (as Eva by the fatal fair Apple, or, thereafter mas∣sacred Guests, by being invited to a Marriage:) Thereby allowing us (a while as yet) to judge the Substantiation, by the outward Species; but intending (as is too evident since) after kissing, to thrust us under the fifth RibbIf any be so ig¦norant or impudent to aske Probation for these thngs so Notorious notorei∣tare fac∣ti; it is answered: may of them were explcte∣ly or implyedly, acknowledged by K. J. himself; and most f them by his Friends (lie bemus confienes reo) and all of them proven per Nu∣bem Testium (viz. The whole Estates) tho two be sufficent to establish all truth. The other causes that are keeped up and nt proven by Witnesses (for reasons you shall know of hereafter) were Snasoriae tantum; wherefore cauae ufficener, ustificae, were only published, and only founded on, in the (then) Prince's Declarations.. The Catastrophe would have followed may be proven (without producing any unnecessry new League) by the most convincing Arguments: Whether from their Reli∣gion; obligeing under pain of Damnation to Murder, and in order thereto, to cheat us: or Experience there∣of, in the Massacres of Waldens. Bohem. Germ. Dutch, French, Savoyans, Irish old and sate, and our own Briti plots: or thence Law; Seml malus semper malus in eodem genere Malitia: or finally Logick; for if scrce 4 years Reign did ack us to uch a Sate, what (a majori) would 8th, & an Immortal popish uccessor have done? if the (then) P. of Orange had not delivered us: since all being acted under the protection of, the French Allie; strong standing Armies; and professed or disguised papists, or villanous
and Mercenary Protestants (as many as could be had being absolute Masters of all Ecclesiastical, Civil and Milit∣ry powers; could meet with no controul (even of safe petitioning) from a headless multitude, but praces & l chryma. The remaining (True) Church, and (whole) State  Europe being, thus, like a Ship, which sailed, and wou have sunk (Britain once lacked) together: and an E fice; which undermined on our side, and the flame taki hold on this Rafter, would, in totum, Up: above all; we b∣ing, the (then) P's Brethren and Neighbours (to be lo∣ed and helped as himself) and sick and in prison (to  visited by him:) if he had not heard such joynt groans  incumbent Evils and impendent dangers, he had be less excusable then the two Hector's themselves; as the vo∣luntar Spectators of the Roman Sword-plays were more Bar∣barous then the (by Zeal and Ambition) constrained Actors. But Piety commands that the ChurchThis is not, de∣fending (with Armes) the Spi∣ritual profession (for it cannot be ruined:) but protecting the Temporal Professors, from being therefore, murdered. Hence, Christian Princes, after swearing (at the Coronation) to maintain the Church; brandish their Sword S: N: E: an W: which insinuates that there is no Region exempted from their care (for the Ʋnity of the Church admits no Division, or Appropriation to one, in Extraordinary Dangers. This hath been decided solemnly twice, by the whole Christian World: viz: First, by the Council of Nice appointing the Indictions each 15. years to begin in October (which may be the date of our Liberty, also) on the day of Maxentius's being overcome by Constan∣tine. (Onuph: Mercat: Hotom:) 2. By the Wars of the Holy Land; wherein so many (even Princes) dyed, and exhausted their Treasuries. Where ever, therefore, there is Truth in what is asserted; it cannot be said to be done on any pretext whatsoever, for (sincere) intention, and (feinged) Pretension are as different, and inconsistent in the same Subject, as Fan∣tome, and Body, Ingenuity and Hypocrisie. This is the Natural signi∣fication of pretext; Praetego, i. e. praevelo; paeendo, i. e. ante ten∣o; praetextum, dicitur, illud Velamen quo moveri aliquis vde∣tur ad aliquid agendum, cum tamen alia Cusa moveatur (Calep: in dicti:) hinc (Suet. in Cae:) & praetextum quidem illi civili∣um armorum hoc fuit, causas autem alias fusse opiniantur; ut C∣cero [per praetextum] exprimit [per Simulationem:] So Paul distinguishes, in saying, Whether in Pretence or Truth; and our Acts  Parliament, especially of Char: d: (optimi interpretes what is impor∣ted thereby in the Test;) pretended Authority, &c. And the French, pre∣tendue Rermé. Hence, since the Fats exressed and founded on by K: William, and the Subjects are (to the World, and each Man's private con∣science) perspicuous Truths, they proceeded on no pretexts: But he, as Prince, adopted Sons (as Pharh' Daughter the exposed Moses) and as King protecteth Subjects; as True Defender of the Apostolick Faith. of GOD be maintained; and Justice requires that Destrovers of Common-wealths be compelled to Reason; and Charitie challenges the Right of relieving and restoring the Op∣pressed: and in case of final inexorableness; it is lawful for a Constantin (requested by the Romon People) even to expel a Maxentius; though it be Criminal in a Porsonna to bring back a Tarquinius.
Passive Obedience hath never got (de facto, at least)  larger Field than we have given it; But now we go to al∣low the highest Prerogatives that ever (de Jure) it could pretend to.
THESIS I. The Enterprise of the (then) P. of Orange, (a Supreme) by his Army (Forreigners) was a just War, both as to its Cause and Solem∣nities, or Matter and Form; and so must have all the Effects such hath had in all Ages. PROBATION. 1. THIS Enterprize, as intended to be, so really was a War; For there are only three States of any Nation, viz. War, Truce and Peace: And so we have no other Word but that of War to express the Nature of this Attempt, since it was neither Truce nor Peace. War is the State of two (bellum quasi duellum) or more Princes contending by force and vio∣lence of Arms;Grotiu. Hostes non solum euistimantur qui jam navali aut terrestri praetio certant, sed pro talibus ha∣bendi & qui Machinas admovent portubus out maenibus; etiamsi nondum pugnam incipiunt; sayes Philo de Legib. The Effects of War by a numerous Army, after de∣nunciation, cannot be called the time of peace. The Sword hanging over the head; Acts of Hostility (tho indeed few) on Persons, Cities, and Goods; taking and Garrisoning of most places, are no wayes justifi∣able but in War: Since the way of Fact (without form of Process) would be an unlawful, violent intru∣sion, if it were not a lawful War; and (as K: J: calls it) in some sense a publick invasion. Hostes sunt qui nohis aut quibus nos publice bellum decernimus; caeteri prae∣dones aut latrones sunt.Hostes ff: v: s: v: Zieg: in Grot: p: 531: In a word the mouth of a Cannon portends the pleading a cause by the Law of Arms †. 2. To preserve neighbouring Subjects from ruin in their Religion, Lives, Fortunes, and Liberties,
and procure re-establishment of their torn Laws and Priviledges; with competent security for the Safety of all these, is a pious and most just cause of War. For After instituting Civil Societies there is a special and unquarrellable jus quaesitum to the Rectors thereof, over their respective Subjects; where these Subjects do by real transgression merit suffering, or the case is dubious; And to this effect only was ordained the distribution of Empires. But if the injuries be most manifest (as these of Busiris, Phalaris, &c.) the right of Humane help by Princes not-subject a∣gainst such oppressing Governours is not precluded by this distribution of Governments. For it is the na∣ture of civil Societies, that every one hath entered therein for his own benefite; and so this kindly pro∣tection of a neighbouring Prince so necessarly bene∣ficial to us, is not against the nature of Society; The advantage of this being also common to all Princes themselves, since he who (attacqued) is now burde∣ned, at another occasion (when Attacquer) is there∣by sublevate. Yea, this is not only, not prohibited (there being no intrinsecal or moral pravity therein) but is also so far a positive Right belonging to Prin∣ces, that (each fearing his neighbour should use it) they think it necessar to exclude it in most treaties, (with this clause causa justa aut injustâ) as Bodinus observesp m. 54. There is one great Family and Society of Mankind, in which, Reges, non unius sibi creditae gentis habent rationem; sed totius humani generisThemist. in Orat: ad Valen:: even as (in Ecclesia turbata at least) he who is not Universal Pastor of the Church, is Pastor of the Uni∣versal Church, and hath a care and wareth (with his Spiritual Armour) accordinglyConstt: Clem Ʋiver∣salis Ec∣clesi curam ae∣cepisse.: or as when a Master of a ship, Father of a Family, or Husband of a Wife, (all Hierogliphicks of a Kingdom) is hin∣dred by the adjacent neighbour (having no more Jurisdiction over him than one Prince over another) from irreparably injuring his Mariners, Servants, or
Spouse; there is no Delict committed against, but favour done to the Maritime, oeonomical, and Mari∣tal Gvernments. And a King hath no more Right to ruine his Subjects against Law, then these (consti∣tute also in a ruling Capacity) to destroy theirs, and so may be equally gainstood by his charitable neighbour. 3. To profite neighbouring Subjects in what a Prince can, is not only Lawful but also Duty by the Natural Law of good Offices; and so what we see performed with so much praise, could not be omit∣ted without blame. There is nothing more service∣able to Man then Man, for which also he is born; says Seneta: And so he should answer that end. Bruts commonly help their fellows: mercy and propensi∣on to Advantage others begins even in Infants; which must proceed in both from Natural instinct. Many are the Obligations betwixt Men engaging to Mutual Aid; for we are Cousins by Nature (says the Lawy∣ers) as come all of one Parent; whence Solon pro∣ounceth the State happy where every one thinketh an others injury, his own: which holds equally in the great state of Mankind as Grotius * concludeth,Grotius 2.25.6. Latissime patens est hominum inter se Conjunctio qua vel sola ad opem ferendam sufficit. But the Conjunction of the same Faith also, addeth to, and maketh Indispen∣sible this Natural Bond of Amity; For we ought to lay down our Lives for the Brethren: And let us not love in word neither in tongue but in deedJohn 2.16, 18.. Natura habemus ut indignationem nostram conjungamus cum iis qui male tractali sunt, etiamsi ad nos nulla pars injuriae pervenert, says ChrysostomChryso. 13. de stat.. And Princes, say∣eth Tacitus are like Gods; and so hear the Prayers of Supplicants if they be just: Et Fortitudo quae defenait infirmos plena Justitia est; as Ambrose hath itAmbr. l. 1. Off. C. 5.. Whence it appears, that the Princes preferring the safety of an innocent Multitude to his Own was the highest Act of Christian Charity; and as the Injurie
was more signal to many than one; So also the Bene∣ficence.Bodin: p. M. 326. In respect of all which, the great Bodinus (speaking of this Question) does in reason, conclude, De pulcherrimis omnibus factis Nullum illustrius est, qua vitam, famam, ac fortunas innocentium ab injuria po¦tiorum defendere, quando judiciorum aduus omes b∣sidentur. 4. Injurie is the just cause of War; Iniquitas par∣tis ad versae justa bella ingerisAugus. Civ. Dei. 4.4. And so there are as ma∣ny Fountains of just publick War as of Legal private Actions. Action is granted for an Injury already done, or not done but justly feared. To evite a wrong justly feared but not actually done, we seek, Cautio de non offendendo; damni infecti; interdicta visfiat. If the dammage be already done, we require it to be Repaired or Punished. Even so the three (of which one would sufficeGrtius 2.1.2.2. just causes of War, viz. Defence of what we yet have; recovery of what is lost; and Punishment of our Oppressors are causes most justifying to this Pious War. For there are only two wayes to obtain Right from the Refractory; viz. By Actions and Accusations betwixt Subjects: And be∣cause these fail (there being no Terrestrial common Judge) War betwixt Soveraigns; Bellum naturall∣ter incipit ubi judicia deficiuntGrotius pros. 5. & L. 2.1.2. And so since Natu∣rally every man is Executer not only of his own right, but also of an other's: and in the Natural state (where none was subject to his fellow, as now no Prince is subject to his) every man might vindicate CrimesGon. 4.14.16. Grotius.. The Prince had good right to espouse our Interest, and make our injuries his own, and so make War to redress them. PlatoDe leg. 4. judges him punishable who hinders not Violence offered to an other: Et Tulli∣us, qui non defendit ne obsistit, sipotest, injuriae, am est in vitio quam si parentes, aut patriam, aut socios, De∣sirat: So Euripides, praebent saxa Perfugiumferis, a∣raeque famulis, urbibus pressis malo tutamen Ʋrbes: As Seneca, Succurram Porituro sed ut ipse non peream; nisi∣sifuturus
ero magnae rei merces. Which last was the Glo∣rious Resolution of the Prince, viz. to carry thorow this great Work or perish in the Attempt. Tho, in extreamest necessity it were Criminal in Subjects to demand these things by Arms, yet it re∣mains most Lawful in a Prince not subject to do it for them: Since when there is a Personal (not real) Impediment, to any Action; that which is not law∣ful to one is lawful to an other, if the matter be such as one may profit an other in. So a Tutor pursues for his Pupil who hath no personam standi in judicio; and a Defensor is admitted (even without a Mandate) for one who is absent and cannot defend himself. The Impediment which prohibits a Subject to resist comes not from the thing it self, Cause, or Matter, for that (viz. Defence, Recovery, and Punishment) is ma∣terially the same in subject and not subject: But from his Personal quality of Allegiance; which being no∣way in, could be no obstacle to, the Person and Actions of his Highness. 5. Not only doth this Right as Adopted afford a just cause of War: But even the Prejudice done to Rights properly the Princes own. And that as he is Head of the Protestant Interest, and principal Pillar of that (then much endangered) Religion: As (being so nearly of the Royal Blood) he is thence concerned in the future welfare of these Nations: And finally as being obliged to hinder any Intrusion on his own or Princess's Rights, till the reality of the Birth were suf∣ficiently cleared. In respect of all which, we might have exclaimed (in case of Refusal) with (juster rea∣son then) the Campani to the Romans, Quandoqui∣dem nostra tueri adversus vim atque, injuriam non vul∣tis justa vi; vestra cerie Defendetis. For, Firstly, What Wounds the Protestants received in the Profession (by Law established) of their Religi∣on, pierced his Highness thorow the sides; and so he was engaged, and had good right to cure them.
For. St. Paul teacheth,1 Cor. 12.18. that all the Members of that one Body, being many are one Body. And God hath set the Members every one of them in the Body, as it hath pleased him. And whether one Member suffer, all the Members suffer with it. They must not love in word on∣ly but in deed, and shew their Faith and Charity by their Works: as is above remarked. Whence this effe∣ctually feeling one another's griefs and evils pertaing not only to each single Person, but also to a People as such, and Princes quá Princes; who should serve Christ not for themselves (in private) only; but also (as to publick) for the Power which they have in their hands. When a house is on fire, the Insurer (espe∣cially) is bound to run to all Rooms where he may quench it: And when a Laik stricketh up in a Ship, he who is interested in the Cargo will (without, yea against, the Master's Invitation) labour to stop it And so there being a great Family and Society not only of Mankind, but also more especially of Prote∣stants; in it Religio contaminata ad omnium pertines injuriamL. 4. C. dehaeret.: And consequently more particularly to the injuring of his Highness. And they who invited him (at that time no Enemy to K J.) to use his Right did no more then what is affirmed by AugustinAugus Epist. 50 Maximinianus Episcopus vagiensis Auxilium pettie a imperatore Christiano contra hostes Ecclesiae; non tam s ulciscendi causa, quam tuendae Ecclesiae sibi creditae. To which end he used first all Peaceable Instances, and these not prevailing,Rosenth. Strv. Pist Franzk. Ludio. Zas in Fedis. Mant. Lucub. Vatte. Tom. 2. Lab. 23. Tit. 20. . this just War. Secondly, In an Haereditary Legal, (not Despo∣tick and Patrimonial) Monarchy, the Heir, succeeds the Father (or other Predecessor) not to him; is not necessarly Haeres Predecessoris, but Haeres Regni by ver∣tue of the first Contract, Law, and Custome: By right proper to himself, not Derivative from his An∣tecessor: Even as in a proper Feu (where the true Feu∣dal Law lives) the Kinsman succeedeth by strength of the Original Investiture: or as a Substitute, in a
commiss or entail, succeedeth rather to the Testator, then to the preceeding Institute. When it is certain who are Heirs to a Kingdom, Simul atque existere caepe∣runt jus proprium eis quaesitum est ex LegeGrot. 2.7.26. (As the Roman Law affirms, that the Unemancipate Child is Vi∣vente Patre quasirerum paternarum Dominus; and the Patriarch's Servant calls his Master's Heir, Lord; And Heirs of a Kingdom have the same Right thô Emancipate, or never in Potestate (Heves quasi herus) from the Law it self which introduced that difference) Whence there Persons, Rights, and Eminencies are by Law specially secured. And so K: J's: even plentitudo potestatis could not deprive them (since not the meanest Subject) of the least present or future E∣molument of this their Property, which was not in his Disposal. But if the Subjects were permitted (by the Prince) to be ruined in all their Religious and Ci∣vil rights, and the interposed Child tamely suffered to exclude (without Cognition of the cause) their Highness's Birth-Rights: It were in effect, De∣priving them not only of the Emoluments, but also Substance of their Properties; being not to succeed at all but Disinherished, or at most to succeed only to wretched Kingdoms. Wherefore the Prince (for himself, and as bound to defend and secure his Prin∣cess's Rights whether Present or Future,) had a just title to prevent all Invasions thereon by obtaining a Legal Disquisition of, and then Caution for them,Peregrin. Fid. Art. 3. N. 29. & Art. 46. N. o: Fusar. Q. 512. N. 1. & Q. 515 cupscild de Fid. Fam. Cas. 11. N. 386. &c. which was all he (fruitlesly) demanded to be done in Parliament. So the Substitute, in a Fidei comiss in diem, may Legally seek Caution (yea force Restitution be∣fore the day, if the Fiduciare egregiously abuse the Heretage. Much more if he, in effect, (quantum in feest, alienate the whole extra Familiam) when it is a Familiary Fidei comiss. The Caution decerned to Pri∣vate persons runs, quod fiduciarii velint die venienie, aut conditione existente, aut si in judicio succumbant fide∣omissa praestare integra *: And a Father must secure
his Son hypotheca rerum suarumTit. F ut Fid. Ca. Cav. L. 7. F. Eod.. Consequently no less could be allowed to a Prince, (considering the matters of Fact in the Memorial) then would, to the meanest of Subjects; since his interest (both evi∣dently lesed, and at most controverted) was great∣er and more inviolable than theirs can pretend to be. 6. The Justness of a War for punishing Offences deserves a more strict enquiry: since the very making war on K. J. is (in part) a punishment. Nature hath not, determined, who shall exact punishment for Ma∣lefices; only that, it were most convenient it should be a Superior: but he who does evil, eo ipso detruds and makes himself Inferiour to one otherways his EqualThom. 2.2. Q. 64. Art. 1.161. Cajetan.. Hence sayeth Democritus, Naturâ evenit melior ut sequiori imperet. This Chastisement is more specially recommended to near Relations because of their presumed piety in CorrectionTit. C. de emend. propinq.. Plutarch holds, That a good Man is designed by Nature, a Per∣petual Magistrate, for by the very Law of Nature, he hath a Principality who does justly. Whence the Learned HugoGrotius 2.20.40., Sciendum quoque, est Reges, aut qui parregibus jus obtinent, jus habere paenas poscendi, non tantum ob injurias in se commissas, sed & ob eas quae ipsos peculiariter non tangunt; sed in quibus vis personis jus naturae aut Gentium immaniter violantibus. But the violating our Propertie in our Goods, Liberties, and Laws is a violation of the Law of Nature and Nations; For, Natura non patitur ut aliorum spoliis, nostras facul∣tates, copias, opes augeamus, sayes Cicero; And the same GrotiusGrotius 2.14.8., Ʋbi enim dominium, aut jus aliud, alicui legittimo modo partum est, id ne ei auferatur, juris est naturalis. And so this Delict (in the name of Hu∣mane Society thereby violated) orbis viribus expiari debuit, as Justin expressethJustin. Lib. 8. Yea, its not only more Noble, but Honest and convenient for a Prince to revenge an others, then his own injuries; because the moderation of his proper grief is more difficult: So the Hebrew Interpreters observe, that
the Kinsman was permitted to exact Talion for his Friends blood even by private Authority; which was no wayes allowed to the lesed himself (when per∣haps, wounded) and that for the same reason. From all which it appears that, the power of punishing is not an effect, proper to civil Jurisdiction; but comes from the Law of Nature: otherways no enemy would have right of punishing an enemy; which Right, not∣withstanding, the use of all Nations does confirm. Whence it necessarly follows, that this war (as Pu∣nitive of K. J.) was most Just: Since the Princes po∣wer over him flows not Ex ulla Jurisdictione Civili, sed ex illo jure Naturali quod & ante institutas Civitates fuit; & nunt etiam viget, quibus in locis homines Ju∣ri Civili non sunt SubjectiGroti. 1.3.21.5.: And, Ʋt quis Ʋltio∣nem sum at ab eo qui peccavit, satis est ut ipse, et qui pec∣cavit subditus non sit †. 7. This war which had so just grounds was De∣nounced (by the Prince's Declarations) much as that of Camillus against the Gauls; Omnia quae Defendi, re∣petique, & Ʋlcisci sas sit: Or as in the Feciale For∣mule, quas nec dederint, nec solverunt, nec fecerunt, quas res dari, fieri, solvi oportuit: ego vos testor popu∣lum illum Injustum, nec jus persolvere. His Decla∣rations were altogether a sufficient Denounciation: For, the Reason of making Declarations of War, and its cause publick, is, that all Mankind may Cog∣nosce on, and be perswaded of, the Justice of its cause: and that it may be certainly constant, it is un∣dertaken by Authority of a Supreme Power, (non pri∣vato ausu) as Grotius and Gentilis testifieGrot. 3: 1: 11: lber: Gentil. Lib: 1: C: 2:. The first being necessary to let the World (yea Enemy himself, and his Party) know the Authors Integrity; And the second; to inferr the peculiar effects which have not place in a war by, or against Subjects or Pirats. De∣claration is pure, or Conditional. Pure Denounciati∣on is, when a Delict is simply to be punished; with∣out admission of Repentance, since Panitendo non,
nocensesse, definit: But such was not the Prince's who before, and after Denounciation, did incessantly re∣quest K. J. to repent restituendô ablatum, (property or safety) as a free Parliament would Advise; and he would proceed no furtherVid. Decla: and the publick papers.. Conditional Denoun∣ciation is exemplified in LiviusLiv. Lib. 8., Eam se injuriam, nisiab ipsis qui fecerint, dematur, ipsos omni vi, depul. surum esse: And of this nature was the Prince's, viz. On Condition of granting his Demands in Parlia∣ment; War and its effects were wholly to cease, and all that was done in the Interim (as necessary for, inducing K. J. to assent, the Prince's own Defence (as it is only a defensive war, tho to prevent and di∣vert a Prince, enter his Enemies Countrey, on condi∣tion of security of not being offended) and for pro∣tecting the Subjects till Grievances were redressed) to be restored in Integrum. Repetion preceeding Indiction it self (for it differs therefromVid. Marcel. Donat. in Liv. Lib. 8. P. 18.) and the Solemnities of Indiction being of civil Institution (not the Law of Nations) Iudictio nullum post se tempus, jure Gentium, requiritGrot. 3.1.13.. Hence the third Punick War, Simul indictum simul illatumest: And so did Cy∣rus to the Armenian: and Servius affirms (speaking of Denounciation (Pater Patratus jaciebat hastam, quae res erat pugnae principium tum certare odiis tum res rapu∣isse licebit. Consequently there needed no delays af∣ter once Declaring at the borders of the Enemies Ter∣ritory: Since that also satisfies the foresaid reason of Declarations. From which Deduction it is evident that the Prince did not only lawfully declare this war, but also did not use therein, the rigour of the Law of Nations. For besides the pressing instances made (beforeSee the Transacti¦ons about the time of Phagel & Stew∣arts Let∣ters. any de∣sign of war) to remove the causes thereof: there were no Acts of Hostility till his just demands (as to the Principal, at least) were a second time rejected; and thereon Declaration made alsoVid. 3. Decla.. Irritatio ani∣mo cum ea prima fuit, poslea juslum bellum decretis civi∣tatum
ultro indicendo factum, as Livius in another case. After which second denyal and the Princes coming to England, a third time competent for con∣venient granting was conceded; but K. J. by turning his back, at once confirmed the former, and shewed the third refusal. So much had the Prince the Law of God in his EyesDeut. 20.10.11., When thou comest nigh to a ity to fight against is, then proclaim peace unto it. And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war a∣gainst thee, then thou shalt besiege it. Salustius sayeth, Sapientes pacis causà bellum gerunt, & laborem spe otii sustentant: Cic toNicom: C. 7., Bellum ita suscipiatur, ut nihil aliud nisi pax quaesia videatur; and elsewhereDe Of. 1., Sic suscipienda bella sunt ob eam causam ut sine Injuria in pace vivatur. All which dictats of Reason Con∣centred in His Highness Conduct. 8. Finally, The Prince followed the greatest Ex∣amples (Reason and use making a Law of Nations) many of which are not near so justsiable as his High∣ness's. So Constantine took Arms, against Maxenti∣rius and Licinius for oppressing the Christians then se∣cured by Laws: And abrogated all the unjust Edicts and Rescripts of LiciniusLi: C. Theod: d. in: is quae sub yran.: As other Christian Em∣perors, against the Persians, for Injuries to Christian Subjects. Theodosius and Arcadius having killed Ma∣ximus made this Law, Quae Tyrannus contra jus rescrip∣sit non valere praecipimusLi: C. Theod d: infirma dis quae sub Tyr. L: valeat cod.. David sought and got pro∣tection of the Philistines. Moses fred the Israelits of the Egyptian bondage. Which being by God's own Will, must be lawful in it self; since he willeth nothing un∣lawful in its own natureVid: Syn. Crit. ibid. con∣cerning the Jew∣els.. The Maccabees are prais∣ed by AmbroseAmbro: de off Lib. 1: C. 40., that even on the Sabbath, they re∣venged the Injuries done to their innocent Brethren. The Governors of Sodom Rebelled against Chedorla omer (whom they had long served) yet Abraham did assist and protect his Kinsman Lot (who was al∣so an Inhabitant) and them against their oppressing Soveraign. Where Observe; Melchisedeck says,
Blessed be the most high GOD which hath delivered (thine) enemies into thine hands.e ests 14.20. So Hercules was Deified for freeing the World of Tyrannous Monsters: in which the just and vertuous Romans did goe beyond all others. Dio, Timoleon, Aratus, Harmedius, Aristo∣gitón, Aratus, all imitators of Hercules, are exalted (by the best Writers) for being Tirannorum interfecto∣res & Magistri. Ludovick XII. of France ook the Pa∣trociny of the Duke of Ferrara and other Subjects, (against Julius II.) whom also his Nephew Henry III. with Force and Treasure, protected (against Julius III.) Which Henry likew se, at the same time, de∣fended the German Liberty against Charles. Gustavus Adolphus is in our Fathers Memories: and Luther had German Princes to protect him against the fury of the Emperor. If the Pope's decision will hold now a days we find him call in Pepinus against the then establish∣ed Lombards: And to enumerate all instances of that nature in after Ages, would fill a Volume. Lately (in firmance of the former) his Holiness, by mediati∣on of Philip; II.) made the Duke of Guise Head of the Catholick League and Protector of that Faith a∣gainst Henry III. and IV. of France: Only for Cold∣ness and Tolleration in the one, and simple being Protestant (and thereby Popery endangered) in the o∣ther: But It is a Canon of Rome it self, Quod quisque juris in alium flatuerit, ipse endem jure uti debet. The Glorious Queen Elizabeth's Assistance of the Protestants in France, Scotland, Germany, and the Spanish Nether∣lands; and King James 6th's traceing her happy foot∣steps, (both most Pious, as Christians, and zealous of the Royal Dignity; as Princes;) carrieth greater then ordinary weight to satisfie, that this War was just and Religious.
THESIS II. Hence by the Law of Nations, the Prince's Title to the Regal Right was Legal, as the Effect of K. James (not the Kingdoms) be∣ing Vanquished in a Solemn War: Tho he had gone no further. PROBATION. EMpire or a Regal Right is acquired (in a just and Solemn War) to the Victor, two wayes, viz. Only, and as much as the Conquered King had it himself; or moreover, all the Right that was both in King and People. This last, (called Absolute Conquest of a Kingdom) when the quarrel is against both King and Subjects, pertains not to our case or enquity: As the Prince truely declared that he had no intention of Conquering the NationVid & Decla. Conquest of the Kng only and what is his (the Kingdom, and what is he Subject's, remaining untouched) falls out, when the war is made for, (not against) them; against the King only: and so the Conqueror (as an Heir) succeeds Tantum in universum jus quod Antecessor habuit. For; as the goods and Rights of each single person are acquired to him who does subjugate the owner; so are also those of a King subacted. Vi∣ctory is Aequiparate to Dedition; For Dedition (say the Lawyers) gives over willingly, what Victory would extort by Force: But in Dedition, Omnia ei qui armis plus potest, dedita sunt; Whence all must be acquir∣ed to the Victor in Victory. Hence all Incorporeal
Rights of the Vanquished become the Victor's also: So the Romans (Alba conquered) did vindicate, Quae Albanorum jura fuerantDion. 111. Grot. 3.8.4.1.2. & 3.6.26. & 3.9.9.161. Zieg. The Conqueror may ac∣quire this Right without any (at least express) con∣sent of the People; so HorniusHorn. de Civ. C. 9. Se. 2.3.5. (a great Royalist, and for the Divine right of Monarchy:) As soon, says he, as GOD gives Victory, he confers on the Victor in∣violable Majesty. If this were not admitted; Contro∣versies about Kingdoms, and Wars and Desolations there∣on should be Immortal (which is repugnant to the common sense of Nations) for many deny the Subjects Acquies∣ence, or prescription, to prejudge the Soveraign. A Conqueror of a Kingdom may alienate it as his Patri∣mony, but a Conqueror of a King only, canno: Since he hath no more Right then the King he suc∣ceeds to; as an heir hath no more then his predeces∣sor: so Cyrus desired the Assyrians to be of good cou∣rage, their Lot should be better then it was for∣merly: their Houses, Lands, right over Wives and Children should remain untouched; their King only changedEnoph. do Instit. Cyr. Lib.. Even as a friend, redeeming a Captive, acquires jus pignoris & recentionis in him: and he must serve his Deliverer (tho [otherwayes then formerly] without any real servitude) till the Lytron be payed: that being but a small Retribution of the great bene∣fit of Liberty: But the Equity is greater in a publick then private Redemption; since both the slavery and delivery is of manyC. 34. Edict. Car. calv Tit: F: Cap. & C. de post∣lim.. Hence GrotiusGrotius 3.8.1.3.. Potest autem imperium acquiri vel tantum ut est in rege, & tunc in ejus duntaxat jus succeditur, non ultra: vel etiam ut est in populo. AndGrotius 3.15.1., Justo bello ut alia acquiri possunt, ita & jus imperantis in populum; ant jus quod in imperi habet ipse populus: So speakingGrotius 1.4.13. of a King who hath only a part of the Supreme Pwer, and the Senate the other part thereof, Potest rex suam imperii par∣tem belli jure amittere; and, Imperia armis quari, Tertullian affirmeth.
2. Hence appears how the Regal Right was ac∣quired to the Prince by Conquest of the King; not the Kingdom. For there were only two ways to obtain (in right of so just a war) the things demanded, and oft denyed, viz. by force on K. James's person or E∣state. Wherefore the Prince (resolving unchange∣ably to keep his sacred person inviolable) was neces∣sitate to use Execution on his Estate. Whence accord∣ing to the Law of Nations, he invaded his possessions, defeat tho mostly without blows his Forces; took his Forts, Cities, and Palaces; Finally got himself and whole Interest in his power. But leaving K. J. in Liberty to go about the granting our requests, K. J. left all to the Princes disposal. Then the Princes jus drem becoming jus in re; officers Civil, and most Military, ceased to act in K. J. Name, and as Actors or Negotiorum gestores at least possessed in Effect all in the Conqueror'sTransit possessio, si colonus altri tra∣diderit. L. 3, Se: 9. Cap. L. 33. cod. L. 32. S. 1. L. 25. S. 2. de acq. post.. He emitted Writs in his own name; and ordered the States to preveen confusion in the Interim; and was obeyed in all, before any de∣lation of the Governments: before which also; all even greatest Royalists made their Addresses and Homage to him; which was an material acknow∣ledgment of, and could not be lawful (to a publick Enemy) without the Translation of the Regal Em∣pire from K. J. by such an entire tho bloodless Victo∣ry over him. That Victory is most Absolute which is won without (even the Contest of) strokes; and none is more Absolute, then all possest none gainstanding. So K. James leaving all to the Prince for the present, (tho with a mind to be restored in the future) Tan∣tisper, voluit non possidere (as Lawyers speak Arg. L. 17. § 1. ff. acq. Poss. Si quis eâ mente possessionem tra∣dit, ut postea ei rei restituatur, desinit possidere) and in his place the Prince possessed and so acquired. 3. That Empire, which was in the person subdued, is, the natural fruit of Victory; and immediatly af∣ter victory competent to the Victor: i. e. the wages
of War as it is called Ezech. 29.18. Seqq: Because they wrought for me, saith the Lord; is clear from the Actings, approved by the Writers, of all Nations and Ages. So GOD speaking of a City expugnate, after repudiating conditions of Peace,) decerns; All the spoyl thereof shalt thou take to thy selfDeut. 30.14.. And it is said of the two Tribs and the half; And the Haga∣tits were delivered into their hands because the war was of GOD (i. e. as it is declared in the foregoing verses) be∣cause they put their trust in him; and they dwelt in their steadsChron. 5.18. Sc.. Jacob expresseth this right; Which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my Sword and with my howGenesis 48.22.. Neither was the taking the Vanquished's Spoyl against the Piety of Asa (the great destroyer of the Images, and restorer of the Laws of Juda) for it is approved in the Text. When the numerous Army of Zera came against him he prayed, O Lord thou art our God let not man prevail against Thee; So they fled, and could not recover, for the fear of the Lord came upon themChron. 14.. &c. And Abraham when Protector of the Sodomits, acquired property of the defeated Kings spoyle; else he could not have given, the tenth, meat, or porti∣on, thereof to others. The Hebrews used to put im∣mediatly, the Conquered's Crown on the Conque∣ror: For Example on David2 Sam. 12.30.: And all these were not Wars by any particular direction from God, Sed ex comuni jure Gentium, as Criticks observe on the re∣spective places. Profane suffrage goes alongs with Sacred: so Alexander after the sight at Gaugamela, was saluted King of Asia: Romani quae Cyphacis fue∣rant sua dixêre lege belliGrot. in Not. ub. Sup.: cum Odoacrum devicisset, ejus quae fuerant belli jure tenuitAgath. 1. de Theodor.: Quo devicto, cum omnia quae illius fuissent, jure belli Setenci facta sintLiv. 43.: and Bocchus in Salust; ob regnum tutandum arma s∣cepisse, nam Numidiae partem unde jugurtham expule∣rat, jure belli suam factam. The Conquest of Willia the First must have been only of Harald and his Parti∣fans (against whom he pretended title,) and not o
of England; else his Successors had had Absolute Po∣wer, or had not had a good right. From all which we shall conclude with the great GrotiusGrot: 2: 18: 2.2.: At reges qui bello solenni victi, regnoquo exuti sunt, cum aliis reg∣nibonis & jus legandi perdiderunt: So Paulus Aemilius did retain the Ambassadors of Perseus who was van∣quished by him. 4. This Acquisition is not only Legal in the Exter∣nal Law of Nations, but also most equitable in In∣ternal Justice, which, besides what is already hinted at both in Right and Fact, is farther demonstrated by this Deduction. There is a just cause of Acquisiti∣on by the Law of nature, when I acquire, that which was not mine, in place of what is mine, and what is due to me, and for repairing and punishing an injurious fact; from him who detained what is mine, and from whom I cannot obtain what is due tome, and who hath lesed me. For otherwayes, I could never be satisfied, the bare retention being fruitless and vain, if I have no right to use it. So when my debitor defers to pay, in lieu of my debt, I get, by Judicial Assignation, his Heretage: and exacti∣on of punishment is payment of that debt which is due to the Delict. But war among Princes, is like Actions betwixt private men before a Supreme Judge; fore∣goeing instances; and at last, Declaration, like to private Citations; finally entire and absolute Victo∣ry, to a Sentence. So that as a Sentence (decerning to me my Adversaries estate, for what is mine, and due to me, and punishment of a bygone Crime, and refractoriness in not giving Caution for the future) jus firmum confert and is most just: so must also the like Acquisition by Victory. Let us consider the true matter of Fact in the Memorial, and Declarations, and there after; the unpayed expences due to, and unretracted injuries (by Proclamations and Letters) against the Prince himself, the short time K. James could, yea, he would not on just conditions, enjoy
the Crown; and its coming to his Children, Paris of his own body; finally the difference betwixt this publick affair and private concerns; and we shall find the Reparation less then Equivalent. For he, who cited for one debt of cautio de damno infecto, to one person; or for one crime against a single man; is Contumacious; loseth the whole thing from which damage is (on Oath) feared, and whole goods (yea Estate,D. D. ad Tit. ff. Dmm. infect. & ad Tit. req: reis, & bs: damm. in Notour Treason) yet he is judged, in Inter∣nal Justice it self, from his implyed consent, to suffer only the Equivalent. How much more therefore, in our case, where there are many debts, to many persons, damage justly feared to a Multitude, re∣peared injuries done to three Kingdoms, and that ones too of the highest nature; and a final Contumacious∣ness to grant redress or security, for the present or future, in any of all these most weighty points. Tho we poise this Equivalency Absolutely in the ballance of Civil or Criminal Judgments, we shall perceive its Adequateness to the debts and Delicts. For he that is Contumax, can not appeal; nor he who hath cōfessed, nor be who hath once assented to stand to the JudgmentStruv: Exer. 50.11. Tit. ff. de app. recip. vel non. But K. J. did assent to a Par:Vid. his Proposals Dec. 8. 1688. This is known by his pub: lick writs & deeds.; confessed partly expresly, partly materially, most of the violati∣ons objected *; and at first and last was Contumax, Non defendere videtur, non tantum qui latitat, sed & is qui praesens negat se defendere; aut non vult suscipere Actionem 51. ff.  1.: and Consequently cannot appeal, or alledge any inequality Even as the Merit of a Delict, in the opinion of all Lawyers; is heightned from the cause which moved the Committer; the cause which should have restrained him; and his Idoneity to con∣sider both. Injustice is the greater, the great dam∣mage is inferred thereby; when it is consummate; or the nearer it comes to the last Act; that which pre∣judges many; and that from which its probable great loss might follow on. If there be joyned to i n other vice of, impiety towards Children, inhu∣manity
to Relatons, Ingratitude to Benefactors. f it be frequent and habitual, in a Person of perfect Age, all these Aggravations augment its Atrocious∣ness. Much Bile, great Power, consummate expe∣rience, and above all if it be infused by Education, nd opinion of Religion, make it the more formida∣ble, and less evitable; and so must be the more Pre∣autioned against. I leave those who know the mat∣ers of Fact (1) the Transactions of Court; to mke he Application. If their remain any scruple as yet, s to the disproportion betwixt the Debts and Delicts f K. J. and their recompence, and satisfaction ob∣ained for them; the famous Royalist ZieglerusGrot. P. M. 538. will olve it: For says he, Magis igitur erit ut continuetur bellum etiam post acceptam satisfactionem, donec hostis Pacis expetat conditiones. Succedit enim in locum pristi∣narum causarum alia nova, quae est causa periculi vi∣tadi. Siquidem ille adversus quem bellum motum fuit, brevi post tempore, insurget, bellumque nullâ just â causâ sibi illa tum causabitur, maximisque coptis, in∣jurias vindicaturus, praesto est. It is true villanous Counsellors set this, otherways, orious Monarch on so Enormous doings, whileas, f himself, he was just and Clement: But this does ot exoner him from Punishment in the Law of all ationsRom 1. Fin. Se. interdum, Inst. urt. L Impe∣rator. ff. qui sine man: L. 2. st. de Nox. Act. since he sinned in not restraining and pu∣shing them. For he who commends a vitious fact, elps in, and lends his name to it; approves and raises it; does not Prohibite when he can, and ould forbid it; who Refets the committers; does ot disswade them when obliged thereto; or Succours ot the Sufferers tho holden to do the same; assent∣th to, and Participats in the guilt. Salvianus of Kings, Potestas magna & Potentissima, quae probi∣bere scelus maximum potest, quasi probat dehere fieri si sciens patitur perpeirari: And Dion in Galba; Priva∣tis sufficit, non delinquere. In Imperio agentibus in∣nbit, & hoc curare, ne delinquat alius: As Augustin,
Qui desinit obviare, cum potest, consentit: And, Qui facinorosum, adstans, hortatar, pro faciente habeturLeg. Long. Li.b 1. Tit. 9. Sect. 251 The reason of which is rendred by Arnobius, Quisqui patitur peccare peccantem, is vires subministrat audaciaeArnol. Adv. Gent. C. 4. And Salvianus, In cujus manu est ut prohibeat, jubet agi si non prohibet admitti. And so since these Concurren∣ces suffice to make up a Merit answerable to the punishment inflicted on K. J. we shall make no more unfavourable gloss on his share in the Tragedy of our Miseries: And consequently the least, we can con∣clude from the Premisses, is, that since this war was inferred for taking away, and continuing to withhold our Properties; the Brocard Quae fecit; si quisque ferat, jus fiet & Aequum, holds of K. J. the Question being betwixt him, and the P. (1) two Soveraigns. Punishment is naturally an evil of Passion which is inflicted for an evil of Acti¦on; and so what hath befallen K. J. is most Just Quâ such a punishment: For Hierax defines Justice Paenae exactionem ab iis qui priores lae sêre; And Plato af∣firms, Nec Deorum nec hominum quisquam hoc dixerit in juste agenti non luendam paenam. 5. When the Supreme Rulers of any People are overthrown, all that pertained to them becomes the overthrower's, wherever it lye and exist; (1) Al their Territories. To evidence this truth, observ that we speak only of the Conquest of a King's right which, being Incorporeal, & wholly in his Person, i acquired (his person subdued) in Ʋniversum to the Con∣queror: not of the Conquest of a Kingdom, which (be∣ing Corporeal, and there being many persons Proprie¦tars thereof who must be subdued; the design being to acquire the rights of all, both of King & Subject, requires to be possessed naturally by, and so confi∣med to, the Conqueror. In a word the Incorporea right accressing to the Conqueror by conquest of  King, is not the object of corporeal apprehension, and so any Act of use on the Conqueror's part, and
sufferance on the Conquered's, is sufficient to the Acquisition thereof: just as usus & patientia suffice to the Transmission of other Incorporeal Rights, for example, a Liferent. But all the lands of the a Kingdom being the proper Object of Corporeal Apprehension; there are, as many Corporal acts of Possession re∣quired to the Acquisition of each individual owner's portion, as were in the former case, to acquire the King's. Victory therefore, over a King only, falls out two ways, viz. either of, and over his Army; himself being free: or of, and over a King being present and his Army; whereby he comes in the Pow∣er of the Victor. In the first case the Victor can ac∣quire no Dominion or Empire as to the Territories; and that for defect of the matter of Acquisition in the persons of the Victi the Souldiers, and of the form in respect of the Territories: For the Souldiers having no such Right, it cannot be had from them; and the Territories, (their Master never having been in Po∣wer, but they remaining possest in his name) are not acquired till actual and firm possession be taken there∣of by making or taking Forts, and the likeGrot. 3.4 4.. The same holds, as Lawyers assert, when a King is Van∣quished and taken without his own Bounds, as Fran∣is. I. was in Italy. Because he had not, (at least) the full exercise of Regal Power extra Territorium, and being taken, only with his, then present, Qualities, could not lose it: and because there was Positive Re∣uctancy of the Subjects, (the war being against them also) who designed not only to defend their King's right, (and so continued to possess in his Name, with∣out the least actual desturbance by the Victor) but al∣so their own Patrimonies. But in our second case; when a King in person, nd within his own Dominions is come in the Power, nd Subjected to the Arbitriment, of the Victor: and eaves all his Territores to the Possession of the Con∣ructor; without any dissent, yea, with Homologa∣tion
of the Subjects: All wheresoever sited, acces∣sed to the same Successor, as there was no Division in the subjugated person of the Author. For a King∣dom is one united Totum, whose parts are Coherent as those of a house: so this Totum being individual, and unpssessed by another, (as, after desertion, Scotland was not possest by K. J) the least Act in the Conquerors name, (as the proclaiming his Declarati∣on, &c.) In any part thereof, acquires, per Ʋnion sitatem, Civil Poffession, and consequently Imperi∣al right, of the Whole: Just as the acquirer needs nei∣ther come not send to all the rooms of a vacant house. What is an Enemie's, is in LawL. divus ff. jur. Fisc. L. bona, Se: apparet, de capt. & post lim. res nullius, & ips pro nullo habetur: and so, even as a deserted Regio is acquired by setting up the least Symbol of poffessi∣on on on the border thereof, (which we have seen in the Indies,) the whole Complex of a King's Dominion is acquired to him who subdued his person, their Ac∣ceding so evident Symbols of possession as were so the P. thorow all Britain. Per Occupationem, says the LawyersBecler. L. 2. C. 2. pussen: L. 4. C. 6., quae fit per universitatem acquiritur domini & Imperium in omnia quae isto tractu comprehendun sola animi destinatione, citra actum corporalem speci∣lem: non est opus ut quis singulas glebas circumambules∣sed dum quis fundum, (idem de insula,) intrat ani cum occupandi, statim Totum occupasse intelligiu So the adjacent Sea is possest and in Dominion of an King of Britain, without any special Apprehension and the Venetian Marries the whole Adriatick by the simple Act of diving a ring therein; whence nothin hindred the P. to acquire the Regal Right by Equipo∣lent acts and means. This Acquisition is like that an Heir, (yea a Conqueror is in effect, at least, a Heir; according to that famous Title of Law, P qui in universum jus succedunt, Haevedis loco habenturL. 1 8. Se. ult. . R. 1. who by Gestion of one Act acquires all his Predece∣sor's Estate wheresoever it be. And as, when one made Captive, the taker acquires all things Copor
and Incorporeal which were his, (whether about his person when taken, or lying in the Victors Domini∣ons, or in any Neutral's Territorry) as accessory to his personGrotius 3.9.6.. The Essence of Dominion consists, in being subjected to our Power and Disposal: Hence the word Possession comes from posse sedere, a Possi∣bility of positio sedis in a place when one pleases: (As in the Civil Law possession is acquired, Oculis, quasi longis manibus, when the thing is patent, and no im∣pediment to enter it) and so; since all K. J. had was in the P's. Power (Ireland follows England, as an ac∣cessory its Principal, and the Roman Provinces; RomeVid. Grotius 3.6.26..) and Legal disposal, for there was none to hinder it; he had also Possession, (External acts pre∣ceeding and Concomitant) and Dominion thereof. That is to say, K. J's. Territories became the P's. Ter∣ritories: whether that word comes a terrendis hostibus thence, by Forts and Forces; or a terrendi jure there, by the Magistrates not acting, what was done, (in K. J. Name) or a terra it self, which was then under the P. (not K. J.) Power and Government. So Hannibal to his Souldiers, Quicquid Romani tot triumphis partum congestumque possident, id omne nostrum cum ipsis Dominis suurumestLiv. 27.. Menander concerning the Territories of the City Daras, Cum Ʋrbs ipsa belli jure a se subjugata esset, Rationis esse, ut & quae sub Ʋrbe fuerant ad se pertinerent. The Vandals defeat, Bellisarius did vindicate Lilybeam n Sicily, as pertain∣ing to themProcor. 2. Vand.: Henry F. Barbarosas son. Sicily taken, did assert to himself Epidamus, Thessalonica, and others possest by the SiciliansNicots Lib. 1.. Bajanus to the Emperor, Ad se ean Ʋrbem pertinere, ut quae Goepidarum fuisset qui Gaepidae ab ipso essent victi. And so these Authors, speaking of Democracies, speak, only, of the sole Su∣preme Governors being subjugated, which is the case in hand, and so inserts our Conclusion. If any after all this, pretend, that (thô the Ps: jus ad rem be undenyable, yet) those Acts of Civil pos∣session
by him, (which existed before delation of the Interregnal Governments,) were not compleat; and sufficient to his acquiring a plenary jus in re. Giv∣ing but not granting this: he hath now a Consum∣mate and compleat real Right (possession, altogether full, having now acceded to his Title,) and that, (as to K. J. and his Partizans) by Conquest confirmed by consent (which was manifested by Election) of the Subjects. For the state of war (not made up by a peace) remains; and so that Title of Conquest con∣tinues still, (as to K. J.) and the P's. present possession is undoubted (possession, being, Detentio rei cum af∣fectione & animo sibi habendi) and so it may be assign∣ed to that Title when the Question is with K. J. since a man may possess a thing by two, or more TitlesL. 3. § 4. ff. acq. poss. L. 159. ff. de R. J. and thence K. J. is dispossessed entirly; for two can∣not possess in solidum the same thing, in the same kind, & at the same time; no more then two can sit or stand in the same individual place at once: and whatever the P. formerly resigned in favours of, and Trans∣acted with, the Subjects, cannot advantage K. J. who holds, that their actings are null; seeing, Res inter alios acta, aliis non prodest; ubi personae conditio locum facit beneficio, ibi, deficiente eâ, beneficium quoque de∣ficitL. in omnibus causis. ff. R. J.; qui legem contemnit, non debet frui ejus benesicio, nihili nullae sunt proprietates, & quod nullum est, nullum, de jure, sortitur effectum. But the truth is that, the P's. Right was, (before now) entirely Consummated by K. J his desertion. A Contract, Emption v.g. is said to be perfected, when (its Effential Requisits being present) jus ad rem emptam is perfectly stated in the person of the Buyer: And it is said to be Consum∣mated when, in vertue of that Right, he obtains jus in re, or the thing bought delivered to him. Even so was the P's. Right of Conquest perfected and con∣summated according to the Law of Nations, which is a comune Contract of all Princes and consequently of K. J. also. For a Just and Solemn war against a
King, (not satisfieing its causes) gives jus ad rem, O (as Livius calls it) Title to his Regal right: Acts of Capture and possession; and finally, full Victory; and that King's giving over (by desertion) all to the Victor: is the same with Tradition: and Conse∣quently confers jus in re on the Conqueror. It were expedient here to clucidate how K. J. his leaving us, was a Dereliction: but since his deserti∣on not only left a real right to the Prince, but also free Liberty to the Subjects to acknowledge the same; that shall be expeded in the third Section, where both their rights are considered joyntly. Here only, a great Block shall be removed out of the way, viz. That K. J's. going off was occasioned by Fear; and so say they, it should not prejudge him. This is wholly false in a Solemn War; since the Hebrew Kings were accused by the Prophets, and punished by God, for coming against what was done out of such a fear and compulsionEzech. C. 17.. For, Fear is a passion and Trepidation of the mind be∣cause of some present, or certain future evil. What is done through this fear, & to evite that evil, is Spon∣taneous and voluntar, and so once subsists: for of two evils, to do or suffer, he voluntarly (ex post facto, & pofito illo casu, licet non ab initio,) choiceth to do as the least evil, and in so farr good. Coacta voluntas etiam voluntas est sayeth the Law: AndGrot. 2.11.7.2. Qui metu ali∣quid fecit, obligatur, quia consensus hic ad fui, non condi∣tionalis, sed absolutus. In this, fear differs from Force and Absolute Violence. For what is done by proper force is acted only by the Forcer himself with∣out any concurrence of the Sufferer: As when a man is dragged out of his house; which cannot be said of K. J. who had full freedom, and was intreated, to stay in his Kingdoms. Moreover, what is lost through fear, stands firm, and is not subject, no not to be restor∣ed in integrum, on two grounds principally. First f it be a vain fear: Secondly, tho the fear be not
vain, if the cause be just which occasioned it. As to the first: vanus timor is, when the fear is not such, that it would put a Moral necessity, on the most constant man, to do what is done therethroughBachov. Zoes.ad Tit. ff. quod met. causa.. So suspicion is no just cause of fearL. 9. pr. Q.M.C.; nor when one con∣ceives fear to himself, from an other's great powerL. 6. C. cod. Michael de Luna & Arrol. de rati. imperti Lib: 1: c: 10., unless, at most, threatned thereby. So that fear, which would be just in a Peasant, is in Law, esteem∣ed vain in a Souldier: and that which would afford restitution to a Pusillanimous man, will not be na∣med to, as reflecting on a Nobleman. Hence, what shall we pronounce of K. J's. fear; he being so Mag∣nanimous a Prince; and secured by most Solemn promises of a Faith never Temerated: Nature hav∣ing garded him by the untainted honour of a Prince, and affectioned Intercessions of a Daughter: The Army being for, not against him, if he would have consented to be joyntly protected by his own Laws. The rejecting all which gave us just fears indeed, that it was a designed total Conquest (not fear) which caused his Desertion. As to the second: Tho this fear was not vanus ti∣mor, yet the cause being just which occasioned it, viz. A Solemn War, what is lost thereby, is irre∣coverable. For K. J. gave cause to the war on him; and so his own Scholsticks decide, At qui causam dedit cur vim pati aut metu cogi debeat, habet quod sibi imputet: nam involuntarium ex voluntario ortum ha∣bes, pro voluntario habeturLessius Lib. 11. c. 17. Dub: 6: Grot. 2.17.18:. In a word, all LaywersStruv. Ex. 8. Th. 12: Mich de Lun. L. 2 c. 10. are express, that what is done out of fear (which a King hath driven on himself) of the effects in a Solemn war, can never be come against. Sicut Gentium consensu introductum est ut bella omnia, sum∣mae potestatis autoritate utrinque, gesta & indicta, pro justis habeantur quo ad effectus externos; ita & hoc, ut talis belli metus hactenus pro justo habeatur, ne quod ita obterum est repeti possitBodin. de rep: L: 4: c: 6. Grot. 2.17.19. & Lib: 3: 19: 11:: So Grotius again; Bel∣lum sollenne (i.e.) publicum utrinque & indictum, si∣cut
alia habet Peculiaria in jure Gentium externo posita, ita & hoc, ut quae in eo bello, aut ejus finiendi causa, promittuntur adeo sunt valida, ut ex causa metus injuste illati in irritum deduci non possint: Which Law of Nations was Absolutely necessary, because (as Gro∣tius adds,) Ni id placuisset bellis talibus (ubi metus utrinque infertur) quae valde sunt frequentia, nec modus nec finis potuisset imponi, quod tamen fieri, interest humani generis. And to take away this Law were in effect, to banish Faith from all publick Negotia∣tions, and Quiet from Mankind; since few Treaties but are made in Arms by Force, and thorow fear to lose Life, or goods; Liberty or the State: which are causes able to shake the most constant. From all which it most evidently appears, that the greatest fear could neither invalidate what K. J. did, or might have done, during his abode: nor consequently, at last, his Desertion: Even as he, who (made Captive in a just war) promiseth a sume for his Liberty is never exeemed from, but by his own party, forced to; PaymentChristin vol. 3. dec. Beli: 124. N. 9. Seqq.. And as, whatever right one, Legally Imprisoned, grants or renounces, is irreversibleL. 21. Pr: ff. Q. M C. 16. D. D.. And if he run away for that debt, he can make no Advantage of being forced by Bailliffs; because the cause of the Force was Originally from himself, and he might and ought to have prevented it.
THESIS III. But his HIGHNESS having Over-given and Resigned, any Title of Conquest, to the Subjects (after the Conquered King's De∣serting them to the Conqueror, and thereby Consummating his right) the Regal Go∣vernment was (pro tempore) Dissolved; and they were as free, from K: J: as if a De∣mocracy had been Surrogate in its place. PROBATION. 1. THE Regal Right being thus stated in the P: he, with a greatness of mind, rare in the Worlds History of our days; did resign the same to the Subjects considered in the Capacity in which they are represented in Parliament. Whence the P. (who alone had the whole Power & Empire, which before Conquest was K.J.) being denuded, Monarchy (as to K J:) necessarly ceased and was dissolved: and our State became a mixt Democracy, after the manner (only with Super-addition of the remanent Power which formerly was in the King) of the Ancient Represen∣tative. So Lycurgus did spoile himself, and the next heirs of the Heraclid race, of Supreme Power; to con∣ferr the same on his, even, Reluctant Citizens: changeing not only the State but Laws, of that thrice happy City. Even as those who wared befored Ninus did not seek Empire but GloryJustin. Lib. 1.. And as the P. glori∣ous Ancestors, and he, have done in, and to the so great advantage, of the Provinces. Antigonus is cele∣brated by Polybius, that when he had Sparta in his po∣wer, he left to them their State and Liberty: and the old vertuous Romans did vindicate Asia, Greece, and most other Cities from their cruel Tyrants, and then left them to their Liberty: as Agapetus (Pope) did to the Children of Valtierus Juetatus, because their
King Clotharius dispatched their Father before the Al∣tar. Who is able or willing in this decrepite Age, to parallel the piety of the Noble Romans, but our Prince For, as they permitted the Cappadocians to use what form of Government they pleased, so he transferred all his Right to us; to the end we might confer it again on King James, or any other, as we found the same most necessary for our safety and happiness: As Abraham took back the spoil, but re∣stored what was become his by the right of War, to the first Owners. 2. This entire Conversion, and thereon Vacancy of the Government, was declared by the States, (ac∣cording to their own inherent, and the Princes co-in∣cident power,) each Member giving his vote on the grounds which convinced his own conscience: And all Men, of what Opinion soever, may see how clear Reason there was for that Declaration, the P: hav∣ing over-given all his Right most evidently. For, a Man declares his mind three wayes, principally; viz. by Word, Write, and Deeds. But, First, the P: both by Word, Write, and Deeds, gave and enjoyned us absolute Liberty of Settleing and Disposing of the Government; And accordingly, in the second place, accepted the Government (in the interim) only cura∣torio nomine in the Peoples name, without any Maje∣sty. This charge, for, calling the States, keeping us in Ordr, and the protecting allAc∣cording to his Decla∣rations, & Delations of the Go∣vern∣ments Ci∣vil and Military, engaged him to wait here till the States final Determination; which being the Election of himself King: He, 3 ly, accepted that, as having then no Right of his own (by conquest) in which Quality he had accepted the former. The first of these was an explicite renunciation of all his Right; and the two last (tho the first sufficed, yet in confir∣mation thereof) contained necessarly an implyed one, which is equivalent to express. For, taciti & expressi eadem vis est, so he who redeems a Captive, with his own Money, tacitely renounces all Right in
the Redeemed, by subsequent embracing her in MarriageL: 13: c: de prost∣lim.; and the Fiduciary restores the fidei com∣miss, (not only verbis, but also) re, cum res à fidei com∣missario possideri, permittitL: re∣cusar: aq: haer.: So, sayes another LawL: 37: ff: ad sest Treb:, recusari haereditas non tantum verbis, sed etiam re, po∣test, aut quovis indicio voluntatis: | And he who (being Proprietar of a thing) wittingly contracteth with an other, who possesseth it, as Lord thereof, is judged to have remitted his property ‡:L: qui∣dam de re jud: Even as returning the Bond, contains a Remission of the Debt due to the ReturnerL. la∣beo. de pact.: And a Superiour conceding or commanding a Subject to do that which he cannot do lawfully, unless loosed from the Law, is under∣stood to have dispensed with the Law to that effectDD: ad l: Bab a rius de off: praefi:. 3. Whence now appears, wherefore the P: did not, then, take the name of King by conquest; and so short while retained the Right; viz. because moved thereto by Reason and Example. By Reason, for, (knowing that a Proprietare may have Dominion tho he call not himself Lord) he intended to acquire no more then was Absolutly ne∣cessary to satisfie (in omnem eventum) the Consciences of all Subjects; i. e. the Power: the which also, re∣solving immediatly to resign (since it was for us only, not himself, he came hither) he would not be called a King of some few dayes. By example, for, how many Hero's have Conquered, not only Kings, but Kingdoms; without ever assuming their Title? Wherefore, since we see the Advantage Translati Im∣perii; and that the P. proceedings, were such, as in their own nature, and in the meaning and use of all Ages, imported animum acquirendi Imperii: And since his promises to us all (to procure, omni habili modo, us Liberty of being once more happy) and his Charity to many (whose Scruples, and Insurrections thereon, he knew could not be otherwayes stoped; because they would judge their using that Liberty Criminal) did oblige him to the same: we must con∣clude
that, after K. J. desertion of all other means, he intended this Acquisition as the only remaining mean, (since any contrary Propositum, in animo, re∣tentum nihil operatur) to make all happy, and that in∣tuitu, and to the end, of this Translation: (Since this exeems all from the possibility of incurring any Delict.) In dubio (it self) ea capienda est Interpretatio, ut quis praesumatur deliquisseL: 51: ff: pro so∣cio.: Semper in dubio, be∣nigniora preferendaL: 56: de R: J:: & quoties idem sermo, duas sen∣tentias exprimit, ea potissimum acciptatur, quae rei ge∣rendae aptior est, ut valeat potius quam pereat societas, & quae est secundum ejus naturamL: 67: d R: I: 16. DD.: But the P's: having Right (thô not nomine yet re, and not as to the out∣ward form, yet as to the substantial matter) and its union with the States own power, excludes all de∣lict from the Acquiesence in their Determinations; and so is the most benigne interpretation, being ac∣cording the Nature; (i. e.) the maintenance of So∣ciety, as the contrary gloss tends to its ruine; and consequently, thô the matter were doubtful, as it is clear, all, who cannot be satisfied otherwayes, should follow this interpretation, else they are enemies to the GOD of Order and Peace, as being enemies to, and disturbers of, Humane Lawful Society. Hence also is clear, that it was not free for any Mutineer to dissent from the subjection he (even) then owed by vertue of this Acquisition and Tran∣slation of the Regal Right; for he was oblieged to Obedience and Complyance on two accounts; First, as to the P: become his Soveraign; since the debt of Allegiance remained unextinguished, the creditor therein, and object thereof, being only changed. Secondly, as to Fellow-subjects, (i. e. the State) since the Obligation to them as parts of the same body (which was Anterior to (and so separable from, and is as binding as) that to the head; whose Society with the Members was only dissolved; but not that of the Members between themselvesQuod non ex∣presse mu∣tatum est cu stare prohibe∣bitur.) Remaining with∣out
any change, even in the Creditors and Object, obstricted him, to the publick good of the Major part, that being the indispensible bond of all those who have once consented to a perpetual Society. For which cause also; the States Determinations did ob∣liege such a Dissenter tho he was unwilling to accept the P's. gracious benefit of Liberty: since, (all his Brethren Subjects being peculiarly interested therein) cum alterius interest, publice aut privatim, invito deu beneficiumDD. ad L. invito R. J.: And since he was freed Antecedently by the P. and K. J's. own facts, from his debt of Allegi∣ance to K. J. for Debitor liberatur, cum quis, eo invito, solvit ejus CreditoriTit. In∣stit. Q. M. O. Tol.; Et desinit debitor esse qui nactus est exceptionem justam, nec ab aequitate naturali abhorre∣temL. 68. de R. 1.. Finally, tho this Acquisition and Translation was not particularly known to some, even good Pa∣triots; yet (that being Internal and so Latent to us, and the States having willed generally, all means ne∣cessary or conducing to their end;) the external effects are not impeded thereby: since, Quod animo retentum est nihil operatur; & licet in causis dissenserint, tamen in hoc convenerunt ut jus transiret omni habili mo∣doSee the DD. who write at large, ad Tit. de Aq. re∣rum dom:. 4. That which summes up all reasonings, and re∣moves all (even) difficulty from the Premisses, i K. J. Desertion. For K. J. resolved not to keep hi Crowns in the quality, and on the conditions offere (else he had acquiesced in them) but intended to hav a new Right without any of those Legal Cloggs; (els he had continued to exerce his old right in that quali¦ty; a thing then, so necessary and implored:) An so dispairing to retain his Kingdoms (as he woul have them) left the Subjects in confusion, and th Prince to order them. This was a real and absolut present Desertion; and consequently gave all righ desireable both to Prince and Subjects. It is th dictate of Nature that we collect the Will from Sign proper and fit to declare it by Moral (not Mathema¦tical)
certainty: For the Nature and Non-perturbance of humane Society require that those signs have some efficacy; since it is not possible to know the mind otherwayes. And so K. J's. going off is a sign morally demonstrative of a present desertion by the feet, in im∣moveables; as Abjection by the hands, is of Dere∣liction in moveables. For since he willed, not to keep his possessions, (which he had Power to do by once saying, Le Roy le veut, to our demands,) he willed to leave them as (being so hemmed) things of no value: And this leaving them is Dereliction and Desertion; relinquo and desero signifying only to leave. Government is so necessary for the preservation of Subjects, that he who intends to have Subjects must at the same time intend to Govern them. No man can serve two Masters; and so In consistencie (the will of reigning, and the will of leaving us to the P's. Regiment, [for he knew what the Subjects would do after his removal,] being inconsistent) he hath Abdi∣cated. At least he hath really given over his Possession at present; but on condition (Resolutive) in effect, of recovery or being restored in the future; which suf∣fices to the Conqueror: Since, Si quis eâ mente posses∣sionem tradit ut postea ei rei Restituatur, desinit possidere †.L. 17, Sect. 1. ff: Aq: Poss. And the Conqueror is not obliged to admit that con∣dition, he having once jus quaesitum, and the state of War (to whose causes much is superadded by K. J.) still continuing. The truth is: any purpose of an After-game (being only Vagrant, and uncertain fu∣turity, contrarium facto of present Retention, and mostly animo retentum) nihil potest operari, as the La∣wyers speak, to intervert what he hath explicitely and actually done, and our present just right of Pos∣session thereon: Since, Nemo potest mutare consilium suum in alterius injuriamL. 65. de R. 1.; & paenitendo non, nocens esse desint. He who suffers his Child or Slave to be exposed to an∣others compassion which he hath not himself (says L. 2.
C. de infant. expos.) is judged to have deserted his Pa∣ternal or Dominical Power, which he hath shown himself unworthy of: And are not Subjects a Kings Chil∣dren, and were they not (when permitted and ex∣posed to the P's. Compassion) K. J's. Slaves. It is cal∣led Desertion, in a Commander, when once leav∣ing his station and Souldiers; he, in the day of Battel, flyeth from his Colours: and in a Master of a Man of War, who in the sury of the Fight, gives over the Helm and permits (as to him) the Ship to Split: and in the Governour of a tenible Castle, who, when (in a Siege) there is most need of his Presence, slips from his Office out at a Postern: all which will hold more firmly, when the Enemy demanded nothing but what those Officers were obliged to by the Law of Arms, their King had commanded to grant, and their Souldiers supplicated to conced. Even so K. J. (the Commander, Master, and Governour of these Kingdoms, which are like an Army, Ship, or Castle †.) leaving that Post in which GOD had set him;Sen. Epist. 102. when the P. required nothing but what was the Law of Na∣tions, according to the Word of the KING of Kings, and the Subjects humble Remonstrances; must be acknowledged to have Deserted. If Subjects once leave their King in his greatest straits when he exacts nothing of them but what their own Laws do bind them to; this is Defection: and so a King's once leaving (a Prince and) his Subjects, (in their greatest needs,) craving meerly what his own Laws (and consequently that of Nations) do determine, is De∣sertion: since Correlativorum eadem est ratio & Disci∣plina. A Kingdom is a Body (Political) and the King (Analogically) its Spirit, (Spiritus vitalis quem tot milia trahuntSen. de Clem. L. 1 C. 4.) Form, or SpeciesL: pro∣ponebatur de jud.. Government is the full and perfect Consociation of the Members and parts cohering by the commontye of this Spirit and Form (as to the Head it self.) When this Spirit
d Form do not appear, it is all the same with Non-istence: Quod non apparet pro eo est quasinon sitGrotius 2.8.7., n esse & non apparere tantundem valent, quoad eum cui napparetGrotius. 2.10 9. qui in urbe Roma est ita ut lateat, nondum ptus paulo videtur; opus enim est ut cognoscatur ‡ nd in Law, sub factis comprehenduntur non facta.L. Ult: ff: de capt. So at as when sickness vehemently encreasing; the oul separates from the Body; Man rests dead (as  that form) unless of new inspired; and a toured pring, the Form or Impediment removed, returns  at least) to a more lax posture: the Government  abandoned by its life, (K. J.) was revived, and con∣rained Liberty rested at its scope, in his Highness osome. There is an egregious example among the Jews, where, if the poor did partly Collect, partly Neglect the Corn lest to them by the Lord of the Ground, that which they neglected might be taken up by any as DerelinquishedSeld. lib: 6: c: 6: p: 699:. Which we hall apply to our case, in the famous Conringius wordsConring: de fin. c. 19. N. 5. we heard befor, that in War, in∣volunta∣rium pro volunta∣rio habe∣tur. Derelinquit ille Imperium in civitatem qui sciens volensque * Patitur eam perire, aut in summum discrimen adduci; nec in salutem ejus quicquam movet dignum memoratu: nec enim ita se gerit circa rem quam pro sua vindicat, vir bonus & prudens, sed erga rem alienam. Grotius asserts, Amissum censetur cujus recuperandi spes projicitur: But K. J. having firmly concluded not to grant our demands, could have no opes of recovering his Estate at present (else he had not left it but granted and recovered) and so, pro tempore, he hath lost it, (at least) by Desertion. A Kings right in such cases is more easily amitted, then a private mans which he hath only for himself, and in which publick Peace is not concerned: But even a private man, Rem suam possideri resciscens, & vel non est admissus, vel majorem vim veretur, possidendi ani mum omississe censetur etiam invitusL. 3 S. 6. l. 6.7. acq. post. Bruner: diss: de poss: th. 11.; (For whileas it is said, Animo retinetur possessio; that is understood, not of a naked and vain Imagination and Cupidity,
but of that rational mind and will which may at plea∣sure exert it self, Corporis ministerio, in Imperat ActsStruv: Ex: 42: ch: 34.) And so all this must much more hold in K James's Desertion. We may rationally presume from K. J's. Noblene and Charity, that he Dispensed, like Solomons true Mo∣ther, who, for the sake of her Child, would rather re¦sign him up wholly to the Enemy, then reserve to he¦self, a share made dead and useless by the Sword; with his present frail Right, (in hopes of one mo fitting his Counsellours humour) whereby (at least) his own friends (whom he knew it was Morally im∣possible to have Protection or keep Life or goods o any other terms) might not be involved in Perma∣nent Rebellion in complying, or ruine in gainstan∣ing: since, if by his ill Administration, he had give occasion of sin or such damage, he were obnoxi∣ous to Divine displeasure. These Conjectures which also favour Piety, present Peace, and humane So∣ciety (whose Interest it is to have Empire fixed and incontrovertible) are to be extended to the outmost. Hence Custome (which is Law,Grot. 2.4.8. only by tacite con∣sent) is introduced by Subjects, only because th King does permit and Tolerate; but is not K. J. a∣parent leaving, and giving up all to the Conqueror determination, expresly to permit and Tolerat A Liferent is not only amitted by Non-usage, bu also by inundation Intercepting Possession thereo and by Civil Death:DD. ad Instit. q. m. u. a. but most Lawyers call the Reg Right a Liferent, and here was Non-usage culpa us fructuarii, and the Possession intercepted, and K. J. Civilly dead as to the Kingdom (after Desertion:) And so why was not his Liferent amitted; since the space o time is only of Civil Institution, and pertains to pr∣vate, not publick business, the reason and state o these being most different. Finally even as the Su being absent, and the Earth Ecclipsing its beams t be reflected from the Moon, we remain in Darkness
and the passages, of the Spirits directed from glandula i, stopt or marred, the Members have no, or on∣ convulsive, motion; and the Primum mobile cease∣g to act, the inferiour Orbs must sist also; and the unain dammed, the rivulets run dry for want of ntinued influence: So had we as to K. J. by his esertion; if the P. (come in his place and right) d not given light, Spirits, Motion, and Influence  our Government: i. e. the same Body remained,  Head only changed. Many would make much curious dissertation here, w K. J. deserted all his Legal Regal right; even ore the Childs birth. For (would they add) K. J. d Derelinquished, said aside, and neglected de∣nedly and voluntarly, the Administration of the vernment by Law (which was his only true, com∣ent and Legal Right) in all the parts thereof, Ci∣, Ecclesiastical, and Military; with intention no re to use it: But this is a full definition of Deserti∣, Go: &c. Legal and Illegal are inconsistent and compatible in the same Subject of Government:  so the sole use of Illegal Exercise totally exclud∣ the Legal as Deserted. King and Tyrant (qui tire ) are repugnant: and so he is no more a King who theast off the Fetters of the Law, then he is a Pr sn∣ who hath got at Absolute liberty by breaking, and  deserting his Prison: and he remains a Mn, but  a King, who leaves his line of Subordinaion to OD; as he remains a Man, but not a Subj ct (as  the Priviledges) who swerves from, and leaps  of his line of Subordination to the King. He can∣ be called a Father of his Subjects, who treats , not as Children, bu as Slaves: Or a Pastor  does not feed, but only fleece the Flock. Some  materially just, but not formally so, do no im∣de this entire Desertion, and so the Actor's be ng  King: since they are exrced, Ex usurpata pst r  Legitimá hactenus Derclictâ) and the real re
Nature, and so Denomination of things, are taken from the Major and Prevalent part: Even as he wh hath a servitude, amits the same either by an tota non-use thereof; or useing it, but not jure Servi tis,L. fin. l. 18. l. 10 S. 1. quem ad: serv. amitt. or not after the due and (by Law or Paction) pre∣scribed mannerL. 18: prl. ult eod. l. 1. S. 6. de iin acta∣que prio. or after a manner contrary to i Constitution: As Adam (Lord of the Creatures) b his Ambition yet mounted a step higher; and so (b one act) deserted that whole happy Post in which  stood and consisted formerly: and a Man is a Robbe (having thrown off honesty,) thô he affect some Justice in dividing the Prey or otherways; even as  Satyr is no Man, tho resembling him in face, g∣sture, and speech. Hence (would they proceed) the King becomin such a Man; the being meerly Passive, in not co∣curing with him (against a Forreign Prince come  rescue us by a War which was Lawful, and cons∣quently unlawful to resist) was no resisting the Ki nor consequently the Powers. For K. J. indeed U∣urped (in place of the, already Deserted, Leg and Limited) an Illegal and Despotical Powe which being null, unwarrantable, and he having  right to make use of (for mandatarius nullam habet p∣testatem extra fines [quoad Materiam aut Formam] m dato propositos; and a King is at most but GOD's M∣datare.) He had no Power, and consequently no was obliged to obey it, (at least) actively; since  whole Legal frame did then lye unhinged; and ad∣licitum nemo obligatur; and non Imperata jure nee jus exequi. No Mortals precept (especially when nul can excuse Suicide, if killed, or murder, if I kill, i wicked cause (such is the opposing a just war, sin Bellum nequit esse utrinque justum;) and so we did rig∣in obeying rather GOD then Man; since both bo and free must make count for their own Actions So Josephus tells us,Eph. 6.8. That the brave Jewish Souldi in Alexander the Great's Army, could neither by stri
nor reproaches be forced to carry (only) Materials for re∣pairing Belus's Temple in Babylon. Much less could any Law or Oath oblige Subjects here, to assist any Officer or Minister, in that crime against the P. see∣ing it is permitted by the Law of all Nations (and con∣sequently the Antecedent consent of all Soveraigns) even to actively resist them, exacting any thing unjust or illegal. For this is not resisting the King (in so far not represented by them, their Commissions be∣ing in so far null; since rei illicitae nullum est Manda∣tum) but holding their hands, and Parrieing the Rod. This was enacted by Kings as a Caution, that any thing Surreptitious, or formerly made Law by the King himself (with advice of his great Council that it was for the publick good of the State) were not obtruded for his real pleasure, or subverted by his less Solemn will (by the Delusion of any Particu∣lar lesser Council; to the publick ruine of the State.) Hence is the check of Seals, And Chancellours; and Rescript of Antiochus 3. Ne Magistratus sibi parerent si quid Legibus adversum jussisset; and Constantine, Ett∣amsi Imperatoris rescriptum proferaturVid. L. 1. C. de peit bon. subl. & ibi Cit: a brunem. and the sa∣mous Law (Devotum, C. de Metat) with the enlarg∣ments of the Doctors thereon. Hence it appears, that the Major part of Subjects (especially Scotland) being meerly Passive till K. J. final Desertion, were altogether blamless: (since all their Active concur∣rence sisted within their breasts without any fait ou∣vert.) Even in the Principles of the rigidst Mutineer. On this ground (of K. J. ceasing to be Lawful King by his own Spontaneous and deliberate Deserti∣on) would they justifie their inviting, and thereafter actively Assisting the P. (in both their Defence) a∣gainst him. But I shall relate the more moderate judgment of a Gentleman (and perhaps the remain∣der [Minor part of the Kingdom] were of the like o∣pinion) both as to the Invitation and active Assist∣ance, I, (said he, being a zealous Royalist) seeing
that without the safe-guard of a Non-subject-Prince, our Laws securing Religion, Lives, Liberties, and Properties, were but trifles (being without Sanction, since it is not permitted to Subjects to defend them, by themselves, say some Men) and seing the ruin of my self and Brethren in the overthrow of these Laws: concluded it lawful to invite the P: to use his Right of Defending them and us; and (ceasing to be K: J's: Subject and become the P's) to assist him, (come to England) as my present Soveraign. As to the First, Though it be Criminal in a Servant (be∣cause of his personal tie, and want of power) to pu∣nish his Master, delinquent against himself and the State; yet it is lawful, to him, to invoke another (no wayes unde that tie, and having power) to use his right therein: and consequently to SubjectsNota. Ts is the strain of e P lists wigs vid: Sur¦vey of Napht:. CHRIST, as Man, submitted himself (in our Na∣ture) to fulfi all righteousness; And consequently as a Subject, to all the Duties which Subjects owe to Kings: since he came in the forme of a Servant and Subject; and was made under the Law. Hence what might have been lawful to him (in His estate of hu∣miition) towards Magistrates, must be (now) lawful to us. But, though CHRIST would not resist Authority, & condemned the resisting it in Peter; (for that injurie was private,) YetMatth: 28: 52: He could have prayed to the Father, (who might do it) for legions, to His assist∣ance in that extremity of danger; (for all Judea was then tyrannized over, also;) And the only reason given (he) for omitting it, is, (not unlawfulness, but) because He was willing to be taken, knowing that it mst be so: This clearly implyes the possibility, of such a Call, (in Him) and consequently the law∣fulnes of such a Call (in us) of force against the oppressing Magistrate: And our King's by assisting ohrs on heir supplication, have approved and con∣seed i shuld be so. As to the second, I was indeed once under K: J: but (for the foresaid Reasons) I renounced and deserted my Domicil, and estate, animo
nunquam redeundi (on the resolutive condition of Non-Redress) and submitted to, and owned, the P: as my (now) Soverraign: which Surrender he accepted (which was meerly giving Sanctuary [causâ cognitâ] to a innocent flying thereto) by his DeclarationsVid: Decl: where he requires &c.. And so my Allegiance was transferred from King James, to his Highness; (Protection and Allegiance being na∣turally reciprocal;) and then I entered in a Religious Covenant under his conduct. LawyersGrotius Gail: Brunem: Struv: Wissenb: ad tit, st: ad mu∣nic: are express that, by the Law of Nature, Nations, and Recent customs, I had right of Liberty of Transition from, and then submission to, any Soveraign I pleased; And consequently to the P: (no Prohibition of this articular case preceeding, nor he pre-declared Enemie;) especially on grounds, so important to me, and profiable to K: Ja: I having left to him my whole Estate (the taking of which, I believed, ould be called Forefeilture) as the price (to con∣duce an other Souldier in my stead) of my necessary bsence. Nothing is unjust which hath not a neces∣ary Repugnancy with the Rational and Social Na∣ureGrot: 1: 2: 1: 3:: But this was not repugnant to the Rational Nature; summa enim ratio est quae pro Religione, & bertate facit: Nor to the Social; for I took this ourse for the good of both my New and Old Socie∣. Even so many Israelites (without consent of their en Kings) submitted themselves to,2 Chro. 29: 10: and 30: 25: were incor∣orate under, and entered in covenant with Asah d Hezekiah as become their King for carrying on a eformation, according to the Law †: They fell to mout of Israel, when they saw the LORD his GOD s with him2 Chr: 15: 9: 15., Junius renders it defecerunt ad eum; hers, Transfugerunt ad eum, dejecerunt se ei; im∣rting both their Defection from Baasha and Sub∣ssion to Asah, as his Subjects; Whence, V: 15: y are comprehended under the name of Judah. If it be pretended that, this Doctrine opens a door  perpetual Revolts of Subjects, Resp: 1: ab incom∣modo
nullum est argumentum: since incommodum and illicitum are quite different; and the abuse of a law∣ful thing by an other, does not take away from me the lawful use of it, else they might part us shortly with the BIBLE it self: Wherefore maneat usus, tol∣latur abusus, since Pirates also saile, and Robbert use weapons. 2: There is no such frequent incom∣modum in this: for, (besides, that this is commodious to the multitude of Subjects, yea, to the King him∣self [detained, for fear thereof, from sinning] and so to Humane Society;) there will be but too sel∣dome the concurrence, of a forreign Prince, univer∣sal unanimity of the Subjects, and sufficient causes in their King; all which are indispensible Requisits. Hence, a forraign Prince, and Subjects here, are ei∣ther conscientious, or not: if they be conscientious, there is no fear of their attempting without just cau∣ses; if they be not conscientious, they will attemp without any, or on other pretences (though we tak from them this:) And consequently there is no Ad∣vantage in not admitting this Doctrine; but grea Disadvantage to the Happiness and security of Man¦kind. In a word, it is certain that Subjects wi never ruin their own Quiet (if not possessed) cause¦lesly: and so the King will remain secure (if he b not raving.) And so we see from this Deductio that, at least, the major part (by which all Societ are estimate) of the Subjects being innocent; the acceding to the Prince; (even before K: James's la Desertion, and so the perfection of the Prince's righ did not impede or vitiate his Right, (subsequent a¦ter that Desertion) through Conquest. Wh would hold also as to its real effect, though some  these Subjects had laboured of some personal defe since accessorium non potest mutare principale, utile  inutile non vitiatur; propositum in animo retentum n operatur: And it is lawful to use evil instruments  good ends, and lawful to himself: (he forced so
too, whom he might have treated, as enemies to be meerly passiveTrans∣fugam jure bel∣li reci∣pimus l: trans∣fugam ff: de acq: rer: Dom::) as GOD himself does Devils and Sinners. From all which it is demonstra∣ble, that [this First being consummate by a Se∣cond, Desertion and final Disappearing as to any Capacity whatsoever] neither Prince nor Subjects have dethroned K: James, but he hath, by his own Facts, depoed himself: And that, it is not by Vi∣gour of any sentence he is un-King'd; but before any Act declaring meerly what was past, (the Mem∣bers being in effect, so many witnesses; [not Judges] not each to himself, but to the rest and the publick; just as, on that account, Legatarius potest esse testis in testamento ubi aliquid ei relictum est; & civis potest esse testisin causa suae universitatis;) he ceased to be King, ipso jure, (as Gracchus proved in the Tribunus-plebis himself, though most inviolablePlut: in Grac∣chum An Sacro∣sanctus erit, cui nihil aut sa∣rum aut fanctum fuit.) his remanent Right having ceded to the Conqueror, and from him to the Subejcts. THESIS IV. The now Manumitted, and so (from the late K: J:) free People, choicing to declare the (then) Prince their King, his present Possession is Founded on all the Rights that the utmost extent of Birth-right, Con∣quest, and Election, conjunctly or separatly, can afford: and so all his Majestie's proceed∣ings (as grounded on immoveable Justice,) are most consistent with his Honour and Glo∣ry. As shall be demonstrated. PROBATION. 1. THE People, having now the whole power in their own hands, might have declared it
to whom they pleased. i. e. King James, or King Wil∣liam, and Queen Mary. It is well known that they being Legally quite of K. J. the current of the Kingdoms ran against recalling and re-establishing him. Their general reasons were (not only the just∣ness of so punishing him [if it can be called any pu∣nishment] for bygones, but also) at home; the new danger of Popery and Slavery, against which K. J. would never have granted sufficient Security, (Re∣ligion and humour being perpetual Barrs thereto) and tho he would from within, yet he could not from without: since there was no way to do it (Pa∣pists promises [to Hereticks especially] being fides punica) from Forreign Combined Invasions: And Abroad; the cutting our selves off from the Protestant Allies, and them from us; a thing grosly against Interest, Gratitude, and Charity, considering their kindness to us, and both their, and our, present and future, Common Perils. Particulars were infinite, of which we had many in the Debates and Writings. Wherefore the States seeing, the Justice, Necessity, & Utility of Electing this time to declare the P: their Mo∣narch; did make that happy choice which he was graciously pleased to accept accordingly. This Con∣descention of His, was an Act of the greatest Justice, and Conscience, and Necessity of Duty and Honour; and consequently, nothing derogating from, but adding to, his former Renown and Glory. For His Majesty may be considered all along this Enterprise, either as a Soveraign Prince (Abstractly from any Relation;) or (Concretly) as K. J's. Nephew and Son-in-Law. I shall shew that, as the first, he hath been blameless; and as the second, nothing unduti∣ful: and Consequently, that as both, Virtue rears him up rather to Wonder then Imitation: For that (like Fabricius.) he was innocent even in war (which is so hard,) Et qui aliquid crederet & in hostem, nefas. This shall be done first in general; then in special both as to his Right by Conquest and as to his Right by Election.
First, in General. Since this was a Just and Solemn War, and also justly Prosecuted (as hath been pro∣ven) the P. (both as a Prince and Kinsman) is neces∣sarly blameless therein: (both as to its Consequen∣ces of Conquest and Election.) For as the Acheans said to the Senate, Quonam modo quae jure belli acta sunt in Disceptationem venient? quicquid in hostibus feci, jus belli defenditLiv. 26.: And as Marcellus, of Souldiers, Quae commissa capite luerent, tum quia palludati fecerunt, LaudamusSen. Epist. 96.. That Mean which is necessary for ob∣taining a good and Lawful end, is also good and Lawful; for in Moralibus, qui dat finem, dat ea quae ad finem perducunt; & dato consequente, datur Antece∣dens sine quo ad consequens perveniri nequit. Neither must this necessity of the Means (requisite to a Law∣ful end) which we have right to use, be examined ac∣cording to a Physical Subtility, but Morally in a Moral Matter, such as War is. In particular, Theologues teach, that War being a means, is destinat to, (and so must preceed) the end (which is to remove those things which perturb Peace:) And so War and its effects continue still just, till by its means that end be gained and fully satisfiedThom. 1.2. Q. 40. Art. 1.. But the P's. end (viz. our Preservation from Popery and Tyranny, present or future) was Lawful; as hath been Demonstrated. And it was Morally impossible to obtain this end but by the means of War: (all others being rejected by K. J.) and to come at this one end by the means of War, there were only two Adequate and Plenary Manners Morally possible, viz. K. J's. own Concessi∣on, or the P's. become, in effect, King by Conquest for denyal of that. But K. J. first would conced but little, and at last (having deserted) could grant no∣thing at all: and so the Prince was Absolutly necessi∣tate (since he knew then [what appeared before Pro∣bably, and thereafter in the Meetings, certainly] that the Subjects would have it no other wayes) to use his own right. This he did most Justly and Noblie;
and that in special, first as to his Right of Conquest, then of Election. 1. As to the Right by Conquest: the Justice of in∣flicting that Punishment; and the necessity of duty and honour (by cause of the state in which K. J. him∣self had cast affairs) and so the Moral impossibility (by K. J. own fault) of hindring the Subjects pro∣ceedings (some way or other) against him; did ob∣lige the P. to use it. 1. As to the Justice of inflicting that Punishment (of useing the Right of Conquest:) The war and punishment being most just in themselves (as is pro∣ven formerly) both being inferred only, after K. J. was obstinatly Inflexible: the inflicting this punish∣ment in right of this war, must be fully justified; be∣cause K. J. hath consented thereto both by his Acts of first Transgressing, and then Deserting. For a De∣lict is a kind of involuntary Contract: since he who wills to, directly transgress (against the Law of Na∣tions V. G.) Indirectly, by Consequence, and imply∣edly, Wills also to merit punishment: So, Ipse te huic paenae subdidisti, say the EmperorsL. Im∣peratores: Jur. Filc. L. Ult.  ad L. jul. Maj.; and he who suffers himself to be Circumcised (when he might avert it by granting some thing in his Power, much more by paying a Debt) consents to the Circumcision and is punished accordinglyStruv: Ex. 8. th. 12.. Hence any damage sustained by the delinquent thorow the inflicting pu∣nishment, cannot be properly and truly called loss: since it's payment of an [implyedly] consensual debt due to the Delict; and Quidamnum sua culpâ sentit, non videtur damnum sentire; & nemo damnum facit nisi qui id facit, quod facere jus non habetL. 151 R: J:; Et non∣dum videtur vim facere qui jure suo utiturL. 155. R. J.; ut & nul∣lus videtur dolo facere qui jure suo utiturL. 55. R. J.. Whence there is no Injurie done to the Nocent when he is punished: Since, Non exiguo falluntur errore qui cen∣suram sive humanam sive divinam acerbitatis & malli nomine infamant; putantes noeentem dici oportere qui
Nocentes afficit paenaLvctant de ira Dei. C. 17.; And, Removeantur patroci∣nia quae favorem reis & Auxilium facinorosis imperti∣endo, maturari scelera feceruntL. 3. Cod. Theod. P. Consequently it is Justice (to which Princes are obliged [since the Law enjoyns, let not thy eye pity them] in so far as able and the Law of Nations permits) to punish Delin∣quents: and so it is no Inhumanity: For GOD, him∣self most Merciful; CHRIST most PatientMatth; 22.7. and Moses; the meekest on Earth; did most severely damn the disobedient. All which holds much more in our case, where (K. J. Person untouched) there is nothing taken from him, but his Deserted Estate: . e. the Power of farther Injuring. For the . as Seneed speaks, Non ira scitur sed cavet: did not Acquiesce in K. J's. evil; but respect His, Ours, and Others good. which did perfect the Equity and Moderation of this punishment. K. J. own good is expressed by Sene∣ca Sen. de ira. C. 6. (more largely then we require,) Interdum ut pe∣reant interest pereuntium, Because a Delinquent, as Plutarch hath it, is, Caeteris noxius at sibi Maxime: Wherefore it was less evil to die (at least as to the Estate only) then (without Repentance which Ad∣versity occasions) by living (thereto) to go on in sin∣ing; as a Medicine, which tho ungrateful to the taste, s healthful, must be given to those (at least) who are otherways irrecoverable. Our good is evident; for hereby we are secured from suffering the like hereaf∣er either from K. J. or others. All Mankind reaps Advantage from the terror of this publick Example: For Princes will be just, (and so Subjects rest happy) east their Neighbours should come and Vindicat esed Humanity; there being no barr of Rebellion. 2. Necessity of Duty and Honour (by cause of the tate to which K: J: had drawn Affairs;) and so the oral impossibility (by K: J's own fault) of impeding, t least, the Subjects even dethroning him; did ge the Prince indispensibly to use his Right by Con∣uest. That is, the Prince seeing an end, (viz.
Self-preservation; and consecutively thereto, [at least a probability of their firm Resolution of] the keep∣ing out of K: James; unalterably concluded by the Subjects: this mean (as most all-satisfying) to that end (the first part of which he would not, and the other [when concluded by the States] he could not, stope) was necessarly concluded by the Prince; yet so as also Legally; it being the inflicting that punishment which he had so just right to inflict. For first, As to Duty. It is known to all in what a strea the Subjects (as their Representatives [as freely elected as ever any were] also told, when advised were carried against K: Iames's return, when K: J himself had once se them free by Desertion. And s would the Prince himself (against Justice) in no using his own Right, (by a strange turn of th Tables,) once more ruin us: since K: J: neithe would in Humour, nor could in, his Religion, an Respect of Forreigners, sufficiently secure us there from: Or could the P: (in power) bring K: J: ba against Milions gainstanding; because they wer perswaded (be the Truth as it will) he went o to destroy them; and that they could expect no le at last (since Papists Religion cannot change, an there was a new subject of Revenge) by borrow∣ed aid; All outward appearances of safety notwith¦standing. And if the P: had left us (which alon [if that same] was in his power) exposed to con¦fusion, or our Enemies (both which were ine table by his deserting his Right, also;) he had, gainst the dictates of Nature, Law, and most s∣lemn promisesVid: his Decl:, (to cause our full Redress a Security) turned our benefit received (but impe∣fect as yet) to our Calamity. But the P: did therwise, as indeed, all that is Sacred did oblie him, in Duty. For, Thou shalt not deliver unto Master the (oppressed) Servant who is escaped fr his Master, unto the — thou shalt not oppress him† Deut: 23: 15, 16.
nd Non debet beneficium in calamitatem convertiL. 20. ff. de cap∣tivis.: nd so, we being given up and intrusted to his never otted Faith, Fides agi visa, deditor non prodiLiv. VII. Se∣ondly, as to Honour. True Honour is the reward  Virtue and Glorious Actions: Whence it hangeth  on the Airy esteem of Vulgar ignorant opinion; ing indeed of it self, Essential and Absolute, in∣rent and Natural, and so can have its Lustre (as e Diamond) from it self alone. Wherefore this ving been justice and Duty cannot be but honour∣le: whatever the Ignorant (of Right and Fact) ink; or the (knowing of both, but) wicked, ed, or interested pretend. Honour would not rmit such a mean Act; as to sist re infecta, and e over (to our irrepairable loss) that right K. I. mself had given, and thrown on, him, and that th so injurious Threats: since this had been bely∣g what he had already done, and tamely sitting down to acknowledge his former Errour. His Glory d Courage were incapable of such Pusillanimity: For if thou faint in the day of Adversity (such was to him K. I's. being Finally remediless) thy strength is small; if thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn to eath; & wilt thou not preserve them that are led to be ainProv. 24.10.11.12. ? Neither would it excuse the P. that what knew in this, we neither did, nor could, know rfectly (it being contrived of purpose, so as no gal Probation could be had: to do which is al∣ys easie to so great Masters and Secretaries as the suits, [for Example the Massacres never known  actually seen;] those of them who [for Money]  it to any, being sure [for their own future ety and honour of the Society] to do that, on word Honour and Oath never to discover the informers d witnesses.) For the Text adds. If thou say, old we know not of it; He that pondereth the hearts, b not He understand it? Finally, let us hear oncerning the right by Conquest) the Noble Ro∣mans
to the VolsciHalic. Lib. 7. Cum non a nobis hoc jus sit institu∣tum, sed a Diis verius quam ab hominibus profectum, Omniumque Gentium tam Graecarum quam Barbarar usu probatum; nihil vobis per ignaviam concedem Maximum enim id probrum foret quae virtute & sor tudine quaesua sunt, ea per formidinem aut stupore amittere: AndLib, 6. Neque enim induct possumus ut sul facilitate deleamus virtutis monuntenta, si ea illis r damus quibus semel perierunt. From all which it is perspicuous that no Commise∣ration or Clemency (entailed by Succession on ou great Prince) did engage him, not to use his Righ by Conquest. For the most Holy Altar it self, she∣ed no favour to those who troubled the State of the Countrey deliberatly: And (as Gilippus saysDiod. Sicul Lib. 13. These who (Dolo malo & injusta alieni cupida Very Coveting, much more Stealth, being a breach of th Commandments) fell into these evils; let them not ac∣cuse Fortune, let them not usurp the name of Suppli∣cants: for those Mens lives full of unjust deeds, ha left open no place for Pity or Refuge. Menander distin∣guisheth excellently Misfortune and Injurie. Injuria illud distat infortunio, Hoc casus, illam quod voluntas efficit: Whence CiceroCic de invent. 2. concludes, Misereri oportet  propter fortunam, non propter malitiam in misen sunt. Hence, since the injuries were done no only to the Prince, but the Subjects, and the dange impended over both; it could be no Clemency o Greatness of Mind in him, to remit their rights, a SenecaSen. de Clement C. 20: (speaking of a Prince) does argue, Na quemadmodum non est magni a nimi qui de alieno Liber lis est; it a Clementem non vocabo in alieno dolore fat∣lem. So we shall conclude with the Sentence of the Admirable LiviusLiv. 7., Satius judicemus pancos aliqu mala ferre quam immen sam multitudinem.
We see likewise from the Premisses, that the P. tended (abinitio) to take nothing from K. J. (that as truly his) on condition of granting the things de∣anded, but to leave the Scepter to him on the Con∣tions (noways truly Noxious, as himself and Pre∣cessors had prejudged in many Parliaments) of our reservation: as Hercules to Priamus, Suscipe, dixit, Rector, habenas, Patrioque, sede, celsus Solio, Sed Sceptra fide meliore tene. ut when K. J. would not keep it on these (first, long ifting the most of them, then all, by Desertion) ustice, Conscience, necessity of duty and honour, ompelled the P. (ex, post facto, & causa supervenien∣) the condition failing, to use his right of Conquest. ven as, when I pursue my Father for a Personal ebt of the duty or fact to which he is obliged, I in∣end not to evict his real estate; yet, he delaying, I'm onstrained to affect it by Adjudication: So in the ummonds of Denounciation, Conquest is not the Will ut implyed Certification. And as, when I wound a an in Self-defence, I intend not Primarly, and rom the beginning, his hurt (which would be Sin) ut my own Preservation: and in the Act it self, (be∣come necessare) I wish it were Morally possible, I might do any other thing to deterr or debilitate him: ut while as himself will not permit it, I remaine lamless. 2. As to the P's. right by Election; What is said of Conquest holds much more in his Accepting the Right by Election: since as K. J's. deeds and the Subjects ir∣epressible Resolutions have conferred and forced on he P. the first Right; so the Subjects by themselves (tho in a different manner) the second. The States might have run to Extremities (as the Suisses and Gri∣sns after getting out under the German Empire, or the
Provinces, Spain) or, he refusing, declared an other ( which they would have been torn with great Divisi err done; and when done, less happy; which his ∣clared promises tied the P. to prevent:) and t would no more (being at Liberty) by recalling K.  be shot (like the Eagle) with their own Pens: an the P. was engaged, to accept the offered Declar on of his own and K. J's. Childrens Rights, by  love he bore to them, and the Zeal and Obliga himself had to embrace all Lawful means of ser the Protestant Religion here, or elsewhere. The  signs of K. J. against both him and all Britain, appe∣ed from injurious Threatnings and great Prepara∣tions: Wherefore to have left us destitute of his C∣duct (armis & consilio) and Alliances (wh strength we had already, so Beneficially know had been to expose us to the very same ruine which came to Avert. But Justice, Duty, Necessity Conscience and Honour, did oblige him; that ( came at first, for us and our Religion) so to stay last, for us and our Religion; and (not only to beg but) continue in well-doing: especially consideri the very same causes (yea Augmented) continu (both as to K. J. and us) should produce the sa effects. And Potestates summae vim non presentem tum, sed quae de longe imminere videatur praevenire  junt, ulciscendo delictum, caeptum jam, sed non C∣summatumGrot, 2.1.16. As to the Prince's Relation, (in being Kins and Son in Law to K: J:) it renders, what he hath d (as a Prince) both as to his Right to Conquest a Election, no wayes undutiful. For, no Natu Bond obliegeth me to gift over the Right I ha from the Law of Nature or Nations; at least wh Justice, necessity of Duty, Conscience, and Hono obliege me to use it my self; No Relation bei iniquitatis vinculum; And Qui jure suo utitur, nulli  cit injuriam: and so that Relation could not hind
e P. (seeing the necessities from the Peoples irre table bent against K. J's. return) from doing these ties to his Religion, Glory, and Countrey. By e Law of Ordinate Charity we must do more e good of the Innocent then Nocent; and common en private: whence such an effectual love to our ood Friends, should only be exerted, except a eater, and more just, to many others (which is the rigine of all Pious censure and war) hinder it: be∣use inordinate Mercy to them were Cruelty to all hers; and punishing those, is, to these, Mercy. ence Augustin, Sicusest aliquando Misericordia puni∣, ita & Crudelitas parcens, And ChrysostomChrysost. ad. 1 Cor. 3.12. Non sevitiâ, sed ex bonitate talia faciunt homines. For ere are three, Successive Orders and Degrees of atural ties, viz. First to GOD, then our Country, d lastly to each single Man. And the inferior de∣ee, (to each single man) must by the order and aw of Nature, being Ballanced with, cede to, its wo Superiours. (To GOD and Countrey.) Hence e must leave Father and Mother and follow CHRIST; nd Cicero concludes, Patriam debere Parentibus esse iorem, and out of Demosthenes, Carum occidisti dum vis Succurrere, nullum Crimen habes: manus est tibi purior ac fiut ante. So a Tutor, thô being the King's Advocat, is oblig∣ed in Law and Honour to defend his Pupil against all Mortals; and so the King himself and nearest Rela∣tions: as in all private judgments (to which War is Assimilate) GOD hath prescribed, Neither shalt thou utenance a Poor man in his cause, —Nor honour the erson of the mightyExoa. 23.2. That is, (as Philo expresses) portet res abstrahere a Litigatorum respectu: Whence he doing the same (necessarly at least) in war, is owayes undutiful; especially since such a desperate Disease was irrepressible, unless by the sharpest Me∣dicines
Finally, Paul only requires Children themsel∣ves to obey Parents in the Lord; And QuintilianQutil. Decls. 271. S Imperesfilio ut sententiam dicat contra quam existimet, lice dicere, haec sunt quae sieri non oporiet: and so K. J's Commands could not break off the P. from what h was perswaded in his own mind. Approved exam∣ples go further then we require in our Circumstances For Thebe is praised for killing her Husband; and T∣moleon his Brother; and Cassius and Fulvius their Som for Tyrranny or endeavours to reduce it: Even a Presbiters (tho Brethren) depose incorrigible Bro∣thers. The Eleven Tribes did near Extirpate the Be∣jamites, (which breach, yet, the LORD made) after requiring, and their not hearkning, but making head against their Brethren: and that for one Crim of not delivering up the guilty of one MaleficeJud. 20.18.21.10.15. And smote Jabsh Gilead for not assisting. And Asa did that which was right in the sight of the Lord: and b heart was perfect: and Maacha his Mother, even her he removed from being Queen: because she had made  Idol in a Grove1 Kings 15.1, 13, 14. 1 Kin. 2.. Solomon accepted his Brother Ad∣ijah's Crown; and smote himself that he died2 Chron. 26. 2 Kin. 15. And Jotham, his Father Ʋzziah's; so soon as he wa cut off from the Congregation, for, his Usurping th Church's Right, and thereon, Leprosie †. So Sele∣cus King of Asia keeped the most famous Demetri (his Father in Law) in Perpetual Prison: and Hg Capet (which I mention, only to stop the Frenc King's mouth) his near Kinsman. Christiern King t Denmark thought it not against his Honour (his Bro∣ther being expelled) to accept his Crown; and Im∣prison himself (returning) in Calemburgh Castle Eadem Pietate (says Bodinus) Iohn King of Swede was forced to keep in Custody his Brother Henry, re∣pudiate by the People, lest he should have vexe himself and the Publick. The great Henry III.  England was Crowned in his Fathers lifetime. And I (1. & 6.) retained his Mothers Scepter, as the Pious Q
Elizabeth (a near Cousin) retained her Person long Captive. All these I hope, either in respect of their high Qualities, deep Knowledge, signal Piety, and be∣ing informed by the greatest Casuists and Lawiers, had sufficient sense of true honour, right, and Con∣science. Finally, To a just war (so called as justa nuptiae, justum testamentum) and to inferr its peculiar effects and consequences whatsoever; (without any respect to its cause or prosecution] there are only two things required in the Law of Nations, viz. Soveraign Power on both sides, and DenunciationGro. 1.3. Q. . 118. de V. S. and pos∣session on both these: and consequently after obtain∣ing Possession, all lawful Obedience is due to the Powers in such Possession. This Law was introduced by Nations for publick Utility and eviting grievous incommodity: So that it being a common Paction of all Mankind (as Civil Law is communis reipublicae spon∣sio) on so just grounds; the possession throw Con∣quest and by occasion of such a War, hath right transmitted by consent, not only of the Conquered (posito o casu) but of all other Mortals. And so the effect of this is, to be acknowledged by Forreigners, and obeyed by Subjects; and that he should be main∣tained in that Possession by both, according to that consent. Caeterum jure Gentium, non tantum is qui ex justa causa bellum gerit, sed & quivis, in bello so∣lenni, & sine fine modoque, dominus sit eorum quae hosti eripit: ut a Gentibus omnibus & ipse & qui ab en Titu∣lum habent, in possessione rerum talium tuendi sintGrot.  6.2. & 3.4.4 War among Princes is like Actions betwixt private men before a Supreme Judge; Victory and effect following thereon, to a Sentence and Execution: so that as, Res judicata proveritate habetur, & praetor jus dicit etiam cum iniqé decernit, Because in Tali jud cio quasi contrahitur; Conquest gives External right to the Conqueror, without respect to the internal ju∣stice. The Reasons that induced all Nations to this consent were evident.
I. Since many things both of Fact and Right escap the most acurate observation; and its impossible t observe exactly the precise measure of Defence, Re∣covery of what is due to us, or ours; or the Equiva¦lent merit of inflicted Punishment; necessity urget to leave the justice of the cause in War, and the mo∣deration used in its effect (and all following thereon) to the Religion of its Authors; since there is no com∣mone Judge, each party pretending he alone hath  just cause; and other States will not Pronounc therein, least they should be implicate in the Contro∣versie. It would be an endless task, and requite an Infallible History of the World (which is not to be made by Man) to prove clearly the just Titles from which any King whatsoever derives his Right: and therefore Possession of the Power and Force have been fixed as sufficient Charters thereof; there being no less necessity of securing this Dominion (for evit∣ing confusion) then of introducing Dominion at first (for that cause) by such an Universal tacit Renunci∣ation and consent of those interested in common. Necessity of it self, Legittimats exceptions (not ex∣prest) from general duties certainly incumbent by the Law of GOD in Expressum; as the instances of the Sabbath, Shew-Bread, plucking cars of (other mens) Corn, and Alliances betwixt Husband and Wife, do make manifest. But absolute Necessity engages (especially) private men, who are not able to judge a controverted Right, and ought not to prefer (in these Points of Law) their own ill infor∣med opinion, to the judgment of all other knowing Concitizens (since it was our consent and will, in first entering Society, that the Major part should ob∣lige each single man in those things for which that So∣ciety was institute [i. e. publick Determinations and common good] and not that there should be no pos∣sibility of establishing peace and calming differences: much more when there is a new consent by choicing
Representatives for that effect) to follow the guide of Possession in their Obedience. And Consequent∣ly this necessity much more Legittimats this obedi∣ence (not certainly prohibited by the Law of GOD, but) certainly enjoyned by it: as shall be proven hereafter. 2. The Advantages of private possession (ut ab armis abstineatur) especially obtained by Sentence (to which Victory is Equivalent) shews us the Rea∣sonableness of this Law. For any Possessor what∣somever, eo ipso, hath more right then he who pos∣sesseth not; and, in dubio, is judged for against the Petitor: for there is a Dominion of Possession it self besides the Presumptive Dominion of the thing pos∣sest. None is holden to produce the title of his pos∣session: and there is a presumption that he possesseth Lawfully. None is to be deprived (even of unjust) Possession without Cognition of the cause (or Citati∣on to that effect) and Moderamen inculpat tutelae is al∣lowed the possessor to defend it, even against a judge proceeding without that. Possessors have retention (at least) for necessar Expences: Et in pari causa (it self) semper melior est conditio possidentisSee for all these Cit. a Struv. Ex. 51. th. 23. Since all this obtains where there is little hazard of publick Peace, how much more must it obtain where publick Peace wold be, otherways, totally ruin'd: which solid ground made CyrusXenoph. instit. Cyri Plato de Legib. Cicer. Orat. ad Quir. cont. Rullum. Liv. Li. 35. to Relate, Lexest sempiterna inter homines, capid hostium Ʋrbe, eorundem res at∣que pecumas, victori cedere; And Plato, Bona, quae victus habuit, omnia Victoris fiunt; And Augustus judge him a Good Man and Citizen who would not have the present state changed; And Cicero, That it behoov∣ed a Patron of ease and concord to defend the Settlement of the Common-wealth, which is in Beeing for the time; And Livius, Optimum quemque presenti statu gaudere. 3. The necessity of admitting Possession obtained by, or by occasion of War, the only
that Demonstrateth Right (in its several kinds) among Supreme Princes, and over the Subjects; is Demonstrable from the context of the Worlds Hi∣story. For the first Origine of Kingly Power (at least after the Flood) was from, or by occasion of, Force (excepting perhaps, some Patriarchal and Consensual RightsBodin. rep. P. 579.:) which begune by Nimrod, the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Monarchies, were derived down by the same Title. So, the old Egyptian, Ethiopian, Graecian, Macedonian, Corinthian, Athenian, Lacedemonian, Cretian, Latin Kings, have got their Empires by Arms, transmitted the same by Succession to their Posterity. Four Emperours held the Roman Empire in one year, the Right ceding to the Stronger successively. The Grand Seigneur hath no other Title to all his Dominions; nor most that ever were setled under, that Mistriss of the World! Rome; or under the conquests of the Goths, Normans, Van∣dals, Hunns, &c. For their Liberty; against the ex∣tant Representatives of these Soveraigns. In a word (not to swell up particular Histories of Denmark, Sweden, France, &c.) remove all Right from pos∣session following on War as to Princes; and the Do∣ctrine of Ressistance as to Subjects (and one of these must have given the foresaid Rights) so that neither can afford a good title; there will not be one Law∣ful King, or State in all Europe: (especially in our times; when some Lawiers (particularly French, conclude neither Prescription nor Subjects consent to prejudge a Soveraign) And yet both Neighbour and Subjects have acknowledged them all Lawful  as both Christians and Pagans did, and do, in the for∣mer instances. All which irrefragably evinces that Mankind hath consented, Possession (on [at least a Lawful Denounced War) should decide all Con¦troversie of Debatable pretensions to the Right po¦sessed, both as to Prince and Subjects. Which is special Providence of GOD, who, otherways, ha
left Men more miserable then beasts; and the con∣fused World to flame in inextinguishable Combusti∣ons born Civil and Publick: Whileas now (for he is a GOD of Order) Possession, in a great measure, prevents these dreadful Convulsions. In the Con∣troversie about Olynthius, in Seneca: Vobis, Athenien∣ses, expedit; alioquin Imperium vestrum in Antiquos finesredigetur quicquid est bello partum: And Quinti∣lian Testifies, Jure belli Regna, Populos, fines Genti∣um, atque Ʋrbium Continert. We must not there∣fore, condemn and upbraid all the Princes and Sub∣jects (in every Revolution) since the Creation, in Criminally denying ObedienceNulla enim tam pro∣pria Re∣bellio est quam reitera∣tio belli emel sediti) contra victo∣rem. Rosenth: 10.35, 24. to our present hap∣py Government. 4. Domestick Precedents and Municipal Laws (to which K. J hath also consented and sworn, and so, on condition of the existence of such a case, re∣nounced his Right) go along, (as indeed, they can∣not hinder) this Law of Nations. For by the express Law11 H: 7. C. 1.4 Ed. 4.1.9 Ed. 4.12. Cook. just 3. fol. 7. of England; the People investing any, their King he becomes King Regnant; & so Treason is committed against him; yea which, the King out of Possession (whom it is no Treason to kill, and whose Pardons are null) coming again to the Crown, may punish as Treason. So Ed. IV. chased out of England, and Henry, VI set up, the Leagues with the former King and Realm subsisted; the right of the Successor and Body being the same, the Head only changedComines 3.6. Vid. Cambden. an. 1572.. Charles I. having sworn to the King of Spain expresly as King of Portugal, did receive Ambassadors from the then new King of Portugal, without being judged, in Eng∣land or Spain, to have broken his former Oath and League. Even as Charles VIII. having Conquered Naples his Discharges on receipt of publ ck dues, were sustained valid by the Vanquished being restoredAfflict. decis. Neip. 114.509.. Yea the Acts of a meer Tyrant and Usurper. (i. e. who without War Denounced, or being a Subject, hath
got Possession de facto, but no Right de jure Gentium, which is noways our case) subsist and obliege; least, otherways, Order and Justice taken away, all ran to ruineGrot. 1.4.15.. So Cicero and Florus argue for Sylla's Laws; and Cromwel's needed Rescinding, Et priva∣tio praesuppouit habitum. This Law of Nations holds much more, when the Possession hath the absolute consent both Tacite and Express, of, (yea proceed∣eth from) the People; as it was in all the steps the P. made both in first coming over; then taking on the Temporary; and at last, the perpetual Government. The last was by precedent consent of the whole Peo∣ple; and the first two by the wholes Ratihabition: which may be cleared by this Example. The Electi∣on of the Roman Emperors, by the Citizens of Rome (which was the Mistress, and alone had the Disposal of the Roman Empire) staying at Constantinople, (Bi∣santini Quirites, says Lucan) was valide by the tacite consent of the Senate and PeopleGros. 1.9.11.. Then the Election of them by the Senate became valid by the Peoples Ratihabition and Acquiescence: As the Legions Ele∣ctions (of themselves insufficient) were also confir∣med: and at last they declared their minds by the mouth of their Bishop and Principal Citizen: and the Emperors so established were, and are, acknow∣ledged by all Forraigners and Subjects. K. J's Muti∣ning Friends were, and are more, specially obliged to this Acquiescence and Consent; since they might have been prosecute as Rebels, Banditi, and Rob∣bers, but were (of admirable Clemency) spared: Even as a Captive in a just war cannot in Conscience, flee from the taker; for the right acquired in him should not be frustrated; and he owes him service by whom he is continued on life, in compensation of that Donation and BenefiteLessius Lib. 1. C. 15.. Whence also appears the natural reason of the Premises, viz. From whomso∣ever we get Protection, we owe to him as a return, Allegiance: and whosoever will, or can, not give us
Protection, hath no title to exact our Allegiance, i. e. Nature doth oblige us to preserve our selves, (un∣der the Conduct of a friend) and not to perish (for the sake of an enemy, especially) in every Revolution. 5. But that which absolutely Enforces, our con∣sent to this Law of Nations, and Obedience to the Powers that (in presenti) are, is the Authority of the holy Scriptures, and the Example of the Primitive Christians, and so, the Obligation of that Humility, Submission, and Peaceable Behaviour which our Re∣ligion teacheth us. For; the Power as it is a Pow∣er, and as it is in it self; and so as a Real Being and for our Good; is good and ordained of GOD: (since every real Being (evil is no being, but priva∣tion) is good of it self and effectively from GOD; And it is GOD that (by what means soever obtained) putteth down one, and setteth up another) without con∣sidering the justness of its Acquisition. Now, it is known that Nebuchadnazar's power over the Nations (was unjust in its Acquisition; and yet) when acquired, GOD calls him His servant, is said to set up his ThroneJer. 43.10., and threatneth him with destruction that, unlawfully, disobeyed himEzek. 17.2 Chron. 36.13. conferred. He made Zedekiah, as King under, and to give Oath of Fidelity to, him; while his own Prince Jeholachin was yet alive: this Oath, GOD (calling it mine) did approve; and therefore punished its breach, and the Re∣bellion against the Conqueror. The like Title had Cyrus, and yet in respect of his Power, the Lord calleth him his Shepherd, and his Anointed, and telleth that it should be himself that would confer that power upon himIsaiah. 44.45.. But which is more, it is certain from all Histories, that the Right; to the Roman Empire, from Caesar down∣ward so long as possessed (at least) by title of Succes∣sion was meer Usurpation (because both assumed by Subjects, without Denounciation of war; yea with∣out a Lawful cause:) Yet St. Paul testifieth, That the Powers that were then were ordained of GOD; and commandeth Submission to them, under the hazard of Re∣sisting
the Ordinance of GOD, and receiving damnation; And was obeyed by the Primitive Christians and Mar∣tyrs (sufficiently able to resist) accordingly. And they swore the Military Oath to every one that pre∣vailed: and so never adhered to the Dethroned Em∣peror but acknowledged the new one. Nor is there one instance of (Clergy especially) in any part or Age of the Christian Church, doing otherways. The Sacredness of the Power once in possession (multa non recte, fiunt, quae facta valent) hath been so universally observed that, indeed, it seems to have been a part of the Traditional Religion conveyed from Noah to his Posterity, (so necessary that was for first Peopling, and then maintaining, the World peopled.) And at last, Authorised by Christ himself, who (because he saw Caesar was in Possession of the Civil Power, by his Image) commanded to give unto Caesar that which was Caesars, (yea he owned the possest Usurper Cajaphas; as St. Paul did Annanias) which perhaps is the reason of our Axiom, that the Crown purgeth all Defects. Finally, since meer possession, without considering the justness of its cause; yea where its cause is evi∣dently unjust; and without Denounciation of War; yea in a Subject who hath no Power of war or to de∣nounce; and without the Peoples good and consent; yea (in some kind) against both; gives such right to the possessor in the Subjects Allegiance: how much more in our case, where there is evidently the justest of causes; yea a concurrence of all the just causes of war; and these declared; and that by a Non-Subject Prince who hath right to War and Declare; and all (in all respects) for the Peoples good and with there consent; yea from both. In respect of all which, if there be an Invasion; our natural ties, to King William, and fellow-Sub∣jects, and Allies, and Our-selves; by our Allegi∣ance, Duty, Gratitude, and Charity: indispensibly oblige us to defend Church and State; from Popery
and Slavery (which will be surely the reward of an unnatural concurrence thereto, by concurring to this Invasion) once out o doors: From French and Irish Dragooning Inquisitions; the necessary consequent (both from their Religion and new Engagements) of sufficient Power: from a Forreign Prince and a Forreign Prelate (such are, at least, the French King, Princes of Italy, and the Pope) whose Forces and Treasure come against us: from stranger Miscreants and Savages (whom no command [especially if wanting pay] can possibly with hold from sacking Friend and Enemy; and a fair prospect of undoubted Victory will make a most fit nick of time [we know what the Jesuits private instructions, and their Reli∣gion and spite to execute, can inspire] unquarrelab∣ly to dispatch Hereticks, Qua Rebels: Quibus & sides servanda non est cum existit potestas) whose Com∣missions from K. J. are null; and so to be resisted as so many Irish Wolves and Armed Robbers: Finally, from bearing (as being the cause of) that Aceldama of innocent Blood (spared, hitherto, by such Mira∣culous Providence) and the lasting ruine (now guar∣ded against) of Religion and Liberties, here and elsewhere. For we need not think the Tragedie will end on this Stage, since (in caise of sudden Victory) all that K. J. esteems bonds, (viz. Religion, Pro∣mises, Honour, Gratitude, and Interest) will in∣dispensibly engage (all then, lying prostrate at plea∣sure without reserve) to mutually relieve the pressed French King, and be revenged on the Protestant Con∣sederats. And in case of a long intestine Desolation (while the French run down all others being destitute of, yea weakned by sending to, Britains Assistance,) what speedy concurrence will be denyed to the fa∣vours of K. William, must be sacrificed with sorrow, to the sury of K. Lewis: since we know his Pretensions and intentions (only stopable here) for an Universal Monarchy, and against Protestancy; and that Reli∣gion
or Faith given, are no barrs to his Majesty. The Advantages, of a Non-subject Prince; and that the next Prince, and, next Princess Husband, in Blood: miraculous, unanimity of the Princes (in most other things at Enmity) Protestant and Popish, abroad; and universal concurrence and con∣sent of the People (as different in Judgements as Faces) at home: Undenyable evidence of Fact giv∣ing Occasion to both; and obstinate inflexibleness of the late K: James, to remove the same: His, first, Abditing, then, Deserting, his Right, and King∣doms; and the Singularity of matter of Right arising from all these: Finally, That no less, and no more, was necessary to stope the scruples of diversly prin∣cipled Men; and so to confound even the Objections against all other Revolutions in the World: are the uncontestible manuduction of Heaven (as GOD indi∣cate him, whom he would have the Israelites own as Judge, by some signal pre-deliverance) to our pre∣sent Establishment. Therefore we'le conclude with COROLARIE I. IF, by the Laws of GOD, Nature, and Nations, King William hath, at present, the Regal Right; and James 7.2. Hath amitted it; then all Subjects owe Allegiance to King William alone, and there is no Allegiance due to the late K: James. But by the Laws of GOD, Nature, and Nations, King William hath, at present, the Regal Right; and James 7: 2: hath amitted it. Therefore all Subjects owe Allegiance to K: William only, and there is no Allegiance due to the late K: James. The consequence of the major is un∣contraverted: For, our Saviour hath determined that no man can serve two masters; and the Law decla∣red, that, nemo potest esse duorum ligius; and both these are sounded on the Nature of things, by which no Man
be Subject to two inconsistent and repagnant Al∣giances; ad impossibile, enim, nemo Obligatur. The r is proven ut supra: and so, I hope, none will ny the Conclusion. Hence COROLARIE II. SOme of our former Laws and Oaths bind us in Allegiance to lawful Heirs and Successors. But : W: and Q. M: are lawful Heirs and Successors. Therefore, our former Laws and Oaths bind us in Allegiance to them. The minor is as clear as Noon: or,Succes∣sor est, is, qui∣cum in∣feriorem teneret locum, priore gradu vacuo, ejus in locum, ascendit: (l: 1, §. si filius. ff. desuis & legit. l. 3. c. cod.) in locumque successisse, dicimus, sive per universitatem sive in rem successerint. (l. 1, §, in locum ff. gd leg.) hinc qui in rei Dominium succedunt, successorum nomine veniunt, (l. 14. §. adjicitur, ff. damn. infect:) & succedaneus of∣ficij dicitur (in l: 27. c, decur,) Haerea is appellatione omnes signi∣ficari successores credendum est. (l. haeredis ff: de v: s.) Hi, sciz. omnes qui in universum jus succedunt haeredis loco habentur. (l. 128. . ult. ff. R: l.) unde Triphoninus; si pater ut haeres, vivo filio, vindictam servo castrensi imposuit (l. haered: §. pater de cast: pecul: ff:) & Plaut: Menaec: abstuli hanc, cujus haeres (i. e. Dominus) nunquam erit post hunc diem. Ʋnde; liberi patroni, perduellionis
damnati, (& sic civiliter mortui) fiunt heredes (id est heri) j. is patronatus: & bona damnatorum (& sic civiliter mortuorum) edunt heredibus, usque ad tertium gradum: vid: introd: CHRIST  Heir of all things; and that by inheritance; te Elect are Heirs of the Kingdom (Ja: 2: 3: Heb: 1: 2: 4: 14:) So that K: W: and Q. M: are, and may be called, Heirs and Successors to eir Kingdoms both in the Natural, Legal, and Scriptural ac∣eptation thereof. he is a Successor who (by coming in the place) ath acquired the whole Right, of the Antecessor: nd he is Heir who is actually Lord, (heres quasi s) per universitatem of that Right, at least, his Predecessor being (civiliter) dead: and he is lawful Heir and Successor whom all Law, Divine and Hu∣mane, hath determined to have so acquired it. But K: W: and Q: M: &c: Ergo &c. Consequently those who deny Allegiance to them are Disloyal and Per∣jured: since Ja: 7: 2: is as uncontravertibly (civiliter) dead, to Britain; as, entering a Monastry, he would be to the World; or Christina of Sweden was, when she resigned and went to Rome. COROLARIE III. OUR former Laws and Oaths binding us to one as King, and as having Regal Right, bind us not to him, when, no more King, and having no Regal Right, and so expire with his Kingship. But James 7: 2: is no more King, and hath no longer any Re∣gal Right. Therefore our Laws and Oaths bind us not to him, but expired (as to him) with his King∣ship. The major is agreed to by all: for the Basis (oc Kingship) subverted; the Superstructure (o Obligation thereto) must fall, nihili, enim, null sunt affectiones: So a Presbyter's Oath to his Bishop Vassal's to his Lord, Souldier's to his General, &c becomes void when their Office terminates, by O∣thers coming in their Right and Place. The minor  no less evident by what is already proven: For, since K: W: is King, and hath the Regal Right to our Alle∣giance, J: 7: 2: cannot remain King, or have that Regal Right; duo enim, non possunt esse Dominie jusde i in solidum.
The Dissenter turnedThis is not serv∣ing the times, but the LORD of times: nor being a Trim∣mer, un∣less all Loyal Subjects since the Creation were such, nor ingra∣titude, for the bene∣fites were out of, given for, and so o∣bliege to, the publick; at least, ad illicitum obligure nequeunt. Loyalist. Our great King, in Right, first, covered, with his Buckler, and, now, fortifies; with Ramparts, the Temple built of lively Stones, from furious Assaul∣ters: Therefore we will cheerfully concur in enviro∣ning this Vine of CHRIST; least the Boars of the For∣rest (after all his care) spoil or devour it. One part shall carry mortar, and another stand ready with Swords;Neh: 4. for bringing our House to its full height, and Repulsing the Enemies who would ruine it. Then: the miserables cryes are not so out of our Ears; but, we will remember (the Christian Voya∣ges as far as Judea) against a far more Execrable Turk, and Saracen: For those that die, with a Free∣will, in so Holy a War, are more Martyrs, then their Brethren who were Forced to suffer, for RELIGION. Trin-uni DEO Gloria. FINIS.
