F2187 23273788 109521
The French man gull'd of his Gold OR A warning for whore-hunters. Showing how a French man newly come into England, to see the fashion of our coun∣try, fell in Love with a Night walking Lady, saying he had two hundred peices in gold about him, which rejoyced this Ladies heart to hear, so after some words be∣tween them he gives her the gold in her Lap, she promises to have him to her Chamber, has him to a Tavern door on the street side and bids him stay there while she went in to cear her Chamber which he willing too, she marches through the house at a back door into an Alley where she left the French man to shift for himself, which was but a sorry shift, which is as followeth. To the Tune of a Fig for France, COme all you gallants listen well A merry jest I will you tell 'Tis of a Frenchman and a whore The like you never heard before, The jest was acted so compleat 'Twill make you luh till you do sweat Then French men take a special care How you do trade with English ware. A French man as it doth appear Did come to try his fortune here And with his brags he did unfold He had two hundred pound in gold With flaxen Periwig did he Walk through the streets most gallantly With a Muffe and Rapier by his side As if he were a God of pride, Then in a rage he deeply swore He would go see an Englih whore The Moon it seemed to shine bright Which made him walk with great delight Into Moor-fields he took his way Where he espyed a Lady gay, They say the English hates the French But ile know that by ths same wench. Then unto her he stepped strait And these same words he did relate Madame quoth he and please your will To let me have of you my fill And if to me you will agree I will be bountiful and free, I'd have you know the Lady said I am no whore but still a maid.
EXcuse me Madam in this case My thoughts don't judge as you are base For out of France I lately came To get a wife that is my aim, And if that you can fancy me Two hundred pound I will give thée, Then prethy Lady fancy me And i'l maintain thée gallantly. With that this Whore she did reply A French-man will both swear and lye You talk of hundreds where you go But not a penny for to show She with such spéeches was so bold That he to her did show his Gold, Nay then thought she Gold out of France Will make me play an English Dance. What is your will with me she said Since I so long have liv'd a Maid, 'Tis not your glistering Gold so bright Shall tempt me with you to delight, Except that you will strait agrée When you have done to marry me, I that I will the French man said, Then prethy dearest ben't afraid. I wll not take your word quoth she For when you have done away you'l flée O no my swéeting understand My Gold thou shalt hld in thy hand For I am in a mighty heat Here take it till I have done the feat She takes his Gold and then said here Go with me to my Lodging sure. He took her by the hand and went With her be séem'd to be content, And as in hand in hand they go Whether she led him he did not know, For she did lead him up a Lane That he forgot from whence he came The French-man swore all is not well For thou wilt lead me into hell. O no my Dear the Lady said Of this same place be not afraid But stand thée here at thi same door While I do step thée in before To sée where there my Chambers clear And then ile call thee in my Dear: But now to see it is cunning Whore She slipped out at the back door. And there the French man staid in vain For not his Lady came again When his patience no longer would proceed He knocked at the door with speed The Maid of the house ask'd who was there Quoth he I am your only Dear, Then with a Mopstick in her hand She knockt him down where he did stand And then she hid him for to go Unto his VVhore as he did know And then the French-man up and told He'd lost two hundred pound in God Which when the people his tale heard They told im he was tightly serv'd Which made him with his French tongue yal And Rogues and Whores he did them call. The French-man he did look as pale Just like Dog without his tail The loss of his Money put him in fears He wisht in the Room he had lost his Ears He with the stones did nigh inclose For he fell down and broke his Nose Which made him for to curse and swear He'd nere trade more with English Ware. Printed for John Clarke at the Harp and Bible in West-Smith-field.
