F2311A 13791255 101845
A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE Surrendring of CHARLEMONT On Wednesday the 14th. of this Instant May. With the Number of Great Guns, and Stores of Ammunition found in that GARRISON. Chester May 19. YEsterday came an Express from Ireland, to the Lord Scravenmore, which immediately was dispatched to the King by Adjutant Else, who will be with you I doubt not this Night: It brings us the welcome News of the Surrender of Charlemont on Wednesday last, the Irish Marching out with Bag and Baggage, being Six Hundred Men. They left in the place Eighty Barrels of Powder, and Seventeen Brass Guns, with Ball and Match answera∣ble. They were reduced to a small Quantity of Provisi∣ons, having left behind them, but the Quarter of a Horse Salted, and very little Meal, not a handful for each. We are further assured, That the Enemy have quitted Dun∣dalk, and some say Ardee and Carling ford, of which we expect a Confirmation. I am advised, That last week Collonel Steward, with a Detachment of Five Hundred, went to the Walls of Dundalk, and brought off One Thousand Head of Cattle, he gave them in the Garrison all Invitation to come forth, but would not be prevailed on, though they were Three Regiments in the place. God grant our Forces speed the Success, and a happy Reducement of that Kingdom. Advertisement. THE Memoirs of Monsieur Deageant: Containing the most Secret Tran∣sactions and Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry IV till the be∣ginning of the Ministry of the Cardinal de Richelieu. To which i added, A Particular Relation of the Arch-Bishop of Embrun's Voyage into England, and of his Negotiation for the advancement of the Roman Catholick Religion here; to∣gether with the Duke of Duke of Buckingham's Letters to the said Arch-Bishop about the Progress of that Affair: Which happened the last Years of King James I. his Reign. Faithfully Translated out of the French Original. Printe for Rich∣ard Baldwin in the Old-Baily. 1690. London: Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Baily. 1690.
