F2441 12142638 54862
The Graver here hath well thy Face design'd. But no hand FULLER can expresse thy Mind For That a RESURRECTION giues to those Whom Silent Monuments did long enclose.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND, VVho for Parts and Learning have been eminent in the several COUNTIES. TOGETHER WITH An Historical NARRATIVE of the Native Com∣modities and Rarities in each County. Endeavoured by Thomas Fuller, D. D. LONDON, Printed by J. G. W. L. and W. G. for Thomas Williams, and are to be sold at the sign of the Bible in Little Britain. MDCLXII.
TO HIS Sacred Majesty. Most Dread Soveraign: THE tender of these ensuing Collections is made with as much Fear and Reverence, as it was intended with Duty and Devotion by the Author whilest living. The Obligation that lieth upon me to endeavour him all right, forced me unto this presumption. It is the first voice I ever uttered in this kind, and I hope it will be neither displeasing to Your MAJESTY, or blamed by the VVorld; whilest (not unlike that of the Son of Croesus) it sounds Loyalty to my Soveraign, and Duty to my Father. The matter of this Work, for the most part, is the description of such native and peculiar Commodities as the several Counties of Your Kingdom afford, with a revival of the Memories of such Persons which have in each County been eminent for Parts or Learning. If this Age abound
with the like, it is their Glory; if not, the perusal may perhaps beget in them a Noble Emulation of their Ancestors. May Your MAJESTIES Raign be Happy and Long, to see Your Countries COMMODITIES improved, and Your WORTHIES multiplied. So prayeth, Your MAJESTIES meanest Subject, the Authors Orphan, JOHN FULLER.
To the Reader. READER, THou hast here presented to thy view a Collection of the VVorthies of England, which might have appeared larger, had God spared [my dear Father] the Author life. At his death there remained un∣printed, the Bishoprick of Durham, the Counties of Derby, Dorset, Gloucester, Norfolk, Northampton, Nor∣thumberland, Nottingham, Oxford, Rutland, with part of Kent, Devonshire, and the Cities of London and Westminster, which now at length (according to the Copy the Author left be∣hind him, without the least Addition) are made publick. It is needless here to acquaint thee with the nature of the Work, it being already fully set down in the first sixteen sheets thereof. Yet thou mayst be pleased to take notice, that (although the Title promiseth thee only the History of the Worthies of England) in the end there is added a short Description of the Principality of Wales. The discounting of Sheets (to expedite the Work at severall Presses) hath occasioned the often mistake of the Folio's. What ever faults else occur in this Impression, it is my request, that thou wouldest score them on my want of Care or Skill in Correcting the same, that they may not in the least reflect on the Credit of my dead Father. JOHN FULLER.
ERRATA. First Book PAg. 27. Line 7. for mutive read mutire. l. 8. for Commoreat . Commoveat. l. 13. for Proselytes r. Prose to its. Gloucestersh. Pag. 366. l. 6. add, were many. l. 7. for may seem to be, r. many. London Pag. 213. l. 44. for unius r. unus. l. 45. for duellum r. duellam. l. 47. for suscipiendum r. suscipiendam, p. 214. l. 6. for primus acie r. primâ acie. York shire Pag. 220. l. 40. for Or, a Fess betwixt three Water bougets, Or, r. Argent, a Fess be∣twixt threee Water bougets, Gules. Wales Preface l. 43. for grains r. pains, p. 4. l. 31. add phrase, p. 17. l. 16. dele half. p. 25. l. 23. for Castro r. Castor, p. 27. l. 9. for Gold r. no Gold, p. 34. l. 30. for is here, r. might have been here, p. 44. l. 19. for freed r. free, p. 47. l. 39. for must, r. might, p. 59. l. 39. for awarded r: avoided, l. 43. for as r. then.
THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND CHAPTER I. The Designe of the ensuing Work. ENGLAND may not unfitly be compared to an House not very great, but convenient, and the se∣veral Shires may properly be resembled to the rooms thereof. No, as learned Master Camden and painful Master Speed with others, have discribed the rooms themselves; so is it our intention, God willing to discribe the Furniture of those rooms; such Emi∣nent Commodities, which every County doth produce, with the Persons of Quality bred therein, and some other observables coincident with the same subject. Cato that great and grave Philosopher did commonly demand, when any new Project was propounded unto him, * Cui Bono, what good would ensue, in case the same was effe∣cted. A Question more fit to be asked, then facile to be answered in all undertakings, especially in the setting forth of new Books, Insomuch, that they themselves, who com∣plain, That They are too many already, help dayl to make them more. Know then, I propound five ends to my self in this Book: First, To gain some Glory to God. Secondly, To preserve the Memories ef the Dead Thirdly, To present Examples to the Living. Fourthly, To entertain the Reader with Delight. And lastly, (which I am not ashamed publickly to profess) To procure some honest profit to my self. If not so happy to obtain all, I will be joyful to attain some, yea, contented and thankful too, if gaining any [especially the First] of these Ends, the Motives of my Endeavours. First, Glory to God, which ought to be the aim of all our actions, though too often our bow starts, our hand shakes, and so our arrow misseth the mark. Yet I hope that our discribing so good a Land, with the various Fruits and fruitful varieties therein, will ingage both Writer and Reader, in gratitude to that God, who hath been so bounti∣ful to our Nation. In order whereunto, I have not only alwayes taken, but often sought occasions, to exhort to thankfulness; hoping the same will be interpreted, no stragling from my Subject, but a closing with my Calling. Secondly, To preserve the Memories of the Dead. A good name is an oyntment poured out, smelt where it is not seen. It hath been the lawful desire of men in all ages to per∣petuate their Memories, thereby in some sort revenging themselves of Mortality,
though few have found out effectual means to perform it. For Monuments made of Wood, are subject to be burnt; of Glass, to be broken; of soft stone, to moulder; of Marble and Metal, (if escaping the teeth of Time) to be demolished by the hand of Covetousness; so that in my apprehension, the safest way to secure a memory from oblivion, is (next his own Vertues) by committing the same in writing toPosterity. Thirdly, To present examples to the living, having here precedents of all sorts and sizes; of men famous for Valour, Wealth, Wisedome, Learning, Religion, and Bounty to the publick, on which last we most largely insist. The Scholar being taxed by his Writing∣Master, for idlenesse in his absence, made a fair defence, when pleading that his Master had neither left him Paper whereon, or Copy whereby to write. But rich men will be without excuse if not expressing their bounty in some proportion, God having provided them Paper enough. [The John 12. 8. poor you have alwayes with you] and set them signal examples, as in our ensuing Work will plainly appear. Fourthly, To entertain the Reader with delight. I confess the subject is but dull in it self, to tell the time and place of mens birth, and deaths, their names, with the names and number of their books, and therefore this bare Sceleton of Time, Place, and Person, must be fleshed with some pleasant passages. To this intent I have purposely inter∣laced (not as meat, but as condiment) many delightful stories, that so the Reader if he do not arise (which I hope and desire) Religiosior or Doctior, with more Piety or Learning, at least he may depart Jucundior, with more pleasure and lawful delight. Lastly, to procure moderate profit to my self in compensation of my pains. It was a proper question, which plain dealing Jacob pertinently propounded to Laban Gen. 30. 30. his Fa∣ther in Law: and now when shall I provide for mine house also? Hitherto no Stationer hath lost by me, hereafter it will be high time for me (all things considered) to Save for my self. The matter following may be divided into Real and Personal, though not according to the legal acception of the words. By Real, I understand the commodities and ob∣servables of every County: by Personal the Characters of those worthy men, who were Natives thereof. We begin with a Catalogue of the particular heads whereof this book doth consist, intending to shew, how they are severally useful, and then I hope, if good as single instruments, they will be the better as tuned in a Consort. CHAP. II. The Real Topicks insisted on in the Respective Counties. The Native Commodities. NO County hath cause to complain with the Grecian Acts 6. 1. Widdowes, that they are neglected in the daily Ministration. God hath not given all Commodities to one, to elate it with pride, and none to others to deject them with pensivenesse; but there is some kind of equality betwixt the Profits of Counties to continue com∣merce' and ballance trading in some proportion. We have therefore in this work taken especial notice of the several cōmodities which every Shire doth produce. And indeed God himself enjoyneth us to observe the variety of the Earths productions, in this kind. For speaking of the land of Gen. 2. 12. Havilah, (where saith he) there is Gold, and the gold of that land is good, there is Bdellium, and the Onix-stone. See here how the holy spirit points at those places where God hath scattered such trea∣sure, and the best thereof in all kinds, that man (if so disposed) may know where to ga∣ther them up. I confess England cannot boast of Gold, and precious Stones, with the land of Havilah, yet affordeth it other things, both above and beneath ground, more needful for man's being. Indeed some shires, Joseph▪like, have a better coloured coat then others; and some with Benjamin have a more bountiful messe of meat belonging unto them. Yet every County hath a Childs portion, as if God in some sort observed Gavel-kind, in
the distribution of his favours, Psal. 107. 8. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wondrous works which he doth for the Children of men. Know Reader, when a Commodity is general to all England, then to avoid Repetition, it is entered in that County where there was the first, or else the most and best of that kind. And we have so contrived it, that generally; Three Commodities are treated of in every County. The Manufactures. Some heathen have causlesly complained of nature as a step-mother to man-kind, be∣cause other creatures come into the world clothed with Feathers, furs, or fleeces &c. or armed with pawes, clawes, beaks, tusks, horns, hoofs, whilest man is exposed naked into the world. I say a causles charge, because providence having given men Hands, and Reason to use them, (two blessings denyed to other creatures,) all Clothing and fencing is emi∣nently and transcendently bestowed upon him. It is very remarkable to see the Manufactures in England, not knowing whether more to admire the Rarity or Variety thereof. Undoubtedly the wealth of a Nation con∣sisteth in driving a native commodity through the most hands to the highest artificial perfection, whereof we have taken especial cognisance in the respective counties, yet so as (though breifly nameing) not largely handling that Manufacture whereon we have formerly insisted. It must not be forgotten that there be some things which cannot properly be termed Natural commodities, because of their quality altered and disguised by mens industry, and yet they attain not the reputation of Manufactures. As salt, being water boyled, malt, barley dryed, Cider, Apples pressed; seeing therefore they have a mixt nature they are promiscuosly placed as suiteth best with my own conveniency. Medicinal Waters. The God of Nature hath not discovered himself so variously wonderful in any thing as in the waters of Fountains, Rivers, &c. England hath as large a share herein as any Country, and her springs wonderful on several accounts. 1. Colour, Black, Red, Yellow, &c. 2. Tast, Sweet, bitter, salt, acide, corroding, astringing, &c. 3. Odour, stinking of Sulphur, like the scouring of a gun very fowl. 4. Sound, beating somtimes like a March, sometimes like a Retreat on several occasions. 5. Heat, Luke-warm, and gradually hot even to scalding. 6. Weight, considerably heavier or lighter in proportion to other watters. 7. Motion, though many miles from the sea, sympathizing therewith eb∣ing and flowing accordingly. 8. Effects, some being surgeons to heale sores, others Physitians to cure diseases. The last is proper for our pen, being the Largess of heaven to poor people who cannot go to the price of a costly cure. Of these more have been discovered by casu∣alty than industry, to evidence that therein we are not so much beholden to mans paynes as Gods providence. Many Springs formerly soveraign have since lost their vertue, yet so that other springs have found it, so that their sanative qualities may seem not taken away but removed. And as there are many mean men of great ability yet depressed in obscurity, so no doubt there are in our Land Aquae incognitae of concealed worth and vertue, in effect no whit inferior to those which in fame are far above them. However the gift which nature holdeth forth may be doubled in the goodnesse thereof, if the hand of Art do but help to receive it, and the patients be prepared with Physick in the using of such water, otherwise fons vitae, may be fons mortis, if diet, due time, and quantity be not observed. Some will say that our English waters must needs be raw, because so far from the fire, whilest those are better boyled, which lying more south are neerer the sun. But experience avow's the contrary, that England affordeth most sanative waters for English
bodies, if men were as judicious in taking, as Nature is bountiful in tendering them. As for the Proprietaries of such (or rather of the ground surrounding such) Medi∣cinal waters, as I would not have them detrimented in the least degree by the conflux of people unto them: so it is injurious in my judgement for them to set them to sale and make gain of Gods free gift therein. I confess water was commonly sold in the land of Canaan proved by that passage in theIsay 55. 1. Prophet, H every one that thirsteth come ye to the waters and he that hath no money &c. Yea so churlish were the Edomites to the Israelites that they would not give, that is afford themDeut. 2. 28. water for mony. But it is considerable, Well-w ater in those hot Countries, was acquired with vast pains and expence, it being dearer to sink a well then build an house, besides many frustrations in that kind before their indeavous found full effect, which made it the more equal for the owners, by such sales to make profit, or rather to make up their reparations. But no such cost be∣ing expended in the case in hand, it may be accounted a kind of Simonie, in such as sell ease and help to poor people, though they may lawfully buy it, as passive and necessitated thereunto. The Wonders. Of these England affordeth many, which by several authors are variously reckoned up. One reckoneth foure as most remarkable,H. Hunting∣ton. another accounted six, a third bringeth then up toSir John Sidney, Samuel Beauland on Neeius. thirteen, which since some have increased. Indeed if so many men, had all agreed in one Number, that had been a Wonder indeed. But under this Title we compre hend all rarityes, which are out of the ordinary Road of nature, the illustration whereof may minister unto us matter of profitable discourse. Of these wonders, some were transient, lasting onely for a time, (like extraordi∣nary Ambassadors imployed on some great affair,) others Liegers and Permanent, the most proper for our Pen to observe. And to prevent vacuitie in some Counties (that this Topicke of wonders might be invested with some matter) some Artificial Rarities are (but very sparingly) inserted, such as transcend the standard of ordinary performance, But thse are cast in as over weight, the former being onely our proper subject. Our great design herein is that men may pay the Tribute of their admiration, where the same is due, to God himself, who, as David observethPsal. 136. 4. only doth great wonders. Only, exclusively of men and Angels. Doth, that is really solidly and substanti∣ally, Iuglers doe shew not doe, whose pretty workes are not Praestationes, but Praestigiae. Great Wonders, called in Scripture MAGNALIA, and if the Latin alloweth the word, we could grant the Divel his Parvalia doing of petty feats, greatened into wonders by his cun∣ning, and our credulity. Wel let our admiration be given to God, seeing Deliberate Wondering (when the soul is not suddenly surprised) being raised up to an height is part of adoration, and cannot be given to any creature without some sacrilege. Such wondring consists of Reverence and ig norance, which best becometh even the wisest of men, in their searches after God his wayes. As for that unkind wondring, which melts not man's heart like wax into the praysing of God, but clay like hardneth it unto stupefaction, Behold you despi∣sers and wonderActs 3. 41. and perish, God keep all good men from being guilty thereof. A secondary end I have herein to shew that England fals not short of forraign Coun∣tries in wonderful sights the same in kind though not in degree. Italy hath her Grotta dela Sibilla, we in Summerset-shire our Wockley Hole. Spain her Anas, we our Mole, &c. Bnt wonders like prophets are not without honour save in their own Country, where constancy (or at least Commonnesse of Converse) with them abateth their respect and reputation. The Buildings. NextReader in our following Book we have inverted the Method, and more properly placed build∣ings next to . we take notice of the signal structures which each County doth afford. In∣deed the Italians do account all English to be Gothish Buildings, onely vast, (and greatnesse, must have something of coarsnes therein) however abating for their advantage above us in Materialls, Marble, Pophery &c. their pallaces may admire the art in some English fabricks, and in our Churches especially. Elisha beholding Hasael, wept by way of prophecie foreseeing that (amongst other
many mischeifs) he would set fire on the strongKing. 8. 12. Cities (and by consequence on the Fair Houses) in Israel. But well may we weep when looking back on our late Civil war, remembring how many beautiful Buildings were ruined thereby, though indeed we have Cause to be thankful to God that so many are left standing in the Land. But what said our Saviour to his Disciples, when transported with wonder at the good¦ly stones in the Temple,Luke 21. 6. are these the things you looke upon? such transitory buildings are unworthy of a Christians admiration. And let it be our care that when the fairest and firmest Fabricks fall to the ground, yea when our earthly house be dissolved, we may have an house not made with hands, but eternal in the2 Cor. 5. 1. Heavens. Local Proverbs. A PROVERB is much matter decocted into few words. Hear what a learnedSalmatius è Levino VVar∣nero. Critick saith of them; Argutae hae brevesque loquendi formulae, quamvis è trivio petitae et plebi fre∣quentatae suas habent Veneres, et genium cujusque gentis penes quam celebrantur, atque acumen ostendunt. Some will have a Proverb so called from Verbum a word and Pro (as in Proavus) signifying Before, being a speech which time out of mind hath had peaceable possession in the mouths of many people. Others deduce it from Verbum a word, and pro for Vice (as in Propraeses) in stead of, because it is not to be taken in the literal sence, one thing being put for an other. Six esentials are required to the compleating of a perfect Proverb, Namely that it be. 1. Short. 2. Playn. 3. Common. 4. Figurative. 5. Antient. 6. True. Otherwise it is no Proverb but a. 1. Oration. 2. Riddle. 3. Secret. 4. Sentence. 5. Upstart. 6. Libel. I have only insisted on such local Proverbs in their respective Counties, wherein some proper Place or Person, is mentioned, such as suggest unto us some Historical int and the interpretation thereof afford some considerable information, and conduce to the illust∣ration of those Counties wherein they are used. Herein I have neglected such narrow and restrictive Proverbs as never travelled be∣yond the smoke of the chimneys of that town wherein they were made, and though perchance significant in themselves, are unknown to the neibouring Counties, so far they are from acquiring a National reception. Besides. I have declined all such which are Frivolous, Scurrilous, Scandalous, confining our selves onely to such whose expound∣ing may contribute to the understanding of those shires wherein they are in fashion. Objection. It is more proper for a person of your profession to imploy himself in reading of, and commenting on the Proverbs of SolomonProverbs 1. 2 to know wisdome and instruction to perceive the words of understanding. Whereas you now are busied in what may be pleasant, not profita∣ble, yea, what may inform the fleshly not edifie the inward man. Answer. Let not our fellow servants be more harsh unto us then our Master himself, we serve not so severe a Lord, but that he alloweth us sawce with our meat, and recreation with our vocation. Secondly, God himself besides such as I may call Supernatural Proverbs (as divine∣ly Inspired) taketh notice and maketh use of the natural or Native Proverbs of the Coun∣try, praysing, approving, and applying some,Luke 4. 23. Physitian cure thy self,2 Pet. 2. 22. The Dog is re∣turned to his Vomit, and the Swine which was washed to her wallowing in the mire; Dslik∣ing and condemning others, and commandingEzek. 8. . them to be abolished. The Fathers have eaten sowre Grapes, and the Childrens teeth are set on edge. Now seeing Antiquity with∣out Verity is no just Plea that any thing should be continued; On this Warrant, I have in these our Country-Proverbs alledged more than I allow, branding some with a Note of Infamy, as fit to be banished out of our discourse.
Lastly, besides Information much good may redound to the Reader hereby; It was the Councel which a Wise gave to a Great man, Read Histories that thou dost not become a History. So may we say, Read Proverbs that thou beest not made a Proverb, as God threatned the sinful people of1 Kings 9. 7. Israel. Sure I am that David by minding of a Country, (no Canonical Proverb) viz. [1 Sam. 24. 13. Wickednesse proceedeth from the wicked] was thereby dis∣fwaded from offering any violence to the person of Saul then placed in his power, whereby he procured much Tranquillity to his own conscience. We have not confined our selves to Proverbs in the strict acception thereof, but sometimes insist on such which have onely a Proverbial Tendency or Lye (as one may say) in the Marches betwixt Proverb and Prophecie, where they afford us a fit occa∣sion to salley forth into such Discourse, as may conduce to the History of our Nation. The Medicinal Herbs. Some maintain this Position, That every Country cures the diseases, which it causes, and bringeth remedies, for all the maladies bred therein. An opinion which grant not true, yet may have much of Truth therein, seeing every Country, and England especially affordeth excellent Plants were it not partly for mens laziness, that they will not seek them, partly for their ignorance that they know not when they have found them, and partly for their pride and peevishnesse, because when found, they disdain to use and apply them. Indeed quod charum, charum, what is fetch'd farr, and bought dear, that onely is esteemed; otherwise were many English plants as rare as they are useful we would hug in our hands, what we now trample under our feet. For proof hereof let not the Reader grudge to peruse these words of a grand Herba∣list, speaking of Virga Aurea, or Golden-rod, growing plentifully, but discovered lately in Middlesex. Gerard in his Herbal. pag. 430. It is extolled above all other Herbs, for the stopping of blood in Sanguinolent Ulcers, and bleeding Wounds, and hath in time past been had in greater estimation and regard then in these dayes; For in my remembrance I have known the dry Herb which came from beyond the Seas, sold in Bucklars-bury in London, for two shillings six pence the Ounce. But since it is found in Hamsted wood, even as it were at the Towns end, no man will give two shillngs six pence for an hundred weight of it, which plainly sets forth our inconstancy and suddain mutability, este ming no longer of anything (how precious soever it be) then while it is strange and rare. We may also observe that many base and barren heaths and hills, which afford the least food for beasts, yeeld the best Physick for man, One may also take notice that such places that are nearest to London, Cambridge, Oxford, Bath, or where some eminent Herbalist hath his habitation, afford us the greater variety of medicinal herbes. Not that more have growne but more are knowne there abouts, where the native plants are not better, but more happie in their vicinitie to such discoverers. And now to be always within the reach if not the touch of mine owne calling we may observe in Scrip∣ture that Gods Spirit directs men to the gathering of such Simples of his owne planting. Is there no * balme in Gilead? True in a literal sense, as well as mystically of our Saviour. Now the reason why I have been so sparing in this Topick, and so seldome insist thereon, is because these Herbs grow equally for goodness and plenty, in all Counties, so that no one Shire can without manifest usurpation intitle it) selfe thereunto. Besides they are so Common, and Numerous, they would justle out matter of more concern∣ment. However we have noted it where the Herb is rare and very useful, and in our fol∣lowing Book (though here the Method be transposed) have placed Medicinal Herbs, next Medicinal waters, conceiving that order most Natural.
CHAPTER III. Of the first Quaternion of Persons. Viz. 1. Princes. 2. Saints. 3. Martyrs. 4. Confessours. WE take the Word, as it is of the Common Gender, inclusive of both Sexes, and extend it onely to Kings with their Wives and Children. Of the second sort we have but few, and those onely from the time of King Edward the Fourth, who first married his Subject, or Native of his Dominions. We confine our selves to such as were born since the Conquest, otherwise we should be swallowed up, should we Lanch out beyond that date into the Saxon Govern∣ment, especially into the gulph of their Heptarchie, where a Prince could not be seen for Princes. But if a British, or Saxon-King comes under our Pen, we preferre to take Cognizance of him in some other notion, (as of Saint, Martyr, Souldier, &c.) so to pre∣serve the Topick of Prince ship intire according to our design. We have stinted our selves onely to the legitimate issue of Kings. And after such who are properly Princes, we have (as Occasion is offered) inserted some who in cour∣tesie, and equity may be so accepted as the Heires to the Crown, (in the Lancastrian difference) though not possessed thereof; or else so near a Kin thereunto, that much of History doth necessarily depend upon them. We have observed these Nativities of Princes, because such signal persons, are not onely Oakes amongst under-woods, but land-markes amongst Oakes, and they directorie for the methodical regulation of History. Besides, in themselves they are of special remarke, as more or less remote from the Crown; not onely their own Honour, but the happiness of thousands being concerned in their extraction, and Divine Providence most visible in marshalling the order thereof. For although Nasci à Principibus fortui∣tum est, may pass for a true instance in Grammar, it is no right Rule in Divinity; which, though acknowledging Job 34. 19. rich and poor the work of Gods hands, pronounceth Princes to be men Psal. 80. 17. of his right hand, made strong for himself, that is, purposely advanced to imploy their own greatness to his glory. Let none Object that the Wives of Kings need not to have been inserted, as Per∣sons of no such consequence in Government; seeing it is the constant practice of the Spirit of God, after the mention of a new King in Judah, to record the name of his Mother, and her Parentage; 2 Cor. 13. 2. His Mothers name also was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah: Chron. 22. 2. His mothers name was Althaliah the daughter of Omri King. 28. 31. His mothers name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libuah. And Divines generally render this reason thereof, that if such Kings proved godly and gracious, then the memory of their mothers should receive just praise for their good Education; if otherwise that they might be blamed for no better principling them in their Infancy. Saints. This word accepts of several interpretations, or rather they are injuriously obtruded upon it. 1. Saints of Fiction, who never were in rerum natura, as St. Christopher &c. 2. Saints of Faction, wherewith our age doth fwarme, alledging two ar∣guments for their Saintship. First, that they so call themselves; Se∣cndly, that those of their own party call them so. Neither of these belong to our cognizance. 3. Saints of Superstition, reputed so by the Court of Rome. 4. Saints indeed, parrallel to St. Pauls 1 Tim. 5. 3. Widows indeed, and both deserve to be honoured.
It is confessed, in this our Book we drive a great trade in the third Sort, and I cannot therefore but sadly bemoan that the Lives of these Saints are so darkned with popish Illustrations, and farced with Fauxeties to their Dishonour, and the Detri∣ment of Church History. For as honest men, casually cast into the Company of Co∣zeners, are themselves suspected to be Cheats, by those who are Strangers unto them, So the very true Actions of these Saints found in mixture with so many Forgeries, have a suspicion of falshood cast upon them. Inquiring into the causes of this grand abuse, I find them reducible to five heads. 1. First, Want of honest hearts, in the Biographists of these Saints, which betrayed their Pens to such abominable untruths. 2. Secondly, VVant of able heads, to distinguish Rumours from Reports, Reports from Records, not choosing but gathering, or rather not gathering, but scraping what could come to their hands. 3. Thirdly, Want of true matter, to furnish out those lives in any proportion. As Cooks are sometimes fain to lard lean meat, not for fashion but necessity, as which otherwise would hardly be eatable for the drynesse thereof; So these having little of these Saints more then their names, and dates of their Deaths (and though some∣times not certain) do plump up their emptinesse with such fictious additions. 4. Fourthly, hope of gain, so bringing in more Custome of Pilgrims to the shrines of their Saints. 5. Lastly, for the same reason for which Herod persecutedActs 12. 3. St. Peter, (for I count such Lyes a persecuting of the Saints memories) merely because they saw it pleased the people. By these and other causes it is come to pass, that the Observation ofDe Trad. Dis∣crip. l. 5. Vives is most true, Quae de Sanctis Scripta sunt, praeter pauca quaedam, multis foedata sunt Commentis, dum qui scribit affectui suo indulget: & non quae egit Divus, sed quae illum egisse vellet, exponit; What are written of the Saints, some few things excepted, are defiled with many fictions, whilst the Writer indulgeth his own affection, and declareth not what the Saint did do, but what he desired that he should have done. To this let me couple the just complaint of that honest Dominican MelchiorLib. 11. c. 6. Canus. Dolenter hoc dico, multò severius a Laertio vitas Philosophorum scriptas, quam à Chri∣stianis vitas Sanctorum, longèque incorruptius & integrius Suetonium res Caesarum expo∣suisse, quam exposuerint Catholici, non res dico Imperatorum, sed Martyrum, Virginum & Confessorum; I speak it to my grief (saith he) that the Lives of the Philosophers are more gravely written by Laertius, than Saints are by Christians, and that Sueto∣nius hath recorded the Actions of the Caesars with more Truth and Integrity, than Catholick have the Lives, I say not of Princes, but even of Martyrs, Virgins, and Confessours. To return to our English Saints. As our Catalogue beginneth with Alban, it en∣deth with Thomas Bishop of Hereford, who dyed Anno Domini 1282. the last English∣man canonized by the Pope. For, though Anselme was canonized after him (in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh) he was no English, but a Frenchman, who dyed more then an hundred years before him. Since which time, no English, and few Foreigners have attained that honour, which the Pope is very sparing to confer. First because sensible, that multitude of Saints abateth veneration. Secondly, the Kalen∣der, is filled (not to say pestered) with them, justling one another for Room, many holding the same day in copartnership of Festivity. Thirdly, the charge of Canonization is great, few so charitable as to buy it, the Pope too covetous to give it to the memories of the deceased. Lastly, Protestants daily grow more prying into the Popes proceedings, and the [suspected] perfections of such persons, who are to be Sainted; which hath made his Holynesse the more cautious, to canonize none whilest their memories are on the Must, immediately after their Deaths, before the same is fined in the Cask, with some competent continuance of time, after their decease. Noble Martyrs. St. Ambrose in his Te Deum doth justifie the Epithet, and by Martyrs all know such only are imported, who have lost their lives for the Testimony of a fundamental Truth.
However we find the word by one of the purest Writers in the primitive times, attributed to such who were then alive. Cyprianus Epist. 77. as marshalled by Pamelian. Cyprianus Nemesiano Felici, Lucio, alteri Felici, Litteo, Coliano, Victori, Faderi, Dativo, Coepiscopis; item, compresbyteris & Diaconibus, & caeteris fratribus in metallo constitutis, martyribus Dei patris Omnipotentis & Jesu Christi Domini, & Dei conserva∣toris nostri, aeternam salutem. See here how he bemartyreth such who as yet did survive, but in so servile a condi∣tion (condemned to the mines) that they were almost hopelesse, without miracle to be released. Yet dare we not presume on this precedent of St. Cyprian (children must not do what their Fathers may) to use the word so extensively, but by Martyrs un∣derstand persons (not in the deepest durance and distresse) but actually slain for the Testimony of Jesus Christ; which by an Ingenious pen is thus, not ill expressed. What desperate Challenger is He? Before he peris in the flame, What ere his pain or patience be, Who dares assume a MARTYRS name? For all the way he goes he's none till he be gone It is not dying but 'tis Death, Only gains a MARTYRS Wreath. Now such Martyrs as our Land hath produced, are reducible to three different Ranks. 1. Britons, suffering under Dioclesian, the persecuting Roman Emperor, as Alban, Amphibalus, &c. 2. Saxons, massacred by the Pagan Danes, as King Edmund, Ebba, &c. 3. English, murdered by the cruelty of Papists, since the Year 1400. as William Sawtree, John Badby, &c. In the two former of these we are prevented, and they anticipated from us, by the Popes canonizing them under the Title of Saints. The third and last only re∣main proper for our pen, martyred by the Romish Prelates for above an hundred and fifty years together. I confess I have formerly met with some men, who would not allow them for Martyrs, who suffered in the Reign of Queen Mary, making them little better then Felons de se, wilfully drawing their blood on themselves. Most of these I hope are since convinc'd in their judgement, and have learn'd more charity in the School of af∣fliction, who by their own Losses have learn'd better to value the Lives of others, and now will willingly allow Martyrship to those, from whom they wholy with-held, (or grudgingly gave) it before. We have reckoned up these Martyrs according to the places of their Nativity, where we could find them, which is my first choice, in Conformity to the rest of this work. But in case this cannot be done my second choyce is, (for know Reader tis no refuge) to rank them according to the place of their death, which is their true birth-place in the Language ofOrigen lib. 3. Commen in Job Albinus . de divin. Offic. cap. de Sexta Feria pag. 60. Antiquity. Hear how a right Antient Authour expresseth himself to this purpose,Nichol. Papa in Epist. ad con∣sulta Bulgaro∣rum cap. 5. in fine. Apte consuetudinem tenet Ecclesia, ut solennes beatorum Martyrum vel Con∣fessorum Christi Dies, quibus ex hoc mundo ad regionem migraverunt Vivorum, nuncu∣pentur Natales, & eorum Solennia non funebria, tanquam morientium, sed, (utpote in vera vita nascentium) Natalitia vocitentur. Now if the day of their Death be justly entituled their Birth-day, the place of their Death may be called their Birth-place by the same Analogy of Reason and Language. We have given in a List of Martyrs names in their respective Countyes, but not their Total Number, only inisting on such who were most remarkable, remiting the Reader for the rest, to the voluminous pains of Mr. Fox, who hath written All, (and if malicious Papists be believed more then All) of this Subject.
Worthy Confessors. All good Christians are concluded within the Compase of Confessors in the Large acception thereof.Rom. 10. 10. With the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation: But here we re∣strain this Title to such, who have adventured fair and far for Martyrdome, and at last, not declined it by their own Cowardize, but escaped it by Divine Providence. Confessor is a Name none can wear whom it cost Nothing, It must be purchased for the Maintenance of the Faith, with the Losse of their Native Land, Liberty, Livelyhood, Limbs, any thing under Life it self. Yet in this confined sense of Confessors, we may say with Leah, at the birth ofGen. 30. 11. Gad behold a Troop cometh, Too many to be known, written, read, remembred, We are forced therefore to reconfine the Word to such, who were Candidates and Probationers, for Martyrdome in proxima potentia. There was not a stride, but, (to use Davids ex∣pression)1 Sam. 20. 3. but a step betwixt them and Death, their Wedding Clothes were made (but not put on) for their marriage to the Fire. In a Word they were soft Waxe, ready chafed and prepared, but the Signature of a violent Death was not stamped upon them. Manifold is the use of our observing these Confessors. First to show that God alone hath Parramount power of Life and Death. Preserving those who by men arePsal. 79. 11. appoin∣ted to Dye. One whose Son lay very Sick, was told by the Physician, Your Son Sir, is a dead man, To whom the Father (not disheartned thereat) returned, I had rather a Physician should call him so an hundred times, than a Judge on the Bench, should do it once, whose Pronouncing him for a Dead man, makes him to be one. But though both a Physician in Nature, and a Judge in Law, give men for Gon, The one passing the Censure, the other Sentence of Death upon them, GOD, to whom belongeth the Issues from Death, may Preserve them long in the Land of the Living. Hereof these Con∣fessors* Psal. 68. 20. are Eminent Instances, and may God therefore have the Glory of their so strange Deliverances. Secondly it serveth to comfort Gods servants in their greatest distress. Let hand joyne in hand; let Tyrants piece the Lions cruelty with the Fox his craft; let them face their plots with power, and line then with policy all shall take no effect. Gods ser∣vants (if he seeth it for his glory and their good) shall either be mercifully preserved from, or mightily protected in dangers, whereof these Confessours are a Cloud of Witnesses. We have an English Proverb, Threatned Folks live long, but let me add, I know a Threatned Man who did never dye at all, namely the Prophet Elijab, Threatned by cruel and crafty Iesabel, The1 King. 19. 2. Gods do so to me and more also, if I make not thy Life like one of their Lives by to morrow at this time, Yet did he never tast of Mortallity, being conveyed by a fiery (hariot into Heaven. Now although our ensuing History presenteth not any miraculously preserved from Death, yet affordetb it Plenty of strange preserva∣tions of Persons to extream Old age, though they wear the Marks of many, and mighty mens Menacies, who plotted and practised their Destruction. We have persued the same course in Confessors, which we embraced in Martyrs, viz. We have ranked them according to their Nativities, where we could certainly ob∣serve them, to make them herein Uniforme with the rest of our Book. But where this could not be attained, we have entred them in those Counties, where they had the longest or sharpest . And this we humbly conceive proper enough, see∣ing their Confessor-ship in a strict sense did bare true date, from place of their greatest Persecution.
CHAPTER IV. Of Popes, Cardinals and Prelates before the Reformation. Popes. I Meet with a mess of English Natives advanced to that Honour. Pope John-Joan is wholly omitted, partly because we need not charge that See with suspicious and doubtful crimes, whose notorious faults are too apparent; partly because this He-She, though allowed of English extraction, is generally believed born atGodwin in Catal. Cardi∣nal▪ p. 159. Ments in Germany. Wonder not that so few of our Countrymen gain'd the Triple-Crown. For first, great our distance from Rome, who being an Island or little World by our selves, had our Archbishop of Canterbury, which formerly was accounted Alterius orbis Papa. Secondly,  talians of late have ingrossed the Papacy to themselves, and much good may their Monopolie do them, seeing our English may more safely repose themselves in some other seate, then the Papal Chair, more fatal, (it is to be feared) to such as sit therein, than ever1 Sam. 4. 18. Eli's proved unto him. Yea, I assure you, four Popes was a very fair proportion for England; For having perused the voluminous book of Pantaleon, De Viris illustribus Germaniae; I find but six Popes Dutchmen by their Nativity, viz. Stephen the Eighth, Gregory the Fifth, Silvester the Second, Leo the Ninth, Victor the Second, and Adrian the Sixth. Seeing therefore Germany in the Latitude thereof, a Continent five times bigger than England, measu∣red by the aforesaidHe taketh in all the Nether∣lands. Pantaleon with advantage, I say, seeing Germany, the Emperour whereof is, or ought to be Patron to the Pope, produced but Six of that Order, Eng∣land's four acquit themselves in a very good appearance. I need not observe that our English word Pope, came from the Latine Papa, signi∣fying a Father, a Title anciently given to other Bishops, but afterwards fixed on the See of Rome. One would have him call'd Papa by abbreviation, quasi PAter PAtriarcha∣rum, flitting only the two first syllables. A prety conceit, which I dare no more avouch than his Fancy, who affirmed the former syllable in Papa to be short in verse, for the Pope personal, who indeed are short-lived; whilest the same syllable is long, the word being taken for the succession of Popes, who have lasted above a thousand years. Cardinals. A word of their Names, Numbers, Degrees, Dignities, Titles and Habit. Cardi∣nals are not so called, because the Hinges on which the Church of Rome doth move; but from Cardo, which signifieth theVitruvius, lib. 10. c. 20. end of a Tenon put into a Mortais being accord∣ingly fixed and fastned to their respective Churches. Anciently Cardinalis imported no more than an Ecclesiastical Person, beneficed and inducted into a cure of Soules; and all Bishops generally made Cardinals as well as the Pope of Rome. In proof whereof, there were anciently Founded in the Church of Saint Pauls, two Cardinals chosen by the Dean and Chapter out of the twelve petty Canons, whose Office it was to take notice of the absence and neglect of all in the Quire, to give the Eu∣charist to the Minister of that Church and their servants, as well in health as in sickness, to hear Confessions, appoint penance, and to commit the dead to convenient sepulture. And two of them lie buried in the Church of Saint Faiths with these Epitaphes. Hic homo Catholicus VVilielmus VVest tumulatur, Pauli Canonicus Minor Ecclesiae vocitatur, Qui fuerat Cardinalis bonus atque sodalis, &c. Perpetuis annis memores estote Johannis Good Succentoris, Cardinalisque minoris, &c.
Many other Churches besides Saint Pauls retained this custome of Cardinal making. Viz. Ravenna, Aquileia, Millain, Pisa, Beneventana in Italy, and Compostella in Spain. But in processe of time Cardinal became appropriated to such as officiated in Rome, and they are reckoned up variously by Authours, Fifty one, fifty three, fifty eight, sixty I believe their number arbitrary to ben creased or diminished, ad libitum Domini Papae. They are divided into three ranks. Cardinall Bishops, Assessors with the Pope. Priests, Assistants to the Pope. Deacons, Attendants on the Pope. The former of these have Chaires allowed them, and may sit down in presence of his Holynesse, and these are seven in number, whose Sees are in the Vicinage of Rome, and some Englishmen have had the honour to be dignified by them. Bishop of 1 Hostia, Bishop of 2 Porto, R. Kilwardby. Bishop of 3 Sabine, Bishop of 4 Alba, Nic. Breakspeare. Bishop of 5 Preneste, Bernar. . Simon . Bishop of 6 Rufine. 7 Bishop of Tusculane. Cardinall Priests succceed, generally accounted twenty eight, divided into foure Septe∣naries, whose Titles are here presented with such Englishmen, Sometimes there were▪ se∣veral English Cardinals suc∣cessively of the same Ti∣tle whose names and numbers will be exhibited in their respe∣ctive Counties. who attained to be honoured with such Churches in Rome. 1. St. Maries beyond Tyber 2. St. Chrysogon Steph. Langhton A. D. 1212 3. St. Ceily beyond Tyber Thomas Wolsey, An. D. 1515 4. St. Anaftasia John Morton An. D. 1493 5. St. Laurence in Damaso 6. St. Marke 7. St. Martin in the Mount William Alan, An. D. 1587 8. St. Sabine John Stafford, An. D. 1434 9. St. Prisca Reginald Pole, An. D. 1540 10. St. Balbine 11. St. Nereus & Achileus Phil. Repington, An. D. 1408 12. St. Sixtus 13. St. Marcellus 14. St. Susan. 15. St. Praxis Ancherus, An. Do. 1261 Chr. Bambridge, An. D. 1511 16. St. Peter ad vincula Ancherus, An. Do. 1261 Chr. Bambridge, An. D. 1511 17. St. Laurence in Lucina 18. St. Crosses Jerusalem Boso An. Dom. 1156 19. S. Steph. in Mount Celius Robert Curson, An. Do. ▪1211 Robert Summercote, A.D. 1234 20. St. John and St. Paul Robert Curson, An. Do. ▪1211 Robert Summercote, A.D. 1234 21. The4. Crowned Saints 22. The holy Apostles 23. S Cyriacus in the Baths Thomas Bourchier, An. D. 1464 24. St. Eusebius Robert Pullen, An. Dom. 1144 25. St. Puntiana Boso. An. Dom. 1160 26. St. Vitalis—St.— John Fisher, An. Dom. 1535 27. St. Marcelline & Peter 28. St. Clement. Observe I pray you this Catalogue of Titles (taken out of Sir Henry Spelman his Glossary) is imperfect, Bish. Godwin in his Cata∣logue of Car∣dinals, p. 165. St. Pastor, being omitted therein, whereof Boso was at last made Cardinal. For these Cardinals were not so moraised to their Churches, but that they might be removed, especially if advanced a Story higher (from Cardinal Deacons to Priests, from Priests to Bishops) and sometimes though remaining on the same flore, they were removed (to make room for others) to some other Title. Many more Englishmen we had created Cardinals, whose certain Titles are unknown. But let us proceed to the Cardinal Deacons 16. in number, 1. St. Mary in Dompusinica. 2. St. Lucy. 3. St. Mary the new. 4. St. Cosmus and St. Damian 5. St. Gregory. 6. St. Mary in the Greek School. 7. St. Mary in the Porch. 8. St. Nicholas by the Prison. 9. St. Angelus. 10. St. Eustachius. 11. St. Mary in the water. 12. St. Mary in the broad way. 13. St. Agathe. 14. St. Lucia on thto p of Sabine. 15. St. Quintin. 16. St. The last lost by the Scribe, in Curia. I onely find one Englishman Boso by Name made Cardinal Deacon, of St. Cosmus and St. Damian, but it was not long before he was advanced to be a Cardinal Bishop.
The habit of Cardinals is all Scarlet, whereof Theodore Beza tartly enough, thus ex∣presseth himself. Crede meae nullo satur antur murice vestes, Divite nec cocco pallia tincta mihi. Sed quae rubra vides Sanctorū caede virorū Et mersa insonti sanguine cuncta madēt. Aut memor istorū quae celat crimina vestis Pro Domino justo tincta pudore rubet. My clothes in Purple liquor ne're were stewd Nor garments (trust me) richly di'd in grain. These Robes you see so red, I have imbrew'd In gore of guiltless Saints, whom I have slain. Or mindful of the faults thay hide, with shame, The bashfull clothes do blush their wearers blame. They wore also a red Hat of a peculiar fashion to themselves, and rid abroad on hors∣back on scarlet Foot-clothes, and Platina in e∣jus vita. Pope Paul the Second, made it penal for any beneath their Order in Rome, to use the same. Yea to such a height of pride did they aspire, that we read this Note in the Roman Pontifical, Notandum, quod Caesar antequam coronetur simplici diademate sedet post primum Episcopum Cardinalem, & si quis Rex adest, sedet tunc post primum omnium Presbyterum Cardinalem. Indeed making their own Canons, and being their own Heralds to Marshal their own precedency, they had been much to blame if not carving a good portion of Honour to themselves, whilest devout Princes, abused by bad Instructors and their own erroneous Consciences, gave to the Clergy what they were pleased to demaund. None might elect the Pope, save such as were Cardi. yea none out of that Order were eligible into the Papacy, as in England, one must first be a Sergeant before he be a Iudge. Cardinal Deacons were, in equal capacity of being Popes with Cardinal Priests, and oftentimes, were preferred before them as they could strenthen their faction, which carried all in these (and I could wish in no other) Elections. WILLIAM ALLEN, who died Anno 1594, was the last Englishman advanced to this Honour, so that our Country hath not had a Cardinl these sixty years, which from the former six hundred years, was never without one or two of that Order. This may seem a wonder, our Nation being as meriting as any for the Romish Cause, and having as good Heads as any, why should they not weare as gay Hats as others? nor will the reasons assigned for the contrary give satisfaction, viz. 1. That the Pope commonly makes Cardinals to gratifie Foreign Kings, whilest our English Soveraigns have ever since been of a different Religion from his Holinesse. 2. That our English Catholicks living beyond Seas in the nature of Exiles, and under persecution (as they call it,) so high an honour is inconsistent with their suffering condition. 3. That our Englishmen want preferment and Estates, to maintain the di∣stance of so great a dignity. There are at the present two English Natives in France of noble extraction and Ro∣mish perswasion, much voyced in common discourse for their probability to such pre∣ferment; but on what grounds I do not know, and list not to enquire. Surely the matter is not great, seeing that dignity hath been observed to be rather fatal then fortunate to the English, and attended with some sad and sudden casualties. 1. Cardinal Mackelsfield was four moneths buried before his Cap was brought him. 2. Cardinal Sertor dyed in Italy in the Juncture of Time, Inter Pileum da∣tum & susceptum. 3. Cardinal Fisher, when his Cap was come to Calis, had his head struck off at Tower-Hill. 4. Cardinal Somercot was poysoned in the very Conclave to prevent his selection to the Popedome. 5. Cardinal Evosham was sent the same way on the same occasion. 6. Cardinal Bambridge was poysoned at Rome, by one of his servants be∣ing an Italian. If such their successe, I suppose it far easier for Englishmen to have their caps (though courser and cheaper) made of our own Countrey-wool, which will be more warm, and may prove more healthful for the wearers thereof. I have done with this Subject,
when I have observed that there is a Cardinal, Bishop of Sabine, a place near Rome; and a Cardinal Priest of Saint Sabine a Church dedicated to her Memory in the same City; the not heeding whereof I suspect hath bred much confusion in our English Writers. The best is, our Englishmen, when they write of Places in Italy cannot commit greater and grosser mistakes, then what Italians have done, when they have wrote of Towns and Places in England; Though perchance such is their pride, that they will say it is our duty to be exact in Italy, and their courtesie to take any notice of England. Let not the Reader wonder if Cardinals inserted in others, are omitted in our Cata∣logue, viz. Ulricus, Ancherus, Theobaldus, Bernardus de Anguiscello, &c. Seeing I am unsatisfied in some of them, whether they were Cardinals; in others, whether they were Englishmen, Forreign Countries laying more probable claim unto them. Nor will it quit the cost of a Contest, nothing more then their names being left in History with∣outa ny other observeables. Prelates before the Reformation. Next succeed such eminent Clergy-men who attained to the honour of being Arch∣Bishops and Bishops in England, and were famous in their generations. Objection. These Popes, Cardinals and Prelates, were superstitious persons and Limbs of Antichrist, whose names are better lost then kept. Yea, it mattered not much, if some good Josiah served their bones as those of the idolatrous Priests of2 Kings 23. 16. Jeroboam, even burn them to ashes, that so their bodies and memories might perish together. Answer. I am afraid our age affords those, who if they were to manage that Act, would together with their bones, sans difference (notwithstanding the distinguishing Epitaph) burn the bodies of the young and old Prophet, I mean utterly extirpate the Ministerial Function. But I answer, it must be confess'd they were deeply died with the Errors and Vices of the Age they lived in, yet so that some of them were for their Devotion exemplary to posterity; and the very worst of them, though yeelding nothing fit for our Imitation, may afford what is well worth our Observation. And here be it remembred, that the same Epithete in severall places accepts sun∣dry Interpretations. He is called A GOOD MAN in common Discourse, who is not Dignified with Gentilitie; A GOOD MAN upon the Exchange, who hath a responsable Estate; A GOOD MAN in a Camp, who is a tall Man of his Armes; A GOOD MAN in the Church, who is Pious and Devout in his Conversation. Thus whatsoever is fixed therein in other Relations, that Person is A GOOD MAN in History, whose Character affords such Matter as may please the Palate of an Ingenious Reader, and I humbly crave the Honour to be his Taster in this Behalf. Now of Bishops before the Conquest, the most were meerly nuda Nomina, Naked Names. As for such appearing Clothed with remarkable History, most of them move in an higher Sphere of Saints, and so are anticipated. Since the Conquest; for the first seven Kings, many Prelates were Foreigners, generally French, and so Aliens from our Subject. It will therefore be seasonable to begin their Catalogue about the time of King Henry the Third, deducing it unto the Popish Bishops, who were deprived in the first of Queen Elizabeth.
CHAP. V. Since the Reformation. NExt those Prelates before, follow such as were since the Reformation, much different (not in Title but) Tenure from the former, holding their places not from the Pope, but their Prince, and practising the principles of the protestant Religion, for the term of a hundred and twenty years, since the latter end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Amongst these, Malice it self meets with many, which it must allow for their Living, Preaching, and Writing, to have been the main Champions of Truth against Error, Learning against Ignorance, Piety against Profss, Religion against Superstition, Unity and Order against Faction and Confusion, verifying the judicious observation of Forreigners, Clerus Britanniae, Gloria mundi. These Prelates, may be Digested into Five Successive Setts, or Companies, under their respective Arch-bishops, allowing each of them somewhat more then twenty years, as large a proportion for the life of a Bishop; as seventy years for the age of a man. 1. Arch-bishop Cranmers, whereof four, besides himself, were burnt at the stake, and the rest exiled in Germany. 2. Arch-bishop Parkers, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth leading Halcion-days, without any considerable Opposition against the Hierarchy. 3. Arch-bishop Whitgifts, much Pen-persecuted, and pelted at with Libellous Pam∣phlets, but supported by Queen Elizabeths Zeal to maintain the Discipline established, 4. Arch-bishop Abbot's, fortunate all the peaceable Reign of King James, and be∣ginning of King Charles, though the Skie was Red and Lowring, foretelling foul wea∣ther to follow, a little before their Death. 5. Arch-bishop Juxton's, whose Episcopal Chairs, were not only shrewdly shaken, but (as to outward appearance) overturned in our late mutinous Distempers. I know the man full well, to whom Mr. Charles Herle (President of the Assembly) said somewhat insultingly, Ile tel you News, last Night I buryed a Bishop, (dashing more at his profession then person) in Westminster Abbey, to whom the other returned with like Latitude to both, Sure you buried him in hope of Resurrection, This our Eyes at this day see performed, and it being the work of the Lord, may justly seem marvellous in our Sight. It is also very remakable, that of this Fift and Last Company, [all Bishops in 1642.] Nine are alive at this present, viz. (Pardon me if not enumerating them exactly according to their Consecration) London, Bath, Wells, Ely, Salisbury, Bongor, Covent. and Lichfield, Oxford, Rochester and Chichester. A Vivacity hardly to be parallel'd of so many Bishops in any other age, providence purposely prolonging their Lives, that as they had seen the Violent Ruining, they might also behold the legal Restitution of their Order. Now although not the Quick but (the) Dead Worthies properly pertain to my pen, yet I crave leave of the Reader in my following work, to enter a brief Memorial of the place of their Nativities. Partly because lately they were dead though not in Law, in the List of a Prevalent party, partly because they are dead to the World, having most attained, if not exceeded the age of man threescore and ten years. To conclude, though the Apostles words be most true that the Lesser are Blessed of the Greater, and that Imperative and Indicative Blessings, allways descend from the superiour, yet an Optative Blessing (no more then a plain prayer) may properly proceed from an inferiour, so that a plain Priest and submissive Son of the Church of England, may blesse the Bishops and Fathers thereof. God Sanctifie their former afflictions unto them, that as the Dan. 3. 25. Fire in the Furnace only burnt the bonds (setting them free who went in fetterr'd) not the cloths (much lesse the bodies) of the children of the captivity, so their sufferings without doing them any other prejudice, may only disingage their souls from all Servitude to this World.
And that for the Future, they may put together, not only the parcels of their scattered Revenues, but compose the minds of the divided People in England, to the Confusion of the Factious and Confirmation of the Faithful in Israel. CHAPTER VI. Of such who have been worthy States-Men in our Land. THe word STATESMEN is of great Latitude, sometimes signifying such who are able to manage Offices of State, though never actually called thereunto. Ma∣ny of these men concealing themselves in a private condition, have never ar∣rived at publike notice. But we confine the term to such, who by their Princes favour have been preferred to the prime places, Of 1. Lord CHANCELLOURS. Of 2. Lord TREASURERS of England. Of 3. SECRETARIES of State. To whom we have added some Lord ADMIRALS of England, and some Lord DEPUTIES of Ireland. Lord Chancellours. The name is taken from CANCELLI, which signifies a kind of wooden Network, which admitteth the eyes of people to behold, but forbids their feet to press on Persons of Quality, sequestred to sit quietly by themselves for publick imployment. Hence Chancells have their denomination, which by such a fence were formerly divided from the body of the Church; and so the Lord Chancellour had a Seat several to him∣self, free from popular intrusion. I find another Notation of this Office, some deducing his name à Cancellando, from Cancelling things amisse, and rectifying them by the Rules of Equity and a good Consci∣ence, and this relateth to no meaner Author then Johannes In his book called Nugae , or Polyeraticon. Sarisburiensis. Hic est qui Leges Regni Cancellat iniquas, Et mandata pii Principis aequa facit. Siquid obest populis, aut legibus est inimicum Quicquid obest, per eum desinit esse nocens. 'Tis he, who cancelleth all cruel Lawes, And in Kings Mandates Equity doth cause, If ought to Land or Laws, doth hurtful prove, His care that hurt doth speedily remove. He is the highest Officer of the Land, whose principal imployment is to mittigate the rigour of the Common Law with Conscientious qualifications. For as the Pro∣phet complaineth that the Magistrates in Israel had turned Amos 5. 7. JUDMENT into WORM∣WOOD, the like would dayly come to passe in England, where High Justice would be High injustice, if the bitterness thereof were not sometimes seasonably sweetned with a mixture of Equity. He also keepeth the Great Seal of the Land, the affixing whereof preferreth what for∣merly was but a Piece of written Parchment, to be a Patent or Charter. For though it be true what Solomon sayes Eccles. 8. 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power; yet that word doth not act effectually, until it be produced under the publick Seal. Some difference there is between learned Authours, about the antiquity of this Office, when it first began in Engand. Polydore Virgil, who though an Italian, could (when he would) see well into English Antiqui∣ties, makes the Office to begin at the Conque∣rour. And B. Godwin accounteth them sufficient∣ly ridiculous, who make Swithin Bishop of Win∣chester, Chancellor of England under K. Athelwolfe. Severall persons are alledged See Master Philpots Cata∣logue of Eng∣lish Chancel∣lors, p. 1. 2, 3. Chancellours to our English Kings before the Conquest, and King E∣thelred appointed the Abbat of Elie, ut in History of Ely. Regis Curia Cancellarii ageret dignitatem.
The Controverfie may easily be compremized by this distinction; Chancellour be∣fore the Conquest, imported an Office of credit in the Kings Court (not of Judicature, but) of Residence, much in the nature of a Secretary. Thus lately he was called the Chancellour (understand not of the Diocess, but) of the Cathedral-Church, whose place was to pen the Letters belonging thereunto. Whereas the notion of the Kings Chancellour since the Conquest, is inlarged and advanced to signifie the supreme Judge of the Land. The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, is in effect the same with the Lord Chancelour of England: save that some will have the Lord Chancellours place ad Terminum Vitae, and the Lord Keepers ad placitum Regis. Sure it is, that because Nicholas Heath late Arch-Bishop of York, and Chancellour of England, was still alive, though outed of his Office, Sir Nicholas Bacon was made Lord Keeper, and in his time the power of the Keeper was made equal with the authority of the Chancellour by Act of Parlia∣ment. We have begun our Catalogue of Chancellours at Sir Thomas More, before whose time that place was generally discharged by Clergy men, entered in our Book under the Title of Eminent Prelates. If any demand, why such Clergy-men, who have been Lord Chancellours, are not rather ranked under the Title of Statesmen, than under the Topick of Prelates? Let such know, that seeing Episcopacy is challenged to be jure Divino, and the Chancellours place confessed to be of Humane Institution, I con∣ceive them most properly placed and to their best advantage. If any ask, why the Lord Chancellours who meddle so much in matters of Law, are not rather digested under the Title of Lawyers then under that of Statesmen? Let such know, it is done, because some Chancellours were never Lawyers ex professo, studying the Laws of the Land, for their intended Function, taking them only in or∣der to their own private accomplishment. Whereof Sir Christopher Hatton was an emi∣nent instance. As we begin our Catalogue with Sir Thomas More, we close it with Sir Thomas Coventry, it being hard toay, whether the Former were more Witty and Facetious, or the Later more Wise and Judicious. Lord Treasurers. Kings without Treasure will not be suitably obeyed, and Treasure without a Trea∣surer will not be safely preserved. Hence it was that the Crowns and Scepters of Kings were made of gold, not only because it is the most pure and precious of metalls, but to show, that wealth doth effectually evidence and maintain the strength and state of Majesty. We may therefore observe, not only in prophane but holy writ; not only in Old, but New Testnment, signal notice taken of those who were Ezra 1. 8.  Neh. 13. 13. over the Treasury, in which great place of Trust, the Eunuch served Candace Queen Acts 8. 27. of Ethiopia. The Office of Lord Treasurers was ever beheld as a Place of great charge and profit. One well skilled in the Perquisits thereof, being demanded, what he conceived the yearly value of the place was worth? made this Return, That it might be worth some thousands of pounds to him (who after death) would go instantly to Heaven, twice as much to him, who would go to Purgatory, and a Nemo Scit to him who would adventure to go to a worse place. But the plain truth is, He that is a Bad Husband for himself, will ne∣ver be a good one for his Soveraign, and therefore no wonder if they have advanced fair Estates to themselves, whose Office was so Advantagious, and they so judicious and prudent persons, without any prejudice to their Master, and (for ought I know) Injury to his Subjects. We have begun our Catalogue at William Lord Powlett Marquess of Winchester. For although before him, here and there Lay-Lords were Intrusted with that Office, Yet generally they were Bishops, and so anticipated under our Topick of Eminent Prelates, and blame me not if in this particular, I have made the Lustrè of the Lords Spiritual, to Eclipse the Lords Temporal, drowning their Civil Office in their Ec∣clesiastical Employment. We close our Catalogue of Lord Treasurers, with Francis Lord Cottington.
Secretaries of State. There were but two of these at once in the Kings time, whereof the one was styled the Principal Secretary, the other the Secretary of Estate. Some have said that the first in the Senioritie of Admition, was accounted the Principall, but the Exceptions in this kind, being as many as the Regularities (the Younger being often brought over the head of the elder to be Principal) Their chiefnesse was Penes Regis Arbitrium. Nor was the one confined to Forreign Negotiations, the other to domestick businesse, (as some have believed) but promiscuously ordered all affaires, though the Genius of some Secretaries did incline them most to forreign Transactions. Their Power was on the matter alike, and Petitioners might make their Applications indifferently to either, though most addressed themselves to him, in whom they had the greatest Interest. Their Salaries were some Two hundred pounds a piece, and five hundred pounds a piece more for Intelligence and Secret Service. Before the Reformation Clergy-men (who almost were all things) were generally Secretaries of Estate, as Oliver King, Secretary to Edward 4. Edward 5. and Henry the 7. and those came under our Pen in the Notion of Eminent Prelates. We there∣fore begin our Catalogue of Secretaries from Sir Thomas Cromwell, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, because from him until our Time a continued Series of Lay∣men hae discharged that Office. We onclude our Secretaries of State with Sir John Cook, who perceiving his aged body not so fit for such Active times, resigned his Place about the beginning of the Long Parliament, though surviving some years after in a private condition. We will for the more safety follow the Pattern of so wise a States-man, and where he gave over his Office, we will give over writing of those Officers, for fear we tread too neere on the Toes of the Times, and touch too much on our Modern distempers. Amiralls or Admiralls. Much difference there is about the Original of this word, whilst most probable their Opinion who make it of Eastern Extraction, borrowed by the Christians from the Saracens. These derive it from Amir, in Arabick a Prince, and , Belonging to the Sea, in the Greek Language, such mixture being precedented in other words. Besides, seeing the Sultans Dominions in the Time of the Holy War, extended from Sinus Arabius, to the North Eastern part of the Midland-Sea, where a barbarous kind of Greek was spoken by many, Amirall (thus compounded) was significatively com∣prehensive of his Jurisdiction, Admirall is but a Depraving of Amirall in vulgar mouths. However it will never be beaten out of the Heads of the Common sort, that seeing the Sea is Scene of Wonders, something of Wonderment hath incorporated it self in this Word, and that it hath a Glimps, Cast, or Eye of Admiration therein. Our English Kings following the Precedent of the Politick Romans, who very sel∣dome entrusted places of great importance (especially during life) in a single person, as also that they might gratifie more and trust less, divided the Over-sight of sea-matters betwixt a Triumvirate of Amiralls, and (like wary Merchants) ventured the charge in several bottoms for the more Safety. 1. The North Amirall. 2. The South Amirall. 3. The West Amirall. His jurisdiction reached from the Mouth of Thames, to the outmost Orcades (though of∣ten opposed by the Scots) and had Yarmouth for his prime Residence. His Bounds stretched from the Thames Mouth to the Lands end, having his sta∣tion generally at Portsmouth. His power extended from the lands end to the Hebri∣des, (having Ireland un∣der his Inspection) Milford Haven the chief Stable for his Wooden Horses. I find that Richard Fitz-alin Earl of Arundell, was by King Richard the second, made the first Amirall of all England, yet so, that if Three Co-Admiralls were restored as formerly, his Charter expired. John Vere Earl of Oxford, was, the sirst of Hen. the seventh, Amirall of England, and kept it until the day of his Death. After∣wards
Men were chequered, at the pleasure of our Princes, and took their turns in that Office. For this cause I can make no certain Catalogue of them, who can take with my most fixed Eye, no steddy aime at them (the same persons being often al∣ternately In, and Out of the Place) whilst Officers protermino vitae, may be with some certainty recounted. Yet have we sometimes inserted some Memorable Amiralls under the Tile of States∣men; and Vice-Amiralls under the Topick of Seamen, because the former had no great knowledge in Navigation, (I say great) it being improper, they should be sea∣masters who in no degree were seamen) and were imployed rather for their Trust, then skill, to see others do their Duty, whilst the latter were allwayes persons well ex∣perienced in Maritine affairs. Lord-Deputies of IRELAND. Ever since King Henry the second conquered Ireland, few of our English Princes went thither in person, and none continued any long time there, save King John, and King Richard the second, neither of them over-fortunate. But that Land was governed by a Substitute, commissioned from our Kings, with the same power though sometimes under several names. Lord Lieutenants. Lord Deputies. Lord Cheif Justice. These were also of a double nature, for Some staid in Eng∣land and appointed Deputies under them, to act all Irish Affairs. Others went over into Ireland, trans∣acting all things by presence, not proxie. Immediately deputed by the King to reside there. We insist on this title, as which is most constant and current amongst them. Not of the Kings Bench or Common∣Pleas but of all Ireland. This power was sometime sole in a single person and sometimes  in two toge∣ther. Thus these three Titles are in sense Synonima, to signifie the same power and place. Some erroniously term them Presidents of Ireland, a Title belonging to the particular Governours of Mounster and Connagh. It is true of Ireland what was once said of * Edom, their Deputies were Kings. No1 King. 22. 47. Vice-roy in Christendome (Naples it self not excepted) is observed in more state. He chooseth Sheriffes, and generally all Officers, save Bishops and Judges, and these also, though not made by his commanding, are usually by his commending to the King. He conferreth Knighthood, hath power of life and death, signified, by the Sword carried commonly before him, by a person of Honour. His attendance and House-keeping is magnificent, partly to set a Copy of State to the barbarous Irish, by seeing the difference betwixt the rude rabble routs runing after their native Lords; and the solemnity of a regulated retinue; partly to make in that Rebellious Nation, a reverential impression of Majesty, that by the Shadow they may admire the Sub∣stance, and proportionably collect the State of the King himself, who therein is re∣presented. Our English Kings were content with the Title of Lords of Ireland, until King Henry the Eighth, who, partly to shew his own power to assume what style he pleased, without leave or liberty from the Pope (whose Supremity he had suppres∣sed in his Dominions) partly the more to awe the Irish, wrote himself King thereof, Anno Dom. 1541. from which Year we date our Catalogue of Lord Deputies, as then, and not before, Vice-Royes indeed. Indeed it was no more then needs, for King Henry the Eighth to assume that Ti∣tle, seeing, quod efficit tale magis est tale, and the Commission whereby King Henry the Second made William-Fitz-Adelme his Lieutenant of Ireland, hath this direction; Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus; Comitibus, Baronibus, et omnibus fidelibus suis in Hibernia, salutem. Now, though by the post-poning of these Kings to Arch-bishops and Bishops, it plain∣ly appears that they were no Canonical Kings, (as I may say) I mean solemnly invested with the Emblems of sovereignty, [the King of 6 Johannis Claus▪ membra∣ni 18 Connagh, the King of Thomond] yet were they more then Kings, even Tyrants in the exercise of their 6 Hen▪ 3. Chart. m. 2. Dominions, so that, King Henry was in some sort necessitated to set himself King Paramount above them all.
CHAPTER VII. Of Capital Judges, and Writers on the Common Law. BY CAPITAL JUDGES, we understand not those who have power to condemn Offenders for Capital Faults, as all the Twelve Judges have (or any Serjeant commissioned, to ride the Circuit,) but the Chief Judges, who as Capital LETTERS stand in Power and Place above the rest, viz. 1. the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. 2. of the Common Pleas, 3. the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and the Learned Antiquary, Sr. Henry Spelman,In his glossary verb, Justiciarius. avoweth the Title of Capital Justicers, properly applicable to these alone. The Chief Justice of the Kings, or Upper Bench, is commonly called the Lord Chief Justice of England, a Title which the Lord Chancellor (accounting himself Chief in that kind) looks on, as an injurious usurpation. And many alive may remember how Sr. Edward Cook was accused to K. James, for so styling himself in the Frontespiece of his Reports, Part the Tenth and Eleventh, insomuch, that the Judg was fain to plead for him∣self, Erravimus cum Patribus, as who could have produced plenty of Precedents therein. 2. The chief Justice of the Common Pleas in Place beneath, is in Profit above the former. So that some have out of Designe quitted That, to accept of This: Amongst these was Sr. Edward Mountague, in the Raign of K. Henry the eighth, who being demanded of his Friends, the Reason of his Self-degradation? I am now (saith he) an Old Man, and love the Kitching above the Hall, the Warmest place best suiting my Age. The Chief Baron is chiefly imployed in the Exchequer, to decide causes which relate to the Kings Revenue. Their Brevia or Writts did commonly run with this Clause, That the Judg should have and hold his PLACE, quam diu se benè geserit, so long as he well behaved himself, on this Token, That Sr. John Walter, Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, being to be outed of his Place, for adjudging the Loan-mony illegal, pleaded for himself; That he was guilty of no Misdemeanour, who had only delivered his Judgment according to his Conscience. Others are granted from the King, durante nostro beneplacito; to continue in their Office, during his will and pleasure. We begin the Army of our Judges, (for some Few, like the Forlorne Hope, advance higher,) about the time of King Edward the first. It is impossible exactly to observe that Inn of Court, wherein each of them had his Education, especially some of them being so Ancient, that in their times, Lincolnes Inn and Greys Inn were Lincoln's Inn and Grey's Inn, I mean, belonged to those their Owners, from whom they had their Names, as being, before they were appropriated to the Students of our Municipall Lawes. Here I will condemn my self, to prevent the condemning of others, and confesse our Characters of these Judges to be very brief and defective. Indeed, were the Subject we treat of overstrewed with Ashes, (like the floor of Bells Temple) it were easie to finde out and follow the Footsteps therein: But here is no such help to Trace the Footings of Truth, Time having almost out-worn all impressions thereof. I perceive though Judges leave more Land than Bishops, they leave lesse Memorialls behind them, of the time, place, and manner, when and where born, and dyed, and how they demeaned themselves. In the same Topick with Judges, we have also placed such as have been Writers of our Common-Law, and such conjunction we hope) is no disparagement, considering many of them were Capital Judges, (as Broke, Dyer, Coke, &c.) and the rest, learned Men, of great repute in their Profession, insomuch that the Judges themselves, in several Cases, have submitted to their Judgments. And here I can but admire at the comparative paucity of the Books of our Common-Law, in proportion to those written of the Civil and Canon Law. Oh how corpulent
are the Corpus'es of both those Lawes. Besides their Shadows are far bigger than their Bodies; their Glosses larger than their Text. Insomuch, that one may bury two Thousand pounds and upwards in the Purchase, and yet hardly compasse a Moity of them: whereas all the Writers of the Common-Law, (except they be much multiplyed very lately) with all the Year-Books belonging thereunto, may be bought for threescore pounds, or thereabouts, which with some men is an Argument, that the Common-Law imbraceth the most compendious course to decide Causes, and by the fewness of the Books, is not guilty of so much difficulty and tedious prolixity, as the common and civil Lawes. Yet is it most true, that common Law-books are dearer than any of the same Proportion, Quot libri, tot librae, holdeth true in many, and is exceeded in some of them. Yea, should now an old common Law-book be new-printed, it would not quit cost to the PRINTRR, nor turn to any considerable account. For the Profession of the Law is narrow in it self, as confined to few persons, and those are already sufficiently furnished, with all Authors on that Subject, which with carefull keeping and good using, will serve them and their sons sons, unto the third Generation. So that a whole Age would not carry off a New Impression of an Ancient Law-book, and (quick return being the life of trading) the tediousness of the sale would eat up the profit thereof. All I will adde is this, that, That TAYLOR, who being cunning in his Trade, and taking exact measure of a Person, maketh a suit purposely for him, may be presumed to fit him better than those, who, (by a general aim) at randome make Cloaths for him. In like manner, seing our municipal Law, was purposely composed by the Sages of this Land, who best knew the Genius of our Nation, it may be concluded more proper for our people, and more applicable to all the Emergencies in this half-Island, than the civil Law, made for the general Concernment of the whole Empire, by such who were unacquainted with the Particularities of our Land and Nation. CHAPTER VIII. Of Souldiers and Seamen, with the necessity to encourage the Trade of Fishing. SOULDIERS succeed, though it almost affrighteth my Pen to meddle with such Martial Persons. It is reported of the God of the Jews, That he would have no share in the Pantheon at Rome, except he might have (and that justly too) the whole Temple to himself. So lately we have been so sadly sensible of the boisterousness of Souldiers, one may suspect, they will [though unjustly] justle all others out of the Book, to make room for themselves. But since their violence hath (blessed be God) been seasonably retrenched, we have adventured to select some signal Persons of that Profession, whose Prowesse made eminent impression on Forreign Parts (so purposely to decline all medling with the dolefull and dangerous Distractions of our Times) beginning our List in the Reign of King Edward the 3d. and concluding in the beginning of King Charles. Seamen. Surely Divine Providence did not make the vast body of the Sea, for no other use, than for Fishes to disport themselves therein, or, (as some do conceit) only for to quench and qualifie the drought and heat of the Sun with the moysture thereof, but it was for higher intendmens. Chiefly, That by sailing thereon, there may be the continuing of Commerce, the communicating of Learning and Religion (the Last from Palestine the Staple thereof) and the more speedy and convenient portage of Burthens, seeing, a laden Ship doth flie in comparison of the creeping of an empty Waggon. Now to speak what Envy cannot deny, Our Englishmen, either for Fights, or Discoveries, whether for tame Ships, Merchants Men, or Wild Ships, Men of War carry away the Garland, from all Nations in the Christian World.
Learned Keckerman, Hoc certum est, omnibus bodie gentibus navigandi industria, & peritia, superiores esse Anglos, & post Anglos Hollandos. who being a German by birth, was unbiased in his judgment, and living in Dantz, (a Port of great trading, whither Seamen repaired from all parts) and writing a Book De re nautica, may be presumed skilful therein, alloweth the English the best Seamen, and next to them the Hollanders. And if the later dare deny the truth hereof, let them remember the late Peace they purchased of the English, and thank God, that they met with so conscientious Chapmen, who set no higher price thereon. Yea, Let the Dutch know, that they are the Scholars to the English, in some of their Discoveries: For I find the four first Circumnavigators of the World thus qualified for their Nativities, 1. Magellanus, a Spaniard. 2. Sr. Francis Drake, an Englishman. 3. Sr. Thomas Candish, an Englishman. 4. Oliver Noort, an Hollander. But be it known, That the last of these had an Englishman, Captain Purchase, his Pilgrims, lib. 2. Page 17. Mellis by name, Pilot to conduct him. Yet let not my commending of our English Seamen be misinterpreted, as if I did not refer all successe to the goodnesse of God, the grand Admiral of the World. The praising of Instruments (by way of subordination) is no more detrimental to the honour of the Principal, than the praising of the edge of the Axe is a disparagement to the strength of the Arm which useth it. God I confesse by his Providence ordereth all by Land and by sea; yea, he may be said to be the first Shipwright; for I behold the Arke, as a Bird, wholly hatcht▪ but utterly unfledg, without any feathers of Masts and Tackling, it could only float, and not sail, yet so, that therein was left pattern enough for humane Ingenuity to improve it to Naval perfection. Yea, God himself hath in Scripture taken signal notice of the dextrous in this nature, on which account we finde the Tyrians, or Men of 1 Kings, 9. 27. Hiram, praised, for that they had knowledg of the sea, when sent with the servants of Solomon to Ophir. We begin our Catalogue of Seamen in the Raign of King Edward the 3d. before which time there were many good seamen in England, but few good English-seamen, our King using Mariners of the Hanse Towns. But it is no good huswifery to hire Chair∣women to do that, which may as well and better be done by her own servants. In the time of Edward the third, England grew famous for Sea-fights with the French, and encreased in credit, especially since the Navy Royal was erected by Q. Elizabeth. Some conceive it would be a great advancement to the perfecting of English Navigation, if allowance were given, to read a Lecture in London concerning that Subject, in imitation of the late Emperour CHARLES the fifth, who wisely considering the rawness of his Seamen, and the manifold shipwracks which they sustained in passing and repassing between Spain and the West▪Indies, established, not only a Pilote Major, for the examination of such as were to take charge of Ships in that voyage, but also founded a Lecture for the Art of Navigation, which to this day is read in the Contraction House at Sivil: the Readers of which Lecture, have not only carefully taught and instructed the Spanish Mariners by word of mouth, but have also published sundry exact and worthy Treatises, concerning Marine causes, for the direction and encouragement of Posterity. Here it were to be wish'd, That more care were taken for, and encouragement given to the breeding of Fishermen; whom I may call the spawn, or young Frie of seamen; yea such as hope that Mariners will hold up, if Fishermen be destroyed, may as rationally exspect plenty of hony and wax, though only old stocks of Bees were kept without either Casts or Swarmes. Nor can Fishermen be kept up, except the publick eating of Fish at set times be countenanced, yea enjoyned by the State. Some suspect, as if there were a Pope in the belly of every Fish, and some bones of superstition in them, which would choak a conscientious person, especially if fasting dayes be observed. But know that such Customes grew from a treble root, of Popery, Piety, and Policy; and though the first of these be pluck'd up, the other must be watered, and maintained; and Statesmen may be mortified and wise without being superstitious: Otherwise the not keeping of Fasting-dayes will make us keep Fasting-Dayes, I mean, The not forbearing of Flesh, for the feeding on Fish, for the good of the STATE, will in processe of time prove the ruine of Fishermen, they of Seamen, both of Englishmen.
We are sadly sensible of the truth hereof in part, (God forbid, in whole) by the decay of so many Towns on our North-east Sea, Hartlepool, Whitebay, Bridlington, Scarborough, Wells, Cromer, Lestof, Alborough, Orford, and generally all from New castle to Harewitch, which formerly set out yearly (as I am informed) Two Hundred Ships, and upwards, inployed in the Fisherie, but chiefly for the taking of Ling, that Noble Fish, corrival in his Joule with the surloin of Beef, at the Tables of Gentlemen. These Fishermen, set forth formerly, with all their male Family, sea-men, sea-youths, I had almost said, sea-children too, (seeing some learn'd the Language of lar-board, and star-board, with Bread, and Butter,) Graduates in Navigation, and indeed the Fishery did breed, the natural and best elemented seamen. But since our late Civil Wars not three ships are imployed yearly for that purpos, Fishermen preferring rather to let their Vesse lye, and rot in their Havens, than to undergo much pain and peril; for, that would not at their return quit cost in any proportion. So that it is suspicious, That in processe of time we shall lose, (the Masters being few and aged) the Mystery of Ling-catching, and perchance the Art of taking and handling some other kinde of sound and good Fish▪ no Nation (without flattery to our selves be it spoken) using more care and skill in ordering of that Commodity. Yea, which is a greater mischief, it is to be feared, that the seminary of sea-men will decay. For (under correction be it spoken) it is not the long voyages to the East∣Indies &c. which do make, but marr sea-men▪ they are not the Womb, but rather the Grave of good Mariners, it is the Fishery which hath been the Nursery of them, though now much disheartened, because their Fish turn to no account, they are brought to so bad Markets. Nor is there any hope of redressing this, but by keeping up Fasting-Dayes, which our Ancestors so solemnly observed. I say, Our Ancestors, who were not so weak in making, as we are willfull in breaking them, and who consulting the situation of this Island, with the conveniencies appendant thereunto, suited their Lawes and accommodated their Customes to the best benefit thereof. Nor was it without good cause why Wednesdayes and Fridayes were by them appointed for Fish-dayes: I confesse some Forreigners render this Reason, (and father it upon Clemens Alexandrinus) that, Because those dayes were dedicated by the Heathen, the one to Mercury the God of cheating, the other to Venus the Goddesse of lust, therefore the Christians should macerate themselves on that day with Fasting, in sorrowful remembrance of their Pronity to the vices aforenamed: But waving such fancies our English Fish, or Fasting-Dayes are founded on a more serious consideration. For our English Fishermen, in Kent, Sussex, Hantsre, &c. set forth on Monday, and catch their Fish, which on Tuesday they send up to London, where on Wednesday it is sold and eaten. Such therefore, who lately have propounded to antidate Fish-eating, and to remove it from Wednesday to Tuesday, must thereby occasion the encroaching on the Lords-Day, to furnish the Markets with that Commodity. Again, such Fishermen as returned on Tuesday, set forth afresh on Wednesday, to take Fish, which on Thursday they send up to London, to supply the remainder of the Week; It being observable, that so great is the goodnesse of God to our Nation, that there is not one week in the year wherein some wholesome Fish, caught on our own Coast, is not in the prime Season thereof. As for Staple or Salt-Fish, there are those that are acquainted in the Criticismes thereof, and have exactly stated, and cast up the proportions, who will maintain, that it will do the deed, and set up the Fishery as high as ever it was, if every one in England able to dispend a Hundred Pounds per annum, were enjoyned to lay out Twenty Shillings a Year, in staple-fish, a Summ so inconsiderable in the Particulars, that it will hurt none, and so considerble in the total, it will help all of our Nation. If any censure this for a tedious Digression, let it be imputed to my Zeal for the good of the Common-wealth.
CHAPTER IX. Of Writers on the Cannon and Civil Law, Physick, Chemistry, and Chirurgery. I Sometimes wondered in my self at two things in the Primitive Church, during the time of the Apostles, First, That seing they enjoyed all things inActs 4. 32. common, what use they had of Lawyers, seing no Propriety, no Pleading, and such a Communion of all things gave a Writ of Ease to that Profession. And yet I find mention made ofTit. 3. 13. Zenas the Lawyer, no Scribe of the Law, (as many amongst the Jews) but  an Advocate, or Barrister therein. Secondly, I wondered what use there was of Physicians in the Church, seeing the Apostles miraculously cured all Maladies, and so (in my apprehension) gave a Supersedeas to the Practitioners in that Faculty, and yet I find honourable mention made ofColos. 4. 14. Luke, the beloved Physician. But since I have wondred at my wondring thereat; For that Communion of Goods was but tmporal, for a short continuance, and topical, of a narrow compasse, practised onely in Judea, or thereabouts, whilest the Churches amongst the Gentiles continued their propriety, and particularly at Rome, where Zenas had his Habitation, and had work enough, no doubt, to exercise his Profession, even amongst Christians themselves. As for the Apostles, they had not alwayes power at their own pleasure to work Miacles and cure diseases in all Persons, no, nor allwayes in themselves (witnesse 2 Cor. 1. 8, and 9. sick St. Paul, receiving in himself the Sentence of Death) but as they were directed, for the glory of God, and other occasions: And therefore notwithstanding their miraculous Power, St Luke might have plenty of Practice in his Profession. Not was it probable, that God (the Authour of all Ingenuity) would by the giving of the Gospel utterly extinguish any literal Calling, which formerly had been publickly, lawfully, and needfully professed. We have in our following Book, given in the List of some Eminent LAVVYERS, Civilians, and Cannonists, who have wrote on that Subject, though we confess them very few in Number, their Profession being lately undeservedly disgraced, though now we congratulate the probability of the Restitution thereof to its former Dignity. Sure I am, in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth, when an Embassadour was sent to Foreign PRINCES, if it were an Affair of grand importance, and more than a mere matter of magnient complement, some able Civilian, [as Doctor Hadden, Dale, Fletcher, &c.] was joyned in Commission with the Noble-man, imployed on that Embassie. And as the Iron Doggs bear the burthen of the fuel, while the Brasen-Andirons stand only for state, to entertain the Eyes; so the Negotiating part was loaded on the Civil , whilest the Pomp-pageantry was discharged at the cost of the Noble-man. Writers on Physick. The Pecept in the Apocrypha hath a Canonical Truth therein, Honour the Physician for necessity sake; and although King Asa justly received little benefit by them, because of his preposterous addressing himself to them, before he went to 2 Chron. 16. 12. God: and the. Woman in the Gospel (troubled with the Issue) reaped lesse ease by Luke 8. 43. their Endeavours; because God reserved her a Subject for his own Miraculous Cure; yet in all Ages Millions have been cured by their Practice. The Ancient Britans, who went without Cloathes, may well be presumed to live without Physick; Yet, seing very Beasts know what is good for themselves (the Dear, the Cretan Dictamum, and Toad, his Antidote of plantaine) sure they had some experimental Receipts used amongst them, and left the rest to Nature, and Temperance to cure: The Saxons had those they termed Leaches, or Bloud-letters,
but were little skilled in methodical practise. Under the Normans, they began in Eng∣land, (and would we had ferch'd Physicians onely, and not Diseases from France.) Yet three hundred years since it was no distinct Profession by it self, but practiced by men in Orders, witness See their se∣veral Chara∣cters under their Names in our ensuing Book. Nicholas de Fernham, the chief English Physician and Bishop of Durham, Hugh of Evesham, a Physician and Cardinal, Grisant, a Physician and Pope. Yea, the word Physician, appears not in our Statutes, till the days of King Henry the eight, who incorporated their Colledge at London, since which time they have multi∣plied and flourished in our Nation, but never more, and more learned then in our age, wherein that Art, and especially the Anatomical part thereof is much improved, our Civil Wars perchance occasioning the latter. We begin our Catalogue at Richardus Anglicus our first Physician, flourishing Anno 1230. and continue to Doctor Harvey, whom I may term Gulielmus Anglicus, such honour he hath done England by his worthy Writings. Thus wishing them all happy success in their Practice, I desire a custome in France, and other for∣reign parts, naturalized in England, where a Physician is liable to Excommunication, if visiting a Patient thrice before he acquainteth a Priest of his sickness, that so the Medicine for soul and body, may go hand in hand together. Chimistry. Chimistry is an ingenious Profession, as which by Art will force somewhat of worth and eminence from the dullest substance, yea the obduras'st, and hardest hearted body, cannot but shed forth a tear of precious liquor, when urged thereunto with its intreaties. They may be termed Parcel-physicians, every day producing rare experiments, for the curing of many diseas es. bu I must confess there occurs t few, (and of those few, fewer Modern ones) through the whole series of our Book: Yet may we be said to have extracted the spirits (I mean such as were eminent therein) of this Profession, being confident the judicious Reader, will value one Jem, before many Barly Corns, and one Drop of a true extract, before many Bottles of worthless water. Chirurgery. Necessary and ancient their Profession, ever since mans body was subject to enmity and casualty. For, that promise, John 10. 39. A bone of him shall not be broken, is peculiar to Christ. As for the other, Psal. 91. 12. To keep them in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against a stone, though it be extended to all Christians, yet it admitteth (as other tem∣poral promises) of many exceptions according to Gods will and pleasure. It seemeth by the Parable of the good Luke 11. 34. Samaritan, who bound up the Passengers wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, that in that age, ordinary persons had a general in∣sight in Chirurgery, for their own and others use. And it is reported to the just praise of the Scotch Buchanan Re∣rum Scoticarum lib. 13. sol. 138. pag. 1. Nobility, that anciently they all were very dextrous thereat, particu∣larly it is written of James the fourth King of Scotland, Quod vulnera scientissime tractaret, He was most scilful at the handling of wounds. But we speak of Chirurgery, as it is a particular Mystery, Professed by such as make a Vocation thereof. Of whom we have inserted some (eminent for their Writings or otherwise) amongst Physicians, and that (as we hope) without any offence, seeing the healing of diseases and wounds were anciently one Calling, (as still great the Sympathy betwixt them, many diseases causing wounds, as Ulcers, as wounds occasioning diseases, as feavers,) till in process of time they were seperated, and Chirurgions only consigned to the Manual Operation. Thus wishing unto them, the three Requisits for their practise, an Eagles Eye, a Ladies Hand, ond a Lions Heart, I leave them, and proceed.
CHAP. X. Writers. BEING to handle this Subject, let not the Reader expect that I will begin their Catalogue from Fabulous Antiquity, or rather fanciful Fabels. For if the first Century of J. Bale or J. Pits. their British Writers were Garbled, four parts of five would be found to be Trash, such as 1. Samothes Gigas 2. Magus Samotheus 3. Sarron Magius 4. Druys Sarronius 5. Bardus Druydius 6. Albion Mareoticus 7. Brytus Julius 8. Gerion Augur 9. Aquila Septonius 10. Perdix Praesagus 11. Cambra Formosa 12. Plenidius Sagax, &c. Of these some never were men, others (if men) never were Writers, others (if Writers) never left Works continuing to our age, though some Manuscript-Mongers may make as if they had perused them. It is well they had so much modesty, as not to pretend inspection into the Book of life, seeing all other books have come under their Omnividencie. We are content to begin our number, at Gildas (commonly surnamed) the wise, (flourishing about the year 580.) and are right gald to have so good a General, to lead our Army of Writers, taking it for a token of good success. Now these Writers were either such who wrote before, or since the Reformation of Religion. The former again fall generally under a treble division, as either Histo∣rians, Philologists, or Divines, and we will insist a little on their several imployments. Of Writers on Philology and Divinity. Doctor Collens Kings Professor in Cambridge, and that Oracle of Eloquence once founded his Speech (made to entertain Strangers at the Commencement) on the words of Rom. 16. 15. Saint Paul, Salute Philologus and Olympas. Under the former, he comprised all persons persent, eminent in Humane Learning, under the later, all skillful in Heavenly Divinity. Indeed Philology properly is Terse and Polite Learning, melior literatura, (married long since by Martianus Capella to Mercury) being that Florid skill, containing onely the Roses of learning, without the prickles thereof, in which narrow sense thorny Phi∣losophy is discharged as no part of Philology. But we take it in the larger notion, as inclusive of all human liberal Studies, and preposed to Divinity, as the Porch to the Palace. Having passed the Porch of Philology, we proceed to the Palace of Divinity. The Writers in this Faculty, we distinguish into two sorts. First, Positive Divines, such I mean, whose works are either Comments on, or else expositions of some portion of Sacred Writ. Secondly, School-men, who have made it their business to Weave find Threads of nicer Distinctions. Writers on History. This is either Ecclesiastical or Civil. Of both these, England presenteth many, but generally Moncks before the Reformation, who too much indulging to Holy Fraud, have farced their Books with many feigned miracles, to the prejudice of truth. How∣ever, herein foreign Historians have been as guitly as English-men of the same Age, witness the complaint of In his book of the coming of Saint James the Apostle in∣to Spain, ch. 1. Mariana the Jesuit, which one may justly wonder how it passed the Index Expurgatorius. Quis enim negare possit Fastos Ecclesiasticos, aliquando adulatione Temporum, aut potius incuria hominum, multis maculis contaminatos, libris aliis,
quibus preces Ecclesiasticae ritusque sacrorum continentur, multas fuisse inspersas confusas∣que fabulas & commenta: Addam nonnunquam in Templis reliquias dabias, prophana Corpora pro sanctorum (qui cum Christo in coelo regnant) exuviis sacris fuisse proposita. Est enim miserum negare non posse, quid sit turpe confiteri; at nescio quo pacto fictis saepe fabulis, & prae posteris mendaciorum nugis, populus magis quam veritate ac synceritate capitur, ea est mentis nostrae inanitas, has sordes, ubi semel irrepserunt in Ecclesiam sacrorum ritus libros Ecclesiasticos, nobis fortassis dormientibus, attrectare nemo audet, mutive nemo, ne impietatis suspicionem commoreat, scilicet, & Religioni adversarius esse videatur. Nor hath our Land been altogether barren of Historians since the Reformation, having yielded some of as tall parts, and large performances, as any Nation in Christendome. Besides these, we have adventured to adde such as have been eminent in Poetry, which may not unfitly be termed the binding of Proselites good behaviour, tying it to the strict observation of time and measure. Amongst these, some are additioned with the Title of Laureat, though I must con∣sess, I could never find the root whence their Bays did grow in England, as to any so∣lemn institution thereof in our Nation. Indeed, I read of Petrarch, (the pre-coeta∣nean of our Chaucer) that he was crowned with a Laurel, in the Vita Petrac. Capitol, by the Se∣nate of Rome, Anno 1341. as also that Frederic the third Emperour of Germany, gave the Laurel to Holdastus lib. tom. 3 p. 482. Conradus Celtes, and since the Count Palatines of the Empire claime the priviledge, solemnly to invest Poets with the Bays. The branches hereof, in all ages have been accounted honourable, in so much that King James in some sort, wav'd his crown (in the two and twenty-shilling-pieces) to wear the Laurel in his new twenty-shilling-pieces. On the same token, that a wag passed this jeast thereon, That Poets being always poor, Bays were rather the embleme of wit then wealth, since King James no sooner began to wear them, but presently he fell two shillings in the pound in publique valuation. As for our English Poets, some have assumed that style unto themselves, as John Kay in his Dedication of The Seige of Rhodes to King Edward the fourth, subscribing himself his humble Poet Laureat. Others have in complement given the title to such persons as were eminent in that Faculty, and nothing more usuall then to see their pictures before their Books, and Statues on their Tombs, ornamented accordingly. However, all this is done by civil courtesie, or common custome, no ceremonious crea∣tion in Court or University. I write not this, as if I grudged to Poets a whole grove of Laurel, much less a sprig to incircle their heads, but because I would not have any specious untruth imposed on the Readers belief. Yet want there not those, who do confidently averr that there is always a Laureat Poet in England, and but one at a time, the Laurel importing Conquest and Sove∣reignty, and so by consequence soleness in that faculty; and that there hath been a con∣stant succession of them at Court, who beside their salary from the King, were yearly to have a tun of win, as very essential to the heightning of fancy. This last I conceive founded, on what we find given to Geffery Chaucer, Vigesimo secundo anno Richardi secundi concessum Galfrido Chaucer unum dolium vini per annum durante vitâ, in portu Civitatis London, per manus capitalis pincernae nostri. But Chaucer, besides his poetical accomplishments, did the King service both in war and peace, as Souldier and Embassadour, in reward whereof, this and many other boons were bestow'd upon him. Musicians. Musick is nothing else, but wild sounds civilised into Time and Tune. Such the ex∣tensiveness thereof, that it stoopeth as low as bruit beasts, yet mounteth as high as Angels. For Horses will do more for a whistle then for a whip, and by hearing their bells gingel away their weariness. The Angels in Heaven imploy themselves in Musick, and one ingeniously expres∣seth it to this effect The Conceipt is Mr. Walles, whose book is nor by me at the present to transcribe the very words. We know no more what they do do above, Save only that they Sing, and that they Love.
And although we know not the Notes of their Musick, we know what their Ditty is, namely Hallalu-jah. Such as cavil at Musick, because Gen. 4. 21. Juball, a descendant from wicked Cain, was the first founder thereof, may as well be content to lye out of dores, and refuse all cover to shelter them, because Jaball, of the same extraction, being his own brother, first in∣vented to dwell in Tents. I confess there is a company of pretenders to Musick, who are commonly called Crowders, and that justly too, because they Crowd into the company of Gentlemen both unsent for, and unwelcome; but these are no more a disgrace to the true professors of that faculty, then Monkies are a disparagement to man-kind. Now right antient is the use of Musick in England, especially if it be true what I read in a worthy Father, and I know not which more to admire, either that so memo∣rable a passage should escape Master Camdens, or that it should fall under my observa∣tion. Clemens Alexand. Strom. lib. 6. pag. 632. In  Insulâ. S Syl. Burgius Latines it. . They say, even those which compose histories, that in the Island of Britanny, there is a certain Cave, lying under a Mountain, in the top thereof gaping. The wind therefore falling into the Cave, and dash∣ing into the bosome of a hollow place, there is heard a tinckling of Cymbals, beating in Tune and Time. Where this musical place should be in Britain, I could never find; yet have been informed, By Master Stephens, a learned ser∣vant to the Bishop. that Doctor Miles Smith, Bishop of Hereford, found something tending that way (by the help of an active fancy) in Herefordshire. But waving this natural, the antiquity of artificial Musick in this Island, is proved by the pra∣ctice of the Bards, thereby communicating Religion, Learning and Civility, to the Britans. Right glad I am, that when Musick was lately shut out of our Churches, (on what default of hers I dare not to enquire) it hath since been harboured and welcomed in the Halls, Parlors and Chambers, of the primest persons of this Nation. Sure I am, it could not enter into my Head, to surm se that Musick would have been so much discouraged by such who turned our Kingdome into a Commonwealth, seeing they prided themselves in the armes thereof, an impaled Harp being Moity of the same. When it was Ask'd what made a good Musitian, one Answered a good voice, another that it was skill, but he said the truth, who said, it was incouragement. It was there∣fore my constant wish, that seeing most of our▪ Musicians were men of maturity, and arrived at their full age and skill, before these distracted times began, and seeing what the Historian wrote in another sence, is true here in our acception and application thereof, Res est unius seculi populus virorum; I say, I did constantly wish, that there might have been some semenary of youth set up, to be bred in the faculty of Musick, to supply succession, when this Set of Masters in that Science had served their ge∣neration. Yet although I missed of what I did then desire, yet thanks be to God, I have lived to see Musick come into request, (since our Nation came into right Tune) and begin to flourish in our Churches and elsewhere, so that now no fear but we shall have a new generation skillful in that Science, to succeed such, whose age shall call upon them to pay their debt to nature. If any who dislike Musick in Churches, object it useless (if not hurtful) in Divine Services, let them hear what both a learned and Hookers Eccle. Pol. pag. 858. Sect. 38. able Divine alledgeth in defence thereof. So that although we lay altogether aside the consideration of Ditty or Matter, the very Harmony of sounds being framed in due sort, and carried from the Ear to the spiritual faculties of the Soul, it is by a native puissance and efficacy greatly avail∣able to bring to a perfect temper, whatsoever is there troubled, apt as well to quicken the spirits, as to allay that which is too eager, soveraign against melancholy and dispair, forceable to draw forth Tears of Devotion, if the Mind be such as can yield them, able both to move and moderate all affections.
In recounting up of Musitians, I have only insisted on such who made it there pro∣fession, and either have written books of that faculty, and have attained to such an eminence therein, as is generally acknowledged. Otherwise the work would be end∣less to recount all up who took it as a quality of accomplishment, amongst whom King Henry the eighth must be accounted, who (as Erasmus testifies to his knowledge) did not onely sing his part sure, but also compose services for his Chappel, of four, five, and six parts, though as good a Professor as he was, he was a great destroyer of Musick in this Land; surely, not intentionly, but accidentaly, when he suppressed so many Quires at the Desolution. Romish Exile Writers. After the Writers before the Reformation, succeed those Romish banished Wri∣ters since the same, all living since the reign of Q▪ Mary which might have been distanced from the former with a black line interposed, as beheld under a far different (yea worse) qualification. For the superstitions of the former were the more pardonable, as living in a dark age, which are less excusable in these since the light of the Gospel. I confess the word Exile carries much of commiseration therein, and with cha∣tably minded men bespeaks pitty to the persons, untill the cause of their banishment be well considered. For some in the first of Queen Elizabeth willfully left the Land, and so in effect banished themselves, others having their lives forfeited by the Laws, had their deaths mercifully commuted by ou Magistrates into banishment. Objection. These men might have been lost without loss, and been omitted in your book as no limbe, but a wen, yea an ulcer thereof. Answer. Grant them never so bad, being digested into a Classis by themselves, their mixture cannot be infectious to others. Secondly, Abate their errours, and otherwise many of them were well meriting of the Commonwealth of learning. Lastly, The passages of their lives conduce very much to the clearing of Ecclesiast∣cal History. In noting of their nativties, I have wholly observed the instructions of Pitses, where I knock off with his death, my light ending with his life in that subject, since which time I have neither list to enquire, nor conveniency to attain, of these Romish fugitives beyond the seas. A just Complaint of the numerosity of needless Books. Solomon was sensible of this vanity, even in his time, when pronouncing of Book there is no end. The Heathen Poet took notice thereof, Scribimus indocti doctique Poemata passim. Poems write a main we do, Learned and unlearned too. All this was before the invention of Printing, when books came but single into the publique, which since that Mistery is made common, come swimning into the world like shoals of Fishes, and one edition spawneth another. This made learned Erasmus for company sake to jeer himself, that he might the more freely jeer others, In prefat, in tertiam seriem quarti Tomi Hierom. p. 408. Multi mei similes hoc morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nesciant, tamen a scribendo temporare non possunt. Many men like my self, are sick of this decease, that when they know not how to write, yet cannot forbear from writing. A worthy English Barronet in his book (incomparable on that subject) hath clearly and truly stated this point. Here I expect, that the judicious Reader will excuse me, if I take no notice of many Modern Phamphliteers, seeing unlearned Scriblers, are not ranked with learned Writers; yea, it was, though tartly, truly said, to the Author of such a book, Dum scateant alii erratis, datur unica Libro Menda tuo, totm est intiger error opus. Whilst others flow with faults, but one is past In all thy book, 'tis fault from first to last.
Indeed the Press, at first a Virgin, then a chast Wife, is since turned Common, as to prostitute her self to all Scurrilous Pamphlets. When the Author of an idle and im∣persect book, endeth with a caetera dessiderantur, one altered it non dessider antur, sed desunt. Indeed they were not (though wanting) wanted, the world having no need of them, many books being like King Joram, who lived not being desired, yea, the Press begineth to be an oppression of the Land, such the burden of needless books therein. Some will say, the charge may most justly be brought against your self, who have loaded the Land with more books, then any of your Age. To this I confess my fault, and promise amendment, that God willing hereafter I will never Print book in the English tongue, but what shall tend directly to Divinity.
CHAP. XI. Of Benefactors to the Publick, wherein also Choise Charities are recommended to men of Estates. These are reducible to several Heads, and we will begin with them who have been Builders of CHURCHES. SUch Centurions who have erected us Synagogues, places for Gods publick VVorship, seem to me to have given good testimony of their Love to our nation. Bitter was the Brave which railing Rabsheca sent to holy Hezekiah proffering him Isaiah 36. 8. 2000 Horses on Condition that the other were but able to find Riders for them. But it grieves me to see the Superstition of the former insult over the religion of this present age, bragging that she left us ten thousand Churches and Chappels more or lesse ready built, if we can find but repairers to keep them up: It is in my opinion both dishonorable to God, and scandalous to all good men to see such houses daily decay: But there is a genera∣tion of people who to prevent the verifying of the old proverb, Pater noster built Churches, and our Father plucks them down; endevour to pluck down both Churches and Our Father together, neglecting, yea despising the use both of the one and the other. Be it here remembred, that it is not only equal but just, that such as have been Founders of Churches or Grand Benefactors unto them, should have due Respect in preserving their Monuments from Violation or Incroachment of others. I urge this the rather, because a∣buses have been frequent in this kind, even to those that have deserved best. I can∣not with patience remember the Story of Henry Keble Lord Maior of London 1511. who, besides other Benefactions in his Life time, rebuilded Alder-Mary-Church run to very Ruines, and bequeathed at his Death a thousand pounds for the finishing thereof. Yet within sixty years after, his Bones were unkindly yea inhumanely cast Stows Survey of London, pag. 89. out of the Vaute wherein they were buried, his Monument plucked down for some Wealthy Person of the* Idem p. 267. present times, to be buried therein, I could not but on this Occasion rub up my old Poetry; Facit Indignatio Versus. The Author to Alder-Mary Church. Ungrateful Church, orerun with rust, Lately buried in the dust; Utterly thou hadst been lost, If not preserv'd by Keble's cost: A Thousand Pounds might it not buy, Six foot in length for him to lie: But outed of his quiet Tombe, For later Corps he must make Roome: Tell me where his Dust is cast, Though't be late, yet now at last; All his Bones with Scorne ejected, I will see them recollected: VVho faine my self would Kinsman prove To all that did God's Temples love. Alder-Mary Churches Answer. Alas! my Innocence excuse, My Wardens they did me abuse, VVhose Avarice his Ashes sold, That Goodness might give place to Gold; As for his Reliques, all the Town, They are scattered, up and down; See'st a Church repaired well, There a Sprinkling of them fell; See'st a new Church lately built? Thicker there his Ashes spilt: O that all the Land throughout, Kebles Dust were throwne about Places scattered with that seed, VVould a Crop of Churches breed. I could wish this was the last Barbarisme in this kind, and am sorry that upon small Inquiry, I could insist on later Instances.
Free-Schools and Colledges. I place Schools before Colledges, because they are introductory thereunto, intended for the beeding of Children and Youth, as the other for youth and men. And seeing much of Truth is contained in our English Proverb, It is as good to be unborn as un∣bred, such may in some sort seem their Second-Parents, who have provided for their Education. These Schools are of two kinds. First, those wherein only a Salary is given to the School-master to teach Children gratis, and these I confess are good. Secondly, such wherein a select number of Scholars have competent maintenance allowed towards their Living in the University, and these all will acknowledge are better. Some do suspect a surfet in our Land of the multitude of Schools, because the Nursery is bigger then the Orchard, the one breeding more Plants then the other can maintain Trees, and the Land not affording sufficient preferment for them, Learning is forced to stoop to mean Courses to make a Livelihood. But I conceive that Store in this kind is no sore▪ and if we must not do evil that good may come thereof, we must not forbear doing that which is good, for fear of accidental Evils which may arise from the same. Bridges. Builders of Bridges (which are high-waies over water) and makers of Caused-waies, or Causways (which are Bridges over dirt) though last in order, are not least in benefit to the Commmon-wealth. Such conveniences save the lives of many, ease the la∣bour of moe painful travellers, and may be said in some sort to lengthen the day, and shorten the way to men in their journeys; yea, Bridges make and keep this our I∣sland a Continent to it self. How great the care of the ancient Romans to repair them, for the safety of passengers, appears by the origination of Pontifex, having the inspe∣ction over bridges, by his primitive institution. Indeed the word bridge appears not in all Scripture, whereof this the reason; the rivers of Palestine were either so shallow, that they were passable by foords, as ofGen. 32. 22. Jab∣bok,Isaiah 16. 2. Arnon andJudges 3. 28. Jordan, before it grew navigable; or else so deep, that they were ferried2 Sam. 19. 18 over, as Jordan, when neer his fall into the Dead Sea: but most of ours in England are of a middle size; so deep, that they cannot be foorded; so narrow, that they need not to be ferried over. Hence come our so eminent bridges, in so much that such structures are accounted amongst our EnglishAnglia, mons, pons, &c. Excellencies. However Palestine was subject with England to the same inconveniences of bad high∣waies, and thereore in the List of Charitable Actours reckoned up by theIsaiah 48. 12. Prophet, he is accounted as a principal, The restorer of paths to dwell in; for indeed some waies may be said not-habitable, being so eep and dirty that they cut off all intercourse, the End general of all mens dwelling together. I will conclude this Topick of Bridges with this memoable accident. Mawd Q▪ to King Henry the first being to pass the River Ley about Stratford, near the falling of the said River into the Thames, was almostCambd. Brit. in Essex. drowned in riding over it. But this proved the bad cause of a good effect; For hereupon she built the Beautiful Bridge there, for the benefit of Travellers: and the Village probably from a fair Arch or Bow therein, re∣ceived (as some conceive) the addition of Stratford Bow. Far be it from me to wish the least ill to any who willingly would not have their fingers to ake, or an hair of their heads lessned. Yet this I could desire, that some Covetous churls who otherwise will not be melted into works of charity, may in their passing over Waters be put into Pe∣ril without Peril. Understand me, might be enangered to fright but not urt, that others might fare the better for their fears; Such Misers being minded thereby to make or repair Bridges for publick Safety and convenience. Alms-houses. Because we live in an age, wherein men begin to be out of charity with charity it self; and there be many covetous (not to say sacrilegious) people, whose Fingers itch
to be Nimming the patrimony of the poor; we will here present the Cavils of this against the charity of former ages herein. Cavil. 1. Show us the foundation of such Structures in Scripture, either in the Old or New Testament. As for the place with fiue porches, wherein theJohn. 5. 2. impotent poor lay, near the Pool of Bethesda, it was of another Nature. Alsmhouses therefore not being Jure Divino may lawfully be abolished. Answer. The Constitution of the Jewish was far different from our English Common∣wealth, wherein every one originally was a Freeholder of some proportion of land, which, though aliened, reverted to the Owner at the year of Jubilee. There needs not an express or particular precept for all our actions, that general one,Prov. 19. 17. He that hath pity upon the Poor lenaeth unto the Lord, is bottome broad enough to build more Alms∣houses on, than all ages will afford. Besides this precept, we have the practice of the primitive Christians in the time of the Apostles,Acts 4. 34. parting with the propriety of all their estate, and well then may we appropriate a part of ours, for the releif of the Poor. Cavil. 2. The builders of them for the most part, have been people formerly guilty of oppression, who, having lived like Wolves, turn Lambs on their death∣beds, and part with their Fleece to people in want. Having ground the faces of the poor, they give the Toll thereof to build an Alms-house, though too little to hold half the beggars which they have made. Answer. The aspersion cannot be fastned on many Founders, so free from the same, that malice may sooner break her own Teeth and Jawes too, thn make impression on their reputation. But, grant the charge true, in this sense, Beatum est fuisse, Blessed are they that have been BAD;1 Cor. 6. 11. Aud such were some of you: Let not envious man repine at that, whereat the blessed Angels rejoyce, the conversion of sinners, and their testifying thereof by such publique expressions. Cavil. 3. Such Builders generally have a Pope in their Belly, puffed up with a proud opinion to merit by their performances. Answer. When did the Caviller steal the Touch-stone of hearts? (for, God, I am sure would not lend it him, who saith,Isaiah 42. 8. My Glory will I not give to another) that he is so well acquainted with mens thoughts and intentions. Charity, saith the1 Cor. 13. 5. Apostle, thinketh no evil, whereas this Caviller thinks little good. We are bound to believe the best of such Founders, especially of such who lived Since the Reformation, whereby the dangerous Error of merit was exploded. Cavil. 4. Grant them guiltlesse of Superstition, they are guilty of Vain-glory. Witness the building of such houses commonly by high▪way sides, whenas our Saviour saith, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doth. Answer. The Objecter shall have leave to build his Alms▪house, in what private place he please; in the middle of a Wood, if he shall think fitting, (But we know* Matth. 5. 16. who saith) Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glo∣rifie your Father which is in heaven. That they may see yours good works, though not as finis operis, yet as modus operandi thereby to provoke others to imitation. Cavil. 5. As some affirm of Tobacco, that it causeth as much Rheume as it bringeth away: Alms-houses do breed as many Poor as they relieve. People in such places, presume to be idle, beholding Hospitals as their Inheritance, wherein their old age shall be provided for. Answer. What is good per se, ought not to be waved for what is ill per a dens This calleth aloud, to the care and integrity of Feoffees intrusted, to be wary in their elections. Besides, I must stick to mine old Maxime, It is better that Ten Drones be fed then one Bee be famished. Cavil. 6. Such places are generally abused against the will of the Founders. Statutes are neglected. What is said of the Laws in Poland, that they last but three dayes, is as true of the short lived orders in Alms-houses. Not the most indigent, or who have been the most laborious, but the best befriended reap the benefit thereof. Answer. I could wish that Alms-houses were the only places, wherein Laws were broken. But grant too much truth in the Cavil, all will say from the beginning it was not so, and I will hope, Unto the end it shall not be so.
Cavil. 7. Hospitals generally have the Rickets, whose heads, their Masters, grow over great and rich, whilest their poor bodies pine away and consume. Answer. Surely there is some other cure for a Ricketish body, than to kill it, viz. by opening obstructions and deriving the Nutriment to all parts of the same. But, enough of this unwelcome Subject, whereof what is spoken, is not to put new Cavils into the heads of any, but to pluck old ones out of the hearts of too many, who have entertained them. If these our Answers seem not satisfactory to any; Know, that as a left handed man hath great odds in Fencing, against one that is right handed: So in Con∣troversies of this kind, Cavillers with their sinister inferences from mens frailties, have a vast advantage over those, who are of candid and ingenuous dispositions. Many faults must be confessed in such Foundations, which for the future may be amen∣ded. But, grant corruptions should continue in such foundations, it is not plea enough for their abolition. If the sentence of condemnation was pronounced on those, who saw Christ naked, and would not* cloth him; how heavy a doome will fall on such,Mat. 25. 43. who found Christ clothed, and stript him in his poor Members of endowments given to their maintenance? Here let me recommend some choice Charity to bountiful Hearts and plentiful Estates. It were arrant presumption for any to imprison freedome it self, and confine ano∣thers Bounty by his own [pretended] Discretion. Let the charitably minded do what, when, where, how, to whom, and how much, God and their own goodnesse shall direct them. However it will not be amisse humbly to represent unto them the follow∣ing considerations: The rather because many well affected to the publick good, have lately been disheartned with the frustrations of former Charity. First, for the time: it is best to do it whilest they are living, to prevent all suspicions that their intentions should be misimployed. Sem will not be angry with me for saying Cham was a Mocker of his Father. Peter will not be offended if I call Judas a betray∣er of his Master: Honest Executors will take no exception if I justly bemoan that too many dishonest ones have aused the good intents of the Testators. How many Legacies sound and whole in themselves have proved before they were payed, as maimed as the Cripples in the Hospitalls, to whom they were bequeathed? Yea as the blinded Syri∣ans (desiring to go, and beleiving they went to 2 King. 6. 20. Damascus) were led to their Enemies, and into the midst of Samaria, so is it more then suspicious, that many blind and con∣cealed Legacies, intended for the Temple of God, have been imployed against the God of the Temple. Next for the objects of well doing. Surely a vigilant Charity must take the Alarum from the Groans of the Prisoners. The Schoolmen reduce all Corporal Charity to seven principal heads, 1 Visito 1 Visit men in Misery 1 Jer. 38. 11. Ebedmelech 1 Jeremiah 2 Poto 2 Give drink to the Thirsty 2 1 Kin 18. 13 Obediah. 2 The Prophets 3 Cibo 3 Meat to the Hungry 3 Neh. 5. 17. Nehemiah 3 The Jews & Rulers 4 Redimo To 4 Rescue the Captive As 4 Gen. 14. 16. Abraham did to 4 Lot 5 Tego 5 Cover the Naked 5 Acts 9. 39. Dorcas 5 The Widowes 6 Colligo 6 Dress the Wounded 6 Acts 16. 33. The good Jaylor 6 Saint Paul 7 Condo 7 Bury the Dead 7 The Devout men. 7 Saint Stephen.* Acts 8. 2. See here how these 7. kinds of good Works are placed like the Planets, whilst to Redeem Captives, stands like the Sun in the midst of all the rest. Indeed it may be sadly presumed; that such Captives oft times want Visiting, Meat, Drink, Clothes, Dressing, and all things but burying (except any will say, that they are buryed alive; Liberty being the Life of mans life) so that the Redeeming of Captives is eminently comprehensive of all these outward acts of Charity. Yea this Act may extend it self to a Spiritual Concernment; to save many Souls from Damnation; seeing it may be feared that many dispairing of Ransome, may put their Souls in Thral∣dome
to purchase the Liberty of their Bodies, and renounce their Religion. could therefore wish, That there were in London, a Corporation of able and ho∣nest Merchants (whereof that City affordeth a plentiful choice) legally impowered to receive and imploy the charity of well affected people for a General Goale Delivery, of all English Captives, in Tunis, Tripoli, Algier, Salli, &c. And our Countrymen first discharged, if there were any Surplusage running over, that it might be disposed for the ransoming of Christians of what Country soever. This were a Heroick Act indeed, whereby Christians endevour to be like Christ himself, who was the Grand Redeem∣er. Oh, that I might be but instrumental (in the least degree) to advance their En∣largement; I should behold it as an advancement to my self. Two Reasons make me the more importunate therein; One, because the Papists had a Company of Fryers in England, of the Order of the Holy Trinity, De Redimendis Captivis, which being now extinct, I humbly conceive that we are bound in Conscience, as to quench the Superstition, so to continue the Charity of so good a design. Secondly, because whilst other Beggars can tell their own Tale, we must plead for them who cannot plead for themselves; There being so great a Gulf of distance betwixt us and them; And God grant, That we may never passe over to theirs, but they return to our Condition. Objection, 1. It maketh Marriners Cowards, who presuming on good mens charity, that they shall be ransomed, do not fight it out valiantly against the Turks, as they ought and might, but surrender themselves on such expectations. Answer. I see not but the same Objection lies with equal force against the Redeem∣ing of Souldiers taken in land Fights, by what Foe soever, by exchange, or other∣wise. Secondly, accidentall and sinister miscarriages, ought not to discourage any sin∣cere intention. Lastly, let those, who have given the best testimonies of their Va∣lour, be first redeemed, and let them lye longer, to suffer bad usage, till the fee∣ling thereof, shall convert them into more valour, if (after their Liberty procured) ingaging again on the same occasion. Objection, 2. The late Long Parliament made an Act, since (after some intermission) renewed, charging a Taxe on Merchants Goods (known by the name of Algier Dutie) for the Redemption of Captives in Turkey. Answer. The blessing of God light on the hearts of those (if living) who first moved, and since revived it, as I doubt not but those departed this life, have found their Reward. I could heartily wish, that yearly a Catalogue were printed of the names of such prisoners thereby redeemed, not knowing whether it would be more honourable for, or Satisfactory to this Nation. But seeing such provisions fall short of doing the Work, and cannot strike home to break off the Fetters of all Prisoners, It will not be amiss to implore the auxiliary Charity of others. Next I desire them to reflect upon aged sequestred Ministers; whom with theirReader, this passage being written some 3. years since, I could not command my own right hand to cross it out, but it must stand as it did. charge, the (generally ill paid) fifth part will not maintain, say not it will be in∣terpreted an affront to the State to Releive them, which it hath adjudged Offenders. If the best of beings should observe this Rule, all the World would be starved. Secondly, some of them, abateing only that their Conscience inclined them to the Royal Cause, were otherwise unblameable both in Life and Doctrine. Thirdly, the better Divines they were, the worse they are able to shift for themselves, having formerly no excur∣sion into secular affairs, so that applying themselves only to, and now debarred the exercise of the Ministry, they are left in a sad condition. Lastly, allow them faulty, yet quid teneri infantes? &c. It is pity their Wives and Children should be ruined for their offence, but enough hereof, seeing in motions of this Nature, a word is enough to the wise, and half a word too much for others. Lastly, I recommend unto their Charity, such Servants who have nothing save what they have gained by their industry, and have lived seven years and upwards, with the same Master, I mean not Apprentices, but such Covenant Servants, which are bound to their Masters (their year being ended) with no other Indentures then their own discretion, and are sensible that they must run a hazard, and may loose with their alteration. Especially such Females, who prefer a good Master in certain, before a good Husband in hopes, and had rather serve in plenty, then wed and adventure Poverty.
I confess such is the cruelty of some Masters, no Servant can, and such the fickle∣nesse of others, no Servant may stay long with them. Such a Master was he, who being Suitor to a Gentlewoman, came every time he visited her, waited on by a new man (though keeping but one at once) such was his unconstancy and delight in Change. Whereupon when taking leave of his Mistresse, he proferred to salute her spare your Complements (said she unto him) for probably I shall shortly see you again, but let me, I pray you, salute your Servant, whom I shall never behold any more. However though sometimes the ault may be in the Masters, or Mistresses, yet generally Servants are to be blamed in our Age, shifting their places so often without cause. The truth is, the Age that makes good Soldiers, marrs good Servants, cancel∣ling their obedience, and allowing them too much Liberty. What Nabal applied false∣ly and spitfully to David (There be many Servants now a dayes which break away every1 Sam. 25. 10 man from his Master) was never more true then now. Yea, what Tully said of the RomanHabemus vi∣gilem consulem qui in consulatu suo nunqum dormivit. Consull (chose in the morning and put out before night) some Servants have been so vigilant, they never slept in their Masters houses, so short their stay, so soon their Departure. The Ficklenesse and Fugitivenesse of such Servants, justly addeth a valuation to their Constancy, who are Standards in a Family, and know when they have met with a good Master, as it appears, their Masters know when they have met with a good Servant. It is pity but such Properties of a Houshold should be incouraged, and Bounty bestowed upon them, may be an occasion to fixe other Servants to stay the longer in their pla∣ces, to the general good of our Nation. I desire these my Suggestions should be as inoffensively taken, as they are innocent∣ly tendred.  I know there was in the water ofJohn 6: Bethesda after the Angell had troubled it, a medicinal power. I know also that such impotent folk as lay in the five porches, were the proper Subjects to be cured: But alas! they wanted one at the critical instant, to bring their wounds and the Cure together, and to put them seasonably into the water. I am as confident that there be hundreds in England, really willing and able to Releive, as that there are Thousands that do desire, and in some sort deserve their charity. But there wanteth one in the prper juncture of time, to present such poor objects, to their liberality, and if these my weak endevours may be in any de∣gree instrumentall to promote the same, it will be a great comfort unto me. I will conclude this Subject with a motive to Charity, out of the Road of, besides, if not against the ordinary Logick of Men. Eccles. 11. . Give a portion to Seven and to Eight, for thou knowest not what evill shall be upon the Earth. To Seven and to Eight, that is, extend thy Bounty to as high a Proportion of de∣serving persons, as can consist with thy Estate, for thou knowest not what evill will be upon the Earth, Matters are mutable, and thou mayest need the relief of others. Ergo, saith the Miser, part with nothing, but keep all against a Wet day, not so, So∣lomon, advising to secure somewhat in a safe bank, the backs and bowels of the Poor. Never Evil more likely to, never People less knowing of the same then our selves. And there∣fore the Counsell never out of, is now most in season. Why Benefactors Since, are distinguished from them, Before the Reformation. I conceive it not fit to mingle both together, for these two Reasons▪ First, because of the difference of their Charity Since the Reformation, as not parched up by the Fear of the Fire of Purgatory, but kindly ripened by the Sun, viz. A Clear Apprehension by the Light of the Scripture, that they were bound to do good Works. Secondly, because a RomishMr. Knot the Jesuite. Goliah hath defied our English Israel, taxing our Church Since the Reformation, as able to shew few considerable pieces of Charity, in comparison of those beyond the Seas, who may hence be easily confuted.
Indeed when I read the emulations between Peninna and Hanna, it mindeth me of the contests betwixt the Church of Rome and us, such the conformity between them. Her1 Sam. 1. 6. Adversary provoked Hanna sore, for to make her fret, because the Lord hath shut up her Womb. But how did Hanna rejoyce afterwards? TheSee the Life of Mr. William Lambert in Kent. Barren hath born seven, and she that hath many Children, is waxed feeble. It is confessed immediately after the Refor∣mation, Protestant Religion stood for a while in amaze (scarcely recovered from the Mari∣an Persecutitn) and was but1 Sam. 2. 5. barren in good works. But since her beginning to bear fruit, she hath overtaken her Roman Corrival, and left her fairly behind. Let the extent of time, and content of ground be proportionably stated, and England cannot be matched for Deeds of Charity in any part of Spain, France, and Italy, as by the ensuing Catalogue of Benefactors to the Publick will appear. Objection. You had better omitted them, leaving them modestly to multiply and in∣crease in their own silence and secresie. You know how dear David paid for2 Sam. 24. 15 numbring the people. Answer. David did not offend in meer numbring the people, but in not paying the Poll-money, appointed byExod. 30. 12. God in such cases (purposely to decline the Plague) which omission argued his Pride of heart. It is lawful for Protestants, without any just sus∣picion of Vain▪ glory and Ostentation, to make a list, and take the number of Bene∣factors in this kind, provided the Quit-rent of praise, be principally paid to the Lord of Heaven. Besides we are not Challengers, but Defenders of our selves herein, against the challenge of another, desiring to do it in all humility, in confidence of our good cause. And here I can hold no longer, but must break forth into a deserved commenda∣tion of good works. Glorious things in Scripture are spoken of you, yea fruits of the spirit. By them the Gospel is graced, wicked men amazed, some of them converted, the rest of them confounded, weak Christians confirmed, poor Christians relieved, our faith justified, our reward in Heaven by Gods free grace amplified; Angels rejoyce for them, Devils repine at them, God himself is glorified in them. Oh therefore! That it were in my power, to exhort my Countrymen, to pursue good works with all earnestnesse, which will add so much to their account. Some will say, if the English be so forward in deeds of Charity, as appeareth by what you said before, any exhortation thereunto is altogether supersuous. I answer, the best disposed to Bounty may need a Remembrancer; and I am sure that Nightingale, which would wake, will not be angry with the Thorn which prick∣eth her Breast when she noddeth. Besides, it is a Truth what the Poet saith, Qui monet ut facias quod jam facis, ipse monendo Laudat, & hortatu comprobat acta suo. Who, what thou dost, thee for to do doth move, Doth praise thy Practice, and thy Deeds ap∣prove. Thus the exhortations of the Apostles at Jerusalem, were commendations of St. Paul, Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I also was forward to do. Lastly, though many of our Nation be free in this kind, there want not those, who instead of being Zealous are Jealous of good works, being so far from shining them∣selves, that they enviously endevour to extinguish the light of others; whose Judge∣ments I have laboured to rectifie herein. The Stating of the Word REFORMATION, with the Extensiveness thereof. No word occurs oftner in this our Book then REFORMATION: It is as it were the Aequator, or that remarkable Line, dividing betwixt Eminent Prelates, Leaed Writers, and Benefactors to the Publick, who lived Before or After It. Know then that this Word in Relation to the Church of England, is of above twenty years extent. For the Reformation was not advanced here, as in some Forraign Free∣States,
suddenly not to say (rapidly) with popular Violence, but Leisurely and treatably as became a matter of so great importance, besides the meeting with much opposition, retarded the proceedings of the Reformers. We may observe that the Jews returned from the Captivity of Babylon at three dis∣tinct times, under the Conduct of several persons. 1. When the main Body of the Captives was brought home by Era. 2. 2. Zorobabel, by whom the second Temple was built. 2. When a considerable Company returned with Ezra 8. 5. Ezra, by whom the Church part (as I may tearm it) was setled in that Nation. 3. When Nehem. 2 6. Nehemiah (no doubt with suitable attendance) came home and ordered the State moiety repairing the VValls of Jerusalem. In like manner we may take notice of three distinct Dates and different degrees of our English Reformation, though in relation to the Jewish, I confess the method was al∣together inverted. For, 1. The Civil part thereof, when the Popes Supremacy was banished in the Reign of King Henry the Eight. 2. VVhen the Church Service was reformed, as far as that Age would admit, in the first year of King Edward the Sixth. 3. VVhen the same (after the Marian interruption) was resumed and more refined in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. The first of these I may call the morning Star. The second the dawning of the day. The third the Rising of the Sun; and I deny not but that since that time his light and heat hath been increased. But now the Question will be, what is to be thought of those Prelates, Writers, and Benefactors, which lived in the aforesaid Interval betwixt the Beginning and Per∣fecting of this Reformation. For these appear unto us like unto the Batable ground lying betwixt England and Scotland (whilest as yet two distinct Kingdomes) in so dubious a posture it is hard to say to which side they do belong. It is Answered the only way to decide this difference is to observe the Inclinations of the said persons so far forth as they are discovered in their Writings and actions: such as appear in some good degree favourers of the Gospel are reputed to be since whilest those who are otherwise, are adjudged to be Before the Reformation. CHAP. XII. Of Memorable Persons. THe former Heads were like private Houses, in which persons accordingly Quali∣fied, have their several habitations. But this last Topick is like a publick Inn, admitting all Comers and Goers, having any extraordinary (not vitious) Remark upon them, and which are not clearly reducible to any of the former Titles. Such therefore, who are over, under, or beside the Standard of Common persons; for strength, stature, fruitfulnesse, Vivacity, or any other observeable emi∣nence, are lodged here under the Notion of Memorable Persons, presuming the pains will not be to Me so much in marking, as the pleasure to the Reader in knowing them. Under this Title we also repose all such Mechanicks, who in any Manual Trade have reached a clear Note above others in their Vocation. Objection. It is Deforme Spectaculum an uncouth Sight, to behold such handy-crafts∣men blended with Eminencies in ingenious professions; such a mottley colour is no good wearing. How would William Cecill, Lord Treasurer of England, and Baron of Burgh∣leigh be offended, to behold James York the Blacksmith, set with him at the same Table amongst the Natives of Lincolne-shire? Answer. I am confident on the contrary, that he would be highly pleased, being so great a Statesman, that he would countenance and encourage his Industrious Country man, accounting nothing little, without the help whereof, greater matters can either
not be attained or not long subsist. Yea, we see what signal notice the Spirit of God takes of the Gen. 4. 21, 22, 23. three Sons of Lamech, the first Founders of Tent-making, Organs, and Iron∣works; and it is observable, that whereas all their names are forgotten, which built the Tower of Babel (though done on design to get them a Gen. 11. 4. name) these three Me∣chanicks, viz. Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal Cain, are nominatim recorded to all poste∣rity. Thus is it better to bottome the perpetuity of ones memory, on honest Industry and ingenuous diligence, then on Stately Structures and expensive magnificence. I confesse it is easier to add to any art than first to invent it, yet because there is a perfection of degrees, as well as Kinds, Eminent Improvers of an art may be allowed for the Co-inventers thereof, being Founders of that accession, which they add there∣unto, for which they deserve to be both regarded and rewarded. I could name a worshipful Family in the South of England, which for 16. several descents, and some hundreds of years, have continued in the same stay of Estate, not acquiring one foot of Land, either by match, purchase, gift, or otherwise, to their ancient Patrimony. The same may be said of some handycrafts, wherein men move in the same compasse, but make no further progresse to perfection, or any considerable improvement, and this I impute generally to their want of competent encouragement. CHAP. XIII. Of Lord Maiors of LONDON. I Have concluded this Work with these Chief Officers in that great City. A place of so great Honour and Trust, that it hath commonly been said, that on the death of an English King, The Lord Maior is the Subject of the greatest Authority in England, Many other Offices determining with the Kings Life (till such time as their Charters be renewed by his Successor) whereas the Lord Maiors Trust continueth for a whole year, without any renewing after the Inter-Regnum. Objection. Such persons had better been omitted, whereof many were little better then , Though by good fortune they have loaded themselves with Thick clay, and will be but a burden in your Book to the Readers thereof. Answer. All Wise men will behold them under a better Notion, as the Pregnant proofs of the truth of 2. Proverbs, not contradictory, but confirmatory one to another. Prov. 10. 22. Prov. 10. 4. The Blessing of the Lord maketh Rich. The hand of the Diligent maketh Rich. The one as the principal, the other as the Instrumental cause, and both meeting in the persons aforesaid. For though some of them were the Younger Sons of Worshipful and Wealthy Parents, and so had good Sums of Money left them; Yet being generally of mean extraction, They raised themselves by Gods Providence, and their own Painfulness. The City in this Respect, being observed like unto a Court, where Elder Brothers commonly spend, and the younger gain an Estate. But such Lord Maiors are here inserted, to quicken the Industry of Youth, whose Parents are only able to send them up to (not to set them up in) London. For wha a comfort is it, to a poor Apprentice of that City, to see the Prime Magistrate there∣of, Riding in his Majoralibus with such Pomp and Attendance, which another day may be his hap and happiness. Objection. It commeth not to the share of one in twenty thousand, to attain to that Honour; and it is as impossible for every poor Apprentice in process of time to prove Lord Maior, as that a Minum with long living mould become a Whale. Answer. Not so, the later is an utter Impossibility as debarred by nature, being Fishes of several kinds. Whereas there is a Capacity in the other, to arive at it,
which puts hopes (the only Tie which keeps the heart from breaking) into the hearts of all of the attainablenesse of such preferment to themselves. Doctor Hutton Arch-bishop of York, when he came into any Great Grammar School (which he did constantly visit in his visitations) was wont to say to the young Scholars, Ply your Books Boys, ply your Books, for Bishops are old men, and surely the possibility of such dignity is a great Encouragement to the Endévours of Students. Lord Maiors being generally aged, and always but Annual, soon make Room for Succession, whereby the Indevours of all Freemen in Companies are incouraged. But if they should chance to fall short, as unable to reach the Home of Honour (I mean the Majoralty it self, yet if they take up their Lodgings at Sheriffe, Alderman, and Common-Councellour with a good Estàtè, they will have no cause to complain. I confess some Counties in our ensuing Discourse, will appear Lord-Maior-less, as Cumberland, Dorset-shire, Hant-Shire, &c. However though, hitherto, they have not had, hereafter they may have Natives advanced to that Honour, and it may put a lawful Ambition into them, to contend who shall be their Leader, and who should first of those Shires attain to that Dignity. As lately Sir Richard Cheverton Skinner descended (I assure you) of a right antient and worshipful Family, was the first in Cornwall, who opened the Dore for others (no doubt) to follow after him. Nor must it be forgotten that many have been Lord-Maiors Mates, though never rémembred in their Catalogues, viz. Such, who by Fine declined that Dignity, and as I am glad that some will Fine, that so the Stock of the Chamber of London may be increased, so am I glad that some will not fine, that so the State of the City of London may be maintained. I begin the observing of their Nativities, from Sir William Sevenoke, Grocer, Lord Maior 1418. For though there were Lord Maiors 200. years before, yet their Birth∣places generally are unknown. It was, I confess, well for me in this particular, that Mr. Stow was born before me, being herein the Heir of Endevours, without any pain of my own. For knowing that Cuilibet Artifici in sua Arte est credendum, I have followed him and who him continued, till the year 1633. at what time their Labours do determine. Since which Term, to the present year, I have made the Catalogue out by my own Inquiry, and friends Intelligence. To speak truth to their due praise, one may be generally directed to their Cradles, though by no other Candle, then the Light of their good works, and Benefactions to such places. CHAP. XIV. A Catalogue of all the Gentry in ENGLAND, made in the Reign of King HENRY the Sixth, why inserted in our Book. AFter we have finished the Catalogue of the worthy Natives of every Shire, We present the Reader with a List of the Gentry of the Land, sollemnly retur∣ned by select Commissioners into the Chancery, thence into the Records in the Tower on this occasion. The Commons in Parliament complained, that the Land then swarmed with Pilours, obbers, Oppressers of the People, Man-stealers, Fellons, Outlaws, Ravishers of Women, Unlawful Haunters of Forrests and Parks, &c. Whereupon it was ordered, for the suppressing of present and preventing of future mischeifs, that certain Commissioners should be impowered in every County, to summon all persons of Quality before them, and tender them an Oath, for the better keeping of the Peace, and observing the Kings Laws both in themselves and Retainers. Excuse me, Reader, if I be bold to inpose my own Conjecture, who conceive, what ever was intended to palliate the Businesse, The Principal Intent was, to detect and suppress such who favoured the Title of York; which then began to be set on foot, and afterwards openly claimed, and at last obtained the Crown. 2. Even-done,
Of the method general used in this Catalogue. The first amongst the Commissioners is the Bishop of their Diocesse, put before any Earl, partly because he was in his own Diocesse, partly because giving of Oaths (their proper work) was conceived to be of Spiritual cognisance. Besides the Bishop, when there were three (as generally) Commissioners, the first of them was either an Earl, or at least (though often intituled but Chivaler) an Actual Baron, as will hereafter appear: And which will acquaint us partly with the Peer∣age of the Land in that Age. Next follow those who were Knights for the Shire in the Parliament foregoing, and, if with the addition of Chivaler or Miles, were Knights by dubbing, before of that their Relation. All Commissioners expressed not equal Industry and Activity in prosecution of their trust. For besides the natural Reasons, that in all Affairs, some will be more rigo∣rous, some more Remiss by their own Temper, some more, some less fancyed their Imployment, insomuch as we find some Shires; 1. Over done, as Oxford and Cambridge-Shires, whose Catalogues are too much allayed, descending to persons of meaner quality. 2. Even done, as generally the most are, where the Returns bear a competent pro∣portion to the Populousness and numerousnesse of the Counties. 3. Under done, as Shropshire, York-shire, Northumberland, &c. where the Returns do not answer to the extent of those Shires. 4. Not done. Which I sadly confess, and cannot help, being Twelve in number as hereafter will appear. I dare not conjecture the cause of this Casualty, whether in such Shires, the Oaths were never Tendred, or tendred and not taken, or taken and not returned, or returned and not recorded, or recorded and not preserved, or preserved but misplaced in some Roll, which hitherto it hath not been my hap to lite upon. It is possible that some disgusted the Kings Design, as who under the pretence of keeping the peace, indevoured to smother and suppress such, who should appear for the Title of York, whereof more in the Respective Countyes. May the Reader be pleased to take notice, that in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, de such a place, began then to be left off, and the addition of Knight and Squire to be assumed. Yet because no Fashion can be generally followed at first, such additions are used in the Returns of some Shires, and neglected in others. In some Counties we have the Names of a few Mechanicks, returned with their Trades, Brasier, Smith, Ironmonger, &c. Who no doubt were considerable, either in themselves, as Robustious Persons, or in their Servants as Numerous, or in their popular and tumultuous Influence of others. And grant these passing under the name of Valecti, (whereof formerly) it appears by the penalty imposed on their Recu∣sancy of the Oath, that they were substantial  which stood (and propably could make others go) on their own Account. Some Clergymen, not only Regular, as Abbots and Priors, but secular Parochial priests, are inserted in some Returns. These some will say might well be omitted, as nothing Informative to the Gentry of the Land, because dead Stakes in the Hedge, then un∣concerned in posterity, because forbidden marriage. However I have here presented as I found them, intending neither to mingle nor mangle, conceiving that if I were found guilty either of Omissions or Alterations, it might justly shake the credit of the whole Catalogue. Indeed if the word Superstition importeth not Trespassing on Religion, and if the bare signification be adequate to the Etymology thereof, a Super Stando, for stan∣ding in his own opinion too curiously, on a thing which in the Judgement of others, may not Merit so much Exquisitenesse, I here voluntarily confess my self Superstitious in observing every Punctillo according to the Original. May the Reader be pleased to take notice that in mens proper names, some letters of like sound, are confounded in vulgar pronunciation, as V for F. Fenner and Venner, K. and C. Kary and Cary; F. and Ph. as Purfrey and Purphrey, though the name be the same in both. Sometimes the name is spelled, not truly, according to Orthography,
but according to the common speaking thereof, which melteth out some essential Letters, as Becham for Beauchamp. Again there is such an allusion betwixt the forms of some letters (nothing symbo∣lyzing in sound) that as they are written (though not in ordinary) in Record-hand, they may easily be mistaken by Writer or Reader, through the similitude of their Chara∣cter, as, m e n f n l g w o u s r t y This hath put us many times to a stand, and sometimes to a loss, what letter, it hath been. But we have in all particulars conformed our Transcript to the original in all pos∣sible exactness, though afterwards taking the boldness to interpose our opinion in our observations. A later List might be presented of the English Gentry, towards the end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, but such would be subject to just exception. For, as the Gibeonites, though by their mouldy bread, and clouted Shooes, pretending to a long peregrination, were but of the Vicinage: So most of those Gentry, notwith∣standing their specious claim to Antiquity, will be found to be but of one Descent, low enough in themselves, did they not stand on the vantage ground, heightned on the Rubbish of the Ruines of Monasteries. CHAP. XV. Of SHIRE-REEVES or SHIRIFFES. REEVE (which hath much Affinity with the Dutch Grave) signifieth an Officer to oversee and order, being chief in the Shire. In Latin Vice-comes, or Vice∣count. And, seeing shadows in effect are as ancient as the bodies, they may be beleived as old as Counts, and Counts as Counties, and Counties as King Alfred, who first divided England into Shires about the year of our Lord 888. The late fashion was, that the Clerk of the Peace for each County, in Michaelmas∣Term, presented to the Lord Cheif Justice of the Kings Bench, sixe or more names of able persons for that Office. The Lord Chief Justice calling the other Judges into the Exchequer Chamber (where the Attorney General, and the Sollicitour attends) pre∣sented three out of that number unto the King, out of which the King pricks one, who stands Sheriffe of the County. His Power is sufficiently known, to suppress Riots, secure Prisoners, distrain for Debts, execute Writs, return the choice of Knights and Burgesses for Parliament, empannel Juries, attend the Jud  the Execution of Malefactors, &c. Several Statutes9 Edward 2. Lincoln. 4. Ed. 3. 9, 5. Ed. 3. 4. have provided, that no man should be Sheriffe in any County, except he hath land sufficient in the same County, to answer the King and his people. And it is remarkable, that since the beginning of that Office, it appeareth not upon any Record, that ever any Sheriffe pro tempore failed in his Estate, but was responsi∣ble in his place. Whereas it is too plain by sad Precedents, that some Receivers (being men of meaner estates) have. Sheriffes are bound to abide in their proper persons, within the4 Hen. 4. 5. County, that they may the more effectually attend their Office. And in our Remembrance, some great persons, whose Activity in Parliament was suspected, have been made Sheriffes to keep them out of harms way, and confine them at home. But later years have dis∣penced with such critical Niceties, (unreasonable that the Sheriffe himself should be a Prisoner in his own County) allowing him more liberty on the providing of an able Deputy in his absence. Though I will not avouch it true, there may be somewhat of truth in their spiteful observation, who maintain, that the Shrevalty in ancient times was Honos sine Onere, in the middle times Honos cum onere, and in our days, little better than Onus sine honore, though  trust the Office will now be restored to its former honour.
Honos sine onere, An honour without a burden. As when Prince Edward the first, was for many years together High-Sheriffe of Bedford and Buckingham-shire; and many prime Peers of the Land, were Honorary Sheriffes, gracing the place with accepting it; living where they pleased themselves, and appointing their Substitutes to transact the businesse of the County. Honos cum onere, An Honour with a burden, From King Edward the Third, till within our Remembrance. For the principal Gentry in every shire, of most ancient extractions and best Estates, were deputed for that place, keeping great At∣tendance and Hospitality: So that as some transcripts hath for the fairness of their Cha∣racter not only evened, but exceeded the Original, the Vice-comes have pro tempore equalled the Count himself and greatest Lords in the Land for their Magnificence. Onus sine honore, A Burden without Honour, when it was obtruded on many as a punishment for the trouble and charge thereof, and laid as a burden, not on the back of that horse which was best able to carry it, but who was least able to cast it off, great persons by friends and favour easily escaping it, whilst it was charged on those of meaner estates: Though I do beleive it found all them Esquires, and did not make any so, as some will suggest. Hence was it, that many Sheriffs were forced to consult principles of Thrift, not being bound so to serve their Country, as to disserve themselves and ruine their estates; and instead of keeping open houses (as formerly) at the Assises, began to latch (though not lock) their dores, providently reducing it to an ORDINARY expence, and no wise man will conclude them to be the less loyal Subjects, for being the more Provident Fathers. At the end of every Shire, after the forenamed Catalogue of the Gentry, in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, I have set down a List of the Sheriffes from the Be∣ginning of King Henry the Second, untill the end of King Charles, carefully collected out of the Records. For I hope that by the former, which I call my Broad (repre∣senting the Gentry of one Generation all over England) and this which I term my Long Catalogue, extending it self successively through many Ages, I hope, I say, both being put together, may square out the most eminent of the Antient Gentry, in some tolerable proportion. Most eminent, seeing I confess, neither can reach all the Gentry of the land. For as in the Catalogue of King Henry the Sixth, many antient Gentlemen were omitted, who were Minors in age, and so uncapable of taking an Oath, so doth not the List of Sheriffs comprehend all the Gentry in the Shire, finding three sorts of peo∣ple excluded out of the same. Such who were 1. Above Discharging the Office. 2. Besides 3 Beneath Above. Such were all of the Peerage in the Land, which since the Reign of King Edward the third were excused I am sure de facto, not imployed in that place, as In∣consistent with their Attendance in Parliament. Secondly, Such who were Besides the Place, priviledged by their profession from that Office, which may be subdivided into, 1. Swordmen, Imployed in Wars beyond the Seas, thus Sir Oliver Ingham, and Sir John Fastoffe both great men, and richly landed in Norfolk, were never Sheriffes thereof, because imployed in the French Wars, the one under King Edward the Third, the other under King Henry the Fifth. 2. Gownmen, as Iudges, Sergeants at Law, Barristers, Auditors, and other Officers in the Exchequer, &c. 3.In relation to the present Mode, other∣wise they also were Gown∣men anciently Cloakmen. Such Courtiers as were the Kings Servants and in ordinary attendance about his Person. Lastly, Such as were Beneath the Place, as men of too narrow Estates to discharge that Office, especially as it was formerly in the magnificent expensivenesse thereof, though such persons might be Esquires of right ancient Extraction.
And here under favour I conceive, that if a strict Enquiry should be made after the Ancient Gentry of England, most of them would be found amongst such middle∣sized Persons as are above two hundred, and beneath a Thousand pounds of Annual Re∣venue. It was the Motto of wise Sir Nicholas Bacon, Mediocria firma, Moderate things are most lasting. Men of great Estates in National Broiles have smarted deeply for their Visible Engagements, to the Ruine of their Families, whereof we have had too many sad Experiments, whilest such persons who are moderately mounted above the level of Common people into a Competency, above want and beneath Envy, have by Gods blessing on their frugality, continued longest in their Conditions, entertaining all alterations in the State, with the less destructive change unto themselves. Let me add, that I conceive it impossible for any man, and difficult for a Corporation of men, to make a true Catalogue of the English Gentry. Because, what Mathematici∣ans say of a Line, that it is Divisibilis in semper divisibilia, is true hereof, if the Latine were, (which for ought I know, if as usuall is) as Elegant, Addibilis in sem∣per addibilia. Not only because New Gentry will every day be added (and that as I conceive justly too, for why should the Fountain of Honour be stopped, if the Channel of desert be running?) but because ancient Gentry will dayly be newly discovered, though some of them perchance for the present, but in a poor and mean condition, as may appear by this particular. It happened in the Reign of King James, when Henry Earl of Huntington, was Lieutenant of Leicester-shire, that a Labourers son in that County, was pressed into the Wars, as I take it to go over with Count Mansfield. The Old man at Leicester, requested his Son might be discharged, as being the only Staff of his Age, who by his Industry maintained him and his Mother. The Earl demanded his name, which the man for a long time was loth to tell (as suspecting it a fault for so poor a man to confess a Truth) at last he told his name was Hastings. Cosen Hastings said the Earl, we cannot all be Top Branches of the Tree, though we all spring from the same Root, Your Son my Kins∣man shall not be pressed. So good was the meeting of Modesty in a poor, with Courtesie in an Honourable Person, and Gentry I believe in Both. And I have reason to beleive, that some who justly own the Sirnames and blood of Bohuns, Mortimers, and Planta∣genets (though ignorant of their own extractions) are hid in the heap of Common∣people, where they find that under a Thatched Cottage, which some of their Ancest∣ors could not enjoy in a Leaded Castle, contentment with quiet and security. To return to our Catalogue of Sheriffs. I have been bold to make some breif histo∣rical Observations upon them, which I hope will not be unpleasing to the Reader, whom I request first to peruse our Notes on Bark-shire, because of their publick Influ∣ence on the rest, facilitating some Difficulties which return in the Sheriffes of other Counties. After we have presented the Sheriffs names, we have annexed their addition, either of estate, as Esquire, or degree, as Knight, Baronet, &c. and this we have done always after, sometimes before K. Henry the Sixth. For, although the Statute of Ad∣ditions, was made in the first of King Henry the fifth, to Individuifie (as I may say) and separate persons from those of the same name: And although it took present ef∣fect in such Suits and Actions, where processe of Utlary lieth, yet was it not univer∣sally practiced in other Writings, till the End of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. After their additions, we have in a distinct Columel, assigned the places of their Habitation, where we could proceed with any certainty, leaving some blanks to im∣ploy the Industry of others. We have endevoured (as neer as we could) to observe proportion of time, in denoting their places, left otherwise our There be confuted by our Then, the date of the Kings Reign which is prefixed. If sometimes we have made a Prolepsis, with Virgil his Lavinia Litora, I mean if we have placed some Sheriffs too early in their possessions, a little before their Families were fixed there, I hope the can∣did Reader will either wink or smile at the mistake. It often commeth to pass, that the same Sheriff in the same Shire, hath two or more fair Seats. This should raise their Gratitude to God, whose own Son was not so well provided, not having where to lay his hand. In this Variety, our Catalogue presenteth but one, sometime the oldest, sometimes the fairest, and sometimes
freely to confess) what comes first to my memory. The best is, truth doth not abate thereby, knowing so much Law; that where a man hath an houshold in two places, he shall be said to dwell in both of them; so that this addition in one of them, doth suffice. Next to the place of Sheriffes, we set down their Arms, whereof largely in the next Chapter. We conclude the Catalogue of Sheriffes with a Comment upon them pre∣senting their most remarkable Actions. Our Husbandmen in Middlesex, make a distin∣ction between Dodding and Threshing of Wheat, the former being only the beating out of the fullest and fairest Grain, leaving what is Lean and Lank to be Threshed out after∣wards. Our Comment may be said to have Dodded the Sheriffes of several Counties, insisting only on their most memorable actions, which are extant in our Printed Histories, otherwise my Eyes could not look into lock'd Chests (I mean) pierce into the private Records of Families, carefully concealed and kept in their choicest Cabinet. Besides, such unprinted Records are infinite (understand it in the same sense in which the strengthNahum. 3. of Tire is called * Infinite) too many for one Authour to manage, and therefore are left to such as undertake the Description of several Counties. CHAP. XVI. Of the Coats of ARMS, affixed to such, who have been Sheriffs of Counties. SOmething must be premised of Arms in general. They may seem in some sort to be Jure Divino to the Jews, having a Precept for the practise thereof. EveryNumb. 2. 2. man of the Children of Israel shall pitch by his own Standard, with the Ensign of their Fathers house. The use thereof is great both in War and Peace. I begin with War, because Arms had their first rise from Arms, and had a military Origination. VVithout these an Army cannot be methodized, and is but an heap of men. Like an Army (saith theCant. 6. 4. Scripture) terrible with banners. VVithout which an Army is not terrible, but ridicu∣lous, routing it self with its own confusion. Now, as no Army without banners; so no banner without Arms therein. If the Trumpet give 1 Cor. 14. 8. an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battail. Now, as the Trumpet tells the time, so the banner pro∣claims the place of meeting, and if it have not distinguishable Emblems therein, who shall know whither to repair to his Captain or Company? Arms are also useful in peace, to distinguish one man from another. They be termed Nomina visibilia, visible names. For, as a name notifieth a man to the Ear, so his Arms do signifie him to the Eye, though dead many years since; so signal the service of Arms on Tombs, to preserve the memory of the deceased. Arms anciently were either assumed or assigned. For at first men took what Arms they pleased, directed by their own fancy. A Custome still continuing in the Low∣Countryes, where the Burgers chuse their own Arms with as great confidence as Trades∣men make their mark, or Innkeepers set up their Signs in England. Assigned Arms were such as Princes, or their Officers under them appointed to particular persons, in re∣ward of their Service. And, whereas Assumed Arms were but personal, these gene∣rally were Hereditary and descended to their Families. It is the rule general in Arms, that the plainer the ancienter, and so consequently more honourable. Arma primò nuda sine ornatu. And when a memorable Gentleman (understand me such an one, the beginning of whose Gentry might easily be remem∣bred) was mocking at the plain Coat of an ancient Esquire, the Esquire returned, I must be fain to wear the Coat, which my great-great-grana-father left me, but had I had the happiness to have bought one, as you did, it should have been guarded after the newest fa∣shion. Two colours are necessary and most highly honourable; though both may be Blazoned with One Word [as VARREY] (formerly born by the Beauchamps of Hatch in
Wilt-shire, and still quartered by the Duke of Somerset) three are very honou∣rable; four commendable; five excusable; more, disgraceful. Yet have I seen a Coat of Arms (I mean within the Escocheon) so piebald, that if both the Metalls, and all the Colours (seven in all) were lost elsewhere, they might have been found therein. Such Coats were frequently given by the Heralds (not out of want of wit, but will to bestowe better) to the new Gentry in the End of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. One said of a Coat that it was so well victualled, that it might endure a Siege, such the plenty and variety of Fowl, Flesh and Fish therein; though some done so small, one needed a magnifying glass to discover them; but such surfeited Coats have since met with a good Mr. Camdn. Physician, who hath cured many of them. I can not but smile at his fansie, who (counting himself, no doubt, wonderfully wittie) would be a reformer of our Heraldry, and thought it fine, if it were thus ordered, that all, 1 Descended of ancient Nobility. should give their Field 1 Or. 2 Extracted from undoubted Gentry.   2 Argent. 3 Advancing themselves by Sea-adventures.   3 Azure. 4 Raised by their Valour in War.   4 Gules. 5 Gown-men preferred for Learning.   5 Sable. 6 Countrymen raised by good Husbandry.   6 Vert. Indeed, as these Metals and Colours are reckoned up in order, so are they re∣puted in honour, save that the contest betwixt Azure and Gules is not so clearly decided. Or and Azure in composition are conceived the richest; Argent and Sable the fairest coat, because setting off each other discernable at the greatest distance. The Lion and Eagle are reputed the most honorable, the Cross the most religious bearing; A Bend is esteemed the best Ordinarie, being a Belt born in its true posture athwart, as a Fess is the same worne about the middle. Things natural in the charge presented in their proper colour are best; and herbes Vert far better than Or, as flourishing better than fadeing; even stained are no stained colours when natural. But seeing the whole mistery of Heraldry, dwells more in the region of fansie, than judgment, few rules of assurance can be laid down therein. We meet with some few coats which have reasons rendered of their bearing. Thus, whereas the Earls of Oxford anciently gave their Coat plain, quarterly Gules and Or, they took afterward in the first a Mullet or Star Argent, because the cheife of the house had a Falling-star (as my Camdens re∣ains in the itle of Ar∣mory. Authour saith) alighting on his shield, as he was fighting in the Holy-land. But it were a labour in vain for one to offer at an account, for all things borne in Armorie. This mindeth me of a passage in the North, where the ancient and worthy Family of the Gascoignes gave for their Arms the Head of a Lucie or Pike, cooped in Pale; Whereon one merrily, The Lucy is the Finest Fish, That ever graced any Dish; But, why you give the HEAD alone, I leave to you to pick this Bone. A Question which on the like occasion may be extended to Beasts and Fowle, whose single heads are so generally born in several Coats. After the names and places of Sheriffs exemplifyed in their respective Counties, we have added their Arms ever since the first of King Richard the second. And, though some may think we begin too late (the fixing of Hereditary Arms in England, being an Hundred years ancienter) we find it sometimes too soon to attain at any certainty therein. In peruseing these Arms, the Reader will meet with much observeable variety, viz. 1. That the same Family sometimes gives two paternal Coats, as,
Spencer in Northampton-shire. Quarterly Arg. and Gules, the second and third, charged with a Fret Or, over all on a Bend Sable 3. Escallops of the First. Azure a Fess Ermin betwixt 6. Sea Meaws heads erased Arg. Sometimes two distinct Families and Names, give the self same Coat, as in Bark∣shire, Fettiplace Gules 2 Cheverons Argent. Hide.   The same name; but being distinct Families in several Counties, give different Arms. Grey. In Leicester-shire, Barry of 6. Argent and Azure, in Chief 3. Torteauxes. In Northumberland, Gules a Lyon Rampant with a Border engrailed Argent. The same Name in the same Shire, being distinct Families, gives different Coats, as in Northampton shire. Green. Of Greens-Norton, Azure three Bucks trippant Or. Of Drayton, Argent a Cross engrailed Gules. The same name and Family in the same Shire, gives the same Coat for Essentials, but disguised in Colours as in Northampton-shire. Tresham. Of Lifden. Of Newton. The same Family giveth a Coat this day, bearing some general allusion to, but much altered and bettered from what they gave some sixty years since, and forbearing to give an instance hereof, for some reason, I refer it to the Readers Discovery. Contented with the Coat it self, I have not inserted the differences of younger Houses, Crescents, Mullets, Martlets, &c. Chiefly because they are generally com∣plained of, and confessed as defective, subject to coincidence, and not adequate to the effectual distinguishing of the branches from the same root. As the affixing of Differences if done, were imperfect, so the doing thereof, is not only Difficult, but also Dangerous. Dangerous, for it would bring many Old houses (and new ones too) on his Head, who undertakes it, so undistinguishable are the Seni∣orities of some Families, parted so long since, that now it is hard to decide, which the Root, and which the Branch. I remember a Contest in the Court of Honour, betwixt the two Houses of Constable, the one of Flamborongh head, the other of Constable-Burton, both in York-shire, which should be the Eldest. The Decision was, it was never decided, both sides producing such ancient Evidences, that in mounting up in antiquity like Hawks, they did not only Lessen but fly out of Sight, even beyond the Kenn and Cognizance of any Record. The Case I conceive occurs often betwixt many Families in England. Some names we have left without Arms. Physicians prescribe it as a Rule of health, to rise with an appetite; and I am loth the Reader should fill himself with all which he might desire. But (not to dissemble) I could not with all mine own, and friends skill and industry, attain their Coats, as of Families either extinct in those Counties before the first, or only extant therein since the last Visitation of Heralds. Yet let not my ignorance be any mans injury, who humbly desireth, that such Vacuities may hereafter be filled up by the particular Chorographers of those respective Counties. This I am sure, A needle may be sooner found in a Bottle of Hay, (a task though dif∣ficult, yet possible to be done) than the Arms of some Sheriffs of Counties be found in the Heraulds Visitations of the said Counties. For many were no Natives of that Shire, but came in thither occasionally from far distant places. Thus the Arms of Sir Jervis Clifton (thrice High-Sheriff of Kent in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth) are invisible in any Kentish Heralds Office, as not landed therein himself though living at Braburn, on the Jointure of Isabel his Wife, the Villare Cant, pag. 26. Widdow of William Scot Esq and I doubt not but instances of the same Nature frequently are found in other Coun∣ties. We will conclude this Discourse of Arms with this memorable Record, being as ancient as the Reign of King Henry the Fift.
Claus. 5. Henrici Quinti Membrana 15. in Dorso in Turre Londinensi. Rex Vic▪ Salutem. &c. Quia prout informa∣mur diversi omines qui in viagiis nostris an∣te haec tempora factis, Arma & Tunicas Ar∣morum vocat. Coat Armours in se susceperunt, ubi nec ipsi, nec eorum Antecessores hujus∣modi Armis ac Tunicis Armorum temporibus retroactis usi fuerint & ea in presenti viagio nostro in proximo Deo dante faciend. exer∣cere proponant; Et quanquam Omnipotens suam gratiam disponat prout vult in naturali∣bus, equaliter Diviti & Pauperi; volentes tamen quemlibet Ligeorum nostrorum predi∣ctorum juxta status sui exigentiam modo de∣bito pertractari & haberi. Tibi praecipimus quod in singulis locis intra Ballivam tuam, ubi per breve nostrum nuper promonst. facien∣dis proclamari facias, quod nullus cujuscunq, status, Gradus, seu conditionis fuerit, hujus∣modi Arma sive Tunicas rmorum in se su∣mat, nisi ipse jure Antecessorto vel ex dona∣tione alicujus ad hoc suficientem potestatem habentis ea possideat aut possidere debeat. Et quod ipse Arma sive Tunicas illas ex cujus do∣no obtinet, die Monstrationis suae personis ad hoc per nos assignatis seu assignandis manifeste demonstret Exceptis illis qui nobiscum apud Bellum de Agincourt Armu portabant sub poe∣nis non admissionis ad proficiendum in viagio praedicto sub numero ipsius cum quo retentus existit, ac perditionis Vadiorum suorum ex causa praedicta praeceptorum, nec non rasura, & ruptura dictorum armorum & Tunicarum vocat. Coat-armours, tempore monstrationis suae praedicto, si ea super illum monstrata fuerint seu inventa, & hoc nulla tenus omit∣tas, T. R. apud Civitatem, Nov. Sarum Secundo die Junii.Per ipsum Regem. The King to the Sheriff health, &c. Because there are divers men as we are informed, which before these times in the Voyages made by us, have assumed to themselves Arms and Coat-Armors where neither they nor their Ancestors in times past used such Arms or Coat Armours, and propound with them∣selves to use and exercise the same in this present Voyage which (God wil∣ling) we shortly inend to make. And although the Omnipotent disposeth his favours in things Natural, as he pleaseth, equally to the Rich and Poor, yet We willing that every one of our Leige Subjects, should be had and Handled in due manner, according to the Exigence of his State and Condition. We com∣mand thee, that in every place within thy Bailiwick, where by Our Writ we have lately shewn, you cause to be proclaimed, that no man of what State Degree or Condition soever he be, shall take upon him such Arms or Coats of Arms, save he alone who doth pos∣sesse or ought to possesse the same, by the right of his Ancestors, or by Do∣nation and Grant of some, who had sufficient power to assign him the same. And that he, that useth such Arms or Coats of Arms, shall on the day of his Muster, manifestly shew to such persons assigned, or to be assigned by us for that purpose, by virtue of whose gift he enjoyeth the same. Those only ex∣cepted who carried Arms with us, at the Battle of Agincourt; uuder the pe∣nalties not to be admitted to go with us in Our foresaid Voyage under His Command by whom he is for the pre∣sent retained, and of the loss of his wages, as also of the rasing out, and breaking off the said Arms called Coat-Armours at the time of his Muster aforesaid, if they shall be shewed upon him, or found about him. And this you shall in no case omit. Witnesse the King at the City of New Sarum, June the second. Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Vicecom. Wilts, Sussex, Dors. sub eadem data. I could wish a reviving of this Instrument in our Age, many Up-starts in our late Civil wars, having injuriously invaded the Arms of ancient Families.
CHAP. XVII. Of the often Altering of Sirnames, and the Various Writing thereof. HAving dealt so largely in Sirnames, it is necessary to observe, that Sirnames of Families have been frequently altered, some Families deposing their Old, and assuming new names on several occasions: But cheifly for, 1. Concealment in time of Civil Wars. A Name is a kind of Face, whereby one is known; Wherefore taking a false name is a Vizard whereby men disguise them∣selves, and that lawfully enough, when not fradulently done to deceive others, but discreetly in danger, to secure themselves: Thus during the Contest 'twixt York and Lancaster, Carington in Warwick-shire took the name of Smith. La Blunt the Name of Croke in Buckingham-shire, with many others. 2. For Advancement when adopted into an estate, as Newport the Name of Hatton, in Northampton-shire; Throckmorton the Name of Carew at Beddington in Surrey, as long before Westcoat the Name of Littleton in Stafford-shire. Besides the same Sirname continued, hath been variously altered in Writing. First, because Time teacheth New Orthography, altering, spelling, as well as speaking. Se∣condly the best Gentlemen anciently were not the best Scholars, and (minding matters of more moment) were some what too incurious in their Names. Besides, Writers ingrossing Deeds, were not over critical in spelling of Names, knowing well where the person appeared the same, the Simplicity of that age, would not fall out about Mis∣nomer. Lastly, Ancient Families have been often removed into several Counties, where several Writings follow the several pronunciations. What Scholar knoweth not, that  their Greek Name for Jupiter, is by their seven Dialects, written ten several wayes and (though not so many Dialects in England) there is a real difference betwixt our Southern, Western, and Northern Pronunciations. Hence it is that the same Name hath been so often disguised unto the Staggering of many, who have mistook them for different. Idem non Idem, quaeruntque in Nomine Nomen. The same they thought was not the same, And in their Name they sought their Name. Thus I am informed, that the Honourable Name of Villiers is written fourteen se∣veral ways, in their own Evidences, and the like (though not so many) Variations, may be observed in others. And the Name of Roper in Darby-shire, changed from Musard to Rubra-Spatha, Rospear, Rouspee, Rooper, Roper. I insist the longer on this point, because in our Catalogue of Sheriffs, the same Sirname is variously written, which some (without cause) may impute to my carelesnesse, being the effect of my care, conforming the Orthogra∣phy exactly to the Original, where such variation doth plainly appear, and however such Diversity appeareth in the Eye of others, I dare profess that I am delighted with the Prospect thereof.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Modern Battels. IMmediately before our Farewell to the Respective Counties, we have inserted a Breviate of Modern Battels since our Civil Distempers. I need here premise no∣thing of the difference betwixt a Skirmish (being only the Ingagement of Parties) and a Battle being an incounter betwixt Generals with their Armies. Nor yet of the difference betwixt Praelium a Fight or Battel, and Bellum a War, the former being a Fight in Field, the later the continuance of Hostility (which may be for many years) whilst the difference dependeth undecided. Peracto Prlio manet Bellum. And though a Truce may give a Comma or Colon to the War, nothing under a Peace can put a perfect Period thereunto. In describing these Battels, I am for distinction sake necessitated to use the word Parliament improperly, according to the Abusive acception thereof for these latter years. Let us think and judge with the Wise, but if we do not speak with the Vulgar, we shall be Dumb to the Vulgar. Otherwise I know a Parliament properly, is a compleat Syllogisme, the Lords and Commons being the two Propositions, the King the Conclusion thereof, and our English Tongue wanteth one word to express the dissenting part of a Parliament, and I trust in God, as our Language doth not afford the Name, so our Land shall not here∣after behold the Nature thereof. These Battels are here inserted, not with any intent (God knows my heart) to perpetuate the odious Remembrance of our mutual Animosities; that Heart burnings may remain, when House burnings are removed; but cheifly to raise our Gratitude to God, that so many Battels should be fought in the bosome of so little a Land, and so few Scars and Signs thereof extant in their visible Impressions. Such, who consi∣der how many men we have lost, would wonder we have any left, and such, who see how many we have left, that we had any lost. In a word, as it is said of the best Oyl, that it hath no Tast, that is, no Tang, but the pure Natural Gust of Oyl therein, so I have indevoured to present these Battels according to plain Historical truth, without any partial Reflections. CHAP. XIX. Of the Number of Modern Shires or Counties in England; And why the WORTHIES in this Work are digested County-wayes. I Say Modern, not meaning to meddle with those antiquated ones, which long since have lost their Names and bounds, asRob. de Glou∣cester, & Co∣dex, Wigornien∣fis. Winchelcomb-shire united to Gloucester-shire,Camdens Brit. Howdon-Shire annexed to York-shire, and Hexham-Shire to Northumberland. As little do we intend to touch on those small Tracts of Ground, the County of Poole and the like, being but the extended Limits and Liberties of some Incorporations. We add Shires or Counties, using the words promiscuously as the same in sense. I confess, I have heard some Criticks making this distinction betwixt them, that such are Shires which take their Denomination from some principal Town, as Cambridge∣shire, Oxford-shire, &c. Whilest the rest not wearing the Name of any Town, are to be reputed Counties, as Norfolk, Suffolk, &c. But we need not go into Wales to confute their Curiosity (where we meet Merioneth-shire, and Glamorgan-shire, but no Towns so termed) seeing Devon-shire doth discompose this their English Conceit; I say,
English Shires and Counties, being both Comitatus in Latine. Of these there be nine and thirty at this day, which by the thirteen in Wales, are made up fifty two, England (largely taken) having one for every Week in the year. Here let me tender this for a real Truth, which may seem a Paradoxe, that there is a County in England, which from the Conquest, till the year 1607 (when Mr. Cam∣dens last Latine Britannia was set forth) never had Count or Earl thereof, as hereby may appear, In his Conclusion of Bark-shire. Immediately it followeth. Haec de Bark shire, quae hactenus Comitis honore insignivit neminem. In hujus Comitatus complexu sunt Paro∣chiae 140. Now this may seem the more strange, because Comes and Comitatus are relative. But, under favour I humbly conceive, that though Bark shire never had any Titular, Honourary or Hereditary Earl, till the year 1620. (when Francis Lord Norris was created first Earl thereof) yet had it in the Saxons time (when it was first modelled into a Shire) an Officiary Count, whose Deputy was termed Vice-comes as unto this day. Why the Worthies in this Work are digested County-ways. First, this Method of Marshalling them is new, and therefore I hope neverthelesse acceptable. Secondly, it is as informative to our judgements, to order them by Coun∣ties according to their place, as by Centuries (so oft done before) according to the time; seeing WHERE is as essential as WHEN to a mans being. Yea both in some sort may be said to be jure divino, understand it ordered by Gods immediate providence, and therefore are coupled together by the Apostle, Acts 17. 26. And hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. If of their habitation in ge∣neral, then more especially of the most important place of their Nativity. The Spirit of God in Scripture taketh signal notice hereof,Psal. 87 6. The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, That this man was born there.John 1. 44. Philip was of Bethsaida, the City of Andrew and Peter; and all know how St. Paul got his best Liberty, where he saw the first light in Tarsus a City of Cilicia. When Augustus Car issued out a decree to taxe the whole World, it was ordered therein, thatLuke 2. 8. every own should go into his own City, as the most compendious way to prevent confusion, and effectually to advance the businesse. I find the same to ex∣pedite this work, by methodizing the Worthies therein according to the respective pla∣ces of their Nativities. If some conceive it a pleasant sight in the City of London, to behold the Natives of the several Shires, after the hearing of a Sermon, passe in a decent equipage to some Hall, there to dine together for the continuance and in∣crease of Love and Amity amongst them: Surely this Spectacle will not seem unplea∣sant to ingenuous Eyes, to see the Heroes of every particular County, modelled in a body together, and marching under the Banners of their several Eminencies. Here may you behold how each County is Innated with a particular Genius, inclining the Natives thereof to be dexterous, some in one profession, some in another; one carrying away the credit for Souldiers, another for Seamen, another for Lawyers, ano∣ther for Divines, &c. as I could easily instance, but that I will not forestall the Rea∣ders Observation; seeing some love not a Rose of anothers gathering, but delight to pluck it themselves. Here also one may see, how the same County was not always equally fruitful in the production of worthy persons; but, as Trees are observed to have their bearing and barren years: So Shires have their rise and fall in affording famous persons, one age being more fertile then another, as by annexing the dates to their several Worthies will appear. In a word, my serious desire is, to set a noble emulation between the several Coun∣ties, which should acquit themselves most eminent in their memorable off spring. Nor let a smaller Shire be disheartned herein, to contest with another larger in extent, and and more populous in persons, seeing Viri do not always hold out in proportion to Ho∣mines. Thus we find the Tribe of Simeon, more numerous than any in Israel (Judah and Dan only excepted) as which at their coming out of Egypt, afforded no fewer,
thanNum. 1. 23. fifty nine thousand and three hundred. Yet that Tribe did not yeild Prince, Preist, Prophet, or any remarkable person; Apocrypha, Judith only excepted. Multi gre∣garii, pauci egregii; and Multitude with Amplitude is never the true Standard of Emi∣nency, as the judicious Reader by perusing and comparing our County Catalogues, will quickly perceive. A Case of Concernment propounded, and submitted to the Equity of the Reader. It is this. Many Families time out of mind, have been certainly fixed in eminent Seats in their respective Counties, where the Ashes of their Ancestors sleep in quiet, and their Names are known with honour. Now possibly it may happen, that the chief Mother of that Family, travelling in her Travel by the way side, or by some other Casualty, as visit of a friend, &c. May there be delivered of the Heir of her Family. The Question is, whether this Child shall be reputed the Native of that place where his Mother accidentally touched, or where his Father, and the Father of his Fathers have landed for many Generations. On the one side, it seemeth unreasonable to any man according to his Historical con∣science, that such a casual case should carry away the Sole credit of his Nativity. This allowed, & tota Anglia Londinizabit, a Moiety almost of the Eminent Persons in this Modern age, will be found born in that City, as the Inn-general of the Gentry and No∣bility of this Nation. Whether many come to prosecute Law-Suits, to see and to be seen, and on a hundred other occasions, among which I will not name, saving of house-keeping in the Countrey. One Instance of many. I find by the Register of St. Dunstans, in the West, Lon∣don, that Thomas Wentworth afterward Earl of Strafford was born in that Parish, and Christned in the Church aforesaid, his Mother big with Child, probably coming thi∣ther for the conveniency of a Midwife. Now what a wrong is it to deprive Woodhouse, Wentworth in York-Shire, where his Family hath continued in a noble Equipage for many years, there possest of a large Revenue, of the honour of his Nativity? On the other side it is clea in the Rigour of the Law (and I Question whether Chauncery in this case, will or can afford any Remedy) that the Minute of the Birth of any person at any place, truly entitles the same to his Nativity. This is plain by the Statutes of those Colledges in either University, that confine Fellowships to Counties, and it will be said, transit onus cum honore, the burthen as well as the Profit is to be conveyed on the same occasion. Reader, the case thus stated, is remitted to thy own arbitration. However thus far I have proceeded therein, in this following Work, that when such Alterations (for I can give them no better term) and accidental Straglings from the known place of their Family shall appear unto me, I am resolved to enter them in those places accor∣dingly. But until I receive such Intelligence, I will confidently admit them in that place which is generally known in persons of Honour for the principal habitation of their Family. CHAP. XX. That Clergy-men formerly carried the Register of their Birth∣place in their Sirnames, and why; As also that (Since the Reformation) the Sons of the married Clergy have been as successeful as others. IT was fashionable for the Clergy (especially if Regulars, Monks, and Friers) to have their Surnames (for Syr-names they were not) or upper-names, because su∣peradded to those given at the Font, from the places of their Nativity, and there∣fore they are as good evidence to prove where they were born, as if we had the de∣position
of the Midwife, and all the Gossips present at their Mothers labours. Hence it is that in such cases we seldome charge our Margin with other Authors, their Sirname being Author enough, to avow their births therein. Some impute this custome to the pride of the Clergy, whose extraction generally was so obscure, that they did , were ashamed of their Parentage. An uncharitable opinion, to fixe so foul a fault on so holy a function; and most false, ma∣ny in Orders appearing of most honourable Descent. Yet Richard Bishop of London, quitted Angervill, though his Father SirBurton in his Description of Leicester-sh. Richard Angervil, was a Knight of worth and worship, to be called of Bury; where he was born, and William Bishop of Win∣chester waved Pattin to wear Waynfleet, though he was eldest Son toGodwins in his Ctal. of the Bishops in Winchester. Richard Pattin an Esquire of great ancientry. Others say, that the Clergy herein affected to be Levi-like,Deut. 33. 9. who said to his Father and to his Mother I have not seen him, practising to be Mimicks ofHeb. 7. 3. Melchisedech, , without Father, without Mother, without Descent, so to render themselves independent in the World, without any coherence to carnal rela∣tions. Surely some were well minded herein, that as they might have no children, they would have no Fathers, beholding the place of their Birth, as co-heir at least to their estates, to which many did , plentiully pay for their nursing there∣in. Question. But oftentimes it comes to passe, That there be many Towns in England, the same to a Title both in spelling and calling. So that on such uncertain Evidence, no true Verdict can be found for their Nativity. One instance of many, William of Wickham was the famous Founder of New Colledge in Oxford. But how can his Cradle be certainly fixed in any place, when it is equally Rockt betwixt twenty Villages of the same Denomination.   Shire. Hundred. 1 Wickham Berks Kentbury 2 High Wickham Bucks Burnham 3 West Wickham Bucks Disborough 4 Wickham west Camb. Chilforde 5 Wickham Essex Thurstable 6 Wickham S. Paul Essex Hinckford. 7 Wickham Bonant Essex Uttlesford* Collected out of the use∣ful Book of Villare Angli∣canum. 8 Wickham Hants Titchfield 9 Wickham-brux. Kent St. Austins 10 Wickham East Kent Suton 11 Wickham VVest Kent Ibidem 12 VVickham Linc. Ellowe. 13 VVickham Brook Suffolk Risbridge 14 VVickham Suffolk Wilforde 15 VVickham Skeyth Suffolk Hartesmer 16 VVickham Oxford Banbury 17 VVickham Sussex Bramber 18 VVickham York Ridall 19 VVickham York Pickering 20 VVickham Abbey York Ibidem. See here a Lottery, and who dare assure himself of the prize, having Nineteen Blanks against him. Indeed if Election should be made by the Eminency of the place, High VVickham in Buckingham-shire would clearly carry it, as an ancient Borough Town, sending Burgesses to Parliament. But all these being VVickhams alike, bring in their Claims to the aforesaid VVilliam, and how shall the right be decided? The same Question may be demanded of several other persons on the same occasion. Answer. I confess the case often occurs, though seldome so many places be Com∣petitors; wherefore herein we have our Recourse to the Circumstances in the History of such a controverted Person, and Consult the most important of them with our greatest Diligence and Discretion. Noscitur è Socio qui non Noscetur ab ipso. We by their Company do own. Men by themselves to us unknown.
Such Circumstances may be called the Associats of a mans Life, as where they most con∣versed, had their Kindred; got their Preferment, &c. And these though not several∣ly, joyntly seve as so many Lights to expound the place of his Birth, and clearing the Homonymi of many places, state that Town justly wherein he was born. Thus are we not only in Bivio or Trivio, but as I may say in Vigentivio being to find Wickhams Birth amongst twenty of his Namesake Villages. But discovering John Perrot his father, richly landed about Winchester, and the principal Actions of his Life presented thereabouts, with some other Remarks, all meeting on the same Scene, one may safely conclude, that Wickham in Hamp-shire, the Eight in the aforesaid Ca∣talogue) is that individual Wikham wherein this Prelate took his first degree, I mean proceeded into the Light of this World. The like Evidence (though not always so clear) hath upon diligent search directed us in Differences of the same Nature. An EXPEDIENT when several Places claim the Birth of the same Person. It often cometh to passe that two or more places intitle themselves to the Nativity of the same Man; Here my Endevour is to keep the Peace (as well as I may) betwixt them, as in the Instance here inserted, Bradwardin. Cast∣rum, unde ortum & nomen T. Bradwardi∣nus Arch. Cant. ha∣buit. Camden Brit. in Herefordshire. T. Bradwardinus Hart∣feldiae natus in Dioece∣si Cicestriensi. J. Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 5. pag. 435. Tho. Bradwardinus Patria Southsaxia, ex Civitate Cice s∣tria oriundus. Joh. Pits de Ang. Scrip. anno 1350. Natus fertur Bradwardi∣nus Hatfeldiae, in Comi∣tatu Suffolciensi. Godwin. in Catal. Episc. Londini impres. anno 1616. See here four places challenge one man, and I am as unwilling to accuse any of fals∣hood, as I am unable to maintain all in the Truth. However the difference may thus be accomodated, Bradwardins Ancestors fetch'd their Name from that place in Herefordshire, according to Camden; though he himself was born (as Bale saith) at Hartfeld in Sussex; within the City (saith Pits) of Chi∣chester, interpret him exensively not to the Walls, but Diocesse and Jurisdiction there∣of. As for Suffolk in Bishop Godwin, I understand it an Erratum in the Printer for Sussex. Our usual expedient in the like cases is this, to insert the Character at large of the controverted person in that County, which (according to our apprehension) pro∣duceth the best Evidence for him; yet so, that we also enter his name with a reference in the other respective places, which with probability pretend unto him. If equal likelyhood appear unto us on all sides, that County clearly carries away his character, which first presenteth it self to our Pen, in the Alphabetical Order. Thus lately, when the same Living was in the gift of the Lord Chancellour, Lord Trea∣surer, and Master of the Wards, that Clerk commonly carried it, who was first pre∣sented to the Bishop. However, though in the disputable Nativities of worthy men, first come, first serv'd, a Caveat is also entred in other Counties, to preserve their Ti∣tles unprejudiced. It must not be forgotten, that many, without just cause, by mistake, multiply differences in the places of mens Births. The Papists please themselves with reporting a Tale of their own inventing, how the men of two Towns in Germany fell out, and fought together, whilst one of them was for Martin, the other for Luther, being but the several names of the same person. If one Author affirms Bishop Jewel born at Buden, another at Berinerber, let none make strife betwixt these two Writers, the former naming the House and Village, the later the Parish wherein he was born, a case which often occurs in the Notation of Nativities.
That the Children of Clergymen have been as successeful as the Sons of Men of other Professions. There goeth a common Report, no less uncharitable than untrue, yet meeting with many Beleivers thereof, as if Clergy mens Sons were generally signally unfortunate, like the Sons of Ely, 1 Sam. 2. 12. Hophnies, and Phineaz's, dissolute in their Lives, and 1 Sam. 4. 11. doleful in their Deaths; This I may call a Libell indeed, according to Sir Francis Bacon his De∣scription thereof; for first, it is a Lye, a notorious untruth; and then a Bell, some lowd and lewd Tongue hath told, yea Rung it out, and perchance was welcome Musick to some hearers thereof. It is first confest, that the best Saints and Servants of God, have had bad as well as good children extracted from them. It is the Note of Illiricus on those words of Saint John to the Elect Lady: 2 Joh. 4. I rejoiced greatly, when I found of thy Children walking in the Truth. He saith not all thy but of thy children, intimating that she had mingled Ware, Corn and Tares in those who were descended from her. Thus Aaron (for I desire to restrain my self in instances of the Priests) had Nadab and Abihu, two Levit. 10. 2. strange Fire Offerers, as well as his Godly Sons Eliazar and Ithamar. Yea, I find one of the best Fathers, having two (and those I beleive all he had) of the worst 1 Sam. 8. 3. Sons, even Samuel himself. Nor do we deny, but that our English Clergy have been unhappy in their off-spring, (though not above the proportion of other Professions) whereof some have not un∣probably assigned these causes. First, If Fellows of Colledges, they are ancient be∣ore they marry. Secondly, their children then are all Benjamins, I mean the chil∣dren of their Old age, and thereupon by their Fathers (to take off as much as we may the weight of the fault from the weaker Sex) cockered and indulged, which I nei∣ther defend or excuse, but bemone and condemn. Thirdly, Such Children after their Fathers Death are left in their Minority, to the careless Care of Friends and Executors, who too often discharge not their due trust in their Education, whence it is such Orphans too osten embrace wild courses to their own destructions. But all this being granted, we maintain that Clergy-mens Children have not been more unfortunate, but more observed than the Children of the Parents of other Professions. There is but one Minister at one time in a whole Parish, and therefore the fewer they are, the easier they are observed both in their Persons and Posterities. Se∣condly, the Eminency of their place, maketh them exposed and obvious to all dis∣coveries. Thirdly, possibly Malice may be the Eye-salve to quicken mens Sight, in prying after them. Lastly, one ill Success in their Sons, maketh (for the reasons aforesaid) more impression in the Ears and Eyes of people, then many miscarriages of those Children whose Fathers were of another Function. (I speak not this out of Intent to excuse or extenuate the Badnesse of the one, by the Badnesse of the other, but that both may be mutually provoked to Amendment.) In a word, other mens Children; would have as many Eyesores, if they had as many Eyes seeing them. Indeed, if happinesse be confin'd unto outward Pomp and Plenty, and if those must be accounted unfortunate (which I in the true meaning of the word must interpret un∣providenced) who swim not in equal Plenty with others, then that Epithet may be fixed on the Children of the Clergy. Whose Fathers coming late to their Livings, and sur∣prised by Death, not staying long on them (which at the best afforded them but nar∣row maintenance) leave them oft-times so ill provided, that they are forced without blame or shame to them (as I conceive) to take sometimes poor and painful Employ∣ments for their Livelyhood. But by our following Endevours it will plainly appear, that the Sons of Ministers have by Gods blessing proved as Eminent as any who have raised themselves by their own Endevours. For Statesmen George Carew, Privy Councellor of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and as able a man [absit Invidia] as the age he lived in produced, was Earl of Totnes, the same place whereof his Father was Arch-deacon. Sir Edwin San∣dys, Son to Arch-bishop Sandys, will be acknowledged even by his Enemies, a man of such merit, that England could not afford an Office which he could not manage.
For Lawyers, Sir Thomas Richardson, lately, and the never sufficiently to be com∣mended Sir Orlando Bridgeman, now Lord Chief Justice, with many others. For Seamen▪ Sir Francis Drake, that great Scourge and Terror to the Spanish Pride. If any say, these are but thin Instances out of so thick a number, de tot modo mili∣bus unus, few of so many Hundreds, know we have only taken some Eminent per∣sons, leaving the rest, for fear to be counted Forestallers to the Collection of the Reader in our ensuing Book. But the Sons of Ministers have never been more successeful, then when bred in the Professions of their Fathers, as if some Peculiar Blessing attended them, whilst they continue therein. Thus of the Prelatical Clergy, we have Francis Godwin a Bishop, the Son of a bishop, and Doctor John King Son to his Reverend Father the Bishop of London. And of other Clergy men we have three Generations of the wards in Suffolk. As many of the Shutes in York shire, no lesse painful then pious and able in their Professions. Let me add, that there were at one time 3 Fellows of Kings Colledge, Sons of emi∣nent Divines, and afterwards Doctors of Divinity. 1 Samuel Collings. 2 Thomas Goad. 3 William Sclater. And I believe there were not severally in their Generations, men more signal in their different Eminencies. It is easie for any to guess out of what Quiver this Envenomed Arrow was first shot against the Children of Clergy men; namely, from the Church of Rome. Who in their Jurisdiction forbid the Banes of all Clergymen, against the Law of Nature, Scripture, and the practice of the Primitive Church. And in other places unsubjected to their power, bespatter the posterity of the Clergy with their scandalous Tongues. Yet be it known unto them, the Sons of English Priests or Presbyters may be as good as the Nephews of Roman Cardinals. However, because Antidotes may be made of poy∣sons, it is possible that Good may be extracted out of this false Report; Namely, if it maketh Clergy-men more careful to go before their Children with good Examples, to lead them with good Instructions; to drive and draw them (if need so requireth) with Moderate Correction seasonably used, putting up both Drye and Wet Prayers to God for his Blessing on their children. As also, if it maketh the children of Clergy-men to be more careful, by their circumspect lives, to be no shame to the Memory and Profession of their Fathers. CHAP. XXI. General Rules for the AUTHOR and READERS. Ease. I Have ranked all persons under their respective Titles, according to their Seniori∣ties, of the ages they lived in. Good the method of the Sons of Jacob, sitting down at the Table of their [unknown] brother Gen. 43. 33. Joseph, the first according to his Birthright, and the Youngest according to his Youth. If therefore, on this account, a mean man take place of a mighty Lord, the later (as being dead) I am sure will not, and the Living Reader should not be offended thereat. Of the Dates of Time annexed to the Persons and their Actions. The Sun, that Glorious Creature, doth serve Mankind for a double use, to lighten their Eyes with his Beams, and Minds with his Motion. The later is performed by him as appointed for Gen. 1. 10. Signs and for Seasons, as he is the great Regulator of Time, joynted into Years and Months, carved into Weeks and Dayes, minced into Hours and Minutes.
At what a sad loss are such, who living in Lone Houses, in a Gloomy Winter Day, when the Sun doth not at all appear, have neither the benefit of Watches, Silent Clocks, nor of Clocks, Speaking Watches, being ready oft-times to mistake Noon for Night, and Night for Noon. Worse Errors are committed by those, who being wholy ignorant in Chronology, set the Grand-children before their Grandfathers, and have more Hysteron∣Proterons, than of all other Figures in their Writings. The Maxime, He who distinguisheth well instructeth well, is most true in the observing of the Distinction of time. It will pose the best Clerk to read (yea to spel) that Deed, wherein Sentences, Clauses, Words and Letters, are without Points or Stops, all continued together. The like Confusion ariseth, when persons and their actions are not distanced by Years, nor pointed with the periods of Generations. I have endevoured in my following work, to Time Eminent Persons by one of these Notations, First, that of their Morning or Nativity, the second, that of their Noon or Flourishing, the last, that of their Night or Death. The first is very uncertain, many Illus∣trious Men being of obscure Extraction. The second more conspicuous, when Mens Lustre attracts many Eyes to take Notice of them. Many see the Oake when grown, (especially if a standard of Remark) whilst few (if any) remember the Acorn, when it was set. The last is not the least Direction, as which is generally observed. It com∣eth to pass somtimes, that their Deaths acquaint us with their births, viz. when atten∣ded on their Tomb with Intelligence of their age, so that by going backward so many years from their Coffins we infallibly light on their Cradles. Some Persons in our Works are notified by all of these Indications, most with two, and all with one of them. When we find a Contest amongst Chronologers, so that with the mutinous Ephesians, Acts 19. 32. some cry one thing, and some another, being as much dispersed in their Opinions, as the Amorites in their Persons (when defeated by Saul) so  Sam. 11. 11. that two of them were not left together, in such a case, I have pitched on that Date (under correction of better judgements) which seemed to me of greatest Probability. An Apology for Qualificatives used, and Blanks left in this History. I approve the plain Country By-word, as containing much Innocent Simplicity therein, Almost and very nigh, Have saved many a Lie. So have the Latines their prope, fere, juxta, circiter, plus minus, used in matters of fact by the most authentick Historians. Yea, we may observe, that the Spirit of Truth it self, where Numbers and Measures are concerned, in Times, Places and Persons, useth the aforesaid Modificatives, save in such cases, where some mystery contained in the number, requireth a particular specification thereof. In times. In places. In persons. Dan. 5. 33. Darius being about threescore and two years old. Luk. 24. 13. From Jerusalem about sixty furlongs. Exod. 12. 37. About six hun∣dred thousand men on foot. Luke 3. 23. Jesus began to be about thirty years of age. Joh. 6. 19. Had rowed about five and twenty furlongs. Act. 2. 41. Added to the church about 3 thousand . None therefore can justly find fault with me, if on the like occasion I have secured my self with the same Qualificatives. Indeed such Historians who grind their Intelli∣gence to the powder of fraction, pretending to cleave the pin, do sometimes misse the But. Thus one reporteth, how in the Persecution under Dioclesian, there were neither under nor over, but just nine hundred ninety nine Martyrs. Yea, generally those that Trade in such Retail-ware, and deal in such small parcells, may by the ignorant be commended for their Care, but condemned by the judicious for their ridiculous curio∣sity. But such who will forgive the use of our foresaid Qualificatives (as but limping and lamenesse) will perchance not pardon the many blanks which occur in this Book, ac∣counting them no better then our Flat fallingto the ground, in default of our Industry
where they found their best preferment, especially if Convents or Dignities of signal note; as Henry of Huntington, not born, but Arch-Deacon there; William of Malms∣bury, and Matthew of Westminster, no Natives of those Towns; but Monks of the Monasteries therein. However to prevent Cavils, and avoid Confusion, and to distinguish those from the former, their Names are marked with S. N. for second Nativity, to shew, that whence soever they fetcht their Life, here they found their best Livelyhood. But when a person plainly appears born beyond the Seas, We take no notice of him, though never so highly advanced in England, as without our Line of Communication, and so not belonging to this Subject. What REM. for Remove when affixed in the Margin doth Denote. We meet with some persons in this our Work, whose Nativities we cannot Reco∣ver with any great Probability, neither by help of History, or Heraldry, or Tradition, or Records, or Registers, or Printed, or Writen books, which hitherto have come to our hands. Now if such persons be of no Eminence, we intend not to trouble our selves and Reader with them, Let Obscurity even go to Obscurity, when we find no great note in them, we take not any notice of them. But in case they appear men of much Merit, whose Nativities are concealed by some Casualty, we are loath that their Memories, who whilst living were Worthies, now dead should be Vagrants, repo∣sited in no certain place. Wherefore we have disposed them in some Shire or other, not as Dwellers, no nor so much as Sojourners therein. But only as Guests, and we render some slight Rea∣sons, why we invited them to that place, rather then another, seeing a small motive will prevail with a charitable mind, to give a Worthy Stranger a Nights Lod∣ging. However, that these may not be confounded with those, of whose Nativities we have either assurance or strong presumption. We have in the Margin charactered them with a Rem. for Remove, it being our desire that they should be transplanted on the first convincing Evidence, which shall appear unto us, to their proper place. And therefore I behold them as standing here with a Staffe in their hands, ready to pack up, and go away, whither any good Guide shall give them direction. Always provided, that as they are set here, with little, they be not removed hence with lesse probability; an unset bone is better then a bone so ill set, that it must be broken again to double the pain of the Patient. And better it is these persons should con∣tinue in this their loose and dislocated condition, than to be falsly fixed in any place, from whence they must again be translated. Now Reader (to recollect our marginal or prefixed characters) know it is the best sign when no Sign at all is added to a name, for then we proceed on certainty; at least wise, on the credit of good Authors, for the place of his Nativity, thus the best of the house giveth his Coat plain, whilst the following differences are but the Diminutions of the younger brothers, viz. 1. Amp. Where our Evidence of a persons birth is but conjectural and craveth fur∣ther instruction. 2. S. N. When having no aim at the place of their birth, we fixe them according to their best Livelyhood. 3. REM. When wholly unsatisfied of their position, we remit their Removal to the Readers discretion. Now seeing order only makes the difference betwixt a wall and a heap of stones, and seeing, Quibene distinguit bene docet, we conceived our selves obliged to part, and not jumble together the several gradations. How Persons belonging to several Topicks are ranked. It often  to passe, that the same person may justly be entituled to two or more opicks, as by the ensuing may appear.
for not seeking due Information. But let such know, that those Officers, who by their place are to find out persons enquired after, deserve neither to be blamed nor shamed, when having used their best diligence, they return to the Court a Non est in∣ventus. For my own part, I had rather my Reader should arise hungry from my Book, than surfeited therewith; rather uninformed than misinformed thereby; rather ignorant of what he desireth, than having a falsehood, or (at the best) a conjecture for a truth obtruded upon him. Indeed, I humbly conceive that vacuity which is hateful in nature, may be helpful in History. For, such an hiatus beggeth of posterity, to take pains to fill it up with a truth (if possible to be attained) whereas, had our bold adventure farced it up with a conjecture, intus existens prohibuerit extraneum, no room had been left for the ende∣vours of others. What Ampliandum, so often occurring in this Book, doth import. It is sufficiently known to all Antiquaries, that causes brought to be heard and de∣termined before the Roman Judges, were reducible to two kinds. 1. Liquets. 2. Ampliandums. When the case as clear and plain, was pre∣ decided. When, being dark and difficult, they were put off to farther debate, somewhat alluding to our Demurrs. Hence it is, that we find the Roman Pro Cec. 290. a. Oratour complaining of an unjust Judge, Cum causam non audisset, & potestas esset Ampliandi, dixit sibi Liquere. I should be loth to be found guilty of the like offence in rash adjudging mens Nati∣vities to places, on doubtful Evidence, and therefore when our presumptions do ra∣ther incline then satisfie, we have prefixed AMP. before the Names of such persons. For when they appear undoubted English, and Eminent in their respective Qualities, it would be in us a sin of omission not to insert them; and yet being ignorant of the ex∣act place of their Birth, it would be presumption peremptorily to design it without this Note of Dubitation, though on the most tempting Probabilities. Know also that when AMP. is used in the Arms of Sheriffs, it is only done in such an Exigent, where there are different Coats of very ancient Families, and largely diffused, as [Nevil, Ferrers, Basset, &c.] So that it is hazardous for me to fixe on one in such great variety. What S. N. frequently appearing prefixed to Mens NAMES doth signifie. When we cannot by all our indevours inform our selves of the Nativities of some eminent person, we are forced to this Refuge (so creditable, that I care not what Eyes behold us entring under the Roof thereof) to insert such persons in those Coun∣ties, where we find them either first or highest preferred: and this we conceive pro∣per enough, and done upon good consideration. For the wild Irish love their Nurses as well (if not better) than their own Mothers, and affect their Foster-brothers, which suckt the same breast, as much as their Natural-brothers whith sprang from the same Womb. If any say these are the wild Irish, whose barbarous customes are not to be imitated, I defend my self by the practice of more civilized people. The Latines have a Proverb, non ubi nascor, sed ubi pascor, making that place their Mother, not which bred, but which fed them. The Greeks have but one word, , both for Life and Livelyhood. The Hebrews accounted that place was to give a Man his Native Denomination, where he had his longest and most visible , from (though not sometimes in) his Infancy. By which common mistake Jesus was intituled on the cross, of Nazareth instead of Bethlehem. Yea, we may observe; that though generally our English Clergy   from their Birth places: Yet some few quitted them, to be named from those ,
Two of Bishops, Writers, Arth. Lakes. Two of Seamen, Souldiers, Sir Francis Drake.   Physicians, Benefactors, Jo. Caius.   Statesmen, Souldiers, Sir Ralph Sadler. Three of Bishops, Writers, Benefactors, Lancelot Andrews. Three of Statesmen, Lawyers, Benefactors, Sir Nicholas Bacon.   Martyrs, Bishops, Writers, Thomas Cranmer.   Statesmen, Lawyers, Writers, Sir Francis Bacon. Four of Saints, Bishops, Writers, Statesmen, Tho. Becket. Four of Lawyers, Statesmen, Writers, Benefa∣ctors, William Lord Cecil.   Confessors, Bishops, Writers, Benefactors Ed. Grindall.   Souldiers, Seamen, Statesmen, Writers, Sir Walter Raleigh. The Question is now, under what head they shall be properly placed, seeing so many lay claim unto them? Some will say, let them be ranked in that capacity wherein they excelled. This I humbly conceive is an invidious work for any to perform. Seeing none have made me, I will not make my self a Judge in this Case, many appearing equally eminent in their several capacities, but have embraced the following Order. First, The Titles of Saints and Martyrs carrieth it clearly from all others, I be∣hold them as heavenly honours, and Glory outshines Gold; next I deny not, I have an affection for Benefactors to the Publick, and much indulge that Topick, clean tho∣rough this Work, Psal. 119. David saith to God himself, thou art good, there is a clear spring, and thou doest good, there is a comfortable stream. Benefaction therefore being a God-like▪act, blame me not if under that Title, those have been ranked, who otherwise had more outwardly honourable Relations. For the rest I am not asha∣med to confesse, that Casualty in such who came first, and Conveniency in such, who agre∣ed best with my present occasion, regulated them in their method, and so be it they be here, the placing of them is not so much material. CHAP. XXII. An Accommodation to prevent Exceptions about the Pre∣cedency of several Professions. IAm sadly sensible, that being to treat of the Worthies in several professions; I shall incur many mens displeasure, in not ranking thm according to their own desires; the rather because there always hath been a Battel Royal about Precedency, betwixt, 1. Swordmen and Gowmen. 2. Swordmen and Swordmen. 3. Gownmen and Gownmen. Concerning the first couple, The Question▪ An doctor praecedat militem? hangeth as yet on the File, and I believe ever will, as which is often determined affirmatively in time of peace, but always Negatively in time of War. Nor less is the contest betwixt Swordmen and Swordmen (I mean of the same side and Interest) about Priority, whether Land or Sea Captains should take place. The former they plead, that they fight on a fixed Element (not so subject as the Sea to ca∣sual advantages) which being a setled Theatre of Valour, men may indifferently try their courage upon it. The Sea Captain alledgeth, that the greater danger the greater dignity, and precedency therefore due to their Profession, who encounter the Winds and the Water, besides the Fierceness and the Fury of their Enemies. Besides, it is very difficult if possible for a ship engaged in Fight, to escape by Flight, whereby
many in Land battels easily preserve themselves. I confess that Custome (the best Herald in controversies of this kind) hath adjudged the Precedency to Land Captains, but not without the great grudge and regret of  therein. We may observe in Nature, that though the water and earth make one Globe, and though Providence preserveth the Earth from being overflown by the Water, yet the Water as the lighter Element, challengeth the highest place to its self, and watcheth all opportunities, (especially when great Rain meet with low banks) to regain its superiority by Inundations. Sea Captains in like manner, though depres∣sed by practice and custome to give place to Land Captains, do it with that distast and dislike, that thereby (though they cannot recover their right) they continue their claim to precedency, watching their opportunity, and now (in our so many Naval expeditions) not altogether out of hope to regain it. Nor less the difference betwixt Gownmen and Gownmen, who should take the upper hand▪ witnesse the Contest betwixt Doctors of Phyfick, and of Canon Law, on that Accompt, the former pleading the following Instrument in their behalf. Memorandum quod anno Domini 1384, in Vigilia Purificationis Beatae Mariae Virginis, in* Caius de Ant. Cantab. pag. 20. plena Convocatione Regentium & non Regentium, per fidem Convocatorum declaratum est, quod Doctor in Medicina dextram partem Cancellarii in Congregationibus & Convocationibus retineret & non Sinistram, Doctor vero in jure civili partem Sinistram & non dextram. Facta est haec Declaratio ex praecepto Regis Richardi Secundi post conquestum, anno Regni sui Octavo, Add to this what a great Nicholaus Vernias Thea∣tinus in praefa∣tione in Burle∣um super Physici Aristotelis. Professor of Philosophy, living in Padua anno 1482, concludeth after a long debating of the Question. Dicamus ergo cum SANCTA ROMANA Ecclesia, quod Medicina est Nobilior jure civili, quodque Medicinae Professores Domini mereantur Dici; Juristae vero Praecones. But for all this, the Doctors of the Canon (since in England united with the Civil) Law, will not yeild unto them, pleading for themselves; First, That Professions are to take place according to the Dignity of the Subject they are employed about. Second∣ly, That the Soul is more worth than the body, which is the Sphear of the Physician. Thirdly, That Canonists meddle with many cases of Soul concernment, and therefore ought to have the Precedency. Wherefore, to prevent all exceptions about Priority, may the Reader acquaint himself with this our method therein. 1. We place Princes; And both Loyalty and Civility will justifie us therein. 2. Saints; As our Saviour said Ioh. 18. 6. My Kingdome is not; so their Dignity is not of this World, and therefore none I hope will repine thereat. 3. 4. Martyrs and Confessors. If any grudge them this their high place, let them but give the same price they paid for it, and they shall have the same Superio∣rity. 5. Eminent Prelates; A distance which they might justly claim in those days above others, as generally the Lord Chancellours and Treasurers of the Land. 6. Statesmen; Whose eminent Offices do warrant and avouch this their station a∣gainst all opposition. 7. Capital Judges; To whom this place doth of right belong. These premised, in the next four we have observed an order without order. Some will maintain that sometimes a Ryot is as good as a Dyet: When at a Feast all meats cast together, help one to digest another. Qui vivit medice, vivit misere, sure I am, Scribit misere, qui scribit methodice, I mean, when tyed up to such strict terms of me∣thod, in such cases that every misplacing is subject to exception. I commend the no less politick then peaceable custome of the Skinners and Merchant Taylors of London, who after many long and costly suits betwixt their Companies for Precedency, to prevent future quarels agreed with themselves at last, to go first by turns or alternatly. The same method I embrace in ranking Souldiers, Seamen, Civilians, Physicians, sometimes one first, sometimes another, ringing no artificial but a meerly casual Change in the ordering their Professions. These thus ranked next follow, 12. Learned Writers. Though many of these since the Reformation, being Doctors of Divinity, may challenge Precedency of some named before, yet they will not be discontented to come last, having learned the Apostles rule, Rom. 12. 2. In honour preferring one another, and God make us as humble as we are humbled.
13. Benefactors to the Publick. It is good to conclude and go out with a good savour, on which account these worthy persons are placed last, to leave the grateful perfume of their memory behind them. As for Memorable persons, they are last, last placed, because (as that Title  taken by us) they are cast in, as Superpondium, or Overweight, our work being ended before. CHAP. XXIII. Of the AUTHORS from whom our Intelligence in the Following WORK hath been Derived. THe plain English saying hath very much of downright Truth therein; I tell you my Tale and my Tale-master, which is essential to the begetting of credit to any Rela∣tion. Indeed when one writeth with St. John (waving his Infallible Inspiration) that which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which we have looked* 1 Ioh. 1. 1. upon, and our hands have handled, such clogging a Book with Authors were superflu∣ous, which now is necessary in him that writeth what was done at distance, far from, in time long before him. First, to assert and vindicate the Writer. When Adam complained that he was naked, God demanded of him, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Intimating thus much,* Gen. 3. 11. that if he could not produce the person who first so informed him, he might justly be suspected (as indeed he was) the Author as well as Utterer of that sad Truth. Our Saviour said toIoh. 18. 34. Pilate, Sayest thou this thing of thy self, or did others tell thee? and all things reported are reducible to this Dichotomie, 1. The Fountain of Invention. 2. The Chanell of Relation. If one ignorantly buyeth stolen Cattel, and hath them fairly vouched unto him, and publickly in an open Fair payeth Tole for them, he cannot be damnified thereby: The case I conceive of him who writeth a falsehood, and chargeth his Margin with the Author thereof. Secondly, To edifie and inform the Reader; Frustra creditur quod sine agnitione Ori∣ginis creditur. It is vainly beleived, which is beleived without the knowledge of the Ori∣ginal thereof. Yea, properly it is no Rational bleif, but an easy, lazy, supine Credu∣lity. Such as designingly conceal their Authors, do it either out of Guiltinesse or Envy. Guiltinesse, when conscious to themselves, that if Inspection be made of such Quota∣tions, they will be found defectively, redundantly, or Injuriously cited, distorted from their genuine Intention. Or else they do it out of Envy. Tyrants commonly cut off the stairs by which they climb up unto their Thrones (witness King Richard the third, beheading the Duke of Buckingham) for fear, that if still they be left standing, others will get up the same way. Such the jealousie of some Writers, that their Readers would be as (if not more) knowing than themselves, might they be but directed to the Original, which they purposely intercept. Some to avoid this Rock of Envy, run on as bad of Ostentation, and in the end of their Books, muster up an Army of Authors, (though perchance they themselves have not seriously perused one Regiment thereof) so that the Goodnesse of their Library, not Greatnesse of their Learning may thence be concluded, that they have (if with the Prophets2 King. 6. 5. Axe some were not borrowed) for I will not say have read, many books in their possession. I have endevoured to steer my course betwixt both these Rocks, and come now to give in the particulars, whence I have derived my Information, knowing full well quantus Author, tanta Fides. These may be referred to 3. heads; First, Printed Books; Secondly, Records in Publick Offices; Thirdly, Manuscripts in the Possession
of private Gentlemen. To which we may adde a fourth, viz. Instructions received from the nearest Relations, to those Persons, whose Lives we have presented. We pass by Printed books, (cited in the Margin) and obvious to all who are pleased to consult them, and first pitch on the Records of the Tower. Master William Riley was then Master of those jewels, for so they deserve to be accompted, seeing a Scholar would preferre that place before the keeping of all the Prisoners in the Tower. I know not whether more to commend his care in securing, dexterity in finding, diligence in perusing them, or courtesie in communicating such Copies of them, as my occasions re∣quired, thanks being all the fees expected from me. I place next the Records in the Exchequer, for although I had a Catalogue of the Sheriffs of England lent me by Master High-more of the Pipe-office, which I compared with another, of that learned Knight Sir Winkefield Bodenham, yet beig frequently at aloss, I was forced to repair to the Originals in the Exchequer. Here le not my gra∣titude be buried in the graves of Master John Witt, and Master Francis Boyton, both since deceased, but whilst living advantagious to my Studies. To these Authentick Records let me adde, the Church Registers in several Parishes, denied indeed by our Commons Lawyers, but stickled for by some Canonists to be Re∣cords-fellows at least, and having though not the formality in Law, the force thereof in History, very useful to help us in many Nativities. And here I cannot but bemoan the  that great Glph, or broad blank left in our Registers, during our Civil Wars, after the laying aside of Bishops, & before the Re∣stitution of his most Sacred Majesty. Yea, hereafter this sad Vacuum is like to prove so thick, (like the Aegyptian Darkness) that it will be sensible in our English Histories. I dare maintain that the Wars betwixt York and Lancaster, (lasting by intermission some sixty years) were not so distructive to Church-records, as our Modern Wars in six years. For during the former, their differences agreed in the same Religion, im∣pressing them with reverence of all Sacred Muniments, whilst our Civil Wars founded in Faction, and variety of pretended Religions, exposed all naked Church Records, a prey to their Armed violence. Let me adde, that it conduced much to the exactness of Jewish Genealogies, that their children were solemnly Circumcised and Named on the Eight-day. On the con∣trary, the omitting the baptizing of Infants, till they be adult, (which causeth, that though the weekly birth exceed the burials, the burials exceed the christenings in Lon∣don,) will perplex those who in the next age shall write the nativities of such persons. Say not it matters not though their nativities be utterly forgotten. For though their fathers were factious Phanaticks, the sons (by Gods grace) may prove sober Christians and eminent in their generations. The last Port to which I traffiqued for intelligence, towards our insuing Work, was by making my addresses by letters and otherwise, to the nearest Relations of those whose Lifes I have written. Such applications, have sometimes proved chargable; but if my weak pains shall find preferment, (that is acceptance) from the judicious Reader, my care and cost is forgotten, and shall never come under computation. Here I cannot but condemn the carelessness, not to say ingratitude of those (I am safe whilst containing my self in general terms) who can give no better account of the Place, where their fathers or grand-fathers were born, then the child unborn, so that sometimes we have been more beholden to strangers for our instructions herein, then to their nearest Kindred. And although some will say Sons are more comfortably con∣cerned to know the time of their Fathers death, then place of their birth, yet I could almost wish, that a moderate fine were imposed on such heirs, whose Fathers were born before them, and yet they know not where they were born. However, this I must grate∣fully confess, I have met with many who could not, never with any who would not fur∣nish me with information herein. It is observable, that men born an hundred years since and upwards, have their na∣tivities fixed with more assurance, then those born some eighty years since. Mens eyes see worst in the Twilight, in that intervale after the Sun is set, and natural light ended, and before candles are set up, and artificial light begun. In such a crepusculum oftime those Writers lived, who fall short of the history of Bale and Leland, yet go before the memory of any alive, which unhappy insterstice hath often perplexed us, and may easier be com∣plained of, then amended.
To conclude, should I present all with Books, who courteously have conduced to my instruction, the whole Impression would not suffice. But I remember the no less civil then politick invitation of Judg. 1. 3. Judah to the Tribe of Simeon, Come up with me into my Lot, [to Conquer the Cananites] and I likewise will go with thee into thy Lot, if such who have lent me theirs, shall have occasion to borrow mine assistance, my Pains, Brains and Books, are no more mine, then theirs to command, which (besides my prayers for them, and thanks to them,) is all my ability in requital can perform. CHAP. XXIII. A double Division of the English Gentry, 1. According to the Nation whence they were extracted, 2. According to the Profession whereby they were advanced. THis discourse I tender the Reader, as a preparative to dispose him for the better observing and distinguishing of our English Gentry, in our ensuing Lives and Cata∣logue of Sheriffs. We begin with the Britains the Aborigines, or Native Inhabitants of the South of this Island, but long since expelled by the Saxons into the West thereof; None then remaining in, some since returning into our Land, of whom hereafter. We confess the Romans Conquered our Country, planted Colonies, and kept Garri∣sons therein, but their descendants are not by any character discernable from the British. Indeed, if any be found able to speak Latine naturally, without learning it, we may safely conclude him of Roman Extraction. Mean time, it is rather a pretty conceit, then a solid notion of that great Vestegan of Decayed In∣telligence pag. 313. Antiquary, who from the allusion of the name collecteth the noble family of the Cecils (more truly Sytsilts) descended from the Cecilii a Sena∣torian Family in Rome. The Saxons succeed, whose Of-spring at this day are the main bulk and body of the English (though not Gentry) Nation, I may call them the whole cloath thereof, though it be garded here and there, with some great ones, of foreign Extraction. These Saxons though pitifully depressed by the Conquerour, by Gods goodness, King Henry the first favour, their own patience and diligence, put together the plankes of their Shiprack'd Estates, and aferwards recovered a competent condition. The Danes never acquired in this Land a long and peaceable possession thereof, living here rather as Inroders then Inhabitants, the cause that so few families (distin∣guishable by their Surnames) are descended from them, extant in our age. Amongst which few, the respected Stock of the Denizes, (often Sheriffs in See Camdens∣Brit. in Devon∣shire. Devon and Glouster∣shire) appear the principal. As for Fitz-Hardinge, the younger son of the King of Denmark, and direct ancestour of the Truly Honourable George Lord Berkeley, he came in long since when he accompanied the Conquerour I must confess, that at this day, there passeth a Tradition among some of the Common People, that such names which Terminate in Son, as Johnson, Tomson, Nicolson, Davison, Saunderson, are of Danish Origination. But this fond opinion, is long since conuted by Vestegan, that ingenious and industrious Of decayed Intelligence. Antiquary. Yea, he urgeth this as an argument (which much prevaileth with me) why those Surnames were not derived from the Danes, because they had no such name in use amongst them, as John, Thomas, Nicholas, David, Alexander, from whence they should be deduced. Yea, he further addeth, that it is more probable, that they made the Childs name, by adjecting the syllable Son to the Appellation of the Father; (a custome which is usual, even at this time amongst the Vulgar sort of the Dutch.) Yet is there not remaining any sign thereof amongst the names of our Age, which probably might have been, Canutson, Ericson, Gormoson, Heraldson, Rofolson, &c.
The Normans or French, under the Conquerour swarmed in England, so that then they became the only visible Gentry in this Nation, and still continue more then a Moity there∣of; several Catalogues of their Names I have so largely exemplifyed in my Church-history, that some have taxed me for tediousness therein, and I will not adde an new obstinacy to my old error. But besides these, we have some Surnames of good Families in England, now extant, which though French, are not by any diligence to be recovered in the lists of such as came over with the Conquerour, and therefore we suppose them to have re∣mained of those Gentlemen and others, which from Henault attended Queen Isabel, wife unto King Edward the second. Of this sort was Deureux, Mollineux, Darcy, Coniers, Longchamp, Henage, Savage, Danvers, with many more. Of the British or Welsh, (after their expulsion hence by the Saxons) some signal persons have returned again, and by the Kings Grant, Matches, Purchases, &c. have fixed themselves in fair possessions in England, especially since the beginning of the reign of their Country-man, King Henry the seventh, rewarding the valour of many, contributing to his Victory in the battle of Bosworth. Of the Welsh, now re-estated in England, and often Sheriffs therein, some retain their old Surnames, as the Griffins in Northamptonshire, the Griffiths and Vaughans in Yorkshire; some have assumed New ones, as the Caradocks, now known by the new Name of Camdens Brit. in Somerset∣shire. the Newtons in Somerset∣shire. Many Scotch (long before the Union of the two Kingdomes under King James) seated themselves in this Land, flying hither for succour from their Civil Wars, and surely it was against their mind, if they all went back again: Distress at Sea hath driven others in, as the Stewards High-sheriffs in Cambridgeshire. As other accidents have occasioned the coming in of the Scrimpshires an hundred years since High sheriffs in Staffordshire, more lately the Nappers in Bedfordshire, and before both, the Scots of Scots-hall in Kent. I much admire that never an eminent Irish native grew in England to any greatness, so many English having prospered in that Country. But it seems, we love to live there, where we may Command, and they care not to come where they must Obey. Our great distance from Italy, always in Position, and since the Reformation in Reli∣gion, hath caused that few or none of that Nation, have so incorporated with the English, as to have found Families therein. Yet have we a sprinkling of Italian Protestants, Castilian a valiant Gentleman, of Berkshire. The Bassanoes excellent Painters and Musicians, in Essex, which came over into England under King Henry the eight, and since in the raign of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Horatio Palavicine, (Receiver of the Popes Revenues) landed in Cambridgeshire, and the Caesars (aliàs Dalmarii) still flourishing in Hartfordshire, in Worshipful Estates, though I never find any of these performing the office of Sheriff. The High-Dutch of the Hans Towns, antiently much conversed in our Land, (known by the name of Easterlings) invited hither by the large priviledges our Kings con∣ferred upon them, so that the Steel-yard proved the Gold-yard unto them. But these Merchants moved round in their own Sphere, matching amongst themselves, without mingling with our Nation. Onely we may presume, that the Easterlings, (corruptly called Stradlings) formerly Sheriffs in Wiltshire, and still famous in Glamorganshire, with the Westphalings, lately Sheriffs of Oxfordshire, were originally of German Extraction. The Low Country-men frighted by Duke D'Alvas Tyranny, flocked hither under King Edward the sixth, fixing themselves in London, Norwich, Canterbury, and Sand∣wich. But these confined themselves to their own Church discipline, and for ought I can find, advanced not forward by eminent Matches into our Nation. Yet I behold the worthy Family of De la Fountain in Lecestershire, as of Belgian Original, and have read how the ancestours of Sir Simon D'us in Suffolk, came hither under King Henry the eight, from the Dunasti or D'us in Gelderland. As for the Spaniards, though their King Philip matched with our Queen Mary, but few of any eminence now extant (if I well remember) derive their Pedigrees from them. This I impute to the shortness of their Reign, and the ensuing
change of Religions. Probable it is, we might have had more Natives of that King∣dome to have setled and flourished in our Nation, had he obtained a marriage with Queen Elizabeth, (of Blessed Memory) which some relate he much endea∣voured. As for Portugal few of that Nation have as yet fixed their habitations, and ad∣vanced Families to any visible height in our Land. But it may please God, here∣after we may have a happy occasion, to invite some of that Nation to reside, and raise Families in England. Mean time the May's (who have been Sheriffs in Sussex) are all whom I can call to mind of the Portugal Race, and they not without a Mixture of Jewish Extraction. Come we now to the second Division of our Gentry, according to the Professions whereby they have been advanced. And here to prevent unjust misprision, be it pre∣mised, that such professions Found most of them gentlemen, being the (though per∣chance Younger) Sons of wealthy Fathers, able to give them liberal education. They were lighted before as to their Gentility, but now set up in a higher Candlestick, by such professions which made a visible and conspicuous accession of Wealth and Dignity, almost to the ecclipsing their former condition. Thus all behold Isis, increased in name and water, after its conjunction with Thame at Dorchester, whilst few take notice of the first Fountain thereof, many miles more Westward in Gloucestershire. The Study of the Common-law, hath advanced most antient extant Families in our Land. It seems they purchased good Titles, made sure Setlements, and entailed Thrift with their Lands, on their posterity. A Sir Edw. Coke. prime person of that profession hath pre∣vented my pains, and given in a List of such principal Families, I say principal, many being omitted by him in so Copious a subject. Miraculous the mortality in Egypt, where there was not a Exod. 12. 30. House wherein there was not one dead. But I hope, it will be al∣lowed Marvellous, that there is not a generous and numerous House in England, wherein there is not one, (though generally no first Born but a Younger Brother,) antiently or at this day Living, Thriving, and Flourishing, by the Study of the Law. Especially if to them (what in Justice ought) be added those who have raised themselves in Courts relating to the Law. The City hath produced more then the Law in number, and some as broad in Wealth, but not so high in Honour, nor long lasting in time, who like Land-floods, soon come, and soon gone, have been dried up before the third Generation. Yet many of these have continued in a certain channel, and carried a Constant stream, as will plainly appear in the sequel of our Worthies. The Church before the Reformation, advanced many Families. For though Bishops might not marry, they preferred their Brothers Sons to great Estates. As the Kemps in Kent, Peckhams in Sussex, Wickham in Hampshire, Meltons in Yorkshire. Since the Reformation, some have raised Families to a Knightly and Worshipful Estate, Hutton, Bilson, Dove, Neil, &c. But for Sheriffs, I take notice of Sandys in Worcester and Cambridgeshire, Westphaling in Herefordshire, Elmar in Suffolk, Rud in Car∣marthenshire, &c. Sure I am, there was a generation of People of the last Age, which thought they would level all Clergy-men, or any descendants from them, with the ground. Yea, had not Gods arme been stretched out in their preservation, they had become a prey to their enemies violence, and what they had designed to them∣selves (and in some manner effected) had ere this been time perfectly com∣pleated. As for the inferiour Clergy, it is well if their narrow maintenance will enable them to leave a livelihood to their little ones. I find but one (See Benefa∣ctours to the Publique in Lincolnshire. Robert Johnson by name) attaining such an estate, that his Grand-son was pricked Sheriff of a County, but de∣clined the place, by pleading himself a Deacon, and by the favour of Arch-bishop Laud. The Study of the Civil-Law, hath preferr'd but few. The most eminent in that faculty, before the Reformation being persons in Orders, prohibited mar∣riage. However since the Reformation there are some Worshipful Families which have been raised by the Study in this Faculty.
Yet have our wars (which perhaps might have been advocated for in Turks and Pagans, who bid defiance to all humanity, but utterly mis-beseeming Christians) been a main cause of the moulting of many Eminent and Worthy persons of this Profession. Nor could it be expected that the Professors of humane laws should have been allowed favour, during our unnatural Dissentions, (the promoters thereof having a constant pique at whatever bore but the resemblance of Order and Civili∣ty) when the true dispensers of Gods Laws, yea the Law of God, yea God himself, was vilified and contemned. The best is, that as Divine Providence hath in his mercy been pleased to restore our Soveraign, so with him we have received both our ancient Laws and Liberties. And now it begins to be fair weather again, as with this so with all other necessary and useful Vocations, which in due time may repair their decayed fortunes. Physick hath promoted many more, and that since the reign of King Henry the eighth. Indeed before his time, I find a Doctor of Physick, Father to Reginald, first and last Lord Bray. But this Faculty hath flourished much the three last fifty years, it being true of Physick, what is said of Sylla, suos divitiis explevit. Sir William Butts Physician to King Henry the eight, Doctor Thomas Wendy and Doctor Hatcher to Queen Elizaheth, raised worshipful and wealthy Families in Norfolk, Cambridge, and Lincoln∣shire, having born the office of Sheriff in their respective Counties. Some have raised themselves by Sea service, and Letters of Mart, especially in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, when we had war with the Spaniard. But such Estates, as flowing so have ebb'd, with the tide, seldome of long continuance. Such Prises have been observed best to prosper, whose Takers had least of private revenge, and most of publick service therein. Amongst these, most remarkable the Baronets Fa∣mily of Drakes in Devonshire, sometimes Sheriffs of that County. Some have raised themselves by their attendance at Court, rewarded by the Kings Favour. Court, where many have carried away more, for bringing the less to it. Here some Younger Brothers have found their lost Birth-right, mending their pace to Wealth, though they started late by their Nativity. But I only generally point at, without touching them, that I may not fore-stall the Reader, whose pains may be pleasant unto him, in his own discovery thereof. Many have advanced themselves by their Valour in forreign Wars, especially in France, as the Knolls, a noble Family, and the aveleys, often Sheriffs in Che∣shire, so that Mars in this sense, may be said to be the father of Plutus, his Steel weapons procuring to his followers the more acceptable mettals of Gold and Silver. But the worst is, where foreign Wars have raised one, our late Civil ones, have ruined ten Families. Some may object, that as they have destroyed, so they have raised many Families (which before in themselves were mean and contemptible) to high Titles, and large Possessions. All I shall return in answer thereunto, is that as most alive saw them rise (per saltum) by unwarrantable means to such a pitch of preferment, so there is but few alive, but may (if not willingly and willfully blind) see them deservedly thrown down with disgrace and contempt, to their former mean and despicable condition. Clothing as it hath given garments to Millions of people, hath conferred Coats of Armes (and Gentility therewith) on many Families in this Land. As on the Springs High-sheriffs of Suffolk. The Country with her two full breasts, Grasing and Tillage, hath raised many Families * Josephus rendreth a reason, as weak in it self, as wide from the truth, why Abells Sa∣crifice was preferred before Cains, viz. Because Abell fairly took, what nature freely tendred in the increase of his Cattle, whilst Cain violently wounded the Earth with his ploughing. But Saint Heb. 11. Paul teacheth use better Doctrine, that faith caused the reception of the one, and unbelief the rejection of the other. Surely, both Callings are equally acceptable to God, who hath so blessed their indeavours, that thereby many have gained estates, inabling them to serve Sheriffs of their County. But I forbear to instance them, least what was the honour of their Ancestours to raise such Families, be counted in this Captious Age to be a dishonour to their Posterity, to be raised by so plain (though honest and necessary) an employment.
Some (the surer to hit the mark of Wealth) have had two strings to their Bow, a com∣plication of prefessions, concurring to their advancement. Thus the Chichlies in Cambridgeshire, are descendants from a Lord Mayor; allied also Collaterally to an Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. On the main, we may observe, how happy a liberal (at least lawful) Vocation, hath proved to Younger Brethren, whereby Ephraim hath out-grown Manasse, the Younger out-stript the Heir of the Family. I knew a School-Boy, not above twelve years old, and utterly ignorant in all Logical terms, who was commanded to English the following Distick, Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus Honores, Cum Genus, & Species, cogitur ire pedes. Onely they favoured the Boy so far, to inform him, that Galenus did signifie the Pro∣fession of Physick, Justinianus of Law, on which ground he thus proceeded, Galenus, the Study of Physick, dat, giveth, Opes Wealth, Justinianus, the Study of Law, dat, giveth, Honores, honour, Cum, When, Genus, high Birth, & Species, and Beauty, [having no other calling (saith the Boy) to maintain them,] Cogitur, is compel'd, ire Pedes, to go on Foot. To prevent such foot-travailing, it is good to be mounted on a gainful Vocation, to carry one out of the mire, on all occasions.
CHAP. XXIV. Some General Exceptions against the Style and Matter of the AUTHOR prevented. Exception. 1. You usurp the Style of Princes, speaking often in the plural; come we now, passe we now, proceed we now, &c. Which is false Grammar, from a Single, ill Ethicks from a private person. Answer▪ First, I appeal to any exercised in reading of Books, whether the same be not used in other Authors. Secondly, We, in such cases includeth the Writer and Reader, it being presumed that the Eye of the one goeth along with the pen of the other. Thirdly, It also compriseth all other Writers, out of whom any thing is transcri∣bed, and their Names quoted in the Margin. Let me add to Gods Glory, my Friends credit, and my own comfort, that our We, is comprehensive of all my worthy Friends, who by their pains or purses, have been contributive to my weak Endevours. Exception 2. The Worthies of England being your Subject, you have mingled many Unworthies among them, rather Notorious then Notable, except in the same sense wherein Barrabas is termed Math. 21. 16. Notable in the Gospel. Answer. Such persons are so few, their Number is not considerable; Secondly, they are so Eminent in their Generations, that their Omission would make a maim in History; Thirdly, how bad soever their Morals, their Naturals and Artificials were transcendent, and the Oracle like Wisdome of wicked Achitophel, found praise from the 2 Sam. 16. 23. Pen of the Holy Spirit; Lastly, the worst of such men have a black line (serving pro Nigro carbone) prefixed to their Name for distinction sake. Exception 3. You might better have omitted the mention of some Modern persons, reputed Reader, this being written in the Mid∣night of our , I could not com∣mand my hand to expunge it. Malignants by the present power, and blasted by these times in their estates. Answer. All Persons unhappy, must not presently be accounted unworthy, especially in distracted Times. Have you not heard of that humerous Waterman on the Thames, who would carry none in his Boat, save such who would go along with the Tide, till by feeding his humour he had almost starved himself, for want of Employment? I should be as peevish as partial, should I admit those only into my Catalogue of Worthyes, who of late years did swim in plenty, seeing many have been great Sufferers, deservedly commendable by the testimony of their Adversaries. Exception 4. You only report the Vertues, but conceal the Faults of many persons within our own memories. Answer. I conceive my self bound so to do, by the Rules of Charity. When an Orator was to praise a person deceased, generally and justly hated for his Viciousnesse, it was suspected that he would for his Fee, force his Conscience by flattery to com∣mend him, whose expectations he thus defeated, This dead person (saith he) must in one respect be spoken well of by all, because God made him; and in another respect, should not be spoken ill of by any because he is dead; & de mortuis nil nisi bonum. How much more, when men have many good Virtues, with some Faults, ought the later to be buryed in their Graves with forgetfulnesse. Exception 5. You make many uncivil and unsatisfactory References of your Reader, to those Books which you have formerly printed, remiting them to be there further Infor∣med, as if when you had invited Guests, you consigned them over (coming to dine with you) to fetch a Dinner at an house they do not know; It being probable that many may read this your Book, who never had your former Works. Answer. Such Refferences are very sparing, only to avoyd Repetition in those Lifes, which I have formerly written at large, as, St. Dunstans, Cardinal Woolsey, Thomas Lord Cromwell, Sir John Cheek, Arch-bishop Whitgift, Mr. Perkins, &c. And I
appeal to all Writers of many Books (of which fault I my self am guilty) whether such Refferences be not usual in the like Cases. I will not add that I have passed my promise (and that is an honest mans bond) to my former Stationer, that I will write nothing for the future, which was in my former Books, so considerable, as may make them Inter-fere one with another to his Prejudice. Exception 7. You often apply the Word create to men, as to create a Cardinal, an Earl, &c. VVhereas consciencious people, allow that word appropriable to God alone, as importing the making of something out of Nothing. Answer. I hope our Common Lawyers will plead for me in this Case, having the phrase so frequent in their Mouths, to create right, to create a Title. Besides, I observe, that such who scruple the useing the Simple Verb, boggle no whit at the compound to re∣create and Recreations. Now seeing to Recreate is to Create twice, I understand not how the useing this word once should be a Sin, whilst it is no Sin in the Repetition or Re∣action thereof. In a word, in words of this Nature, I conceive one may conform himself to the Custome of Common Language. Exception 8. You out of Flattery, conceal the mean Extraction of many (especi∣ally Modern) men, who have attained to great preferment, pointing at the place of their Birth, but suppressing their Parentage. Answer. I conceive my self to have done well in so doing. If enquiry be made into all mens descents, it would be found true what the Poet doth observe. Majorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum Aut Pastor fuit, aut illud quod dicere nolo. The first of all thine Ancestors of Yore, Was but a Shepheard, or, I say no more. Besides, it plainly proveth the Properness of their parts, and Tallnesse of their Indu∣stry, who thereby, and by Gods blessing thereon, reached so high preferment, though disadvantaged by standing on so low ground of their extraction. Exception 9. Hast makes Wast, you have hudled your Book too soon to the Presse, for a Subject of such a Nature. You should have sent to the Gentry of several Counties, to have furnished you with Memorables out of their own Pedegrees, and should have taken a longer time to compose them. —Nonum{que} prematur in annum. Eight years digest what you have rudely hinted, And in the Ninth year let the same be printed. Answer. That Ninth year might happen Eight years after my Death, being sensible of the Impression of Age upon me, and a Stranger to my method, would hardly rally my scattered and posthumed Notes. By the difficulty to get some few, I con∣clude the impossibility to procure all the observeables out of Gentlemens Records, and therefore leave the Task to the Industry of others in their Respective Counties. Exception. 10. Some Instructions have lately been sent you, concerning some persons which appear not in this your VVork. Answer. Lately indeed, though neither many nor considerable, since such Shires were put under the Press. In Holland, VVagons go to, and return from their Stages at set hours, though carrying but one Passenger, and sometimes altogether empty. Such the Condition of the Press it stays for no man, nor will attend the Leisure (not to say Lagging) of any, but proceedeth on with what it hath in present, be it never so little. Exception 11. In your, Protestant Writers, you promiscuously mingle some very zea∣lous for Episcopacy, others as active for Presbytery, these ought to have been sorted se∣verally by themselves, seeing the great distance of Judgement betwixt them. Answer. I hope such conjoyning of them, may happily presage a comfortable Ex∣pedient betwixt them, who differ not in Fundamentals of Religion. 2. I had rather pri∣vately bemoan, then publickly proclaim, the difference betwixt them when alive, charitably believing that being dead; Jam bene conveniunt, & in unâ sede morantur Now they are agreed well, And in bliss together dwell.
However it is not without Precedents in the best Authors, to conjoine those in History, who dissent in opinion; VVitnesse Thuanus when concluding every year, with the Funerals of eminent persons, though fervent in opposite perswasions. Exception 12. There is great disproportion, betwixt your Catalogue of Statesmen, beginning the Lord Treasurers, under King Henry the Seventh; the Lord Chancelours, under King Henry the Eighth; other Statesmen at other Epoches: whereas had you ob∣served the same Aera in all of them, it had added much to the Uniformity of your VVork; And as all start not from the same place, they run not to the same mark, some being continued to this day, some concluded seven years since, such imparity making the List seem lame, like the Legs of a Badger. Answer. I hope, that a more charitable fancy, with as good a judgement, will com∣pare it to the Pipes of an Organ; which though of an uneven length, contribute to the better melody. A reason is rendred, in the respective places, where these gene∣ral Topicks are premised, why such several Catalogues begin and end at such times. And I do believe, that they will prove Satisfactory to such ingenuous Readers, that come with no cavilling premeditation. Exception 13. In your Catalogue of Learned Writers, you have omitted many, as may appear by Pitseus his Appendix Illustrium Angliae Scriptorum. For, of the four hundred by him mentioned, not fifty appear in your List of them. Answer. Pitseus himself shall plead for me, who, in his Preface to his Appendix, ingenuously confesseth, Eos adhuc efficere non valeo dignos, qui inter illustres Scriptores locum obtineant. So that one may call them Obscuros illustres, little being known of the books which they wrote, less of the times when they lived, nothing of the pla∣ces where they were born. However, seeing some persons of eminence have strag∣led amongst them, I have selected such with my best care, and presented them in my Catalogue. Exception 14 Of some men you have little save their Name, Life, and Death, and yet you tearm such eminent persons. Answer. Surely they were so in themselves, and deserve more should be then is left written of them, through the injury of time. All that I will plead in my own De∣fence is this; There is an Officer in the Exchequer, called Clericus nihilorum, or the Clerk of the Nichils, who maketh a Roll of all such sums as are nichill'd by the Sheriff upon their Estreats of the Green wax, when such sums are set on persons, either not found, or not found solvible. This Roll, he delivereth into the Treasurers Remem∣brancers office, to have execution done upon it for the King; and thus the Clerk hath done his duty, leaving it to them to see, if they can make any thing of his Re∣turn. I conceive in like manner I have performed my utmost, in that I return such persons to have nothing more to be said of them, findable by all my endevours. However I consign them over to more able Historians, whose pains I will neither prejudice nor discourage; but if they be pleased to begin where I ended, I wish them more happy success in their discoveries. Exception 15. Your Book is surcharged with Scripture observations, and reflections in Divinity, even when no necessity leadeth you thereunto. Answer. The Reader hath Conitentem, but I will never acknowledge Reum, plead∣ing Custome and Conscience in my just excuse. Custome being habited by my profession therein. The Learned observe of St. Luke, that being a Physician by his function, and describing the great difference between Paul and Barnabas, he made use of an ex∣pression in his own faculty,Acts 15. 39. and there was betwixt them a Dissention [in Greek ] that is, the height and heat of a burning Feaver. So that the Spirit of God guiding his Pen, permitted him to make use of the Language proper to his Vocation. And I presume the same favour will be indulged to me by all ingenuous persons, to have (I will not say a partiality) but an affection to the expressions of, and excursions into my own Calling. Secondly, I plead Conscience, that, seeing some may Cavil this Work to be a Deviation from my function (and I my self perchance sensible of some truth therein) I will watch and catch all opportunity to make a fair Regresse to my profes∣sion.
Exception 15. You lay down certain Rules for the better regulating your work, and directing the Reader, promising to confine your self to the observation thereof, and break them often your self. For instance, you restrain the Topick of Lawyers to Capital Judges and Writers of the Law, yet under that head insert Judge Paston, and others, who were only puny Iudges in their respective Courts; You limit States∣men to Lord Chancelours, Treasurers, English Secretaries of State, &c. and put in Sir Edward Waterhouse▪ who was Secretary but in Ireland. In a word, few heads are pre∣served pure according to their constitution, without the mixture of improper persons amongst them. Why did you break such Rules, when knowing you made them? why did you make such Rules, when minding to break them? And this is an Exception of Exceptions against you. Answer. I never intended to tye my self up so close, without reserving lawful Li∣berty to my self upon just occasion. Indeed we read of St. Ranulph Ce∣. in ejus vita Math. West. Anno 712. Flo∣rent. Wigor. An. 708. Egwin the third, Bishop of Worcester, that he made for himself a pair of Iron Shakels, and locking them close unto his Leggs, cast the Key thereof into the Severn, desiring never to be loosed till he had made satisfaction for his Sins; Returning from Rome, a Fish leaped into the Ship, in whose Belly was found the Key, and so Egwin was miraculously restored to his Li∣berty. Had I in like manner fettered my self to the Topicks propounded, on presumption of so strange a release, none would have pitied my restraint, wilfully contracted on my self. But the best is, I resolved to keep the Key in my own hands, to enlarge my self when I apprehended a just cause thereof. However I have not made use of this Key, to recede from my first Limitations, save where I crave leave of, and render a reason to the Reader; such anomalous persons being men of high merit, under those heads where they are inserted. Exception 16. You have omitted many Memorable persons still surviving, as meri∣ting as any you have inserted. Answer. The return of I. 8. Epig. 69. Martial in a case not much unlike, may much befriend me herein, Miaris Veteres, Vacerra, solos, Nec laudas nisi mortuos poet as, Ignosas petims Vacerra, tanti Non est, ut placeam tibi, perire. Deceased Authors thou admir'st aloe, And only praisest Poets dead and gone. Vacerra pardon me: I will not buy Thy praise so dear, as for the same to dye. All men being like-minded with Martial herein, none surviving will distaste their omission in a work, for reasons afore-alledged (save in some cases) confined to the memories of the departed. Exception 17. Speaking of the Commodities of several Counties, you say the Wool of Hereford shire is best, and yet Gloucester-Shire is best, the VVheat of Hereford-shire is best, and yet Middlesex best, the Lead of Darby-shire best, and yet Somerset-shire best, the Iron of Sussex best, and Stafford-shire best. The same may be observed in your praising of persons, making several men at the same time the best Poets, Divines, Schoolmen, &c. and this must be both falshood and flattery together. Answer. Impute it (I pray) to my peaceable disposition, unwilling to occasion discord betwixt Eminencies, the rather because things of the same kind may severally be the best in sundry Qualities. Some Wool best for Cloath, other for Hats, some Wheat best for yeilding of most, other finest flower, some Lead best for Bullets, other for Sheeting Houses, some Iron best for Ordnance, other for Nails, Keys, and smaler Uensils. Neither is it without precedent in Scripture to Character several men best in the same Profession, both 2 Kng. 18. 5. 2 Kin. 23. 25.  and Josiah being commended to have had none like unto them neither before nor after them. Exception 18. During the later years of King Charles of blessed Memory, you have for the most part omitted the Sheriffs in your Catalogue. Answer. There was then, (as I may say) a Schisme in that Office, betwixt the She∣riffes and Anti Sheriffes. As for the former, made by the Kings Designation, and be∣held as the only Legal Ones, I durst not Name them, as the times then stood, when
I collected that Catalogue, for fear lest thereby I might betray some of them (till that time concealed) to a Sequestration. I therefore preferred to leave a void space in my List, and wish it were the worst Breach or Desolation made by our late Civil Wars. Exception 19. But since the happy turn of the times, you might have inserted them, not only without any Danger, but with great Honour unto them. Answer. When the Danger was removed, the Difficulty did deter me. For in those Tumultuary times; the Royal Sheriffes did not Regularly, (according to ancient Custome) pass their Accounts in the Exchequer at London, so that I was at a losse to recover Certainty herein. Wherefore according to my General Motto, [a Blank is better then a Blot] I left a Vacuity for them. For which Bald Place, the Reader (if so pleased) may provide a Perewake, and with his pen insert such Sheriffes as come to his Cognizance. Exception 20. It was expected, that you should have presented the Maps of all Shires, which would have added much Light and Lustre to your Work, (which now is as an House without Windows, very Dark and uncomfortable) as also that you should have Cut the Arms of all Gentlemen, in Copper (at the least in VVood) which would have been more satisfactory to them, and Ornamental to your Book. Answer.  are , as I have found by dear Experience▪ Besides, when they are done, they are not done, the working them off at the Rowling Presse being as expen∣sive as the Graving them; both which will mount our Book to an unreasonable price; Secondly, it would be disgraceful to Cut those Maps worse, and difficult (if not impos∣sible) to do them better then they are done already. Thirdly, such Gentlemen (not formerly furnished therewith) may procure them at a cheaper rate then I could afford them. Lastly, such new Re-Graving them would be injurious to the Owners of the Old Maps, and I will not bottome my Profit on another mans prejudice. Exception 21. You betray unworthy partiality in omitting and inserting of Persons. For John of Gaunt, though son to a King, and worthy VVarrier, can get no room in your Book, whilst Simon de Gaunt a Bishop of Salisbury (both of them by their Sir∣names equally appearing Forreigners) hath a place found for him therein. It seems a Prelate finds more favour from you then a Prince. Answer. Is there not a cause, and that a Satisfactory one? I prefer not a Prelate before a Prince, but Truth before both, and the methodical regulation of my book, according to the rules premised, without which all will fall to confusion. It is as no∣toriously known, that John of Gaunt was born at Gaunt in Flanders (and so an Alien from our Subject) as plainly it appeareth, that Simon de Gaunt (though his Father was a Fleming) was born in London, Magister Simon de Gaunt (saith Mattew of VVest∣minster) Editus Londini, vir in arte Theologiae peritus. Exception 22. You discover much negligence in dateing of particular persons, in∣stancing the time only when they flourished, without observing when they were born or dye; and this mindeth me of a passage in Tully in Ver∣rem. Orat. Tully, charging Verres the Deputy of Sicily with notorious Lazinesse, quod nunquam solem nec orientem, nec occidentem viderat, that he never saw the sun rising, being in bed after, nor setting being in bed before it: Thus your Pen is altogether a Sluggard, only taking notice of them when shining in the Ver∣tical Height, without either beholding them Rising out of their Cradle, or setting in their Coffin. Answer. Let Tully tell out his Story, and it will befriend and furnish me with a just defence. Sicily (saith he) enjoyeth so clear a Skie, that the Sun is seen there every day in the year rising or setting. Intolerable therefore the Sloth of Verres (noble at no∣thing but oppression) that he never saw the Sun either to rise or set, as Roosted after or before; Were it so that either the rising or setting of eminent persons (their Birth and Death) were (with the Sicilian Sun) ever visible, as always recorded by Authors, I would confess my self justly taxed with unexcusable Lazinesse: But seeing sometimes a Pannick silence herein, not meeting either with the Midwife, or Sexton, who deli∣vered or buryed such people, we conceive our selves have satisfied, if instanceing only the time wherein such persons flourished. Exception 23. It had been more proper and more Satisfactory for you to have placed your Exceptions and Answers, rather at the end then beginning of your Book, when the Reader had wholly perused it, only Premising you will be responsible to such Object∣ions as would be made against your Endevours herein.
Answer. I am of his opinion, who said, Premising, is better then Promising. Sure it is a safer way to prevent a disease then to remove it. Besides I hope, that, clearing these obstructions in the Front of my Book, I shall smooth the Readers way, and invite him the rather to peruse it. However these Answers (whereever placed) are placed aright, if meeting (which I desire) a Candid acceptance thereof. Exception 24. It is easie for one to cast down a Pillar of his own erection, but let another set it up, and then let him trye his Strength thereat. None will pinch them∣selves so as to fetch blood, though others may do it. Your Exceptions are all of your own making to your own advantage. Answer. I have endevoured to propound them without any Partiality. However if my labours meet with greater and more exception from others against them, I hope they shall also meet with the general Courtesie and Candor of Course, which Custome hath in some sort made due to Authors, to forgive their smaller faults, on which com∣fortable confidence I proceed. CHAP. XXV. An Apologie for the unvoluntary Omissions in this BOOK. WHen I first communicated my design herein to a person of The truly Noble Robert Lord Bruce. Honour, he offer∣ed this grand Objection against it, That no Industry could be so circumspect, or Intelligence so comprehensive, but that many Memorable persons would es∣cape his Observation, and then Exception will be taken at such Omissions. This Objection many since have renewed and enforced, alledging that the Omitting of One shall get me more Anger then the inserting of many, gain me good will. To this I Answer first in general. It is the priviledge of Divine Writ alone, to be so perfect that nothing may be taken thence, or added thereunto; The best humane Authors have had their failings in their best performances, far be it from me to pretend my dimme Eyes more quick-sighted then St. Bernards, who notwithstanding non vidit omnia; I trust therefore, that favour will be indulged to my Endevours, for my many Infirmities. To Come to particulars, some seeming Omissions will appear to be none, on bet∣ter Enquiry, being only the leaving of many persons (which belong not to our land) to their Forraign Nativities. If any ask, why have you not written of John a Gaunt? I answer, because he was John of Gaunt, born in that City in Flanders. Thus whilst our Kings possessed large Dominions in France (from King William the Conquerour, to King Henry the Sixth) many eminent English men had their birth beyond the Seas, without the bounds of our Subject. Secondly, I hope real Omissions will neither be found many nor material; I hope I shall not appear like unto him, who undertaking to make a Description of the Planets, quite forgot to make mention of the Sun, I believe most of those who have escaped our Pen, will be found Stars of the Lesser Magnitude. Thirdly, I protest in the presence of God, I have not wittingly, willingly or wil∣fully shut the Dore against any worthy person which offered to enter into my know∣ledge, nor was my prejudice the Porter in this kind, to exclude any (of what perswa∣sion soever out of my Book) who brought merit for their Admission, Besides, I have gon, and rid, and wrote, and sought and search'd with my own and friends Eyes, to make what Discoveries I could therein. Lastly, I stand ready with a pencel in one hand, and a Spunge in the other, to add, alter, insert, expunge, enlarge, and delete, according to better information. And if these my pains shall be found worthy to passe a second Impression, my faults I will confess with shame, and amend with thankfulnesse to such as will contribute clearer Intel∣ligence unto me. These things premised, I do desire in my omissions the pardon especially of two sorts, concerned in my History; first Writers since the Reformation, (having those be∣fore it compleatly delivered unto us) who cannot be exactly listed.
First, for their Numerousnesse, and therefore I may make use of the Latine Distick, wherewith John Pitseus pag. 923. closeth his Book of English Writers. Plura voluminibus jungenda volumina nostris Nec mihi scribendi terminus ullus erit. More Volums to our volums must we bind, And when thats done a Bound we cannot find. Secondly, for the scarcenesse of some Books, which I may term Publici-pri∣vati juris, because though publickly printed, their Copies were few, as intended on∣ly for friends, though it doth not follow that the Writers thereof had the less Merit, because the more Modesty. I crave pardon in the second place for my Omissions, in the List of Benefactors to the Publick, for, if I would, I could not compleat that Catalogue, because no man can make a fit garment for a growing Child, and their Number is daily encreasing. Besides if I could, I would not. For I will never drain (in Print) the spring so lowe, but to leave a Reserve; and some whom I may call Breeders for poste∣rity, who shall passe un-named, in which Respect, I conceive such Benefactors most perfectly reckoned up, when they are Imperfectly reckoned up. All I will add is this, when St. Paul writing to the Phil. 4. 3. Philippians had saluted three, by name, viz. Euodias, Syntyche, and Clement, he passeth the rest over with a Saluta∣tion General, whose Names are in the Book of Life. Thus I have indevoured to give you the most exact Catalogue of Benefactors; but this I am sure, what is lost on Earth by my want of Industry, Instruction, &c. Will be found in Heaven, and their names are there recorded, in that Register which will last to all Eternity. As for my omitting many Rarities and Memorables, in the respective Counties, I plead for my self, that mine being a general Description, it is not to be expected that I should descend to such particularities, which properly belong to those who write the Topography of one County alone. He shewed as little Ingenuity as Ingeniousnesse, who Cavilled at the Map of Grecia for imperfect, because his Fathers house in Athens was not represented therein. And their expectation in effect is as unreasonable, who look for every small observeable in a General work. Know also, that a mean person, may be more knowing within the Limits of his private Lands, then any Antiquary whatso∣ever. I remember a merry challenge at Court, which passed betwixt the Kings Porter, and the Queens Dwarfe, the latter provoking him to fight with him, on condition that he might but choose his own place, and be allowed to come thither first, assigning the great Oven in Hampton Court for that purpose. Thus easily may the lowest domineere over the highest skill, if having the advantage of the ground within his own private concernments. Give me leave to fill up the remaining Vacuity, with, A Corrollary about the Reciprocation of Alumnus. The word Alumnus is effectually directive of us (as much as any) to the Nativi∣ties of Eminent persons. However we may observe both a Passive and Active inter∣pretation thereof. I put Passive first, because one must be bred before he can breed; and Alumnus signifieth both the Nursed child and the Nurse, both him that was edu∣cated, and the Person or Place which gave him his Education. Wherefore Lau∣rentius Valla (though an excellent Grammarian) is much deceived, when not admit∣ting the double sense thereof, as by the ensuing instances will appear. Passive Pro Educato. Active Pro Educatore. Cicero Dolabellae. Mihi vero gloriosum, te juvenem Consulem florere laudibus, quasi Alumnum Disciplinae meae. Plinie lib. 3. de Italia. Terra omnium ter∣rarum Alumna, eadem & parens numine Deum electa. De finibus 122. b. Aristoteles, caeteri{que} Platonis Alumni. Augustinus lib. 70. Civit. Jovem Alumnum cognominaverunt, quod omnia aleret. The Design which we drive on in this observation, and the use which we desire should be made thereof is this, viz. That such who are born in a Place, may be sen∣sible
of their Engagement thereunto; That if God give them ability and opportunity, they may expresse their Thankfulnesse to the same. Quisquis Alumnus erat, gratus Alumnus erit. A Thankful man will feed The Place which did him breed. And the Truth hereof is eminently conspicuous in many Persons, but especially in great Prelates before, and rich Citizens since the Reformation.
BARK-SHIRE hath Wilt-shire on the West, Hamp-shire on the South, Surry on the East, Oxford and Buckingham-shre (parted first with the Isis, then with the flexuous River of Thames) on the North thereof. It may be fancied in a form like a Lute lying along, whose belly is towards the West, whilst the narrow neck or long handle is extended toward the East. From Coleshull to Windsor, it may be allowed in length forty miles. But it a∣mounteth to little more then half so much in the broadest part thereof▪ It partaketh as Plentifull as any County in England of the Common Commodities, Grasse, Grain, Fish, Foul, Wooll, and Wood, &c. and we will particularly instance on one or two of them. Naturall Commodities. Oakes. It was given in instruction to the Spies sent to search the Land of Canaan, that a∣mongst other enquiries, they should take particular notice, Whether there beNum. 13. 20. Wood therein or not? An important question, the rather because at that time the Israelites were in A∣rabia the Desert, where they saw not a tree in many moneths travaile (in so much that it is Recorded for a wonder, that in Elim wereExod. 12. 27. seventy Palm trees) and now knew the worth of wood by wanting it. But Bark-shire affordeth abundance of trees of all kinds, though her Oakes in Wind∣sor-Forest for the present come onely under our commendation. First for their firm∣ness, whereof our Ships are made. The Oake in other Kingdoms may be called cow∣ardly, as riving and splitting round about the passage of the bullet, fearing as it were the force thereof; whilst our English, as heart of Oake indeed, though entred with bul∣let, remaineth firm round about it. Secondly, for the conveniencie of Portage. The wealth of a covetous man (want∣ing an heart to make use thereof) may not unfitly be compared to the Oakes and Firre∣trees, (good and plentifull indeed) in the High-lands in Scotland, but growing on such unaccessible mountains, no Strength or Art can render them usefull, nature in this kind having given them full coffers, but no key to unlock them. Whereas so indulgent is Divine Providence to England, that our four principal Forests lie either on the Sea, or Navigable Rivers; viz. New-Forest on the Sea, Shire∣wood on the Trent, Dean on the Severne, and this Windsor-Forest on the Thames, and I could wish more care were taken for preserving the Timber therein. Bark The very name of this Shire justly intitles us here to handle this Commodity, (though common to other Counties,) because Bark-shire (as some will have it) was so called from a stripped orCamd. Brit. in this Coun∣ty. Bark-bared-Oake, to which signal place the people repair∣ed in time of trouble to make their generall defence. It is essential for making good Leather, though lately one hath propounded a way to tanne it solid and saleable with∣out the help thereof, on condition (and good reason too) he may be allowed rea∣sonable profit for so rare an invention. But many think, that he that waits for dead mens shooes, and he that stays for Leather-shooes made without bark, may both of them go a long time bare-foot. Trouts. This is a pleasant and wholesom Fish, as whose feeding is pure and cleanly, in the swiftest streams, and on the hardest gravell. Good and great of this kind are found in the River of Kennet nigh Hungerford, though not so big as that which Gesner affirmes taken in the Leman-lake, being three cubits in length. They are in their perfection in
the moneth of May, and yearly decline with the Buck. Being come to his full growth, he decays in goodness, not greatness, and thrives in his head till his death. Note by the way, that an hog-back and little head, is a sign that any fish is in season. Other commodities of This, return in other Counties, where they may be mentioned with more conveniencie. The Manufactures. Clothing. It is plyed therein, and because we meet with the best of our Manufactures in the first of our Shires, a word of the Antiquity thereof. 1. Cloth sure is of the same date with Civility in this Land. Indeed the ancient Brittains are reported to go naked, clothed onely with colours painted, custom ma∣king them insensible of cold, with the beggar, who being demanded how he could go naked, returned, all my body is face. But no sooner had the Romans reduced this Island, but cloth though course, such as would hide and heat, was here generally made and used. 2. Fine Cloth (though narrow) for persons of worth at home to wear, and for for∣reign Exportation began in England about the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Third. Before which time our Statutes take no Cognizance of Clothing as in∣considerable, (Wooll being transported in specie) and needing no Rules to regulate it, save what prudence dictated to private Husbands with their own families. 3. Broad Cloth (wherein the wealth of our Nation is folded up) made with broad loomes, two men attending each of them, began here in the Reign of King Henry the eighth. And I have been informed that Jack of Newberry was the first that introduced it into this County. Well may the Poets feign Minerva the Goddess of Wit, and the Foundress of Weaving, so great is the ingenuity thereof. The Buildings. Windsor Castle was a Royal seat ever since the Conquest, but brought to the mo∣dern Beauty, chiefly at the cost of King Edward the Third. It is a Castle for Strength, a Palace for State, and hath in it a Colledge for Learning, a Chappel for Devotion, and an Almes-house (of decayed Gentlemen) for Charity. In this Palace most remarkeable, the Hall for greatness, Winchester-Tower for height, and the Terrace on the North-side for pleasure, where a dull eye may travaile twenty miles in a mo∣ment. Nor boasteth so much, that it consisteth of two great Courts; as that it con∣teined two Great Kings [John of France, and David of Scotland,] Prisoners therein to∣gether, as also that it was the seat of the Honourable Order of the Garter. Many neat Houses and pleasant seats there be in this County, both on the Kennet and Thames, which seem dutifully to attend at distance on Windsor Castle, as Aldermaston, Inglefield, &c. most sweet in their situations. Proverbs. I meet with [but one] in this County, but either so narrow that they stretch not be∣yond the bounds thereof, or else so broad, that all other Counties equally share in the cause and usage of them. Wherefore seeing this is the first English Shire in the Alpha∣betical Order, to avoid a Vacuity, we will here insert such Proverbs, wherein England or English-men are by express mention concerned. But first we will dispatch that sole Pro∣verb of this County, viz. The Vicar of Bray, will be Vicar of Bray still.] Bray, a Village well known in this County, so called from the BIBROCES a kind of ancient Britons Inhabiting thereabouts. The Vivacious Vicar hereof living under King Henry the 8. King Edward the 6. Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, was first a Papist, then a Protestant, then a Papist, then a Protestant again. He had seen some Mar∣tyrs burnt (two miles off) at Windsor, and found this fire too hot for his tender temper. This Vicar being taxed by one for being a Turn-coat, and an uncon∣stant
Changeling, Not so, said he, for I alwaies kept my Principle, which is this, to live and die the Vicar of Bray. Such many now adayes, who though they cannot turn the wind, will turn their Mils, and set them so, that wheresoever it bloweth, their Grist shall certainly be grinded. Proceed we now to the Proverbs General of England: When our Lady falls in our Lords lap] Then let England beware a sad clap] Then let England beware a mishap] aliàs, Then let the Clergy-man look to his cap.] I behold this proverbial prophecy, or this prophetical menace, to be not above six score yeares old, and of Popish extraction since the Reformation. It whispereth more then it dare speak out, and points at more then it dares whisper; and fain would in∣timate to credulous persons, as if the blessed Virgin offended with the English for abolishing her Adoration watcheth an opportunity of Revenge on this Nation. And when her day (being the five and twentieth of March, and first of the Gregorian year) chanceth to fall on the day of Christs Resurrection, then (being as it were fortified by her Sons assistance) some signal judgment is intended to our State, and Church-men especially. Such Coincidence hath hap'ned just fifteen times since the Conquest, as Elias Ashmole Esquire, my worthy friend, and Learned Mathematician, hath exactly computed it; and we will examine by our Chronicles, whether on such yeares any signal fatalities befell England. A. D. Anno Reg. D. L. G. N. Signal Disasters. 1095 W. Rufus 8. G 13 K. Rufus made a fruitless invasion of Wales. 1106 H. first 6. G 5 K. Hen. subdueth Normandy, and D. Robert his Brother. 1117 H. first 17. G 16 He forbiddeth the Popes Legate to enter England. 1190 R. first 2. G 13 K. Richard conquereth Cyprus in his way to Palestine. 1201 K. John 2. G 5 The French invade Normandy. 1212 K. John 13. G 16 K. John resigneth his Kingdom to the Pope. 1285 Ed. first 13. G 13 Nothing remarkable but Peace and Plenty. 1296 Ed. first 24. AG 5 War begun with Scotland, which ended in Victory. 1380 R. second 4. AG 13 The Scots do much harm to us at Peryth Fair. 1459 H. sixth 38. G 16 Lancastrians worsted by the Yorkists in fight. 1543 H. eighth 34. G 5 K. Henry entred Scotland, and burnt Edenburgh. Hitherto this Proverb hath had but intermitting truth at the most, seeing no con∣stancy in sad casualties. But the sting (will some say) is in the taile thereof, and I be∣hold this Proverb born in this following year. 1554 Q. Mary 2. G 16 Q. Mary setteth up Popery and Martyreth Protestants. 1627 Charles 3. G 13 The unprosperous Voyage to the Isle of Rees. 1638 Charles 14. G 5 The first cloud of trouble in Scotland. 1649   G 16 The first complete year of the English Common-wealth (or Tyranny rather) which since, blessed be God, is returned to a Monarchy. The concurrence of these two dayes doth not return till the year 1722. and let the next generation look to the effects thereof. I have done my part in shewing, remit∣ting to the Reader the censuring of these occurrences. Sure I am so sinfull a Nation deserves that every year should be fatal unto it. But it matters not, though our Lady falls in our Lords lap, whilst our Lord sits at his Fathers right hand, if to him we make our addresses by serious repentance. When HEMPE is Spun England is Done. Though this Proverb hath a different Stamp, yet I look on it as Coined by the same Mint- Master with the former, and even of the same Age. It is faced with a Literal, but would be Lined with a Mysticall sense. When Hemp is Spun, that is, when all that necessary Commodity is imployed, that there is no more left for Sailes and Cordage,
England (whose strength consists in Shipping) would be reduced to a Doleful Condition. But know under HEMPE are Couched the Initial Letters of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Mary, Philip and Elizabeth, as if with the Life of the last, the Happiness of England should expire, which time hath confuted. Yet to keep this Proverb in Countenance, it may pretend to some Truth, because then England with the Addition of Scotland lost its name in Great Brittain by Royal Proclamation. When the Black Fleet of NORVVAY is come and gone] ENGLAND Build Houses of Lime and Stone,] For after Wars you shall have none.] There is a Larger Edition hereof, though this be large enough for us, and more then we can well understand. Some make it fulfilled in the eighty eight, when the Spanish∣Fleet was beaten, the Sur-name of whose King, as a LearnedThe Lord Bacon in his Essaies. pag. 215. Author doth observe, was NORVVAY▪ Others conceive it called the Black Fleet of Norway, because it was never black (not dismall to others, but wofull to its own Apprehension,) till beaten by the English, and forced into those Coasts according to the English Historian. They betookJ. Speed in his History of Great Brit. in the year 1588. themselves to Flight leaving Scotland on the West, and bending to∣wards Norway ill advised. (But that necessity urged, and God had Infatuated their Councells) to put their shaken and battered bottoms into those Black and Dangerous Seas. I observe this the rather, because I believe Mr. Speed in this his Writing, was so far from having a Reflexion on, that I Question, whether ever I had heard of this Prophecy. It is true that afterwards England built houses of Lime and Stone, and our most hand∣some and Artificiall Buildings, (though formerly far greater and stronger,) bear their date from the defeating of the Spanish Fleet. As for the Remainder, After Wars you shall have none; We find it false, as to our Civil Wars by our woful Experience. And whether it be true or false, as to Forreign Invasions hereafter, we care not at all, as beholding this prediction either made by the wild fancy of one foolish man; and then, why should this many wise men attend thereunto? or else by him, who alwaies either speaks what is false, or what is true with an intent to deceive; So that we will not be ellated with good, or dejected with bad success of his fore-telling. England is the ringing Island.] Thus it is commonly call'd by Foreigners, as having greater, moe, and more tune∣able Bells than any one County in Christendom, Italy it self not excepted, though Nola be there, and Bells so called thence, because first founded therein. Yea, it seems, our Land is much affected with the love of them, and loth to have them carryed hence into forreign parts, whereof take this eminent instance. When Arthur Bulkley the covetous Bishop ofGodwin in his Bishops of Bangor. Bangor, in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, had sacri∣legiously sold the five fair Bels of his Cathedral, to be transported beyond the Seas, and went down himself to see them shipp'd, they suddenly sunk down with the Vessell in the Haven, and the Bishop fell instantly blind, and so continued to the day of his death. Nought else have I to observe of our English Bells, save that in the memory of man, they were never known so long free from the sad sound of Fu∣nerals of general infection, God make us sensible of, and thankfull for the same. When the sand feeds the clay, England cryesAn old In∣terjection of Lamentation. Well a-day:] But when the clay feeds the sand, it is merry with England.] As Nottingham-shire is divided into twoCamd. Brit. in Nottingh. parts, the sand and the clay, all England falls under the same Dicotomie, yet so as the sand hardly amounteth to the Fifth part there∣of. Now a wet year, which drowneth and chilleth the clay, makes the sandy ground most fruitfull with corn, and the generall Granarie of the Land, which then is dearer in other Counties; and it is harder for one to feed foure, than foure to feed one. It is fur∣thermore observed, that a drought never causeth a dearth in England, because (though parching up the sandy ground) the clay, being the far greatest moiety of the Land, ha∣ving more natural moisture therein, affordeth a competent encrease. —England were but a fling,] Save for the crooked stick and the gray-goose-wing.]
But a fling That is, a slight, light thing, not to be valued, but rather to be cast away, as being but half an Island. It is of no great extent. Philip the Second, King of Spain, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth called our English Ambassadours unto him, (whilst as yet there was Peace betwixt the two Crowns) and taking a small Map of the World, layed his little finger upon England, (wonder not if he desired to finger so good a Countrey,) and then demanded of our English Ambassadour, where England was? In∣deed it is in greatness inconsiderable to the Spanish dominions. But for the crooked stick, &c.] That is, use of Archery. Never were the Arrows of the Parthians more formidable to the Romans, then ours to the French horsemen: Yea re∣markable his Divine Providence to England, that since Arrowes are grown out of use, though the weapons of war be altered, the English mans hand is still in Ure as much as ever before, for no Country affords better materials of Iron, Saltpeter and Lead; or better work-men to make them into Guns, Powder, and Bullets; or better marks-men to make use of them being so made: So that England is now as good with a streight Iron, as ever it was with a crooked stick. England is the Paradise of Women, Hell of Horses, Purgatory of Servants.] For the first, Billa vera Women, whether Maids, Wives, or Widowes, finding here the fairest respect, and kindest usage. Our Common-Law is a more courteous carver for them, than the Civil-Law beyond the seas, allowing Widows the thirds of their Husbands Estates with other Priviledges. The , or highest seats are granted them at all Feasts, and the wall (in crowding, most danger to the weakest, in walking most dignity to the worthiest) resigned unto them. The Indentures of maid-servants are cancelled by their Marriage, though the term be not expired; which to young∣men in the same condition is denyed. In a word, betwixt Law and (Laws-Corrival) Custom, they freely enjoy many favours, and we men, so far from envying them, wish them all happiness therewith. For the next, Englands being an Hell for Horses] Ignoramus, as not sufficiently sa∣tisfied in the evidence alledged. Indeed the Spaniard, who keeps his Gennets rather for shew than use; makes wantons of them. However, if England be faulty herein in their over-violent Riding, Racing, Hunting; it is high time the fault were amended, the rather because, TheProv. 10. 12. good man regardeth the life of his beast. For the last, Pugatory for servants] we are so far from finding the Bill, we cast it forth as full of falshood. We have but two sorts, Apprentices, and Covenant-servants. The Parents of the former give large summes of money to have their Children bound for seven yeares, to learn some Art or Mystery; which argueth their good usage, as to the generality in our Nation. Otherwise it were madness for men to give so much money to buy their Childrens misery. As for our Covenant-servants, they make their own Covenants, and if they be bad, they may thank themselves. Sure I am, their Masters if breaking them and abusing their servants with too little meat or sleep, too much work or correction, (which is true also of Apprentices) are liable by Law to make them reparation. Indeed, I have heard how in the Age of our Fathers, servants were in far greater subjection than now adayes, especially since our Civil Wars hath lately dislocated all relations; so that now servants will do whatsoever their Masters injoyn them; so be it, they think fitting themselves. For my own part, I am neither for the Tyranny of the one, nor Rebellion of the other, but the mutuall duty of both. As for Vernae, Slaves or Vassals, so frequent in Spain and forreign parts, our Land and Lawes (whatever former Tenures have been,) acknowledg not any for the present. To conclude, as Purgatory is a thing feigned in it self; so in this particular it is false in application to England. A famine in England begins first at the horse-manger.] Indeed it seldom begins at the horse-rack; for, though hay may be excessive dear caused by a dry summer, yet winter-grain (never impaired with a drought) is then to be had at reasonable rates. Whereas, if Pease or Oates, our horse-grain, (and the latter mans-grain also generally in the North for poor people) be scarce, it will not be long ere Wheat, Rie, &c. mount in our Markets. Indeed, if any grain be very dear, no grain will be very cheap soon after.
The King of England is the King of Devils.] The German Emperour is termed the King of Kings, having so many free Princes under Him: The King of Spain, King of men, because they willingly yield their Sovereign rational obedience: The King of France, King of Asses, patiently bearing unconscionable burdens: But why the King of England King of Devils? I either cannot, or do not, or will not understand. Sure I am, S. Gregory gave us better language when he said, Angli velut Angeli, for our fair complexions; and it is sad we should be Devils by our black conditions. The English are the Frenchmen's Apes.] This anciently hath been, and still is charg'd on the English, and that with too much truth, for ought I can find to the contrary. —dolebat, Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli. —it is to us a pain This should be said, and not gain-said again. We ape the French chiefly in two particulars. First in their language, (which if Jack could speak, he would be a Gentleman) which some get by travell, others gain at home with Dame Eglentine in In his Pro∣logue of the Prioresse. Chaucer, Entewned in her voice full seemly, And French she spake full feteously After the scole of Stratford at Bowe, For French of Paris was to her unknow. Secondly in their Habits, accounting all our fineness in conformity to the French∣fashion, though following it at greater distance than the field-pease in the Country the rath ripe pease in the garden. Disgracefull in my opinion, that seeing the English victorious Armes had twice charged through the bowels of France, we should learn our fashions from them to whom we taught Obedience. The English Glutton.] Gluttony is a sin anciently charged on this Nation, which we are more willing to ex∣cuse than confess, more willing to confess than amend. Some pretend the coldness of Climate in excuse of our sharp Appetites; and plead the Plenty of the Land (England being in effect all a great Cookes-shop, and no reason any should starve therein,) for our prodigious Feasts. They alledge also that foreigners (even the Spaniards themselves) coming over hither, acquit themselves as good Trencher-men as any; so that it seems want, not temperance makes them so abstemious at home. All amounts not to any just defence, excess being an ill expression of our thank∣fullness to God for his goodness. Nor need we with the Egyptians to serve up at the last course a dead mans head, to mind us of our mortality, seeing a Feast well con∣sidered is but a Charnel house of foul, Fish and Flesh; and those few shell-fish that are not kill'd to our hands are kill'd by our teeth. It is vaine therefore to expect that dead food should alwaies preserve life in the feeders thereupon. Fox, Stow, Speed, all our English Hi∣storians in the first year of K. Ed. 3. Long beards heartless, painted-hoods witless;] Gay-coats graceless, make England thriftless.] Though this hath more of Libell than Proverb therein, and is stark false in it self, yet it will truely acquaint us with the habits of the English in that Age. Long-beards heartless.] Our English did use nutrire comam, both on their Head and beards, concieving it made them more amiable to their friends, and terrible to their foes. Painted-hoods witless.] Their hoods were stained with a kind of colour, in a middle way betwixt dying and painting, (whence Painters-stainers have their name) a My∣stery vehemently suspected to be lost in our Age. Hoods served that Age for Caps. Gay-coats graceless.] Gallantry began then to be fashionable in England, and per∣chance those who here taxed them therewith would have been as gay themselves, had their Land been as rich and able to maintain them. This sing-song was made on the English by the Scots, after they were flush'd with Victory over us in the Reign of King Edward the Second. Never was the Battle at Cannae so fatal to the Romans, as that at Sterling to the Nobility of England; and the Scots puffed up with their Victory, fixed those opprobrious Epithets of heartless, witless, graceless upon us. For the first, we appeal to themselves, whether Englishmen have
not good hearts, and with their long beards, long swords. For the second we appeal to the World, whether the wit of our Nation hath not appeared as considerable as theirs in their Writings and Doings. For the third we appeal to God, the onely Sear∣cher of hearts, and trier of true grace. As for the fourth thriftless, I omit it, because it sinks of it self as a superstructure on a foundred and sailing foundation. All that I will adde is this, that the grave, sage and reduced Scotish-men in this Age, are not bound to take notice of such expressions made by their Ancestors; seeing when Nations are at hostile defiance, they will mutually endeavour each others disgrace. He that England will win,] Must with Ireland first begin.] This Proverb importeth that great designs must be managed gradatim, not only by degrees, but due method; England, it seems, is too great a morsel for a forreign foe to be chopped up at once, and therefore it must orderly be attempted, and Ireland be first assaulted. Some have conceived, but it is but a conceit (all things being in the bosom of Divine Providence,) that, had the Spanish Armado in eighty eight fallen upon Ire∣land, (when the well affected therein were few and ill provided,) they would have gi∣ven a better account of their service to him, who sent them. To rectify which errour, the King of Spain sent afterward John de Aquila into Ireland, but with what success is sufficiently known. And if any foreign Enemy hath a desire to try the truth of this Proverb at his own peril, both England and Ireland lie for Climate in the same posture they were before. In England a bussl of March dust is woth a King randsom.] Not so in Southern sandy Counties, where a dry March is as destructive, as here it is beneficial. How much a Kings randsom amounteth unto, England knows by dear experience, when paying one hundred thousand pounds to redeem Richard the first, which was shared between the German Emperour and Leopoldus Duke of Austria. In∣deed a general good redounds to our Land by a dry March, for if our clay-grounds be over-drowned in that moneth, they recover not their distemper that year. However, this Proverb presumeth seasonable showers in April following, or other∣wise March dust will be turned into May-ashes, to the burning up of grass and grain; so easily can God blast the most probable fruitfulness. England a good Land and a bad People.] This is a French Proverb, and we are glad, that they being so much Admirers and Magnifiers of their own, will allow any goodness to another Country. This maketh the wonder the less, that they have so much endeavoured to get a share in this good Country, by their former frequent invasions thereof; though they could never since the Conquest, peaceably posses a hundred yards thereof for twenty hours, whilst we for a long time have enjoyed large Territories in France. But this Proverb hath a design to raise up the Land to throw down the People, grace∣ing it to disgrace them. We English-men are, or-should be ready humbly to confess our faults before God, and no less truly, then sadly to say of our selves; Ah sinfull Na∣tion! However before men we will not acknowledge a visible badness above other Na∣tions: And the plain truth is, both France and England have need to mend, seeing God hath formerly justly made them by sharpe Wars alternately to whip one ano∣ther. The High-Dutch Pilgrims when they beg, do sing; the French-men whine and cry; the Spaniards curse, swear, and blaspheme; the Irish and English steal.] This is a Spanish Proverb, and I suspect too much truth is suggested therein, the rather because the Spaniards therein spare not themselves, but unpartially report their own black Character. If any ask why the Italians are not here mentioned, seeing surely their Pilgrims have also their peculiar humours; know, that Rome and Loretta the staples of Pilgrimages, being both in Italy, the Italians very seldom (being frugal in their Superstition.) go out of their own Country. Whereas stealing is charged on our English, it is confess'd, that our poor people are observed light-fingered, and therefore our Lawes are so heavy, making low Fe∣lony
highly Penal, to restrain that Vice most, to which our Pezantry is most ad∣dicted. I wish my Country more true Piety, then to take such tedious and useless journeys; but if they will go, I wish them more honesty, then to steal; and the people, by whom they pass, more Charity, than to tempt them to stealth, by denying them necessaries in their journey. Princes. JOHN, Eldest Son of King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at Windsor before his Fathers voyage into Syria. His short life will not bear a long Character, dying in his infancyJ. Speed hist. pag. 563. 1273. (the last year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d.) and was buryed August the 8. in Westminster, under a Marble Tomb, in-laid with his Picture in an Arch over it. Idem p. 564.ELEANOR Eldest Daughter to King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at Windsor Anno Dom. 1266. She was afterwards marryed by a Proxy, (a naked sword being in bed interposed betwixt him and her body,) to Alphons King of Arragon with all Ceremonies of State. And indeed they proved but Ceremonies, the substance soon , the said King Alphons dying Anno Dom. 1292. before the Consummati∣on of the Mrriage. But soon after this Lady found that a Living Earl was better then a Dead King. when Marryed to Henry the 3d. Earl of Berry in France, from whom the Dukes of  and Kings of Sicil are descended. This Lady deceased in the seven and twentieth of her Fathers Reign, Anno Dom. 1298. MARGARET, third Daughter of King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at WindsorSpeeds Chron. p. 564. in the 3d. year of her Fathers Reign, 1275. When fifteen year old she was Marryed at Westminster, July 9th. 1290. to John the second Duke of Brabant, by whom she had Issue, John the third Duke of Brabant, from whom the Dukes of Burgundy are descended. MARY, sixth Daughter of King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at Windsor April the 12. 1279. being but ten years of Age, she was made a Nun at Ames∣bury in Wilt-shire without her own, and (at the first) against herIdem Ibidem. Parents consent, meer∣ly to gratify Queen Eleanor her Grand-mother. Let us pity her, who probably did not pity her self, as not knowing a vaile from a kerchief, not understanding the requisites to, nor her own fitness for that profession, having afterwards time too much to be∣moan, but none to amend her condition. As for the other Children of this King, which he had by Eleanor his Queen, proba∣bly born in this Castle, viz. HENRY. ALPHONSE. BLANCHE. Dying in their infancy immediately after their Baptism, it is enough to name them, and to bestow this joynt Epitapb upon them. leansed at Font we drew untainted Breath, Not yet made bad by Life, made good by Death. The two former were buryed with their Brother John, (of whom before) at West∣minster in the same Tomb, but where Blanche was interred is altogether un∣known. Edward the Third Son to Edward the Second and Queen Isabel, was born at Windsor October 13. 1312. (and proved afterwards a pious and fortunate Prince.) I behold him as meerly passive in the deposing of his Father, practised on in his Minority by his Mother and Mortimer. His French Victories speak both of his Wisdom and Valour; and though the Conquests by King Henry the fifth were thicker, (atchieved in a shorter time) His were broader, (in France and Scotland by Sea and Land,) though both of length alike, as lost by their immediate Successours. He was the first English King which Coined* Gold, which with me amounts toCamd. Rem. under the ti∣tle of Moneyr. a wonder, that before his time all yellow payments in the Land should be
made in foreign Coin. He first stamped the Rose-Nobles, having on the one side, Jesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat. And on the reverse, his own image with sword and shield, sitting in a ship waving on the Sea. Hereupon an English Rhymer,Manuscript in . Cotton. in the Reign of King Henry the sixth, For four things our Noble she weth to me, King, Ship, and Swerd, and Power of the See. He had a numerous and happy issue by Philippa his Queen, after whose death, be∣ing almost seventy years old, he cast his affection on Alice Piece his Paramour, much to his disgrace; it being true what Epictetus returned to Adrian the Emperour, asking of him what Love was, In puero, pudor; in virgine, rubor; in soemina, furor; in juvene, ardor; in sene, risus. In a boy, bashfulness; in a maid, blushing; in a woman, fury; in a young man, fire; in an old man, folly. However, take this King altogether at home, abroad, at Church, in State, and he had few equals, none superiours. He dyed Anno Dom. 1378. Speeds hist. pag. 602.WILLIAM, sixth Son of King Edward the third and Queen Philippa, was born at Windsor. Indeed his second Son born at Hatfield was of the same name, who dyed in his infancy, and his Mother had a fond affection for another William, because her Fa∣thers, Brothers, and a Conquering Name, till his short Life also, dying in his cradle, weaned her from renewing her desire. As for King Edwards female Children, Isabel, Joan, Blanch, Mary and Margaret, there is much probability of their French, and no assurance of their English Nativity. HENRY the sixth, Son to Henry the fifth, was born in Windsor-Castle, against the will of his Father, by the wilfulness of his Mother. He was fitter for a Coul then a Crown; of so easie a nature, that he might well have exchanged a pound of Patience for an ounce of Valour: Being so innocent to others, that he was hurtful to himself. He was both over-subjected and over-wived; having marryed Margaret the Daughter of Reinier King of Jerusalem, Sicily and Arragon, a Prince onely Puissant in Titles, otherwise little able to assist his Son in Law. Through home-bred Dissentions he not onely lost the foreign acquisitions of his Father in France, but also his own inheritance in Eng∣land to the House of York. His Death, or Murder rather, happened 1471. This Henry was twice Crowned, twice Deposed, and twice Buryed, (first at Chertsy, then at Windsor,) and once half Sainted. Our Henry the seventh cheapned the price of his Canonization, (one may see for his love, and buy for his money in the Court of Rome) but would not come up to the summe demanded. However this Henry was a Saint (though not with the Pope) with the People, repairing to this Monument from the farthest part of the Land, and fancying that they received much benefit thereby. He was the last Prince whom I find expresly born at Windsor. It seems that afterwards our English Queens grew out of conceit with that place, as unfortunate for Royal Na∣tivities. Saints. MARGARET ALICE RICH were born at AbbingtonThe English Martyrology in the 15. and 24. of Aug. in this County, and were successively Prioresses of Catesby in Northampton-shire. They were Sisters to St. Edmund, whose life ensueth, and are placed before him by the Courtesie of England, which alloweth the weaker Sex the upper hand. So great the Reputation of their Holiness, that The former Dying Anno 1257. The latter 1270. Both were honouredMah. Paris in hist. Majori. ad an. D. 1217. and deincep. for Saints, and many Miracles reported by crafty, were be∣lieved by Credulous people, done at their shrine by their Reliques. St. EDMUND Son to Edward Rich and Mabel his Wife, was born atAntiq. Brit. pag. 165. Abbington in Bark-shire, and bred in Oxford. Some will have Edmunds-Hall in that University built by his means, but others (more probably) nam'd in his Memory. He became Canon of Salisbury, and from thence, by the joynt-consent of Pope, King and Monkes, (three cords seldom twisted in the sa ne Cable) advanc'd Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, where he sate almost ten years till he willingly deserted it; partly, because offended at the power of the Popes Legate, making him no more then a meer Cypher, signifying
onely in conjunction (when concurring with his pleasure;) partly, because vexed at his polling and peeling of the English people, so grievous, he could not endure, so ge∣neral, he could not avoid to behold it. For these reasons he left the Land, went (or, shall I say, fled?) into France, where he sighed out the remainder of his Life, most at Pontiniack, but some at Soyssons where he dyed Anno 1240. Pope Innocent the fourth Canonized him six years after his death, whereat many much wondred, that he should so much honour one, a professed foe to Papal Extor∣tions.Veritus, ne mins isius  Roma∣nam sedem ob tot acceptas in∣jurias vindica∣rent. Some conceived he did it se defendendo, and for a ne noceat, that he might not be tormented with his Ghost. But what hurt were it, if all the Enemies of his Holiness were Sainted, on condition they took death in their way thereunto? Sure it is that Lewis King of France, a year after translated his Corps, and, three years after that, be∣stowed a most sumptuous Shrine of Gold, Silver, and Chrystal upon it; and the 16. of November is the Festival appointed for his Memorial.M. Parker Antiq. Brit. pag. 173. Martyrs. It appeareth by theFox, Acts and Mon. pag. 817. confession of Thomas Man (Martyred in the beginning of King Henry the eighth) that there was at Newberry in this County a glorious and sweet So∣ciety of faithful Favourers, who had continued the space of fifteen years together, till at last by a certain lewd person, whom they trusted and made of their Council, they were betrayed, and then many of them to the number of six or seven score were abjured, and three or four of them burnt. Now although we knew not how to call these Martyrs who so suffered, their Names no doubt are written in the Book of Life. We see how the day of the Gospel dawned as soon in this County, as in any place in England, surely Seniority in this kind ought to be respected, which made Paul a pusney in piety toRom. 16. 7. Andronicus and Iunia his kinsmen, to enter this caveat for their Spiri∣tual precedency who were in Christ before me.] On which account, let other places give the honour to the Town of Newberry, because it started the first (and I hope not tire for the earliness thereof) in the race of the Reformed Religion. Yea Doctor William Twis, the painful Preacher in that Parish, was wont to use this as a motive to his flock, to quicken their pace, and strengthen their perseverance in piety, because that Town ap∣pears the first fruits of the Gospel in England. And Windsor the next in the same Coun∣ty had the honour of Martyrs ashes therein, as by the ensuing list will appear. There was in Windsor a company of right godly persons, who comfortably enjoyed themselves, untill their enemies designed their extirpation, though it cost them much to accomplish it, one of them confessing that for his share he expended an hundred marks, besides the killing of three Geldings. These suspecting that the Judges Itine∣rant in their circuit would be too favourable unto them, procured a special Session, got four arraigned and condemned by the Commissioners, whereof the three follow∣ing were put to death, on the Statute of the six Articles. 1.Fox, Acts and Mon. pag. 1211. &c. Anthony Persons, a Priest and profitable Preacher, so that the great Clerks of Windsor thought their idleness upbraided by his industry. Being fastned to the stake he laid a good deal of straw on the top of his head, saying, this is Gods hat, I am now arm'd like a souldier of Christ. 2. Robert Testwood, a singing-man in the Quire of Windsor. There hapned a contest betwixt him and another of that Society, singing an Anthem together to the Virgin Mary. Robert Philips on the one side of the Quire. Robert Testwood on the other side of the Quire. Oh Redemtrix & Salvatrix! Non Redemtrix, nec Salvatrix. I know not which sung the deepest Base, or got the better for the present. Sure I am, that since by Gods goodness the Nons have drowned the Ohs in England. Test∣wood was also accused for disswading people from Pilgrimages, and for striking off the nose of the image of our Lady. 3. Henry Fillmer Church-Warden of Windsor, who had Articled against their su∣perstitious Vicar for heretical Doctrine. These three were burnt together at Windsor, Anno 1544. and when account was
given to their patient death to King Henry the eighth sitting on horse-back, the King turning his horses head said, Alas poor innocents! A better speech from a private per∣son then a Prince, bound by his place not only to pity, but protect oppressed inno∣cence. However by this occasion other persecuted people were pardoned and preser∣ved, of whomUnder the en∣suing Title of Confessors. hereafter. This storm of persecution thus happily blown over, Bark-shire enjoyed peace and tranquillity for full twelve years together, viz. from the year of our Lord 1544. till 1556. When Dr. Jeffrey the cruel Chancellour of Sarisbury, renewed the troubles at Newberry and caused the death of JULINS PALMER. See his Character (being born in Coventry) in Warwick∣shire. JOHN GWIN. THOMAS ASKINE. These three July 16. 1556. were burnt in a place nigh Newberry called theFox, Acts and Mon. pag. 1934. Sand∣pits, enduring the pain of the fire with such incredible constancy, that it confounded their fos, and confirmed their friends in the Truth. Confessors. JOHN MARBECK was an Organist in the Quire of Windsor and very skilful there∣in, a man of Admirable Industry and Ingenuity, who, not perfectly understanding the Latin Tongue, did out of the Latin with the help of the English Bible make an En∣glish Concordance, which Bishop Gardiner himself could not but commend as a piece of singular Industry, Professing that there were no fewer then twelve Learned men to make the first Latin Concordance; And King Henry the eighth hearing thereof, said that he was better imployed, then those Priests which accused him. Let therefore our Mo∣dern Concordances of Cotton, Newman, Bernard, &c. as Children and Grand-Children do their duty to Marbecks Concordance, as their Parent at first endeavour'd in our Language. This Marbeck was a very zealous Protestant, and of so sweet and amiable Nature, that all good men did love, and few bad men did hate him. Yet was he con∣demned Anno 1544. on the Statute of the 6. Articles to be burnt at Windsor, had not his pardon been procured, divers assigning divers causes thereof; 1. That Bishop Gardiner bare him a speciall affection for his skill in the My∣stery of Musick. 2. That such who condemned him, procured his pardon out of Remorse of Conscience, because so slender the evidence against him, it being que∣stionable whether his Concordance was made after the Statute of the 6. Ar∣ticles or before it, and, if before, he was freed by the Kings General pardon. 3. That it was done out of design to reserve him for a discovery of the rest of his party; if so, their plot failed them. For being as true as Steel, (whereof his fetters were made, which he ware in Prison for a good time) he could not be frighted or flattered to make any detection. Here a mistake was committed by Mr. Fox in his first Edition, whereon the Pa∣piss much insult, making this Marbeck burnt at Windsor for his Religion, with An∣thony Persons, Robert Testwood, and Henry Fillmer. No doubt Mr. Fox rejoyced at his own mistake, thus far forth; both for Marbecks sake who escaped with his Life, and his Enemies who thereby drew the less guilt of bloud on their own Consciences. But hear what he pleads for his mistake. 1. Marbeck was dead in Law, as condemned whereon his errour was probably grounded. 2. He confessing that one of the four condemned was pardoned his Life, mis∣naming him  instead of Marbeck. 3. Let Papists first purge their Lying Legend from manifest and Intentio∣nall untruths, before they censure others for casuall slips and un-meant Mi∣stakes. 4. Recognizing his Book in the next Edition, he with blushing amended his
errour. And is not this Penance enough according to the principals of his accusers Confession, Contrition, and Satisfaction? All this will not content some morose Cavillers whom I have heard jeeringly say, that many who were burnt in Fox in the Reign of Queen Mary, drank Sack in the days of Queen Elizabeth. But enough is said to any ingenious person; And it is impossible for any Author of a Voluminous Book consisting of several persons and circumstances (Rea∣der in pleading for Master Fox, I plead for my self) to have such Ubiquitary intelli∣gence, as to apply the same infallibly to every particular. When this Marbeck dyed is to me unknown, he was alive at the second English Edition of the Book of Martyrs 1583. thirty and nine years after the time of his Condemnation. ROBERT BENET was a Lawyer living in Windsor, and a zealous Professor of the true Religion. He drank as deep as any of the Cup of Affliction, and no doubt had been condemned with Testwood, Persons, and the rest; Had he not at the same time been sick of theFox, Acts and Mon. pag. 1220. plague-sore in the Prison of the Bishop of London, which proved the means of his preservation; Thus it is better to fall into the hands of God, than into the hands of men. And thus as out of the devourer came food, out of the Destroyer came life, yea the Plague-sore proved a Cordial unto him. For by the time that he was recovered thereof, a Pardon was freely granted to him; as also to Sir Thomas Cardine, Sir Phi∣lip Hobby, (both of the Kings Privy-chamber) with their Ladies and many more design∣ed to death by crafty Bishop Gardner, had not His Majesties mercy thus miraculously interposed. Cardinalls. I have read of many, who would have been Cardinals, but might not. This County af∣forded one, who might have been one, but would not, viz. WILLIAM LAUD, the place being no less freely profered to, then disdainfully refused by, him with words to this effect: That the Church of Rome must be much mended, before he would accept any such Dignity. An expression which in my mind amounted to the Emphaticall Peri∣phrasis of NEVER. But we shall meet with him hereafter under a more proper Topick. Prelats. WILLIAM of READING aMtth. West. in flor. Hist. Learned Benedictine, imployed by King H. the Second in many Embassies, and by him preferred Arch-Bishop of Bourdeaux, where he dyed in the Reign of King Richard the first. JOHN DE BRADFIELD, sive de lato Campo. Finding fifteen Villages of the Name, IAMP fixt his Nativity at Bradfield in Berks, as (in my measuring) the nearest to Rochester, where he was Chanter and BishopBishop God∣win in his Bi∣shops of Ro∣chester. 1274. If mistaken, the matter is not much seeing his Sir-name is controverted and otherwise written, John de HOE. However being Char∣ractred, Vir conversationis honestae, decenter literatus & in omnibus morigeratus. I was desi∣rous to crowd him into our Book where I might with most probability. RICHARD BEAUCHAMP was Brother saith Bishop Godwin to Walter Beauchamp (mistaken for William, as may appear byIn his Brit. in this Coun∣ty. Mr. Camden) Baron of St. Amand, whose chief habitation was at Wydehay in this County, he was bred Doctor in the Laws, and became Bishop first of Hereford, then of Salisbury. He was Chancellour of the Garter, which Office descended to his Successors, Windsor-Castle the seat of that Order being in the Dioces of Salisbury. He built a most beautifull Chappel (on the South-side of St. Maries Chappel) in his own Cathedral, wherein he lyeth buryed. His death hap∣ned Anno Dom. 1482. Since the Reformation. THOMAS GODWIN was born atFrancis God∣win his Son in his Catalogue of Bishops of Bath & Wells. Oakingham in this County, and first bred in the Free School therein. Hence was he sent to Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, maintained there for a time by the bounty of Doctor Layton Dean of York, till at last he was cho∣sen Fellow of the Colledge. This he exchanged on some terms for the School-Masters place of Barkley in Gloucester-shire, where he also Studied Physick, which afterwards pro∣ved beneficial unto him; when forbidden to teach School in the Reign of Queen Mary.
Yea Bonner threatned him with fire and faggot, which caused him often to Obscure him∣self and Remove his Habitation. He was an Eloquent Preacher, Tall and Comely in Per∣son; qualities which much Indeared him to Q. Elizabeth, who loved good parts well, but better, when in a goodly Person. For 18. years together he never failed to be one of the Select Chaplains, which Preached in the Lent before her Majesty. He was first Dean of Christ-church in Oxford, then Dean of Canterbury, and at last Bishop of Bath and Wells. Being infirm with Age, and deseased with the Gout, he was necessitated for a Nurse to marry a second wife, a Matron of years proportionable to himself. But this was by his Court-Enemies (which no Bishop wanted in that Age) represented to the Queen to his great Disgrace. Yea they traduced him to have married a Girl of twenty years of age, until the good Earl of BedfordSir John Ha∣rington in his aditional sup∣ply to Bp. God∣win. Pag. 115. casually present at such discourse; Madam, (said he to her Majesty) I know not how much the Woman is above twenty, but I know a Son of hers is but little under forty. Being afflicted with a Quartern feaver, he was advised by his Physicians to retire into this County, to Oakingham the place of his Birth, seeing in such Cases Native Ayr may prove Cordial to Patients, as Mothers milk to (and old men are twice) children. Here he dyed (breathing his first and last in the same Place,) November the 19. 1590. And lyeth buried under a Monument in the South-side of the Chan∣cell. THOMAS RAMME was born atSir Jams Warede Praesu∣libus Lageniae Pag. 67. Windsor in this County, and admitted in Kings Colledge in Cambridge Anno Dom. 1588. whence he was made Chaplain first to Robert Earl of Essex, then to Charles Lord Mountjoy, both Lord Lieutenants in Ireland, After many mediate Preferments, he was made Bishop of Fernos and Laghlin in that King∣dom, both which he Peaceably injoyed, Anno 1628. WILLIAM LAWD was born at Reading in this County, of honest Parentage, bred in Saint Johns Colledge in Oxford, whereof he became Pesident; Successively Bi∣shop of Saint Davids, Bath and Wells, London, and at last Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury. One of low Stature, but high Parts; Piercing eyes, Chearfull countenance, wherein Gravity and Pleasantness, were well compounded: Admirable in his Na∣turalls, Unblameable in his Morals, being very strict in his Conversation. Of him I have written in my Ecclesiastical History, though I confess it was some∣what too soon for one with safety and truth, to treat of such a Subject. In∣deed I could instance in some kind of course Venison, not fit for food when first killed, and therefore cunning Cooks bury it for some hours in the Earth, till the rankness thereof being mortified thereby, it makes most palatable meat. So the me∣mory of some Persons newly deceased are neither fit for a Writers or Readers repast, un∣till some competent time after their Interment. However I am Confident that unpartial Posterity, on a serious review of all Passages, will allow his Name to be reposed amongst the HEROES of our Nation, seeing such as behold his expence on St. Pauls as but a Cy∣pher, will assign his other Benefactions a very valuable Signification, viz. his erecting and endowing an Almes-house in Reading, his increasing of Oxford Library with Books, and St. Johns Colledg with beautifull buildings. He was beheaded Jan. 10. 1644. States-men. Sir JOHN MASON Knight was born at Abbington (where he is remembred among the Benefactors to the beautifull Almes-house therein,) bred in All souls in Oxford. King Hènry the eighth coming thither was so highly pleased with an oration Mr. Mason made unto Him, that he instantly gave order for his education beyond the seas, as confi∣dent he would prove an able Minister of State. This was the politick discipline of those days to select the pregnancies of either Universities, and breed them in forraign parts for publique employments. He was Privy-Councellour to King Henry the eighth, and K. Edward the sixth. OneSir Jo. Hay ward in his Edw. the 6. pag. 105. maketh him His Secretary of State, which some sus∣pect too high;Stows Annals Edw. 6. pag. 612. another, but Master of the Requests, which I believe as much beneath him. He continued Councellor to Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, to whom he was Trea∣surer of the Household, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.
Mr. Camden gives him this true character, Vir fuit gravis, atque eruditus: which I like much better then that which followeth, so far as I can understand it, Cam. Eliz. Anno 1566. sub fin m. EcclesiasticorumThese words are absurdly rendred by A∣  Darcy (who under∣stood not L∣tin, and trans∣lated Camden aut of the Fnch Trans∣ation) He was diligent and careful to th preservation of Benefits. Beneficiorum incubator maximus. Surely he could be no Canonical Incumbent in any Benefice, not being in Orders, which leaveth him under the suspicion, of being a great ingrosser of long leases in Church-livings, which then used to be let for many years, a pityful pension being re∣served for the poor Curate. Thought possibly in his younger time, he might have Tonsuram primam, or be a Deacon, (which improved by his great power) might qualify at least countenance him for the holding of his spiritual promotions. He died 1566. and lieth buried in the Quire of St. Pauls (over against William Herbert first Earl of Pembroke,) and I remember this Distick of his Long Epitaph: Tempore quinque suo regnantes ordine vidit, Horum a Consiliis quatuor ille fuit. He saw five Princes, which the scepter bore, Of them, was Privy-Councellour to Four. It appears by His Epitaph, that he left no Child of his own Body, but adopted his Ne∣phew to be his Son an Heir. Sir THOMAS SMITH Knight was born at Abbington, bred in the University of Ox∣ford, God and himself raised him to the eminency he attained unto, unbefriended with any extraction. He may seem to have had an ingenuous emulation of Sir Tho. Smith se∣nior, Secretary of State, whom he imitated in many good qualities, and had no doubt equalled him in preferment, if not prevented by death. He attained only to be Ma∣ster of the Requests, and Secretary to K. James, for His Latine Letters, higher places expecting him, when a period was put to his life Novemb. 28. 1609. He lieth buried in the Church of Fullkam in Middlesex, under a monument erected by his Lady, Frances daughter to William Lord Chandos, and since Countess of Exeter. Souldiers. HENRY UMPTON Knight, was born (as by all Indications in the Heralds Office doth appear) at Wadley in this County. He was Son to Sir Edward Umpton, by Anne (the Relick of John Dudley Earl of Warwick, and) the Eldest Daughter of Edward Sey∣mour Duke of Somerset. He was imployed by Queen Elizabeth Embassadour into France, where he so behaved himself right stoutly in her behalf, as may appear by this particular. In the Moneth of March Anno 1592. being sensible of some injury offered by the Duke of Gwise to the honour of the Queen of England, he sent him this ensuingExemplifyed in Mills his Catalogue of honour in the Edition of Royal paper in the List of the arls of War∣wick. challenge. For as much as lately in the Lodging of my Lord Du Mayne and in publick elsewhere, Impudently, Indiscreetly, and over boldly you spoke badly of my Soveraign, whose sacred Person, here in this County I represent. To maintain both by word and weapon her honour, (which never was called in question among people of Honesty and Vertue) I say you have wickedly lyed in speaking so basely of my Soveraign, and you shall do nothing else but lie, whensoever you shall dare to taxe her honour. Moreover that her sacred Person (being one of the most complete and Vertuous Princess that lives in this world) ought not to be evil spo∣ken of by the Tongue of such a perfidious Traytor to her Law and Country, as you are. And hereupon I do defy you, and challenge your Person to mine with such manner of Arms as you shall like or choose, be it either on horse back or on foot. Nor would I have you to think any inequality of Person between us, I being issued of as great a Race and Noble house (every way) as your self. So assigning me an indifferent place, I will there maintain my words, and the Lie which I gave you, and which you should not endure if you have any Courage at all in you. If you consent not, meet me hereupon, I will hold you, and cause you to be generally held for the arrantest coward, and most slanderous slave that lives in all France. I expect your Answer. I find not what answer was returned. This Sir Henry dying in the French Kings Camp before Lofear had hisFnn▪ by Lee Clrentiaux. markt fol. 45. Corps brought over to London, and carryed in a Coach to Wadley, thence to Farington, where he was buryed in the Church on Tuesday the 8. of July 1596. He had allowed him a Barons Hearse, because dying Ambassadour Leigier.
Writers. HUGH of READING quitted his expectances of a fair Estate, and sequestring him∣selfS. N. from worldly delights, embraced a Monastical life, till at last he became Abbot of Reading. Such, who suspect his sufficiency, will soon be satisfied when they read the high Commendation which Petrus Bloesensis Arch Deacon of Bath, (one of the greatest Scholars of that Age) bestoweth upon him. He wrote a Book (of no Trival Questions) fetcht out of the Scripture it self, the reason why I. BaleDe Scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. num. 20. (generally a back-friend to Monks) hath so good a Character for him, who flourished Anno Dom. 1180. ROGER of WINDSORI vehement∣ly suspect this man, meerly made by the mistake of Pitseus [Anno 1235.] for Rger Wendo∣ver. was undoubtedly born in this Town, otherwise he would have been called Roger of St. Albans, being Chanter in that Convent. Now in that Age Monks were reputed men of best Learning and most leasure. The cause why our English Kings alwaies choose one of their order (who passed by the name of Histo∣ricus Regius, the Kings Historian) to write the remarkable passages of his time. Our Roger was by King Henry the third selected for that service, and performed it to is own great credit and the contentment of others. He flourished in the year of our Lord 1235. ROBERT RICH Son to Edward and Mabell his Wife, Brother of St. Edmund Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, was born at Abbington in this County; he followed his Brother at very great distance both in Parts and Learning, (though accompanying him in his Travells beyond the Seas) and wrote a Book of the Life, Death and Mi∣racles of his Brother, being much to blame, if he did not do all right to so near a Rela∣tion. He dyed about the year of our Lord 1250. RICHARD of WALLINGFORD was born in that Market Town, pleasantly sea∣ted on the River Thames, wherein his Father was a Black-Smith. He went afterwards to Oxford, and was bred in Merton Coll▪ then a Monke, and at last Abbot of St. Albans, where he became a most expert Mathematician, especially for the Mechanical part thereof, and (retaining somewhat of his Fathers Trade) was Dexterous at making pritty engines, and Instruments. His Master-piece was a most Artificial Clock, made (saith myBle de Scrip. Brit. Cet. 5. num. 19. Author) Magno la∣bore, majore sumptu, Arte verò maxima, with much Pain, more Cost, and most Art. It remain'd in that Monastry in the time of John Bale (whom by his words I collect an Eye-witness thereof) affirming that Europe had not the Like; So that it seemed as good as the famous Clock at Strasburg in Germany, and in this Respect better, because an∣cienter; It was a Calendar as well as a Clock, Shewing the fixed Stars and Planets, The Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, Minutes of the Hours, and what not? I have heard that when Monopolies began to grow Common in the Court of France, the Kings Jester moved to have this Monopoly for himself, viz. a Cardescue of every one who carried a Watch about him, and cared not how he employed his Time. Sure∣ly the Monks of Saint Albans were Concerned to be carefull how they spent their hours, seeing no Convent in England had the like Curiosity; This their Clock gathering up the least Crum of Time, presenting the Minutary fractions thereof; On which ac∣count, I conceive Richard the maker thereof, well prepared for the time of his dissolu∣tion, when he died of the Leprosie, Anno Dom. 1326. Since the Reformation. HENRY BULLOCK was most probbly born in this County, where his ancientAMP. name appears in a worshipful estate. He was bred Fellow and Doctor of Divinity in Queens Colledge in Cambridge. A good Linguist, and general Scholar, familiar with Erasmus, (an Evidence of his Learning, it being as hard to halt before acriple, as to de∣ceive his Judgement,) calling him Bovillum in his Epistles unto him. By the way our English Writers, when rendring a Sirname in Latine which hath an Appellative signification, content them to retein the Body of the Name, and only dis∣guise the termination, as Cross, Peacok, Crossus, Peacocus, &c. But the Germans in such a Case doe use to mould the meaning of the name, either into Latine, as I. Fierce they translate I. Ferus, Bullock, Bovillus, or into Greek, as Swarts they render Me∣lanthon, Reeck-lin Capnio.
Tis confessed our BullockBae de Scrip . . 9. Num. 7. compelled by Cardinal Wolsy wrote against Luther, but otherwise his affections were biased to the Protestant Party. The Date of his death is unknown. WILLIAM TWIS was born at Spene in this County, which was an ancient Roman Camdns Brit. in Bark-shire. City mentioned by Antonine in his Itinerary by the name of Spinae. This mindeth me of a passage inLib. 2. . . Clemens Alexandrinus, speaking of sanctified afflictions, Nos qui∣dem è Spinis uvas colligimus; and here in another sense Gods Church gathered grapes, this Good man, out of this thornie place. Hence he was sent by Winchester-School to New-Colledge in Oxford, and there became a general Scholar. His plaine preaching was good, solid disputing better, pious living best of all. He afterwards became Preacher in the place of his nativity (Spinham lands is part of Newberry,) and though generally our Saviours observation is verified, A prophet is not without honour save in his own coun∣try, (chiefly because Minutiae omnes pueritiae ejus ibi sunt cognitae) yet here he met with deserved respect. Here he laid a good foundation, and the more the pity, if since some of his fancifull auditors have built hay and stubble thereupon. And no wonder if this good Doctor toward his death was slighted by Sectaries, it being usuall for New-lights to neglect those who have born the heat of the day. His Latin Works give great evi∣dence of his abilities in controversial matters. He was chosen Prolocutor in the late Assembly of Divines, wherein his moderation was very much commended, and dying in Holborn he was buried at Westminster, Anno Dom. 164. WILLIAM LYFORD was born at Peysmer in this County, and bred in Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelour of Divinity 1631. He was also Fel∣low of that foundation, on the same token that his Conscience Post factum was much troubled, about his resigning his place for money to his Successor, but (as his friends have informed me) he before his death took order for the restitution thereof. The modesty of his mind was legible in the comeliness of his countenance, and the meekness of his Spirit visible in his courteous Carriage: He was afterwards fixed at  in Dorset-shire, where his large Vineyard required such an able and painfull Vine-dresser; Here he layed a good foundation (before the beginning of our Civil Wars) with his learned Preaching and Catechising; and indeed, though Sermons give most Sail to mens souls, Catechising layeth the best Ballast in them, keeping them stedy from being carrid away with every wind of Doctrine. Yet he drank a deep Draught of the bitter Cup, with the rest of his brethren, and had his share of Obloquie from such factious Persons as could not abide the wholsome words of sound Doctrine. But their Candle (without their Repentance) shall be put out in darkness, whilst his memory shall shine in his Learned works he hath left behind him. He died about the year of our Lord, 1652. Romish Exile Witers. THOMAS HYDE was born atRegister of New . Anno 1543. Newberry in this County, and bred a Master of Art in New Colledge in Oxford; he was afterwards Canon of Winchester, and chief Master of the school therein: He, with ohn martil the second Master, about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, left both their School and their Land, living long beyond the Seas; This Hyde is charactred byPits. d Scrip. Brit. Anno 1597. one of his own perswasion, To be a man of up∣right life, of great gravity and severity: He wrote a book of Consolation to his fellow∣exile. And died Anno Dom. 1597. Bnefactors to th Publick. ALFREDE the fourth Son to K. Athelwolph was born atCamb. Brit. in Bark-shire. Wantage a market-town in this County. An excellent scholar, though he was pastMr.  in his notes on , pag. 192. twelve years of age before he knew one letter in the Book; and did not he run fast who starting so late came soon to the mark? He was a Curious Poet, excellent Musician, a valiant and successeful Souldier, who fought seven Battles against the Danes in one year, and at last made them his Sub∣jects by Conquest, and Gods servants by Christianity. He gave the first Institution, or (as others will have it) the best  to the University of Oxford. A Prince who cannot be painted to the Life without his losse, no words reaching his worth.
He Divided 1. Every natural day (as to himself) into three parts, eight hours for his devotion, eight hours for his imployment, eight hours for his sleep and refection. 2. His Revenues into three parts, one for his expences in War, a second for the maintenance of his Court, and a third to be spended on Pious uses. 3. His Land into Thirty two shires, which number since is altered and in∣creased. 4. His Subjects into Hundreds, and Tythings, consisting of Ten persons, mutually Pledges for their Good behaviour; such being accounted suspi∣tious for their Life and Loyalty that could not give such Security. He left Learning, where he found Ignorance; Justice, where he found Oppression; Peace, where he found Distraction. And having Reigned about Four and thirty years, He dyed and was buried at Winchester, Anno 901. He loved Religion more then Super∣stition, favoured Learned men more then Lasie Monks, which [perchance] was the cause that his memory is not loaden with Miracles, and He not solemnly Sainted with other Saxon Kings who far less deserved it. Since the Reformation. PETER CHAPMAN was born atStows Sur. of Lond. p. 98. Cokeham in this County, bred an Iron-monger in London, and at his death bequeathed five pounds a year to two Scholars in Oxford, as much to two in Cambridge; and five Pounds a year to the Poor in the town of his Na∣tivity, besides threescore pounds to the Prisons in London, and other Benefactions. The certain date of his death is to me unknown. JOHN KENDRICK was born at Reading in this County, and bred a Draper in the City of London. His State may be compared to theMat. 13. 32. Mustard-seed, very little at the beginning, but growing so great, that the birds made nests therein, or rather he there∣in made nets for many birds; which otherwise being either infledged or maimed, must have been exposed to wind and weather. The Worthiest of Davids WORTHIES were digested into▪ Sam. 23. 19. Ternions, and they again subdivided into two Ranks. If this double Dichotomie were used to methodize our Protestant Benefactors since the Reformation, sure I am that Mr. Kendrick will be (if not the last of the first,) the first of the second Three. His Charity began at his Kindred, proceeded to his Friends and Servants, (to whom he left large Legacies,) con∣cluded with the Poor, on whom he bestowed above twenty thousand pounds, Reading and Newbury sharing the deepest therein. And if any envious and distrustfull Miser (measu∣ring other mens hearts by the narrowness of his own) suspecteth the truth hereof, and if he dare hazard the smarting of his bleered eyes to behold so bright a Sun of Bounty, let him consult his WillStows Survey of Lon. 193. publickly in Print. He departed this life on the 30. day of September, 1624. and lyes buried in St. Christophers London. To the Curate of which Parish he gave twenty pounds per annum for ever. RICHARD WIGHTWICK, Bachelor of Divinity, was Rector of East Isley in thisS. N. County: What the yearly value of his living was I know not, and have cause to believe it not very great; however one would conjecture his Benefice a Bishoprick by his bounty to Pembroke Colledge in Oxford, to which he gave one hundred pounds per an∣num, to the maintenance of three Fellows and four Scholars. When he departed this life is to me unknown. Memorable Persons. THOMAS COLE commonly called the rich clothier of Reading. Tradition and an authorless pamphlet make him a man of vast wealth, maintaining an hundred and fourty meniall servants in his house, besides three hundred poor people whom he set on work; insomuch that his Wains with cloth filled the high-way betwixt Reading and London, to the stopping of King Henry the first in his Progress; Who, notwithstanding (for the incouraging of his Subjects industry) gratified the said Cole, and all of his profession, with the set measure of a Yard, the said King making his own Arme the standard
thereof, whereby Drapery was reduced in the meting thereof to a greater certainty. The truth is this, Monkes began to Lard the lives of their Saints with lies, whence they proceeded in like manner to flourish out the facts of Famous Knights, (King Arthur, Guy of Warwick, &c.) in imitation whereof some meaner wits in the same sort made description of Mechanicks, powdering their lives with improbable passages, to the great prejudice of truth: Seeing the making of Broad-cloath in England could not be so ancient, and it was the arme (not of King Henry) but King Edward the first, which is notoriously known to have been the adequation of a yard. However, because omnis fabula fundatur in Historia, let this Cole be accounted emi∣nent in this kind, though I vehemently suspect very little of truth would remain in the midst of this story, if the grosse falshoods were pared from both sides thereof. JOHN WINSCOMBE, called commonly Jack of Newberry, was the most conside∣rable clothier (without fancy and fiction) England ever beheld. His Looms were his lands, whereof he kept one hundred in his House, each managed by a Man and a Boy. In the expedition to Flodden-field against James King of Scotland he marched with an hundred of his own men, (as well armed, and better clothed then any) to shew that the painfull to use their hands in peace could be valiant, and imploy their Armes in War. He feasted King Henry the eighth and his first Queen Katharine at his own house, extant at Newberry at this day, but divided into many Tenements. Well may his house now make sixteen Clothiers houses, whose wealth would amount to six hundred of their estates. He built the Church of Newberry from the Pulpit westward to the Tower inclusively, and died about the year 1520. some of his name and kindred of great wealth still remaining in this County. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Parveis John Parveis Erlgeston Fishmonger 1432 2 Nicholas Wyfold Thomas Wyfold Hertley Grocer 1450 3 William Webbe John Webbe Reading Salter 1591 4 Thomas Bennet Thomas Bennet Wallingford Mercer 1603 The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth, 1433. Robert Bishop of Sarum. Commissioners to take the Oaths. William Lovel Chivaler   Robert Shotsbroke, Knights for the Shires. William Fyndern.   Johan. Prendegest. Praeceptor Hospitalis St. Johan. Jerus. in Anglia de Grenham Johannis Golefre Armigeri Willielmi Warbelton Ar. Willielmi Danvers Ar. Johannis Shotesbrooke Ar. Thomae Foxle Ar. Phi. Inglefeld Ar. Thomae Rothewell Ar. Willielmi Perkyns Ar. Thomae Drewe Ar. Richardi Ristwold Ar. Richardi Makeney Ar. Johannis Rogers Ar. Willielmi Stanerton Ar. Willielmi Floyer Ar. Thomae Bullok Ar. Richardi Bullok Ar. Johannis Estbury Ar. Johannis Kentwode Ar. Richardi Hulcote Ar. Johannis Gargrave Ar. Johannis Chaumpe Ar. Willielmi Baron Ar. Willielmi Fitzwaryn Ar. Johannis Stowe. Willielmi Hales Johannis Hyde Johan. Stokys de Brympton Willielmi Fachell Roberti Vobe Thomae Pynchepole Johannis Yorke Johannis Ildesle Thomae Ildesle Johannis Colle Richardi Wydeford Richardi Abberbury Thomae Lanyngton Thomae Denton Nicholai Whaddon Petri Delamare Johannis Martyn Thomae Frankeleyn Willielmi Felyce Richardi Hamwell Roberti Wodecok Johannis Warvyle Johannis Rokys Johannis Seward
Willielmi Walrond Iohannis Medeford Rogeri Merlawe Willieimi Latton Richardi Shayle Thomae Coterell Iohannis George Iohannis Sewalle Iohannis Sturmy Thomae Hammes Iohannis Wering Roberti Beche Iohannis Coventre Iohannis Lokwode Iohannis Fitzwarwin Henrici Samon Thomae Plesance Edwardi Gybbes Will Coke de Kingeston Lyle Iohannis Firry Nicholai Hunt Hugonis Mayne Willielmi Newman senioris Davidis Gower Iohannis Dienys Richardi Dancastre Willielmi Drew de Hungford Iohannis Parker de Doington Willielmi Standard Richardi Collis Nicholai Long Roberti Chevayn Richardi Walker Walteri Canonn. de Croke∣ham. Parker Roberti Rove de Abendon Iohannis Richby de Reding Iohannis Stokes de Abendon Iohannis Whitwey Willielmi Umfray Simonis Kent Iohannis Hatter Willielmi Brusele Richardi Irmonger Richardi Vayre Gilberti Holeway Iohannis London Willielmi Pleystow Iohannis Bancbury Thomae Liford Henrici Ildesle Iohannis Chebeyn Iohannis Mortymer Iohannis Spynache Iohannis Moyn de Faryndon Iohannis Ely Iohannis Goddard Willielmi Ditton Walteri Suttou Nicholai Barbour Willielmi Iacob Iohannis Benet de Newberry Iohannis Magot Willielmi Croke de Newberry Willielmi Clement Iohannis Moyn de Moryton Roberti Freman Iohannis Lewes Thomae Steward Willielmi Sydmanton Richardi Waltham Iohannis Babeham Iohannis Clere Iohannis Botele de Newberry Richardi Meryvale Willielmi Waleys Iohannis Beneton Willielmi Croke de Welford Willielmi Charectour Willielmi Hertrugge Iohannis Kybe Willielmi Wylton Richardi Coterell Laurentii Alisandre Thomae Bevar Vincentii Bertilmewe Iohannis Pynkeney Thomae Attevyne Iohannis Crouchfeld Iohannis Smewyn Iohannis Sifrewast Iohannis Batell Iohannis Bythewode Thomae Bowell Thomae Hony Walteri Waryn Iohannis Yernemouth Henrici Russel Roberti Ivenden Henrici Berkesdale Iohannis Absolon Iohannis Berkesdale Iohannis Clerk de Inkpenny Richardi Bertlot Gilberti Cohenhull Gilberti Vyell Gilberti Attewyke Richardi Attepitte Thomae Padbury Hugonis Rose Iohannis Woderove Thomae Pert Iohannis Merston Richardi Grove Rogeri Burymill Thomae Grece Richardi Pekke Richardi Mullyng Iohan. Parker de Wokingham Iohannis Whitede Iohan. Sherman de Wyndesor Willielmi Wodyngton Rogeri Felter Willielmi Felde Iohannis Billesby Iohannis Gunter Iohannis Glover Richardi Atteforde Iohannis Stacy Iohannis Baron de Wytenham Iohannis Horwode Willielmi More Willielmi At-mille Henrici de la River Iohannis Poting Henrici Brown Iohannis Brown Richardi Rissul Iohannis Yatynden Iohannis Kete Iohannis Pernecote Rogeri Gunter Thomae Swyer Richardi Bocher de Thacham Iohannis Elys de Thacham Thomae Mery Richardi Phelipp Iohannis Thoursey & Iohannis Bassemore. Gardiners complain that some kind of Flowers and Fruits will not grow prosperous∣ly and thrive kindly in the Suburbs of London; This they impute to the smoak of the City offensive thereunto. Sure I am that ancient Gentry in this County sown thick in former, come up thin in our Age.
Antiqua è multis nomina pauca manent. Of names which were in days of yore, Few remain here of a great store. I behold the vicinity of London as the cause thereof, for though Barkshire be conve∣niently distanced thence, (the nearest place sixteen, the farthest sixty miles from the same) yet the goodness of the ways thither, and sweetness of the seats there, (not to speak of the River Thames, which uniteth both in commerce,) setteth Barkshire really nearer then it is locally to London: The cause, I believe, that so few families remain of the forenamed Catalogue. The paucity of them maketh such as are extant the more remarkable, amongst whom William Fachel or Vachel (the 29nth. in number) was right ancient, having an estate in and about Reading, as by the ensuing Deed will appear: Sciant presentes & futuri, quod ego Joannes Vachel dedi, concessi, & hac praesente charta mea confirmavi Rogero le Dubbare, pro servicio suo, & pro quadam summa pecuniae quammihi dedit primo manibus, totum & integrum illud tenementum cum pertinentiis suis quod habui in veteri vico Rading inter tenementum quod quondam fuit Thomae Goum in parte boreali, & te∣nementum quod quondam fuit Jordani le Dubbar in parte australi, habend. & tenend. dicto Rogero, & haeredibus suis vel Assignatis, libere quiete, integre, in bona pace in perpetuum de capitalibus dominis illius foedi per servicium inde debitum & consuetum, Reddendo inde an∣nuatim mihi & haeredibus vel Assignatis meis duos solidos & sex denarios, ad festum Sancti Michaelis, pro omni servicio seculari, exactione, & donand. & ego praedictus Joannes & heredes mei vel mei assignati, totum praedictum tenementum cum omnibus suis pertinentiis dicto Rogero, & haeredibus vel assignatis suis Warrantizabimus, & contra omnes gen∣tes defendemus in perpetuum per servitium praedictum. In cujus rei testimonium praesenti chartae sigillum meum apposui, hiis Testibus, Radulpho de la Batili, Thom. de Lecester, Nicho. Bastat, Waltero Gerard, Robert. le Taylur, Johan. le Foghel, Bado le Foghellar, Gilberto de Heg∣feild, & aliis. Dat. Rading duodecimo die Februarii, anno Regni Regis Edward. fil. Regis Henrici vicesimo nono. The descendents of this name are still extant in this County at Coley in a worshipfull condition. SHERIFFES. Anciently this County had sometimes the same, sometimes a distinct Sheriffe from Oxfordshire, as by the ensuing Catalogue will appear so well as we can distinguish them. Of Barkshire. Of both. Of Oxfordshire. Anno HEN. II. 1 Restoldus 1 Willielm. de Pontearch   2 Henr. de Oille 2 Richard. de Charvill   3 Henricus de Oille 3 Gilbertus de Pinchigen   4 4   5 Henricus de Oille 5 Gulielmus Pinchigen   6 6   7 Manassar Arsic 7 Richard. Lucy   8 Idem. 8 Adam. le Cadinns   9 Idem. 9 Adam. de Catmer   10 Thomas Basset 10 Idem.     11 11 Adam. de Catmer   12 12 Idem.   13 13 Idem.   14 14 Idem.   15 15 Idem.   16 Hugo de Bockland   16 Adam. Banaster 17 Idem.   17 Idem. 18 Idem.   18 Idem. 19 Idem. & Hugo de Bockland   19 Idem.
Anno   Anno 20 Hugo de Bockland   20 Alard. Banaster 21 Idem.   21 Idem. 22 Idem.   22 Rob. de Turvill 23 Hugo   23 Idem. 24 Idem.   24 Idem. 25 Hugo de Sto. Germano   25 Idem. 26 Idem.   26 Galf. Hose 27 Idem.   27 Galf. Hosatts 28 Idem.   28 Idem. 29 Idem.   29 Rob. Witefield 30 Idem.   30 Idem. 31 Idem.   31 Alan. de Furnell 32   32 Idem. 33 Rogerus filius Renfr.   33 Idem. Anno RICHARD. I. Anno 1 Robertus filius Renfr.   1 Rob. de la Mara 2 2 Robertus de la Mara   3 3 Willielmus Briewere   4 4 Idem.   5 5 Idem.   6 6 Idem.   7 Willielmus filius Rad.   7 Henricus de Oille 8 Philippus filius Rob.   8 Henr. de Oille & 8 Alan. de Marton.   8 Pagand. de Chaderington 9 Philip. filius Rob.   9 Hugo de Nevill 9 Alan. de Manton.   9 Galf. de Savage 10 Stephan. de Turnham   10 Hugo de Nevill 10 Johannes de Ferles.   10 Galfr. de Salvage Anno JOHANNES. Anno 1 Stephan. de Turnham   1 Hugo de Nevill 1 Johannes de Ferles.   1 Galfr. Slavagius     2 Rob. de Cantelu 2 Gilbert. Basset   2 Fulk. de Cantelu 2 Richard. Caverton   2 Nich. de Kent     3 Will. Briewere & 3 Will. Briewere   3 Rich. de Parco   4   5 Hubert. de Burgo.   5 Jo. de Wickeneholt junior 6   6 Thom. Banaster   7 Richard. de Tus     8 Tho. Basset     9 Rob. de Amnari   10 Richardus de Tus.   10 Tho. Basset 11 Robert. de Magre   11 Idem. 12 Johan. de Wikenholton   12 Idem. & Rob. de Magre 13 Idem.   13 Idem.   14 Johan. de Wikenholton       15 Tho. Basset 15 Johan. de Wikenholton   15 Rob. e Magre     16 Tho Basset 16 Idem.   16 Rich. Letus   17 Johan. de Wikenholton    
Anno HEN. III. Anno 1   1 2 Richardus filius Reg.   2 Fulco de Breantee 2 Hen. de Saio.   2 Rad. de Bray 3 Idem.   3 Idem. 4 Idem.   4 Idem.   5 Idem cum filiis Radulph. de   6 Hen. de Saio. Bray. 6 Idem. 7 Idem.   7 Falkesius de Breantee     7 Ric. de Brakele 8 Fakesius de Breantee   8 Ric. de Ripariis 9 Hen. de Saio   9 Ric. de Brakele   10 Henricus de Saio   11 Hugo de Batonia   11 Galfr. de Craucombe,     11 Rob. de Haya 12 Hugo de Bada   12 Philippus de Albritaco 13 Rob. de Haya   13 Galfr. de Craucombe 14 Hen. de Saio   14 Galf. de Craucombe     14 Rob. de Haya 15 Idem.   15 Idem. 16 Idem.   16 Idem.   17 Johan. de Hulcot.     18 Rob. de Maplederham   19 Englelard de Cicomaco     19 Nich. de Hedington   19 Johan. Bruus 20 Idem.   20 Idem. 21 Rob. Bren▪   21 Johan. de Tiwe 22 Simon de Lauchmore   22 Idem. 23 Idem.   23 Idem. 24 Sim. de Lauchmore.   24 Johan. de Plesseto     24 Will. Hay 25 Idem.   25 Will. Hay 26 Idem.   26 Idem. 27 Idem.   27 Idem. 28 Alanus de Farnham   28 Will. Hay 29 Idem.   29 Idem. Sheriffs of Barkshire and Oxfordshire. HEN. III. Anno 30 Aland. de Farhnam Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Widom. filius Roberti Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Nich. de Henred for 9 years together. Anno 44 Walter. de la Knivere Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Fulco de Kucot Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 John de Sto. Walerico Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Idem. Anno 52 Nich. de Wiffrewash Anno 53 Tho. de Sto. Wigore Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. de Insula. Anno 55 Rog. Epis. Cov. & Lich. Anno 56 Idem. EDW. I. Anno 1 Gilb. Kikby Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Hen. de Shoctebroke Anno 5 Hen. de Shoctebroke Anno 6 Jacob. de Patebery Anno 7 Hen. de Shoctebroke Anno 7 Alanus filius Rol. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Jac. Croke Anno 9 Joh. de Cridemers Anno 10 Johan. de Cridemers Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Johan. de Tudemers Anno 13 Radul. de Beauyes Anno 24 Radul. de Beauyes Anno 15 Thom. de Duners Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Willielmus de Gresmull
Anno 19 Richar. de Wilniescote Anno 20 Will. de Bremchele for 4 years together. Anno 24 Hen. de Thistelden for 5 years together. Anno 29 Nich. de Spershete for 7 years together. EDW. II. Anno 1 Tho. Danvers Anno 2 Rich. de Ameray Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Tho. Danvers Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. & Phil. de la Beach Anno 7 Phil. de la Beach Anno 8 Richar. de Windsor Anno 9 Richar. de Poltiampton Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Otvelus Pursell, & Richar. de la Bere Anno 12 Richar. de la Bere, & Joh. de Brumpton Anno 13 Johan. de Brumpton Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Drogo Barentine for 5 years together. EDW. III. Anno 1 Johan. de Brumpton Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Johan. de Bockland Anno 4 Philip. de la Beach Anno 5 Rich. de Colshul. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Johan. de Brumpton Anno 8 Willielm. de Spershalt Anno 9 Johan. de Alveton Anno 10 Willielm. de Speshalt Anno 11 Johan. de Alveton for 4 years together. Anno 15 Edward. de Morlins Anno 16 Robert. Fitz-Ellis Anno 17 Johan. de Alveton for 5 years together. Anno 22 Johannes Laundeles for 6 years together. Anno 28 Johan. de Alveton Richar. de Nowers Anno 29 Johan. de Willamscot Anno 30 Johan. Laundeles Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Robert. de Moreton Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Roger. de Elmerugg Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Roger, de Cottesford Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Roger. de Elmerugg for 3 years together. Anno 43 Roger. de Cottesford Anno 44 Tho. de la Mare Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Gilbert. Wace Anno 47 Roger. de Elmerugg Anno 48 Johan. James Anno 49 Gilbert. Wace Anno 50 Regind. de Maliris Anno 51 Johan. de Rothwell Reader, let me freely confess my self to thee, had I met with equall difficulty in the Sheriffs of other Counties as in this, the first shire it had utterly disheartned me from proceeding. The Sheriffs of Barkshire and Oxfordshire are so indented, or (par∣don the metaphor,) so intangled with Elflocks, I cannot comb them out. I will not say that I have done always right in dividing the Sheriffs respectively, but have endeavoured my utmost, and may be the better believed, who in such a sub∣ject could meet with nothing to bribe or bias my judgment to partiality. Be it premised, that though the list of Sheriffs be the most comprehensive Catalogue of the English Gentry, yet is it not exactly adequate thereunto. For I find in this County, the Family of the Pusays so ancient, that they were Lords of Pusay, (a village nigh Faringdon) long before the Conquest, in the time of King Canutus, holding their lands by the tenure of Cornage (as I ake it,) viz. by winding the Horn, which the King aforesaid gave their Camdens Brit. in this Coun∣ty. family, and which their posterity, still extant, at this day do produce. Yet none of their name, (though Persons of Regard in their respective generations,) appear ever Sheriffs of this County. I am glad of so pregnant an instance, and more glad that it so seasonably present∣eth it self in the front of our work, to conute their false Logick who will be ready to conclude Negatively, for this our Catalogue of Sheriffs excluding them the lines of ancient Gentry whose Ancestors never served in this Office. On the other side, no ingenuous Gentleman can be offended with me if he find not his Name registred in this Roll, seeing it cannot be in me any Omission, whilst I ollow my Commission, faith∣fully transcribing what I find in the Records. Richard I. 3 WILLIELMUS BRIEWERE,] He was so called, (saith Cadens Brit. in Sommerset. my Author) because his Father was born upon an Heath, though by the similitude of the Name, one would have suspected him born amongst briers. But see what a poor mans child may come to: He was such a Minion to this King Richard the first, that he created him Baron of Odcomb in Sommersetshire. Yea, when one Fulk Paynell was fallen into the Kings dis∣pleasure,
he gave this William Briewere the Town of Bridgewater, to procure his re∣ingratiating. His large inheritance (his son dying without issue) was divided amongst his Daughters, married into the honourable Families of Breos, Wake, Mohun, La-fert, and Percy. 8 PHILIPPUS filius ROB.] ALAN. de MARTON.] It is without precedent, that ever two persons held the Shrevalty of one County, jointly, or in Co-partnership, London or Middlesex alone excepted, (whereof hereafter.) How∣ever, if two Sheriffs appear in One year, (as at this time, and frequently hereafter) such Duplication cometh to pass by one of these Accidents; 1. Amotion of the first put out of his place for misdemeanor, (whereof very rare precedents) and another placed in his Room. 2. Promotion. When the first is advanced to be a Baron in the year of his Shre∣valty, and an other substituted in his Office. 3. Mort. The former dying in his Shrevalty, not priviledged from such Arrests to pay his Debt to Nature. In these cases Two (and sometimes Three) are found in the same year, who successive∣ly discharged the office. But if no such mutation happened, and yet two Sheriffs be found in one year, then the second must be understood Sub-vice-comes, (whom we commonly also call Mr. Sheriffe in courtesie,) his Deputy, acting the affaires of the County under his Authority. However, if he who is named in this our Catalogue in the second place, appear the far more Eminent Person, there the Intelligent Reader will justly suspect a Transposition, and that by some mistake the Deputy is made to pre∣cede him, whom he only represented. Be it here observed, that the place of Under-Sheriffs in this age was very honoura∣ble, not hackned out for profit. And although some uncharitable people (unjustly I hope) have now adays fixed an ill character on those who twice together discharged the place, yet anciently the office befitted the best persons; little difference betwixt the High-Sheriffe and Under-Sheriffe, save that he was under him, being otherwise a man of great credit and Estate. Henry III. 2 FULCO de BREANTEE. Oxf.] This Fulco, or Falkerius, or Falkesius de Breantee, or Breantel, or Brent, (so many seve∣ral ways is he written,) was for the first six years of this King High-Sheriffe of Ox∣ford, Cambridge, Huntington, Bedford, Buckingham, and Northampton shires, (Counties continued together) as by perusing the Catalogues will appear. What this Vir tot locorum, Man of so many places was, will be cleared in In the Title Souldiers. Middlesex, the place of his Nativity. 56 ROG. EPIS. COVENT. & LICH.] That Bishops in this age were Sheriffs of Counties in their own Dioceses, it was usuall and obvious. But Bark-shire lying in the Diocess of Sarum, Oxfordshire of Lincolne, that the far distant Bishop of Coventry and Lich. should be their Sheriffe, may seem ex∣traordinary and irregular. This first put us on the inquiry who this Roger should be, and on search we found him surnamed De Molend, aliàs Longespe, who was Godwn in the Bishops of Coventry and Lich. Nephew unto King Henry the third, though how the kindred came in I can not discover. No wonder then if his royal re∣lation promoted him to this place, contrary to the common course; the King in his own great age, and absence of his Son Prince Edward in Palestine, desiring to place his Con∣fidents in offices of so high trust. Edward II. 6 PHIL. de la BEACH] Their Seat was at Aldworth in this County, where their Statues on their Tombs are Ex∣tant at this day, but of Stature surely exceeding igies Justo Majores impo∣sitae, Camd. Brit. n Brkshire. their due Dimension. It seems the Grecian Officers have not been here, who had it in their Charge to order Tombs, and
proportion Monuments to the Persons represented. I confess Corps do stretch and extend after their Death, but these Figures extend beyond their Corps, and the People there living extend their Fame beyond their Figures, Fancying them Giants, and fit∣ting them with Porportionable Performances. They were indeed most Valiant men, and their Male Issue was extinct in the next Kings Reign, whose Heir Generall (as appeareth by the Hralds Visitation,) was married to the ancient Family of WHITLOCK. Sheriffs of Bark-shire and Oxfordshire. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Edmund Stoner   Azure, 2 ars Dancetee Or, a Chief G. 2 Tho. Barentyn   Sable, 2 Eaglets displayed Arg. Armed Or. 3 Gilbertus Wa     4 Iohannes Ieanes     5 Richar. Brines     6 Tho. Barentyn ut prius   7 Iohan. Hulcotts   Fusilee Or & Gules a Border Azure. 8 Rober. Bullocke Arborfield Gu. a Cheveron twixt 3 Bulls Heads Arg. armed Or. 9 Iohan. Holgate     10 Tho. Barentyn ut prius   11 Gilb. Wace, mil.     12 Thomas Pool     13 Williel. Attwood     14 Hugo. Wolfes     15 Robert. Bullock ut prius   16 Williel. Wilcote     17 Tho. Farington   Sable, 3 Unicorns in pale, Cur∣rent, Arg. armed Or. 18 Tho. Barentyn ut prius   19 Edrum. Spersholt     20 Williel. Attwood     21 Iohan. Golafre     22 Idem.     HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Will. Wilcote     2 Tho. Chaucer Iohan. Wilcote Ewelme Ox. Partee per pale Ar. & G. a bend counter-changed. 3 Robert. Iames     4 Idem.     5 Tho. Chaucer ut prius   6 Will. Langford     7 Rob. Corbet, mil.   Or. a Raven proper. 8 Iohan. Wilcote     9 Th. Harecourt, m. Stanton Ox. Gules, two Barrs Or. 10 Petrus Besiles Lee Berk. Argent, 3 Torteauxes. 11 Rob. Corbet mil. ut prius   12 Will. Lile mil.   Or, a Fess betwixt 2 Cheverons Sable. HEN. V.     Anno     1 Thomas Wykham   Arg. 2 Cheverons Sable, etwixt 3 Roses Gules. 2 Iohan. Golofre     3 Iohan. Wilcote ut prius   4 Rober. Ieames     5 Tho. Wikhammil. ut prius   6 Rober. Andrews     7 Iohan. Wilcote     8 Will. Lysle ut prius   9 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Willielmus Lisle ut prius   2 Tho. Stonore ut prius   3 Ioh. Gowfre, at.     4 Ri. Walkested, mi.     5 Tho. Wykham ut prius   6 Tho. Stonar ut prius   7 Rober. Iames     8 Phil. Englefield Inglefield Barry of six Gules & Arg. on a Cheife Or, a Lion Passant Azure. 9 Tho. Wikham. mi. ut prius   10 Will. Finderne     11 Will. Darell   Azure a Lion Ramp. Arg. Crown∣ed Or. 12 Steph. Haytfield     13 Rich. Restwold   Argent three Bends Sable. 14 Tho. Fetiplace Childre. Gules, 2 Cheverons Arg. 15 Ri. Quatermayns OXFOR. G. a Fess betwixt 4 hands Or. 16 Iohan. Norys   Quarterly, Arg. & Gules, a Fret Or, with a Fess Azure. 17 Edward. Rede*     18 Walter Skull †   * G. a Saltyre twixt 4 Garbs Or. 19 Iohan. Stokes   † Ar. a Bend...betw. 6 Lions-heads erased of the Field. 20 Petrus Fetiplace ut prius   21 Iohan. Norys ut prius   22 Iohan. Charles     23 Iohan. Lidyard Benham Arg. on a Chiefe Or, a Flower de luce Gules. 24 Io. Roger, Iuri.     25 Edw. Langford     26 Idem.     27 Iohan. Penicok     28 Will. Wikham ut prius   29 Edward. Rede ut prius   30 Io. Chalers, mil.     31 Io. Roger, ar. ut prius   32 Tho. Stonore ut prius   33 Ric. Quatermayns ut prius   34 Rob. Harecourte ut prius   35 Wal. Mantell     36 Iohan. Noris, ar. ut prius   37 Will. Brocas, ar.     38 Tho. de laMore, ar.   Arg. 6 Martlets 3.2 & 1 Sable EDWARD. IV.     Anno     1 Rich. Harecourte ut prius   2 Ri. Restwood, ar. ut pruis   3 Idem. u prius   4 Tho. Roger, ar. ut prius   5 Io. Barantyn, ar. ut prius   6 Tho. Stonore, ar. ut prius   7 Ri. Harecourt, ar. ut prius   8 Ioh. Howard, mil. NORKF. Gu. a Bend inter 6 Croslets fitchie Argent. 9 Will: Norys, mil. ut prius   10 Tho. Prout, ar.     11 Ed. Langford, ar.     12 Will. Staverton     13 Will. Bekynham,     14 Iohan. Langston     15 Hump. Forster, ar. Aldermastō. S. a Cheveron between 3 Arrows Argent. 16 Tho. de laMoremi. ut prius   17 Tho. Restwold ut prius   18 Iames Vyall     19 Johan. Norys, ar. ut prius   20 Hum. Talbot, mil.   G. a Lion Ramp. within a Border engrailed Or. 21 Tho. de la More ut prius   22 Will. Norys, mil. ut prius   RICH. III     Anno     1 Tho. Kingeston     2 Iohan. Barntyn     3 Edward. Frauke ut prius  
HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Edw. Mountford     2 Will. Norys, mil. ut prius   3 Tho. Say     4 Will. Besilles ut prius   5 Th. Delamore. mi. ut prius   6 Ioha. Horne, mil.     7 Will. Harecourt ut prius   8 Ro. Harecourt, ar. ut prius   9 Geo▪ Gainsord, ar.     10 Idm.     11 Ioh. Ashfield, ar.     12 Hugo Shirley, ar.   Paly of 6, 0, & Az. a Cant. Er. 13 Anr. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius   14 Ge. Gainsford, ar.     15 Iohan. Basket   Az. a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3 Leopards heads Or. 16 Will. Besilles, ar. ut prius   17 Rich. Flower, mil.     18 Io. Williams, mil. Tame Ox. Az. an Organ-pipe in Bend Sini∣ster Saltirewise surmounted of another Dexter betwixt 4 Crosses Patee Arg. 19 Will. Harecourt ut prius   20 Edw. Grevill, ar.     21 E. Chamberlain †     22 Io. Horne, ar.   † Gules a Cheveron Arg. twixt 3 Escallops Or: 23 Idem.     24 Io. Langford, mil.     HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Will Essx, ar. Lamborn Az. a Cheveron Ermin betwixt 3 Eagles displayed Arg. 2 Will. Harecourt ut prius   3 Will. Barantin, ar. ut prius   4 Tho. Haydock, ar.     5 Wal. Raducy, mil.     6 Si. Harecourt, mil. ut prius   7 Io. Dauncy, mil.   Azure a Dragon Or. & Lion combtant Arg. 8 Geor. Foster, mil. ut prius   9 Ed. Chamberl. mi. ut prius   10 Will. Essex, mil. ut prius   11 Tho. Englefeld, ar. ut prius   12 Hen. Brugges, ar.   Argent on a Cross S. a Leopards∣head Or. 13 Io. Oswalston, ar.     14 Sim. Harecourt ut prius   15 Io. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius   16 Will. Essex, mil. ut prius   17 Will. Barantin, m. ut prius   18 Tho. Denton, ar.   Guls a Cheveron, twixt 3. Cres∣sents Arg. 19 Tho. Ellyot, ar.     20 Si. Harecourt, mil. ut prius   21 Will. Stafford, ar. Bradfield Or. a Chev. G. & a Canton Erm. 22 Hen. Brugges, ar. ut prius * Az. on a Fess Engrailed Or, be∣tween 3 Spear-Heads Arg. a Grey-hound cursant Sable. 23 Tho. Umpton, *ar. Wadley   24 Hum. Forster, mil.     25 Will. Farmar, ar.   Arg. a Fess Sable twixt 3 Leo-pards Heads Erased Gul. 26 Walt. Stoner, mil. ut prius   27 Tho. Carter, ar.     28 An. Hungerford   Sable, 2 Bars, Arg. in Chief 3 Plates. 29 Si. Harecourt, mil. u prius   30 Ioh. Williams, mi. ut prius   31 Rich. Brigges, ar. ut prius   32 Will. Essex, mil. ut prius   33 Wal. Stoner, mil. ut prius   34 Will. Barantin, m. ut prius   35 Will. Farmor, ar. ut prius   36 Ioh. Williams, ar. ut prius   37 Hum. Foster, mi. ut prius   38 Le. Chamberlain ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Fra. Englefeld, m. ut prius   2 Anth. Cope, *mil. Hanwel *Ar a Chev. Az. betw. 3 Roses Gu∣slipp'd & leav'd Vert, 3 Flowers de Luce, Or. 3 Will. Rainsf. mil.     4 Richar. Fines, ar. Broughton, Az. 3 Lions Rampant Or, 5 Will. Hide, ar. S. Denchw. Gu. 2 Cheverons Ar. 6 Le Chamberl. mi. ut prius   REX PHIL. & Ma. Regina.     Anno     1 Io. Williams, mi. & Io. Brome, mil. ut prius   1, 2 Ric. Brigges, mil. ut prius   2, 3 Will. Rainsford     3, 4 Tho. Brigges, ar. ut prius   4, 5 Ioh. Denton, ar. ut prius   5, 6 Rich. Fines, ar. ut prius   REG. ELIZA▪     Anno     1 Edw. Ashfeld, ar.     2 Edw. Fabian, ar.     3 Ioh. Doyle, ar.   Or 2 Bendlets Az. 4 Hen. Norys, ar. ut prius   5 Ric. Wenman, ar.   Quarterly Gules & Az. a Cross Patence Or. 6 Ioh. Croker, ar. Tame P. Ox. Argent on a Cheveron Engrailed Gules between 3 Crows, as many Mullets Or, pierced. 7 Tho. Stafford, ar. ut prius   8 Christ. Brome     Henry IV. 2 THOMAS CHAUCER.] He was sole son to Geffery Chaucer, that famous Poet, from whom he inherited fair lands, at Dunnington-Castle in this County, and at Ewelme in Oxfordshire. He married Maud daughter and coheir of Sir John Burwash, by whom he had one only daughter named Alice, married unto William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk. He lyeth buried un∣der a fair tomb in Ewelme Church, with this inscription. Hic jacet Thomas Chaucer, Armiger, quondam Dominus istius villae & Patronus istius Ecclesiae, qui obiit 18. die Men∣sis Novembris Anno Dom. 1434. & Matilda uxor ejus, quae obiit 28. mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1436. Henry V. 1 THOMAS WIKHAM.] I behold him as kinsman, and next heir to William Wykham, that famous Bishop of Winchester, to whom the Bishop left, notwithstanding above Bishop God∣win in Bishops of Winchester. six thousand pounds bequeathed by him in legacies, (for the discharge whereof he left ready mony) one hundred pound lands a year. As for his Arms, viz. Argent, two Cheverons Sable between three Roses Gules; a most ingenious Sir Isaac Wake in his Musae Regnan∣ts. Oxfordian conceiveth those Cheverons (aliàs
Couples in Architecture) given him in relation to the two Colledges he built, the one in Oxford, the other in Winchester. It will be no sin to suspect this, no original of, but a post-nate-allusion to his Armes, who was (whatever is told to the contrary) though his parents were impoverished, of a Harpfield Ec∣cle. Hist. pag. 550. Knightly extraction. But if it was his assigned, and not hereditary Coat, it will be long enough ere the Heraulds Office grant another to any upon the like occasion. Henry VI. JOHANES GOWFRE, Ar. No doubt the same with him who 2do Hen. 5nti. was written John Golofre. He is the first person who is styled Esquire, though surely all who were before him were (if not Knights) Esquires at the least: And afterwards this addition grew more and more fashionable in the Reign of King Henry the sixth. For after that ack Straw (one of the grand founders of the Levellers) was defeated, the English Gentry, to appear above the common sort of people, did in all publick instruments insert theit Native or acquired Qualifications. Edward IV. 8 JOHN HOWARD, Miles.] He was son to Sir Robert Howard, and soon after was created a Baron by this King, and Duke of Northfolk by King Richard the third, as Kinsman and one of the Heirs of Anne Dutchess of York and Northfolk, whose Mother was one of the Daughters of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Northfolk. Soon after he lost his life in his quarrell who gave him his honour in Bosworth field. From him descended the Noble and Numerous family of the Howards, of whom I told E Arundle Notingham Suffolk Barksh. B Moubray Estrick. four Earls and two Barons sitting in the last Parliament of King Charles. I have nothing else for the present to observe of this Name, save that a Verstegan of decaied intel∣ligence, pag. . great Antiquary will have it originally to be Holdward (L. and D. being omitted for the easier pronuncia∣tion) which signifieth the Keeper of any Castle, Hold, or Trust committed unto them, wherein they have well answered unto their Name. Did not Thomas Howard Earl of Surry well hold his ward by Land, when in the reign of King Henry the eighth he con∣quered the Scots in Flodden-field, and took James the fourth their King Prisoner? And did not Charles Howard (afterwards Earl of Nottingham) hold his ward by Sea in 88. when the Armado was defeated? But hereof (God willing) hereafter; 15 HUMPHRY FOSTER, Ar.] This must be he (consent of times avowing it) who was afterwards Knighted, and lyeth buried in Saint Martin in the Fields London, with the following Weavrs Fun. Mon. pag. 447 inscription. Of your charity, pray for the soul of Sir Humphery Foster Knight, whose body lyeth buried here in earth under this Marble-stone; which deceased the 18. day of the Month of September, 1500. on whose Soul sesu have mercy, Amen. Heny VII. 8 ROBERT HARECOURT, Miles.] Right ancient is this family in France, having read in a French Jean LeFeron eale Chapter d.  Marschaviz, de France, sol. 5. Herauld who wrote in the reign of King Edward the sixth, that it flourished therein eight hundred years, as by a Genealogy drawn by him should appear. Of this Family (for both give the same Coat at this day (viz.) Gles two Barrs Or,) a younger branch coming over at the Conquest, fixed it self in the Norman Infancy at Staunton Harecourt in Oxfordshire. And I find that in the reign of King ohn, Ri∣chard de Harecourt of Staunton aforesaid, marrying Orabella daughter of Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester, had the rich manor of Bosworth in Leicester-shire bestowed on him for his wifes portion. I cannot exactly distinguish the several Harecourts contemporaries in this County, and Sheriffs thereof, so as to assign them their severall habitations, but am confident that this Robert Harecourt (Sheriffe in the reign of King Henry the seventh,) was the same
person whom King Edward the fourth made Knight of the Garter. From him lineally descended the valiant Knight Sir Simon Harecourt, lately slain in the wars against the Rebells in Ireland, whose Son, a hopefull Gentleman, enjoys the Manor of Staunton at this day. 15 JOHN BASKET.] He was an Esquire of Remark and martiall activity in his younger days, who in some years after removed to Devenish in Dorsetshire, to whom King Henry the eighth, going over into France, committed the care of that County, as by his following Letter will appear: Henry VIII. By the King. Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. And whereas we at this time have written as well to the Sheriff of that Our Shire, as also to the Justices of Our Peace within Our said Shire, Commanding and straightly Charging, that as well the said Sheriffs as the said Ju∣stices, endeavour them for the keeping of Our Peace and the entertainment of Our Subjects, in good quiet and restfullness, durying the time of Our journey into the parties of beyond the Sea; to the which We entend to dispose us about the latter end of this present month of May: And forasmuch also as We have for your great ease spared you of your aettendance upon Us in Our said journey, and left you at home to doe Us service in keeping of Our Peace, and good Rule amongst Our said Subjects. We Will therefor and Command you that dure∣ing the time of Our said absence out of this Our Realme, ye have a speciall over-sight, regard and respect, as well to the Sheriff, as to the said Justice, how and in what diligence they do, and execute Our Commandement, comprised in Our said Letters. And that ye also from time to time as ye shall see meet quickly and sharply call upon them in Our name, for the execution of Our said Commandement; and if you shall find any of them Remiss or Negligent in that behalf, We will that ye lay it sharply to their charge, Advertising that in case they amend not their defaults, ye will thereof Advertise Our Councell remining with Our dearest Daughter the Princess, and so We charge you to do indeed: And if Our said Sheriffe or Justice, or any other Sheriffe or Justice of any Shire next to you, upon any side ad∣joyning, shall need or require your Assistance, for the Execution of Our said Commande∣ments, We Will and Desire you that what the best power ye can make of Our Subjects i Harneys, ye be to them Aiding and Assisting from time to time as the Case shall require. Not failing hereof as you intend to please Us, and as We specially trut you. Given under Our Signet at Our Manor of Greenwich, the 18. day of May. Henry VIII. 1 WILLIAM ESSEX, Ar.] He was a worthy man in his generation, of great command in this County, (whereof he was four times Sheriffe,) and the first of his family who fixed at Lambourn therein, on this welcome occasion. He had married Elizabeth, daughter and sole heir of Thomas Rogers of Benham, whose Grandfather John Rogers had married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of John Shotebroke of Bercote in this County (whose ancestors had been Sheriffs of Barkeshire in the fourth, fifth and sixth of King Edward the third,) by whom he received a large inheritance. Nor was the birth of this Sir William (for aferwards he was Knighted) beneath his estate, being Son unto Thomas Essex Esquire, Remembrancer and Vice-Treasurer unto King Edward the fourth; who dyed November 1. 1500. lyeth buried with a plain Epi∣taph in the Church of Kensington, Middlesex. He derived himself from Henry de Essex, Baron of Rawley in Essex, and Standard-Bearer of England, (as I have seen in an exact Pedigree attested by Master Camden,) and his posterity have lately assumed his Coat, viz. Argent an Orle Gules. There was lately a Baronet of this family, with the reve∣nues of a Baron, but * riches endure not for ever, if providence be not as well used inProv. 27. 24. preserving as attaining them.
24 HUMPHRY FORSTER, Knight.] He bare a good affection to Protestants, even in the most dangerous times, and . Acts & Mon. p. 1219. spake to the Quest in the behalf of Master Marbeck that good ; yea he confessed to King Henry the third, that never any thing went so much against his Idem p. 1221 Conscience which under his Graces authority he had done, as his attending the execution of three poor men Martyred at Windsor. Edward VI. 1 FRANCIS INGLEFIELD, Mil.] He afterwards was Privy-Councellor unto Queen Mary, and so zealous a Romanist, that after her death he left the land, with a most large inheritance, and lived for the most part in Spain. He was a most, industrious agent to solicite the cause of the Queen of Scots, both to his Holiness, and the Catholick King. As also he was a great Pro∣motor of, and Benefactor to the English Colledge at Valladolit in Spain, where he lyeth in∣terred in a family of his alliance is still worshipfully extant in this County. Queen Mary. 1 JOHN WILLIAMS, Miles.] Before the year of his Sherivalty was expired, Queen Mary made him Lord Williams of Tame in Oxfordshire. In which town he built a small Hospitall, and a very fair Cam. Brit. in . School; He, with Sir Henry Bennyfield, were joynt-Keepers of the Lady Elizabeth, whilst un∣der restraint, being as civil as the other was cruel unto Her. Bishop Ridley when mar∣tyred requested this Lord to stand his friend to the Queen, that those Leases might be confirmed which he had made to poor Tenants; which he See the pic∣ture of Bishop Ridley his burning in Mr. Fox. promised and performed accordingly.▪ His great estate was divided betwixt his two daughters and coheirs, one married to Sir Henry Norrice, the other to Sir Richard Wenman. Queen Elizabeth. 4 HENRY NORRICE, Ar.] Son-in-law to the Lord Williams aforesaid. He was by Queen Elizabeth created Baron Norrice of Ricot in Oxfordshire; it is hard to say whether this tree of honour was more remarkable for the root from whence he sprung, or for the branches that sprang from him: He was Son to Sir Henry Norrice, who suffered in the cause of Queen Anne Bul∣len, Grandchild to Sir Edward Norrice, who married Fridswide sister and coheir to the last Lord Lovell. He was Father (though himself of a meek and mild disposition) to the Martiall brood of the Norrices, of whom I  de∣scription of Oxfordshire, Title Souldi∣ers. hereafter. Elizabeth his great Grandchild, sole Daughter and heir unto Francis Norrice Earl of Barkshire, and Baroness Norrice, was married unto Edward Wray Esquire, whose only Daughter Elizabeth Wray, Baroness Norrice lately deceased, was married unto  Bertue Earl of Lindsey, whose Son, a Minor, is Lord Norrice at this day. Sheriffs of Barkeshire alone. Name Place Armes REG. ELIZA.     Anno     9 Edw. Unton, mil. Wadley on a Fess Eng. Or, twixt 3 Spear-Heads Arg. a Hound cur∣sant, S. collered Gu. 10 Io. Fetiplace, ar. Chilrey G. 2 Chev. Argent. 11 Will. Forster, ar. Aldermerston Sable, a Chev▪ betw. 3 Arrows Arg. a Chev. 12 Will. Dunch, ar. Litlewitnā Or,  2 Toures in  & a flour de Lice in Base. Arg. 13 Ioha. Winchcomb Budebury   14 Hen. Nevill, mil. Billingber   15 Tho. Essex, ar. Lamborn . a . Erm. betw. 3 Eagles Arg. 16 Ric. Lovelace, ar. Hurley Gules. on a chiefe indented, Sable, three Marvets Or. 17 Anth. Bridges, ar. Hemsted∣Marshal   18 Thom. Parry, ar.   See our Notes. 19 Io. , . ut prius   20 Tho Stafford, ar. Bradfeld Or, a Chev. Gul. & Canton Er. 21 Tho. Stephans, ar.     22 Hum . ar. ut prius   23 Tho. Bullock, ar. Gules a Chev. twixt three Bulls∣heads Ar. armed Or. 24 Tho▪ Read, ar. Abington G. a Saltyre twixt 4 , Or. 25 . Molens, ar. Clapgate   26 Be. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius   27 Edw. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius   28 Chri. Lillcot, ar. Rushcomb Or. 2  vairry Arg. & Sable. 29 Edm. Dunch, ar. ut prius   30 Thom. Parry. ar. ut prius   31 Tho. , ar. Shaw. Azure a Fess  inter ▪  Or. 32 Iohan. , ar.     33 Rich. Ward, ar.    
34 Fr. Winchcombe▪ ut prius   35 Hum. Forster, ar. ut prius   36 Ricar. Hide, ar. S. Denchw. Gules, 2 Chevrons Arg. 37 Hen. Nevill, ar. ut prius   38 Edm. Wiseman, ar. Stephenton Sable, a Chev. twixt 3 Bars of Spears Arg. 39 Chri. Lidcotte, mi. ut prius   40 Hen. Pool, mil.     41 Tho. Reede, mil. ut prius   42 Sa. Backhouse, ar. Swallofield   43 Ioha. Norris, mil.     44 Ed. Fetipl, mil. ut prius   Ed. Dunch, ar. &  Ja. ut prius   JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Edm. Dunch, ar.   Sable, a Chev. betw. 3 Towers Argent. 2 Ant. Blagrave, ar.   Or. on a Bend Sable, 3 Greaves Errased at the Ankle, Ar. 3 Tho. Read, ar. ut prius   4 Will. Stonhou. ar. Radley Arg. on a Fess Sable, between 3 Falcons volant Az. a Leopards∣heads and 2 Mullets, Or. 5 Fr. Winchcombe ut prius   6 Will. Foster, mil. ut prius   7 Anth. Barker, mil. Suning.   8 Ric. Lovelace, ml. ut prius   9 Tho. Vachell, mil. Colly. Bender of six peeces, Er. & Az 10 Tho. Hinton, ar.     11 Car. Wiseman, ar. ut prius   12 Io. Ayshcombe, ar.     13 Will. Young, mil.     14 Will. Standin, ar. Aborfield   15 Val. Knightley, m.   Quarterly Er. & Or. 3 Pales. Gu. 16 Ioh. Catcher, ar.     17 Hum. Foster, ar. ut prius   18 Gabri. Pyle, mil. Compton   19 Io. Winchcombe ut prius   20 Io. Marrycot, ar.     21 Will. Hide, ar. ut prius   22 Io. Blagrave, mil. ut prius   23     24     CAR▪ I. REX     Anno     1 Ioh. Darrell, Bar. W. Woodh. Az. a Lion Ramp. Or, Crowned Argt. 2 Edr. Clark, mil. Ardigton   3 Gor. Willmot, ar. Charlton   4 Edw. Yates, Barr. Buckland   5 Sam. Dunch, ar. ut prius Per Fess embattel'd Arg. & Sable 3 Yates caunterchanged. 6 Io. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius   7 Hen. Samborn, ml. Moulsford   8 Hen. Powle, ar.     9 Edm. Dunch, ar. ut prius   10 Hum. Dolman, ar. ut prius   11 Will. Barker, ar. ut prius   12 Ric. Harrison, mi. Hurst Or, on a Cheife Sable, 3 Eagles displaied of the first. 13 Ge. Stonhouse, B. ut prius   14 Hump. Hide, ar. ut prius   15 Geo. Puresy, ar. Wadley S. 3 Pair of Gantlets dipping, Ar. 16 Peregrine Hobby Bisham Ar. 3 Fusiles upon Slippers G. 17 Tanfield Vachel ut prius   18     19     20     21     22 Io. Southleg, ar.     Queen Elizabeth. 9 EDWARD UNTON or UMPTON, Miles.] This ancient and worshipfull name was extinct in the days of our fathers for want of Issue Male, and a great part of their lands devolved by an Heir-general to G. Purfen of wadley Esquire, whose care is commendable in preserving the Monuments of the Umptons in Farington Church, and restoring such as were defaced in the war to a good degree of their former fairness. 26 BESILIUS FETIPLACE] Some may colourably mistake it for Basilius or Basil, a Christian-name frequent in some families, whereas indeed it is Besil a Surname. These liv'd in great regard at Lee, thence called Besiles-Lee in this County, untill Elizabeth danghter and heir of William Besiles, last of that name, was married unto Richard Fetiplace, whose great∣great-grand-child was named Besile, to continue the remembrance of their Ance∣stors. Reader, I am confident an instance can hardly be produced of a Surname made Chri∣stian in England, save since the Reformation; before which time the Priests were scrupulous to admit any at Font, except they were baptized with the name of a Scrip∣ture or Legendary-Saint. Since it hath been common; and although the Lord Coke was pleased to say he had noted many of them prove unfortunate, yet the good suc∣cess in others confutes the generall truth of the observation. King James. 8 RICHARD LOVELACE, Knight.] He was a Gentlman of Mettal, and in the reign of Queen Elizabeth making use of letters of Mart, had the successe to light on a large remnant of the King of Spains Cloth of silver, I mean his West-Indian Fleet; wherewith he and his posterity are the warmer to this day: King Charles created him Lord Lovelace of Hurley.
King Charles. 1 Sir JOHN DARELL, Baronet.] He being the first, who in the Catalogue of Sheriffs occurreth of that order, a word of the institution thereof. We meddle not with ancient Baronets, finding that word former∣ly promiscuously blended with Bannerets, (Sir Ralph Fane in aRot. Pat. quar∣to Edwardi sexti. Patent passed unto him, is expressly term'd a Baronet,) but insist on their new erection in the ninth of King James. Their Qualifications. Their Service. Their Dignity. 1. They were to be per∣sons, Morum, probitate spectati. 2. Descended at least of a Grand-father, by the Fathers side, that bare Arms. 3. Having a clear estate of one thousand pounds per annum, two thirds there∣of at least in possession, the rest in reversion ex∣pectant on one life only, holding in Dower or in Joynture. 1. Each of them was to advance towards the planting of the Province of Ulster in Ireland, with Colonies and Castles to defend them, money e∣nough to maintain thirty Foot for three years, after the rate of eight pence a day for everyone of them. 2. The first years wages was to be paid down on the passing of their Pa∣tent, the remainder, as they contracted with the Kings Commissioners, authorized to treat and conclude thereof. 1. They were to take place, with their wives and chil∣dren respectively, imme∣diately after the sons of Barons; and before all Knights-bachelours of the Bath, and Bannerets; save such solemn ones ashere∣after should be created in the field by the King there present, under the Standard Royall display∣ed. 2. The addition of Sir was to be prefixed before theirs, of Madam, their wives names. 3. The Honour was to be hereditary, and knight∣hood not to be denied to their eldest sons of full age, if desiring it. 4. For an augmentation in their Arms they might bear a bloody hand in a Canton or Escutcheon, at their pleasure. The King did undertake that they should never exceed two hundred, which number compleated if any chanced to die without issue-male, none were to be substituted in their place, that so their number might daily diminish, and honour increase. He did also promise for himself and his Heirs, that no new Order under another name should be superinduced. The Battles. Newberry the first 1643. Septemb. 20. The Earl of Essex having raised the Siege of Glocester, and returning towards Lon∣don, was rather followed then overtaken by the Kings army. Both sides might be traced by a tract of bloody foot-steps, especially at Auborn in Wilts, where they had a smart encounter. At Newberry the Earl made a stand: Here happen'd a fierce fight on the East-side of the Town, wherein the Londoners did shew that they could as well use a Sword in the field, as a Met-ward in a Shop. The Parliament was conceived to lose the most, the King the most considerable persons; amongst whom the Earl of Carnarvon and Sunderland, the Viscount Falkland, Colonel Morgan, &c. Both armies may be said to beat and be beaten, neither winning the Day, and both the Twi-light. Hence it was that both sides were so sadly filled with their Supper over night, neither next morning had any stomack to break-fast, but keeping their stations, were rather contented to face, then willing to fight one another.
Newberry the second 1644. Octob. 27. One would wonder, where the Earl of Essex, so lately stript out of all his Infantry in Cornwall, so soon reinvested Himselfe with more Foot, save that London is the Shop∣general of all Commodities, recruited with fresh (but not fresh-water) Souldiers, he gave the King battle. This fight was as long and fierce as the former, but the conquest more clear on the Parliaments side. The Cornish (though behaving themselves vali∣antly) were conceived not to doe so well, because expected to have done better. The Royalists were at night fain to hang lighted matches on the Hedges, (so to si∣milate their aboad thereabouts) whilst they drew of, securing their Canon in Dun∣nington-castle, (the Governour whereof Sir J. Bois did the King Knights service,) and so in a pace slower then a flight, and faster then a retreat, returned in as good order as their condition was capable of. Many here lost their lives, as if Newberry were so named by a sad Prolepsis, fore-signifying that that Town should afford a new-burying place to many slain in two bloody Battles. The Farewell. Being to take my leave of this Shire, I seriously considered what want there was therein, that so I might wish the supply thereof. But I can discover no naturall de∣fect, and I therefore wish the inhabitants, a thankfull heart to that God, who hath given them a Country so perfect in profit and pleasure. Withal it is observed that the lands in Barkshire are very skittish, and often cast their Owners, which yet I impute not so much to the unruliness of the Beasts, as to the unskilfullness of the Riders. I de∣sire heartily, that heareafter the Barkshire Gentry may be better settled in their, Saddles so that the sweet places in this County, may not be subject to so many muta∣tions.
BEDFORD-SHIRE. BEDFORD-SHIRE hath Northampton-shire on the North, Huntington and Cambridge-shires on the East, Hartford-shire on the South, Buckingham shire on the West thereof. It lieth from North to South in an ovall form, and may be allowed two and twenty miles in length, though the generall breadth thereof extendeth not to full fifteen. The soil consisteth of a deep clay, yet so that this County may be said to wear a belt or girdle of sand about, or rather athwart the body thereof, (from Woburne to Potton) affording fair and pleasant, as the other part doth fruitfull and profitable places for habitation, which partakes plentifully in the partage of all English conveniencies. Here let this Caveate be entred to preserve its due [but invaded] right, to much grain growing in this County. For Corne-Chandlers (the most avouchable Authors in this Point) will inform you, that when Hartford-shire Wheat and Barley carries the Credit in London, thereby much is meant (though miscalled) which is immediately bought in and brought out of Hartford-shire, but Originally growing in Bedford shire, about Dunstable and else where. But let not the dry Nurse, which onely carried the Child in her Armes and dandled it in her Lap, lay claime to that Babe which the true Mother did breed and bear in her body. Naturall Commodities. Barley. White, large, plump and full of flower. The Country man will tell you, that of all our grains this is most nice, and must be most observed in the severall seasons thereof. It doth not onely allay hunger, but also in a manner quencheth thirst, when ordered into Malt. It is (though not so t oothsome) as wholesome as Wheat it self, and was all the Staff of Bread, which Christs body leaned on in this life: Eating to attest his Humanity; Baly-loaves to evidence his Humility.John 6. 9 Malt. This is Barley with the property thereof much altered, having passed both water and fire, steped and dried on a kilne. That the use hereof was known to the Greeks, plainly appears by the proper word wherewith they expresse it ; and no Maltster of Bedford can better describe the manner thereof then is done byLib. 10. c. 29. Aetius; Est hor∣deum madefactum, quod germen emisit, deinde cum ligulis enatis tostum est. Besides, we read of , and Lib. 1. & 10. Athenaeus maketh mention of such, who were ——, Drinkers of Barley-wine. A liquor probably more wholesome for Northern bodies then that which groweth in grapes. What great estates Maltsters got formerly in this County, may be collected from the wealth of the Ale-brewers therein, there being so near a relation betwixt the two Callings. For I read in the reign of King Henry the fifth, of William Murfley an Ale∣brewer of Dunstable, (accounted, I confes, a Lollard, and follower of the Lord Cob∣ham;) who whenHarpield Hist. of Wik. pag. 708. and Ho∣linshed pag. 544. taken, had two horses trapped with gilt armour led after him, and had a pair of gilt-spurs in his bosome, expecting (say they) Knight-hood from the Lord Cobham. And although I believe not the report in full habitude, it is enough to intimate unto us, that in that age it was a wealthy imployment. Fullers-Earth. Great store of this is digged up not far from Woburne in this County, whence it is commonly called Woburne-earth. Such the use thereof in Drapery, that good cloth canSee more hereof in Surrey, Ti le, Nat. Commod. hardly be made without it, forreign parts affording neither so much, nor so good of this kind. No wonder then if our Statutes strictly forbid the transportation there∣of, to preserve the perfection of clothing amongst our selves. But were this Fullers∣earth like Terra Lemnia, or Sigillata, and all the parcells thereof lock'd up under a seal,
yet the Dutch (so long as they are so cunning, and we so careless,) will stock themselves hence with plentifull proportions thereof. Larks. The most and best of these are caught and well dressed about Dunstable in this Shire A harmless bird whilst living, not trespassing on grain; and wholesome when dead, then filling the stomack with meat, as formerly the Ear with Musick. In winter they fly in flocks, probably the reason why Alauda signifieth in Latins both a Lark and a Legion of Souldiers; except any will say a Legion is so called, because Helmetted on their heads and crested like a Lark, therefore also called in Latine Galerita. If men would imitate the early rising of this bird, it would conduce much unto their health∣funess. The Manufactures. Fat folke (whose Collops stick to their sides) are generally Lasie, whilst leaner people are of more activity. Thus fruitfull Countries (as this is for the generality thereof) take to themselves a Writ of Ease; the principall cause why Bedford shire affords not any trades peculiar to it self. The Buildings. This County affordeth no Cathedral, and the Parochial Churches intitle not them∣selves to any eminency. Onely I hear such high commendations of a Chappel and Monument erected at Maldon by Thomas Earl of Elgin to the memory of his deceased Lady Diana Cecil, that I am impatient till I have beheld it, to satisfie my self, whe∣ther it answereth that Character of curiosity which credible persons have given thereof. Taddington, Amphtill and Wobourn carry away the credit amongst the houses of the Nobility in this County. Wonders. At Hareles-wood commonly called Harold in this County, the River of OuseHypodagma pag. 163. Anno 1399. parted asunder, the water from the Fountain standing still, and those towards the Sea giving way, so that it was passable over on foot for three miles together, not with∣out the astonishment of the beholders. It was an Ominous Prefage of the sad Civil Wars betwixt the two houses of York and Lancaster. There is a Rivolet in this County (though confining on Buckingham-shire) near a Village called Aspeley, and takes the strange operation thereof from his Pen, who (though a Poet) is a credible Author, The Brook which on her bank doth boast that earth alone,* Draitons Po∣ly-olbion the 22. Song. Which noted of this Ile, converteth wood to stone. That little Aspeleys earth we anciently instile, 'Mongst sundry other things, A wonder of the Ile. But, by his leave, there is an other of the same nature in Northampton-shire, which be∣cause lesse known, I will there enlarge my self on that Subject. Proverbs. As plain as Dunstable Road.] It is applyed to things plain and simple without either welt or guard to adorne them, as also to matters easie and obvious to be found without any difficulty or direction. Such this Road being broad and beaten, as the confluence of many leading to London from the North and North-west parts of this Land. As crooked as Crawley brook.] This is a nameless brook arising about Wobourn, running by Crawley, and falling immediately into the Ouse. But this proverb may better be verifyed of Ouse it self in this Shire, more Maeandrous then Maeander, which runneth above eighty miles in eighteen by land. Blame it not, if sensible of its sad condition, and presaging its fall into the foggy fens in the next County, it be loth to leave this pleasant place; as who would not prolong their own happiness?
The Baylife of Bedford is coming] This Proverb hath its Originall in this, but Use in the next County of Cambridge, The River Ouse running by is called the Baylife of Bedford, who swelling with rain, snow-water, and tributary brooks in the winter, and coming down on a suddain arrest∣eth the Ile of Ely with an inundation. But I am informed that the Drayners of the fenns, have of late with incredible care, cost, art and industry, wrested the Mace out of this Bayliffs hand, and have secured the Country against his power for the fu∣ture. Princes. MARGARET BEAUFORT Countess Richmond and Derby, No person of judge∣ment or ingenuity will find fault with her Posture under this Title, who was Great-great-grand-child to King Edward the third, and Mother to King Henry the seventh, besides her [almost incredible] Alliance to soSee their number in her funeral Ser∣mon preached by Bishop Fishr. many forreign Princes. Thus Reader, I am confident I have pleased thee as well as my self, in disposing her in this place. And yet I am well assured, that were she alive she would (half-offended hereat,) be more contented to be ranked under another and lower Topick of Bene∣factors to the Publick; yea, (if left to her own liberty) would chuse that Reposing Place for her memory. This is not onely most consonant to her humility and charity, (desi∣ring rather to be Good then Great,) but also conformable to her remarkable expression, (according to the devotion of those darker days,) that if the Christian Princes would agree to march with an Army for the recovery of Palestine, she would be their Landress. This is she who besides a Professor of Divinity place in both Universities, founded the two fair Colledges of Christs and Saint Johns in Cambridge. By the way be it ob∣served, that Cambridge hath been much beholden to the strength of bounty in the weaker Sex. Of the four Halls therein, two, viz. Clare and Pembroke, were (as I may say) fe∣minine foundations; and of the 12. Colledges, one third, Queens, Christs, Saint Johns and Sidney, owe their Original to worthy women. Whereas no female ever founded Colledge in Oxford, (though bountifull Benefactors to many,) seeing Queens Colledge therein, though commended to the Queens of England for its successive Patronesses, had R. Eglesfield for the effectual founder thereof. And Cambridge is so far from being ashamed of, she is joyfull at, and thankfull for such charity, having read of our Saviour himself, that Mary Magdalen, and Joanna,Luk. 8. 3. and Susanna, and many other women ministred unto him of their substance. But this worthy Lady Margaret being too high for a mean man to commend, is long since gone to the great God to reward, dying in the beginning of the reign of her Grand-child King Henry the eight. Saints. AINULPHUS of Royal British bloud was an holy Hermit, who waving the vanities of this wicked world, betook himself in this County to a solitary life, renowned for the Sanctity (or rather Sanctimony) thereof. The age he lived in is not exactly known, but sure it is, that Ainulphs-bury (a Town in the confines of This and Huntington-shire,) was erected in his memory, part whereof (corruptly called Ainsbury) is extant at this day, and the rest is disguised under the new name of Saint Neots. Martyrs. THOMAS CHASE, an ancient and faithfull labourer in God's vineyard, led his life most in Buckingham-shire, but found his death in this County, long kept in durance and hanged at last in the Bishops prison at Wobourn. His Executioners to palliate their murder, and asperse his Memory, gave it out that he had destroyed himself. A loud lye, seeing he was so loaden withFox Acts & Monu. pag. 775. Chaines, that he could not lift up his own body. But the clearing hereof must be remitted to that day, wherein all things done in secreet shall be made manifest. His martyrdome happened in the reigne of King Henry the seventh, Anno Domini 1506.
Prelates. SILVESTER de EVERTON, for so is he written in the Records of Whence Bi∣shop Godwin transcribed his Catalogue of Bishops. Carlile, (though Eversden and Everseen in other books) which are most to be credited, as passing under the pens of the best (and to his particular the most knowing) Clearks, no doubt, took his name from Everton a Village in this (but the confines of Cambridge) Shire. He was a man memorable for his preferment, and very able to discharge the Lay-part thereof, receiving the Great Seal, Anno the 29. of King Henry the third 1246. and is commended for one most John Phili∣pot, in his Cha∣nelors of Eng∣land pag. 20. cunning in customes of Chancery. The same year he was chosen Bishop of Carlile, though demurring on the acceptance thereof (conscious to himself perchance as unqualified) his consecration was deferred untill the next year. He with the rest of the English Bishops addressed themselves to King Henry the third, and boldly enough Requested-Required of him, that all forreigners and  persons might be put out of their Bishopricks. Now, as to the point of insufficiency, the King singling out this Silvester thus bespake him.  Pa∣ris Anno 1253. Et tu Silvester Carliolensis, qui diu lam∣bens Cancellariam, Clericorum meorum Cle∣riculus extitisti, qualiter post-positis multis Theologis, & personis reverendis, te in Epis∣copum sublimavi, omnibus satis notum est. And thou Silvester of Carlile, who so long licking the Chancery, was the little Clark of my Clergy-men, it is sufficiently known to all, how I advanced thee to be a Bishop, before many reverend persons, and able Divines. His expression licking the Chancery hath left Posterity to interpret it, whether taxing him for Ambition, liquorishly longing for that Place: Or for Adulation, by the soft smoothing of flatery making his way thereunto: Or for Avarice, licking it so, that he gained great (if good) profit thereby. As for his expression, little Cleark, it is plain it referred not to his stature, but dwarfness in learning. However all this would not perswade him into a resignation of his Bishoprick, though it was not long before he lost both it and his life, by a fall from a skittish-horse, Anno Domini 1254. I find no Bishop born in this County since the Reformation, and therefore we may go on in our propounded method. Capital Judges, and Writers on the Law. Sir JOHN COKEYN Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the reign of King Henry the fourth, founded a worshipfull Family at, and imparted his Sirname to Cokeyn∣Hatley in this County. But being convinced, that he was born at Ashbourn in Derby∣shire, I have reserved his character for that County. EDMOND WINGATE Esq. was a Native of this County, whose family flourish∣eth at Hartington therein: He was bred in Greys- in the Study of our Common∣law, whereof he wrote besides others a Book Intitled, The Reason of the Common-law, and is lately deceased. Writers. JOHN of DUNSTABLE, so called from a Market-town in this County wherein he was born. If hitherto the Reader hath not, it is high time for him now, to take no∣tice of a person of such perfection. Indeed at first my Pen feared famishing, finding so little; since surfetting, meeting so much of this man. For this John of Dunstable was John of all Arts, as appeareth by his double Epitaph, one inscribed on his Monu∣ment, the other written on his memory. But be it premised of both, that we will not avouch the truth of the Latine, or quantity in these verses; but present them here as we find them, with all their faults, and his vertues on whom they were made. On his tombe in Saint Stephen's Wall∣brook, London. Clauditur hoc tumulo qui  pectore clausit, Dunstable I, Juris Astrorum conscius ille, ......... novit.....  pondere ; Hic vir erat tua Laus, tua Lux,  Musica Princeps Qui{que} tuas fulces per  sparserat Artes, .......................................................... Suscipiant proprium   sibi Cives The second made by Extant in  Fun. Mon. pag. 577. John Wheatham∣sted, Abbot of Saint Albans. Musicus hic Michalus alter, novus & Ptolo∣maeus. Junior ac Atlas supportans robore . Pausat sub cinere; melior vir de muliere Nunquam natus erat, vitii quia labe carebat. Et virtutis opes possedit unicus omnes. Perpetuis annis celebretur fama Johannis Dunstable; in pace requiescat & hic sine fine.
What is true of the bills of some unconscionable Trades-men, if ever paid, over paid; may be said of this hyperbolical Epitaphs, if ever believed, over believed. Yea, one may safely cut off a Third in any part of it, and the remainder will amount to make him a most admirable person. Let none say that these might be two distinct persons, seeing (besides the concurrence of time and place,) it would bank-rupt the Exchequer of Nature to afford two such persons, one  at once being as much as any will be∣lieve. This Dunstable died an. 1455. Sinee the Reformation. GEORGE JOY was born in this Bale. de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 9. County, though the exact place be not expressed. He was a great friend to Master Fox. Acts & Monu. pag. 1027. Tindall, and therefore perfectly hated by Woolsey, Fisher, and Sir Thomas Moor, the perticulars of his sufferings if known would justly advance him into the reputation of a Confessor.▪ He translated some parts of the Bible into English, and wrote many books reckned up by Bale; notwithstanding many ma∣chinations against his life, he found his Coffin where he fecht'd his Cradle, in sua patria sepultus, being peaceably buried in his native Country 1553. the last year of King Edward the sixth. FRANCIS DILLINGHAM was born at Dean in this County, and bred Fellow in Christ-Colledge in Cambridge. He was an excellent Linguist, and subtile Disputant. My Father was present in the Bachillors-Scholes, when a Greek Act was kept, between him and William Alabaster of Trinity-Colledge, to their mutuall commendation. A dis∣putation so famous that it served for an Aera or Epoche, for the Scholars in that age, thence to date their seniority. He was afterwards chosen Anno 1607. to be one of the Translators of the Bible, and being richly beneficed at Wilden in this County, died a single man, leaving a fair estate to his brother Master Thomas Dillingham, who was chosen one of the late As∣sembly, (though for age, indisposition, and other reasons not appearing therein,) and for many years was the humble, painfull, and faithfull Pastor of Deane, the place of his Nativity. WILLIAM SCLATER was born at So was I in∣formed by his Son, Doctor  late Minister of Peters  : Layton-buzard in this County, son to An∣thony Sclater the Minister thereof for fifty years together, who died well nigh an hun∣dred years of age. This William his son was bred in , then in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, where he commenced Bachillor, and (after many years discountinance) Doctor of Divinity. Hence he was invited to be  at Walsal in Stafford-shire, where he began his sermons (afterwards printed) on the three first Chapters of the Romans. Afterwards John Coles Esquire of Sommerset-shire over-intreated him into the Western parts, where he presented him Vicar of Pitmister. Here he met with mani∣fold and expensive vexations, even to the Jeopardy of his life, but by the goodness of God his own innocency and courage, with the favour of his Diocesan, he came off with no lesse honour to himself, then confusion to his adversaries. He was at first not well affected to the Ceremonies of the Church, but afterwards on his profound studying of the point, he was reconciled to them, as for order, and decen∣cy, and by his example others were perswaded to conforme. Constancy of studying contracted the stone upon him, which he used to call flagellum studiosorum. Nor was his health improved by being removed to a wealthier Living, when John Lord Pawlet of Hinton (at the instance of Elizabeth his Lady, in whose in∣heritance it was, a worthy favourer of piety and pious men,) preferred him to the rich Parsonage of Limpsam in Somerset-shire, where indeed there was scarce any element good save the earth therein. Whereupon for his own preservation he was re-perswaded to return to Pitmister, there continuing till the day of his death, which happened in the year of our Lord 1627. in the fifty one year of his age, leaving many learned works behind him, as his Comment on the Romans, and on the Thessalonians, Sermons at Pauls cross, and the treatise of Tithes, styled the Ministers portion, with other posthume works, some since set forth by, more remaining in the hand of his son William Scalter Doctor of Divinity, and Minister at London, lately deceased.
Benefactors to the Publick. Sir WILLIAM son to William HARPER was born in the Town of Bedford, but bred a Merchant-taylor in the City of London. Where God so blessed his endeavours, that Anno 1561. he was chosen Lord Mayor thereof. In gratitude to God and the place of his Nativity, he erected and Sto. Survey of London pag. 62. endowed a free-schole in Bedford, in which Town he lyeth buryed. HENRY GREY son to Henry Grey was born at Wrest in this County. Something must be premised of his extraction. Richard Grey third Earl of Kent of that family, was so profuse a person, that he wilfully wasted his Estate, giving away what he could not spend to the King and others; so little he reflected on Sir Henry Grey his Brother (but by a second Venter) of Wrest in this County. Hereupon the said Sir Henry, though heir to his Brother Richard after his death; yet perceiving himself overtitled or rather under-stated, for so high an honour, (the undoubted right whereof rested in him) declined the assuming thereof. Thus the Earldome of Kent lay (though not dead) asleep in the family of the Greys almost 50. years, viz. form the 15 of King Henry the eight till the 13. of Queen Elizabeth, when she advanced Reginald Grey, grand∣child to Sir Hen. Grey aforesaid, (who had thriftily recruted himself with competence of Revenues) to be Earl of Kent, Anno 1571. This Reginald dying Issuelesse within the year, Henry his Brother (the subject of our present description) succeeded to his honour. A person truly noble, expending the income of his own Estate and of his Ladies fair Joynter, (Mary the Relict of Edward Earl of Darby) in hospitality. He was a most Cordiall Protestant, on the same token that being present at the execution of the Queen of Scots, when she requested the Nobility there, to stand by and see her death, he (Camb. Eliz.  Anno 1587. fearing something of Superstition) hardly assented thereunto. Yet was he as far from the faction as Superstition, deserving the caracter given unto him. Idem in his Brit. in Kent. Omnibus verae nobilitatis Ornamentis vir longè Honoratissimus. He left no Isue, except some will behold him in some sort Parent of Sidney Colledge in Cambridge, as one of the executors to the Foundress thereof, who did both Prove and Improve her will, besides his Personall benefaction thereunto. And being the survi∣ving executor, he did perpetuate the fellowships (formerly temporary) according to the implicite trust deposited in him, to the advantage of that foundation. He died Anno Domini 1613. FRANCIS CLEARK Knight, was born at Eaton-soton in this shire near to Saint Neots, in the Lordship there commonly called the Parsonage. He was a noble Benefa∣ctour to Sidney-colledge, augmenting all the Scholarships of the Foundation, and erect∣ing a fair and firme range of building. Such his skill in Arithmetick and Architecture, that staying at home, he did provide to a brick what was necessary for the finishing thereof. He founded four new Fellowships, and had he been pleased to consult with the Colledge, the settlement with the same expence might have proved more ad∣vantageous. For, though in gifts to private persons, it be improper that the Re∣ceiver should be the Director thereof, a Corporation may give the best advise to im∣prove the favours conferr'd upon it. But it is a general practice, that men desire rather to be broad then thick Benefactours. However seeing every one may do with his own as he pleaseth, blessed be the me∣mory of this worthy Knight, whose gift in effect was selt by the Colledge before the giver thereof was seen, being himself a meer stranger unto it. Some say, that be∣cause this was the youngest foundation in the University (generally the last child hath the least left it,) his charity pitched upon it. But I have been informed, that Sir Fancis coming privately to Cambridge, to see unseen, took notice of Doctor Ward his daily presence in the Hall, with the Scholars conformity in caps, and diligent performance of exercises, which indeared this place unto him. Thus the observing of old Statutes, is the best load-stone to attract new Benefactours. His death happyned, Anno Domini, 163
Memorable Persons. A WOMAN, whose name I cannot recover, lived, died, and is buried at Dunstable in this County. It appeareth by her Hackwil's Apolog pag. 253. Epitaph in the Church, that she had nineteen children at five births, viz. three several times three children at a birth, and five at a birth, two other times. How many of them survived to mans estate is unknown. Here I must dissent from an Huartes in the trial of wits. Author maintaining that more Twins were born in the first Age of the World, then now adays. Whereas we meet with none but single births in the Patriarchs before the Flood, and more  six hundred years after the Deluge, Esau and Jacob were the first Twins mentioned in Scripture. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Thomas Chalton Thomas Chalton Dunstable Mercer 1449 2 William Stoker Thomas toker Eaton Draper 1484 3 William Butler ichard Butler Bidenham Grocer 1515 4 William Harper William Harper Bedford Merchant-Taylor 1561 The Names of the  of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. William Bishop of Lincoln, John de Fanhope Chivaler. Commissioners. John Wenlock Armig. Knights for the shire. John Gascoigne Armig. Knights for the shire. Abbatis de Woborn, & sui Celerarii Abbatis de Wardon Prioris de Dunstable Prioris de Chekesond Prioris de Nunham Prioris de Chaldwell Prioris de Buschemede Simonis Filbrigge, Chivaler. Henrici Bronnflete, Chivaler. Thomae  Chi∣valer. Thomae Maningham Thomae Hoo Johannis Broughton Iohan. Enderby Roberti Mordant Iohan. Hertusherne Hen. Godfrey Iohan. Boteler de Northzele Hum. Acworth Iohan. Ragon Thomae Ragon Iohan. Iohan. Radwell Iohan. Fyse Iohan. Coldington Chri. Preston Steph. Cruker Tho. Roxston Will. Lancelin Hen. de Lye Iohan. Conquest de Houghton Tho. Lonnde Walte. Lnnde Iohan. Lonnde Rich. Merston Iohan. eeke junioris Tho. Peeke Will. Peeke Iohan. Glove junio∣ris Iohan. Turvey de Turvey Iohan. Ferrour de Bedford Iohan. Gerveys de Maldon Hen. Etewell Rober. Bollock Will. Wale Nich. Ravenhull Nich. Low Valentini Bailli de Luton Willielmi White de eadem Iohan. Boughton Hugonis Hasselden Thomae Bailli de Houghton Will. Trought Hen. Manntell Rober. Valence Iohan. Attehay Will. Ypping Iohan. Petifer Tho. Purvey Will. Purvey Will. Shotfold Will. Wingate Will. Kene Tho. Stokker Ade Alford Iohan. Morton Tho. Morton Tho. Stratton Tho. Chamberlain Radulp. Cleark Math. Stepeing Nich. Harding Will. Marham Rich. Sampson Rober. Warner Iohan. Coke de Craw∣ley. Will. Sileham Will. Purvey Will. Rede Tho. Blondell Will. Milward Rober. Ratele Iohan. Kiggill de Todinton Iohan. Pestell de Nunham Thomae Chopper de Turvey Iohan. Marram Thomae Jakes Iohan. Pikot Will. Molso Iohan. Sewell Hen. Sewell Radul. Falwell Hug. Billingdon Iohan. Baldoe Will. Palmer Rober. Davy, junioris Iohan. Stanlow Rich. Lincoln
Waleri Taillard Thomae Spencer de Geton Iohan. Spencer Iohannis King de Harowdon Iohan. Wait Will. Bochell Thomae William Roberti Ratull Rober. Warner de le Hethe Ioan. Potter Iohan. Grecell Will. Bocher de Hen∣low Will. Hle de Chiting∣don Iohan. Halle Will. Ludsopp Iohan. Conquest de Houghton Stephani Cruker Tho. Rokeston Will. Lancelein Hen. de Lye o. Ragon Iohan. Mepurshale Iohan. Fitz Iohan. Pekke, junioris Hugonis Billingdou Tho. Pekke Will. Pekke Iohan. Glove, junio∣ris Hungry Time hath made a Glutton eal on this Catalogue of Gentry, and hath left but a very little morsell for manners remaining; so few of these are found extant in this hire, and fewer continuing in a Gentile Equipage. Amongst whom I must not forget the Family of the Blundels, whereof Sir Edward Blundell behaved himself right valiantly, in the unfortunate expedition to the Isle of Ree. Sheriffs of Bedford and Buckingham-shire. HEN. II. Anno 1 Rich. Basset & Albertus de Veer. Rob. Carun Anno 2 Henri de Essex consti∣tuit Simonem Fitz. Petre Vicecomitem for 4 years. Anno 6 Gal. filius Radulph Anno 7 Rich. filus Orti for 3 years. Anno 10 Hug. de la Leg & Rich. filius Osberti for 6 years. Anno 16 David. Archidea. & Will. filius Rich. Anno 17 Will. filius Rich. & David. Arch. for 3 years. Anno 20 Will. filius Rich. for 6 years. Anno 26 Will. Rufus for 7 years. Anno 33 Will. Rufus, & Oger. filius Ogeri, pro dimad. Anni. RICH. I. Anno 1 Will. Rufus for 6 years. Anno 7 Simon. de Belchampe for 3 years. Anno 10 Will. de Albeny & Rob. Braybrook JOHAN. R. Anno 1 Will. de Albeny Anno 2 Galf. filius Petri, & Rob. de Braybrook for 4 years. Anno 6 Rob. de Braybrook & Rob. filius Hemer. Anno 7 Rob. & Rober. Anno 8 Rob. filius Hemeri Anno 9 dem. Anno 10 Rob. de Braybrook for 3 years. Anno 13 Rob. de Braybrook, & Hen. filius ejus Anno 14 Hen. Braybrook, & Rob. Pater ejus Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Hen. Braybrook Anno 17 Idem. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Fulco de Breantel Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Ful. de Breantel & Rad. de Bray for 4 years. Anno 8 Ful. de Breantel Anno 9 Walt. de Pateshull de Ac∣cestane for 4 years. Anno 13 Steph. de Wegrave & Will. de Martiwaste Anno 14 Steph. de Segne Anno 15 Steph. de Segne & Rich. de Atteneston for 3 years. Anno 18 Steph. de Segne & Joh. Ulecot Anno 19 Radus. filius Reginald Anno 20 Will. de Bello Campo. & Ric. de Porchhalt Anno 21 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 22 Reginald. de Albo Mona∣sterio Anno 23 Rob. de Hega Anno 24 Pauus Penire Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Joh. rumband Anno 27 Will. Holdwell for 7 years. Anno 34 Alex. de Hammeden for 3 years. Anno 37 Nul. Tile Com. in Ro∣tulo Anno 38 Simon de Glendon Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Rob. le Savage. Rich. le Savage filius Johan. Anno 41 Rob. de Tottenhall Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Alex. de Hamden. for 4 years. Anno 47 Alex. de Hamden. & Si∣mon de Pateshill for 5 years. Anno 52 Edw. filius Regis Primo∣genitus Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Edw. filius primo genitus & Barthol. de Towen Sub∣vic. ejus for 3 years.
EDW. I. Anno 1 Thomas de Bray Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Hugo de Stapleford for 4 years. Anno 7 Johan. de Chedney for 4 years. Anno 11 Radul. de Goldington for 3 years. Anno 14 Will. de Boyvill for 3 years. Anno 17 Will. de Tarrevill Anno 18 Joh. de Popham Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Will. de Turrevill for 5 years. Anno 25 Sim. de Bradenham Anno 26 Walter. deMolesworth for 10 years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Gil. de Holme, & Wal. de Molesworth Anno 2 Will. Merre for 4 years. Anno 6 Walt. de Molesworth, & Joh. de Pabenham for 3 years. Anno 9 Joh. de la Hay Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Joh. de la Hay, & Rog. de Tirringham. Anno 12 Phil. de Aylesbury. & Rich. de Cave Anno 13 Rich. de Cave, & In∣gilran de Berenger Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Ingelramus Berenger Anno 16 Anno 17 Rog. de Tiringham Anno 18 Rog. de Tiringham & Joh. de la Hay Anno 19 Johan. de la Hay & Phil. de Aylesbury. EDW. III. Anno 1 Johan. de la Mareschall & Phil. de Aylesbury Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Joh. de Mareschall Anno 4 Phil. de Aylesbury for 3 years. Anno 7 Nul. Titl. Com. in Ro∣tulo Anno 8 Rad. de Wedon Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rich. Ward Anno 11 Rad. de Wedon Anno 12 Nich. de Passelow, & Will. Aloton Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Nich. Passelow Anno 15 Ger. de Braybrook Anno 16 Henric. Chalfhunt, & Gerrard. de Braybrook Anno 17 Joh. Aygnell, & Hen. Chalfhunt Anno 18 Hen. Chalfhunt, & Joh. Wignell Anno 19 Tho. de Swinford Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Will. Croyser Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Tho. Fernibrand Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Joh. Chastilion, & Tho. Fernibrand Anno 26 Joh. Chastilion Anno 27 Ger. de Braybrook Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Pet. de Salford, & Ger∣Braybrook Anno 30 Pet. de Salford Anno 31 Joh. de Hampden, & Hug. Chastilion Anno 32 Joh. de Hampden Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Pet. de Salford Anno 35 Joh. de Hampden Anno 36 Pet. de Salford for 4 years. Anno 40 Joh. de Aylesbury for 6 years. Anno 46 Johan. Chyne Anno 47 Johan. Ragoun Anno 48 Johan. Aylesbury Anno 49 Johan. de Arden Anno 50 Johan. de Broughton Anno 51 Johan. de Ollueyge Henry II. 1 RICHARDUS BASSET, & ALBERICUS DE VEER.] The Catalogue of the Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington-shires, as also of Essex and Hartford-shire, beginneth with the same names so that ix Counties (but all lying together) were under their inspection. None need to question, but that this Albe∣ricus de Veer was the very same with him, who by Maud the Empress was made the first Earl of Oxford, of whom hereafter this year in Cambridge-shire. Mean time we take notice of an Usterosis, beholding R. Basset (though first named) as his Under-Sheriff. 2. HENRY de ESSEX.] He is too well known in our English Chronicles, being Baron of Raleigh in Essex, and Here∣ditary Standard-bearer of England. It happened in the reign of this King, there was a fierce battle fought in Flint-shire at Coleshull, betwixt the English and Welch, wherein this Henry de Essex, Come Camdens Brit. in Essex, wth hm i Flint∣shre. Animum & Signum simul abjecit, betwixt Traitor and Coward cast away both his Courage and Banner together, occasioning a great over-throw of English. But he that had the baseness to doe, had the boldness to deny the doing of so foul a fact; untill he was challenged in combate by Robert de Momford, a Knight, Eye-wit∣ness thereof, and by him overcome in a Duell. Whereupon his large inheritance was confiscated to the King, and he himself, partly thrust, partly going into a Convent, hid his head in a Coul, under which, betwixt shame and sanctity, he blushed out the re∣mainder of his life.
16 DAVID ARCHIDIACONUS, &c.] It may justly seem strange, that an Arch-deacon should be Shriff of a Shire, and one would have sought for a person of his Profession rather in a Pulpit, then in a Shire∣Hall. Some will answer, that in that Age Men in Orders ingrossed not onely Places of Ju∣dicature, but also such as had Military and Martial Relations, whereof this Sheriff did in some sort partake. But under correction, I conceive, that though Bishops (who had also Temporall Baronies) were sometimes Sheriffs, yet no inferiour Clergy-men, being in Orders, were ever advanced to that Office, neither in Anoient, nor in Modern Times. Sure I am, that in the reign of King Charles, one being pricked Sheriff of Rutland, es∣caped, pleading that he was a Deacon. Yet we meet with many, whose surnames sound of Church-relation, both in the Catalogue of Ancient and Modern Sheriffs. 1. Abbot of London 2. Arch-deacon of Cornwall 3. Bishop of Sussex 4. Chaplain of Norfolke Clerk of Northamptonshire Dean of Essex Frier of Oxfordshire Moigne of Dorsetshire M on of Devonshire Parson of Buckinghamshire Pope of Oxfordshire Prior of London It addeth to the difficulty, that whereas persons of their profession were formerly enjoyned single lives, we find in this list some of their sons in the next generation Sheriffs also. But take one answer to all, as these were Lay▪men, so probably their Ancestors were Ecclesiasticks, and did officiate according to their respective Orders and Dignities. These afterwards having their patrimony devolved unto them, by the death of their elder bre∣thren, were dispenced with by the Pope to marry, yet so that they were always afterwards called by their former profession, which was fixed as a surname on their posterity. Thus we read how in France, Hugh de Lusignian, being an Arch-bishop (and the last of his fami∣ly) when by the death of his Brethren, the Signieuries of Partnay, Soubize, &c. fell unto him, he obtained licence to marry, on condition that his posterity should bear the name of Archevesque, and a Miter over their Arms for ever. As for the Surname of Pope in England, it is such a transcendent, I cannot reach it with mine own, and must leave it to more judicious conjectures. King John. 13. ROB. de BRAYBROOK, & HEN. filius. ejus.] 14. HEN. BRAYBROOK, & ROB. pater ejus.] Here is a loving reciprocation. First, a son Under-sheriff to his father, ▪that was his du∣ty; Secondly the father Under-sheriff to his son, that was his courtesie. Indeed I can name one Under sheriff to his own father, being a Gentleman of right worthy extra∣ction and estate, which son afterwards (in my memory) became Lord Chief Justice, and Treasurer of England. Henry III. 52 EDVARD. filius REGIS primo-genitus.] It soundeth not a little to the honour of these two shires, that Prince Edward, after∣wards the most renowned King of England, (first of his Christian name since the Con∣quest) was their Sheriff for five years together. Yea, the Imperial-Crown found him in that office, when it fell unto him, though then absent in Palestine. We may presume, that Bartholomew de Fowen his Under-sheriff, was very sufficient to manage all matters under him.
Sheriffs of Bedford and Buckingham-shire. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Ioh. de Aylesbury Aylesbury Azure a Cross Argent. 2 Tho. Peynere     3 Egidius Daubeny SOMER. Gules four Lozenges in Fess Argent. 4 Tho. Sackwell SUSSEX Quarterly Or and Gules a Bend Vayre. 5 Ioh. de Aylesbury ut prius   6 Idem. ut prius   7 Ioh. Widevill Northam. Arg. a Fess, & Canton Gu. 8 Rob. Dikeswell     9 Tho. Covell   Az. a Lion Ramp. Arg. a File of 3 Lambeaux Gu. 10 Ioh. de Aylesbury ut prius   11 Rad. Fitz. Rich.     12 Tho. Peynere     13 Tho. Sackvill ut prius   14 Edm. Hampden Hampden Buc. Arg. a Saltire G. betw. 4 Eaglets displayed Az. 15 Will. Teringham Teringhá B. Az. a Cross ingrailed Arg. 16 Tho. Peynere     17 Phil. Walwane     18 Ioh. Longvile Wolvertō Gules a Fess Indented betwixt 6 Cross Croslets Arg. 19 Edm. Hampden ut prius   20 Regin. Ragon     21 Ioh. Worship     22 Idem.     HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Tho. Eston     2 Edw. Hampden ut prius   2 Ro. Beauchamp Eaton Bed. G. a Fess, betw. 6 martlets Or. 3 Reg. Ragon     4 Iohan. Boys KENT Or a Griffin Sergreant S. within 2 Borders G. 5 Idem.     6 Edw. Hampden ut prius   7 Tho. Peynere     8 Rich. Hay   Sable, three Pickaxes Arg. 9 Bald. Pigott Stratton Bed.   10 Tho. Strickland YORK sh. G. a Chev. Or between 3 Crosses formee Arg. on a Canton ermin, a Bucks-head erased, sable. 11 Rich. Wyott     12 Bald. Pigott ut prius   HEN. V.     Ano     1 Tho. Strickland ut pris   2 Edw. Hampden ut prius   3 Tho. Wauton     4 Rich. Wyott     5 Ioh. Gifford     6 Will. Massy     7 Walt. Fitz. Rich.     8 Iohan. Radwell     9 Ioh. Radwellet     10 Will. Massy     11 Idem.     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Iohan. Wauton     2 Ioh. Chen▪y mil. Cheneys B. Checky Or & Az. a Fess G. Fretty Erm. 3 Rich. Wyott     4 Ioh. Cheney ut prius   5 Will. Massy, ar.     6 Hum. Stafford, ar.   Or, a Chev. G. a Quarter Erm. 7 Tho. Wauton, mi.     8 Tho. Hoo   Quarterly Sable, and Arg. 9 Ioh. Cheney ut prius   10 Egid. Daubeny, m. ut prius   11 Tho. Wauton, mil.     12 Ioh. Glove     13 Ioh. Hampden, ar. ut prius   14 Ioh. Broughton     15 Rob. Manfeld     16 Hum. Stafford, mi. ut prius   17 Ioh. Hampden ut prius   18 Walt. Strickland ut prius   19 Ioh. Brekenoll     20 Edw. Campden ut prius   21 Edw. Rede     22 Tho. Singleton     23 Ioh. Wenlock   Arg. a Chev. betw. 3 Black-more∣heads conped Proper. 24 Tho. Rokes     25 Tho. Gifford     26 Gor. Longvile ut prius   27 Idem. ut prius   28 Will. Gedney     29 Ioh. Hampden ut prius   30 Ro. Whittingham     31 Rob. Olney     32 Edw. Rede, ar.     32 Ioh. Poulter HARTF. Arg. a Bend voided Sable. 33 Tho. Singleton     34 Tho. Charlton, m.     35 Ioh. Hampden ut prius   36 Ioh. Maningham     37 Ioh. Heyton, ar.     38 Ioh. Broughton   Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Mullets Gules. EDWARD. IV     Anno     1 Edw. Rede, ar.     2 Tho. Reynes     3 Idem.     4 Pet. House, ar.     5 Ioh. Broughton ut prius   6 Ioh. Bottiler, mil. Biddenham G. a Fess compone Arg. & Sable betw. six Crosses Croslets Or. 7 Tho. Hampden ut prius   8 Ioh. Foster, ar. BERKS. S. a Chev. engrailed betw. 3 Arr. A. 9 Will. Lucy, ar.   G. Crasaly Or, 3 Pikes hauriant Arg. 10 Rob. Dooth, ar. CHESH. Arg. 3 Boars-heads erased Sable, Tusked Or. 11 Regin. Grey Wrest. Bed. Barry of 6 Ar. & Az. in chief 3 Toreauxes. 12 Ioh. Lanoston, ar.     13 Ioh. Botiler, mil. ut prius   14 Rich. Bulstrode   See our Notes in BUCKS. 15 Hugo. Brudenell BUCK. Ar. a Cheveron Gu. between 3 Chappws Az. 16 Edw. Molinen     17 Io. Rotheram, ar. Luton Bed. Vert 3 Roe-Bucks tripping Or, a Baston G. 18 Tho Rokes     19 Tho. Fowler     20 Rich. Enderby, ar.   Arg. 3 Bars Dancette S. a Pale in Chief Ermine. 21 Ioh. Verney   Az. on a Cross Arg. five mullets G 22 Tho. Hampden ut prius   RICH. III     Anno     1 Dru. Brudnell ut paius   2 Tho. Fowler     3 Ioh. Boone, mil.     HEN. VII.     Anno     6 Gor. Ingleton     2 Tho. Rokes     3 Tho. Fowler    
4 Ioh. Rtheram ut prius   5 Rich. Gofrey     6 Ioh. Laneston se.     7 Rich. Rstwood LaVache B▪   8 Edw. kaine, ar. Hatley Arg. three Cocks G. 9 Rich. Godfrey, ar.     10 Will. Rde     11 Tho. Darell Lillingstō B. Az. a Lion Ramp. Or, Crowned Argen▪ 12 Tho. Langston     13 Ioh. Gefford, ar.     14 David. Phillip, ar.     15 Rich estwood     16 Hug. Conway, mi.   S. on a Bne twixt 2 Cotises Ar. a Rose G. twixt  Annulets of the 17 Ioh. St. Iohn, mi. Bletso. Bed. Arg. on a Chief Gules 2 mullets pierced Or. 18 Rich Blount, ar.   Brry Formy  of  Or & sable. 19 Edw. Bulstrod, ar. ut prius   20 Tho. Darell ar. ut prius   21 Ioh. Cheyney, ar. ut prius   22 Will. Gascoigne Cardintō B. Arg. on a Pale S. a Lucies-head erected Or. 23 Ioh. Longvile, mi. ut prius   24 Geor. Harvey, ar.   . on a  Arg. three Tre-foiles . HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Mordant, ar. Turey Be. A. a Cheveron-inter 3. Estoiles S. 2 Ioh. Dive, ar. Brum B. Parte per Pale Arg. & G. a Fess Azure. 3 Rad. Verney, ar. ut prius   4 Tho. Dineham, ar.     5 Will. Gascoigne ut prius   6 Edw. Bray, ar.   Arg. a Chev. between 3. Eagles-legs rased . 7 Ioh. St. Iohn, mil. ut prius   8 Gor. Harvey, mil. ut prius   9 Will. Gascoigne ut prius   10 Mih. Fisher, ar.     11 Will. Rede, mil.     12 Ioh Cheney, ar. ut prius   13 Rob. Lee, mil. Quarendon Ar. a Fess btw. 3 Crssants S. 14 Rob. , ar. Winge Bu. Az. 10 Bellets 4, 3, , & 1, Or, in a chief of th second, a Lion Issuant . 15 Tho. Langston, ar.     16 Rad. Verney ut prius   17 Tho. Rotherham ut prius   18 dw. Grevill, mil.   Sable a Bordure & Cross Engrai∣ed Or, therein five pellets. 19 an. Pigote, ar. ut prius   0 Ih Hpden, m. ut prius   21 Ioh. St. Iohn, mil, ut prius   2 Mich. Fisher     23 Rob. Dormer, ar. ut prius   24 Edw. Dun, mil.     25 Rob. Lee, mil. ut prius   26 Ioh. St. Iohn, mil. ut prius   27 Rog. , ar. SHROP. Or, a Riven Proper. 28 Tho. Longvile, ar. ut prius   29 Will. Windsor, m. Bradenham Gules, a Saltier Arg. between 12 cross croslets Or. 30 Rob. Dormer, mil. ut prius   31 Tho. Rotheram, ut prius   32 Rad. Verney, mil. ut prius   33 Joh. Gostwick, m. Willingtō Arg. a Bend Gules cotized sable twixt 6 Cornish choughes proper on a Chief Or 3 mullets vet. 34 Idem. ut prius   35 Tho. Giffard, ar.     36 Mich. Fisher, mil.     37 Lod. Dye, ar. ut prius   38 Rob. Drury, mil.   Arg. on a Chief vert the Lette Tau betwixt 2 mullets pierced Or. EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Fran▪ Russell▪ mil. Cheneis A Lion Ramp. Gules on a chiefe sables 3 calops of the first. 2 Fran. Pigott, ar. ut prius   3 Ioh. St. Iohn, mil. ut prius   4 Tho. Rotheram, ut prius   5 Oliv. St. Iohn, ar. ut prius   6 Tho. Pigott, ar. ut prius   MARIA REG.     Anno     1 Will. Dormer, mi. ut prius   REX PHIL. & Ma. Regina.     Anno     1 Arth. Longvile, ar. ut prius   2 Rob. Drury, mil. ut prius   3 Rob. Peckham, mi.     4 Tho. Pigott, ar. ut prius   5 Hum. , m.   Arg. a Bend engrailed Sable. 6     REG. ELIZA:     Anno     1 Will. Hawtry, ar. Checkers B. Argent 4 Lioncells passant Sable betwixt 2 Gemews in end. 2 Tho. Teringham ut prius   3 Rob. Drury, mil. ut prius   4 Ioh. Goodwin, ar.     5 Paul Damil, ar.     6 Tho. Fleetwood, Vache Bu. Parte per pale Nebule Az & Or. 6 marteletts counterchanged. 7 Hen Cheyne, ui. Tuddington   8 Ioh. Cheny, ar.   AMP. 9 Ioh. Burlacy, ar.     10 Will. Dormer, mi. ut prius Sable a Fess engrailed  3 flower. de luce Arg. 11 Edw. Ashfeld, mi.     12 Lod. Mordant, mi. ut prius   13 Tho. Pigo, ar. ut prius   14 Lodo. Dive, ar. ut prius   15 Gor Peckham, mi.     16 Rad. Astry, ar. Harlingtō B. Barry-wave of 6. Arg. & Az. on a Chief G. 3 Bezants. Henry VI. 8 TNOMAS HOO.] If any ask me the place of his residence in these Counties, I must returne, non sum informatus. But this is he, who is caractered by Brit. . Master Camden, Vir egregius, whom King Henry the sixth made Knight of the Garter, and Lord Hoo and Hatings. He left four Daughters thus married. 1 Anne to Sir Jeffry Bollen. 2 Eleanor to Sir Richard Carew. 3 Jane to Robert Cople, Esq. 4 Elizabeth to Sir John Devenish. From the first of these was Queen Elizabeth descended. Some of the Issue Male of the same family were very lately extant in Hertford-shire. 23 JOHN WENLOCK.] His surname seemeth to have something in it of Salopin reference, to a Market-town therein so called; However, his principal residence was (but where, to me unknown) in this County, whereof he was returned Knight to the Paliament, in the twelfth of this Kings reign. The very same, whom afterwards this King created Baron Wenlock,
and Knight of the Garter, and who afterwards lost his life in His cause, valiantly fight∣ing in the battle of Teuxbury. It is charity to enter this memorial of him, the rather because he died without issue, (and his fair estate forfeited to King Edward the fourth, was quickly scattered amongst many Courtiers) but from his Cousin and Heire-gene∣ral, the Lauleys in Shropshire are lineally descended. Henry VII. 17 Sir JOHN SAINT JOHN, Mil.] There were three Sir John Saint Johns successively in the same family, since their fix∣ing in this County: 1. The father, (this year Sheriffe) being son to Sir Oliver Saint John, by Mar∣garet daughter and sole heir to Sir John Beauchamp. This Margaret was afterwards married to John Duke of Somerset, to whom she bare Margaret, Mother to King Henry the seventh. 2. The son [Sheriffe in the seventh year of King Henry the eighth.] 3. The grand-child, Sheriffe in the third of Edward the sixth, and father to Oliver the first Lord Saint John. This we insert to avoid confusion, it being the general complaint of Heraulds, that such Homonymie causeth many mistakes in pedigrees. 22 WILLIAM GASCOIGNE.] Much wondering with my self how this Northem Name stragled into the South, I con∣sulted one of his Family, and a good Antiquary, by whom I was informed that this William was a Younger Brother of Gauthorpe house in York-shire, and was settled at Car∣dinton nigh Bedford in this County, by Marrying the Inheritrix thereof. He was after∣wards twice Sheriffe under King Henry the eighth, Knighted, and Controler of the House of Cardinall Woolsey. A rough Gentleman, preferring rather to profit then please his Master. And although the Pride of that Prelate, was sar above his Covetousnesse, yet his Wisedome well knowing Thrift to be the Fuell of Magnificence, would usually disgest advice from this his Servant, when it plainly tended to his own Emolument. The Name (and which is worse) the Essate is now quite extinct in this County. Henry VIII. 1 JOHN MORDANT, Ar.] He was extracted of a very Ancient parent in this County, and married one of the Daughters and Heirs of Henry Vere of Addington in Northampton-shire, whereby he re∣ceived a great Inheritance, being by Aged persons, in those parts, remembred by the name of John of the Woods. (Reader I was born under the shadow), and felt the warmth of them,) so great a Master he was of Oaks and Timber in that County, be∣sides large possessions he had in Essex, and elswhere. King Henry the eight owning him deservedly for a very wise man, created him Baron Mordant of Turvey. 29 WILLIAM WINDSOR, Mil.] He was descended from Walter Fitz Cam: Brit. in Bark-shire. Otho, Castle-keeper of Windsor, in the time of King William the Conqueror, and was by King Henry the eighth created Baron Windsor of Bradenham in Buckingham-shire Ancestor to the present Lord Windsor, descended from him by an Heir-general so that Hickman is his Surname. Eward VI. 1 FRANCIS RUSSEL, Mil.] He was Son to John Lord Russel, afterward Earl of Bedford. Succeeding his Fa∣ther in his honour, so great was his Hospitality that Queen Elizabeth was wont to say pleasantly of him, That he made all the beggars. He founded a small School at Wo∣bourne, and dying in great age and honour, was buried at Cheneys 1585. 5 OLIVER SAINT JOHN, Ar.] He was by Queen Elizabeth made Lord Saint John of Bletso in this County, and left two sons who succeeded to his honour. First John whose onely daughter Anne was married to William Lord Effingham, and was mother to Elizabeth now Countess Dow∣ager of Peterborough. His second son was Oliver, blessed with a numerous issue, and Ancestor to the present Earl of Bullinbrook.
Queen Mary. 1 WILLIAM DORMER, Mil.] He was son to Sir Robert Dormer (Sheriffe the 14. of K. Henry the 8.) by Jane Newdigate his wife, which Lady was so zealous a Papst, that after the death of Q. Mary, she left the land, and lived beyond the Seas. This Sir William by Mary Sidney, his wife, had a daughter, married to the Count of Feria, when he came over hither with King Philip. This Count, under pretence to visit his sick Lady, remaining here, did very earnest∣ly move aCam. Eliz.  1558. match betwixt King Philip, his Master, and Queen Elizabeth, which in fine took no effect. He the also mediated for Jane Dormer, his Grand-mother, and some other fugitives, that they might live beyond the Seas, and receive their revenues out of England; which favour the Queen though not fit to indulge, whereat the Count was so incensed, hat he moved Pope Pius the fourth to excommunicate Her,Uxore frustra  itente idem, Anno 1560. though his wife did with all might and maine oppose it. Sheriffs of this County alone. Name Place Armes REG. ELIZA.     Anno     17 . Rotheram, Es. Farly Vert, 3 Roe bucks tripping Or, a Baston Gul. 18 Ioh ewelbury G. a Salter engrailed Arg. 19 Ge. Kenesham. Es. Temsford   20 Ioh. Spencer, Esq Cople   21 Nich. Luke, Esq. Woodend Ar. a Bugle-horn S. 22 Hen. Butler, Esq. Biddenhā G. a Fess Chokee Ar. & S. betw. 6 Cross  Ar. 23 Ioh. Tompson, Es. Crawley   24 Ric. Conquest, Es. Houghton Q. Ar. & S. a Labelw▪th 3 points. 25 Lodo. Dive, Esq. Brumham Parte per Pale Ar. et G. a Fess Az. 26 Ioh. Rowe, Esq & Ric. Charnock, Es. Holeot Ar. on a Bend S. 3 Crosses Croslet of the field 27 Oliv. St. John, Es.   Ar. on a Chief G. 2 Mullets Or. 28 Ric. Charnock, Es. ut prius   29 Will. Butler, Esq. ut prius   30 Rad. Astry, Esq. Westning Barrwavee of six Ar. & Az. on a Chief G. 3 Bezants. 31 Oliv. St. John, Es. ut prius   32 Ge Rotheram, Es. ut prius   33 Exp. Hoddeson, Es. ut prius   34 Will. Duncombe Batlesden Party per Chev. countr Flore G. & Arg. 3 Talbots-heads Erazed countercharged. 35 Nich. Luke, Esq. ut prius   36 Ioh. Dive, Esq ut prius   37 Wil. Gostwick, Es. Willingtō Arg. a Bend G. cotized S. twixt 6 Crnish chaughes proper on a chief Or 3 Mullets vert. 38 Ric. Conquest, Es. ut prius   39 Tho. Cheney, Esq. Sundon   40 Edr. Rateliffe, Kt. Elstow Arg. a Bend engrailed S. 41 Wll. Butler, Esq ut prius   42 Ioh. Crost, Kt.     43 Ric Charnocks, Es. ut prins   44 Geo. Francklyn, Malvern   45 Ioh. Dive, Kt. ut prius   JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Ioh. Dive, Kt. ut prius   2 Ioh. Leigh, Esq.     3 Edr. Sands, Kt. Eaton   4 Fran. Anderson, E. Eworth Arg. a Cheveron twixt 3 Cross∣Croslets S. 5 Tho. Snagge, Kt. Marson   6 Edw Mordnt, Es. Ockley Aa. a Chev.  3 Estoyles S. 7 Tho. Ancell, Esq. Barford G. on a Saltier Or, betw. 4 Bezants a Malcel of the first. 8 Fran Ventres, Kt. Campton Azu. a lutie beewaot 2 Bends∣wavy Arg. 9 Rob. Sandy, Esq.     10 Wil. Beecher, Esq. Hooberry   11 Ric. Sanders, Esq. Marson Parte per Ch. Ar. & S. 3 Elephants heads Erazed ceunterchanged. 12 Edw. Duncombe ut prius   13 Will. Plomer, Esq. Holms Vert a Ch. between 3 Lions-heads Erazed O Billited G. 14 Rog. Burgoyne,* Sutton   15 Oliv. Luke, Kr. ut prius * G a Chev. Or, between 3 Talbots on Chief embattled Arg. as many martlets S. 16 Edw. Conquest, K ut prius   17 Ge. Keynsham, Es.     18 Fran. Stanton, Es. Birchmor.   19 Will. Bryers, Esq. Woodbery   20 Will. Hawkins, Es. Tilbrook   21 Fran. Clerke, Kt.     22 Math. Denton, Es. Barton   CAR. I. REX     Anno     1 Ioh. Wingate, esq. Harlingtō S. a Bend Erm. Cotized Or betw. 6 martlets Arg. 2 Edw. Gostwick, kt. ut prius   3 Ioh. Moore, esq.     4 Anth. Chester, ba.   Pr pale, Ar. & S. a Chev. betw. 3 ams-heads ervsed armed Or, within a horderingrailed round∣ly, all counterchanged. 5 Mich. Grigg, esq.     6 Will. Cater, esq.* Kempston   7 Edm. Anderson, ut prius   8 Ia. Beverley, esq.† Clapwell * Erm. an a Pile G. a Lion Pass. Gard. Or. 9 Oufl. Winch, esq. Everton   10 Hum. Monoux, es. Wootton † Emine, a Rose Gules. 11 Rich. Gery, esq. Bushmede   12 Hen. Chester, esq. ut prius   13 Will. Boteler, esq. ut prius   14 Will. Plomer, esq. ut prius   15 Rich. Child, esq. Puddingtō G. a Chev. engrailed Erm. twixt 3 Doves Arg. 16 Ioh. Burgogne, es. ut prius   17 Tho. Alflon, Kt. b. Wodhill Azure, ten Stars Or. 18     19     20 Nich. Denton, esq.     21     22 Math. Taylor, esq. Eaton   The Farewell. Being to take my farewell of this County, I am minded of the mistake (what Wri∣ter is free from them?) in Mr. Stow, telling us ofStow in survey of London pag. 18 writing of the river Thames. tide-boats, till-boats and barges, which come from Bedford-shire down the Thames to London, which surely must row over many miles of drie-land in their passage thereunto. But, if there be a possibility of such a conveyance by art and industry to be effected, may his words prove true by way of pre∣diction, seeing certainly such a conveniency must needs be advantagious to this County.
BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE. BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE it is a long narrow County, (the miles therein proportioned accordingly) stretching forty four miles from North to South, whilst the breadth is content with fourteen at the most. A fruitfull Country, especially in the vale of Alesbury, where one [lately]intire Pasture, called Beryfield (now part of the Inheritance of Sir Robert Lee, Baronet) in the Mannor of Quarendon, is let yearly for eight hundred pounds, the tenant not complaining of his Bargaine. This County takes its name from Buckingham the chief town therein, as that from Beeches, (called in the Saxon tongue Buccen) growing plentifully thereabouts, as in o∣ther places in this County, and therefore placed first amongst its Naturall Commodities. Beech. This was esteemed sacred amongst the Romans.Plin, lib. D.|cimo sxto pag. 87. cap. 38. vers. 44. Manius Curis juravit se ex praeda nihil attigisse, praeter guttum faginum quo sacrificaret; Protested, that he touched nothing of the Prey besides a Beech-cup, wherewith he should sacrifice. It is also Medicinall, though we would wish none sore Lips or Eyes, to try the truth ofPlin. lib. Ni∣gs. quar. pag. 442. cap. 5. vers. 37. Plinys report, whe∣ther Beech-leaves cure the one, or the ashes of Beech-mast heal the other. Our ordinary ue thereof (besides making of many Utensils) is for building of Houses. One asked, when Beach would make the best Timber, meaning what season of the year was best to cut it down for that purpose: It was answered, that Beech would make the best Timber when no Oake was to be had; a time I assure you which daily approcheth in our Land. Hence it was, that such care was taken in the reign of KingSta. 35. of Hen. the eight cap. 17. Henry the eighth, (when woods were in a far better condition then now adays,) for the preserving of the Standells of Beech. As also it was provided in theStat. Primo Eliza. cap. 15. first of Queen Elizabeth, that no Timber-trees of Oak, Beech and Ash, (where Beech deservedly is made second,) being one foot square at the Stub, and growing within fourteen miles of the Sea, or any Navigable River, should be converted to coal or fewell, as the debasing of that, which if Nature did not first intend, Necessity must employ for better service. Sheep. The best and biggest bodied in England are the Vale of Ailsbury in this County, where it is nothing to give ten pound or more for a Breed-ram. So that, should a For∣rainer hear of the price thereof, he would guess that Ram rather to be some Roman Engine of battery, than the creature commonly so called. I know not, whether his observation, with the reason thereof, be worth the insert∣ing, who first took notice, that our cattle for food, are English, when feeding in the field, but French when fed on in a family. English 1. Sheep. 2. Ox. 3. Calfe. 4. Hog. 5. Pigg. French 1. Mutton. 2. Beef, 3. Veal. 4. Bacon. 5. Pork. Whereof he assigned this reason, that after the Norman-conquest the French so tyran∣nized over the English-tenants, that they forced them to keep and feed their cattle, but the Monsieurs eat all their good meat, after it was slaughtered. Forrainers much admire at our English sheep, because they doe not (as those beyond the seas) follow their shephards like to a pack of dogs, but wander wide abroad; and the Popish priests tell their simple flocks, that this disobedience of our sheep happen∣eth unto us,Sam.   pag. 84. because (Risum teneatis amici?) we have left the great Shephard the Pope, whereas they did so long before our separation from Rome, because freed from the fear of wolves (infesting them in forraine parts) they feed safely in the fields, needing nei∣ther guide to direct, nor guard to defend them.
Tame Pheasants. They first took their name from Phasis a River in Asia, and long their flight thence into England: A Fowl fair in the Feathers, a Cock especially, (Males by nature (though Female by art) the finest of both Sexes) and dainty in the flesh. Aboundance of these are kept about Wicombe, the care being more then the cost, seeing their generall repast is on Pismires. Whether these tame be as good as wild-pheasants, I leave to Pallate-men to decide. The Manufactures. It is true of this County, that it liveth more by its Lands then by its Hands. Such the fruitfulness, venting the native Commodities thereof at great rates, (thank the vicinity of London, the best Chapman) that no handy-crafts of note, (save what com∣mon to other countries) are used therein. Except any will instance in Bonelace, much thereof being made about Owldney in this County, though more I believe in Devon∣shire, where we shall meet more properly therewith. Proverbs. Mich. Dra∣ton in his P ly olbion. Buckingham-shire Bread and Beef.] The former is as fine, the latter as fat in this as in any other County. If therefore the inhabitants thereof come with hearty grace and hungry appetites, no doubt both strength and health will follow on their repast. Here if you beat a Bush it's odds youl'd start a Idem ibidem. Thief.] No doubt there was just occasion for this Proverb at the Originall thereof, which then contained Satyricall truth, proportioned to the place before it was Reformed, where∣of thus our Cam. Brit. in Buckinghamsh. great Antiquary. It was altogether unpassable in times past by reason of Trees, untill that Leofstane Abbot of St. Albans did cut them down, because they yeilded a place of refuge for thieves. But this Proverb is now Antiquated, as to the truth thereof, Buckingham-shire af∣fording as many maiden Assizes as any County of equall populousness. Yea, hear how she pleadeth for her self, that such High-way-men were never her Natives, but fled thither for their Shelter out of Neighbouring Counties. Saints. St. EDBURG daughter unto Redwald King of the East-Angles embraced a Mo∣nasticall life at Alesbury in this Couny, where her Body was deposited, and removed afterwards to Edburgton, (now Edburton) in Suffolk her Native Country; It seems her person would make one County proud, which made two happy. Alesbury observing her Memory on the day of———whilst Edburton was renowned for her Miracles. By the way, it seems wonderfull that in Scripture we onely meet with one Posthume∣Miracle, viz. the Grave-fllow of Elisha, raised with the touch of his Bones; whilst most of Popish miracles are [reported] born after the Saints death, meerly to mold mens minds to the Adoration of their Reliques. St. RUMALD was the same with St. Rumbald, (commonly called by Country people St. Grumbald,) and St. Rumwald as others spell him; but distinct from ano∣ther St. Rumwald of Irish extaction, a Bishop and Martyr, whose Passion is Celebrated at Mchlyn in Braband. This Criticisme, Reader, I request thee to take on my credit for thy own ease, and not to buy the truth of so difficult a trise with the trouble I paid for it. Entring now on the Legend of his life, I writ neither what I believe, nor what I expect should be believed, but what I find written by others. Some make him Son of a British The English Martyrology on the 28. of August. King, which is sufficiently confuted by his own Saxon name. More pro∣bable their tale who relate him Son to a King of Northumberland, by a Christian daughter of Penda King of Mercia. Being born at Cam▪ Brit. in Buckinghamsh. Kings Sutton in this County, as soon as he came out of his Mothers womb, he cryed three times, I am a Christian.
Then making a plain Consession of his faith, He desired to be baptized, chose his God∣fathers and his own name Rumwald. He also by his fingers  Legend Anglica in the life of Saint Rumwald. directed the standers by to fetch him a great hollow-stone for a font, which sundry of his fathers servants essayed in vain as much above their strength: Till the two Priests (his designed Godfathers) did goe and fetch it easily at his appointment. Being Baptized, He for three days discoursed of all the Common places of Popery, and having confirmed their truth, he bequeathed his body to remain at Sutton one year, at Brackly two, and at Buckingham ever after. This done he expired. Reader, I partly guess by my own temper how thine is affected with the reading hereof, whose soul is much divided betwixt severall actions at once. 1. To frown at the impudency of the first inventors of such improbable untruths. 2. To smile at the simplicity of the believers of such improbable untruths. 3. To sigh at that well-intended devotion abused with such improbable untruths. 4. To thank God that we live in times of better and brighter knowledge. Now although St. Rumwald was born in this County, he was most honoured at Box∣ley in Kent, and thereon a story depends. There was in the Church of Boxley a short Statue of St. Rumwald (as of a boy-saint) smal, hollow, and light, so that a child of seven years of age might easily lift it. The moving hereof was made the Criterion of womens chastity. Such who paid the Priest well might easily remove it, whilst others might tugg at it to no purpose. For this was the contrivance of the cheat, that it was fastned with a Pin  i his Perambu∣lation of Kent pag. 187. of wood by an invisible stander behind. Now when such offered to take it who had been bountifull to the▪ Priest before, they bare it away with ease, which was impossible for their hands to remove who had been Close-fisted in their Confessions. Thus saith my Idm ibidem: Author it moved more laughter then Devotion, and many chast virgins and wives went away with blushing faces, leaving (without cause) the suspicion of their wantonness in the eyes of the Beholders; whilst others came off with more credit, (because with more coyn,) though with less cha∣stity. The certain time of his life is unknown, but may be guessed about the year 680. Martyrs. JOHN SCRIVENER was Martyred at Amersham Anno Dom. 1521. on whom an ex∣traordinary piece of cruelty was used, his own Fox Acts and Mon pag. 838▪ children being forced to set the first fire upon him, for which the law Deut. 13. 6. was most erroneously pretended, as will appear by the perusing thereof, If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy▪ son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosome, or thy friend which is as thy own soul entice thee secretly, saying, let us go and serve other gods.——Thou shalt not consent unto him, nor hearken unto him.——But thou shalt surely kill him, thine hand shall be first upon him to put him to death. See we here how in the case of Idolatry one is to spare none related unto them, either as Equalls or Inferiors. But this Law injoines not children to accuse or execute their own parents, as Scrivener his children were compelled to do. A barbarous cruelty, especially seeing the Civil law among the heathen Romans did provide, that filius non torquetur in caput parentis, A son shall not be examined on the rack to accuse his father, in such cases wherein his life is concerned. Others besides Scrivener were martyred, and more Confessors  in this small County, See Fox his Acts and Mon. in that yer. Anno 1521. then in all England elsewhere for twenty years together. Pelates. RICHARD de WENDOVER, (a place well known in this Shire,) was Rector of Bromley in Kent, where the Bishop of Rochester hath a Palace▪ and that See being va∣cant, he was lawfully chosen the Bishop thereof. But Edmond Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury (afterwards Sainted) refused to give him consecration, because he was rude Godwin in the Bishops of Ro. and unlearned. Hereupon Wendover appealed to the Pope, whom he found his better friend, because Edmond (a bitter inveigher against Papal extorsions) was a Foe unto him, and so was consecrated. Now none will grdge him his Place amongst our Worthies, seeing what he lack'd in learning he had in holiness, and such his signal Idem ibidem. sanctity, that after his
death he was by speciall Mandate of King Henry the third buried in the Church of West∣minster (as another Jehojadah) for his publick2 Chr. 2416. goodness, Anno 1250. JOHN BUCKINGHAM (for so his Name is truly written) aliàs Bokingham and Bukingham, took his Name and Nativity no doubt from Buckingham in this County, a∣la-mode of that Age. He was bred at the University of Oxford, and although since by some causelesly slandered for want of Learning, was a great Disputant, and well studied Scholar, as hisJ. Bile & J. Pits de script. Bt. works do declare. He was afterwards preferred Bishop of Lincoln, where several contests happened betwixt him and Pope Boniface the ninth, who in revenge ex plenitudine Potestatis removed him from Lincoln to Litchfield, that is, from the Hall in∣to the Kitchin, a Bishoprick of less credit and profit. Buckingham grew sullen hereat, and would rather shut himself out, then play at a less game, and so quitting Episcopacy 1397. lived and died a private Monck at Canterbury, where he lies buried the lower∣most in the body of Christ-Church, under a very fair Grave-stone, as myill. Sommers in his Anti∣quities of Cant. pag. 181. industrious friend hath well retrived his memory, though the brasse on his Monument be worn or rather torn away. He indented with the Prior and Covent at Canterbury, to build him a Chantry-Chappel near his Sepulcher, which I find not performed. JOHN YOUNG was born atNew▪ col. Regi. Anno 1482. Newton-longvile in this County, and bred in New∣colledge in Oxford, on the same token that there are no fewer then ten Youngs in their Register, reckoned Fellows of that Foundation; and one said, that Seeing the Colledge was always New, well may many Fellows be Young therein. This John Young became Warden thereof, and afterwards was made Bishop of the fair City of Callipoli in Greece. An excellent place to fat a (neither Camel nor Lion but) Camelion in, and seeing the great Turk was his Tenant, little the rent he paid to this his Landlord. However this titular Bishoprick gave him Precedency, a Vote in General Councils, and Power of Ordina∣tion. But some English Earth doth not well with such Grecian Aire, and for his better support he was made Master of the Rowles Jan. 12. in the first of KingJ. Philpot in his Catalogue of the Masters of the Rowles. Henry the eighth, and either died or resigned his Office some eight years after. As I remember he lieth buried with a brass Inscription in New-colledge Chappel. JOHN HOLYMAN was born atNew-colledge Register Anno Dom. 1512. Codington in this County, bred in New-colledge in Oxford, and afterwards became a Benedictine in Reading, untill that Monastery was dissol∣ved. Queen Mary in the first of her reign preferred him Bishop of Bristoll, whilst his predecessor Paul Bush (deprived for being married) was yet alive. He lived peaceably, not embrewing his hands in Protestants bloud, and died seasonably for himself, a little before the death of Queen Mary, 1558. Since the Reformation. JOHN HARLEY was born in the Parish of Newport-Paganel in this County, as a learnedMr. Martin beneficed neer Northampton. Antiquary (a native of the same place) hath informed me, where some of his kindred were lately (if not still) in being. He was bred first Fellow, then School∣Master in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, in the dangerous days of King Henry the eighth, he was an hearty but concealed Protestant. In the first week of the reign of King Edward the sixth, whilst most mens minds stood at a gaze (it being dead-water with them, which way the tide would turn,) Master Harley in the Parish-Church of Saint Peters in Oxford and a solemn Lent-Sermon, pub∣liquely preached Antipapal doctrine, and powerfully press'd justification by faith alone, whereupon the over-officiousLaurence Humphred in the latine life of Bishop Je∣wel. Vice-Chancellor hurried him up to London for an He∣retick, there to answer for his contempt. But the case was soon altered, Harley was acquitted, commended, preferred to be Tutor to the sons of John Earl of Warwick, afterwards Duke of Northumberland. He was thence made Bishop of Hereford. It is said ofGen. 15. 15. Abraham, he was buried in a good old age. It cannot be said of our Harley, he died in an old age (finding him not above fifty,) though expiring in a good age in two respects; in relation to the piety of his life past, and in reference to the fu∣ture troubles, which immediately followed. Surely had he survived a little longer, he had lost his life, as he did his Bishoprick for beingBp. Godwin in his . of the Bishops of Hereford. married, in the first of Q. Mary.
Doctor LAURENCE HUMPHRED, Harley his Scholar in Magdalen-colledge hath consecrated this Distick to the memory of his Master, though the Muses in my mind looked very solemnly, without the least smile at the making thereof, Flo domui Harlaeus, socius ludique Magister, Celsus-deinde throno, celsior inde polo. He died Anno Domini 1554. shifting from place to place, the cause why there is no certain intelligence where he was interred. ROBERT ALDRICH, although he lived but in the twilight of Religion, he is justly to be placed not on the Dark but Light side of Reformation. For though his actions were but weak, his affections were sincere therein. Mr. Hatchers in his Manu∣script Cat. of the Fellows of Kings-colledge. Born he was at Burnham in this County, bred in Kings-colledge in Cambridge, ▪Proctor of that University anno 1525. About which time many letters passed betwixt him and his familiar friend Erasmus, who stileth him Blandae eloquentiae juvenem. He was afterward School-ma∣ster, then Fellow and Provoster of Eaton, and at last made Bishop of Carlile, anno 1537. by King Henry the eighth. He was never a through paced Papist, (much lesse a perse∣cutor of Protestants,) though a complyer with some superstitions. He died at Horn∣castle in Lincoln shire, (a house belonging to his See) in the reign of QueenGodwin in his Catal. of . Mary, 1555. WILLIAM ALLEY was born atMr. Hatcher ut prius. Wikham in this County, bred first at Eaton, then in Kings-colledge, where he was admitted Anno Domini 1528. Hence he went away being Batchelour of Arts, and afterwards became Lecturer in Saint Pauls, I say Lecturer, which name though since it hath sounded ill in some jealous ears as infected with faction, was an ancient office founded in some Cathedralls to read Divinity there, and this Master Alleys learned lectures (according to that age) are Extant in Print. He was Consecrated Bishop of Exeter, July 14. 1560. and dying 1576. lyeth buried un∣der a fair Marble in his own Cathedrall. RICHARD COX was born atIdem ibidem. Whaddon in this County, and bred for some years in Kings-colledge in Cambridge; Even when Cardinal Woolsy was erecting Christs∣church in Oxford. This great Prelate, desiring that this his Colledge should be as fair within as without, and have learning answerable to the building thereof, employed his Emisaries, to remove thither the most hopefull Plants of Cambridge, and this Richard Cox amongst the rest. He became afterwards School-master of Eaton, which was happy with many florishing wits under his endeavours, and Haddon amongst the rest whom he loved with filiall affection, nor will it be amisse to insert the Poeticall Passe betwixt them. Walter Haddon to Doctor COX his School-master. Vix caput attollens è lecto scribere carmen Qui velit, is voluit, scribere plura, Vale. Doctor COX to Walter Haddon his Scholar. Te magis optarem salvum sine armine Fili Quam sine te salvo, carmina multa, Vale. Hence he was sent for to be Instructor to Prince Edward, which with good conscience, to his great credit he discharged. Here, Reader, forgive me in hazarding thy cen∣sure, in making and translating a Distick upon them, Praeceptor doctus, docilis magis an puer ille? Ille puer docilis, Praeceptor tu quque doctus. Master more able, child of more docility? Docil the child, Master of great ability. At last he was prefered Bishop of Ely 1559. commendably continuing therein, what∣ever causless malice hath reported to the contrary, twenty one years, and dying Anno Domini, 1580. THOMAS BICKLEY was born atGodwin in Catal. of . of Chichester. Stow in this County, bred first Chorister, then Scholar, then Fellow in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. In the first of Edward the sixth his detestation of Superstition may rather be commended, then his discretion in ex∣pressing it, when (before the publique abolishing of Popery) at Evening-prayer he brake the consecrated Host with his hands, andDr. Humfred in his Latine life of Bishop Jewel pag. 73. stamped it under his feet, in the Col∣ledge-chappel. Afterwards he fled over into France, living an exile at Paris & Orleans all the reign of Queen Mary. Returning into Eugland, he became Chaplain to Arch-bishop Parker, who preferred him Warden of Merton-colledge, wherein he continued twenty years. When pass'd the age of a man (eighty years old) he began the life of a Bishop,
and was rather contented, then willing to accept the Bishoprick of Chichester * freely    , non nim   pit. Godwin ut ps. offered unto him. Yet lived he eleven years therein, and died ninety years of age, April 30 1596. and had a most sumptuous funerall, all the Gentry of the Vicinage doing their homage to the Crown of his old age, which was foun'd in the way of truth. He led a single life, left an hundred pound to Merton-colledge, and other moneys to pious uses. JOHN KING was born at Warnhall nigh Tame in this County, Robert King the last Abbot of Osney and first Bishop of Oxford being his great Uncle, he was first Deane of Christ-church, then Bishop of London, being ful fraught with all Episcopal qualities, so that he who endeavoureth to give a perfect account thereof, will rather discover his own defects, then describe this Prelates perfections. He died Anno Dom. 1618. being bu∣ried in the Quire of Saint Pauls with the plain Epitaph of Resurgam, and I cannot con∣ceal this elegant Elegie made upon him. Sad Relique of a blessed soul, whose trust We sealed up in this Religious dust. O do not thy low Exequies suspect, As the cheap Arguments of our Neglect. 'Twas a commanded duty that thy Grave As little pride as thou thy self should have. Therefore thy covering is an humble stone, And, but a word, Resurgam. for thy inscription; When those that in the same earth neighbour thee, Have ach his Chronicle & Pedigree. They have their waving Pennons and their flaggs, Of Matches and Alliance formal Braggs. Whenthou (although from ancestors thou came, Old as the Heptarchy, great as thy name,) Sleepst there inshrin'd in thy admired parts, And hast no Heraldry but thy deserts. Yet let not them their prouder Marbles boast, For they rest with less Honor, though more cost. Go search the world, & with your Mattokwound The groaning bosom of the patient ground. Digg from the hidden veins of her dark womb All that is rare and precious for a tomb: Yet when much treasure, & more time is spent, You must grant his the Nobler Monument, Whose faith standsore him for a Hearse, & hath The Resurrection for his Epitaph. See more of the character of this most worthy Prelate, in our Ecclesiasticall Hi∣story anno 1620. wherein he died. RICHARD MONTAGUE was born at So am I in∣formed by his Son-in-law Doctor David Sokes. Dorney (where his Father was Vicar of the Parish) within 3. miles of Eaton, and so (though not within the reach) within the sight of that Staple Place for Grammar learning, wherein he was bred; Thence was he chosen successively Fellow of Kings Colledge in Cambridge, Fellow of Eaton, Parson of Stanford Rivers in Essex, Canon of Windsor, Parson of Petworth, elected Bishop of Chichester, and at last of Norwich. He spent very much in repairing his Parsonage-house at Petworth, as also on his Episcopal house at Allingbourn near Chichester. He was most exact in the Latin and Greek; and in the Vindication of Tithes wrestled with the grand Antiquary of England, and gave him a fair flat fall in the point of a Greek Criticisme, taxing him justly for mistaking a God (amongst the Aegyptians) more then there was, by making a Man amongst the Grammarians fewer then they should be. He hath many learned works extant against the Papists, some in English, some in Latin; and one called, his Appello Caesarem, which (without his in∣tent and against his will) gave occasion of much trouble in the Land. He began an Ecclesiasticall History, and set forth his Apparatus, and alas! it was but an Apparatus; though, through no Default of his, but defect of his Health; sicknesse, troublesome times, and then death surprizing him: Had it been finished, we had had Church Annalls to put into the Ballance with those of Baronius; and which would have swayed with them for Learning, and weighed them down for Truth. He dyed Anno Dom: 1641. HENRY KING D. D. son to John King (lately mentioned) Bishop of London and his wife (of the ancient family of the Conquests) was born in this County, in the me town, house, and chamber with his father; a locall Coincidence which in all considerable particulars cannot be parallel'd.
We know the Scripture-Proverb used in Exprobration, Ezek. 16. 44 As is the mother so is the daughter, both wicked, both wofull. But here it may be said by way of thankfullness to God, and honour to the persons, As was the father so is the son, both pious, both prosperous, till the calamity of the times involved the later. Episcopacy Anno 1641. was beheld by many in a deep consumption, which many hoped would prove mortal. To cure this it was conceived the most probable cordiall, to prefer persons into that Order, not only unblameable for their life, and eminent for their learning, but also generally beloved by all disingaged people; and amongst these King Charles advanced this our Doctor, Bishop of Chichester. But all would not do, their Innocency was so far from stopping the mouth of malice, that malice almost had swallowed them down her throat. Since God hath rewarded his Patience, giving him to live to see the Restitution of his Order. David saith, that the goodPsal. 1. Tree [Man] shall bring forth his fruit in due season; so our Doctor varied his fruits according to the diversity of his age. Being brought up in Christ∣church in Oxford, he delighted in the studies of Musik and Poetry, more elder he applyed himself to Oratory and Philosophy, and in his reduced age fixed on Divinity, which his Printed Sermons on the Lords-prayer, and others which he preached, remaining fresh in the minds of his Auditors will report him to all posterity. He is still living Anno Domini 1660. Writers on the Law. Sir GEORGE CROOK Knight, son of Sir John Crook and Elizabeth Unton his wife, was born at In his life prefixed to his Reports. Chilton in this County, in the second year of the reign of Queen Eliza∣beth, bred first in Oxford, then a double Reader in the Inner Temple, Serjeant at Law, and the Kings Serjeant, Justice first of the Common-bench 22. Jacobi, and then of the Upper-bench 4. Caroli. His ability in his profession is sufficiently attested by his own Printed Reports. Eight eminent Judges of the Law out of their knowledge of his great wisdome, learning and integrity, approving and allowing them to be published for the Common benefit. He was against the Illegality of Ship-money, both publickly in Westminster-hall, and privately in his judgment demanded by the King, though concluded to subscribe (ac∣cording to the Course of the Court) by plurality of voices, The Country-mans wit (levelled to his brain) will not for many years be forgotten. That Ship-money may be gotten by Hok, but not by Crook, though since they have paid taxes (loins to the little fin∣ger, and Scorpions to the Rod of Ship-money,) but whether by Hook or Crook, let others inquire. His piety in his equall and even walkings in the way of God through the several turn∣ings and occasions of his Life, is evidenced by his Charity to man, founding a Chappel at Beachley in Buckingham-shire, two miles at least distanced from the Mother-Church, and an Hospitall in the same Parish with a liberall Revenue. Considering his declining and decaying age, and desiring to examine his Life, and pre∣pare an Account to the Supreme Judge, he petitioned King Charles for a Writ of Ease, which though in some sort denied, (what wise Mr. would willingly part with a good Servant?) was in effect granted unto him. He dyed at Waterstock in Oxford shire, in the eighty second year of his age, Anno Dom. 1641. EDWARD BULTSTRODE Esq. born in this County, bred in the studies of our mu∣nicipall Laws in the Inner Temple, and his Highness his Justice in North-wales, hath written a book of divers Resolutions and Judgments, with the reasons and causes there∣of, given in the Court of Kings-bench in the reigns of King James and King Charles; and is lately deceased. Souldiers. Sir WILLIAM WINDSOR Knight. I am confident herein is no mislocation be∣holding him an Ancestor to the right honourable Thomas Windsor Hickman Lord
Windsor, and fixed at Bradenham. He was deputed by King Edward the third in the fourty seventh year of his reign Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, which Country was then in a sad Condition. For the King was so intent on the Conquest of France (as a Land nearer, fairer, and due to him by descent,) that he neglected the effectuall reducti∣on of Ireland. This encouraged the Irish Grandees (their O's and Mac's) to Rant and Tyrant it in their respective seignieuries, whilst such English who were planted there, had nothing Native (save their Surnames) left; degenerating by degrees to be Irish in their Ha∣bits, Manners and Language. Yea, as the wild Irish are observed to love their Nurses or Fosters, above their natural Mothers, so these barbarizing English were more en∣deared to the interest of Ireland which fed, then of England which bare and bred them. To prevent more mischief this worthy Knight was sent over, of whose valour and fidelity the King had great experience. He contracted with the King to defray the whole charge of that Kingdome, (as appeareth by the instrument in the 47. Edw. 3. claus. pers. 2▪ M. 24. & 26. Tower) for eleven thousand two hundred thirteen pounds, six shillings and eight pence per annum. Now Sir William undertook not the Conquest, but Custody of the Land in a defen sive war. He promised not with a daring Mountebank to Cure, but with a discreet Phy∣sician to ease this Irish Gout. Indeed I meet with a passage in The same also in effect i found in  in Rich. he second. Froissard relating how Sir William should report of himself, that he was so far from subduing the Irish, he could never have access to un∣derstand and know their Countries, albeit he had spent more time in the service of Ireland, then any Englishman then living. Which to me seems no wonder, the Irish vermin shrowding themselves under the Scabs of their Bogs, and Hair of their Woods. How∣ever he may truly be said to have left that land much improved, because no whit more impaired during those dangerous distractions, and safely resigned his office (as I take it) in the first of K. Richard the second. ARTHUR GRAY Baron of Wilton is justly reckoned amongst the Natives of this Shire, whose father had his Habitation (not at Wilton a decayed Castle in Hereford-shire whence he took his Title, but) at Waddon a fair house of his Family not far from Buck∣ingham. He succeeded to a small Estate much diminished on this sad occasion. His father William Lord Gray being taken Prisoner in France, after long ineffectuall soliciting to be (because captivated in the publick service) redeemed on the publick charge, at last was forced to ransom himself with the sale of the best part of his Patrimony. Our Arthur endeavoured to advance his estate by his valour being entered in Feats of war, under his Martial father at the siege of Lieth, 1560. where he was Camdens Eliz. anno notato. shot in the shoulder, which inspirited him with a constant antipathy against the Scotch. He was afterwards sent over Lord Deputy into Ireland anno 1580. where before he had re∣ceived the Sword or any Emblemes of Command ut Camdens Eliz. anno 1580: acrioribus initiis terrorem incu∣teret, to fright his foes with his fierce beginning, he unfortunately fought the rebels at Glan∣dilough to the great loss of English blood. This made many commend his Courage above his Conduct, till he recovered his credit, and finally suppressed the rebellion of Desmund. Returning into England, the Queen chiefly relied on his counsel for ordering our Land-forces against the Spaniards in 88. and fortifying places of advantage. The men∣tion of that year (critical in Church differences about discipline at home, as well as with foreign foes abroad) mindeth me that this Lord was but a Back-friend to Bishops, & in all divisions of Votes in Parliament or Council-table sided with the Anti-prelatical party. When Secretary Davison, that State-Pageant, (raised up on purpose to be put down,) was censured in the Star-chamber about the business of the Queen of Scots, this Lord Gray onely defended him, as doing nothing therein but what became an able and honest Minister of State. An Camdens Eliz. anno 1587. ear-witness saith, Haec fuse oratoriè & animosè Greium disseren∣tem audivimus. So that besides bluntness (the common and becoming eloquence of Soul∣diers) he had a real Rhetorick, and could very emphatically express himself. Indeed this warlike Lord would not wear two heads under one Helmet, and may be said always to have born his Beaver open, not dissembling in the least degree, but owning his own judg∣ment at all times what he was. He deceased anno Dom. 1593.
Writers. ROGER de WENDOVER was born at that Market-town in this County, bred a Benedictine in St. Albans, where he became the Kings Historian. Know, Reader, that our English Kings had always a Monck, generally of St. Albans (as near London, the Staple of news and books) to write the remarkables of their reigns. One addeth (I am sorry he is a Ponticus Vi∣ruius cited by J. Ble de script. Brit. Cent▪ 4. num. 94. forrainer, and therefore of less credit at such distance,) that their ▪Chronicles were lock'd up in the Kings Library, so that neither in that Kings, nor his Sons life they were ever opened. If so, they had a great encourage∣ment to be impartiall, not fearing a blow on their teeth, though coming near to the heels of truth, which in some sort were tied up from doing them any hurt. This Roger began his Chronicle at the Conquest, and continued it to the year 1235. being the 19. year of King Henry the third. Indeed Mathew Paris doth quarter too heavily on the pains of Wendover, who onely continuing his Chronicle for some years, and inserting some small See Dr. Watts his Prefatory notes to Math: Paris. alterations, is intituled to the whole work. As a few drops of blood, because of the deep hiew thereof, discoloureth a whole bason of water into red∣nesse; so the few and short Interpolations of Paris, as the more noted Author, give a denomination to the whole History, though a fabrick built three stories high where∣of our Roger laid the foundation, finished the ground-room and second loft, to which by Mr. Paris was added the garret, as since the roof by W. Rishanger. This Wendover died about the year of our Lord 1236. JOHN AMERSHAM was born in that small Corporation in this County, bred a Monck in St. Albans, where he contracted not onely Intimacy, but in some sort Identity of Affection, with John Wheathamsted Abbot thereof; insomuch that what was said of two other friends was true of them, (Ethicks making good the Grammar thereof) Duo Amici Vixit in eodem Conventu. Now there was a great Faction in that Convent against their Abbot, which to me seemeth no wonder; for the generality of Moncks being lewd, lazy and unlearned, they bare an Antipathy to their Abbot, who was pious, painfull, and a profound Schollar. Nor did they onely rail on his Person whilst living, but also revile his Memory when dead. Our Amersham, surviving his dear friend, wrote a book (besides other of his works) intituled the Bale de script. Brit. & Pits. Aetat. 14. num▪ 843. Shield of Wheathamsted, therein defending him from the undeserved Darts of his Enemies Obloquy. He flourished Anno Dom. 1450. MATHEW STOKES was born in the Hatchets M. S. 8. of the Fel∣lows of Kings∣Colledge. Town, and bred in the School of Eaton, untill he was admitted in Kings-colledge in Cambridge, Anno Domini 1531. He afterwards became Fellow of that house, and at last Esquire Bedle, and Register of the University. A Register indeed both by his place and painfull performance therein; for he (as the Poets fain of Janus with two faces) saw two worlds, that before and after the Re∣formation. In which juncture of time so great the confusion and embezeling of Records, that had not Master Stokes been the more carefull, I believe, that though Cambridge would not be so Oblivious as Massala Corvinus who forgot his own name, yet would she have forgotten the names of all her Ancient Officers. To secure whose succession to Posterity, Mr. Stokes with great industry and fide∣lity collected a Catalogue of the Chancellours, Vice-Chancellours and Proctors. He was a Zealous Papist (even unto persecution of others) which I note not to disgrace his Me∣mory, but defend my self, for placing him before the Reformation, though he lived many years in the reign of Q. Elizabeth. Since the Reformation. WALTER HADDON was born of a Knightly Family in this Ble de script. Brit. Ceat. nono. Num. 87. County, bred at Eaton, afterwards Fellow in Kings-colledge, where he proceeded Doctor of Law, and was the Kings Professor in that Faculty, chosen Vice-chancellour of Cambridge 1550. soon after he was made President of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, which place he waved in the reign of Queen Mary, and sheltered himself in obscurity. Queen Elizabeth made him one of the Masters of her Requests, and employed him in several Embassies beyond the Seas. Her Majesty being demanded whether She preferred him or Buchanan for learning, wittily and warily returned,
Buchananum omnibus antepono, Haddonum nemini postpono. Indeed he was a most Eloquent man, and a pure Ciceronian in his stile, as appeareth by his writings, and especially in his book against Osorius. The rest may be learned out of his Epitaph. S. Memoriae.GUALTERO HADDONO Equestri loco nato juris consulto, Oratori, Poet celeberrimo, Graecae Latinaeque Eloquentiae sui temporis facile principi, sapientia & sanctitate vi∣tae, in id evecto, ut Reginae Elizabethae à supplicum libellis magister esset, destinare∣turque majoribus nisi facto immaturius cessisset: Interim in omni gradus viro longe eminentissimo, conjugi sui optimo meritissimoque Anna Suttona, uxor ejus secunda flens maerens desiderii sui signum posuit. Obiit Anno Salut. hum. 1572. Aeta∣tis 56. This his fair Monument is extant in the wall at the upper end of the Chancell of Christs-church in London. Where so many ancient Inscriptions have been barbarously defaced. LAURENCE HUMPHRED was born in this Humfredus Patrīa Buchin∣gam s. Baleus de Script. Brit. Cent. 9. num. 93. County, bred in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, a great and generall Scholar, able Linguist, deep Divine, pious to God, hum∣ble in himself, charitable to others. In the reign of Queen Mary he fled into Germany, and there was Fellow-Commoner with Mr. Jewell, (whose life he wrote at large in La∣tine) in all his sufferings. Here he translated Origen de Recta Fide, and Philo de  tate out of Greek. Returning into England in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, he was made  of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, and Dean of Winchester. Higher preferment he  ver attained, because never desired it, though a learned Camdens Elizabeth in Anno 1589. Author seems to put it on another account, fortasse eo quod de adiaphoris non juxta cum Ecclesia Anglicana senserit. I deny not but he might scruple some ceremonies, but sure I am he was much molest∣ed in his Colledge with a party of fierce (not to so furious) Nonconformists, from whom he much dissented in judgment. He died Anno Dom. 1589. Here I must confess a mistake in my Ecclesiastical History (misguided therein with many others by general tradition) when I reported the gold lately found and shared amongst the President and Fellows of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, to have been the gift of this Doctor Humphred, which since appeareth a legacy left by William Wain∣fleet their Founder. Would I had been mistaken in the Matter as well as in the Person, that so unworthy an act had never been performed. But what said Cen. 43. 13. Jacob to his sons? Carry back the money again, peradventure it was an oversight. Seasonable restitution will make reparation. ROGER GOAD was born at Mr. Hatcher in his M. S. Catalog. of the Fellows of Kings-col. Houton in this County, and was admitted Scholar in Kings-colledge in Cambridge 1555. Leaving the Colledge he became a School-master at Guilford in Surrey. But pity it is that a great candle should be burning in the Kitchin, whilst light is lacking in the Hall, and his publique parts pent in so private a profession. He was made not to guide boys, but govern men. Hence by an unexpected election he was surprised into the Provostship of Kings-colledge, wherein he remained fourty years. He was thrice Vice-chancellonr of Cambridge; a grave, sage and learned man. He had many contests with the young Frie in this Colledge, chiefly because he loved their good better then they themselves. Very little there is of his in print, save what he did in Conjunction with other Doctors of the University. By his Testament he gave the Rectory of Milton to the Colledge, and dying on Saint Marks day 1610. lieth bu∣ried in a Vestery on the North-side of the Chappel. JOHN GREGORY was born November 10. 1607. at Amersham in this County, of honest though mean parents, yet rich enough to derive unto him the hereditary in∣firmity of the gout, which afflicted him the last twenty years of his life. He was bred in Christ-church in Oxford, where he so applied his book, that he studied  his life  to his boo. sixteen hours of the four and twenty for many years together. He attained to be an exquisite Lin∣guist and general Scholar, his modesty setting the greater lustre on his learning. His notes on Dr. Redleys book of Civil-law gave the first testimony of his pregnancy to
the world, and never did text and comment better meet together. He was first Chaplain of Christ-church, and thence preferred by Bishop Duppa, Pre∣pendary of Chichester and Sarum, and indeed no Church-preferment compatible with his age was above his deserts. He died at Kidlington in Oxford-shire 1646. and was buried at Christ-church in Oxford. I find a smart Epitaph made by a friend on his me∣mory, and it was in my mind as well valiantly (consider the times) as truly indited. Ne premas Cineres hosce, Viator, Nescis quot sub hoc jaeent Lapillo; Graeculus, Hebraeus, Syrus, Et qui te quovis vincet Idiomate. At nè molestus sis Ausculta, & causam auribus tuis imbibe: Templo exclusus Et avita Religione Jam senescente, (ne dicam sublatâ) Mutavit Chorum, altiorem ut capesceret. Vade nunc, si libet, & imitare. R. W. His Opera Posthuma are faithfully set forth, by his good friend John Gurgain, and deser∣vedly dedicated to Edward Bish Esquire, one so able that he could, charitable that he would, and valiant that he durst relieve Master Gregory in his greatest distress. SAMUEL COLLINS, son to Baldwin Collins (born in Coventry, a pious and painfull preacher, prodigiously bountifull to the poor, whom Queen Elizabeth constantly cal∣led Father Collins) was born and bred Hence he stileth himself in his books Aetonensis. at Eaton, so that he breathed learned aire from  of his nativity. Hence coming to Kings-colledge in Cambridge, he was suc∣cesively chosen Fellow, Provost, and Regius Professor. One of an admirable wit and , the most fluent Latinist of our age: so that as Caligula is said to have sent  souldiers vainly to fight against the tide, with the same success have any encountred the torrent of his tongue in Disputation. He constantly read his Lectures twice a week, for above fourty years, giving notice of the time to his Auditours in a ticket on the School-dores, wherein never any two alike; without some considerable diffe∣rence in the critical language thereof. When some displeased Courtier did him the injurious courtesie to preferre him downwards (in point of profit) to the Bishoprick of Bristol, he improved all his friends to decline his election. In these troublesome times (affording more Preachers then Professors) he lost his Church but kept his Chair, wherein he died about the year 1651. WILLIAM OUGHTRED was (though branched from a right ancient Family in the North) born in the Town, bred in the School of Eaton, became Fellow of Kings∣colledge; and at last was beneficed by Thomas Earl of Arundel at Albury in Surrey. All his contemporaries unanimously acknowledged him the Prince of Mathematicians in our Age and Nation. This aged Simeon had (though no Revelation) a strong perswasion that before his death he should behold Christs anointed restored to his Throne, which he did accordingly to his incredible joy, and then had his Dimittis out of this mortal life, June 30. 1660. Romish Exile Writers. THOMAS DORMAN was born at Ammersham in this County, being nephew unto Thomas Dorman of the same town, A Confessour in the reign of King Henry the eighth. True it is, this his Uncle through weakness did abjure (let us pity his, who desire God should pardon our failings,) but was ever a cordial Protestant. He Fox his Acts and Mon. pag. 838. bred this Thomas Dorman junir at Berkhamsted-school (founded by Dr. Incent) in Hartford∣shire, under Mr. Reeve a Protestant School-master. But this Dorman turn'd tail afterwards, and became a great Romanist, running over beyond the seas, where he wrote a book intituled Against Alexander Nowel, the English Calvinist. J. Pits doth repent that he affordeth him no room in the body of his book, referring him to his Pagin 914. Appendix. He flourished Anno 1560. Memorable Persons. JOHN MATHEW Mercer, son to Thomas Mathew was born at Sherington in this County, Lord Mayor of London, Anno Dom. 1490. He is eminent on this account that he was the first Stow Survy of London pag. 573. Bachelar that ever was chosen into that office. Yea it was above a hundred and twenty years before he was seconded by a single person succeeding him
in that place, viz. Sir John This Mayor was the second Batchlor saith How, continu∣ing Slow in his Survay of London pag. 195. Leman Lord Mayor 1616. It seemeth that a Lady Mayo∣resse is something more then ornamentall to a Lord Mayor, their wives great portions or good providence, much advantaging their estates, to be capable of so high a dignity. Dame HESTER TEMPLE, daughter to Miles Sands Esquire was born at Latmos in this County, and was married to Sir Thomas Temple of Stow Baronet. She had fourSed quaere. sons and nine daughters, which lived to be married, and so exceedingly multiplied, that this Lady saw seven hundred extracted from her body. Reader, I speak within compass, and have left my self a reserve, having bought the truth hereof by a wager I lost. Besides there was a new generation of marrigable females just at her death, so that this aged vine may be said to wither, even when it had many young boughs ready to knit. Had I been one of her relations, and as well enabled as most of them be, I would have erected a monument for her thus design'd. A fair tree should have been erected, the said Lady and her Husband lying at the bottom or root thereof; the Heir of the family should have ascended both the middle and top-bough thereof. On the right-hand hereof her younger sons, on the left her daughters should as so many boughs be spread forth. Her grand-children should have their names inscribed on the branches of those boughs, the great-grand-children on the twiggs of those branches, the great-great-grand-children on the leaves of those twiggs. Such as surviv'd her death should be done in a lively green, the rest (as blasted) in a pale and yellow fading-colour. Lib. 7. cap. 13. Plinie, who reports it as a wonder worthy the Chronicle, that Chrispinus Hilarus, Praelata pompa, with open ostentation, sacrificed in the Capitol, seventy four of his chil∣dren and childrens children attending on him, would more admire if admitted to this spectacle. In comment upon the 8. c. os Lib. 15. De Civit. Dei. Vives telleth us of a Village in Spain of about an hundred houses, whereof all the inhabitants were issued from one certain old man who then lived, when as that Village was so peopled, so as the name of propinquity how the youngest of the children should call him, could not be given. Lingua enim nostra supra abavum non ascendit, Our language (saith he, meaning the Spanish) affords not a name above the great-grand∣fathers father. But had the off-spring of this Lady been contracted into one place, they were enough to have peopled a City of a competent proportion, though her issue was not so long in succession, as broad in extent. I confess very many of her Descendants dyed before her death, in which respect she was far surpassed by a Roman Matron, on whom theAusonius Epitap. Heroum num. 34. Poet thus Epitapheth it, in her own person. Viginti atque novem, genitrici Callicratea, Nullius sexus mors mihi visa fuit. Sed centū et quin{que} explevi bene messibus annos, Intremulam baculo non subeunte manun. Twenty nine births Callicrate I told, And of both Sexes saw none sent to grave. I was an hundred and five winters old, Yet stay from staff my hand did never crave. Thus in all ages God bestoweth personal felicities on some, far above the proportion of others. The Lady Temple dyed Anno Dom. 1656. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Brokle William Brokle Newport Paganel Draper 1433 2 Thomas Scot Robert Scot Dorney Draper 1458 3 Henry Collet Robert Collet Wendover Mercer 1486 4 John Mathew Thomas Mathew Shreington Mercer 1490 5 John Mundy William Mundy Wycombe Goldsmith 1522 6 John Coates Thomas Coates Bearton Salter 1542
The Names of the  of this County Rturned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth, 1433. William Bishop of Lincoln, Commissioners to take the Oathes. Reginald de Gray de Ruthyan Chivaler.   Thomas Sakevile Miles, Knights for the Shire.   William Wapload. Knights for the Shire.   Reginaldi Lucy, Chiv. Walteri Lucy, Chiv. Iohan. Cheyne, Chiv. Tho. Chetewode, Chiv. Iohan. Cheyne, Arm. Iohan. Hampden de Hampden, Ar. Andreae Spering Thomae Rokes, Ar. Iohan. Langeon, Ar. Iohan. Iwardby, Ar. David Breknook, Ar. Thomae Stokes, Ar. Iohan. Hampden de Kimbell. Walteri Fitz Richard, Armigeri. Iohan. Stretlee, Ar. Tho. Shyngelton, Ar. Thomae Cheyne, Ar. Iohan. Stokes, Ar. Thomae Gifford, Ar. Iohan. Gifford d Whaddon Senioris, Ar. Thomae Boteler, Ar. Rob. Puttenham, Ar. Roberti Olney de Weston, Ar. Iohan. Tyringham, Ar. Iohan. Brekenock, Ar. Thomae Rufford, Ar. Iohan. Dayrell, Ar. Nicolai Clopton Edmundi Brutenell Iohan. Sewell Iohan. Watkins Willillmi Brook de Chesham. Bernardi Sanderdon Thomae More Will. Fouler. Iohannis Arches Iohan. Skydmore Iohan. Kimbell Will. Joyntour Rogeri More Iohan. Horewode Iohan. Baldewin Thomae Atte Welle Will. Chapman de Aylesbury Tho. Turnour Iohan. Knight de Hampslape Will. Watford Thomae Oliver Will. Colingrgg de Toursey Thomae Malins Will. Parker de Eton Will. Burton persone Ecclesiae de Crowle Iohan. Clerke de Olney Rich. Hawtreve Iohan. Giffard de Hardmede Iohan. Tapelo de Hampslape Thomae Knight de eadem Iohan. Giffard de Whaddon junioris Iohan. Sapcote de Olney Rich. Arnecok Will. Edy Nich. Brackwell Will. Sambroke Iohan. Edy junioris Thomae Edy Iohan. Puchas Will. Berewell Ade Ashinden David. Whitchirche Iohan. Sweft Will. Britwell de Cherdesle Iohan. Verney Eustachii Grenvile Iohan. Fitz Iohn Will. Gerebray Tho. Maudeleyn Iohan. Vesy Tho. Wodewarde Rich. Enershawe Iohan. Harewold de Weston Hen. Loveden Iohan. Thorp Iohan. Parker de Fenny Stratford Nicholai Baker de Crowle Nich. Hobbesson Tho. Malette Iohan. Kerye Tho. Tappe Rich. Hoo de Snen∣ston Iohan. Manchestre Iohan. Phelip Hen. Hunkes Rich. Miches Will. Meridale Tho. Edward Iohan. Vaux Will. Dun Hen. Toursey Hen. Dicon Will. Winslowe Iohan. Bilindon Hen. Porter Tho. Turgens Rober. Dalafeld Math. Colett Iohan. Hampden de Wycombe Iohan. Wellesburn Tho. Merston Will. Attegate Tho. Mery Rich. Milly Will. Wodeward Tho. Pusey Roberti Broun de Beknesfeld Iohan. Iourdeley Tho. Houghton Rich. Yaulode Iohan. Gold de Ailes∣bury Will. Clarke de eadem Will. Clarke de Cul∣verdon Thomae Kene de Hor∣sendon Will. Symeon Will. Fether Iohan. Caradons Will. Combe de Ayles∣bury Will. Gill Rich. Lamburn Will. Hid Tho. Bristow Nich. Baron Will. Cook de Fert∣well Iohan. Glover de Kimbell Iohan. Balke de Ayles∣bury Iohan. Lucy & Rich. Lucy
Sheriffs. This County had the same with Bedford-shire, untill they were parted in the seventeenth year of Queen Elizabeth. Since which time these have been the Sheriffs of this County alone. Name Place Armes REG. ELIZA.     Anno     17 Ioh. Croke, ar. Chilton G. a fess between 6 martlets Arg. 18 Griff. Hampden, armiger. Hampden Argent a Saltire Gules betwixt 4 Eaglets Az. 19 Mich▪ Blount, ar.   Barry  of. 6 Or. & Sable. 20 Rob. Drury, ar. Arg on a Chief vert the  Tau betwxt 2  pierced Or. 21 Rich. Crafford, ar.     22 Paul. Darell, ar. Lillingstone Az. a Lion Rampant Or,  Argent. 23 Th. Tasborough, a.   Az. on a Cross Arg. 5 mullets G. 24 Edm. Verney, ar.   Arg. 4 Lions passant S. betwixt 2 Gemewes in Bend. 25 Will. Hawtrey, ar. Checkers       Az. 10 billets 4, 3, 2, & 1. Or, in a Chief of the second a Lion issuant Sable. 26 Rob. Dormer, ar. Wing   27 Edw. Bulstrod, ar. See our Notes. Arg. on 2 Bars S. 6 martlets Or. 28 Ioh. Temple, ar. Stow * Ar. on a Bend S. 2 Cubit arms Is∣suant out of 2 pettet Clouds Ra∣yonated all proper Rending of a of a  Or. 29 Ioh. Goodwin, ar. See 21 of K. James.   30 Ioh. Burlace, *ar.     31 Fran. Cheney, ar. Chesham the Vache Checky Or &  Fess G Fretty Erm. 32 Ge. Fleetwood, a.   Partee per pale Nebulee Az. & , 6 martilets counterchanged. 33 Ale. Hampden, a. ut prius   34 Hen. Longvile, ar. Wolvertō Gules a Fess indented twixt 6 Crosses  Arg. 35 Tho. Pigot, ar. Dodershal S. 3  Arg. 36 Mic. Harecourt, a.   Or. 2 Barrs Gules. 37 Edw. Tirrell, ar. Thornton Arg. 2 Chev. Az. within a Bor∣der Engrailed G. 38 An. Tirringham, a. Tirringham Az. a  Engrailed Arg. 39 Ioh. Dormer ut prius   40 Will. Garrend, ar.   See our Notes in Northampton∣shire. 41 Will. Clarke, mil.     42 Tho. , ar.   G. a Chev. between 3 Cressets Ar. 43 Will. Burlace, ar. ut prius   44 Anth. Chester, ar. Chichely Per Pale Arg. & Sable, a Chev. between 3 Rams-heads Erased armed Or, within a Border in∣grailed, roundelly, all Counter∣changed. 45 Fran. Cheney, mi. ut prius   REG. JAC.     Anno     1 Fran. Cheney, mi. ut prius   2 W. Willoughby. m   AMP. 3 Ri. Ingoldesby, m. Lethenbor. Erm. a Saltire Engrailed S. 4 Hen. Longvile. m. ut prius   5 Will. Andrews, m   G. a Saltire Or, Charged with another, . 6 Fran Fortescu, m.   Az. a Bend Engrailed Ar. cotised Or. 7 Anth. Greenway, a.     8 Rob. Lovet, mil. Liscomb Arg. 3 wolves passant in Pale S. 9 Iero. Horsey, mil.   Az. 3 Horses-heads Couped Or, Bridled Ar. 10 Edw. Tirrell, mil. ut prius   11 Sim. May ne, ar.   Arg. on a Bend ingr. S. 3 dexter handsof the first. 12 Bri. Iohnson, ar. Beaconfield Quarterly Azure & G. a Cross Patoncee, & a Chief Or. 13 Edm. Wheeler, mi. Riding-Co. Or. a Chev. between 3 Leopards∣heads . 14 Th. Temple, m. & B. ut prius   15 Ioh. Laurence, mi. Iver Arg. a Cross knotted G. on a Chief Az. 3 Leopards-heads Or. 16 Fra. Duncombe, a.   Party per Chev. counter-Flore, G. & Arg. 3 Talbots-heads Erazed countercharged. 17 Be. Winchombe, a. See our Notes.   18 Hen. Lee, m. & ba. Quarrendō Arg. a Fess betwixt 3 Cressants Sable. 19 Ioh. Denham, mil.   Gules 3  Erm. 20 Will. Fleetwood ut prius *Per pale Or & G. a Lion Ramp.  three flower de luces counterchanged. 21 Fra. Goodwin, *m.     22 Will. Pen, †ar. Pen †Arg. on a Fess S. 3 Plates. REG. CARO.     Anno     1 Edw. Coke, mil. Stoke Partee per pale G. & Az. 3 Eagles Argent. 2 Gil. Gerrard, bar.   Quarterly, the 1 & 4 Arg. a Sal. G. the 2 & 3 Az. a Lion Ramp. Erm. Crowned Or. 3 Tho. Darel, a. ut prius   3 F. Catesby. a. Northamp. Ar. 2 Lions passant, S. crowned Or. 4 The. Lee, ar. ut prius   5 Will. , m. ut prius   6 Tho. Hide, baro.   Or, a Chev. betwixt 3  Az. in Chief an Eagle of the first. 7 . Dupper, ar.     8 Rob. Dormer, ar. ut prius   9 Fran. , mi. ut prius   10 Pet. Temple, mil. ut prius   11 Heneage Proby, a.   Erm. on a Fess▪ G▪ a Lion Passant the tail extended, Or. 12 Anth. Chester, ba. ut prius   13     14     15 Tho. Archdale, ar,     16     17 Rich▪ Grevile, mi.   Sable a border & Cross engrailed Or, thereon 5 Pellets. 18     19     20 Hen. Beak, ar.     21     22 Will. Collier, ar.     Queen Elizabeth. 17 JOHN CROKE Ar.] Being afterwards Knighted, he was the son of Sir John Crook a Six-clerk in Chancery, and therefore restrained marriage untill enabled by a statute of the 14. of Henry the eighth. His  in the Civil warres between York and Lancaster concealed their* Pref. to Crok's Reports. proper name Le Blount under the assumed one of Croke. As for this Sir John Croke, first Sheriff of Buckingham after the division of Bedford∣shire, he was most fortunate in an issue happy in the knowledge of our municipall Law: Of whom Sir John Croke his eldest son Speaker of the Parliament in the 43. of Queen Elizabeth. He received this Eulogium from Her Majesty, That he had proceeded therein with such wisdome and discretion, that none before him had deserved better. As for Sir George his second son, we have spoken of him In the Wri∣ of Law in this County. before.
26 ROBERT DORMER Ar.] He was on the 10. of June 1615. made Baronet by King James, and on the 30. day of the same Month was by him Created Baron Dormer of Wing in this County. His grand-child Robert Dormer was by K. Charles in the 4. of his reign Created Viscount Ascot and Earl of Carnarvan. He lost his life, fighting for him who gave him his Honour, at the first battle of Newbury. Being sore wounded, he was desired by a Lord, to know of him what suit he would have to his Majesty in his behalf, the said Lord promising to discharge his trust in presenting his request, and assuring him that his Ma∣jesty would be willing to  him to the utmost of his power: To whom the Earl replied, I will not dye with a suit in my mouth to any King, save to the King of Heaven By Anne daughter to Philip Earl of Pembrook and Montgomery, He had Charles now  of Carnarvan. 27 EDWARD BULSTROD Ar.] I have not met with so ancient a Coat (for such it appeareth beyond all exception) so voluminous in the Blazon thereof, viz. Sable, a Bucks head Argent, attired Or, shot the Nose with an Arrow of the third, headed and feathered of the second, a Cross Patee fitchee betwixt the Attire, Or. 34 HEN. LONGVILE Ar.] He had to his fourth son Sir Michael Longvile, who married Susan sole daughter to Hen. Earl of Kent. Now, when the issue in a direct line of that Earldome failed in our me∣mory, Mr. Selden was no less active then able to prove that the Barony of  was dividable from the Earldome, and descended to the son of the said Sir Michael, and thereupon he sate as Baron Ruthyn in our late long Parliament. Since his death his sole daughter and heir hath been married unto Sir Henry Yelverton of Easton in the County of Northampton Baronet, a worthy Gent. of fair estate, so that that Honour is likely to continue in an equipage of breadth proportionable to the height thereof. King James. 17 BENEDICT WINCHCOMBE Ar.] His armes (too large for the little space allotted them) I here fully represent in gratitude to the Memory of his Ancestor, so well deserving of See Memora∣ble persons in Bark-shire. Newbury, viz. Azure, on a Chev. engrailed between three Birds Or, as many Cinque foiles of the first, on a Chief of the se∣cond a Flower the Luce between two spears heads of the first. King Charles. 1 EDWARD COKE Kt.] This was our English , so famous for his Comments on our Common-law. This year a Parliament was called, and the Court-party was jealous of Sir Edwards activity against them, as who had not digested his discontentments. Hereupon to prevent his election as a member, and confine him to this County, he was prick'd Sheriff thereof. He scrupuled to take the oath, pretending many things against it, and particularly that the Sheriff is bound thereby to prosecute Lollards, wherein the best Christians may be included. It was answered, that he had often seen the Oath given to others without any re∣greet, and knew full well that Lollard in the modern sense imported the Sir Henry  in   verbo Lollard. opposers of the present Religion, as established by Law in the Land. No excuses would serve  turn, but he must undertake this office. However his friends beheld it, as an injurious degradation of him, who had been Lord Chief-justice, to attend onthe Judges at the Assises. 9 FRANCIS CHENEY Mil.] It is an Epidemical disease, to which many ancient Names are subject, to be variously disguised in writing. How many names is it Chesney, Chedney, Cheyne, Chyne, Cheney, &c. And all de Casineto. A name so Noble and so diffused in the Catalogue of Sheriffs, it is harder to miss then find it any County.
Here, Reader, let me amend and insert what I omitted in the last County. There was a fair Family of the Cheneys flourishing in Kent, (but landed also in other Coun∣ties,) giving for their Armes, Azure, six Lions Rampant Argent, a Canton Ermin. Of this house was Henry Chency High sheriffe of this County and Bedford shire in the 7. of Q. Elizabeth, and not long after by her created Baron of Tuddington in Bedford-shire. In his youth he was very wild and venturous, witness his playing at Dice with Henry the second King of France, from whom he won a Diamond of great worth at a Cast: And being demanded by the King, what shift he would have made to repair himself in case he had lost the cast; I have (said young Chency in an hyperbolical brave) SHEEPS TAILS enough in Kent, with their Wool to buy a better Diamond then this. His redu∣ced Age afforded the befitting fruits of Gravity and Wisdome, and this Lord deceased without Issue. As for Sir Francis Cheney Sheriff for this present year, we Viz. in the 31. year of Q. Elizabeth. formerly observed the distinct Armes of his Family. This worthy Knight was father to Charles Cheney Esq. who by his exquisite Travelling hath Naturalized foreign perfections into himself, and is exemplarily happy in a vertuous Lady, Jane Daughter to the truly Noble William Marquis of New-castle, and by her of hopefull Posterity. The Farewell. On serious consideration, I was at a loss to wish to this County, what it wanted, God and the Kings of England have so favoured it with naturall perfections, and civil priviledges. In avowance of the latter it sheweth more Burrow-towns (sending Burges∣ses no fewer then twelve to the Parliament) then any Shire, (though thrice as big) lying in the Kingdome of Mercia. Now seeing at the instant writing hereof, the ge∣nerall News of the Nation is, of a Parliament to be called after his Majesties Corona∣tion, my prayers shall be that the Freehoulders of this County shall (amongst many therein so qualified) chuse good Servants to God, Subjects to the King, Patriots to the County, effectually to advance a happiness to the Church and Common-wealth.
CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE. CAMBRIDGE-SHRE hath Lincoln shire on the North, Northfolk and Suffold on the East, Essex and Hartford-shire on the South, Huntington, and Bedford-shires on the West, being in length thirty five, in breadth not fully twenty miles. The Tables therein as well furnished as any, the South∣part affording bread and beer, and the North (the Isle of Ely) meat there∣unto. So good the grain growing here, that it out-selleth others some pence in the Bushel. The North-part of this County is lately much improved by drayning, though the poorest sort of people will not be sensible thereof. Tell them of the great benefit to the publick, because where a Pike or Duck fed formerly, now a Bullock or Sheep is fatted, they will be ready to return, that if they be taken in taking that Bullock or Sheep, the rich Owner indicteth them for Felons; whereas that Pike or Duck were their own goods only for their pains of catching of them. So impossible it is that the best project though perfectly performed should please all interests and affections. It happened in the year 1657. upon the dissolution of the great Snow their banks were assaulted above their strength of resistance, to the great loss of much Cattle, Corn, and some Christians. But soon after the seasonable industry of the Under∣takers, did recover all by degrees, and confute their jealousies who suspected the re∣lapsing of these lands into their former condition. This Northern part is called the Isle of Eelie, which Doctor Smith in the lise of his Father-in-law Doctor illet. one will have so named from the Greek word  Fenny or Marish-ground, But our Saxon Ancestors were not so good Grecians, and it is plain that plenty of Eels gave it its denomination. Here I hope I shall not trespass on gravity, in mentioning a passage observed by the In his Co∣mitiat Oration De duobus Te∣stibus pag. 15. Reve∣rend Professour of Oxford Doctor Prideaux, referring the Reader to him for the Au∣thours attesting the same. When the Priests in this part of the County would still retain their wives, in despight of whatever the Pope and Monks could doe to the con∣trary, their wives and children were miraculously turned all into Eels (surely the greater into Congers, the less into Griggs) whence it had the name of EELY, I understand him a LIE of EELS. No doubt the first founder of so damnable an untruth, hath long since received his reward. However for this cause we take first notice amongst this Counties Naturall Commodities, Of Eels. Which though they be found in all Shires in England, yet are most properly treated of here, as most, first, and best, the Courts of the Kings of England being thence therewith anciently supplyed. I will not ingage in the controversy whe∣ther they be bred by generation as other fish, or aequivocally out of Putrefaction, or both ways which is most probable; Seeing some have adventured to know the distin∣guishing marks betwixt the one and other. I know the Silver Eels are generally pre∣ferred, and I could wish they loved men but as well as men love them, that I my self might be comprised within the compass of that desire. They are observed to be never out of season, (whilst other fishes have their set times,) and the biggest Eels are ever esteemed the best. I know not whether the Italian proverb be here worth the remembring, Give Eels without wine to your Enemies. Hares. Though these are found in all Counties, yet because lately there was in this Shire an Hare-park nigh New-market, preserved for the Kings game, let them here be parti∣cularly mentioned. Some prefer their sport in hunting before their flesh for eating, as accounting it melancholick meat, and hard to be digested, though others think all the hardness is how to come by it. All the might of this silly creature is in the flight thereof, and remember the answer which a school-boy returned in a latine distick, being demanded the reason why Hares where so fearfull,
Cur metuunt lepores? Terrestris, nempe, marinus, Aethereus quod sit, tartareusque canis. Whether or no they change their sex every year, (as some have reported) let Huntsmen decide. These late years of our civil wars have been very destructive unto them, and no wonder, if no law hath been given to hares, when so little hath been ob∣served toward men. Saffron. Though plenty hereof in this County, yet because I conceive it first planted in Essex we thither refer our description thereof. Willows. A sad Tree, whereof such who have lost their love make their mourning garlands, and we know what Exiles hung up their Psalm 137. 2. Harps upon such dolefull Supporters. The twiggs hereof are Physick to drive out the folly of children. This Tree delighteth in moist places, and is triumphant in the Isle of Ely, where the roots strengthen their Banks, and lop affords fuell for their fire. It groweth incredibly fast, it being a by-word in this County, that the profit by Willows will buy the Owner a Horse, before that by other Trees will pay for his Saddle. Let me adde, that if green Ash may burn before a Queen, withered Willows may be allowed to burn before a Lady. Manufactures. Paper. Expect not I should by way of Preface enumerate the several inventions, whereby the ancients did communicate, and continue their Notions to Posterity. First by writing in Leaves of Trees still remembred, when we call such a Scantling of Paper a Folio or Leafe. Hence from Leaves men proceeded to the Bark of Trees, as more solid, still couenanced in the Notation of the word Liber. Next they wrote in Labels or Sheets of Lead, wherein the Letters were deeply engraven, being a kind of Printing before Printing, and to this I refer the words of Job (an Author allowed Contemporary with, if not Senior to Moses himself.) ob 19. 23. Oh that my words were now written, oh that they were printed in a book. To omit many other devices in after ages to signify their conceptions, Paper was first made of a broad Flag (not unlike our great Dock) growing in and nigh Canopus in Egypt, which it seems was a saple commodity of that Country, and substantiall enough to bear the solemn Curse of the Prophet, The Paper-reeds by the brooks shall wither; be driven away, and be no more. Isaiah 19. 7. Our Modern Paper is made of Grinded Raggs, and yet this New Artificiall doth still thankfully retain the Name of the Old Naturall Paper. It may pass for the Emblem of Men of man Extraction, who by Art and Industry, with Gods blessing thereon come to high preferment. Psal 113. 7. He raiseth the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set him with his Princes, even with the Princes of his People. One may fin, if searching into the pedigree of Paper, it cometh into the world at the doungate, raked thence in Rags, which refined by Art, (especially after precious secrets are written therein) is found fit to be choicely kept in the Cabinets of the Greatest . Pity it is that the fist Author of so usefull an invention cannot with any P. Virg. de  inventi∣onibus lib. 2. cap. 8. assu∣rance by assigned. There are almost as many severall kinds of Paper as conditions of Persons betwixt the Emperor and Beggar, Imperial, Royal, Cardinal, and so downwards to that course Pa∣per called Emporetica, usefull onely for Chapmen to wrap their wares therein. Paper Participats in some sort of the Caracters of the Countrymen which make it, the Vene∣tian being neat, subtile and courtlike, the French light, slight and slender, the Dutch thick, corpulent and gross, not to say sometimes also charta Bibula, sucking up the Ink with the sponginess thereof.
Paper is entred as a Manufacture of this County, because there are Mills, nigh Stur∣bridge-fair, where Paper was made in the memory of our Fathers. And it seemeth to me a proper Conjunction, that seeing Cambridge yeildeth so many good writers, Cam∣bridg-shire should afford Paper unto them. Pitty, the making thereof is disused; consi∣dering the vast sums yearly expended in our Land for Paper out of Italy, France, and Germany, which might be lessened were it made in our Nation. To such who object that we can never equall the perfection of Venice-paper, I return, neither can we match the purity of Venice-glasses, and yet many green ones are blown in Sussex, profitable to the makers and convenient for the users thereof, as no doubt such courser (home-spun Paper) wouldbe found very beneficiall for the Common-wealth. Baskets. These are made of the Osiers plentifully growing in the moist parts of this County, an acre whereof turns to more profit then one of wheat. A necessary utensill in an house, whereby many things are kept, which otherwise would be lost. Yea, in some sort it saved the life of St. Paul, when let down by the wall of Damascus in2 Cor. 11. 33. a basket. Whence some (not improbably) conjecture him hominem tricubitalem, a man of low stature. Martial confesseth Baskets to have been a Brittish invention, though Rome after∣wards laid claime thereunto. Barbara de pictis veni Baseauda Britannis, Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam. 1 foreign Basket first in Brittain known, Am now by Rome accounted for her own. Their making is daily improved with much descant of art, splitting their wickers as small as threads, and dying them into several colours, which daily grow a greater commodity. The Buildings. Cambridge is the chief credit of this County, as the University is of Cambridge. It is confess'd, that Oxford far exceeds it forsweetness of situation; and yet it may be maintained, that though there be better aire in Oxford, yet there is more in the Colledges of Cambridge. For, Oxford is an University in a Town, Cambridge, a Town in an Uni∣versity; where the Colledges are not surrounded with the offensive embraces of Streets, but generally situated on the out-side, affording the better conveniency of private Walks and Gardens about them. But havingIn my Histo∣ry of that Uni∣versity. formerly written of the fabricks of Cambridge, I forbear any further inlargement. Eely Minster. This presenteth it self afar off to the eye of the traveller, and on all sides at great distance, not onely maketh a promise, but giveth earnest of the beauty thereof. The Lanthorn therein built by Bishop Hotham, wherein the labour of twenty years, and five thousand ninety four pounds eighteen shillings ten pence half penny farthing was ex∣pended, is a Master-piece of Architecture. When the bells ring, the wood-work thereof shaketh and gapeth, (no defect but perfection of structure) and exactly chock∣eth into the joynts again; so that it may pass for the lively embleme of the sincere Christian, who, though he hath motum trepidationis, ofPhil. 2. 12. fear and trembling, stands firm∣ly fixt on the basis of a true faith. Rare also is the art in the Chappel of Saint Maries, the patern or parent of that in Kings-colledge in Cambridge, though here (as often else∣where) it hath happened, the child hath out-grown the father. Nor must the Chappel of Bishop West be forgotten, seeing the Master-masons of King James, on serious in∣spection, found finer stone-work herein, then in King Henry the seventh his Chappel at Westminster. It grieved me lately to see so many new ligh's in this Church, (supernumerary win∣dows more then re in the first fabrick) and the whole structure in a falling condition, except some good mens chay seasonably support it. Yet, was I glad to hear a great Antiquary employed to transcribe and preserve the monuments in that Church, as all
others in the late-drowned-land. And it is hard to say, which was the better office, whether of those who newly have dried them from the inundation of water, or of those who shall drain them from the deluge of oblivion, by perpetuating their antiquities to posterity. Wonders. Let me here insert an artificial wonder of what is commonly called Devils-ditch; Country-folk conceiting that it was made by the Devil, when the Devil he made it, being the work of some King or Kings of the East Angles. See the laziness of po∣sterity, so far from imitating the industry of their ancestors, that they belibell the pure effects of their pains as hellish atchivements. But if the aforesaid Kings meerly made this ditch to get themselves a name, Divine Justice hath met with them, their names being quite forgotten. More probably it was made to divide and defend their Domi∣nions from the Kingdome of Mercia, or possibly to keep the people in employment, for diversion of mutinous thoughts, laziness being the mother of disloyalty, industry of obedience. Proverbs. Cantabrigia petit Aequales Aequalia. Cambridge requires all to be equal.] Some interpret this of their Commons, wherein all of the same Mess go share and share alike. Others understand it of the expenses out of the Hall, all being  in their Collations, all paying alike. Which Parity is the best Preservative of Company, according to the Apothegme of Solon, whichIn vitâ So∣lois. Plutarch so commends for the wisedome thereof, , Equality breeds no Battles. Otherwise it is a Murthering-hot where one pays all the Reckoning, as recoiling on him that dischargeth it: Yea such inequality is a certain symptome of an expiring society. Some expound the words, that Graduates of the same degree, (either within or without the University) are to be Fellows well met one with another. Dido had a piece of State in her Court peculiar to her self, (which may be called an Equipage indeed) where she had a hundred servants in ordinary attendance pares  mi∣nistri. Virg. Ae. lib. 1. juxta finem. all of the same age. Thus the same Degree in effect levells all Scholars, so that seniority of years ought not to make any distance betwixt them, to hinder their familiarity. I have nothing else to adde of this Proverb, saving that it is used also in Oxford. Cambridge-shire Camels.] I cannot reconcile this common saying to any considerable sense, I know a Camel passeth in the Latine proverb, either for gibbous and distorted, or for one that un∣dertaketh a thing awkely or ungeenly. in Helvidium. Camelus saltat, or else for one of extraordi∣nary bulk or bigness, all unappliable in any peculiar manner to the people of this County, as straight and dexterous as any other, nor of any exorbitant propor∣tions. All that I can recover of probability is this, the Fen-men dwelling in the Northern part of this County, when stalking on their Stilts are little giants indeed, asCamden in Cambridge∣shire. Master Camden hath well observed. However that Mathematician who measured the height of Herules by the bigness of his foot, would here be much mistaken in his dimensi∣ons, if proportionably collecting the bulk of their bodies from the length of their legs. A Boisten horse and a Cambridge Master of Art, are a couple of Creatures that will give way to no body.] This Proverb we find in the Letter of William Zoon written to George Bruin in his Theatre of Cities, and it is objected against us by an. Twin. Ant. Acad. Ox. pag. 333. Oxford Antiquary, as if our Masters wanted manners to give place to their betters, though all things considered it soundeth more to their honour then disgrace. For mark what immediately went before in the sameGulielmus Zoon. Author, In plateis ambulan∣tes, decedi sibi de via, non à civibus solùm, sed etiam à peregrino quovis nisi dignitate ex∣cellat, postulant: Walking in the Streets, they require, not onely of the Towns-men, but
also of every stranger except they excell in dignity, that they goe out of the way unto them. Herein two things are observable in the Scholars, 1. Their Manners or Civility. 2. Their Manhood or Courage. If the party, whatever he be, appear digni∣fied above them, they willingly allow him Superiority, what is this, but to give what is due to another? If he seem beneath them, then they doe uti jure suo, and take what is their own to themselves. What reaon is it he should give place to a Towns-man? ut quid cedat Plenum vacuo, scientia ignorantiae? This mindeth me of a passage in Plutarch concerning Themistocles, when a Boy going home from School, he met one of the Athenian Tyrants in the City, and the people cryed out unto him to goe out of the way, What (said The∣mistocles) is not all the street broad enough for him, but I must be put out of my path and pace to make room for him? This was interpreted by such as heard him, as a presage of his future magnanimity. And surely it shews not want of breeding, but store of spirit, when a man will not be put out of his way, for every swelling emptiness that meets him therein. An Henry-Sophister] So are they called, who after four years standing in the University, stay themselves from commencing Bachelors of Art, to render them (in some Colledges) more ca∣pable of preferment. Several reasons are assigned of their name. That tradition is senseless, (and inconsistent with his Princely magnificence) of such who fansie, that K. Henry the eighth coming to Cambridge, staid all the Sophisters a year, who expected a year of grace should have been given unto them. More pro∣bable it is, because that King is commonly conceived of great strength and staure, that these Sophistae Henriciani were elder and bigger then others. The truth is this, in the reign of King Henry the eighth, after the destruction of Monasteries, earning was at a loss, and the University (thanks be unto God more scar'd then hurt) stood at a gaze what would become of her. Hereupon many Students staid themselves, two, three, some four years, as who would see, how their degrees, (before they took them) should be rewarded and maintained. Martyrs. WILLIAM FLOWER was born atSo Mr. Fox spells it, in his Acts and Mon. pag. 1573. called Sil Well at this day. Snow-hill in this County, bred first a Monk in Ely, till relinquishing his habit he became a Secular Priest and a Prote∣stant, and after many removals fixed at last at Lambeth. Wonder not, Reader, to see a long black line prefixed before his name, which he well deserved to distinguish him from such men, who had an unquestionable title of Martyrdom. Whereas this Flower dangerously wounded a Popish Priest with a Wood∣knife, (a mischievous weapon) in Saint Margarets Westminster, just at the Ministration of the Masse, so that the bloud of the Priest Spirted into the Challice. A fact so foul, that the greatest charity would blush to whisper a syllable in the ex∣cuse thereof. As for such who in his defence, plead the precedent of Elia his killing of Baals Priests, they lay a foundation for all impiety in a Christian Common-wealth. If in the Old World Giants were the Product of those Marriages, when the sons of God took to Wives theGen. 6. 2. daughters of Men, (a Copulation not unlawfull, because they were too near a kin, but because they were too far off;) what Monsters will be generated from such mixtures, when Extraordinary actions by immediate Commissions from God shall be matched unto Ordinary Persons of meer men, and Heaven unjustly alledged and urged for the defence of Hell it self? However it plainly appears that Flower afterwards solemnly repented of this Abo∣minable act, and was put to death for the Testimony of the truth. Grudge not Reader to peruse this following Parallel, as concerning the hands of the Martyrs in the reign of Queen Mary.
The right-hand of Thomas Tomkins was burnt off in effect (so as to render it useless) by Bishop Bonner, some days before he was Martyr'd. Arch-bishop Canmer at the Stake first thrust his right hand into the flame to be burnt in Penance for his subscription to a Recan∣tation. The right hand of William Flower, before he went to the Stake, was cut off by order of the Judges for his Barbarous fact. Yet though his right hand suffered as a Malefactour, there want not those who main∣tained thatThere were but 3. more Maryred in this County, whereof John Hullier Fellow of Kings-col. was most re∣markable. Martyr belongs to the rest of his Body. Prelats. STEPHEN de FULBORN was born at Fulborn (no other of that name in England) in this County. Going over into Ireland to seek his Providence (commonly nick∣named his fortune) therein, he became anno 1274▪Sir James Ware in the Arch-bishops of Tuam. Bishop of Waterford, and Lord Treasurer of Ireland. Hence he was preferred Arch-bishop of Tuam, and once, and again was Chief Justice of that (allow me a Prolepsis)Ireland pro∣perly was no Kingdome till the time of K. Henry the eighth. Kingdome. He is reported to have given to the Church of Glassenbury in England,Sir James ut prius. Indulgnces of an hundred days which I cannot understand, except he promised pardon of so many days, to all in his Province who went a Pilgrimage to that place; and this also seems an over-papal Act of a plain Arch-bishop. He died 1288. and was buried in Trinity Church in Dublin. NICHOLAS of ELY, was so called (say some) from being Arch-Deacon thereof, which dignity so died his Denomination in grain, that it kept colour till his death, not fading, for his future higher preferments, though others conjecture his birth also at Ely. When the bold Barons obtrued a ChancellourJohn Philipot in his Catal. of Chancellors pag. 23. (A Kings Tongue and Hands by whom he publickly speaks and acts) Anno 1260. they forced this Nicholas on King Henry the third for that Office, till the King some months after displaced him, yet (knowing him a man of much merit) voluntarily chose him L. TreasurerIdem in his Catalogue of Treasurers pag. 16. when outed of his Chancellors place, so that (it seems) he would trust him with his Coffers, but not with his Conscience; yea he afterwards preferred him Bishop of Worcester, then of Winchester. Here he sate 12. years, and that Cathedrall may (by a Synedoche of a novel part for the whole) challenge his interment, having his HeartBishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of Win∣chester. inclosed in a Wall, though his body be buryed at Waverly in urry 1280. WILLIAM of BOTLESHAM was born at Bottlesham (contractly Botsam) in this County. This is a small village, which never amounted to a Market-town, some five miles East of Cambridge, pleasantly seated in pure aire, having rich arable on the one, and the fair health of New-market on the other side thereof. It hath been the nur∣sery of refined wits, affording a Triumvirate of learned men, taking their lives there, and names thence: and to prevent mistakes (to which learned pens in this point have been too prone) we present them in the ensuing parallels. William Godwin in the Catal. of Landaffe and Rochester. of Bottlesham, John of Bottlesham, Nicholas of Bottlesham, Made by the Pope, first Bishop of Bethlehem in Sy∣ria, afterwards Anno 1385. Bishop of Landaffe, and thence removed to Roche∣ster. A famous Preacher, Confessor to King Richard the second, and learned Writer, but by Walsingham and Bale, called John by mis∣take. He dyed in Febru. Anno 1399. Nor must we forget that he was once Fellow of Pembroke-hall. Was bred in Peter-house in Cambridge, whereunto he was a Benefactor, as also to the whole University, Chap∣lain to T. Arundel, Arch∣bishop of Canterbury; by whose recommendation he was preferred to succeed his Towns-man in the See of Rochester; which he never saw (saith myIdem in the Biposhs of R∣chester. Authour) as dying in the beginning of the year 1401. Was a Carmelite bred in Cambridge, afterwards re∣moved to Paris, where in Sorbone he commenced Doctor of Divinity. Re∣turning to Cambridge he became Prior of the Car∣melites (since Queens-col∣ledge) where he wrote many books, and lies bu∣ried in his own Bale pag. 576. and Pits. pag. 625. Covent Anno Domini 1435.
Let all England shew me the like of three eminent men, (all contemporaries at large) which one petty village did produce. Let Bottlesham hereafter be no more fam'd for its single Becon, but for these three lights it afforded. THOMAS of NEW MARKET was born therein, and though that Town lyeth some part in Suffolk, my Bale de Script. Ang. Cent. 7. Num. 60. Author assures his Nativity in this County. He was bred in Cambridge, an excellent Humanist and Divine, (having left some learned Books to Po∣sterity) and at last was advanced to be Idem i bidem. Bishop of Carlile. Surely then he must be the same with Thomas Merks, consecrated Anno 1397. Bale maketh him to flourish under K. Henry the fourth. con∣sent of time most truly befriending the conjecture. Merks also and Market being the same in effect. Neither doth the omission of New in the least degree discompose their Identity, it being usuall to leave out the Prenomen of a Town for brevity sake, by those of the Vicenage, (amongst whom there is no danger of mistake,) commonly calling West-chester, Chester, South-hampton, Hampton. If the same, he is famous in our English Histories, because his devotion (in a Transposed Posture to publick practise) See his speech in Parliament Speed pag. worshiped the Sun-setting, King Richard the second, for which his memory will meet with more to commend then imitate it. Yet was his Loyalty shent, but not sham'd: and King Henry the fourth being sick of him, not daring to let him to live, nor put him to death, (because  Prelate) found an Expedient for him of a living death, confining him to a Titular Godwin in the Bishop of Carlile. Grecian Bishoprick. He dyed about 1405. THOMAS THIRLBY Doctor of Laws, was (as I am assured by an excellent Mr. Martin beneficed neer Northampton. An∣tiquary) born in the Town, and bred in the University of Cambridge, most probably in Trinity hall. He was very able in his own faculty, and more then once employed in Embasseys by King Henry the eighth, who preferred him Bishop of Westminster. Here, had Thirlby lived long, and continued the course he began, he had prevented Queen Mary from dissolving that Bishoprick, as which would have dissolved it self for lack of land, sold and wasted by him. And though probably he did this to raise and enrich his own family, yet such the success of his sacriledge, his name and alliance is extinct. From Westminster he was removed to Norwich, thence to Ely. He cannot be fol∣lowed (as some other of his order) by the light of the Fagots kindled by him to burn poor Martyrs, seeing he was given rather to Prodigality then cruelty, it being signally observed that he wept at Arch-bishop Cranmers degradation. After the death of Queen Mary, he was as violent in his opinions, but not so virulent in his ex∣pressions; always devoted to Queen Mary, but never invective against Queen Eliza∣beth. He lived in free custody, dyed, and is buried at Lambeth 1570. Since the Reformation. GODFREY GOLDSBOROUGH D. D. was born in the Town of Cambridge, where some of his Sur-name and Relation remained since my memory. He was bred in Trinity-colledge, (Pupil to Arch-bishop Whitgiff) and became afterwards Fellow thereof, at last he was consecrated Bishop of Gloucester Anno Dom. 1598. He was one of the second set of Protestant Bishops, which were after those so famous for their sufferings in the Marian days, and before those who fall under the cognizance of our generation; the true reason that so little can be recovered of their character. He gave a hundred mark to Trinity▪colledge, and died Anno Dom. 1604. ROBERT TOWNSON D. D. was born in Saint Botolphs parish in Cambridge, and bred a Fellow in Queens-colledge, being admitted very young therein, but 12. years of age. He was blessed with an happy memory, insomuch that when D. D. he could say by heart the second Book of the Aeneads which he learnt at School, without missing a Verse. He was an excellent Preacher, and becoming a Pulpit with his gravity. He at∣tended King James his Chaplaine into Scotland, and after his return was preferred Dean of Westminster, then Bishop of Salisbury. Hear what the Author of a Pamphlet, who inscribeth himself A. W. saith in a Book which is rather a Satyre then a History, a Libell then a Character, of the Court of King James, for after he had slanderously inveighed against the bribery of those days in Church and State, hear how he seeks to make amends for all.
King James's Court, pag. 129, 130. Some worthy men were preferred gratis to blow up their [Buckingham and his party] Fames, (as Tolson a worthy man paid nothing in fine or Pension, and so after him Davenant in the same Bishoprick.) Yet these were but as Musick before every hound. Now although both these persons here praised were my God-fathers and Uncles, (the one marrying the sister of, the other being Brother to my Mother) and although such good words seem a Rarity from so railing a mouth, yet shall not these considera∣tions tempt me to accept his praises on such invidious terms as the Author doth proffer them. O! Were these worthy Bishops now alive, how highly would they disdain to be praised by such a pen, by which King James their Lord and Master is causelesly traduced! How would they condemn such uncharitable commendations, which are (if not founded on) accompanied with the disgrace of others of their order? Wherefore, I their Nephew in behalf of their Memories, protest against this passage, so far forth as it casteth Lustre on them, by Eclipsing the credit of other Prelates their contemporaries. And grant corruption too common in that kind, yet were there besides them at that time, many worthy Bishops raised to their dignity by their Deserts, without any Simonicall com∣plyances. Doctor Townson had a hospitall heart, a generous disposition, free from covetous∣ness, and was always confident in Gods Providence, that, if he should dye, his children (and those were many) would be provided for, wherein he was not mistaken. He lived in his Bishoprick but a year, and being appointed at very short warning to preach before the Parliament, by unseasonable tting up to study, contracted a Fever, whereof he died, and was buried in Westminster Abbey, Anno Dom. 1622. THOMAS (son to William) WESTFIELD D. D. was born Anno Dom. 1573. in the Parish of Saint Maries in Ely, and there bred at the Free-school under Master Spight, till he was sent to Jesus-colledge in Cambridge, being first Scholar, then Fellow thereof. He was Curate, or Assistant rather, to Bishop Felton, whilst Minister of Saint Mary le Bow in Cheapside, afterward Rector of Hornsey, nigh, and Great Saint Bar∣tholomews in London, where in his preaching he went thorow the four Evangelists. He was afterwards made Arch-Deacon of Saint Albans, and at last Bishop of Bristol, a place proffered to, and refused by him twenty five years before. For then the Bishoprick was offered to him to maintain him; which this contented meek man, having a self∣subsistence, did then decline, though accepting of it afterwards, when proffered to him to maintain the Bishoprick, and support the Episcopall dignity by his signall devotion. What good The particu∣lars of this were procured for me by my worthy friend Mathew Gilly Esquire, from Elizabeth the Bishops sole surviving daughter. opinion the Parliament (though not over-fond of Bishops) conceived of him, appears by their Order ensuing, The thirteenth of May 1643. From the Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates.Upon information in the behalf of the Bishop of Bristoll, that his Tenants refuse to pay him his Rents, it is Ordered by this Committee, that all profits of his Bishoprick be restored to him, and a safe conduct be granted him to pass with his family to Bristoll, being himself of great age, and a person of great learning and merit. Jo. Wylde. About the midst of his life he had a terrible sickness, so that he thought (to use his own expression in his Diary) that God would put out the candle of his life, though he was pleased onely to snuff it. By his will (the true Copy whereof I have) he desired to be buried in his Cathedral Church neer the tombe of Paul Bush, the first Bishop thereof. And as for my worldly goods, (Reader, they are his own words in his Will) which (as the times now are) I know not well where they be, nor what they are, I give and bequeath them all to my dear wife Elizabeth, &c. He protested himself on his death-bed a true Prote∣stant
of the Church of England, and dying Junii 28. 1644. lyeth buried according to his own desire above mentioned, with this inscription; Hic jacet Thomas Westfield, S. T. D. Episcoporum intimus, peccatorum primus. Obiit 25. Junii, anno MDCXLIV. Senio & moerore confectus. Tu Lector (quisquis es) vale & resipisce. Epitaphium ipse sibi dictavit vivus. Monumentum uxor moestissima Elizabetha Westfield Marito desideratissimo posuit superstes. Thus leaving such as survived him to see more sorrow, and feel more misery, he was seasonably taken away from the evil to come. And according to the Anagram made on him by his Daughter, Thomas Westfield, I dwel the most safe. Enjoying all happiness and possessing the reward of his pains, who converted many, and confirmed more by his constancy in his Calling. States-men. JOHN TIPTOFT son and heir of John Lord Tiptoft, and Mills Cat. of Hon. pag. 1010. Joyce his wife (daughter and Co-heir of Edward Charlton Lord Powis by his wife Eleanor, sister and Co-heir of Edmund Holland Earl of Kent) was born at Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. num. 46. Everton in this (but in the confines of Bedford) shire. He was bred in Baliol-colledge in Oxford, where he attained to great learning, and by King Henry the sixth was afterwards created first Vice-count, then Earl of Worcester, and Lord Hgh Constable of England, and by K. Edward the fourth Knight of the Garter. The skies began now to lowre, and threaten Civil Wars, and the House of York fell sick of a Relapse. Mean time this Earl could not be discourteous to Henry the sixth who had so much advanced him, nor disloyall to Edward the fourth in whom the right of the Crown lay. Consulting his own safety, he resolved on this Expedient, for a time to quit his own and visit the Holy-land. In his passage thither, or thence, he came to Rome, where he made a Latin speech before the Pope, Pi the second, and conver∣ted the Italians into a better opinion then they had formerly of the English-mens learning, insomuch that his holiness wept at the elegancy of the Oration. He returned from Christs sepulcher to his own grave in England, coming home in a most unhappy juncture of time, if sooner or later, he had found King Edward on that Throne, to which now Henry the sixth was restored, and whose restitution was onely remarkable for the death of this worthy Lord. Thus those who when the house of the State is on fire, politickly hope to save their own chamber, are sometimes burned therein. Treason was charged upon him for secret siding with King Edward, who before and afterward de facto, and always de jure, was the lawfull King of England; on this account he lost his life. Then did the axe at one blow cut off more learning in Eng∣land
then was left in the heads of all the surviving nobility. His death happened on Saint Lukes-day 1470. Edward Lord Tiptoft his son was restored by Edward the fourth, Earl of Worcester. But dying without Issue his large Inheritance fell to his three Milles ut supra. Aunts, sisters to the learned Lord aforesaid, viz. First Philip, married to Thomas Lord Ross of Ham-lake. Second, Jone, wife of Sir Edmund Ingoldsthorp of Borough-green in this County. Third Joyce, married unto Sir Edward Sutton son and heir of John Lord Dudley, from whom came Edward Sutton Lord Dudley, and Knight of the Garter. JOHN CHEEKE Knight, Tutor to King Edward the sixth, and Secretary of State, was born over against the Market-cross in Cambridge. What Crosses afterwards befel him in his course of life, and chiefly before his Pious death, are largely related in our Church∣History. Souldiers. The courage of the men in this County before the Conquest, plainly appeareth by this authentick passage in a memorable author, who reporteth, that when the rest of the East Angles cowardly fled away in the field from the Danish army, Chronicon. o. Bromton pag. 887. Homines co∣mitatus Cantabrigiae viriliter obstiterunt: The men of the County of Cambridge did manfully resist. Our author addeth, Unde Anglis regnantibus laus Cantabrigiensis Provinciae splendidè florebat; Whence it was that whilst the English did rule, the praise of the people of Cambridge shire did most eminently flourish. Nor lost they their reputation for their manhood, at the coming in of the Normans, who partly by the valour of their persons, partly by the advantage of their fens, made so stout resistance, that the Conqueror who did fly into England, was glad to creep into Ely. Yea, I have been credibly informed that Cambridge-shire men commonly passed for a current proverb, though now like old coine, almost grown out of request. Indeed the Common People have most Robustious Bodies, insomuch that Quarter∣sacks were here first used, men commonly carrying on their backs (for some short space) eight bushels of Barly, whereas four are found a sufficient load for those in other Counties. Let none say that Active valour is ill inferred from Passive strength, for I do not doubt but (if just occasion were given) they would find as good Hands and Arms as they do Backs and Shoulders. Writers. MATTHEW PARIS is acknowledged an English-man by all, (save such who mistakeAMP. Parisius for Parisiensis) and may probably be presumed born in this (as bred in the next) County, where the name and family of Paris is right ancient, even long before they were settled therein at Hildersham, which accrued unto them by their marriage with the daughter and Heir of the Camdens Bri. in Cambridge∣shire. Buslers. Sure I am, were he now alive, the Parises would account themselves credited with his, and he would not be ashamed of their affinity. He was bred a Monke of Saint Albans, skilled not only in Poetry, Oratory and Divinity, but also in such manual as lye in the suburbs of liberal Sciences, Painting, graving, &c. But his Genius chiefly disposed him for the writing of Histories, wherein he wrote a large Chronicle from the Conquest, unto the year of our Lord 1250. where he concludes with this distich; Siste tui metas studii, Matthaee, quietas Nec ventura petas, quae postera proferat aetas. Matthew here cease thy pen in peace, and study on no more; Nor do thou rome at things to come, what next age hath in store. However he afterwards resuming that work, continued it untill the year 1259. This I observe, not to condemn him, but excuse my self from inconstancy, it being it seems a catching disease with Authors, to obey the importunity of Others, contrary to their own resolution.
His history is unpartially and judiciously written, (save where he geth too much to Monkish Miracles and Visions,) and no writer so plainly discovereth the pride, avarice, and rapine of the Court of Rome, so that he seldome kisseth the opes to without biting it. Nor have the Papists any way to wave his true jeeres, but by suggesting, haec non ab ipso scripta, sed ab aliis falsò illi Pits. de it. Aug. dscript. pag. 38. ascripta; insinuating a suspicion of forgery, in his last edition: understand them in what ome 80. years ince was set forth by Mathew Parker, whereas it was done with all integrity, according to the best and most ancient Manu∣scripts, wherein all those Anti-papal passages plainly appear, as since in a latter and exacter Edition, by the care and industry of Doctor William Wats. This Mathew left off living and writing at the same time, viz. anno 1259. I will only adde, that though he had sharp nailes, he had clean hands, strit in his own, as well as striking at the loose conversations of others, and for his eminent austerity was imployed by Pope Innocent the fourth, not only to visit the Monkes in the Diocess of Norwich, but also was sent by him into Norway, to reform the discipline in Holui, a fair Convent therein, but much corrupted. HELIAS RUBEUS was born at Ble dpt. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 48. Triplow in this County, bred D. D. in Cambridge. Leland acquainteth us that he was a great Courtier, and gracious with the King, not in∣forming us what King it was, nor what time he lived in; onely we learn from him, that this Rubeus (conceive his English Name Rouse, or Red) seeing many who were Nobi∣litatis Portenta (so that as in a Tympany their very greatness was their Disease) boasted (if not causelesly) immoderately of their high Extraction, wrote a Book contra Nobili∣tatem inanem. He is conjectured to have flourished about the year 1266. JOHN EVERSDEN was born at one of the Eversdens in this County, bred a Monk in Bury-Abbey, and the Cellerer thereof An Officer higher in sense then sound, being by his place to provide diet or the whole Convent, assigning particular persons their por∣tions thereof; But our Eversdens mind mounted above such mean matters, busied him∣self in Poetry, Law, History, whereof he wrote a fair volume from the Bale descript. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 40. beginning of the world, according to the humour of the Historians of that age; starting all thence, though they run to several marks. Being a Monk he was not over fond of Fryers. And observeth that when the Franciscans first entred Bury Anno 1336. there happened a hideous He∣ricano, levelling trees and towers, and whatsoever it met with. The best was, though they came in with a Tempest, they went out with a Calme, at the time of the dissolu∣tion. This John flourished under King Edward the third, and dyed about the year 1338. RICHARD WETHERSET, commonly called of Cambridge, (saith Bale) because heS. N. was Chancellour thereof. But there must be more in it to give him that denomination, seeing many had that office besides himself. He was a great Scholar, and deep Divine, it being reported to his no small praise, That he conformed his Divinity to Bale Descript. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 88. Scripture, and not to the rules of Philosophy. He flourished under King Edward the third anno 1350. WILLIAM CAXTON born in that Town (a noted stage betwixt Roiston and Huntington) Cent. octa. Num. 43. Bale beginneth very coldly in his commendation, by whom he is cha∣ractered, Vir non omnino stupidus, aut ignavia torpens; but we understand the language of his Liptote, the rather ecause he proceedeth to praise his Diligence and Learning. He had most of his Education beyond the Seas, living 30. years in the Court of Margaret Dutchesse of Burgundy, Sister to King Edward the fourth, whence I conclude him an Anti-Lancastrian in his affection. He continued Polychronicon, (beginning where Tre∣visa ended,) unto the end of King Edward the fourth, with good judgment and Fide∣lity. And yet when he writeth Polychron. lib. ult. cap. 10. that King Richard the second left in his Treasury Money and Jewells, to the value of seven hundred thousand pounds, I cannot credit him, it is so contrary to the received Character of that Kings Riotous Prodigality. Caxton carefully collected and printed all Chaucers works, and on many accounts deserved well of Posterity, when he died about the year 1486.
Since the Reformation. RICHARD HULOET was born at Bal dript. B. Cw. 9. Num. 67. Wishich in this County, and brought up in good learning. He wrote a book called the English and Latine A B C, and dedicated the same to Thomas Goowrich Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor of England. Some will con∣demn him of Indiscretion, in presenting so low a subject to so high a person, as if he would teach the Greatest States-man in the land to spell aright. Others will excuse him, his book being, though, of low of generall use for the Common people, who then began to betake themselves to reading, (long neglected in the land) so that many who had one foot in their grave, had their hand on their primer. But I believe that his book (whereof I could never recover a sight) though entitled an A B C, related not to Lite∣rall reading, but rather to some Elementall grounds of Religion. He flourished Anno Domini 1552. JOHN RICHARDSON was born of honest parentage at Linton in this County, bred first Fellow of Emanuell, then Master of Saint Peters, and at last of Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, and was Regius Professor in that University. Such who represent him a dull and heavy man in his parts, may be confuted with this instance. An extraordinary Act in Divinity was kept at Cambridge before King James, where∣in Doctor John Davenant was Answerer, and Doctor Richardson amongst others the op∣posers. The Question was maintained in the negative, concerning the excommunicating of Kings. Doctor Richardson vigorously pressed the practice of Saint Ambrose excom∣municating of the Emperour Theodosius, insomuch that the King in some passion re∣turned, profecto fuit hoc ab Ambrosio insolentissimè factum. To whom Doctor Richardson, rejoyned, responsum vere Regium, & Alexandro dignum, hoc non est argumenta dissolvere, sed desecare. And so sitting down he desisted from any further dispute. He was employed one of the Translators of the Bible, and was a most excellent lin∣guist, whose death happened Anno Dom. 1621. ANDREW WILLET D. D. was born at Ely in this County, bred Fellow of Christs∣colledge in Cambridge. He afterwards succeeded his father in the Parsonage of Barley in Hertford shire, and became Prebendary of Ely. He confuted their cavill who make children the cause of covetousness in Clergy-men, being bountifull above his ability, notwithstanding his numerous issue. No less admirable his industry appearing in his Synopsi, Comments, and Commentaies, insomuch that one considering his Polygraphy, said merrily, that he must write whilst he slept, it being unpossible that he should do so much when waking. Sure I am, he wrote not sleepily nor oscitantèr, but what was solid in it self, and profitable for others. A casuall fall from his horse in the high-way near Hodsden breaking his leg, accele∣rated his death. It seems that Gods promise to his children to keep them in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against the stone, 'Tis (as other Temporall promises) to be taken with a Tacit clause of revocation, viz. if Gods wisdome doth not discover the contrary more for his glory and his childrens good. This Doctor died Anno Domini 1621. Sir THOMAS RIDLEY Kt. Dr. of the Laws, was born at Ely in this County, bred first a scholar in Eaton, then Fellow of Kings-colledge in Cambridge. He was a general scholar in all kind of learning, especially in that which we call melior literatura. He afterwards was Chancellor of Winchester, and the Vicar generall to the Arch-bishop of Canterbury: his me∣mory will never dye whilst his book called the view of the Ecclesiastical Laws is living; a book of so much merit, that the Common Lawyers (notwithstanding the difference be∣twixt the professions) will ingeniously allow a due commendation to his learned per∣formance in that subject. He died Anno Domini 1629. on the two and twentieth day of January. ARTHUR HILDERSHAM was born at Strechworth in this County, descended by his mothers side from the Bloud-Royal, being great-great-grand-child to George Duke of Clarence, brother to Edward the fourth. Yet was he not like the proud Nobles of Tecoa, who counted themselves too good to put their hands to Gods work. But being bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, he entred into the Ministry. How this worthy
Divine was first run a ground with poverty, and afterwards set a float, by Gods Provi∣dence, how he often alternately lost and recovered his voice, being silenced and restored by the Bishops, how after many intermediate afflictions, this just and upright man had peace at the last, is largely reported in my Ecclesiastical History, to which (except I adde to the truth) I can adde nothing on my knowledge remarkable. He died Anno Domini 1631. R. PARKER, for so is his Christian name defectively written in my Book, was born in Ely, (therefore Place-nameing himself Eliensis) was son (as I am confident) to Master Parker Arch-deacon of Ely, to whom that Bishoprick in the long vacancy (after the death of Bishop Cox) was profered, and by him refused, tantum opum usuram iniquis conditionibus sibi oblatam respuens. Our Parker was bred in, and became Fellow of Caius∣colledge, an excellent Herauld, Historian, and Antiquary, Author of a short, plain, true, and brief Manuscript, called Sceletos Cantabrigiensis, and yet the bare Bones thereof, are Fleshed with much matter, and hath furnished me with the Nativities of severall Bishops who were Masters of Colledges. I am not of the mind of the Italian, (from whose Envy God deliver us) Polidore Virgil, who having first served his own turn with them, burnt all the rare English Ma∣nuscripts of History he could procure, so to raise the valuation of his own works. But from my heart I wish, some ingenious person would Print Mr. Parkers Book, for the use of Posterity. He was a melancholy man, neglecting all Preferment, to enjoy him∣self, and died in the place of his Nativity, as I conjecture, about 1624. MICHAEL DALTON Esquire, He was bred in the study of our Municipall-law in Lincolns Inn, and attained great skill in his own profession. His gravity graced the Bench of Justices in this County, where his judgment deservedly passed for an Oracle in the Law, having enriched the world with two excellent Treatises, the one of the Office of the Sheriffs, the other of the Justices of Peace. Out of the Dedicatory Epistle of the later, I learnt this (which I knew not before) that K. James was so highly af∣fected with our English Government by Justices of Peace, that he was the first, who setled the same, in his Native Country of Scotland. Mr. Dalton dyed before the be∣ginning of our Civil Distempers. THOMAS GOAD D. D. was son to Dr. Roger Goad (for more then fourty years Pro∣vost of Kings-colledge) but whether born in the Provosts Lodgings in Cambridge, or at Milton in this County, I am not fully informed. He was bred a Fellow under his Fa∣ther, afterwards Chaplain to Arch-bishop Abbot, Rector of Hadly in Suffolk, Prebendary of Canterbury, &c. A great and Generall Scholar, exact Critick, Historian, Poet, (delight∣ing in making of verses, till the day of his death) School-man, Divine. He was substituted by K. James, in the place of Doctor Hall, (indisposed in health) and sent over to the Synod of Dort. He had a commanding presence, an uncontrolable spirit, im∣patient to be opposed, and loving to steere the discourse (being a good Pilot to that pur∣pose) of all the Company he came in. I collect him to have died about the year 1635. ANDREW MARVAIL was born at So his son-in∣law informed me. Mildred in this County, and bred a master of Arts in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. He afterwards became Minister in Hull, where for his life time he was well beloved. Most facetious in his discourse, yet grave in his carriage, a most excellent preacher, who like a good husband never broached what he had new brewed, but preached what he had prestudied some competent time before. Insomuch that he was wont to say, that he would crosse the common proverb, which called Saturday the working day, and Munday the holy day of preachers. It happened that Anno Dom. 1640. Jan. 23. crossing Humber in a Barrow-boat, the same was sand-warpt, and he With Mrs. Skinner (daughter to Sir Ed. Coke) a very religi∣ous Gentle∣woman. drowned therein, by the carelesness (not to say drunkenness) of the boat-men, to the great grief of all good men. His excellent comment upon Saint Peter, is daily desired and expected, if the envy and covetousness of private persons for their own use, deprive not the publick of the benefit thereof.
Benefactors to the publick. HUGO de BALSHAM (for so is he truly written) was born in this County as may easily be spelled out of the four following probabilities put together. First, it was fashionable for Clergy-men in that age to assume their Surnames from the place of their Nativity. Secondly, Balsham is an eminent village in this County, whereof an ancientHenry of Huntington. Author taketh notice, naming thence the neighbouring ground Amaenis∣sima Montana de Balsham. Thirdly, There is no other Village of that name throughout the Dominions of England. Fourthly, It is certaine this Hugh was bred in this County, where he attained to be Sub-prior, and afterwards Bishop of Ely. This Hugh was he who founded Peter-house in the University of Cambridge, the first built (though not first endowed) Colledge in England. This Foundation he finished Anno 1284. bestowing some lands upon it, since much augmented by Bountifull Bene∣factors. He sat 28 years in his See, and dyed June the 6. 1286. Sir WILLIAM HORN Salter, son to Thomas Hon was born at Snail-well in this County, he was Knighted by King Hen. the seventh, and Anno 1487. was L. Mayor of London. He gave bountifully to the Preachers at Saint Pauls crosse, and bestowed five hundredStows survay of London pag. 575. Marks to the mending of the high ways, betwixt Cambridge the County Town where he had his first Life, and London the City where he got his best liveli∣hood. Know in that Age Horn his five hundred Marks, had in them the intrinsick value of our five hundred pounds, which in those days would go very far in the wages of Laborers. Sir WILLIAM (son of JOHN) PURCASE was born at Gamlinggay in this County, bred a Mercer in London, and Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1497. He caused Morefields under the walls to be made plain ground, then to the great pleasure, since to the greater profit of the City. Sir THOMAS (son of JOHN) KNEISWORTH was born at Kneisworth in this Coun∣ty, bred a Fishmonger in London, whereof he was Lord Mayor, Anno 1505. He ap∣pointed the Water-conduit at Bishop-gate to be built, to the great convenience of the City, formerly much wanting that usefull Element. Be it here observed for the in∣couragement of the industry of Cambridg-shire Apprentices, that by the premises it doth appear that this small County in the compass of eighteen years afforded three L. Mayors and Benefactors, which no other Shire of equal or greater quantity ever pro∣duced. Since the Reformation. JOHN CRANE was born in Wishbeech in this County, bred an Apothecary in Cambridg, so diligent an youth, that some judicious persons prognosticated that he would be a rich man. Dr. Butler took so great a fancy unto him, that he lived and died in his Family, yea and left the main body of his rich Estate unto him. This Mr. Crane had a large heart, to entertain his friends, and Annually very nobly treated all the Oxford men at the Commencement. He gave at his death no less then three thousand pounds to charitable uses, bestowing the house he lived in (and that a very fair one) aster his Wives death, on the Publick Professor of Physick, and in settlement of his other Benefactions, discreetly reflected on Wishbeech where he was born, (to which he gave 100l. to build a Town-hall) Cambridge, where he lived, Lin, where he was well acquainted, Ipswich, where Doctor Butler (the first founder of his estate) was born, and Kingston where his lands lay. He in some sort gives Preventing Physick to the Scholars now he is dead, by giving 100l. to be lent gratis to an honest man, the better to enable him to buy good Fish and Fowl for the University, having observed much sickness occasioned by unwholsome food in that kind. He bequeathed to Dr. Wren Bi∣shop of Ely, and Doctor Brounrigg Bishop of Exeter, one hundred pounds a piece by his
Will, and as much by a Codecil annexed thereunto. Besides his concealed Charities, his hand was always open to all the distressed Royalists. He died in May, 1650. Memorable Persons. WILLIAM COLLET was born at Over in this County, bred a Clerk in London, till at last he attained to be Keeper of the Records in the Tower, none equalling him in his dexterity in that office. He went the same path with his predecessor in that place, Master Augustine Vincent, but out-went him as survivor. And because Method is the mother of Memory, he orderly digested all Records, that they were to be found in an instant. He abominated their course, who by a water would refresh a Record, to make it usefull for the present, and useless ever after. He detested under the pretence o mending it, to practice with a pen on any old writing, preserving it in the pure natue thereof. Indeed Master Selden and others in their Works, have presented Posterity with a plentifull feast of English rarities, but let me say that Collet may be called their Ca∣terer, who furnished them with provision on reasonable rates. He died to the great grief of all Antiquaries Anno Dom. 1644. EDWARD NORGATE son to Robert Norgate D. D. Master of Bennet-colledge, was born in Cambridge, bred by his Father-in-law (who married his Mother) Nicholas Felton Bishop of Ely, who finding him inclined to Limning and Heraldry, permitted him to follow his fancy therein. For, parents who cross the current of their childrens ge∣nius, (if running in no vicious chanells) tempt them to take worse courses to them∣selves. He was very judicious in Pictures, to which purpose he was imployed into Italy to purchase them for the Earl of Arundel.This story is o his own relation. Returniug by Marseilles he missed the money he expected, and being there unknowing of, and unknown to any, he was observed by a French Gentleman (so deservedly styled) to walk in the Exchange (as I may ll it) of that City, many Hours every Morning and Evening, with swift feet and sad face, forwards and backwards. To him the civil Monsieur addressed himself, desiring to know the cause of his discontent, and if it came within the compass of his power, he promised to help him with his best advise. Norgate communicated his condition, to whom the other returned, Take I pray my Counsel, I have taken notice of your walking more then 20▪ miles a day, in one furlong upwards and downwards, and what is spent in needless going and returning, if laid out in Progressive Motion, would bring you into your own Country. I will suit you (if so pleased,) with a light habit, and furnish you with competent money for a Footman. Norgate very chearfully consented, and footed it (being accommodated accordingly) through the body of France, (being more then five hundred English miles,) and so leasurely with ease, safety, and health, returned into England. He became the best Illuminer or Limner of our age, employed generally to make the Initial letters in the Patents of Peers, and Commissions of Embassadours, having left few heirs to the kind, none to the degree of his art therein. He was an excellent Herald by the title of—and which was the crown of all, a right honest man. Exemplary his patience in his sickness (whereof I was an eye-witness) though a compli∣cation of diseases, Stone, Ulcer in the bladder, &c. ceased on him. He died at the He∣ralds Office, Anno Dom. 1649. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Robert Clopton Thomas Clopton Clopton Draper 1441 2 William Horn Thomas Horn Snaylewell Salter 1487 3 William Purchase John Purchase Gamelinghey Mercer 1497 4 Thomas Kneisworth John Kneisworth Kneisworth Fish-monger 1505 5 Thomas Mirfine George Mirfine Ely Skinner 1518 6 William Bowyer William Bowyer Harstone — 1543 7 Richard Mallory Anthony Mallory Papworthamus Mercer 1564
The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth, 1433. John Bishop of Ely, Commissioners to take the Oathes. John de Tiptoft Chivaler. William Allington Knights for the shire. John Burgoin miles. Knights for the shire. Will. Pole, Mil. Iohan. Colvyle, Mil. Will. Hazenhull, Mil. Will. Malory, Mil. Iohan. Argenton, Mil. Will. Alyngton Senioris de Horseth Laurencii Cheyne de Ditton Hen. Somer de Gran∣cotre Iohan. Cheyne de Longstanton Thomae Dischalers de Whaddon Will. Frevill de Shel∣ford Ioha. Hore de Chil∣derle Ioh. St. George de Haclee Will. St. George de Eadem Rob. Bernard de Iselham Rob. Alyngton de Horseth Walt. Clovile de Pam∣pisworth Walt. Cotton de Lade∣vade. Will. Burgoyne de Caxton Ioh. Moris de Trum∣piton Ioh. Pigot de Aviton Tho. Cotton de Lan∣wade Simo. Brunne de We∣nelingham Edm. Seyntlowe de Malketon Alexan. Child de Hor∣ton Iohan. Keterich de Beche Nicholai Caldcote de Melreth Walt. Hunty don de Trumpiton Radul. Sanston de Sanston Will. Fulburne de Fulburn Rob. Kingston de Berk∣low Rich. Stotevil de Brinkelee Rich. Foster de Bode∣kisham Iohan. Ansty senioris de Ovye Iohan. Totehill de Swafham Iohan. Chirche de Bassingburn Edm. Bendisch de Barenton Iohan. Ansty junioris de Tanerisham Radul. Hamelin de Sanston Iohan. Fulburn de Fulburn Iohan. Borlee de Isel∣ham Iohan. Bury de Stre∣telee Magistri de Chepen∣ham de Chepenham Nich. Hamond de Swofham Tho. Cantyes de Lit∣tillington Iohan. Walter de Cranden Iohan. West de Crox∣ton Iohan. Knesworth de Knesworth Warini Ingrith de Melreth Iohan. Wilford sen. de Badbrurgham Iohan. Wilford junio. de eadem Sim. Hokington de Hokington Iohan. Clopton de Clopton Iohan. Bungeye de Ful∣burn Ioh. Mars de Abiton Tho. Danseth de Cony∣ton Tho. Haneheech de Shelford Hen. Calbech de Bal∣sham Will. Sternede de Sta∣pileford Iohan. Wizhton de Hokington Rob. Anfleys de El∣tislee Will. Eremilond de Iselham Iohan. Vescey de Swa∣nesey Galf. Clopton de Clop∣ton. Will. Baily de Saham Tho. Parker de Kerte∣lenge Tho. Bulseham de Chenele Iohan. Bate de Reche Iohan. Taillour de Brinkle Iohan. Cotisford de Weston Rog. Hunte de Balse∣ham Iohan. How de Sanston Tho. Paris de eadem Iohan, Trope de Dokis∣worth Iacob. Russil de Ske∣lington Rich. Hoggepound de wrotting Iohan. Palgrave de eadem Tho. Cokeparker de Campis Iohan. Petzt. de eadem Steph. Petiz de eadem Iohan. Lambard de eadem Iohan. Smith de eadem Iohan. Britsale de Berkelow Will. Fuller de Lin∣tone Iohan. Plukerose de eadem Thomae Hamont de eadem Iohan. Person de eadem Iohan. Haberd de Onye Iohan. Orveye de Ditton Philip. Grome de Hin∣ton Edm. Preston de Bo∣tisham Tho. Bunte de eadem Ioh. Wilkin de Wil∣burgham Will. Thornton War∣nier de Saham Tho. Stapelton de Bad∣burgham Iohan. Ray de Novo Mercato Hen. Attelane de Be∣che Iohan. Knith de ea∣dem Walt. Fote de Mid∣dilton Ioh. Andrew de Wa∣terbeche Rob. Bertelct de eadem
Iohan. Tylly de ea∣dem Hen. Clerke de ea∣dem Ioh. Annfleys de Crit∣ton Iohan. Fox de ea∣dem Richard. Mably de Howis Iohan. Attechercke de eadem Iohan. Mably de ea∣dem Will. Colyn de Mad∣dyngle Iohan. Custance de eadem Tho. Mesynger de ea∣dem Will. Reynolt de ea∣dem Will. Knight de Che∣sterton Iohan. Bacon de ea∣dem Ioh. Bernard de ea∣dem Henrici Speed de∣Hyston Will. Page de eadem Iohan. Smith sen. de eadem Walt. Spernd de Co∣tenham Hen. Mey de eadem Hugon. Bernard de eadem Will. Burbage de Drayton Iohan. Gifford de ea∣dem Rober. Salman de ea∣dem Hen. Roys de Lol∣worth Iohan. Asplen de ea∣dem Iohan. Ganelock de Over Ioh. Sampson Bocher de eadem Iohan. Barby de ea∣dem Hen. Okeham de ea∣dem Will. Shetere de We∣nelingham Iohan. de Botre de ea∣dem Iohan. Shetere de ea∣dem Will. Bakere de Swan∣sey Sim. Hurlpeny de ea∣dem Rich. Wright de ea∣dem Iohan. Halton de ea∣dem Ioh. Howesson de Ellys∣worth Iohan. Bole de ea∣dem Will. Fermour de ea∣dem Iohan. Wareyan de ea∣dem Io. Annfleys de Pap∣worth Everard Io. Kent de Papworth Anneys Iohan Dantre de Gra∣nele Io. Annfleys de Cony∣ton Thom. Crispe de ea∣dem Will. Beton de Fen∣drayton Will. Pecard de ea∣dem Ioh. Grewere de ea∣dem Rich. Hemington de Longstanton Henri. Rede de ea∣dem Io. Page jun. de ea∣dem Will Driffeld de ea∣dem Ioh. Hawkyn de ea∣dem Will. Atte low de ea∣dem Tho. Pelle de Hoking∣ton Ioh. Fulham de ea∣dem Ioh. Williem de West∣wyk Tho. Herward de ea∣dem Hen. Page de Ramp∣ton Will Page de eadem Ioh. Watesson de ea∣dem Ioh. Bette de Herde∣wyk Tho. Newman de Toft Tho. Basely de ea∣dem Tho. Crispe de Calde∣cote Ioh. Faceby de ea∣dem Tho. Adam de Eve∣risdon Magna Henri. Bocher de ea∣dem Tho. Tant de Everis∣don parva Will Baron de ea∣dem Will. Parnell de Kingston Rich. Mading le de eadem Ioh. Couper de eadem Sim. Lavenham de Brunne Galfri. Norman de eadem Sim. Wareyn de Stowe Will Semer de eadem Thom. Bette de ea∣dem Iohan. Freman de Esthatbee Iohan. Bradfeld de eadem Tho. Fysher de Game∣lingey Ioh. Brampston de eadem Walt. Aydrok de eadem Ioh. Smith de eadem Iohan. Drapr de eadem Iohan. Goneld de Croxton Willielm. Redford de eadem Iohan. Michell de Eltislee Iohan. Gylmyn de eadem Thom. Bernard de eadem Tho. Burgoyn de Caxton Ioh. Noris de eadem Iohan. Pachat de eadem Will. Mold de Whad∣don Richar. Lylye de eadem Iohan. Oradle de ea∣dem Will. Adam de Mel∣reth Tho. Cosyn de eadem Will. Lylye de eadem Iohan. Gentyng de eadem Ioh. Zoksle de Melde∣burn Iohan. Turnere de eadem Tho. Gentyng de ea∣dem Iohan. Bayly de ea∣dem Nich. Pulter de ea∣dem Will. Turpin de Knes∣worth Ioh. Street de eadem Will. Willwys de Royston Thom. Mellman de eadem Walt. King jun. de Hungrihatle Guidonis Moyn de eadem Iohan. Pynk de ea∣dem Ioh. Malbern de Ste∣pilmorden Iohan. Crystmasse de eadem Iohan. Busshe de ea∣dem Will. Frost de Gylde∣myorden Iohan. Lyly de ea∣dem
Rich. Pern de eadem Rich. Wolleys de Bas∣singburn Iohan. Parlet de eadem Iohan. Reymond de eadem Iohan. Bettele de eadem Rich. Batte de Abi∣ton Thomae Lorkin de eadem Ioh. Gibbe de Litil∣lington Iohan. Benizch de eadem Will. Baker de Tad∣low Tho. Pelle de eadem Ioh. Goslin de Cran∣den. Will. Ward de Tad∣low Ioh. Derby sen. de Copton Rich. Derby de eadem Tho. Sherlee de Shen∣gey Iohan. Smith de eadem Will. Pink de wendy Prioris de Bernwell Prioris de Angleseye Prioris de Speneye Prioris de Fordham Will. Lasselys perso∣ne Ecclesiae de Over. Tho. Attewode perso∣ne Ecclesiae de Ellis∣worth Ioh. Terinton persone Ecclesiae de Lolworth Ioh. Deping persone Eccl. de ritton Nich. Holey persone Eccl. de wansey Ioh. Car away persone Eccl. de Fulburn Radulphi Wathe per∣sone Eccl. de Will∣burgham parva Wil. Lavender persone Eccl. de Middilton Rich. Drayton persone Eccl. de Kingston. Tho. Lawngham per∣sone Eccl. de Eltyslee Rob. Dixon persone Ecclesiae de Shelford Magna Adam persone Eccl. de Dokisworth Will. Midleton persone Eccl. de Clopton Ioh. Blak persone Eccl. de Hungrihatlee Will. Mowt vicarii Ecclesia de Brunne Ioh. Camisby persone Eccl. de Sneyleswell Iohan. Smith persone Eccl. de Brynkle Io. Bocher vicarii Eccl. de Longstanton Io. Gotobed vicarii Eccl. de Swafham Rect. de Chenele vica∣rii de Dittons Valens Persone Eccl. de Fi∣ditton The Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington-shires. HIN. II. Auno 1 Rich. Basset, Albericus de Veer. Auno 2 Paganus Vic. & Rob. Grim∣ball. Auno 3 Idem. Auno 4 Auno 5 Idem. Auno 6 Auno 7 Idem. Auno 8 Idem. Auno 9 Nich. de Chenet Auno 10 Hamo Petom Vic. Auno 11 Idem. Auno 12 Hamo Petom, & Phil. de Daventre Auno 13 Phil. de Daventre for 3 years. Auno 16 Ebrar. de Beach, & War. de Basingborn Auno 17 Idem. Auno 18 Ebrardus de Beach for 6 years. Auno 24 Walt. filius Hugonis for 3 years. Auno 27 Walt. filius Hugonis, & Will. filius Stephani Auno 28 Walt. filius Hugonis Auno 29 Rad. de Bardulff. Auno 30 Idem. Auno 31 Nich. filius Roberti for 3 years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Nich. filius Roberti Anno 2 Will. Muschet Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Rich▪ Anglicus Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Reginaldus de Argentuen Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Tho. de Huntsdon Anno 9 Merric. de Marignes Anno 10 Rob. de Iusula. JOH. R. Anno 1 Rob. de Insula Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Hamo de Valoignes, & Rall. de Valoigne Anno 4 Walt. de Stuieclea Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rob. de Tateshall, & Magi∣ster Aristoteles Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Iosteli. de Stuieclea Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Fulco filius Theobaldi for 6 years. Anno 16 Will. Comes. Sarisb. & Wer. de Marigne Anno 17 Will Comes. Sarisb. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Fulco de Breante, & de Radul. Bray Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Fulkesius de Breante, & Joh. de Ulicot for 4 years. Anno 9 Galf. de Hacfield sive Had∣field for 8 years. Anno 17 Geremias de Caxton for 4 years. Anno 21 Henri. de Colvel for 6 years. Anno 27 Hugo de Hodeng Anno 28 Rad. de Hereford for 3 years. Anno 31 Phil. de Staunton for 3 years. Anno 34 Henr. Colvile Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Simon. de Hoton Anno 37 Idem. Anno 38 Ioh. de Moyne Anno 39 Ioh. de Moyne, & Ioh. de Marines Anno 40 Idem.
Anno 41 Will. de la Stow Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Will. le Moyne Anno 44 Ioh. de Scalarus Anno 45 Ioh. de Scalarus, & Ioh. Lovell. Anno 46 Saer de Frivile Anno 47 Iohan. Lovell for 5 years. Anno 52 Almaricus Pech Anno 53 Saerus de Frivile Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Rob. del Estre Anno 56 Idem. EDW. I. Anno 1 Rob. del Estre Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Walt. Shelfhanger Anno 4 Will le Moyne for 3 years. Anno 7 Bal. de Sto Georgio Anno 8 Will. de Rothing Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Tho. de Belhus. for 7 years. Anno 17 Hugo de Babington for 8 years. Anno 25 Will. de Mortuo Mari Anno 26 Will de Sutton Anno 27 Tho. de Gradinor Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Rob. Hereward Anno 30 Rob. de Bajose for 5 years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Ioh. Crekes, & Rob. de Hoo for 3 years. Anno 4 Iohan. de Crekes for 3 years. Anno 7 Tho. de Stolarus Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Radul. Giffard for 3 years. Anno 12 Math. de Bassingborne Anno 13 Ioh. de Crekes Anno 14 Almaricus de Zouch for 5 years. EDW. III. Anno 1 Math. de Bassingborne Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Almar. la Zouch Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Will. le Moyne Anno 6 Will. filius Ioh Muchett Anno 7 Rich. de Bajocis, & Warr. de Bassing Anno 8 Anno 9 Ioh. de Lymbery, & Will. Muschetts Anno 10 Tho. de Lacy Anno 11 Will. Muschett Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Warrin. de Bassingborn Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Ioh. de Papworth, & Ioh. de Lacy Anno 16 Warr. de Bassingborn for 4 years. Anno 20 Rob. de Engane Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Guido. de Sto Cler. for 4 years. Anno 26 Iohan. Lisle de Rubeo. Monts. Anno 27 Gui. de St. Clere Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Tho. de Scalar Anno 30 Ioh. de Harewdon Anno 31 Nich. Stanell for 4 years. Anno 35 Ioh. Furneux, & Tho. Cheyne Anno 36 Nich. Styvecle for 10 years. Anno 46 Will. de Pappeworth Anno 47 Rog. Harlaston Anno 48 Tho. Sewalle Anno 49 Tho. Torell Anno 50 Bald. St. George Anno 51 Ioh. Deugayne Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Ioh. Avenel Gamling∣gay. Arg. a Fess betw. 6 Annulets G. Az. Cresuly, a Fess Dansette Ar. 2 Will. Moygn     3 Radu. Wykes     4 Hen. English     5 Tho. Sewale     6 Will. Moygne ut prius   7 Phil. Tillney   Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Griffins∣heads erased G. 8 Hen. English     9 Ioh. Heningford   G. 3 Unicorns-heads cooped Or. 10 Rob. Paris Hildershā   11 Will. Pappeworth     12 Will. Chenye   Azure a Fess inter 3 Leopards∣faces Or. 13 Edw. de la Pole     14 Rob. de Paris ut prius   15 Nice. Steucle Stivele H   16 Ioh. Kinost     17 Will. Chenye, mi.     18 Nich. Paris ut prius   19 Ioh. Lakynghech     20 Ioh. Harlington     21 Andr. Newport   Arg. a Cheveron, Gules betwixt 3 Leopards-heads S. 22 Idem. ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Tho. Hasdden     2 Will. Rees & Jo. Howard   Gules a Bend betwixt six Cross Croflets Fitchee Arg. 3 Idem.     4 Ioh. Hobildon ut prius   5 Idem.     6 Rob. Scotte     7 Ioh. Bernakes     8 Ioh. Hobildon     9 Ioh. Paniel     10 Bald. St. George Hatley C. Arg. a Chief Az. over all, a Lion Ramp. G. Crowned Or. 11 Will. Allein     12 Rob. Scotte     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Rob. Hockshe cho     2 Will. Alington Horsheath S. a Bend betwixt 6 Billetts Arg. 3 Tho. Reviles     4 Rob. Scott     5 Walt. Pole, mil. ut prius   6 Will. Asconhall     7 Tho. Reviles     8 Rob. Scott    
9 Idem. ut prius   10 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Ro. Scott, & Will▪ Alington ut prius   2 Wal de la Pole, m. ut prius   3 Nich. Slyvebley     4 Ioh. Hore Childerley   5 Tho. Dischalers Whaddon Gules 6 Scallops 3, 21. Arg. 6 Nich. Alington ut prius   7 Walt. de la Pole ut prius   8 Lavi. Cheyney Ditton c. AMP. 9 Ioh. Austey     10 Io. Shardelo, m.     Ioh. .   S. a Bend Ar. between 2 Cotisses Dancette Or. 11 Rob. Stonham   Arg. on a Cross Sable 5 Escalopes Or. 12 Rog. Hunt     13 Idem.     14 Rob. Stonham ut prius   15 Idem.     16 Will. Alington ut prius   17 Gilb. Hore ut prius   18 Hen. Langley     19 Idem.     20 Will. Lee     21 Tho. Peyton Isleham S. a Cross ingrailed Or, in the first Quarter a Mullet Arg. 22 Wil. St. George, m. ut prius   23 Idem. ut prius   24 Ioh. Chalers ut prius   25 Idm.     26 Tho. Bernard   Ar. a Bear ramp. & Border Eng. S. 27 Wal. Trumpingtō Trūpington Az. Cresulee 2 Trumpets Or. 28 Ioh. Harlaston   Arg. a Fess Ermin erised Sable. 29 Will. Alington ut prius   30 Tho. Tiesham Northamp. Parteè per Saltyrs, Sa. & Or. 6 Trefoiles of the first. 31 Tbo. Peyton ut prius   32 Wil. Hasdden     33 Hen. Paris, ar. ut prius   34     35     36 Tho. Tresham, ar. ut prius   37 Ioh. Colvill, mil.   Az. a Lion ramp. Arg. over all a Label G. 38 Tho. Findern, m.     EDW. IV.     Aano     1 Ioh. Alington, ar. ut prius   2 Ioh. Stuke, ar.     3 Idem.     4 Ioh. Cheyne     5 Ioh. Boughton, ju   Ar. a hev. betwixt 3 Mullets G. 6 Ioh. Berleley, mil.   Gul. a Chev. betwixt 10 Crosses from 6 & 4 Arg. 7 Ioh. Forster, * ar.     8 Will. St. George, ut prius * S. a Chiv. betwixt 3 Arrows Ar. 9 Rich. Sapcote, m. Elton Sable 3 Dove-coats Arg. 10 Tho. Gray, ar.   Barry of six, Arg. & Az. 3 Tor∣teauxes in Chief. 11 Tho. Gray, mil. ut prius   12 Ioh. Austy     13 Tho. Pgott Abington c. Sable 3 Pickaxes Argent. 14 Io. Broughton, m. ut prius   15 Io. Cheyue, mil.     16 Tho Cotton, ar. Ladwade c. S. a Cheveron twixt 3 Griffons∣beads eraced Arg. 17 Will. Alington, ju. ut prius   18 Will. Frevill, ar. Sheford ca, G. 3 cressants Ermine. 19 Rob. Patis, ar. ut prius   20 Tho. Huntingdon     21 Gal. Blodwell     22 Rob. Tilney ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Rob. Taneld     2 Ioh. Wake, ar. Salston C. Or, 2 Barrs Gules 3 Torteaxes in Chief. 3 Io. Hudleston, *m   * G. Frettee Arg. HEN. VII.     Anno   * G. a Lion ramp. Queve forchee, Arg. within a Border V. charged an Enteir of 8 Escallop. Or. 1 Will. Findern     2 Tho. Oxenburgg*     3 Will. Taillard †   † Quarterly Arg. & S. a cross pa∣tonce quarterly perced counterch. 4 Ioh. Hafilden     5 Will. Wentworth   S. a Chev. betwixt 3 Leopards∣heads Or. 6 Tho. Cheyney, m.     7 Will. Cheyney, ar.     8 Ioh. Burgoyne Caxson ca. Az. a Talbot passant Arg. 9 Tho. Cotton, ar. ut prius   10 Gerrard Steukly     11 Tho. Cheney, m.     12 Chri. Peyton, ar. ut prius   13 Rich. Stutvill, ar. Brynklo ca. Barruly Arg. & G. a Lion Ramp. Sable. 14 Rob. Peiton, mil. ut prius   15 Tho. Cotton, ar. ut prius   16 Jo. Clarevax     17 Edw. Lucy, ar.   G. Crusuly Or, 3 Lucies, [or Pikes] Hauriant Arg. 18 Tho. Cheyne, m.     19 Chri. Druell, ar.     20 Ioh. Frevile, ar. ut prius   21 Anth. Mallory, ar.   Or, a Lion ramp. G. collered of the first. 22 Idem. ut prius   23 Will. Findern, m.     24 Tho. Gery     HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Fra. Halisden, ar.     2 Ioh. Paris, ar.     3 Egid. Alington, m. ut prius   4 Tho. Cotton, ar▪ Conningtō Az an Eagle displayed Arg. 5 Tho. Throsby     6 Ra. Chamberlein   Or, Fretty S. on a Cheif of second 3 Bezants. 7 Ioh. Paris, ar. ut prius   8 Ioh. Cutte, mil. Childerly c. Argeni on a Bud Engrailed S. 3 Plates. 9 Will. Tanfeld, ar.     10 Anth. Malory, ar. ut prius   11 Egid. Alenton, m. ut prius   12 Fran. Alisdon, ar.     13 Ioh. Moor, ar.     14 Ioh. Huddleston ut prius   15 Anth. Hansard   Gules three mullets Argent. 16 Ioh. Huddleston ut prius   17 Rob. Payton, ar. ut prius   18 Tho. Piggot, ar. ut prius   19 Rob. Aprice, ar. VVashingly s. S. 3 Spears-heads Arg. 20 Ioh. Paris, ar. ut prius   21 An. h. Hansard, ar. ut prius   22 Egi. Alington, m. ut prius   23 Anth. Malory, ar. ut prius   24 Tho. Eliot, mil. Carltō   25 Rch. Sapcotte, m. ut prius   26 Tho. Chichele, ar.   Or a Chev. betwixt 3 Cinkfoiles Gules. 27 Rob. Peyton, mil ut prius   28 Tho. Crumwell, a.   See our Notes in this year. 29 Tho. Megges, ar.     30 Tho. Hutton, ar.     31 Phu. Paris, ar. ut prius   32 Rich. Crumwell, Hinchin∣brook H. Sable a Lion rampant Argent. 33 Oliv. Leder, ar.     34 Edw. North, mil. Catlidge Az. a Lion passant Or between 3 flower de lices Arg. 35 Rob. Aprice, ar. ut prius   36 Tho. Eliot, mil. ut prius   37 Egid. Alington, m. ut pris   38 Law. Tailard, m. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Tho. Cotton, ar. ut prius   2 Ioh. Hudleston ut prius   3 Ioh. Cotton, ar. ut prius * Ar. on a Chev. betwixt 3 Boars∣heads couped S. as many Scallops Or, a Border Vert Bzantee. 4 Tho. Bolles, * ar.     5 Ioh. Cutte, mil.     6 Egi. Alington, m. ut prius   MA. REGI.     Anno     1 Rob. Peyton, ar. ut prius   REX PHIL. & Ma. Regina.     Anno     2 Oliv. Leaden, mil.     3 Law. Tayla rd, m. ut prius   4 Ioh. Cotton, mil. ut prius   5 Rob. Tirwhite, m. LINCO. Gules, 3 Pewets Or. 6 Wil. Laurence, ar. St. Ives Arg. a cross Ragule G. on a chief of the second a Lion passant Gardant Or. REG. ELIZA.     Anno     1 Ioh. Hutton, ar.   Ar. a chief Vert, charged with an Eagle disp, within a Border eng. G. 2 Tho. Cotton, mil. ut prius Arg. on a Cbev. G. 3 Lozinges Or twixt as many Goats-heads grazed Az. armed & chollered of the third on a chief S. a Lion passant Gardant Ermine. 3 Fran. Hynde, ar. Madenly C.   4 Hen. Darcy, ar. Leightō H. Azure 3 Cinque-fotles betwixt 9 Crosses-croflets Arg. 5 Cle. Chichiley, ar. ut prius   6 Will. Mallory, ar. ut prius   7 Hen. Williams, alias Cromwell, m. ut prius   8 Wil. Worthingtō     9 Rob Peyton, ar. ut prius   10 Tho. Revell. ar.     11 Hen. Longe, ar. Shengey C. S.' a Lion ramp. betwixt 8 Crosses crossed Argent. 12 Fran. Hynde, ar. ut prius   13 Hen. Crumwell ut prius   14 Ioh. Cutts, mil. ut prius   15 Tho. Wendy Hastinield Ca. Az. a Chev. twixt 3 Lions-heads eraced within a Border engrai∣ed Or. 16 Ioh. Hutton, ar. ut prius   17 Will. Mallory, ar. ut prius   18 Rob. Bevill, ar. Chastertō G. a Chev. Or betwix 3 Bezantes. 19 Tho. Reu, ar.     20 Fitz Rad Cham∣berlaine ut prius   21 Tho: Holmes, ar.     22 Hen. Crumwell, m. ut prius   23 Rob. Taylor     24 Tho. Cotton. ar. ut prius   25 Hen. Darcy, mil. ut prius   26 Anth. Cage, mil.   Partie per pale Az. & G. over all a Saltire Or. 27 Tho. Wendy, ar. ut prius   28 Rob. Peiton, ar. ut prius   29 Fran. Crumwell ut prius   30 Rad. Bevill, ar. ut prius   31 Fran. Hynde, m. ut prius   32 Tho. Chichley, ar. ut prius   33 Ioh. Cotton, ar. ut prins   34 Hen. Crumwell ut prius   35 Ioh. Peyton, ar. ut prins   36 Tho. March, ar. Waresley H. Or, 3 Pales Az. on a Chief G. 3 Talbets-heads erazed of the fist. 37 Rob. Brudenell Diddington H. Ar a Cheverou G. twixt 3 Capps Azure 38 Anth. Cage, ar. ut prius   39 Iar. Clifton, mil. Leighton H. Sa. semee de Cinq foiles a Lion ramp. Argent. 40 Oli. Crumwell, m. ut prius   41 Egi. Allington, ar. ut pris   42 Will Hind, ar. ut prius   43 Ioh. Cutts, mil. ut prius   44 Tho. Wendy, ar. ut prius   45 Ioh. Bedell, mil. & pri. Iaco. Hamarton Hunt. Gules a Chev. engrailed betwixt 3 scollopps Ag. REG. JAC.     Anno     1 Ioh. Bedell, mil. ut prius   2 Ioh. Peyton, mil. ut prius   3 Rob. Bevill, mil. ut prius   4 Tho▪ Iermy, mil. Tevershā C. Arg. a Lion ramp. Guarda nt G. 5 Rob. Payne, mil. Medlow H, Az. a Bend trunked Rgulee be∣twixt six Estoles Or. 6 Ioh. Cage, ar. ut prius   7 Oliv. Cheney, mi. Steukley H,   8 Reg. Millicent, m.     9 Sim. Steward, mi. Sturney C. Qarterly, First France on a bor∣dr. G. 8 Fermlauxes Or. The se∣cond Or, a fess Checky arg. and Az. a border engrailed G. 10 Edw. Hind, ar. ut prius   11 Tho. Baldwyn, ar.     12 Edw. Aldred, ar.    
13 Mi. Sands, m. & b Wilburham Or a Fess indented betwixt 3 Crosses-croslets Fitche G. 14 Fran. Brown, ar.     15 Will. Wendy, ar. ut prius   16 Tho. Steward, m. ut prius   17 Ioh. Cutts, mil. ut prius   18 Tho. Maples, ar. Stow Az. a Chev. quarterly O. & Ar. between 3 Flower deluce. of the second. 19 Rob. Symonds Wichsord C.   20 Ed. Peton, m. & b. ut preus   21 Rob Audley, ar: St Ives   22 Iac. Reynold, mil.     CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Mart. Peirce, ar. CAMBR. G. a Cheveron, Ermine twixt 3 Da* ons-heads eraced Arg. 2 Ioh. Goldsburgh Godman che∣ster A.   3 Rob. Hagar, ar. Buyne-cast: Ca. Ag. on a Bend S. 3 Lyons pas∣sant of the first. 4 Tho. Parker, ar.     5 Iacob. Pedley, ar.     6 Tho. Terrell, ar. Fulborn C. Arg. two Cheverons Az. within a border engrailed G. 7 Rich. Covil, ar.   Az. a Lion ramp. Arg. a File os 3 Lambeaux G. 8 Capel. Bedell, ar. ut prius   9 Anth. Cage, ar. ut prius   10 Rob. Ballam, ar.     11 Ludo. Dyer, Bar. Gr. Ston ton Hu. O, a chief indented Gules. The Sheriffs of Cambridge-shire alone. Name Place Armes 12 Ioh. Carleton, ba. Chevely Arg. on a Bend Sa. 3 Mascats of the first. 13 Tho. Chichesley ut prius   14 Tho. Wendy, ar. ut prius G. a Fess twixi 3 Scallops Or. 15 Tho. Pichard * Trūpington Arg. a Fess betwixt 3 Crosses Fitchee G. 16 Ioh Crane, † ar. Kingston   17 Ioh. Cotton, mil. Landwad S. a Cheveren betwixt 3  ∣heads erazed Arg. The Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington-shires again. Name lace Armes 18 Tho. Martin, mil. Barton Arg. an Eagle displayed G. 19 Idem. ut prius   20 On slo. Winch, ar.     21 Tris. Diumond Wel.   Edward IV. 16 THOMAS COTTON, Ar.] This Thomas Cotton (different in Arms, and descent from the Cottons of Hunt.) was
of Cambridg-shire (the same person who in the. Gentry of that County [Henric 6. 12.] was returned the twenty second in Order. Henry the VIII. 24 THOMAS ELIOT, Mil.] He was son to Sir Richard Bale descript. Bt. Cent. oct. Num. 77. Eliot, and born, some say, in Suffolk, but his house and chief estate lay in this County. After his long sailing into forraign parts, he at last cast an∣chor at home, and being well skilled in Greek and Latine was the Author of many excellent works. Of these one in Latine was styled Idem ibidem. Defensorium bonarum mulierum, or the defence of good women; though some will say that such are hardly found, and easily deended. He wrote also an excellent Dictionary of Latine and English, if not the first, the best of that kind in that age; and England then abounding with so many learned Clergy-men, I know not which more to wonder at, that they mist, or he hit on so ne∣cessary a subject; let me adde Bishop Cooper grafted his Dictionary on the stocke of Sir Thomas Eliot, which worthy Knight deceased 1546. and was buried at Carlton in this County. 28 THOMAS CROMWELL, Ar.] Here Reader I am at a perfect los, and do desire thy charitable hand to lead me. No Cromwell Thomas can I find at this time in this County, and can hardly suspect him to be the Cromwell of that Age, because only additioned Armiger. Indeed I find him this very year created Baron of Okeham, but cannot believe that he was Un-knighted so long, besides the improbability that he would condescend to such an Office, having no Interest I ever met with in Cambridg-shire, though (which may signifie somewhat) he was at this time Chancellor of the University of Cambridge. Thus I have started the doubt, which others may hunt down to their own satisfaction. 34 EDWARD NORTH, Mil.] He was a prudent Person, and in managing Matters of importance of great dispatch, not unskilled in Law, and eminently imployed in the Court of Augmentation. A Court though short lived (erected in the end of King Henry the eighth, dissolved in the begin∣ning of King Edward the sixth his reign) yet very beneficial to the Officers there∣in. This Sir Edward was made by Queen Mary Baron of Catlidge in this County, and was a considerable Benefactor to Peter-house in Cambridge, where he is remembred in their Parlour with this Distich under his Picture; Nobilis Hic vere fuerat si Nobilis ullus, Qui sibi  Nobilitatis erat. He was Father to Roger Lord North, and Great-grand-father to Dudly Lord North now surviving. Edward the VI. 2 JOHN Misprinted Sir Robert n my Ecclesiasti∣call History. HUDDLESTON, Mil.] He was highly honored afterwards by Queen Mary, and deservedly. Such the Tust she reposed in him, that (when Jane Grey was proclaimed Queen) she came privately to him to alston, and rid thence behind his servant (the better to disguise herself from discovery) to Framlingham castle. She afterwards made him (as I have heard) her Privy-Councellor, and (besides other Great Boones) bestowed the bigger part of Cambridge∣castle (then much ruined) upon him, with the stones whereof he built his fair house in this County. I behold his Family as branched from the Huddlestones in Cumber∣land. Queen Elizabeth. 14 JOHN CUTS, Mil.] He was a most bountifull house-keeper, as any of his estate, insomuch that Queen Elizabeth in the beginning of her reign (whilst as yet she had peace with Spain) the
sickness being at London, consigned the Spanish Embassadour to this Knights house in this County. The Embassadour coming thither, and understanding his name to be John Cuts, conceived himself disparaged to be sent to one of so short a name, the Spanish Gentlemen generally having voluminous Surnames, (though not so long as the Deity in New-Spain, called Lord Herbert in the life of K. Henry the 8 pag. 181. Yoca huvaovamaorocoti) usually adding the place of their habitation for the elongation thereof. But soon after the Don found that what the Knight lacked in length of name, he made up in the largeness of his entertain∣ment. 34 HENRY CROMWELL, Mil.] This was the fourth time he was Sheriff in the reign of the Queen. He was son to Richard Cromwell Esquire, Sheriff in the 32. of King Henry the eighth, to whom his Valour and Activity so endeared him, that he bestowed on him so much Abby-land in this County, as at that day, at a reasonable rate, is worth twenty thousand pounds a year, and upwards. He was no whit at all allyed to (though intimately acquainted with) Thomas Lord Cromwell, (the Mauler of Monasteries,) which I knowingly affirme, though the contrary be generally believed. For when Doctor Goodman late Bishop of Gloucester presented a Printed paper to Oliver Cromwell (Grand child to this our Sheriff) mentioning therein his near Affinity to the said Lord Cromwell, the pretended Protectour, desirous to confute a Vulgar Er∣rour, in some passion returned, That Lord was not related to my Family in the least degree. 39 JARVASIUS CLIFTON, Mil.] He had a fair Estate at Barrington in Somerset-shire, whence he removed to Huntington∣shire, on his Match with the sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Henry Darcy of Leighton∣bromswold in that County. This Sir Jarvase was by King James created Baron of Leighton aforesaid, and there began a beautifull house, which he lived not to finish. His sole Daughter Katherine was married to Esme Steward, Duke of Lenox, to whom she bare the truly Illustrious (by Virtues and high Extraction,) James Duke of Rich∣mond. King James. 9 SIMON STEWARD, Mil.] I remember he lived (after he was Knighted) a Fellow-commoner in Trinity-hall, where these his Armes are fairly depicted in his Chamber, with this Distich over them. Francorū Carolus voluit sic Stemmata ferri, Singula cum valeant sunt meliora simul. French Charls would have these Coats to be thus worn; When singly good, their better jointly born. But how the Royal Name of Steward came first into this County, consult I pray the ensuing Epitaph in Ely Minster, transcribed (as my Son hath informed me) by himself, exactly from his Monument. Premendo sustusit. Ferendo vicit.Secundum Redemptoris Mundi adventum expectat hic Marcus Steward Miles, filius haeresque Simeonis Steward Armig. Nicholao Steward Armig. geniti, qui patrem ha∣buit Richardum Steward Armig. quem genuit Thomas Steward Armig. Johannis Ste∣ward militis filius, cujus Pater erat Johannes Steward Miles, ejus nominis in Angliâ pri∣mus, qui cum Jacobo Roberti Scotiae Regis filio in Franciam tranfretans, (regnante tunc Henrico quarto) vento eorum propositis opposito, in Anglicano littore applicuerunt, ubi diu post pro obsedibus custodiebantur: Sed hic Johannes in amorem cujusdam virginis Anglicanae, nomine Talmach, incidens, obtentâque Johannae Reginae veniâ, cui ancilla in∣serviebat, eam in conjugem cepit, in fidemque Regis Henrici dum vixisset solenniter est juratus. Hujus pater erat Alexander, quem genuit Andreas Steward, Miles, Alexandri, cognominati Ferocis filiorum natu minimus, cujus pater erat Walterus Steward, à Dun de vale in Scotiâ dictus. Sed Primus in Genealogiâ hâc summonitus, & hic sepultus, ex Annâ unâ filiarum & Haeredum Roberti Huicke Armig. Reginae Elizabethae Medici pri
marii, varios habuit liberos, quos omnes inadultos Fata rapuere, praeter duos, Marians scilicet Gulielmo Forster in Com. Berke. militi nuptam, & Simionem Steward Militem, Haere∣dem filiúmque suum moestissimum, qui pii Officii, singularisque erga Patrem Amoris gratiâ, hoc posuit monumentum, ubi inscriptum legas, quòd cum multos Annos, & Bello, & Pace, pro Patriâ feliciter egisset, aetate tandem confectus militari singulo, & Auratis Calcaribus à Jacobo Rege Screnissimo ornatus, senex pene octogenarius fatali Necessitati concessit, 28. Februarii, Anno salutis 1603. The Farewell. It is hard for a Physitian to prescribe proper Physick to such a Patient, who hath a Hot Liver, and a Cold Stomack, because what is Good for the One is Bad for the Other. As hard it is, for Weather to please the Concernments of this County, whose Northern part being Moist and Fenny, desires Fair weather; outh and South-eastern Dry and Heathy, delighteth so much rain, tht it can well digest (save in harvest time) one shower every Day, and two every Sunday. But the God of Heaven, * who can make it rain on one place,Amos 4. 7. and not on another, can fit tue Necssity of Bth, and I remitte them both to his Provi∣dence.
CHES-SHIRE. CHES-SHIRE lieth in form of an Axe, Wirral being the handle there∣of, having Lanca-shire (parted with the river Mersey) on the North, a corner of York-shire on the North-East, Darby and Stafford▪ shires, (seve∣red with mountains) on the East, Shrop-shire on the South, Denbigh, Flint-shire, and the Irish Ocean on the West thereof. The longest part (advantaged with excursions) is four and fourty, the broadest twenty five miles. This County was reputed a Palatinate before the Conquest, and since continued in the same dignity. It is much senior to Lancashire in that honour, which relateth to Cheshire as the copy to the original, being Palatinated but by King Edward the third, referring the Duke of Lancaster to have his regal juridiction. Adeò integrè & liberè sicut Comes Cestriae, &c. And whereas Records are written in the Common-law, Con∣trà Coronam & dignitatem Regis, in this County they run thus, Contra dignitatem gla∣dii Cestriae. It aboundeth with all things necessary to mans life, and it is observable that all the rivers, and rivolets therein, rise in, or run through, some meer or pool, as Cumber-meer, Bag-meer, Pick-meer, Ridley-pool, Petty-pool, &c. so that Cheshire hath more lakes in this kind, then all the neighbouring Counties, affording plenty of Carps, Tenches, Trouts, Eeles, &c. therein. The Gentry of this County are remarkable upon a four-fold account. 1. For their Numerousness, not to be parallel'd in England in the like extent of ground. 2. Their Antiquity, many of their Ancestors being fixed here before the Norman-conquest. 3. Their Loyalty, especially against a Northern enemy, heartily hateing a Vate Royall of Eng. pag. 19. Scot, un∣derstand it before the union of the two Kingdomes. 4. Hospitality, no County keep∣ing better houses, which because all growes on their own, may be the better afforded. One said pleasantly that it appeared to all people that the Cheshire Gentry were good house-keepers, because they gave so many wheat-sheaves (bread being the staffe of hospitality, wheaten the best of bread) in their Coats of Armes. Indeed I have told no fewer then six and twenty, called Garbs in Herauldry, which are born in the several Coat-Armours of the Gentry of this County. The Original whereof is sufficiently known to be out of conformity to Hugh  the fifth Earl-Palatine of Chester, who gave Azure six Garbs, Or. And many of the Gentry of the County being his dependents, had assigned them, or did assume in their sheilds something in allusion thereunto. Naturall Commodities. Salt. This is most Essentiall to mans Lively-hood, without which neither Sacrifice was acceptable to God, nor Meat is savory to Man. It is placed on the Board with bread, to shew that they are equally necessary to mans sustenance. A General in our late wars soundly chid a Captain for his so soon surrendring of a Castle, seeing he had store of Powder therein. I had (returned the Captain) plenty of BLACK, but no WHITE Powder at all. And here it is Remarkable to Observe the defects which sundry places have herein. 1. Some Countries have Salt without Flesh within many miles, as in the South∣part of Africa. 2. Some have plenty of Flesh, but no Salt to make use thereof, as in many parts of Tartary. 3. Some have Flesh and Salt, but the Flesh utterly uncapable of seasoning, as about Nombre de Dios, and other places near the Meridian in America. 4. Some have Flesh, Salt, and Flesh capable thereof, but so unconscionably dear, that Common people have little comfort therein, as in France▪ no Coun∣try
having Salt most plentifull, and (for reason of State) most excessive in the▪ rate thereof. These things considered, we who have Flesh, Salt, Salt at reasonable prises, and Flesh capable thereof, have cause to professe, O Fortunati nimium bona si sua norint Angligenae▪ The manner of making of Salt in this County, is so largely and exactly described by Mr. Camden, that nothing can be added thereunto. Cheese. Poor men do eat it for hunger, Rich for digestion. It seems that the Ancient Camdens Brit. in Chshire. British had no skill in the making thereof, till taught by the Romans, and now the Romans may even learn of us more exactness therein. This County doth afford the best for quantity and quality, and yet their William Smith in his Vale Royal pag. 18. Cows are not (as in other Shires) housed in the Winter, so that it may seem strange that the hardiest Kine should yield the tenderest cheese. Some Esayed in vain to make the like in other places, though hence they fetch'd both their kine and Dary-maids. It seems they should have fetch'd their ground too, (wherin surely some Occult excellency in this kind) or else so good Cheese will not be made. I hear not the like commendation of the Butter in this County, and perchance these two Commodities, are like Stars of a different Horizon, so that the Elevation of the one to Eminency is the Depression of the other. Mill stones. Stones they are Naturall, as Fitted for that Purpose, Artificial. Very great and good, are digged up at Mowcop-hill in this County, though one Moity thereof be in Staf∣fordshire, out of which the River Trent doth arise. How necessary these are for mans sustenance, is proved by the painful experience of such aged persons, who wanting their Molare Teeth must make use of their Gums for Grinders, and such bad shifts should men be put to, if wanting Mills where stones turn Corn into bread. Manufactures conside∣rable, I meet with none in this County, and therefore proceed. The Buildings. Beestone-castle, Situated on a steep-hill, carried away the Credit of this County for Building; it was erected by Rayulf the third Earl of Chester, when he returned victo∣rious from the holy land. I am much taken with the neatness of the structure, though, I confess, my eye never did, and now never shall behold it. When some justly quarrell at Virgill his fiction, making Dido fall in love with Eneas, who indeed was dead many years before her Cradle was made. Others have sought ingeniously to salve the Anticronisme in History, by the Plea that she fell in love with his picture which she saw in Tapestry. Yet I may truly aleadge for my self that I was affected with the delight of this Castle, though by me never seen, and now levelled to the ground, (since the late Wars) Beholding the delineation thereof, cut by the charge of John Savage Esquire. Veraque cum desunt Maenia picta juvant When Real Walls are vanish'd quite, Painted ones doe us delight. I confess learn'd Leland is very confident that this Castle shall see better times, de∣riving his intellegence from ancient predictions. Tempus erit quando rursus caput exret altum, Vatibus antiquis si vas mihi credere vati. Beestone in time its head a loft shall heave, If I a Prohet, Prophets may believe. But I give credit to Lelands History, when he tells what is past, more then to his pro∣phecy when he foretells what is to come.
The Wonders. It is reported by credible and believed by discreet Persons, that there is a Pool ad∣joyning to Brereton, the seat of the honorable family of the Breretons, wherein bodies of Trees are seen to swim for certain days together, before the death of any Heir of that House. If so, let not all men look for so solemn summons to pay their Debts to Nature. God grant us that Gray-haires, Dimness of Sight, Dulness of other Senses, De∣cay in general of Strength, Death of our Dearest Relations, (especially when far younger then our selves) before our eyes, &c. may serve us (instead of Swimming Logs) and be sanctified unto us, for sufficient and effectual Monitors of our Mortality. We must not forget the many Fir-Trees found here buried under ground, whereof largely hereaftr in In the won∣ders of Angle sea. a more proper place. The People of this County cut such pieces of Wood very small, and use them instead of Candles, which give a good light. My . Smith in his Vale-royal of England pag. 17. Author adds, that such Wooden-candles have long Snuffes, and yet saith he (which to me amounts to a Wonder,) In falling do no harm, though they light into Tow, Flax, or the like. Strange that the least fire should be so Dead as not to be Revived with such Cor∣dials: Let not this encourage Careless Servants to tempt Providence with such Com∣bustible Conjunctions. No County being more sadly sensible of Casualties by fire. Nantwich, a fair Market therein, being Once Anno 14. and again Anno 1583. twice burnt down to the ground, within the compass of one hundred and fifty years. Proverbs. Cheshire Chief of Men.] Say not that this Proverb carries a challenge in it, and our See our Pro verbs in Kent.  of Kent will under∣take these Chief of Men, for ingrossing Manhood to themselves. And some will opposeto this narrow County-Proverb, an English one of greater latitude, viz. No man so good, but another may be as good as he. For, rather then any difference shll arise, by wise and peaceable men, many Chief's will be allowed. Indeed the Cestrians have always demeaned themselves right valiantly in their un∣dertakings. This was well known to K. Richard the second, who in dangerous times sent for Holinshead Chron. pag. 489. two thousand Cheshire men, all Archers, to attend him. Which number, in time of a suspicious Parliament was Stows Survey of London pag. 522. doubled by him, all having Bouch of Court, (bread and beer) and six pence a day, large wages in that age. Pity it was that the valour of these Cheshire men, was once wasted against themselves, in a terrible battle betwixt King Henry the fourth, and Henry Percy surnamed Hotspurr, not ill described by our Author, There Draytons Po▪ lyalbion, Song . Dutton, Dutton kills▪ a Done doth kill a Done; A Booth, a Booth; and Leigh by Leigh is overthrown; A Venables, against a Venables doth stand; And Troutbeck fighteth with a Troutbeck hand to hand; There Molineux doth make a Molineux to die; And Egerton, the strength of Egerton doth try; O Cheshire wert thou mad, of thine own native gore, So much untill this day thou never shedst befor! Nor doth this abate our former commendation of their loyalty, the cause they maintained, being so intricate and perplexed; one side fighting for Mortimer, who should be King by right; the other for Henry the fourh, who actually was so; and politick men, who know the one were loyall, will be loth to say, that the other were Traitors. Let no Ill-natured wit, urge in opposition to the Manhood of Cheshire men, their late miscarriage under a Worthy Knight, whom I forbear to name, partly, because he name∣eth himself, (though I say nothing of him,) partly, because before my pains pass the Press, he will probably be honorably Additioned. For had other Counties seasona∣bly contributed their promised Assistance, what now proved an abortive birth would
have been a Vital Infant. Besides, better things were provided for our Gracious Sove∣raign, that he the Copy, as God the Original might not come in the tempestuous Wind of War, Fire of , or Earthquake of open Enmity, but in the still  Kings 19. 12. voice of a Peacea∣ble Composition. And to shew that this should not be Mans work, God suffered both the Men of Kent, and Cheshire Chif of Men to fail in their Loyal Endeavours, that it might onely be GODS WORK, and justly marvailous in our Eyes. Better Wed over the Mixon then over the Moor. Over the , that is hard by or at home, Mixon being that heap of Compost which lyeth in the yards of good husbands. Then over the Moor, that is fun off or from London. The road from Chester leading to London, over some part of the Moor-lands in Staffondshire. The meaning is, the Gen∣ry in Cheshire find it more profitable to match within their County, then to bring a Bride out of other . 1. Because better acquainted with her birth and breeding. 2. Because (though her Portion perchance may be less) the expence will be less to maintain her. Such  in  County have been observed, both a prolonger of worship∣full families, and the  of    them, seeing what In his Brit. in Ireland. Mr. Camden re∣ported of the Citizens of , is verified of the Cheshire Gentry, they are all or an Alli∣ance. Cardinals. WILLIAM MAKILESFIELD was saith my Author Pitz de - script pag. 388.  . Bishop In his  of Cardinals. Godwin  little ,  [] in Civitate . However I con∣ceive him born in this  finding a  Market-town and Forrest therein so named, though he was reputed a , because  in that Age was in the  of Coventry and Lichfield. But,    not swim against the stream, I Remit the Reader to his Character in Warwickshire. . WILLIAM BOOTH was first bred in  Inn in London, in the studie of our Municipall Laws, till he  that profession on the proffer of a  Place in Saint Pauls, and took Orders upon him. It was not long before he was  Bishop of Letchfield, and six years after translated to . He expended much money     his   , and    died and was buried in Saint Maries Chappell in Southwell 1464. LAURENCE BOOTH Brother (but by another Mother) to William aforesaid, was bred and became Master of -hall in ; and was Chancellour of that University. He made the Composition  the  and  colledge to their mutuall advantage, and was an eminent  to his own Colledge, bestowing thereon all the  ( )      Church, a∣mongst which was St.     the Colledge of a Pension of five pounds which he redeemed, and and Conferred there on the  and Patronage of Overton-Waterfield in Huntingtanshire. As it is Gods, so it is all!   method, in   Servants▪ Be faith∣full in a little, and thou shalt rule over much. Doctor Booth well performing his Chan∣cellors Place, in Cambridge, was    to    to  the fixth. Well   , he was   ▪ of King  the fourth made Lord High Chancellor, ( seems his       , but )        ▪ Bishop of York, and deserving well of both Sees. For he built in the first the  of  colledge, and         . It must not be forgotten than this     of  ▪ till the day of his death, and   his     ,  , and Bishop , not that they were  (        ,) of the place, but the place   ▪
with them, as it is this day by the Right Reverend Father in God Benjamin Lany Lord Bishop of Peturborough. This Arch-bishop died Anno Dom. 1480. JOHN BOOTH Brother to Laurence, aforesaid, Bachellor of Laws, was consecrated Bishop of Exceter in the sixth of King Edward the fourth, 1466. He built the Bishops Chair or Seat in his Cathedral, which in the judicious Eye of Bishop In his Cata- of Bishops of Exeter. Godwin hath not his Equall in England. Let me adde, that though this be the fairest Chair, the soft Cushi∣on thereof was taken away, when Bishop Vescy alienated the Lands thereof. The worst was, when Bishop Booth had finished this Chair, he could not quietly sit down therein, so troublesome the times of the civil wars betwixt York and Lancaster. So that prefer∣ring his privacy, he retired to a little place of his own purchasing at Horsley in Hamp∣shire, where he dyed April the first 1478. and was buried in Saint Clements Danes, London. We must remember that these three Prelates had a fourth and eldest Brother Sir Roger Booth Knight, of Barton in Lancashire, Father of Margaret, Wife of Ralph Ne∣vill third Earl of Westmerland. And may the Reader take notice, that though we have entred these Bishops (according to our best information) in Cheshire, yet is it done with due reservation of the right of Lancashire, in case that County shall produce bet∣ter Evidence for their Nativities. THOMNS SAVAGE was born at Bishop God∣ in the Arch bishop  York. Maklefield in this County, his Father being a Knight, bred him a Doctor of Law in the University of Cambridge. Hence was he pre∣ferred Bishop of Rochester, and at last Arch-bishop of York. He was a greater Courtier then Clerke, and most Dextrous in managing Secular Matters, a mighty Nimrod, and more given to Hunting, then did    . consist with the Gravity of his Profession. No doubt there wanted not those, which taxed him, with that Passage in Idem . Saint Jerome, Penitus non invenimus in scripturis sanctis, sanctum aliquem Venatorem, Pisca∣tores invenimus sanctos. But all would not wean him from that sport, to which he was† In his com∣ment on the 90. . so much addicted. His provident Precedent spared his Successors in that See many pounds of needless ex∣pences, by declining a costly instaulation, being the first who privately was instauled by his Vicar. Yet was he not Covetous in the least degree, maintaining a most numerous Family, and building much, both at Scroby and Cawood. Having sate seven years in his See, he died, 1508. his Body being buried at York, his Heart at Maklefield, where he was born, in a Chapel of his own Erection, intending to have added a Colledge thereunto, had not death prevented him. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM CHADERTON D. D. Here I solemnly tender deserved thanks to my Manuscript R. Parker in Scel. Cant, in the Masters of Queens-col∣ledge. Author, charitably guiding me in the Dark, assuring, that this Doctor was ex praeclaro Chadertonorum Cestrensis comitatus stemmate prognatus. And although this doubtfull Direction doth not cleave the Pin, it doth hit the White, so that his Nativi∣ty may with most Probability (not prejudicing the right to Lancashire when produced) here be fixed. He was bred first Fellow, then Master of Queens, and never of Magdalen∣colledge in Cambridge, (as Reverend Bishop In his Cata. of the Bishops of Lincola Prin∣ted 1616. Godwin mistaketh) and chosen first the La∣dy Margarets then Kings Professor in Divinity, and Doctor Whitacre succeeded him im∣mediately in the Chair. He was Anno 1579. made Bishop of Chester, then of Lincoln. 1594. demeaning himself in both to his great commendation. He departed this life in April 1608. His Grand-child a virtuous Gentlewoman of rare accomplishments, married to Mr. Joceline Esquire, being big with child, wrot a Book of advise, (since Printed and In∣titled) the Mothers Legacie to her unborn Infant, of whom she died in travail. WILLIAM JAMES D. D. was born in this In  Cestriensi natus Bishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of Dur∣ham. County, bred a Scholar in Christs∣church in Oxford, and afterwards President of the University Colledge. He succeeded Bishop Mathews in the Deanary and Bishoprick of Durham. He had been Chaplain to Robert Dudly Earl of Lecester, and (I hope) I may lawfully transcribe what I read,
Sir J. Harrington view of the Church of England, pag. 204. This hope of Comfort came to his Lord-ship thereby, that if it pleased God to impart any mercy to him, (as his mercy endureth for ever,) it was by the especial Ministry of this Man, who was the last of his Coat, that was with him in his sickness. He was a principal means of recovering Durham house unto his See. This house was granted by King Edward the sixth, to the Lady (afterwards Queen) Elizabeth, (only for term of life,) and lay long neglected during her Raign, till Bishop James about the sixth of King James regained it, and repaired the Chappel, (which he found not only Profaned, but even defaced) to his great cost, and furnished it very de∣cently. He once made so Sir J. Har∣rington pag. 206. compleat an Entertainment for Queen Elizabeth, that Her Ma∣jesty commended the order and manner thereof for many years after. This maketh me the more to admire at what I have heard reported, that when King James in his progress to Scotland Anno 1617. passed through the Bishoprick of Durham, some neg∣lect was committed by this Bishops Officers, for which the King secretly and sharply check'd this Bishop, who layed it so to heart, that he survived the same Reproof not a full twelvemonth. JOHN RICHARDSON was (as he told me) born in this County, of a Family of good worship and great antiquity therein. After his hopeful education in Country Schools, he was bred in the University of Dublin, where he was Graduated Doctor in Di∣vinity, and afterwards was made Bishop of Ardagh in Ireland. In the late Rebellion he came over into England, continuing for many years therein. Episcopal Gravity was written in his Countenance, and he was a good Divine according to the Rule, Bonus Tex∣tuarius, bonus Theologus, no man being more exact in Knowledge of Scripture, carry∣ing a Concordance in his Memory. Great was his paines in the Larger Annotations, espe∣cially on Ezechiel. For let not the Cloaks carry away the credit from the Gowns and Rochet in that Work, seeing this Bishop might say, Pars Ego magna fui, and Doctor Featly, with others of the Episcopal Party, bare a great share therein. Our Saviour we know, lived on the Charity Luk. 8. 3. of such good People, as ministred unto him; and yet it may be collected that it was his constant custome, (especially about the feast of the Joh. 13. 29. Pass∣over) to give some Almes to the poor. So our Bishop who was relieved by some, had his Bounty to bestow on others, and by his Will (as I am Informed) he bequeathed no inconsiderable Legacy to the Colledge in Dublin. He died Anno 1653. in the 74. year of his Age. States men. Sir THOMAS EGERTON Knight, was extracted from the Ancient Family of the Egertons of Ridley in this County, bred in the Study of the Municipal Laws of our Land, wherein he attained to such eminency, that Queen Elizabeth made him her Soli∣citor, then Master of the Rolls, and at last Keeper of the Great Seal, May 6. in the 38. year of her Raign, 1596. Olaus Magnus reporteth that the Emperour of Muscovia, at the Audience of Embassadours, sendeth for the Gravest and Seemliest men in Musco and the Vicinage, whom he apparelleth in Rich Vests, and placing them in his presence, pretendeth to For∣raigners, that these are of his Privy-council, who cannot but be much affected with so many Reverend aspects. But surely all Christendome afforded not a Person which car∣ried more Gravity in his Countenance and Behaviour, then Sir Thomas Egerton, in so much that many have gone to the Chancery on purpose only to see his Venerable Garb, (hap∣py they who had no other business) and were highly pleased at so acceptable a Spe∣ctacle. Yet was his Outward Case nothing in comparison of his Inward Abilities, Quick Wit, Solid Judgment, Ready Utterance. I confess Master In his Eliza∣beh Anno 1596. Camden saith he entred his Office▪ Magna expectatione & Integritatis opinione, With a great expectation and opinion of Inte∣grity. But no doubt had he revised his Work in a second Edition, he would have af∣forded
him a full-faced commendation, when this Lord had turned his expectation into performance. In the first of King James, of Lord Keeper he was made Lord hauncellour, which is only another Name for the same Office, and on Thursday the seventh of Novemb. 1616. of Lord Elismer he was created Viscount Brackley. It is given to Courts whose Jurisdictions do border, to fall out about their bounds, and the Contest betwixt them, is the hotter, the higher the Spirits and Parts of the Respective Judges. Great the Contention for many years together betwixt this Lord of Equity, and Sir Edward Cook the Oracle of Justice at Westminster-hall, I know not which of them got the better, sure I am such another Victory would (if this did not) have undone the Con∣queror. He was attended on with Servants of most able parts, and was the sole Chancellor since the Reformation, who had a Bishop Williams. Chaplain which (though not immediatly) succeeded him in his place. He gave over his Office which he held full twenty years, some few days be∣fore his death, and by his own appointment his body was brought down and buried at Duddleston in this County, leaving a fair Estate to his Son, who was afterwards Created Earl of Bridgwater. When he saw King James so profuse to the Scots, with the grave Fidelity of a States-man, he sticked not often to tell him, that as he held it necessary for his Maje∣sty amply to remunerate those his Country-men, so he desired him carefully to pre∣serve his Crown-lands for his own support, seeing he or his Successour, might meet with Parliaments, which would not supply his Occasions, but on such Conditions as would not be very acceptable unto him. It was an ordinary Alled'd by Sir Fa. Bcon in his Censure on the Earl of Som rset. Speech in his Mouth to say, Frost and Fraud both end in Foul. His death happened Anno Dom. 1616. Capitl Judges. Sir HUMPHRY STARKEY was born with most Probability in this County, whereAMP. his Name is in good, hath been in a better Esteem and Estate. He in the Study of our Laws so profited, that (after some intermediate Dignities) he was preferred Chief Ba∣ron of the Exchequer. I cannot with certainty fix his admission into that Office (Con∣fusedSir Hen. Sp. Goss. verbo justiciarius, seems to assign him, 1 Edw. 5. 1 Rich. 3. 1 Hen. 7. Times causing Confused Dates) but with as much certainty as we can collect, we conclude him preferred to that place 1. Henrici 7. We need enquire no farther into his ability, finding him by so wise and frugal a King, imployed in a place belonging to his Coffers, who though he was sometimes pleased to be remiss in matters which concerned his Subjects, was ever carefull in things wherein his own Emolument was interested. Wonder not that we have so little left of this Judge his Actions, because Empson and Dudly (Loaders grinding more then the Chief Miller) were such Instruments, whose over-activity made all others seem Slugs in that Court. It doth sound not a little to the praise of our Starkey, that where∣as that Age was justly complaining of the Extortions of the Kings Officers, nothing of that nature (no hearing, best hearing in this kind) is laid to his charge. He was bu∣ried in Leonard Shorditch, where this remains of his Epitaph. Orate pro Animabus Humphredi Starkey, Militis, nuper Capitalis Baronis de Scaccario Domini Regis Henrici septimi, & Isabellae Uxoris ejus, & omnium amicorum suoum, &c. The date of his death, defaced on his Tombe, appeareth In Sir Henry Spelm. ut prius. elsewhere to be at the end of K. Henry the seventh, so that his on the Bench was parallel with his Soveraigns sitting on the Throne, begun in the first, and ended in the last of his raign. Sir HENRY BRADSHAW Knight. This Surname being diffused in Darbyshire and Lancashire, aswell as in this County, his Nativity advantaged by the Alphabet, (first come first served) is fixed herein. He became so noted for his skill in our Common Law, that in the sixth of K. Edward the sixth in Hillary terme, he was made Chief Ba∣ron of the Exchequer, demeaning himself therein to his great commendation.
Pity it is that Demetrius who is well reported of all* men, should suffer for his nameJohn 12. sake Demetrius the Silver Smith, who made the Shrines forActs 19. 24 Diana, and raised per∣secution against Saint Paul. And as unjust it is, that this good Judge of whom nothing ill is reported, should fare the worse for one of the same Surname of Execrable Me∣mory, of whom nothing good is remembred. I have cause to conceive, that this Judge was outed of his place for Protestant inclination 1. Mariae finding no more mention of him. Sir RANDAL CREW was born in this County, bred in the study of our Municipal Law, wherein such his proficiency, that (after some steps in his way thereunto) in the 22. of K. James he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, and therein served two Kings, (though scarce two years in his Office) with great integrity. King Charles his occasions calling for speedy supplies of Money, some Great-Ones adjudged it unsafe to adventure on a Parliament, (for fear in those distempered Times, the Physick would side with the Disease,) and put the King to furnish his necessities by way of Loan. Sir Randal being demanded his Judgement of that Design, and the Consequence thereof, (the imprisoning of Rusants to pay it) openly manifested his dislike of such Preter-legal Courses, and thereupon, November 9. 1626. was command∣ed to forbear his sitting in the Court, and the next day was by Writ discharged from his Office, whereat he discovered no more Discontentment, then the weary Travailer is offended, when told that he is arrived at his journies end. The Country hath constantly a Smile for him for whom the Court hath a Frown, this Knight was out of Office, not out of Honour, living long after at his house in Westminster, much praised for his Hospitality. Indeed he may the better put off his Gown, (though before he goeth to bed) who hath a warm Suit under it, and this learned Judge, by Gods blessing on his endeavours, had purchased a fair Estate, and particularly Crew-hall in Cheshire, (for some ages for∣merly the possession of the Falshursts) but which probably was the Inheritance of his▪ Ancestors. Nor must it be forgotten, that Sir Randal first brought the Model of ex∣cellent Building into these remorter parts, yea, brought London into Cheshire, in the Loftiness, Sightliness and Pleasantness of their Stuctures. One word of his Lady, a virtuous wife being very essential to the integrity of a Married Judge, lest what Westminster-hall doth conclude, Westminster Bed-chamber doth revoke. He married Julian Daughter and Co-heir of John Clipsby of Clipsby in North∣folk, Esq. with whom he had a fair Inheritance. She died at Que in Surry, 1623. and lieth buried in the Chancell of Richmond with this Epitaph. Antiquâ fuit orta Domo, pia vixit, inivit Virgo pudica thorum, sponsa pudica polum. I saw this worthy Judge in health 1642. but he survived not long after, and be it re∣membred he had a Younger Brother Sir Thomas Crew, a most honest and learned Ser∣eant in the same Profession. Whose Son John Crew Esquire, (of his Majesties Privy∣Councel,) having been so instrumental to the happy change in our Nation, is in Gene∣rall report, (which no doubt will be effected before these my paines be publick) de∣signed for some Title of Honour. Sir HUMFREY DAVENPORT. His Surname is sufficient to intitle this County un∣to him, but I will not be peremtory till better information. He was bred in the Temple, had the reputation of a Studied Lawyer, and upright person, qualities which commended him to be chosen Chief Baron of the Exchequer. How he behaved himself in the case of the Ship-money, is fresh in many mens memories. The Rea∣der cannot be more angry with me, then I am grieved in my self, that, for want of in∣telligence, I cannot doe the right which I would and ought, to this worthy Judges Me∣mory, who died about the beginning of our Civil distempers. Souldiers. Sir HUGH CALVELY born at Calvely in this County.  Brit. in Cheshire. Tradition makes him a man of Teeth and Hands, who would Feed as much as two, and Fight as much as ten
men, his quick and strong Appetite, could disgest any thing but an Injury, so that killing a man, is reported the cause of his quitting this County, making hence for London, then for France. Here he became a most eminent Souldier, answering the Character our great Camden ibi∣dem. Antiquary hath given him, Arte militari ita in Galliâ incruit, ut vivide ejus virtuti nihil fuit impervium. I find five of his principall Ahievements. 1. When he was one of the thirty English in France, who in a duel encountred as many Britans. 2. When in the last of King Edward the third, being Governour of Calice he looked on, (his hands being tyed behind him by a Truce, yet in force for a Month,) and saw the English slain before his eyes, whose bloud he soon after revenged. 3. When in the first of King Richard the second, after an unfortunate voyage of our English Nobility, beaten home with a Tempest, he took Bark bulloigne and five and twenty other French-ships, besides the Castle of Mark, lately lost by negligence, which he recovered. 4. When in the next year he spoiled Estaples, at a Fair-time, bringing thence so much Plunder as enriched the Calicians for many years after. 5. When he married the Queen of Aragon, which is most certain, her Armes be∣ing quartered on his Tomb, though I cannot satisfy the Reader in the Parti∣cularities thereof. The certain date of his death is unknown, which by proportion may be collected about the year 1388. After which time, no mention of him, and it was as impossible for such a spirit not to be, as not to be active. Sir ROBERT KNOWLES Knight, was born of mean parentage in this Weavers Fun Mon. pag. 436 County, yet did not the weight of his low extraction depress the wings of his Martial mind, who by his valour wrought his own advancement. He was Another of the thirty English, who for the honour of the Nation, undertook to duel with as many Sir Wal. R∣leigh Hist. of the World lib 5. pag. 545. Britons, and came off with great reputation. He was afterwards a Commander in the French-war under King Edward the third, where in despight of their power he drove the people  him like sheep, destroy∣ing Towns, Castles and Cities, in such manner and number, that many years after, the sharp points, and Gable end of overthrown houses, (cloven asunder with instruments of war) were commonly call'd KNOWLES Lamberts er amb. of Kent. HIS MITRES. The last piece of his servrce, was performed in suppressing Wat Tiler and his Rebells. Then I behold aged Sir Robert, buckling on his armonr, as old Priam at the taking of Troy, but with far better success, as proving very victorious; and the Citi∣zens of London infranchized him a member  of, in expression of their thankfulness. His Charity was as great as his Valour, and he rendred himself no less loved by the English, then feared of the French. He gave bountifully to the building of Rochester∣bridge▪ founding a Chappel and Chantery at he East end thereof, with a Colledge at  in Yorkshire, where Constance his Lady was born, endowing it with one hundred and eighty pounds per annum. He died at his  of Scon-Thorp in Norfolk, in peace and honour, whereas  generally set in a cloud; being at least ninety years of age, for he must be  no  then  years old, when Anno 52. he was a Generall under K. Ed∣  third, and he  untill the . of August 1407. being buried in White∣Friers in London, to which he had been a great benefactour. JOHN SMITH Captain, was  in  County, as Master Arthur Smith his Kins man, and my School-master did inform me. But whether or no, related unto the Wor∣shipfull Family of the Smiths at   in this Coun∣ty. . I know not. He spent the most of his life in  . First in Hungary under the Empe∣, fighting against the Turks, Three of which, he himself killed in single Duells, and therefore, was Authorized by So is it writ in the Table over  tomb.  King of Hungary to bear three Turks-heads, as an Augmentation to his Armes. Here  gave intelligence to a besieged City in the night, by significant -works formed in , in legible Characters, with many
strange performances, the Scene whereof is laid at such a distance, they are cheaper cre∣dited, then confuted. From the Turks in Europe, he passed to the Pagans in America, where towards the latter end of the Raign of Queen Elizabeth, such his Perills, Preservations, Dangers, Deliverances, they seem to most men above belief, to some beyond Truth. Yet have we two witnesses to attest them, the Prose and the Pictures both in his own book, and it soundeth much to the diminution of his deeds, that he alone is the Herauld to pub∣lish and proclaime them. Two Captains being at dinner, one of them fell into a large relation of his own atchivements, concluding his discourse with this question to his fellow, And pray Sir (said he) what service have you done? To whom he answered, Other men can tell that. And surely such reports from strangers carry with them the greater reputation. However, moderate men must allow Captain Smith to have been very instrumentall, in setling the plantation in Virginia, whereof he was Governour, as also Admiral of New-England. He led his old age in London, where his having a Princes mind imprison'd in a poor mans purse, rendred him to the contempt of such who were not ingenuous. Yet he efforted his spirits with the remembrance and relation of what formerly he had been, and what he had done. He was buried in Sepulchres-Church-Quire, on the South∣side thereof, having a ranting Epitaph inscribed in a table over him, too long to tran∣scribe. Onely we will insert the first, and last verses, the rather because the one may fit Alexanders life for his valour, the other his death for his religion; Here lies one conquer'd that hath conquer'd Kings. Oh may his soul in sweet Elysium sleep. The Orthography, Poetry, History and Divinity in this Epitaph are much alike. He on the 21. of June, 1631. Physicians. If this county hath bred no Writers in that faculty, the wonder is the less, if it be true what I read, that if any here be sick, They William Smith Vale-royal pag. 16. make him a posset, and tye a kerchieff on his head; and if that will not mend him, then God be mercifull to him. But, be this understood of the common people, the Gentry having the help (no doubt) of the learn∣ed in that profession. Writers. THOMAS ECLESTONE (A Village in Broxtone Hundred) was born in this County, bred a Franciscan in Oxford. Leland saith of him, that under the conduct of prudence and experience, he contended with many paces to pierce into the Penetrales of Learn∣ing. He wrote a book of the succession of Franciscans in England, with their works and wonders, from their first coming in, to his own time, dedicating the same to (not G. Notingham the Provinciall of his Order) but to his friend and Fellow-Frier, his mor∣tified mind (it seems) not aiming at honour therein. He wrote another Book inti∣tuled, De impugnatione Pitz▪ de scrip. Brit. Anno 1340. Ordinis su per Dominicanos, Of the assaults which the Domi∣nicans made on his Order. These two sorts of Friers whipping each other with their Cords or Knotted Girdles to the mutual wounding of their reputations. He died Anno Domini 1340. Since the Reformation. RALPH RADCLIFFE was born in this Bale Script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 98. County, who travelling Southward, fixed himself at Hitching in Hertfordshire, where he converted a demolished house of the Carmelites, into a Publique Grammar-school. He here erected a fair stage, whereon, part∣ly to entertain his Neighhours, and partly to embolden his Scholars in pronuntiation, many interludes were acted by them. Ang. Script. Num. 992. Pitz. praiseth him, being a School-master, that he confined himself to his own profession, not medling with Divinity, and yet amongst
his books he reckoneth up a Treatise of the Burning of Sodome, and another of the Afflictions of Job. Nor must we forget his book entitled de triplice Memoriâ, of the Threefold Memory, which (though I never met with any that saw it) may probably be presumed, of the Water Wax Iron Memory, receiving things very somewhat very hardly easily   retaining them no a little long Time. He flourished under the raign of King Edward the sixth, Anno Domini 1552. and it is likely he died before the raign of Queen Mary. JOHN SPEED was born at Farrington in this County as his own Mrs. Black∣more a Statio∣ners wife in Pauls-Church∣yard. Daughter hath informed me; he was first bred to a handicraft, and as I take it to a Taylor. I write not this for his but my own disgrace, when I consider how far his Industry hath outstript my Ingenious Education. Sir Fulk Grevill, a great favourer of Learning, perceiving how his wide soul was stuffed with too narrow an occupation, first wrought his inlargement as the said Author doth ingeniously confess, Whose In his de∣scription of Warwick-shire. merits to me-ward I do acknowledge in setting this hand free from the daily imployments of a manuall Trade, and giving it his liberty thus to express the in∣clination of my mind, himself being the procurer of my present Estate. This is he who afterwards designed the Maps and composed the History of England, though much help'd in both (no shame to crave aid in a work too weighty for any ones back to bear,) by Sir Robert Cotton, Master Camden, Master Barkham and others. He also made the usefull Genealogies preposed formerly to English Bibles in all Volumes, having a Patent granted him from King James, in reward of his great Labours, to re∣ceive the benefit thereof to him and his. This was very beneficiall unto them by Com∣position with the Company of Stationers, untill this Licentious age neglecting all such Ingenious helps to understand Scripture, and almost levelling (if not prevented) the propriety of all Authors of Books. He dyed in London Anno 1629. and was bu∣ried in Saint Giles without Criplegate, in the same Parish with Master John Fox, so that no one Church in England, containeth the Corps of two such usefull and voluminous Historians. Master Josias Shute Preach'd his Funerall Sermon: and thus we take our leaves of Father Speed, truly answering his name in both the acceptions thereof for Celerity and Success. JOHN DOD was born at Shottliedge in this County, (where his Parents had a com∣petent Estate) bred in Jesus-colledge in Cambridge, by Nature a Witty, by Industry a Learned, by Grace a Godly Divine, successively Minister of Hanwell in Oxford, Fenny∣Compton in Warwick, Cannons-Ashby and Fausly in Northampton-shire, though for a time silenced in each of them. A Father (who shall pass nameless) is censured by some for his over-curiosity in his conceit, rather then Comment, Math. 5. 2. And he opened his mouth and taught them. For Christ (saith he) taught them often, when he opened not his mouth, by his Example, Mi∣racles, &c. Here I am sure, accordingly Master Dod, when his mouth was shut, (prohi∣bited preaching) instructed almost as much as before, by his holy demeanour, and pious discourse. A good Chimist, who could extract Gold out of other mens lead, and how loose soever the premises of other mens discourse, piety was always his naturall and un∣forced conclusion inferred thereupon. For the rest I refer the Reader to Master Samuel Clark, by whom his life is written, wherein are many remarkable passages. I say Master Samuel Clark, with whose pen mine never did, nor shall interfere. Indeed as the flocks of Jacob were distanced three Gen. 30. 36. days journeys from those of Laban, so (to prevent voluntary or casuall commixtures) our styles are set more then a Months journey asunder. The Jewish Rabbins (have a fond and a false conceit, that Methuselah, who indeed dyed in the very See Arch-bi∣shop ushers Cron. year (and his death a sad prognostick) of the deluge, had a Cabin built him in the outside of Noahs Ark, where he was preserved by himself. But most true it is, that good Father Dod, though he lived to see the flood of our late Civil Wars, made to himself a Cabin in his own contented conscience, and though his
cloths were wetted with the waves, (when plundred) he was dry in the deluge, such his self-solace in his holy meditations. He dyed being eighty six years of age, Anno 1645. When thieves break in a house and steal, the owner thereof knows for the present that he is robbed, but not of what or how much, till some days after he finds out, by the want of such things which were taken from him. The Vicenage of Fausly, where Mr. Dod dyed, knew then they were bereaft of a worthy treasure, though ignorant in the perticulars of their losses, till daily discovery hath by this time made them sensible thereof. Benefactors to the Publique. Sir RICHARD SUTTON was born atSo my good friend Dr. Tates Principal of Brasen-Nose hath informed me. Presbury in this County, he is generally be∣lieved a Knight, though some have suspected the same, but suppose him but Esquire. He was one of a Plentifull Estate and Bountifull Hand. It happened that William Smith Bishop of Lincoln began Brasen-Nose-Colledge, but dyed before he had finished one Nostrill thereof, leaving this Sutton his Executor, who over-performed the Bishops Will, and compleated the Foundation with his own liberall Additions thereunto. When the following Verses were composed, in the Person of Brasen-Nose-Colledge, the Muses seemed neither to smile nor frown, but kept their wonted countenance. But take them as they are. Begun by one but finish'd by another, Sutton he was my Nurse, but Smith my Mother: Or if the Phrase more proper seem, say rather, That Sutton was my Guardian, Smith my Father; 'Cause equal Kindness they to me exprest, Better I neither love, love both the best. If Both they may be call'd, who had one will, What One design'd, the Other did fulfill. May such Testators live who Good intend, But if they dye, Heaven such Exec'tors send. This Worthy Knight being born in this County, deservedly reflected upon his own Country-men, making them (and those of Lancashire) most capable of Preferment. I collect his death to have happened about the middle of the Raign of King Henry the eighth. Since the Reformation. ROBERT BRASSY was born atMr. Hatcher in his Manuscript Catalogue of the Fellows of Kings-colledge. Bunbury (contracted for Boniface-Bury) in this County, bred D. D. in Kings-colledge in Cambridge, whereof he was elected the 13. Provost. He being a Learned and Stout man, publickly protested against the Visitors of theFox, Acts & Mon. pag. 1958. University in the Raign of Queen Mary, as to his own Colledge. Say not he onely opposed Superstition with Superstition, pleading Popish Exemptions: For conside∣ring the times, he Drave the nail which would best go, and thereby took off the edge of those Persecuting Commissioners. But let none Envy him a place under this title, who deserved so well of Cambridge. For when many Doctors therein, whose Purblind souls saw onely what was next them, for the present, and either could not, or would not look far forward to Posterity, had re∣solved to sell their Rights in Sturbridge-fair for a trifle to the Towns-men, (which if done, the Vice-Chancellor might even have held the Stirrup to the Mayor,) he onlyMr. Hacher ut prius. op∣posed it and dash'd the designs. He dyed Anno Domini 1558. and lyes buried on the South-side of the Chappell. GEORGE PALIN was (as I have Cogent presumptions) born at Wrenbury in this County, bred a Merchant in London, free of the Company of Girdlers. Indeed we may call his Benefactions Aureum Cingulum charitatis, the Golden Girdle of Cha∣rity. With our Saviour he Went ABOUT Acts 10. 38. doing good, compleating the Cir∣cuit of his Bounty, continuing till he ended where he began.
1. To Wrenbury (where we believe him born) two Hundred pound to purchase Lands for the relief of the poor. 2. Nine Hundred pound for the building of Almes-houses in or about London. 3. To Trinity-colledge in Cambridge three hundred pound. 4. To the Colledge of Saint Johns the Evangelist in Cambridge, three Hundred pounds. 5. To the Hospitall of Saint Thomas in Southmark, fifty pounds. 6. To the Preachers at Pauls Cross, to∣wards the bearing of their charges, two Hundred pounds. 7. Toward the making a sweet Chime in Bow-church, one Hundred pounds. 8. To six Prisons in and about London, sixty pounds. 9. To Brasen-Nose-colledge in Oxford, two Scholar-ships, to each yearly four pounds. 10. To the Colledge of Saint John Ba∣ptist in Oxford, two Scholar-ships of the same value. 11. To Christ-Church Hospital, three Hun∣dred pounds. 12. To the Church and Poor (to buy them Gowns) of Wrenbury, seventy pounds. With other Benefactions; Verily, I say unto you, I have not met a more universall and unpartial Charity to all Objects of want and worth. He died about the beginning of the raign of King James. JOHN BREWERTON Knight, a Branch of that well-spred Tree in this County, was bred one of the first Scholars of the foundation in Sidney-colledge, and afterwards being brought up in the study of the Common-law, he went over into Ireland, and at last became the Kings Serjeant therein. I say at last, for at his coming thither (in the tumults of Tirone) neither Rex nor Lex, neither King nor Serjeant were acknowledged, till Loyalty and Civility were by degrees distilled into that Nation. He obtained a plentifull Estate, and thereof gave well nigh three thousand pounds to Sidney-colledge. Now as it is reported of Ulysses returning from his long travail in For∣raign Lands, that all his family had forgot him, so when the news of this Legacy first arrived at the Colledge, none then extant therein ever heard of his name, (so much may the spunge of forty years blot out in this kind) onely the written Register of the Colledge faithfully retained his name therein. This his gift was a gift indeed, purely bestowed on the Colledge, as loded with no detrimentall Conditions in the acceptance thereof. We read in the Prophet, Isaith 9. 3. Thou hast increased the Nation, and not multiplied their Joy. In proportion whereunto we know it is possible, that the comfortable condition of a Colledge may not be increased, though the number of the Fellows and Scholars therein be augmented, superadded Branches sucking out the sap of the Root. Whereas the Legacy of this worthy Knight, poneba∣tur in lucro, being pure gain and improvement to the Colledge. His death happened about the year 1633. JOHN BARNSTON D. D. was born of an ancient Family in this County, bred Fellow of Brasen-Nose-Colledge in Oxford, afterwards Chaplain to Chancellor Egerton, and Residentiary of Salisbury. A bountifull House-keeper, of a cheerfull spirit, and peaceable disposition, whereof take this eminent Instance. He sate Judge in the Con∣sistory when a Church-warden, out of whose house a Chalice was stolen, was sued by the Parish to make it good to them, because not taken out of the Church-Chest, (where it ought to have been reposited) but out of his private house. The Church-warden pleaded that he took it home onely to scoure it, which proving ineffectuall, he retained it till next morning to boil out the in-laid Rust thereof. Well (said the Doctor) I am sorry that the Cup of Union and Communion should be the cause of difference and discord between you. Go home and live lovingly together, and I doubt not, but that either the Thief out of remorse will restore the same; or some other as good will be sent unto you, which by the Doctors secret Charity came to pass accordingly. He founded an Hebrew Lecture in Brasen-Nose-Colledge and departed in Peace in the beginning of our Wars about the year 1642.
Memorable Persons. WILLIAM SMITH was born in this County, wherein his Surname hath been of signal note for many ages. His Genius inclined him to the study of Heraldry, wherein he so profitted, that Anno——he was made Persuivant of Arms. By the name of Rougdragon, he wrote a description Geographical and Historicall of this County, left (it seems) in the hands of Raynulph Crew Knight, sometimes L. Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and lately set forth by the favour of Mr. Raynulph Crew Grand-child to that worthy Knight, the time of his death is to me unknown. WILLIAM WEB a native of this County, was bred a Master in Arts▪ and ater∣wards betook himself to be a Clark of the Mayors Court in Chester. It appeareth also he was Under▪ sheriffe to Sir Richard Lee High-sheriffe of this County, in the thir∣teenth year of King James. He compiled a description of Cheshire and Chester, lately Printed by procurement of that no less Communicative then Judicious Antiquary Sir Simon Archer of Tamworth, in Warwickshire. I cannot attain the certain date of his death. RANDAL CREW Esquire, second Son to Sir Clipsby, Grand-child to Judge Crew. He drew a Map of Cheshire, so exactly with his pen, that a judicious eye would mis∣take it for Printing, and the Gravers skill and industry could little improve it. This Map I have seen, and Reader, when my eye directs my hand, I may write with confi∣dence. This hopefull Gentleman went beyond the Seas, out of design to render him∣self by his Travells more useful for his Country, where he was Barbarously Assassinated by some French-men, and honourably buried with generall lamentation of the English at Paris 1656. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Hugh Witch Richard Witch Nantwich Mercer 1461 2 Thomas Oldgrave William Oldgrave Knotysford Skinner 1467 3 Edmond Shaw John Shaw Donkenfield Goldsmith 1482 4 James Spencer Robert Spencer Congleton Vintner 1527 5 Thomas Offley William Offley Chester Merchant-Taylor 1556 6 Humfry Weld John Weld Eaton Grocer 1608 7 Thomas Moulson       1634 I am certainly informed that this Thomas Moulson ounded a fair School in the Town where he was born, but am not instructed where this is, or what Salary is setled there∣on. Reader, know this, that I must confess my self advantaged in the description of this County, by Daniel King a native of this County, whence it seems he travelled beyond the Seas, where he got the Mystery both of Survaying and Engraving. So that he hath both drawn and graven the portraicture of many ancient structures now decayed. I hope in process of time this Daniel King will out-strip King Edgar, erecting more Abbeys in Brss, then he did in Stone, though he be said to have built one for every day in the Year. But Cheshire is chiefly beholding to his Pains, seeing he hath not only set forth two Descriptions thereof, (named the Vale Royal of England,) with the praise to the dead Persons the Authors thereof duly acknowledged, but also hath en∣livened the same with severall Cuts of Heraldry and Topography, on whom we will be∣stow this Distick. Kingus Cestrensi, Cestrensis Patria Kingo Lucem Alternatim, debet uterque suam. Cheshire to King and King to Cheshire owes, His light,  doth ▪ what each Bstows. What is amiss in my Poetry, shall be amended in my Prayers for a Blessing on his and all ingenious-mens undertakings. Cheshire is one of the 12. pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose Gentry were not returned into the Tower, in the 12. year of K. Henry the sixth.
Sheriffs. HEN. II. Anno 30 Gilbert. Pipehard Anno 35 Rich. de Pierpoint RICH. I. Anno 1 RECOR∣DA MANCA JOHAN. Anno 1 Rich. de Burham Anni Incerti HEN. III. Anno 15 Rich. de Sonbach Anno 23 Rich. de Wrenbury Anno 52 Iordan. de Peulesdon Anno 56 Hugh de Hatton. EDW I. Anno 4 Patrick de Heselwall Anno 9 Will. de Spurstow Anno 15 Rich. de Wilbraham Anno 26 Will. de Prayers Anno 33 Robert. de Bressey EDW. II. Anno 2 Philip. de Egerton Anno 5 David. de Egerton Anno 13 Will. de Mobberley Anno 16 Rich. Filhurst EEW. III. Anno 1 Joh. de Wrenbury Anno 10 Adam. de Parker Anno 19 Rich. de Oulton Anno 22 Jacob. Audley, Mil. Anno 24 Tho. Daniers Anno 33 Tho. le Young Anno 41 Johan. Scolehall Anno 44 Lauren. de Dutton, Mil. Sheriffs. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Hu. de Venables Kinderton Azure 2 Bars Argent. 8 Tho. del. Wood     9 Hu. E. of Stafford   Or, a Cheveron Gules. 10 Idem. ut prius   11 Ioh. Massy, mil.   Quarterly counterchanged Gules & Or. in the first a Lion pass. 12 Rob. Gravenour Eton Azure a Garbe Or. 17 Rob. Leigh High-liegh Arg. five fusils Bend-wise Sable. HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Ioh. Massy Puddington Ut prius, save tht in the first quart. 3 flour de lues Ar. 2 Idem.     3 Hen.   Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Ra∣vens-heads erazed S. 10 Will. Bruerton, m. Bruerton Argent 2 Bars Sable. HEN. V.     Anno     3 Tho. Adlington Az. 2 Bars Arg. a Bend cmponce Or & Gules. 10 Hugh. Dutton Dutton Quarterly counter-changed Arg. & G. in the 2 & 3 Quarter a Fret Or. HEN. VI.     Anno     5 Rich. Warberton Arley Arg. 2 Cheverons and a Canton G. a Mullet Or. 8 Ran. Bruerton, m. ut prius   16 Ioh. Troutbeck   Az. 3 Troutes  in Trian∣gle, Teste a la  Arg. 17 Rob. Booth, † m. Dunham   18 Rob. Booth, mil. prioris filius. ut prius † Arg. 3 Boars-heads eraz ed & erected Sable. EDW. IV.     Anno     2 Will. Stanly Howton Arg. on a Bend Az 3 Stags-beads  Or. RICH. III.     Anno     Idem. ut prius   HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Idem. ut prius   10 Ioh. Warberton ut prius   21 Rasp. Birkenhead   S. 3 Garbes Or, within a border engrailed Argent. HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Idem. ut prius   17 Will. Stanly, mil. ut prius   18 Geo. Holford Holford Arg. a Grey-hound Passant S. 19 Tho. Venables ut prius   20 Idem. ut prius   21 Ioh. Done   Az. 2 Bars Arg. on a Bend G. 3 Arrows. 22 Idem. ut prius   23 Edw. Fitton Gowsworth Arg. on a Bend Az 3 Garbs Or. 33 Ioh. Holford ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Idem. ut prius   REG. MARI.     Anno     1 Will. Brereton, k. ut prius   PHIL & MAR.     Anno     2, 1 Pet Ligh, kni. ut prius   3, 2 Hu Cholmley, es.   Gu. in Cheif 2 Helmets Arg. in Base a Garbe Or. 4, 3 . Wilbrahā, es. Wodey Az. 2 Bars Arg. on a Canto S. a Wolfs-head etased of the second. 5, 4 Tho. Venables, es. ut prius   6, 5 Phi. Egerton, esq. Ridley Arg. a Lion Ramp. G. betwixt 3 Pheons Sable. REG. ELIZA.     Anno     1 Wil. Cholmley, es. ut prius   2 Ioh. Savage, esq. Rocksavage. Argent 6 Lions rampant Sable. 3 Ral. Egerton, es. ut prius  
4 Io , es ut prius   5 Rich. Brook, esq   Cbecque Or and Sable. 6 Will. Massey, esq. ut prius   7 Ioh. Savage, esq. ut prius   8 Hug. Cholmly, es. ut prius * Az. 2 Brs  Erm▪ on a cheif O, a demi Lion Issuant S. 9 Lau. Smith * esq. Hough   10 Ral. Done, esq.   Az. 2 Bars Arg. on a Bend G. 3 Arrows of the second. 11 Geo. Calveley, es.   Arg. a. Fess G. betwixt 3 Calves, Sable. 12 Ioh. Savage, esq. ut prius   13 Will. Booth, kn. Arg. 3  Erected S. 14 Tho. Stanley, esq.   Arg. on a Bend Az. three 15 Ioh. Savage, kni. ut prius   16 Ioh. Savage, mil. ut prius   17 Hen. Manwaring.   Argent 2 Bars Gules. 18 Row. Stanley, es ut prius   19 Ioh. Warren, esq   Checkee Azu. & O, on a Can∣ton G. a Lion Rmpant Arg. 20 Tho. Brook, esq. ut prius   21 Ioh. Savage, kni. ut prius   22 Ral. Egerton, es. ut prius   23 Geo Calveley, kn. ut prius   24 Wil. Brereton, kn. ut prius   25 Pet. Warberton, e. ut prius   26 Wil. Leversage, e. Whelock Arg. a  betwixt 3 Plow-hares S. 27 Tho. Wilbraham ut prius   28 Hug. Calveley, es. ut prius   29 Ran. Davenport, e. Damport Ag. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cross Croslets Fitch. e S. 30 Tho. Leigh, esq. ut prius   31 Hu Cholmley, kn. ut prius   32 Wil. Brereton, kn. ut prius   33 Ioh. Savage, kn. ut prius   34 Tho. Brook, esq. ut prius   35 Tho. Venables: es. ut prius   36 Per. Warberton, e. ut prius   37 Per. Leigh, esq. ut prius   38 Ioh. Done, esq. ut prius   39 Geo. Booth, kni. ut prius   40 Edw. Warren, kn. ut prius   41 Tho. Holcroft, kn.   Arg. a Cross and Border. engrai∣led S. 42 Tho. Smith, kn. ut prius   43 Tho. Ashton, kn. Ashton Per Cheveron. S. and Arg. 44 Ric. Gravenor, k. ut prius   JAC. REX.     Anno   * Az. a Fess Arg. Frettee G. be∣twxt 3 Flower de Luces Or. 1 Geo. Le▪ cester, * Toft   2 Wil. Davenport, k. ut prius   3 Ra. Manwaring, k. ut prius   4 Tho. Vernon, kn. Hasting Or on a Fret Azure 3 Garbes of the first. 5 Ioh. Savage, kn. ut prius   6 Hen. Bunbury, kn. Staney Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Chest-rooks of the first. 7 Will. Brereton, es. ut prius   8 Geff. Shakerly, es.   Arg. 3 Molehills vert. 9 Tho. Dutton, esq. ut prius   10 Wil. Brereton, kn. ut prius   11 Urian. Leigh, kn. ut prius   12 Geo. Calveley; kn. ut prius   13 Rich. Lea▪ kn. Lea. Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Leo∣pards-heads S. 14 Rich. Wilbrahā, k. ut prius   15 Ioh. Davenport ut prius   16 Ralp. Calveley, es. ut prius   17 Ran. Manwaring ut prius   18 Ro. Cholmondely ut prius   19 Tho. Marbury, es. Marbury Or on a Fess engrailed Azure 3 Garbes of the first. 20 Geor. Booth, bar. ut prius   21 Tho. Smith, kn. ut prius   22 Ric. Gravenor, b. ut prius   CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Brereton▪ kn. ut prius   2 Ioh. Done, kn. ut prius   3 Ioh. Calveley, es. ut prius   4 Edw. Stanley, bar. ut prius   5 Tho. Leigh, esq. ut prius   6 Pet. Dutron, esq. ut prius   7 Tho. Stanley, esq. ut prius   8 Ric. Brereton, es. ut prius   9 Edw. Fitton, esq. ut prius   10 Pet. Venables ut prius   11 Tho. Ashton, bar. ut prius   12 Will. Leigh, esq. ut prius.   13 Tho.  bar. Duddingtō Arg. a Cheveron .  Or, betwixt 3 Gadds of stteel S. 14 Tho. Cholmley ut prius   15 Phil. Manwaring ut prius   16 Tho. Powell, bar. Berkenhad Sable 3 Roses Arg. 17 Ioh. Billot, esq.   Arg. on a Chief G. 3 Cinque foils of the Field. 18 Hug. Calvely, k. ut prius   19 Tho. Leigh, esq. ut prius   20 Ri. Gravenor, ba. ut prius   21 Rob. Totton, esq. Winthaw Quarterly Arg. & G. 4 Crescents counter changed. 22 Hen. Brood, esq.     Reader, if thou discoverest any difference in the Method betwixt this and the other Catalogue of Sheriffs, impute it to this cause, that whilst I fetched the Rest from the Fountain in the Exchequer, I took these out of the Cestern, I mean the Printed Book of Vale-royal. I presume, that the Sheriff who is last named, continued in that Office all that Intervale of years, till his Successor here nominated entred thereon. The Reader may with the more confidence relie on their Armes, imparted unto me by Mr. Daniel King, who to me really verifieth his own Anagram. DANIEL KING, I KIND ANGEL. And indeed he hath been a Tutelar one to me, gratifying me with whatsoever I had need to use, and he had ability to bestow. Henry III. 56 HUGH de HATTON.] King William the Conquerer bestowed Lands on one of his Name and Ancestors at Hatton in this County. From him is Lineally descended that Learned and Religious (witness his pious meditations on the Psalmes▪) Sir Christopher Hatton Knight of the Bath, created by King Charles the first, Baron Hatton of Kerby in Northampton-shire. The Original of this grant of the Conquerors is still in this Lords Possession, preserved in
our Civil Wars, with great care and difficulty by his vertuous Lady. On the same token that her Lord patiently digested the plundring of his Library and other Rarities, when hearing the welcome tidings from his Lady, that the said Record was safely secured. Queen Mary. 3 Sir HUGH CHOLMLY or CHOLMONDELEIGH.] This worthy person bought his Knight-hood in the field at Leigh in Scotland. He was five times High-sheriffe of this County, (and sometimes of Flintshire,) and for many years one of the two sole deputies Leiutenants thereof. For a good space he was Vice-President of the Marches of Walles under the Right Honorable Sir Henry Sidney Knight, conceive it during his abscence in Ireland. For Fifty years together he was esteemed a Father of his Country, and dying Anno 157.. was buried in the Church of Mallpasse, under a Tombe of Allabaster, with great lamentation of all sorts of people, had it not mitigated their Mourning, that he left a Son of his own name Heir to his Vertues and Estate. 2 JOHN SAVAGE, Ar.] I behold him as the direct Ancestor unto Sir Thomas Savage Kt. and Baronet, Created by K. Charles the first, Baron Savage of Rock savage in this County. This Lord (a very prudent States-man) married Elizabeth eldest Daughter and Co-heir of Thomas Lord Darcy of Chich, Viscount Colchester, and Earl of Rivers, Honours entailed on his Poste∣rity, and now injoyed by the Right Honorable Thomas Savage Earl Rivers. The Battles. Rowton heath 1645. Sept. 24. His Majesty being informed, that Colonel Jones had seized the Suburbs and Strong Church of St. Johns in Chester, advanced Northward for the relief thereof. Poins, one of the Parliaments Generalls, pursued his Majesty. At Rowton-heath within 3. miles of Chester the K. Army made an Halt, whilst his Majesty with some prime persons march∣ed into the City. Next day a fierce Fight happened on the Heath, betwixt the Kings and Poinses Forces, the latter going off with the greater loss. Judicious Persons conceive, that had the Royalists pursued this Single Enemy, (as yet unrecruited with additional strength,) they had finally worsted him, which Fatall omission (opportunities admit of no after-games) proved their overthrow. For next day Col. Jones drew out his men into the field, so that the Royalists being charged on the Heath in Front and Rear, were put to the worst, the whole body of whose Army had Wings without Legs, Horse without Foot, whilst the Parliament was powerfull in both. Immediatly after, a considerable Party of Horse (the Lord Byron Governour of the City being loth to part with any Foot as kept to secure the Kings person,) came out of Chester, too late to succour their defeated Friends, and too soon to engage themselves. Here fell the Youngest of the three Noble Brethren, who lost their lives in the King service, Bernard Stuart Earl of Leichfield, never sufficiently to be lamented. The Farewell. To take my leave of Cheshire, I could wish that some of their hospitality were planted in the South, that it might bring forth fruit therein; and in exchange I could desire, that some of our Southern delicacies might prosperously grow in their gardens, and Quinces particularly, being not more pleasant to the palate, then restorative of the health, as accounted a great cordiall. The rather, because a Will. Smith in his Vle pag. 18. native of this County, in his description thereof, could not remember he ever saw Quince growing therein.
CHESTER is a fair City on the North-east side of the River Dee, so ancient that the first founder thereof is forgotten, much beholding to the Earls of Chester and others for Increase and Ornaments. The Walls thereof were lately in good repair, especially betwixt the New-tower and the Wa∣ter-gate. For I find how Anno 1569. there was a personal fight in this City betwixt the twoThe Vale∣Royal of Eng∣land, pag. 86. Idem pag. 199. Sheriffs thereof, viz. Richard Massey and Peter Lycherband, (who shall keep peace if aged Officers break it?) who deservedly were fined for the for∣feiting of their gravity, to repair that part of the Wall. It seems it is more honour to be keeper of a gate in Chester, then a whole City elsewhere, seeing Eastgate therein was com∣mitted to the cody formerly of the Earl of Oxford, Bridgegate to the Earl of Shrews∣bury, Watergate to the Earl of Daby, and Northgate to the Mayor of the City. It is built in the form of a Quadrant, and is almost a just Square, the four Cardinal Streets thereof (as I may call them) meeting in the middle of the City, at a place called the Pentise, which affordeth a Pleasant Prospect at once into all Four. Here is a property of building peculiar to the City called the Rows, being Galleries, wherein Passengers go dry without coming into the Streets, having Shops on both sides and underneath. The fa∣shion whereof is somewhat hard to conceive, it is therefore worth their pains, who have Money and Leasure to make their own Eyes the Expounders of the manner thereof. The like being said not to be seen in all England, no nor in all Europe again. The Buildings. Saint Werburges Church is a fair structure, and had been more beautifull if the tower thereof (intended some say for a steeple, the first stone whereof was laid 1508.) had been finished. It was built long before the Conquest, and being much ruined was after∣ward repaired by Hugh Lupus first Earl of Chester. It was afterward made by King Henry the eighth, one of his five Royal Bishopricks, Oxford, Gloucester, Bristol and Peter∣borough, being the other four. I say Royal Bishopricks, as whose Ecclesiastical Jurisdi∣ctions were never confirmed by the Pope, nor Baronies by the Parliament. The first is plain, King Henry the eighth erecting them after he had disclaimed the Popes Supremacy, and in the days of Queen Mary, when England was in some sort re∣conciled to Rome, the Pope thought not fit to contest with the Queen about that Cri∣ticismē, because these five Bishopricks were erected without his consent, but suffer'd them to be even as he found them. Their Baronries also were not (though their Bisho∣pricks were,) ever confirmed by Act of Parliament, so that they owed their beings sole∣ly to the Kings Prerogative, who might as well Create Spiritual as Temporal Peers, by his own Authority. And therefore when some Anti-praelatists in the late Long Parliament, 1641. endeavoured to overthrow their Baronries, (as an Essy and Preludium to the rest of the Bishopricks,) for want of Parliamentary Confirmation, they desisted from that design as fond and unfeisable, on better consideration. Proverbs. When theVale- royal of England, written by Witt. Webb, p. 22. daughter is stoln, shut Pepper-gate.] Pepper-gate was a postern of this City, on the East-side (as I take it) thereof; but in times past closed up and shut upon this occasion. The Mayor of the City had his daugh∣ter (as she was playing at ball with other Maidens in Pepper-street,) stoln away by a Young-man, through the same gate; whereupon in revenge he caused it to be shut up, though I see not why the City should suffer in her conveniences, for the Mayor his want of Care, or his Daughter her lack of Obedience. But what shall we say Love will make the whole Walla Gate to procure its own Escape. Parallel to this Proverb is the Latine, Serò sapiunt Phryges, when men instead of preventing, postvide against dangers. Martyrs. GEORGE MARSH was condemned by Bishop Coats, and cruelly burnt without this City, near unto Spittle Boughton; but because he was born elsewhere, see his character in Lancashire.
Prelates. GEORGE DOUNHAM D. D. son to John Dounham Bishop of Chester, was born in this City, as by proportion of time may most probably be collected. He was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, elected Fellow thereof 1585. Christs-coll. Register. and chosen Logick-pro∣fessor in the University. No man was then and there better skill'd in Aristotle, or a grea∣ter Follower of Ramus, so that he may be termed the Top-twig of that Branch. It is seldome seen, that the Clunch-fist of Logick (good to knock a man down at a blow) can so open it self as to smooth and stroak one with the Palme thereof. Our Dounham could doe both, witness the Oration made by him at Cambridge, (preposed to his book of Logick) full of Flowers of the choicest eloquence. He preached the Sermon April 17. 160. at the Consecration of James Mountague Bishop of Bath and Wells, ir∣refragably proving therein Episcopacy jure Divino. He that receiveth a Bishop in the Name of a Bishop, shall receive a Bishops reward. It was not long before Doctor Dounham was made Bishop of Derry in Ireland, then newly augmented with the addition of London-Derry, because so planted with English, it was easy to find London in Derry, but not Derry in Derry, so much disguised from itself with new buildings. But this Learned Bishop was the greatest beauty thereof, indeavouring by gentleness to Cicurate and Civillize the wild-Irish, and proved very successfull therein. The certain date of his death I cannot attain. Sea men. DAVID MIDDLETON was born in this City, as his Kinsman and myMaster John Spencer Libra∣ry Keeper of Zion-colledge. Friend hath informed me. He was one of those who effectually contributed his assistance to the making of Through lights in the World, I mean New Discoveries in the East and West∣Indies, as we may read at large in his ownPuchas his Pigrims, 1. part, pag. 226. & sq. Printed relation. The tender-hearted Reader whose affections go along with his eye, will sadly sympa∣thize with his sufferings, so many and great his dangers, with Caniballs and Portugals, Crocodiles and Hollanders, till at last he accomplished his intentions, and setled the Eng∣lish trade at Bantam, I meet with no mention of him after 1610. Sir HENRY MIDDLETON Knight, was younger brother (as I take it) to the for∣mer, deservedly knighted for his great pains and perills in advancing the English trade. Amongst many most remarkable is his Voyage into the Red-sea, which had like to have proved the Dead sea unto him, I mean cost him his life. Here he was tolled to land at Moha, by the treacherous Aga, and then had eight of his men barbarously slin, himself and seven more chained up by the Necks. The pretence was because that Port was the Door of theMat. 4. . Holy City, which (though it be Jerusalem in the language of the Scrip∣ture) is Mecca in the Phrase of the Alcaron, and it is Capitoll for any Christian to come so near thereunto. Then was he sent eightscore miles and upwards to the Bashaw at Zenan in Arabia, in the Month of January 1611. This City of Zenan lyeth but six∣teen degrees and fifteen minutes of Northern latitude from the Equator, and yet was so cold, that there was Ice of a Fingers thickness in one night, as the said Sir Henry did Purchas his Pilgrims lib. 3. pag. 255. relate; This confuteth the Character of these Countries misapprehended by An∣tiquity not to be habitable, for the excess of heat therein. At last the Turkish Bashaw gave him leave to depart, and sailing Eastwards, he repaired himself by a gainfull composition with the Indians, for the losses he had sustained by the Turkes. His ship called the Trades increase, well answered the name thereof, un∣till it pleased God to visit his men therein with a strange disease, whereof one hundred English deceased, the grief whereat was conceived the cause of this worthy Knights death, May 24. 1613. whose name will ever survive whilst Middletons Bay (from him so called) appeareth in the Dutch Cards. Writers. ROGER of CHESTER was born and bred therein, a Benedictine Monke in Saint Werburges. In obedience to the Bishop of Chester, he wrot a Brittish Chronicle from the beginning of the World. This was the fashion of all Historians of that age, run∣ning
to take a long rise, [from the Creation it self] that so (it seems) they might leap the further with the greater force. Our Rogers Chronicle was like a ship with double decks, first onely continuing it to the year 1314. and then resuming his subject, he superadded five and twenty year more thereunto, entitling it Polycratica Temporum. Both Bale and Pitz praise him for pure latine (a rarity in that age) and assign 1339. the time of his death, Chester the place of his buriall. RANDAL or RANULPH HYGDEN, (commonly called Ranulph of Chester) was bred a Benedictine in Saint Werburge. He not onely Vamped the history of Roger afore∣said, but made a large one of his own from the beginning of the World, commenda∣ble for his Method and Modesty therein. Method, assigning in the Margent, the date of each action. We read Genesis 1. that Light was made on the First, and the Sun on the Fourth day of the Ceation, when the Light (formerly diffused and dispersed in the Heavens, was Contracted, United,) and Fixed in one full Body thereof. Thus the Notation of Times confusedly scattered in many antient Authors, (as to our English Actions) are by our Ranulphus reduced into an Intire bulk of Cronology. Modesty. Who to his great commendation, Bale de script. Brit. Gent. 6. Nu. 1. Unicuique suorum Authorum, honorem integrum servans, confeseth himself (to use his own expression,) with Ruth the Moa∣bite, to have gleaned after other Reapers. He calleth his book Poly-Cronicon. He continued sixty four years a Monke, and dying very aged, 1363. was buried in Chester. HENRY BRADSHAW was born in this City, and lived a Benedictine therein. A di∣ligent Historian, having written no bad Chronicle, and another Book of the Life of Saint Werburg in verse. Take a tast at once, both of his Poetry, and the Originall Building of the City, both for Beauty alike. The Founder of this City, as saith Polychronicon, Was Leon Gawer, a mighty strong Giant. Which builded Caves and Dungeons many a one, No goodly Building, ne proper, ne pleasant. These his verses might have passed with praise, had he lived, (as Arnoldus Vion doth erroniously insinuate Pits de Ang. Script. pag. 690. Anno 1346. But flourishing more then a Century, since [viz. 1513.] they are hardly to be excused. However Script. Brit. Ceut. 9. Num. 17. Bale informeth us that he was (the Diamond in the Ring) pro ea ipsa aetate, admodum pius, and so we dismiss his Memory with Commendation. Since the Reformation. EDWARD BRIERWOOD was as I am informed born in this City, bred in Brasen∣nose-colledge in Oxford. Being Candidate for a Fellowship, he lost it without loss of credit. For where preferment goes more by favour then merit, the Rejected have more honour then the Elected. This ill success did him no more hurt then a Rub doth to an over-thrown Bowl, bring∣ing it the nearer to the mark. He was not the more sullen, but the more serious in his studies, (retiring himself to Saint Mary-hall) till he became a most accomplished Scholar in Logick, witness his worthy work thereof, Mathematicks, being afterwards a Lecturer thereof in Gresham-colledge, All learned and many modern languages, hereof he wrot a Learned book, called his Enquiries. No Sacrilegious Enquiries, whereof our age dothsurfet. (It is a Snare after vows to make Pro. 20. 25. Enquiries,) but judicious disquisitions of the Originall and Extent of Languages. A little before his death Pens were brandish'd betwixt Master Byfield and him, about
the keeping of the Sabbath, Master Brierwood learnedly maintaining that th▪other ex∣acted more strictness therein then God enjoyned. Let me contribute my symbole on this Subject. Our Saviour is said to be made Gal. 4. 4. under the Law, and yet he saith of himself, The Son Mat. 12. 8. of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath. Indeed he was made under the fourth Commandement, as under the rest of the Law, to observe the dominion, not tyranny thereof, (usurped, partly, by the misinterpretation of the Priests partly, by the misap∣prehension of the People,) and therefore both by his Life and Doctrine did manumisse men from that vassallage, that the day instituted for rest and repose should not be abu∣sed for self-affliction and torment. To return to our Brierwood, I have heard a great Scholar in England say, That he was the fittest Man whom he knew in England, to sit at the Elbo of a Professor to prompt him. But in my opinion he was a very proper person to discharge the place himself. I con∣jecture his death about 1633. JOHN DOWNHAM younger Son of William Downham Bishop of Chester, was (as far as my best enquiry can recover) born in this City, bred in Cambridge B. D. and afterwards became a painfull and profitable Preacher in London. He was the first who commendably discharged that eminent In the Church behind the Ex∣change. Lecture, plentifully indowed by Master Jones of Munmouth, and is memorable to posterity for his worthy work of the Christian Warfare. Well had it been for England, had no other war been used therein, for this last twenty years, all pious Persons being comfortably concerned in the prosecution thereof. Seriously considering that their Armour is of proof, their Quarrel is lawfull, their Fight is long, their Foes are fierce, their Company are Saints, their Captain is Christ, their Conquest is certain, their Crown is Heaven. This grave Divine died very aged about the year 1644. Benefactors to the Publique. WILLIAM ALDERSEA a pious and godly man, was Mayor of the City 1560. demeaning himself in his place with much Gravity and Discretion. He caused with much Cost and Industry the Catalogue of the Mayors of Chester to be compleated, and that on this occasion. He found by Authentick Evidences, that one Alano de Whetly ad been four times Mayor of Chester, and yet his name was never mentioned in the ordi∣dinary Book of Mayors. This put this good Magistrate on the employment, (Dete∣ction of faults informes little without Correction of them,) to amend and compleat that lame list out of their Records. Thus Imperfections may occasion Perfection, which makes me to hope, that hereafter the Defects of this my Book (without prejudice to my Profit or Credit,) will be judiciously discovered, and industriously amended by others. This William died the twelfth of October Anno 1577. and lyeth buried in the Chancell of Saint Osswalls under a fair stone of Alabaster. Sir THOMAS OFFLEY Son to William Offley was Stows Suvey of London pag. 585. born in the City of Chester, and bred a Merchant-taylor in London, whereof he became Lord Mayor Anno 1556. The usefull custome of the night Bellman (preventing many Fiers and more Felonies,) began in his Mayoralty. He was the Zachaeus of London, not for his low Stature, but his high Charity, bequeathing the half of his Estate (computed by a Reverend D. Willet in his Catalogue of good works since the Re∣formation pag. 1226. Divine, to amount to five thousand pounds) unto the Poor, although he had children of his own. Yea, he appointed that two hundred pound should be taken out of the other half (left to his son Henry) and employed to charitable uses. He died 1560. and was buried in the Church of Saint Andrews Undershaft. I am heartily sory to meet with this passage in my Stows Survey of London pag. 1226. Author. Sir Thomas Offley bequeatheth one half of all his goods to charitable actions. But the Parish [meaning Saint Andrews Undershaft] received little benefit thereby. If the Testators Will were not justly performed, it soundeth to the shame and blame of his Executors. But if the charity of Sir Thomas acted Eminus not Comminus, I mean at some distance, and not at his own habitation, it was no injury for any to dispose of his own at his own pleasure. I find also two other of the same Sur-name, not mutually more allyed in bloud, then in charitable dispositions.
Master Hugh Offley Leather-seller, Sheriff of London in the year 1588. buried also in Saint Andrews aforesaid. Besides many otherStow his Sur∣vey of London pag. 154. benefactions, he gave six hundred pounds to this City to put forthVale Royal of England pa. 207. youngmen. Mr. Robert Offley bred in London, and (as I take it) Brother to the aforesaid Hugh Offley did in year the of our Lord 1596. bestow six hun∣dred pounds on twenty four youngmen in Chester whereof twelve wereIbidem. Apprentices. I know not the exact date of his departure. It is hard to instance in a Lease of kinsmen born so far from, bred in London, meeting together in such bountifull performances. I believe it was the First of these three Offleys on whom the Rhythme was made, Offley three dishes had of daily Roast, An Egge, an Apple, and (the third) a Toast. This I behold neither sin nor shame in him, feeding himself on plain and wholesome repast, that he might feast others by his bounty, and thereby deserving rather praise then a jear from posterity. JOHN TERER Gentleman, and a Member of this City. He erected a seemly wa∣terwork built Steeplewise at the Bridgegate, by his own ingenious industry and charge. This since hath served for the conveying of River-water from the Cisterne, in the top of that Work, through Pipes of Lead and Wood, to the Citizens houses, to their great con∣veniences. I could wish all designes in the like nature hopefully begun, may as hppily be compleated. My industry cannot attain the exact time of his death, only I find that his son of the same name, indeavoured the like to bring water from a fine spring, to the midst of this City, which I believe was effected. The Farewell. And now being to take our leave of this Antient and Honorable City, the worst that I wish it is, that the distance betwixt Dee and the New-tower may be made up, all Obstru∣ctions being removed, which cause or occasion the same. That the Rings on the New-tower (now only for sight) may be restored to the Service for which they were first intended, to fasten Vessels thereunto. That the Vessells on that River (lately degenerated from Ships into Barks) may grow up again to their former Strength and Stature.
CORNWALL. CORNWALL, it hath its name partly from the Form, partly from the Inhabitants thereof: from the former it is so called, because narrow in fashion of a horn, which (by the way) is a word of all others passing thorough both Learned and Modern Languages with the least varia∣tion, 1 Keren, Hebr. 2 Keras, Gr. 3 Cornu, Lat. 4 Corn, Fr. 5 Cuerno, Span. 6 Corno, Ital. 7 Horn, Eng. 8 Horne, Dut. 9 Kerne, Wel. The latter Wale signifies strangers, for such were the Inhabitants of this County, re∣puted by their Neighbours. It hath Devonshire on the West, divided from it generally with the River Tamer, encompassed with the Sea on all other sides, affording plenty of Harbours, so that For∣raigners in their passage to or from Spain, Ireland, the Levant, East or West Indies, sometimes touch herewith, sometimes are driven hither against their will, but never without the profit of the Inhabitants, according to the Common Proverbe, where the horse lieth down, there some hairs will be found. The Language of the Natives, it is a different tongue from the English, and dialect from the Welsh, as more easie to be pronounced, and is sufficiently copious to express the conceits of a good wit both in Prose and Verse. Some have avouched it derived from the Greek, producing for the proof thereof many words of one sense in both, as Kentron, A spur; Schaphe, A boat; Ronchi, Snoring, &c. But the judicious behold these as no regular congruities, but casuall coincidencies, the like to which may be found in languages of the greatest distance, which never met together since they parted at the confusion of Babel. Thus one would enforce a conformity between the Hebrew and English, because one of the three giants sons of Anak, was called Ahiman. The Cornish-tongue affordeth but two natural oaths, orCarews Sur∣vey of Cornwall pag. 55. three at most; but whe∣ther each of them be according to the kinds of Oaths, divided by the School-men, one Assertory, the other Promissory, to which some add a third, Comminatory, is to me un∣known. The worst is, the Common Cornish supply this (I will not say defect) not onely with swearing the same often over, but also by borrowing other oaths of the English. Naturall Commodities. Diamonds. These of themselves sound high, till the Addition of Cornish substracteth from their Valuation. In Blackness and Hardness, they are far short of the Indian. Yet Set with a good Foyle (advantaged Hypocrisie, passeth often for Sincerity,) may at the first sight deceive no unskilfull Lapidary: as their Lustre is less then Orient Diamonds, so herein they exceed them, that Nature hath made both their Face and their Dressing, by whom they are Pointed and Polished. But, enough hereof, the rather, because some from the Latine names of Jewells, Jocalia, things to be jested and played with, and Baubellae, things which are Trifles and Baubles, spightfully collect that Stones, accounted precious, are more beholding to the Consent of Fancy, then their own Intrinsick worth for their high valuation. Ambergreese. I confess this precious Commodity is fixed to no place in the world, as too great a Treasure for any one Country to engross, and therefore it is only fluctuating and ca∣sually found by small parcells, sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another; yet, because the last, greatest and best quantity thereof, that ever this Age did behold, was found on the Coasts of this County, we will here insert a little of the name, nature, and use thereof.
It is called Ambra-gresia, That is, gray Amber, from the Colour thereof, which modern name utterly unknown to the Antients, doth speak it to be of later invention, whereof a Learned Doctor of Physick hath assigned this probable reason, because it was never found in the Midland-sea, (which in effect was all the Seas to the Antients) but onely in the main Ocean, which was not navigated on, till within this last two hun∣dred years, since Seamen have gotten the use of the Card and Compass. It is almost as hard to know what it is, as where to find it. Some will have it the sperme of a fish, or some other unctuous matter arising from them; others, that it's the foam of the Sea, or some excrescency thence boiled to such a height by the heat of the Sun; Others, that it is a gum that grows on the shore. In a word, no certainty can be collected herein, some Physitians holding one way, and some another, but this is most sure, that Apothecaries hold it at five pounds an Ounce, which some say is dearer then ever it was in the memory of man. It is a rare Cordiall for the refreshing of the spirits, and soveraign for the strength∣ning the head, besides the most fragrant scent, far stronger in Consort when Com∣pounded with other things, then when singly it self. A mass of this Ambergreese was about the third year of King Charles found in this County, at Low water, close to the shore of the Mannor of Anthony, then belonging to Richad Carew, Esquire. Garlick. Here is a great and sudden fall indeed, from the sweetest of Gums, to the most stink∣ing of Roots. Yet is not the distance so great, if the worth of Garlick be such as some have avouched it. Not to speak of the murmuring Num. 11. 5. Israelites, who prized it before Manna it self; some avow it Soveraign for men and beasts in most Maladies. In∣deed the scent thereof is somewhat Valiant and Offensive, but wise men will be con∣tented to hold their noses, on condition they may thereby hold or recover their health. Indeed a large book is written de esu allii, which if it hold proportion with truth, one would wonder any man should be sick and dye, who hath Garlick growing in his Gar∣den. Sure I am, our Palate-people are much pleased therewith, as giving a delicious Hault-gust to most meats they eat, as tasted and smelt in their Sauce, though not seen therein. The best Garlick is about Camdens Brit. in Corn∣wall. Stratton in this County. Pilchards. Plenty hereof are taken in these parts, persecuted to the shore by their enemies, the Tunny and Hake, till in pursuance of their private revenge, they all become a prey to the Fisherman. The Pilchard may seem contemptible in it self, being so small, though the wit of the vulgar here will tell you, they have seen many Pilchards an ell∣long, understand it laid at length, head and tail together. Their numbers are incredible, imploying a power of poor people, in Polling, (that is, Beheading,) Gutting, Split∣ting, Powdering and Drying them, and then (by the name of Fumadoes,) with Oyle and a Lemon, they are meat for the mightiest Don in Spain. I wish, not onely their nets, but fish may hold, suspecting their daily decay, their shoals usually shifting coasts, and verging more westward to Ireland. Other fish here be which turn to good account, all welcome to Fishermens hooks, save the Star-fish, esteemed contagious. Blew-Slate. These are commonly found under the Walling-Slate, when the depth hath brought the workmen to the water. They are thin in substance, clear in colour, light in weight, and lasting in continuance. Generally they carry so good a regard, that (be∣sides the supply of home-provisions) great store of them are imported into other parts of the land, and transpotted into France and the Low-Countries. All that I have to say of Slate, is that Polydore Vir∣gil, de Invent. Rerum in lib: 3. Cap. 8. Pag. 251. Cinyra the son of Agriopae is said first to have found them in Cyprus, for the Covering of Houses.
Tinne. The most and best in Christendome this County doth produce. Yea it was the Onely Tinne in Europe, untill a Fugitive Miner running hence, discovered Tinne in Voiteland; in the Confines of Bohemia. God may be said in this County, to rain Meat (such the plen∣ty thereof,) and give Dishes too, made of Pewter, which hath Tinne for the Father, and Lead for the Mother thereof, and in our Age doth Matrizae too much. Vast their Ex∣pence in making their Addits, (understand them Addresses, and Accesses to the Mine,) with Dressing, Breaking, Stamping; Drying, Crazing, Washing and Melting, all plentifully repayed in the Selling of it. The discovery of many of these Mines have been very remarkable, for some have gained more Sleeping, then others Waking, having dreamt that in such [Impropable] places, Tinne was to be found, and pursuing such Directions, have found it accordingly. The Virg. . 6. Poet we know faineth Two Ports of Dreames, Sunt geminae somni portae; quarum: altera ertur Cornea, quaveris facilis datur exitus umbris: Altera Candenti, perfecta nitens Elephanto, Sed falsa ad Coelum mttunt insomnia manes. Dreames have two Gates, one made [they say of Horn By this Port pass, true, and Prophēticks Dreames White Ivory the other doth adorne, By this false Shades, and lying Fancies streames. Strange that the Best Gate, for matter [Ivory] should present the Worst [false] Dreames. It seems these Cornish Dreames passed through the Horny Gate, which fell out so happily, that, thereby many have been inriched, and left great Estates to their Posterity. I cannot take my leave of these Tinners, untill I have observ'd a strange practice of them, that once in seven or eight years, they burn down (and that to their great profit) their own Melting houses. I remember a merry Epigram in Lib. 3. Epig. 5. Martial, on one Tongili∣an, who had his house in Rome, casually [reputed] burnt, and gained ten times as much, by his friends contribution to his loss. Collatum est decies. Rogo non potes ipse videri Incendisse tuam, Tongiliane domum? Gaining ten fold, tell truly I desire, Tongilian did'st not set thy house on fire? But here the Tinners avow themselves incendiaries of their own houses, on a pro∣fitable account. For, during the Tinnes melting in the blowing-house, diverse light sparkles thereof, are by the forcible wind, which the bellows sendeth forth, driven up to the thatched roof, on the burning whereof they find so much of this light Tinne in the ashes, as payeth for the new building, with a gainfull overplus. The Buildings. Master Attorney Noy was wont pleasantly to say, that his house had no fault in it, save onely that it was too near unto London, though indeed distanced thence full three hun∣dred miles, in the remoter part of this County. But seriously one may say, and de∣fend it, that the distance of Cornwall from that Metropolis, is a Conventent Inconveni∣ency. As for the structure of their Houses, they are generally but mean, though the Nobility and Gentry have hansome habitations, and amongst them none excelleth. Mount-Edgecomb. It was built by Sir Richard Edgecomb Knight, take his Character from Crew in his Sur. of Corn. pag. 100. one who very wel knew him, mildness and stoutness, diffidence and wisdom, deliberateness of under∣takings, and sufficiency of effecting; made in him a more commendable, then blazing mix∣ture of vertue. In the Raign of Queen Mary (about the year 1555.) he gave entertain∣ment at one time, for some good space to the Admirals of the English, Spanish, and Netherland, and many Noble men besides. A passage the more remarkable, because I am confident that the Admiralls of those Nations never met since, (if ever before) amicably at the same Table. Mount-Edgcombe was the Scene of this Hospitality, a house new built and named by the aforesaid Knight, a square Structure with a round Turret
at each end, Garretted on the top. The Hall (rising above the rest) yieldeth a stately sound as one entereth it, the Parlour and Dyning-Roome afford a large and diversified prospect both of Sea and Land. The high scituation (cool in Summer, yet not cold in Winter) giveth Health: the Neighbour River wealth. Two Block-houses great safety, and the Town of Plymouth good company unto it. Nor must I forget the fruitful ground about it, (pleasure without profit, is but a flower without a root,) stored with Wood, Timber, Fruit, Deer and Gonnies, a sufficiency of Pasture, Arable and Meadow, with Stone, Lime, Marl, and what not? I write not this to tempt the Reader to the breach of the Tenth Commandement, To covet his Neighbours house, and one Line in the prevention thereof. I have been cre∣dibly informed that the Duke of Medina Sidonia Admiral of the Spanish-Fleet in the 88. was so affected at the sight of this House (though but beholding it at a di∣stance from the Sea,) that he resolved it for his own possession in the partage of this Kingdome, (blame him not if choosing best for himself,) which they had preconque∣red in their hopes and expectation. But he had catch'd a great Cold, had he had no other Clothes to wear, then those which were to be made of a skin of a Bear, not yet killed. Medicinal Waters. I know none in this County, which are reported to be Soveraign constantly for any diseases. Yet I meet with one so remarkable a recovery, that it must not be omitted. However I remember his Good Counsell, He that telleth a miraculus truth, must always carry his Author at his Back. I will onely Transcribe his words, speaking of the good Offices which Angels doe to Gods Servants. Doctor Joseph Hall then Bishop of Exeter, since of Norwich, in his Book called, The Great Mistery of Godliness, pag. 169.Of this kind was that (no less then Miraculous) Cure, which at Saint Maderns in Corn∣wall was wrought upon a Poor Cripple, whereof (besides the attestation of many hundred of the Neighbours,) I took a strict and impartial Examination in my last Visitation. This Man for sixteen years together was fain to walk upon his hands, by reason the sinews of his legs were so contracted, and upon Monitions in his Dreame to wash in that Well, was suddenly so restored to his limbs, that I saw him able both to walk, and get his Own Maintenance. I found here was neither Art, nor Collusion. The thing done, the Author In∣visible of God. So Authenticall an Author, (without any other Assistance ad Corroborandum,) is enough to get belief in any, save, such surly souls, who are resolved on Infidelity of what their own Eyes have not beheld. The Wonders. If the word be strained up to the height, I confess Cornwall affordeth none at all; but if it be slackned, and let down a little, there are those things which this Dutchy doth tender, and we all willing to take for Wonders, for discourse sake, at the least, viz. The HURLERS. These are Stones competently distanced, whom Tradition reporteth, to be for∣merly Men Metamorphoz'd into Stones, for Hurling (a Sport peculiar to Cornwall) on, and so profaning of the Lords-day. Thus unequally yoaking Scripture and Ovid to∣gether, the Tale is made up betwixt them. But seeing such Devotion is not durable which is founded on Deceit, we protest against, and reject this fiction, the rather, because▪ the same Lawgiver, who injoyned us, Remember thou keepest holy the Sabbath day, gave us also in Command, Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy Neighbour, and we will not accept a false Doctrine, to make a true use thereof. Yet surely conformable to the Judgement of those Times was this Tradition made, and thence one may collect that boisterous Exercises (or Labours rather,) so far from refreshing the weary, that
they weary the refreshed, are utterly inconsistent with the conscientious keeping of that Day, and deserve heavy Punishments, for profaning thereof. Otherwise we really believe, these Stones were Originally set up for Limits and Bounds, or else a Monument erected in Memory of some Victory here atchieved. Main Amber. Main is in Cornish the Stone, and Amber as some conceive of Cam, English Brit. in Corn∣wall. Ambrosius that vali∣ant Brittan, erected probably by him on some Victory atchieved against the Romans, or some other Enemies. This is a Master-piece of Mathematicks and Criticall Pro∣portions, being a great stone of so exact position on the Top of a Rock, that any weak∣ness by touching it may move it, and yet no force can remove it, so justly is it poised. I have heard in common discourse, when this Main Amber hath been made the Em∣bleme of such mens dispositions, who would listen to all counsel, and seem inclined thereunto, but are so fixt, that no reason can alter them from their first resolution. But know Reader, that this Wonder is now Unwondred, for I am credibly informed that some Souldiers of late have utterly destroyed it. Oh, how dangerous is it for Art to stand in the way where Ignorance is to pass! Surely covetousness could not tempt them thereunto, though it did make one to deface a fair Monument in Turkey on this occasion. A Tombe was erected near the high-way (according to the Fashion of that Coun∣try,) on some person of quality, consisting of a Piller, and on the Top thereof a Cha∣piter or great Globe of stone, whereon was written in the Turkish Tongue, The Brains are in the Head. This passed many years undemolished, it being Piaculum there to violate the concern∣ment of the dead, untill one not of more Conscience, but Cunning then others, who had passed by it, resolved to unriddle the meaning of this Inscription; breaking the Hollow Globe open, he found it full of Gold, departed the richer, not the honester for his discovery. Sure I am, if any such temptation invited the Souldiers to this Act, they missed their mark therein. Their pretence as I understand to this destructive design was Reformation, some People as they say making an Idol thereof, which if true, I pitty the destroying of Main Amber, no more then the Stamping and Pulverizing of the brasen Serpent by King Hezkiah. But I cannot believe so much Stupidity in Christians, they took much pains by cutting off the Stone to dislodge it from its Center, (in how few minutes may envy ruin what art hath raised in more hours,) and now Cornwall hath one Artificial wonder fewer then it had before. Except any will say that to keep up the number, the unexampled Envy of these Souldiers may be Substituted in the room thereof. And let them sink in Obscurity, that hope to swim in Credit by such mis-atchivements. Proverbs. By Tre, Pol, and Pen,] You shall know the Cornishmen.] These three words are the Dictionary of such Surnames, which are originally Cornish, and though Nounes in sense, I may fitly terme them Prepositions. 1. Tre a Town. Hence Tre-fry, Tre-lawney, Tre-vanion, &c. 2. Pol signifieth an Head. Hence Pol-wheel. 3. Pen a Top. Hence Pen-tire, Pen-rose, Pen-kevil, &c. Some adde to these a fourth inchoation, viz. Car (which I guess to signify a rock) as Carmino, Carzew, &c. but I dare not make additions, but present it as I find it in my Author. To give one a Cornish Hugg.] The Cornish are Masters of the Art of Wrestling, so that if the Olympian Games were now in fashion, they would come away with the victory. Their Hugg is a cunning
close with their fellow combitant, the fruits whereof is his fair fall, or foil at the least. It is figuratively appliable to the deceitfull dealing of such, who secretly design their overthrow, whom they openly embrace. Cews Sur▪  Cwall fol. 115. Hengsten down, well ywrought,] Is worth London town, dear ybought.] The truth hereof none can confirm, or confute; seeing under-ground-wealth is a Nemo scit, and vast may the treasure be of Tinne in this Down. Sure I am, that the gainfull plenty of metall formerly afforded in this place, is now fallen to a scant∣saving-scarcity. But, to make the Proverbe true, it is possible, that the Cornish Dia∣monds found therein, may be pure and orient (as better concocted) in the bowells thereof. For, though crafty (not to say dishonest) Chapmen, put the best grain in the top, and worst in the bottome of their sack; such is the integrity of nature, that the coursest in this kind are higher, and the purest still the lowest. Idm fol. 141. Tru-ru,] Triveth eu,] Ombdina geveth try-ru.] Which is to say, Tru consisteth of three streets, and it shall in time be said, Here Truru stood. I trust the men of this town are too wise, to give credit to such predi∣ctions, which may justly prove true to the superstitious believers thereof. Let them serve God, and defie the Devil with all his Pseudo-prophesies. Like to this is another fond observation, presaging some sad success to this Town, because ru, ru, which in English is Woe, Woe, is twice in the Cornish name thereof. But, let the men of Truru, but practice the first syllable in the name of their town, and they may be safe and se∣cure from any danger in the second. He doth sail into Cornwall without a Bark.] This is an Italian Proverb, where it passeth for a description (or derision rather) of such a Man who is wronged by his Wises disloyalty. I wonder the Italians should take such pains to travail so far to fetch this expression, having both the Name and Matter nearer home. Name, Having the field Cornetus  lib. 8. cap. 3. Campus in agro falisco, (called Corneto at this day.) And a people called . Corni in Latium, with the Cornicti montes near Tiber, not to speak of its two Promontories tearm∣ed by good Authors . lib. 3. cap. 5. Mela lib. 2. cap. 4. Cornua duo Italiae, the two Horns of Italy. Matter, Keeping their wives under restraint as generally full of Jealousie, which if just, I much bemoan the Gaolers, if not, I more pity their Prisoners. Whereas in our Cornwall, the Wives liberty is the due reward of their Chastity, and the Cause of their husbands comfortable confidence therein. He is to be  Sur. of Cornwall fol. 126. summoned before the Mayor of Halgaver.] This is a joculary and imaginary Court, wherewith men make merriment to them∣selves, presenting such Persons as go Slovenly in their Attire, untrussed, wanting a spur, &c. Where judgement in formal terms is given against them, and executed more to the scorn then hurt of the persons. But enough hereof, least I be summoned thi∣ther my self. When Dudman and Ramehead meet.] These are two forelands, well known to Sailers, well nigh twenty miles asunder, and the Proverbe passeth for the Periphrasis of an impossibility. However, these two Caew  of Cornwall fol. 141. Points have since met together, (though not in position) in possession of the same owner, Sir Pierce Edgecombe, enjoying one in his own, the other in right of his wife. Saints. SAINT KIBY was son to Solomon Duke of Cornwall, whom severall inducements moved to travail. First, because A Prophet hath the least Honour in his own Country. Secondly, because Britain at that time was infected with Arianisme. Thirdly, be∣cause he had read so much of the works, and heard more of the worth of Saint Hilary Bishop of Poicteers in France. This main motive made him address himself to that worthy Father, with whom he lived fifty years, and afterwards saith learned Leyland was by him made Bishop of the Isle of Anglesey.
Pardon me Reader, if suspending my belief herein, seeing, surely that holy and humble French Saint would not pretend to any Metropoliticall power, in appointing a Bishop in Britain. More probable it is that Saint Hilary made him a Bishop at large sine titulo, whereof there are some precedents in Antiquity. However into Wales he went, and there converted the Northern parts thereof to, and confirmed the rest in Chri∣stianity. A Three-fold memoriall is in the Isle of Anglesey, extant at this day. One of his Master, in Point Hilary, another of himself, in Caer-Guiby, and a third of both, in Holy∣head. He florished about the year of our Lord, 380. URSULA daughter to Dinoth Duke of Cornwall, was born in this County. This is she, who se life is loaden with such Anticronismes, and Improbabilities, that it is questio∣nable, whether this fable was ever founded in a truth, or hath any thing in History for its Original. This Ursula is said to have carried over out of Britain, eleven thousand Maids of prime quality, besides See Master  notes on Polyolbion pag. 131. threescore thousand of meaner rank, (seventy one thousand in all, a prodigious number,) to be married to so many in little Britain in France. Preposte∣rous in my mind, to proffer themselves, and it had argued more modesty if their Hus∣bands had fetcht them hence. But blame them not, who paid so dear for their Adventures. All shipp'd from Lon∣don, some of them were drowned in their Passage, the rest slain by the Hunnes of Colen, say some, at Rome, say others, by King Attila under Gratian the Emperour. Mendacium Aequabile, observing equall Temper of untruth, in time, place, and person. However, there is a Church at Colen dedicated to their Memories, where the Virgin Earth (let the Rich. White of Basing-Stoke in Hist. Brit. Mart. and English Mar∣tyr. on Octob. 21. reporter have the Whetstone) will digest no other body, no not the Corps of an Infant newly Baptised, (as good a Maid I believe as the best of them) but will vomit it up in the night time again, as if they had never been buried. This Massacre is reported to have happened in the year of our Lord 383. SAINT MELIORUS was onely son of Melianus, Duke of this County, who be∣ing secretly made a Christian, was so maliced by Rinaldus his Pagan-brother-in-law, that he first cut off his right-hand, and then his .  in Cata. Sanct. Brit. Anno Dm. 411: left-legg, (no reason of this transposed method of cruelty, save cruelty,) and at last his head about the year 411. whose body being buried in some old Church in this County, by the miracles reported to be done thereat, procured the reputation of a Saint to his memory. Prelates. WILLIAM de GREN-VIL was born of a worshipfull family in this Carew Survey of Corn. fol. 59. County, and became Canon of York, Dean of Chichester, Chancellour of England, (under K. Edward the first,) and Arch-bishop of York. But the worst was, two years his Confirma∣tion was deferred untill he had paid nine thousand fiveh undred marks. Let him thank the Pope, who gave him the odd five hundred, not mounting it to even ten thousand. Besides he had this favour, not (as many others) to be consecrated by a Proxy, but the very hands of P. Clement the fifth. This paiment reduced him to such poverty, he was re∣lieved by the Clergy of his Province, by way of Benevolence. This, not doing the deed, to make him a Saver, he was fain to crave another help of the same Hand, un∣der the new Godwin in the Arch-bish. of York. name of a Subsidie. Indeed it was pity that the Father of the Diocess should want any thing, which his Sons could contribute unto Him. He highly favou∣red the Templars, though more pitying, then profiting them, as persons so stiffly op∣posed by the Pope and Philip King of France, that there was more fear of his being sup∣pressed by their Foes, then hope of their being supported by his Friendship. He was present in the Councel of Vienna, on the same token, that therein he had his place as∣signed next the Arch-bishop of Triers, and that I assure you, was very high, as be∣neath the lowest Elector, and above Wortzbury or Herbipolis, and other German Prelates, who also were Temporal Princes. But now he is gone, and his pompe with him, dy∣ing at Cawood 1315. and buried in the Chappel of Saint Nicholas, leaving the reputation of an able Statesman, and no ill Scholar behind him. MICHAEL TREGURY was born in this Ble de Scrip. Brit. Cent. Oct. Num. 13. County, and bred in the University of Ox∣ford,
where he attained to such eminency, that he was commended to King Henry the fifth, fit to be a forraign Professor. This King Henry, desiring to Conquer France, as well by Arts, as Armes, (knowing that learning made Civil Persons, and Loyall ,) reflected on the City of Cane (honoured with the Ashes of his Ancestors) in Normandy, and resolved to advance it an University, which he did Anno 1418. placing this Michael, the first Professor in the Colledge of his Royal Erection. Hence King Henry the sixth, preferred him Arch bishop of Dublin in Ireland, wherein he Sir James Wre, de scrip. Hib. lib. 2. pag. 13. continued 22. years, deceasing December 21. 1471. and is buried in the Church of Saint Patrick in Dublin. I am sorry to see the Author of so many learned books disgraced on his Mo∣nument, with so barbarous an Epitaph. Idem de Ar∣ch epis. Dublin. pag. 30. Praesul Metropolis Michael hic Dubliniensis, Marmore Tumbatus, pro me Christum flagitetis. Allowing him thirty years old when Professor at Cane, he must be extreamly aged at his departure. JOHN ARUNDLE was born of right ancient Parentage of Garews Sr. Corn. fol. 59. & Bishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of Exe∣ter. Lanhearn in this Coun∣ty, bred in the University of Oxford, and was by King Henry the seventh preferred Bi∣shop of Coventry and Lichfield, anno 1496. thence translated to his Native Diocese of Exeter, 1501. Impute it to the shortness of his continuance in that See; that so little is left of his Memory, (not enough to feed, much less Feast the Pen of an Historian.) He dyed atBishop God∣win ut prius. London, anno 1503. and lyeth buryed saith my Author in St. Clements, Stows Survey. not acquaint∣ing us whether Clements East cheap, or Clements▪ Danes; but I conclude it is the latter, be∣cause the Bishops of Exeter had their Inne or City-house (now converted into Essex∣house) within that Parish. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. There passeth a pleasant Carew Survey of Cornwall fol. 59. Tradition in this County, how there standeth a man of great strength and stature with a black Bil in his hand, at Polston-bridge (the first entrance into Cornwall, as you pass towards Launceston, where the Assizes are holden) ready to knock down all the Lawyers that should offer to plant themselves in that Coun∣ty. But in earnest, few of that profession have here grown up to any supereminent height of Learning, Livelyhood or Authority. Whether because of the far distance of this County from the Supremer Courts, or because of the multiplicity of petty ones nearer hand, (pertaining to the Dutchy, These can∣not now be pretended an hinderance, being put down by the long-lasting Parliament. Stannerie's, and other Franchises,) ena∣bling Atturneys and the like of small reading to serve the peoples turne, and so cutting the profit from better-studyed Counsellers. Some conceive that Sir Robert Tresillian, chief Justice of the Kings-Bench in the fifth of King Richard the Second, to be this Country-man, though producing no other evidence save Tre the initial syllable of his Surname, as a badge of Cornish extraction. However we have purposely omitted him in this our Catalogue; partly, because not claimed by Mr. Carew in his Survey for their Countryman, partly, because no Worthy, as justly executed by Act of Parliament for pronouncing their Acts revocable at the Kings pleasure. As for one Cornish man (though neither Writer nor actual Judge) his worth commands us to remember him: namely, WILLIAM NOY born in this County, was bred in Lincolns-Inn, a most sedulous Student, constantly conversant with ancient Records, verifying his Anagram: WILLIAM NOY, I Moyl in Law. He was for mny years the stoutest Champion for the Subjects Liberty, untill King Charles entertained him to be his Attorney; after which time, I read this Character of him in an History written by an Hamond L'E∣strange Esq his Life of King Charles. ingenious Gentleman. He became so servilely addicted to the Prerogative, as by Ferretting old penall Statutes, and devising new exactions, he became for the small time he enjoyed
that power; the most pestilent Vexation to the subjects that this latter age produced. However others behold his Actions with a more favourable eye, as done in the pur∣suanceReader, in the last page I af∣firmed, that Mr. Noy was no writer. But since I am in∣formed, that there is a Post∣hume Book of his. of the place he had undertaken, who by his Oath and Office was to improve his utmost power to advance the profit of his Master. Thus I see that after their Deaths, the Memories of the best Lawyers may turn Clients, yea and sue too in forma Pauperis, needing the good word of the Charitable Survivors to plead in their behalf. He dyed, anno Domini 163.. Let me add this passage from his mouth that was pre∣sent thereat. The Goldsmiths of London had (and in due time may have) a Custom once a year to weigh Gold in the Star-Chamber, in the presence of the Privy Councill and the Kings Attourney. This solemn weighing by a word of art they call the Pixe, and make use of so exact scales therein, that the Master of the Company affirmed, that they would turn with the two hundereth part of a grain. I should be loath (said the At∣torney Noy standing by) that all my actions should be weighed in those Scales. With whom I concur in relation of the same to my self. And therefore seeing the Ballance of the Sanctuary held in Gods hand are far more exact, what need have we of his mercy and Christs merits to make us Passable in Gods presence? Souldiers. King ARTHUR, Son to Uther-Pendragon, was born in Tintagel-Castle in this County, and proved afterward Monarch of Great Britain. He may fitly be termed the British Hercules in three respects, 1. For his illegitimate birth, both being Bastards, begotten on other mens Alomena wife to Amphitruo, and Igern wife to Gloise Pr. of Cornwall. wives, and yet their Mothers honest women, deluded, the one by Miracle, the other by Art-Magick of Merlin, in others personating their husbands. 2. Painfull life, one famous for his twelve labours, the other for his twelve vi∣ctories against the Saxons, and both of them had been greater, had they been made less, and the reports of them reduced within compass of proba∣bility. 3. Violent and wofull death, our Arthurs being as lamentable, and more ho∣nourable, not caused by Feminine Jealousie, but Masculine Treachery, being murdered by Mordred, near the place where he was born. Draytons Po∣lyolbion pag. 5. As though no other place on Britains spacious earth, Were worthy of his end, but where he had his birth. As for his Round-Table, with his Knights about it, the tale whereof hath Trundled so smoothly along for many ages, it never met with much beliefe amongst the judicious. He died about the year Anno Dom 542. And now to speak of the Cornish in generall. They ever have been beheld men of Valour. It seemeth in the raign of the aforesaid King Arthur, they ever made up his Van-Guard, if I can rightly understand the barbarous Verses of a Michael Cor∣nubiensis. Cornish Poet. Nobilis Arcturus nos primos Cornubienses, Bellum facturus vocat (ut puta Caesaris enses) Nobis, (non aliis reliquis) dat primitus ictm. Brave Arthur, when he meant a field to fight, Us Cornish-men did firstof all invite. Onely to Cornish (count them Cesars swords,) He the first blow in Battle still affords. But afterwards in the time of King Joan. Sarishu. de nugu Curial. 5. cap. 18. Canutus, the Cornish were appointed to make up the Rear of our Armies. Say not they were much degraded, by this transposition from Head to Foot, seeing the judicious in Marshaling of an Army, count the rength (and therefore the credit) to consist in the Rear thereof. But it must be pitied, that these people misguided by their Leaders, have so often abused their valour in rebellions, and particularly in the raign of King Henry the seventh, at Black-heath, where they did the greatest execution, with their Arrows, reported to be the L▪Verulam, in King Henry the seventh pag. 171. length of a Taylors-yard, the last of that proportion, which ever were seen in England. However the Cornish have since plentifully repaired their credit, by their exemplary Valour and Loyalty, in our late Civil Wars.
Sea-men. JOHN ARUNDEL of Trerice Esquire, in the fourteenth of King Henry the eighth took prisonerCarew's sur∣vey of Corn∣wall. Duncane Campbell a Scot, (accounted their Admiral by his own Country∣men, a Pirat by the English, and a Valiant man by all,) in a fight at Sea. This his Goodly, Valiant, and Jeopardous enterprise, (as it is termed) was represented with ad∣vantage by the Duke of Norfolk to the King, who highly praised and rewarded him for the same. Civilians. JOHN TREGONWELL was born in thisCarew in his survey of Corn∣wall sol. 61. Speed Chron. pag. 780. County, bred in Oxford, where he pro∣ceeded Doctor of the Laws, both Canon and Civil, and attaining to great perfection in the Theoretick, and practicall parts of those professions, he was imployed to be Proctor for King Henry the eighth, in the long and costly cause of his divorce from Queen Katherine Dowager. Now as it was said of the Roman Dictator, Sylla suos divitiis explevit, So King Henry full fraught all those with wealth and rewards, whom he re∣tained in that imployment. This Doctor he Knighted, and because so dexterous and di∣ligent in his service, gave him a pension of fourty pounds per annum. And upon the re∣signation thereof, (with the paying down of aPrima parte rot. 9. in the remembrancers (formerly cal∣led Osbornos) office. Thousand pounds) he conferred on him and his heirs the rich demesne and scite of Middleton, a Mitred Abby in Dorsetshire, posses∣sed at this day by his posterity. This Sir John died about the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred and fourty, and is buried under a fair Monument in the Church of Middleton aforesaid. Physitians. Although this County can boast of no writer graduated in that faculty in the Uni∣versity, and that generally they can better vouch practise for their warrant, then war∣rant for their practise, yet Cornish-men would be offended if I should omit RAWECarew in his survey of Corn∣wall fol. 66. HAYES a Blacksmith by his occupation, and furnished with no more learning then is sutable to such a calling, who yet ministred Physick for many years, with so often success and generall applause, that not onely the home-bred multitude believed so mainly in him, but even persons of the better calling resorted to him, from the re∣mote parts of the Realm, to make tryall of his cunning, by the hazard of their lives, and sundry either upon just cause, or to Cloke their folly, reported that they have reaped their errands ends at his hands. He flourished Anno Dom. 1602. —ATWELL born in this County and Parson of Saint Tue therein, was well seen in the Theoricks of Physick, and happy in the practise thereof, beyond the belief of most, and the reason that any can assign for the same. For although now and then he used blood∣letting, he mostly for all diseases prescribed milk, and often milk and apples, which (al∣though contrary to the judgements of the best esteemed practitioners) either by virtue of the Medicine, or fortune of the Physitian, or fancy of the Patient, recovered many out of desperate extremities. This his reputation for many years maintained it self unimpaired, the rather, because he bestowed his pains and charge gratis on the poor, and taking moderately of the rich, left one half of what he received in the housholds he visited. As for the profits of his benefice, he poured it out with both hands in pious uses. But for the truth of the whole, fit fides penesCarew in his Survey of Cornwall fol. 60. authorem. This Atwell was living 1602. Writers. HUCARIU the LEVITE was born in thisBale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 47. & Pits. an. 1040. County, and lived at Saint Germans therein. All-eating Time hath left us but a little Morsell for manners of his Memory. This we know, he was a pious and learned man, (after the rate of that Age) and it ap∣peareth that he was eminent in his function of Divine Service, because Levite was  fixed upon him. In his time (as in the days of Eli) the Word of God was pre∣cious, which raised the repute of his pains, who wrote an hundred and ten Homilies, be∣sides* 1 Sam. 3. 1. other Books. He flourished 1040.
JOHN of CORNWALL (so called from the County of hisBle de script. Ag. Cent. 3. Num. 6. Nativity,) leaving his Native soil, studied in forraign Universities, cheifly in Rome, where his Abilities com∣mended him to the Cognizance of Pope Alexander the third. It argueth his learning, that he durst cope with that Giant, Peter Lumbard himself, commonly called The Ma∣ster of the Sentences, and who on that account, expected that all should rather obey, then any oppose his judgement. Yea it appeareth, that the judgement of this Peter Bishop of Paris, was not so sound in all points, by a passage I meet with inAnno 1179. Mathew Paris of Pope Alxander the third, writing a letter to an Arch-bishop of France, to abrogate the ill doctrine of Peter sometimes Bishop of Paris, about Christs Incarnation. But our John wrote against him in his life time, a book de Homine assumpto, and put Peters Pen to some pains to write his own vindication. He wrote also a book of Phi∣losophy and Heresies. Wonder not at their conjunction, Philosophy being in Divinity, as Fire and Water in a Family, a good Servant, but bad Master; so Sad it is, when the Ar∣ticles of our Creed must be tried by the Touchstone of Aristotle. This John flourished under K. Henry the second, Anno 1170. SIMON THURWAY was born in thisBale de script. Brt. Cent 3. Num. 47. County, bred in our English Universities, un∣till he went over into Paris, where he became so eminent a Logician, that all his Au∣ditors were his admirers. Most firm his memory, and fluent his expression, and was knowing in all thngs, save in himself: For, profanely he advanced Aristotle above Moses, and himself above both. His pride had a great and sudden fall, losing at the same instant, both language and memory, becoming compleatly  without reason or speech. Yet was his dumness to all intelligent people, a loud Sermon on Saint PaulsRom. 12. 3. precept, Not to think of themselves more highly then they ought to think, but to think so∣berly. PolydoreLib. 15 Angl. Hst Virgil saith of him, Juvene nil acutius, sene nihil obtusius; whilest othersBale ut prius. adde, he made an inarticulate sound like to lowing. This great judgement be∣fell him about the year of our Lord 1201. MICHAEL BLAUNPAYN born inBale de script. Brit. Cent. . Num. 10. Cornwall, (some so commonly call him Michael the Master, that he had almost lost his native name,) was bred in Oxford nd , and became as good a riming Poet as any in that Age. In happened one Henry of Normandy chief Poet to our Henry the third, had traduced Cornwall as an inconsiderable Country, cast out by nature in contempt into a corner of the land. Our Michael could not en∣ure this affront, but full of Poeticall fury falls upon the Libeller, take a tast (little thereof will go far) of his strains. Non opus est ut opes numerē quibus est opulenta, Et p quas inopes sustentat non ope lenta, Piscibus & Stanno nusquam tam fertilis ora. We need not number up her wealthy store, Wherewith this helpful land relieves her poor, No Sea, so full of Fish, of Tinn no Shore. Then as a valiant Champion he concludeth all with this exhortation to his Country∣men. Quid nos deterret? si firmiter in pede stemus, Fraus ni nos superat, nihil est quod non superemus. What should us fright, if firmly we do stand? Bar Fraud, and then no Force can us command. His Pen so lushious in praising when so pleased, was as bitter in railing when dispo∣sed, witness this his Satirical character of his foresaid Antagonist. Est tibiHence  Gammon. Gamba Capri, crus passeris, & latus Apri, Os leporis, catuli nasus, dens & gena Muli, Frons Vetulae, tauri caput, & color undique Mauri, His argumentis quibus est argutia Mentis, Quod non à Monstro differs, satis hic tibi Monstro. Gamb'd like a Goat, sparrow-thigh'd, sides as Boar, Hare-mouth'd, Dog-nos'd, like Mule thy teeth & chin, Brow'd as old wife, bul-headed, black as More. If such without, then what are you within? By these my Signs, the wise will easily conster, How little thou didst differ from a Monster. He flourished Anno 1350. though the certain time and place of his death is unknown. GODFREY of CORNWALL was bred a Doctor in Paris and Oxford, and afterwards became a Carmelite of no mean esteem amongst those of his own order. It happened in his time that Gerardus Bononiensis, a French-man, Master Generall of the Carmelites,
made two Provincials (formerly but one) of that order in England, alledging that two. 4. 9. * are better then one, and matters would be the more exactly regulated, by their double inspection. The plain truth was, the French-man did it out of covetousness, that so two loaders might bring double grists to his Mill. Our Godfrey appeared a Champion for the old way, that matters might run in their ancient channell, and wrote de . Brit. . 5. Num. 6. a Book to that purpose, as many others on severall subjects. John Baconthorpe, his Contemporary, much esteemed him, and quoted him by the Title of . 29.  . Doctor Solennis. I doubt not but this our Godfrey in mannerly requitall, re-gave Baconthorpe the courtesie of Doctor Resolutus, and here I would fain be satisfied how these received Epithetes [Doctor Profundus, Doctor Subtilis, &c.]came first to be fixed on such and such Schoolmen. Surely they asumed them not themselves, which had argued too much pride and presumption. Nor could I ever, as yet, meet with any Authentique record of Pope or University, which setled it upon them. Possibly one Eminent Writer gave it to another his Correspondent, who in reciprocation of kindness (title thou me, and I will title thee,) returned as splendid a style to him again. This our Solemn Doctor flourish∣ed Anno Domini 1310. JOHN TREVISA was born at Caradock in this County, bred in Oxford, afterwards Vicar of Berkeley in Gloucester-shire, and Chaplain to Thomas Lord Berkeley, at whose in∣stance (besides other Histories writ by him) he translated the Bible into English, a daring work for a private person in that age, without particular Command from Pope or Pub∣lique Council. Some much admire he would enter on this work, so lately performed (about fifty years before) by John Wicklife. What was this, but actum agere, to do what was done before? Besides Wicklife and Trevisa agreeing so well in their judgements, it was much he would make a Retranslation. Such consider not, that in that age it was almost the same pains for a Scholar to translate as transcribe the Bible. Secondly, the time betwixt Wicklife and Trevisa was the Chrisis of the English tongue, which began to be improved in fifty, more then in 300. years formerly. Many course words (to say no worse) used before are refined by Trevisa, whose translation is as much better then Wicklifes, as worse then Tyndals. Thus, though the fountain of the Original hath always clearness alike therein, channels of Translations will partake of more or less purity, according to the translators age, industry and ability. This Trevisa died a through old man, about the year 1400. Since the Reformation. JOHN SKUISH was born in. Cornwall, a man of much experience and generall learning. He was saith my Author à consiliis to ardinal Woolsy, whereby I collect him learned of the Laws, and of his Counsell, except that, that great Prelate like a Prince, had Counsell of State belonging unto him. This Skuish wrote a Chronicle being collected out of many severall Authors. I have some presumptions to conclude him inclined to the Protestant reformation. He flourished Anno Dom. 1530. BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON. The first syllable of his Name, and what is ad∣ded thereunto by my Author, . . pag. 696. parentum stemmate clarus, and the sameness of his name with an ancient Family in this County, are a three-fold Cable to draw my belief, that he was this Country-man. He was bred in the University of Oxford, and having attained to good learning therein, twice travailed beyond the Seas. Once for pleasure and curiosity into France and Italy, whereby he much improved himself. Returning home, he became Library-keeper to King Edward the sixth, and Dean of Chichester. The second time for safety and necessity, in the first of Q. Mary, getting (I believe) his best subsistance (being an Exile in Germany,) with making and translating of Books, where he was living 1556. and may be rationally presumed to dye before Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown, because being a man of merit, and Eccle∣siastically Dignified, we hear no more of his preferment.
RICHARD CAREW Esquire, son to Thomas Carew and Elizabeth Egecomb, was born at Anthony in this County, of right worshipfull parentage, who honoured his ex∣traction with his learning. He was bred a Gentleman-commoner in Oxford, where, being but fourteen years old, and yet three years standing, he was called out to dispute ex tem∣pore, before the Earls of Leicester and Warwick, with the matchless Sir Philip Sidney. —si quaeritis hujus, Fortunam pugnae, non est superatus ab illo. —Ask you the end of this contest? They neither had the better, both the best. He afterwards wrote the pleasant and faithfull description of Cornwall, and I will not wrong his memory with my barbarous praise, after so eloquent a pen. Sed haecCamdens Brit. in Cornwall. planiùs & planiùs docuit Richardus Carew de Anthonie, non minus generis splendore, quàm virtute & doctrina nobilis qui hujus regionis descriptio∣nem latiore specie, & non ad tenue elimavit, quemque mihi praeluxisse non possum non agnoscere. This his book he dedicated to Sir Walter Raleigh, with this modest complement,In his Dedi∣catory Epistle. that he appealed to his direction, whether it should pass; to his correction, if it might pass; and to his protection, if it did pass. Adding moreover, that duty not presumption, drawing him to that offering, it must be favour, not desert, must move the other to the acceptance thereof. This Survey was set forth 1602. and I collect the Author thereof died about the middle of the raign of K. James. I know not, whether he or his son first brought up the use of Gambadoes, much worne in the West, whereby whilest one rides on horse∣back, his leggs are in a Coach, clean and warme, in those dirty Countries. CHARLES HERLE was born in this County, of an Antient and Worshipfull Fami∣ly, bred (though never FellowA mistake in my Church History.) in Exeter-colledge, and at last richly Beneficed in Lan∣cashire. We read how PharaohGen. 47. 21, 22. removed all the Egyptians, (the Priests alone excepted) from one end of the Borders of the land to the other end thereof, but we the Ministers in England are of all men most and farthest removeable, three hundred miles and more being interposed betwixt the place of Mr. Herles Birth and Benefice. He was a good Scholar, and esteemed by his party a deep Divine, and (after the death of Doctor Twiss) President of the Assembly. As I dare not defend all the do∣ctrine delivered in his Printed books; so I will not inveigh against him, lest in me it be interpreted a revenge on his memory for licencing a bookBy Mr. John . written against me, where∣in I was taxed for Popish Complyance, though since (in my self still the same man) I groan under a contrary Representation. The best is, innocence doth turn such groans in to songs of gladness. Mr. Herle departed this life about 1655. Having received no instructions of any eminent benefactors in this County, either before or since the Reformation, we may proceed to Memorable Persons. —Carew in his survey of Corn∣wall fol. 63. KILTOR in the last Cornish Commotion, (which was in the raign of King Edward the sixth, Anno Dom. 1546.) was committed to Launceston Gaol, for his activi∣ty therein. This man lying there, in the Castle-green, upon his back, threw a stone of some pounds weight, over the Towers top, (and that I assure you is no low one,) which leadeth into the Park. JOHN BRAY Tenant to Master Richard Carew, (who wrote the survey of this County) carried upon his back about the year 1608. at one time by the space well near of a Butt length, sixIdem fol. 6. Bushells of Wheaten Meal, reckoning fifteen gallons to the Bushell, and upon them all the Miller, a Lubber of four and twenty years of age. JOHN ROMAN his Contemporary, a short Clonish▪Grub, may well be joyned with him. He may be called the Cornish Milo, so using himself to burdens in his Child-hood, that when a man, he would bear the whole carkase of an Oxe, and (to use myIdem fol. 63. Authors words) yet never tugged thereat. VEAL, an old man of Bodmin in this County, was so beholden to Mercuries pre∣dominant* Idem fol. 62 strength in his nativity, that without a teacher, he became very skilfull in
well-near all manner of handy-crafts, a Carpenter, a Joyner, a Mill-wright, a Free-ma∣son, a Clock-maker, a Carver, a Mettall-founder, Architect, & quid non? yea, a Chi∣rurgeon, Physitian, Alchimist, &c. So as that which Cic. de Oat. Gorgias of Leontium vaunted of the liberall Sciences, he may prosess of the Mecanicall, viz. to be ignorant in none. He was in his eminency Anno 1602. EDWARD Carew in his survey of Corn∣wll, pag. 13. BONE of Ladock in this County, was servant to Mr. Courtney therein. He was Deaf from his Cradle, and consequently Dumb, (nature cannot give out where it hath not received,) yet could learn, and express to his master any news that was stir∣ring in the Country. Especially, if there went speech of a Sermon within some miles distance, he would repair to the place with the soonest, and setting himself directly against the Preacher, look him stedfastly in the face, while his Sermon lasted, to which religious zeal, his honest life was also answerable. Assisted with a firm memory, he would not onely know any party, whom he had once seen, for ever after, but also make him known to any other, by some speciall observation and difference. There was one Kempe, not living far off, defected accordingly, on whose meetings, there were such embracements, such strange, often, and earnest tokenings, and such hearty laughters, and other passionate gestures, that their want of a tongue, seemed rather an hinderance to others conceiving them, then to their conceiving one another. Lord Myors I meet with but this one and that very lately [Sir Richard Cheverton Skinner] born in this County, imputing it chiefly to their great distance from London. Insomuch that antiently when Cornish-men went (or rather were driven up by the violence of their occasions) to that City, it was usual with them to make their Wills, as if they took their Voyage into a Forraign Country. Besides the children of the Cornish Gentry, counted themselves above, and those of the Poorer sort counted themselves beneath a Trade in London, as unable to attain it, by reason of the differance of their Language, whose Feet must travail far to come to London, whilst their Tongues must travail further to get to be understood when arrived there. This is one of the twelve pretermitted Counties, the names of whose Gen∣try were not returned into the Tower in the 12. of King Henry the sixth. Sheriffs of Cornwall. HEN. II. Anno 1 RECOR∣DA MANCA Anno 22 Eustachius fil. Stephani for 5 years. Anno 27 Alanus de Furnee for 4 years. Anno 31 Hug. Bardulph Dapifer Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. RICH. I. Anno 1 Will. de Bachland Anno 2 Rich. Revel for 9 years. JOHAN. R. Anno 1 Ioh. de Torrington Anno 2 Hug. Bardolph Anno 3 Rich. Flandry Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will. de Botterel for 5 years. Anno 11 Ioh. filius Richard. for 6 years. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Anno 3 Guliel. Lunet Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gul. de Pucot Anno 7 Reg. de Valle Torta Walt. de Treverden Anno 8 Reg. de Valle Torta Anno 9 Gul. Bregnen junior Rog. de Langford Reg. de Valle Torta A BLANK in the Records to the end of this Kings Raign, (being forty four years) except, any suppose (which is not very probable, that) the three fore∣mentioned persons, all, two, or one of them, continued so long in their Office.
EDW. I. Anno 1 Anno 2 Anno 3 Ioh. Wigger Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rob. de Chini Anno 6 Anno 7 Will. de Munckton for 5 years. Anno 12 Alex. de Sabridsworth Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Simon. de Berkeley Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Edw. Comes Cornubiae for 12 years. Anno 29 Thom. de la Hide for 7 years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Anno 2 Anno 3 Pet. de Gaviston Com. Cornubiae Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Tho. de la Hide Anno 7 Tho. de Excedekney Anno 8 Rich. de Polhampton Anno 9 Rich. de Hewish Anno 10 Hen. de Willington Anno 11 Anno 12 Anno 13 Isab. Regina Angliae Anno 14 Nullus Titulus in Rotulo Anno 15 Nullus Titulus in Rotulo Anno 16 Nullus Titulus in Rotulo Anno 17 Isab. Reg. Angliae, Regis Consors Anno 18 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Eliz. Regina, Regis mater for 5 years. Anno 6 Will. de Botreaux Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Ioh. Petit Anno 9 Idem Anno 10 Ioh. de Chudeleigh Anno 11 Ioh. Hamly Ioh. Petit Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Anno 14 Edw. Dux Cornubiae Anno 15 Hen. Terrill Rog. de Prideaux Anno 16 Edw. Dux Cornubiae Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Guliel. Pipehard Anno 19 Edw. Dux Cornubiae for 9 years. Anno 28 Ioh. Northcot Will. Auncell Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Guliel▪ Auncell Anno 32 Edward. Dux Cornubiae to the end of this Kings raign. Sheriffs. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Nich. Wampford     2 Rad. Carmino   Azure a bend Or, a Labell of 3 points G. 3 Oto. de Bodrigay     4 Will. Talbot AMP.   5 Ioh. Bevill Gwarnack Arg. a Bull Passant G. armed & Tripped Or. 6 Wa. Archdeacō, m. Anthony Arg. 3 Cheverons S. 7 Wil. Fitzwanter, m.     8 Rich. de Kendall   Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Dol∣phins Sable. 9 Ioh. Bevill ut prius   10 Nich. Wamford     11 Ioh. Colyn     12 Rich. Sergeaux     13 Tho. Peverell     14 Will. Talbot ut prius   15 Ioh. Colyn     16 Ioh. Col shall     17 Ioh. Herle   Arg. a Fess G. betwixt 3 Shel∣drakes proper. 18 Ia. Chuddelegh   Ermin, 3 Lions Rampant G. 19 Will. Talbot ut prius   20 Ioh. Bevill ut prius   21 Ioh. Colshull     22 Gal. Seyntalyn   Or, on a Cross G. 5 Bezants. HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Hen. fil. Regis Hen. 4. Primoge∣nitus & Johannes Keynes.   The Armes of England with the Difference of the Heir Apparent. 2 Idem. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 Idem. ut prius   5 Pre. Henricus ut prius   6 Ioh. Cole     7 Pre. Henricus ut prius   8 Idem. ut prius   9 Idem. ut pris   10 Idem. ut prius   11 Idem. ut prius   12 Idem. ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno     1 Ioh. Kederow     2 Idem.     3 Will. Talbot ut prius   4 Oto. Trevarthā, m.     5 Hen. Fullford   G. a Cheveron Arg. 6 Ioh. Arundel, mil. Lanhearn S. 6 Swallows in pile Arg. 7 Steph. Derneford     8 Ioh. Arundel, mi. ut prius   9 Ioh. Arundel, mil. Trerice Ut prius, with due difference. HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Ioh. Arundel, m. ut prius   2 Tho. Carmyno ut prius   3 Will. Talbot ut prius   4 Ioh. Herle, mil. ut prius   5 Ioh. Arundel, mil. ut prius   6   7 Ioh. Namson     8 Tho. Carmino ut prius   9 Ro. Chambleyn     10 la. Chuddeleigh ut prius   11     12 Ioh. Herle, mil. ut prius   13 Tho. Bonevill S. 6 Mullets, 3, 2, & 1. Ar.
14 Ioh. Yerd     15 Tho. Whalesbrew ut prius   16 Ren. Arundel ut prius   17 Ioh. Collshull     18 Ich. Nanson     19 Ioh. Masndy     20 Th Whalesbrough     21 Ioh. Blewet   Or, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Eagles displaied vert. 22 Ioh. Arundel ut prius   23 Ni vel Mic. Power     24 Io. Champernoun   Gul. a Saltire Vairee, twixt 12 Billets Or. 25 Ioh. Austill     26 Hen. Foretscu   Az. a Bend engrailed Arg. Co∣tissed Or. 27 Ioh. Trevilyan †     28 Ioh. Basset   † G. a Demyhorse Arg. issuing out of the waves of the sea. 29 Ioh. Nanson     30 Tho. Butside     31 Will. Dawbeney   Arg. a Fess lozengee Gules. 32 Th Walesbrough     33 Ioh. Petyt     34 Ioh. Conkworth     35 Ioh. Nanson, ar. ut prius   36 Ioh. Arundel     37 Ioh. Walesbrough ut prius   38 Ioh. Trevilian, ar.     EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Ro. Champernon ut prius   2 Ren. Arundel ut prius   3 Ren. Arundel ut prius   4 Tho. Bere     5 Alver. Cordburgh     6 Will. Bere     7 Ioh. Collshull, m.     8 Ioh. Sturgeon, ar.     9 Alver. Cornburgh     10 Ioh. Arundel, mil. ut prius   11 Ioh. Fortescu, ar. ut prius   12 Idem. ut prius   13 Idem. ut prius   14 Idem. ut prius   15 Rich. Dux Glouc. vir, ad terminum vic. suae.   France and England, on a Label of three Ermine, as many Cantons G. 16 Ioh Fortescu, ar.     17 Egid. Dawbeney ut prius   18 Will. Cornsnyowe     19 Rob. Willoughby,     20 Rich. Nanson     21 Tho. Greenvil   Gules Three Rests Or. 22 Tho. Fullford   Gules, a Cheveron Arg. RICH. III.     Anno     1 Ioh. Treffey Foy S. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Haw∣thorns Arg. 2 Ia. Tirell, mil. ESSEX. Arg. 2 Cheverons Az. within a Border engrailed G. 3 Will. Houghton     HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Tho. Greenvil ut prius   2 Ioh. Tremayn   G. 3 Armes in Circle joyned at the Tronkes, Or with Hands proper. 3 Alex. Carew Anthony Or, 3 Lions Passant Gardant S. Armed and Langued G. 4 Rich Nanson     5 Ioh. Treffey, mil. ut prius   6 Ioh. Roscarrock Roscarrock Arg. a Chever. twixt 2 Roses G. a Sea▪Tenchnayat proper. 7 Th. Tregarthen, a. Walt. Enderby, ar. LINCO. Arg. 3 bars Dancette S. a pale in cheif Ermine. 8 Rich. Vivian *     9 Wal. Enderby, ar.   * Arg. a Lion Ramp, G. mounted on 2 Barrs Wavee in Base Az. 10 Petrus Bevell ut prius   11 Edw. Arundel, ar. ut prius   1 Ioh. Basset     13 Pe. Edgcombe, m. Edgcombe G. on a Bend Ermin between 2 Cotises Or, 3 Boars-heads cooped Arg. 14 Idem. ut prius   15 Ioh. Treffey, mil. ut prius   16 Wil. Treffey, ar. ut prius   17 Pet. Bevill ut prius   18 Wit. Trevanyon Cary-hays Arg. on a Fess, B 3 Escalops Or between 2 Cheverons G. 19 Ioh. Godolphin* Godolghā   20 Rich. Vivian, ar. ut prius * G. an Eagle displayed with 2 Heads twixt 3 flour de luces Argent. 21 Pet. Eggcombe, m. ut prius   22 Mich. Vivian, ar. ut prius   23 Wil. Tevanion, a. ut prius   24 Th. Trevanion, m. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Arundel, mi. Talvern   2 Ro Graynfield, a. ut prius   3 Wil. Carsew, ar. Bokelly S. a Goat Passant Arg. attired and Tripped Or. 4 Iac: Eryse, ar.   S. a Chevern twixt 3 Griffons Sergeant Or. 5 Ioh. Camyno ut prius   6 Ioh. Carew, at. ut prius   7 Wit. Trevanion, m. ut prius   8 Pe. Eggcombe, m.     9 Io. Basset, mil.     10 Ro. Greenfield, a. ut prius   11 Io. Arundell de Trevise, ar. ut prius   12 Ioh. Skewys, ar.     13 Ioh. Basset, mil. ut prius   14 Ro. Greenfield, a. ut prius   15 Io. Arundell de Trevise, ar. ut prius   16 Will. Lour, ar.   Az. a Cheveron engrailed Or between 3 Roses Arg. 17 Rich. Penrose, ar.   Arg. 3 Bends S. charged with 9 rest of the field. 18 Ri. Greenfield, ar. ut prius   19 Hu. Trevanyon, a. ut prius   20 Ioh. Chamond, ar. Launcels Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 flour de luces G. 21 Wil. Godolphin, a.     22 Chri. Tednoke, a.     23 Ioh. Arundell de Trevise, ar, ut prius   24 Hu. Trevanion, m. ut prius   25 Wi. Godolphin, m.     26 Pe. Edgcombe, m. ut prus   27 Ioh. Reshymar, m. Hailford Az. 3 Bars Arg. in chief a Wolf Passant of the first. 28 Ioh. Chamond, m ut prius   29 Hug. Trevanyō, m.     30 Wi. Godolphin, m.     31 Ioh. Reskymer, ar. ut. prius   32 Ioh. Arundell, ar. ut prius   33 Ioh. Arundell, m. ut prius   34 Hu. Trevanyon, a. ut prius   35 Ric. Chamond, ar. ut prius   36 Ric. Greenfield, a. ut prius   37 Tho. Saint Al∣bine, ar. ut prius   38 Ioh. Trelawney, a. Pool Arg. a Cheveron S. betwixt 3 Oake-leaves vert. EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Ioh. Milaton, ar.     2 Pet. Chamond, ar. ut prius   3 Wil. Godolphin, m. ut prius   4 Ric. Roscorrek, ar. ut prius   5 Hu. Trevanyon, m. ut prius   6 Reg. Mohun, ar.   Or, a Cross engrailed Sable. REG. MARI.     Anno     1 Io. Arundell de Trevise, mil. ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     1, 2 Io. Arundell de Lanhern, mil. ut prius  
2, 3 Ric. Edgcombe, a. ut prius   3, 4 Io Rskymer, ar. ut prius   4, 5 Ioh. Bevil, ar. ut prius   5, 6 Io Carminoe, ar. ut prius   REG. ELIZA.     Anno     1 Reg. Mohun, ar. ut prius   2 Ioh. Trelawny, ar. ut prius   3 Ric. Roscarrake, a. ut prius   4 Ric. Chamond, ar. ut prius   5 Hen. Chiverton, .   Arg. a Castle S. on a Hill Vet. 6 Hu Trevanyon, a. ut prius   7 Will. Milliot, ar.     8 Ioh Trelawny, ar. ut prius   9 Ioh. St. Albyen, ar. ut prius   10 Wi. Godolphin, m. ut prius   11 Pet. Edgcombe, a. ut prius   12 Hen. Curwen, mi. CUMBE. Arg. Frettee G. a chief Az. 13 Will. Mohun, ar. ut prius   14 Pet. Courtney, ar. Ladock Or 3 Torteaux and a File with as many Lambeaux Az. 15 Ioh. Arundel de Trevise, ar. ut prius   16 Ioh. Bevil ut prius   17 Geo. Kekwick, ar. atch-French Arg 2 Lions in Bend passant S. cotised G. 18 Rich. Gevill, ar.     19 Will. Mohum, ar.     20 Will. Louer, ar. ut prius   21 Fr. Godolphin, ar. ut prius   22 Ioh. Arundel, ar. ut prius   23 Ioh.     24 Rich Carew, ar. ut prius   25 Ge. Greenvill, ar. nt prius   26 Tho. Cosworth, a. Cosworth Arg, on a Chev. betwixt 3 wings Az 5 Bzants. 27 Io. Roscarroke, ar. ut prius   28 Ioh. Wray, ar. Trebigh S. a Fess betw. 3 Btle-axes Ar. 9 Ant. Rouse, ar. Halton O, an Egle displayed B. pru∣nin? her wng  and Langued G. 30 Tho. St. Albin, ar. ut prius   31 Will. Bevill, ar. ut prius   32 Walt. Kendall, ar.   Argent a  betwixt 3 Dlphins S. 33 Geo Kegwhich, a. ut prius   34 Ri. Chamernown ut prius   35 Tho. Lower, ar. ut prius   36 Ioh. Trelawne, ar. ut prius   37 Car. Trevanion, a. ut prius   38 Ber. Grenvill, ar. ut prius   39 Pet. Courtney, ar. ut prius   40 Will. Bevill, ar. ut prius   41 Will. Wray, ar. ut prius   42 Fran. Buller, ar. Tregarrids S. on a plain Cross Arg. quart er∣pierced 4 Egles of the field. 43 Hanibal Vivian ut prius   44 Anth. Rouse, ar. ut prius * S. 3 Croissants, within a border Agent. 45 Arth. Harris, ar. * & primo Iac.     JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Arth. Harris, ar. ut prius   2 Fr. Godolphin, m. ut prius   3 Nic. Predeaux, ar. Padstow A Cheveron Sab. in chief, a Fyle with 3 Lambeaux G. 4 Deg. Chamond, a. ut prins   5 Ioh. Arundell, ar. ut prius   6 Io. Rashly, a. mo. Ioh▪ Acland, m.   Sa. a Cross twixt 2 Croissants Argent. Cheekee Arg. & S. a Fess G. 7 Chri. Harris, mil. ut prius   8 Ri. Edgcombe, m. ut prius   9 Rich. Bullar, ar. ut prius   10 Will Wrey, mil. ut prius   11 Will. Coriton, ar.   Argent a Saltire Sable. 12 Rich. Roberts, ar. Trewro Az. 3 estoyles and a Chief wavy Or. 13 Io. Chamond, ar. ut prius   14 Will. Dode, ar.     15 Fran. Vivian. ar.   Argent a Lin ramant G. 16 Rich. Carsew, ar. ut prius   17 Reskmim. Boniton Cardew Arg. a Chevtwixt 3 flowrs de luces S. 18 Nich. Glyn, ar. Glynfford Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Sammons spears S. 19 Sa. Pendervis, a.*     20 Ioh. Speccot, ar. †   * S. a Falcon rising betwet 3 Mullets O. 21 Rich. Gedy, ar.     22 Io. Moyle, ar. vir.* S. Germains † Or on a Bend G. 3 Millroinds Argent. CAR. REG.   * G. a Moyle passant Arg. Anno     1 Tho. Wivell, ar.     2 Ioh. Trefuses, ar.   Arg. a Cheveron betw. 3 whar∣row Spindles S. 3 Io. Rashleigh, ar. ut prius   4 Geor. Hele, ar.   G. a Bead Losengee Erm. 5     6 Io. Trelawney, m. ut prius   7 Ioh. Prideaux, ar. ut prius   8 Nic. Loure, mil. ut prius   9 Cha. Tevanio, a. ut prius   10 Hu. Bosgawen, ar.   Vert a Bull passant Arg. Ared Or, in a Cheif Ermin a Rose Gules. 11 Io. St. Albin, a. ut prius   12 Rich. Buller, mil. ut prius   13 Fran Godolpin, a. ut prius   14     15 Rich. Trevill, ar.   Or, a Cross engrailed Sa. in the first quarter a Mullt G. 16 Fran. Willear     17     18     19     20     21     22 Edw. Heile, ar. ut prius   Edward III. ROGER de PRIDDEAUX.] My eye cannot be entertained with a more welcome object, then to behold an antient Name, not onely still continuing to, but eminently flourishing in our age. On which account, I cannot but congratulate the happiness of this Family, expecting a daily Ac∣cession of Repute from the hopefull branches thereof. Edward IV. 10 JOHN ARUNDLE, Mil.] This worthy Knight was forewarned, (by what Calker I wot not,) that he should be slain on the Crews Sur∣vey of Con. pag. 119. Sands. This made him to shun his house at Efford (alias Ebbing-ford) as too Maritime, and remove himself to Trerice, his more Inland habitation in this County. But he found it true, fata viam inveniant; for being this year Sheriff, and the Earl of Oxford surprizing Mount Michael (for the House of Lancaster) he was concerned by his Office, and Command from the King, to endeavour the reducing thereof, and lost his life in a skirmish on the sands thereabouts. Thus it is just with Heaven, to punish mens
curiosity in enquiring after, credulity in believing of, and cowardise in fearing at such prognostications. 21 THOMAS GRANVIL.] Be it entred (by way of caveat) that there is some difference in the blazoning of the coat of the Granvils or Greenvils. What usually are termed therein Rests, being the Handles of Spears; (most honorable in Tilting to break them nearest thereunto,) are called by some Criticks, , being the necessary appendants to Organs, convaying wind unto them. If, (as it seemeth) their dubious Form, as represented in the Scut∣cheon, doth ex aequo answer to both, with me they shall still pass for the Rests of Spears. For though I dare not deny, but the Greenvils might be good Musitians, I am assured they were most valiant Souldiers in all their Generations. But the merits of this ancient Family are so many and great, that ingrossed they would make one County proud, which divided would make two happy. I am therefore re∣solved equally to part what I have to say thereof, betwixt Cornwall and Devonshire. Richard III. The Reader will take notice, that, (as it is in our Catalogue) Richard Duke of Glou∣cester was High-Sheriff of this County, ad terminum vitae, a strange Precedent, (if it may be said to go before, which hath nothing to follow after,) seeing for the last two years, he was both King of England and Sheriff of Cornwall. We therefore behold all the follow∣ing persons unto the first of King Henry the seventh, but as so many Deputies under him, and amongst these we take speciall notice of 2 JAMES TIRREL, Mil.] This is he, so infamous in our English Histories, for his activity in murdering the In∣nocent sons of King Edward the fourth, keeping the Keyes of the Tower, and standing himself at the foot of the Staires, whilst Mr. Forest and J. Dighton, stifled them in their Beds. I behold this Sir James as an Essex-man, though now the prime Officer of this County. For King Richard accounted Cornwall the back dore of Rebellion, and therefore made this Knight the Porter thereof. Indeed it is remote from London, and the long sides of this County afford many landing-places, objected to Britain in France, whence the Usurper always feared (and at last felt) an Invasion, and therefore he appointed him Sheriff to secure the County, as obliged unto him, by gratitude for favours received, and guilt for faults committed. This Tirrel was afterwards executed for Treason, in the Tower yard in the beginning of King Henry the seventh. Henry VII. 12 JOHN BASSET.] This was a busie year indeed in this County, when the Cornish Commotion began (headed by Flammock a Lawyer, and Michael Joseph a Blacksmith,) at the Town of Bodmin. Let none impute it to the neglect of this Sheriff, that he suppressed them not, seeing (besides that they quickly quitted this County, and went Eastward) it was not the work of Posse Comitatus, but Posse Regni, to encounter them. However, after long-running, (for they marched the breadth of the land, from Cornwall to Kent, be∣fore battle was bid them,) they were overtaken, and overcome at Black-heath. 13 PETER EDGCOMBE, Mil.] The Names of pierce [or Peter] and Richard, have been (saith my  in , fol. 101. Author) succes∣sively varied in this family, for six or seven Descents. Such Chequering of Christian Names serve Heraulds instead of Stairs, whereby they ascend with assurance into the Pedigrees of Gentlemen, and I could wish the like alternation of Font-names fashiona∣ble in other families. For where the Heirs of an House, are of the same Name, for many generations together, it occasioneth much mistake, and the most cautious, and conscientious Heralds, are guilty of making Incestuous Matches, confounding the Fa∣ther for the Son, and so reciprocally.
Queen Elizabeth. 4 RICHARD CHAMOND, Esq.] He received at Gods-hand an extraordinary favour of long life, serving in the office of a Justice of Peace almost sixty Carew in his Survey of Cornwall pag. 1 8. years. He saw above fifty several Judges of the Westerne Circuit, was Uncle and Great-uncle to three hundred at least, and saw his youngest child above fourty years of age. 19 WILLIAN MOHUN.] He was descended from the ancient Lords of Dunster, and Earls of Somerset, of which one received a great Papall priviledge, whereof largely in my Church History. I be∣hold him as Grand-father to John Lord Mohun of Oakehampton, (descended by a Co∣heir from the Courtneys Earls of Devonshire,) and Great-grand-father to the Right Ho∣nourable Warwick Lord Mohun. 29 ANTHONY ROUSE, Esq.] Give me leave only to transcribe what I find written of him, Ut prius pag. 114. He employeth himself to a kind, and uninterrupted entertainment of such as visit him, upon his not sparing, inviting, or their own occasions, who (without the self-guilt of an ungrateful wrong) must witness, that his frankness confirmeth their welcome, by whatsoever means, provision, the fewell of Hospitality, can in the best manner supply. He was Father to Francis Rouse, late Provost of Eaton, whose Industry is more commendable then his Judgment in his many Treatises. King James. 2 FRANCIS GODOLPHIN, Mil.] Master Carew confesseth in his pag 13. Survey of this County, that from him he gathered sticks to build that nest, who was assistant unto him in that playing labour, as he termeth it. This ingenious Gentleman entertained a Dutch Mineral-man, and taking light from his experience, built thereon far more profitable conclusions, from his own inven∣tion, practicing a more saving way, to make Tinn, of what was rejected for refuse before. And here the mention of his Ingenuity, minds me how Hereditary Abilities are often intailed on Families, seeing, he was Ancestor unto Sidney Godolphin slain at....... in Devonshire, valiantly fighting for his Lord and Master. His Christian and Sur-name di∣visim signifie much, but how high do they amount in conjunction? There fell wit and valour, never sufficiently to be bemoaned. 10 WILLIAM WREY, Mil.] He was direct Ancestor to Sir Chichester Wrey Knight and Baronet, who though scarce a Youth in Age, was more then a Man in Valour, in his loyall service. He married Anne one of the Daughters and Co-heirs of Will. Bourchier Earl of Bath, whose son Bourchier Chi∣chester, shall ever have my prayers, that he may answer the nobleness of his Extraction. 12 RICHARD ROBERTS.] He was afterwards created a Baron, and was Father unto the Right Honourable the Lord Roberts, one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council, lately designed Deputy of Ireland, as a Person of singular ability and integrity. The Battles. I shall inlarge my self the rather on this subject, because building my discourse there∣in, not on the floting sands of uncertaine relations, but the Rock of reall Intelligence. Having gotten a Manuscript of Sir Ralph Hoptons, (courteously communicated unto me by his Secretary Master Tredui,) interpolated with his own hand, being a Memo∣riall of the Remarkables in the West, at which that Worthy Knight was present in per∣son. I begin with that which is called the Battle of Liskerd, taking the name from the next Town of note thereunto, otherwise Bradock-Downe was the particular place there∣of. Before the Fight began, the Kings Side took it into their seasonable consideration, that seeing by the Commission the Lord Mohun brought from Oxford, four Persons, [viz. the said Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Berkeley and Colonel Ashburn ham,] were equally impowered in the managing of all Military matters, and seeing
such equality might prove inconvenient, (which hitherto had been prevented with the extraordinary moderation of all Parties,) in ordering a Battle, it was fittest to fix the power in One Chief, and generall consent setled it in Sir Ralph Hopton▪ He first gave order that publick Prayers should be had in the Head of every Squa∣dron, and it was done accordingly, (and the Enemy observing it, did stile it saying of Mass, as some of their Prisoners afterwards did confess.) Then he caused the Foot to be drawn up in the best order they could, placed a Forelorn of Musketiers in the little In∣closures, winging them with the few Horse and Dragoons he had. This done two small Mynion- Drakes speedily and secretly fetched from the Lord Mohuns house, were planted on a little Barrough within Randome-shot of the Enemy, yet so, that they were covered from their sight, with small Parties of Horse about them. These concealed Mynions were twice discharged with such success, that the Enemy quickly quitted their ground, and all their Army being put into a Rout, the Kings Forces had the execution of them, which they performed very sparingly. They took Twelve Hundred and Fifty Prisoners, most of their Colours, all their Cannon, (be∣ing four Brass-guns upon Carriages, (whereof Two were Twelve-pounders,) and One Iron aker,) all their Ammunition, most of their Armes, and marching that night to Liskard, the Kings Forces first gave God Publick thanks and then took their own Private repose. STRATTON fight succeeds on Tuesday 16. May 1643. But first let us take a true account of the two Armies respectively, with the visible Inequality betwixt them. The Kings Forces were in want of Ammunition, and were to hew out their own way up a Steep-hill with their Valour, exposed to all Disad∣vantages and Dangers. Their Horse and Dragoons exceeded not five hun dred, their oot about two thousand four hundred in number. The Parliament Army had plenty of all Pro∣visions, and had Advantagiously Barocadoed themselves on the top of a Hill. Their Horse in∣deed were not many, (having lately sent away twelve hundred to surprizethe Sheriff and Commis∣sioners at Bodmin,) but Foot were five thousand four hundred by Pole as their Major Generall did acknowledge. As for the Kings Forces order was given that by four severall Avenues they should force their Passage to the top of the Hill, which was very steep, the Enemy as obsti∣nately indeavouring to keep them down, as the other did valiantly strive to ascend. The fight continued doubtfull with many countenances of various events, (from 5. of the Clock in the Morning till 3. in the Afternoon,) amongst which most remarkable the smart Charge made by M. G. Chudeleigh, with a Stand of Pikes, on Sir Bevill Green∣field, so that the Knight was in Person overthrown, and his Party put into disorder, which would have proved destructive unto it, had not Sir John Berkeley (who led up the Musketiers on each side of Sir Bevill Greenfield,) seasonably relieved it, so re-inforcing the Charge, that Major General Chudelegh was taken Prisoner. Betwixt three and four of the Clock the Commanders of the Kings Forces, who embraced those four severall ways of Ascent, met to their mutuall joy almost at the top of the Hill, which the routed Enemy confusedly forsook. In this Service, though they were Assaylants they lost very few men, and no considerable Officer, killing of the Enemy about three hundred, and taking Seventeen hundred Prisoners, all their Cannon [being thirteen pieces of Brass-ordnance,] and Ammunition, [Seventy Barrels of pouder,] with a Magazin of Bisket, and other provisions proportionable. For this Victory Publick Prayer and Thanksgiving was made on the Hill, and then the Army was disposed of, to improve their success to their best advantage. For this good Ser∣vice Sir Ralph Hopton was afterwards, at Oxford, created Baron ofReader being  to this worthy Lord, I culd doe no less, then (in G a∣titude to his ) make this Exemplifi∣cation. Stratton, in form as followeth, CAROLUS Dei gratia Angliae, &c. Cum & Nominis nostri & Posteritatis interest, & ad clara exempla propaganda utilissimè compertum, palam fieri omnibus premia, apud nos vertuti sita, nec perire fidelium Subditorum officia, sed memori & benevolo pectore fixis∣simè
insidere; his praesertim temporibus, cum plurimorum (quibus antehac nimium indul∣simus) temerata, aut suspecta fides, pretium aliorum constantiae addidit. Cumque nobis certò constat Radulphum Hopton militem de Balneo Splendidis & Antiquis Natalibus, tum in caetera sua vita integritatis & morum eximium, tum in hac novissima tempestate, fatalique Regni & rebelli motu, rari animi fideique exemplum edidisti, Regiae dignitatis in eaque publice contra utriusque Adversarios assertorem & Vindicem acerrimum. Quippe quia non solum nascenti huic Furori (nec dum omnibus manifesto) optimis Consi∣liis fortis in Curia Senator restiteret; Sed insinuante se latius veneno & crescente foerocia Domm ad suos reversus fortior Miles in Agro suo Somersetensi & vicini partibus omni ope & manu iniquissimam causam oppugnaverit, in Arce praesertim Sherbornianâ sub Au∣spiciis Marchionis Hertfordiae egregiam operam navaverit. Mox ulterius progressus pol∣lenti in Devonia factionis Tyrannide, & munitissima Civiate in foedus illecta, & jam un∣dique bonis Subditis perniciem minante, ipse penè in illa Regione Hospes, contracto è Cor∣nubia milite, & primoribus statim impetum eorum repressit, jacentésque & afflictas nostras partes mirifica virtute recreavit: Et licet summis necessitatibus conflictanti exigua pars negocii ostes erant, tantum abuit ut vel illis, vel istis succumberet, ut contra copiis auctiores & bellico apparatu instructissimos, saepiùs signis collatis in aciedemicans semper superior excesserit. Testis Lanestonia, Saltash, Bradock, aliaque obscura olim nomina & loca, nunc Vi∣ctoriis illius & perduellium cladibus nobilitata. Vix etiam ab his respiraverat cum novus belli furor lassas jam ferè & continuis praeliis luxatas vires numerocissimo exercitu adortus, uberiorem triumphandi dedit materiam. Cum ille in Campis Strat∣toniae, in difficillimas licet angustias redactus, inops militaris instrumenti & consumpto jam pulvere tormentario, armatos inermis, vallo munitos intectus, sola causa & virtute animatus, ita retudit, concidit, castris exuit, ut totam belli molem cum ipsis authoribus profigavit; Quicquid fugae illius residuum erat, inter Urbis unius Moenia eaque arcta obsi deon astricta concluso. Qua quidem pugna memorabili praeter quod miserum Popellum, Jugo intolerabili levaverat, Sedes suas expulsis, Ecclesias Pastoribus, Pacem omnibus, & Fir∣mamentum Pacis obsequium pristinum restituerit. Et jam sequenti armorum nostrorum faelicitati qua partes Regni Occidentales maturius ad officium & verum Dominum redierunt & viam aperuisse & momentum ingens extitisse libentissime profitemur; In hac opera lau dabili cum praefatus Radulphus perstet adhuc invicto animo & industria indefessa nullo ar∣duo quantumvis labore & periculo excusatus, cumque mille Argumentis testatum fecerit, Honorem salutemque nostram sibi omni fortuna & captio potiorem, nos virum fortissimum optimeque affectum animum benigno studio prosequi & amplius demereri volentes, hunc & praeconio merito ornandum, & propriori ad nos gradu extollendum censuimus. Sciatis igi∣tur nos de gratia nostra speciali  ex certa scientia & mero motu praefatum Radulphum Hopton ad statum, gradum, stilum, Dignitatem, Titulum & Honorem Baronis Hopton de Stratton in Comitatu nostro Cornubiae, &c. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Teste meipso apud Oxon. Quarto die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri decimo nono. This Honour determined in this Lord, dying Issuless at Bruges in Flanders, since which time King Charles the second hath conferred the Title of Baron of Stratton on Sir John Berkeley, younger Sonto Sir Maurice Berkeley of Bruiton in Somerset-shire. This was he who was one of the first four Tetrarchs or Joint-managers in chief of Marshall matters in Cornwall, this is he who was so highly Instrumentall in the reducing of Exe∣ter, being afterwards deservedly appointed the Governour. How since he hath shared in his Majesties sufferings beyond the Seas is sufficiently known. As for the generall disarming and disbanding of the Parliament Army in this Coun∣ty Anno 1644. It was a Conquest without a Battle, on this occasion▪ I have seen the Head, bow down to take a Thorne out of the Foot. Such the proportion of Cornwall to England, and such was the Condescention of the King to come into this County. Essex followed him with all his Forces, till he pen'd himself in a narrow Place (or rather large Pound,) so that he was surrounded on all Sides, with the Sea and the Kings Soul∣diers. Hereupon Essex (with some prime Commanders) shipped himself for Plimouth,
thence for London, whither also their Horse forced their Passage (without considera∣ble loss,) under the Conduct of Sir William Belfore, whom the Kings Horse did sequi, non assequi, follow but not overtake. The Foot left behind, submitted to the King on such conditions as are generally known. His Majesty earnestly endeavouring (by the Enemies own confession,) the exact ob∣serving of Articles, which if some unruly Royalist did violate, (Souldiers will hardly wear bad Cloaths, whilst their Foes being in their Power have better on their Backs,) it was not so much an Offering as returning of an Injury, some of them having formerly felt the same Usage on the like occasion. The Parliament Foot did not depose their Disaffections with their Armes, soon resuming (or rather retayning) their former Prin∣ciples, which made them adde new Armes to their old inclinations in the second Battle at Newbury. The Farewell. Being now to part with this County, I wish it all happiness, and particularly that Flaws or Flaughs may either never come thither or quickly depart thence. Which being a kind of English Hericano hath little civility therein, as throwing down some houses, more trees, and making more waste with the blast thereof. And may the same Divine Providence, which is their , be also Neptune unto it, to secure this Coun∣ty, from the fury of Water, as well as from the fierceness of the Wind, that their LIONESS may never get a LION unto it, so to propagate Inundations betwixt them. And now to wish an Honour to this Dutchy, and therewith a happiness both to It and all England, the strength of my weak prayers (twisted with many Millions more pro∣ceeding from Loyall hearts in this Land) shall never be wanting, that God would be pleased to bestow a Duke of Cornwall, of the loines of our Gracious Soveraign, to be possessed of the vertues, and to be Heir Apparent to the Lands of his Father. A Duke, presumed in Law to be of full age to all purposes and intents, the first minute of his birth, which happy minute God in due time send for the comfort of our Nation.
CUMBERLAND. CUMBERLAND hath Scotland on the North, Northumberland and Westmerland on the East, Lancashire on the South, and the Irish sea on the West. It is not unlike a Half Moon in the form thereof, which from its Tips North and South may be allowed to be somewhat more then 40. miles, though East and West it spreadeth not above 26. miles. The soyl though generally hard, and exacting much toyl to improve it, is pleasant with the Varieties, and profitable with these Naturall Commodities. Pearls. These are found commonly by the river Irt, where Mussels (as also Oysters and other Shellfish,) gaping for the Dew, are in a manner impregnated therewith. So that some conceive that as Dew is a Liquid Pearl, so a Pearl is Dew consolidated in these fishes. Here poor people getting them at low water, sell to Jewellers for Pence, what they sell again for Pounds. Indeed there is a Spanish Proverbe, that a Lapidary who would grow rich, must buy of those who go to be executed, (as not caring how cheap they sell,) and sell to those that go to be married, as not caring how dear they buy. But waving these advantages, such of that Mistery which Trade with Country-people herein, gaine much by buying their Pearls, though far short of the Indian in Orientness. But whether not as usefull in Physick is not as yet decided. Black-lead. Plenty hereof is digged up about Keswick, the onely place (as I am inform'd) where it is found in Europe, and various is the use thereof. 1. For Painters (besides some mixture thereof in making Leadcolours,) to draw the Pictures of their Pictures, viz. those shadowy lines made onely to be unmade again. 2. For pens, so usefull for Scholars to note the remarkables they read, with an impression easily deleble without prejudice to the book. 3. For Feltmakers for colouring of hats. 4. To scoure leaden cisternes, and to brighten things made of Iron. 5. In Flanders and Germany, they use it for glasing of stuffs. Besides these visible, surely there are other concealed uses thereof, which causeth it daily to grow the dearer, being so much transported beyond the seas. Copper. These mines lay long neglected, (choak'd in their own rubbish) till renewed about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, when plenty of Copper was here afforded, both for home-use and orraign transportation. But Copper it self was too soft for severall military services, and could not alone (no single person can prove a parent) produce brass most usefull for that purpose. Here taste and see, Divine Providence, which ne∣ver doth its work by halfes, and generally doubleth gifts by seasonable giving them. Lapis calaminaris (whereof hereafter in due place,) was then Bishop Carle∣tons Thankfull Remem cap. 1. pag. 4. first found in England, the Mother of Brass as Copper the father hereof. Hence came it to pass that Queen Elizabeth left more brass then She found Iron-ordnance in the Kingdome. And our wooden walls (so our ships are commonly call'd) were rough-casted over with a coat of a firmer constitution. We must not forget the names of the two Dutch-men (good froggs by sea, but better moles by land,) who re-found out these Copper-mines, wherein also some silver (no new milk without some creame therein,) viz. Thomas Shurland and Daniel Hotchstabter of Auspurge in Germany, whose Nephews turning purchasers of lands hereabouts, prefer easily to take what the earth tenders in her hands
above ground, then painfully to pierce into her heart for greater treasure. I am sorry to hear, and loath to believe what some credible persons have told me, that within this twenty years the Copper within this County hath been wholly discontinued, and that not for want of Mettall, but Mining for it. Sad, that the industry of our age could not keep, what the ingenuity of the former found out. And I would willingly put it on another account, that the burying of so much steel in the bowells of men, dureing our Civil Wars, hath hindred their digging of Copper out of the entralls of the Earth, hoping that these peaceable times will encourage to the resuming thereof. The Buildings. This County pretendeth not to the mode of Reformed Architecture, the Vicinity of the Scots causing them to build rather for Strength then State. The Cathedrall of Car∣lile, may pass for the Embleme of the Militant-Church, Black but Comely, still bearing in the Complexion thereof, the remaining signes of its former burning. Rose-castle, the Bishops best Seat, hath lately the Rose therein withered, and the Prickles in the Ruins thereof onely remain. The houses of the Nobility and Gentry are generally built Castle-wise, and in the time of the Romans, this County (because a Limitary) did abound with Fortifications, Mr. Cambden taking notice of more Antiquities in Cumberland and Northumberland, then in all England besides. The Wonders. Although, if the word, Wonders, be strained up high and hard, this County afford∣eth none, yet if the sense thereof be somewhat let down, the compass thereof fetcheth in the Moss-Troopers. So strange the condition of their living, if considered in their Original, Increase, Height, Decay and Ruine. 1. Originall, I conceive them the same called Borderers in Mr. Cambden, and characte∣red by him to be a wild and war-like people, they are called Moss-Troopers, because dwel∣ling in the Mosses, and riding in Troops together. They dwell in the Bounds, or meeting of two Kingdomes, but obey the Laws of neither. They come to Church as seldome as the 29. of February comes into the Kalender. 2. Increase, When England and Scotland were united in Great Britain, they that for∣merly lived by Hostile incursions, betook themselves to the robbing of their Neigh∣bours. Their Sons are free of the trade by their Fathers Copy, they are like unto Job (not in piety and patience, but) in suddain plenty and poverty, sometimes having Flocks and Heards in the morning, none at night, and perchance many again next day. They may give for their Motto, vivitur ex rapto, stealing from their honest Neighbours, what sometimes they re-gain. They are a nest of Hornets, strike one and stir all of them about your ears. Indeed if they promise safely to conduct a Traveller, they will perform it with the fidelity of a Turkish Janizary, otherwise, wo be to him that falleth into their quarters. 3. Height, Amounting forty years ince to some Thousands. These compelled the Vicenage, to purchase their security, by paying a constant rent unto them. When in their greatest height, they had two great Enemies, the Laws of the Land, and the Lord William Howard of Naworth. He sent many of them to Carlisle, to that place, where the Officer always doth his work by day-light. Yet these Moss-Troopers, if possibly they could procure the pardon for a condemned person of their Company, would ad∣vance great sums out of their Common stock, who in such a case, cast in their Lots amongst themselves, and all have one Prov. 1. 14. purse. 4. Decay, Caused by the wisdome, valour and diligence, of the Right Honorable Charles L. Howard, now Earl of Carlisle, who routed these English-Tories with his Regi∣ment. His severity unto them will not onely be excused, but commended by the judi∣cious, who consider, how our great Lawyer doth describe such persons who are solemn∣ly .
Bracton. Lib. tertio Tract. 2. Cap. 11. Ex tunc gerunt Caput Lupinum, ita quod sine judiciali inquisitione ritè , & se∣cum  judicium portent, & meritò sine Lge pereunt, qui secundum Legem vivere re∣cusarunt; Thenceforward [after they are out-law'd] they wear a In the Law of K. Edw. an Out-law'd person is called   Lambert fol. 127. B. Num. 7. Woolfs-head, so that they lawfully may be destroyed, without any judiciall inquisition, as who carry their own Con∣demnation about them, and deservedly die without Law, because they refused to live according to Law. 5. Ruine. Such the success of this worthy Lords severity, that he made a Through Re∣formation amongst them, and the Ring-leaders being destroyed, the rest are reduced to Legall obedience, and so I trust will continue. Proverbs. —Cambd. Brit. in Cumberland. If Skiddaw hath a cap] Scruffell wots full well of that.] These are two neighbour hills, the one in this County, the other in Anan-dale in Scotland. If the former be capp'd with clouds and foggy mists, it will not be long be∣fore rain falls on the other. It is spoken of such who must expect to sympathize in their sufferings, by reason of the vicinity of their habitation. Tum tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. When thy neighbours house doth burn, Take heed the next be not thy turn. The Cumberlanders have found the truth hereof by their sad experience, in our Ci∣vil Wars, paying dear for their vicinity with Scotland. Cambd. Brit. ibidem. Skiddaw, Lauvellin, and Casticand,] Are the highest hills in all England.] I know not how to reconcile this ryme, with another which I meet with in the same Combd. Brit. in Lancashre. Author, Igleborrow, Pendle and Penigent, Are the highest hills between Scotland and Trent. But in order of an expedient betwixt them, we may observe. First, that every Coun∣ty is given to magnify (not to say altify) their own things therein. Secondly, that the survey goes according to the guess of mens eyes (as never exactly measured) variable according to severall apprehensions. Thirdly, some hills are higher in view, rising al∣most perpendicularly of a suddain by themselves, whilst the invisible greatness of o∣thers is not heeded so much, which mount with the Country about them creeping up insensibly by degrees. Mean time no mention of Plynillymon hill, as being in Wales, and without compare the Monarch of all mountains South of Scotland. Saints. Saint HREBERT Priest and Confessor may justly be referred to this County. For there is a lake therein (Lib.  cap. 9. . Ang. Bede calleth it Prgrande Stagnum) nigh Keswick made by the River Darwent, wherein three Islands are found, in the least of which this Herebert lead an Eremiticall life. If he travailed hence it was to visit his friend Saint Cuthbert, betwixt whom such Intimacy, that  telling him how his own death approach∣ed, Herebert falling down at his Idem  feet, importunately requested him, that they might both pass out of this World together, which by Saint Cuthberts prayers is said to be obtained. Thus as they were loving in their lives, so in their death they were not devided; departing this World the same day and hour, Anno Dom. 688. Saint ALRIKE born and bred in this County, led an Eremiticall life in a forrest near to Carlile. This man did not more macerate himself with constant fasting, then time since hath consumed his memory, which hath reduced it to nothing more then the scelleton of his name, without any Historicall passages to flesh and fill up the same, for I account the report of Saint Vide .  in  1170. Goderick, another Hermite, (and present at this mans
death) not worth the remembring, viz. that he saw the soul of Alrike ascend to Hea∣ven, as it were in a Sphericall form of a burning wind, but we lissen unto it but as unto wind. He dyed Anno 1107. Martyrs. This County affordeth none in the raign of Queen Mary, whereof accept a double reason. First, the People thereof generally were nuzell'd in Ignorance and Supersti∣tion. Secondly, such as favoured the Reformation were connived at by Owin Ogel∣thorp, the courteous Bishop of Carlile, who Crowed Queen Elizabeth, and who in re∣quittall had a favour for him had he lived any longer. However Cumberland had one Native, who going up to London, first found a Husband and then met with Martyr∣dome therein, viz. ELIZABETH FOSTER was born atFox. Acts & Mon. pa. 1857. Graystock in this County, though her Maiden Sur-name be unknown. Travailing to London, she was there married to one John Forster Cutler, of the Parish of Saint Brides in Fleetstreet, and being summoned before Bonner, for not coming to Church, was imprisoned and strictly examined. Being moved by the Bi∣shop to desert her answers, I will not (said she) go from them by Gods grace. Hereupon she was condemned, and being fifty five years of age accordingly suffered with six o∣ther Martyrs, all in one fire in Smithfield, Jan. 27. 1556. Prelates. ROGER WHELPDALE was born in the borders of this County, (so that West∣merland pretends to a share of him) bred in Baliol-colledge in Oxford, and afterwards became Provost of Queens-colledge in that University. A good 1. Logician witness his books of 1. Summulae Logicales. 2. Mathematician 2. De Quanto & Continuo. 3. Divine 3. De Deo invocando. BaleCenturia Sex∣ta Nam. 29. ingenuously confesseth, that he cannot find where this Learned man after his long labours in Oxford, led the rest of his life, and Pitz (who seeing with Bales eyes, both are blind or sighted together) is at the same loss. But herein we are able guide our guides, and light a candle to direct them, for he was by King Henry the fifth, preferred Bishop of Carlile, 1419. he sate three years in that See, and dying at London Feb. 4. 1422. was buried in Saint Pauls. ROGER LAYURN was born of a Noble Family, not living far fromGodwin in the Bishops of Carlile. Carlile. A Noble Family indeed, expiring in the days of our Grand-fathers, when Elizabeth sole daughter and heir of Sir Francis Layburn, was married to Thomas Dacre last Baron of Gilsland and Graystock. This Roger was bred Fellow in Pembroke-hall, Doctor of Divi∣nity, and at last was consecrated Bishop of Carlile, 1503. two years after he solemnly accepted of the Mastership of Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, which I have heard called Episcopale Collegium, not onely because it hath bred so many Bishops (for the propor∣tion thereof,) but chiefly because many Prelates have held the Mastership thereof, even untill their death. Doctor Layburn dyed soon after 1509. before he could express his good intentions to his Colledge or Cathedrall. Since the Reformation. EDMUND GRINDALL was born at Saint Bees in this County, bred Scholar, Fel∣low and Master of Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, and Proctour of the University. In the raign of Queen Mary, he fled beyond the seas, and was no Violento in the Troubles of Franckford, but with all meekness to his might, endeavoured a pacification. Re∣turning home he was made successively Bishop of London, Arch bishop of York and Canterbury, by Queen Elizabeth, highly favouring him for his learning, piety, modesty and single life; till at last he lost Her love, by the mischievous practices of his ene∣mies. His fault was for keeping others from breaking two of Gods Commandements,
Thou shalt not steal, when he would not let the Lord of Leicester have Lambeth-house; and, Thou shalt not commit adultery, when he would not permit Julio, the Earls Italian Physician, to marry another mans wife. But it was objected againsthim to the Queen, that he was a fierce defender of fa∣ctious Prophecying, which in process of time would undermine the Hierarchy, though moderate men were of the opinion, they might prove profitable, as by Arch-bishop Grindall, limited and regulated. Being really blind more with grief then age, (dying at sixty four) he was willing to put off his clothes before he went to bed, and in his life time to resigne his place to Doctor Whitgiff, whoSir. G. Paul in  lie pag. 27. refused such acceptance thereof. And the Queen, commiserating his condition, was graciously pleased to say, that, As She had made him, so he should die an Arch bishop, as he did July 6. 1583. Worldly wealth he cared not for, desiring onely to make both ends meet; and as for that little that lapped over, he gave it to pious uses in both Universities, and the found∣ing of a fair Free-school at Saint Bees, the place of his nativity. HENRY ROBINSON D. D. was born inSo Mr. Ro∣binson Statio∣ner and his Countrymn informed me. Carlile, bred Fellow, and at last Provost of Queens-colledge in Oxford, and afterwards 1598. was consecrated Bishop of the place of his nativity. When Queen Elizabeth received his Homage, She gave him many Gracious words, of the good Opinion, which She conceived of his Learning, Integrity and Sufficiency for that place. Moreover adding, that She must ever have a care to furnish that See with a worthy man, for hisSir J. Haring∣ton in his view of the Church of England, p. 108. sake who first set the Crown on Her Head, and many words to the like purpose. He was a Prelate of great gravity and temperance, very mild inO. Ogle∣thorp. Speech, but not of so strong a constitution of body as his countenance did promise. And yet he lived to be a very old man. He dyed Anno Dom. 16... RICHARD SENHOUSE D. D. was born of worshipfull parentage at Netherhall in this County. A valiant man in his younger days, and I have heard that in his old age, he felt the admonitions of his youthfull over-violent exercises. He was bred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, and became an Excellent Preacher, his Ser∣mons losing no lusture by his good utterance, and gracefull delivering of them. He was Chaplain to King Charles whilst Prince, and Preached his Sermon at His Corona∣tion. He was preferred Bishop of Carlile, enjoying the place but a short time. He dyed Anno Domini 1626. Capitall Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir RICHARD HUTTONIt is pity his Manuscripts on the Law should be smothered in private hands, which I hope will hereafter become publici uris. was born at Perith of a Worshipfull Family, (his elder Brother was a Knight,) and bred in Jesus Colledge in Cambridge. He intended his Stu∣dies for Divinity, till disswaded by the importunity of his friends (amongst whom George Earl of Cumberland most eminent,) he became Barrister in Grays-Inn. But in expression of his former affection to Divinity, he seldome (if ever) took Fee of a Clergy-man. Afterwards being Recorder of York, he was Knighted and made Judge of the Common-Pleas. In the Case of Ship-money, though he was against the King, (or rather for the Commons) yet His Majesty manifested not the least distast, continuing to call him the Honest Judge. This person so pious to God, and charitable to his poor Members, was dissolved about the beginning of our National misery. Thus God before he new ploweth up a land, with the furrows of a Civil War, first cutteth down his old crop, and gathereth them like ripe sheaves into his barn. He dyed at Serjeants-Inn, and was buried at his earnest desire without any Funerall Sermon, (save what his own vertues preached to posterity,) at St. Dunstons in the West on the 27. day of Febr. Anno Dom. 1638. Sir JOHN BANKS was born at Keswick, of honest parents, who perceiving him judi∣cious and industrious, bestowed good breeding on him in Grays-Inn, in hope he should attain to preferment, wherein they were not deceived. After he was called to the Bar, for some years he solicited suits for others, thereby attaining great practicall expe∣rience. He afterwards might laugh at them, who then did smile at him, leaving many
behind him in learning, whom he found before him in time, untill at last he was Knight∣ed by K. Charles, made first his Aturney, then Chief Justice of the Common-pleas, dy∣ing in the midst and heat of our Civil dissentions. He ordered by his Will (the Copy whereof I have received from my good Mr: John  Mini∣ster at . friend) that his body should be buried under some plain Monument, at the discretion of his Executors, and after an Epitaph mentioning the severall places he had held, This Motto to be added, Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini Tuo da gloriam. It must not be forgotten that by his said Will he gave to the value of thirty pounds per annum, with other Emoluments to be bestowed in Pious uses, and chiefly to set up a Manufacture of Course Cottons in the Town of Keswick, which I understand hath good, and is in hopes of better success. Civilians. GEORGE PORTER was born at Weery-hall in the Parish of Bolton in this County, of gentile extraction. He was afterward Fellow of Queens-colledge in Cambridge, Doctor and Professor of Civil-law therein, for above thirty years, so that he might have been made Comes Imperii primi ordinis, according to the constitution of Theodosius the Em∣peror, allowing that honour to Professours in that faculty, Cod. Theod. lib. 6. . 21. Cum ad viginti annos observatione jugi, ac sedulo docendi labore pervenerint. He was of a pitifull nature, and we commonly called him (for I had oft the honour to be in his mess,) The Patron of infirmities, whose discourse was always defensive and charitable, either to excuse mens failings, or mitigate their punishments. He was va∣liant as well as learned, and with his sterne looks and long sword, frighted three thieves from setting upon him. He dyed Anno Domini 163.. and Doctor Collins, (who with Saint Chrysostome was in laudatoriis hyperbolicus,) Preaching his Funerall Sermon, en∣deavoured to heighten his memory to his soul, mounting it above the skies for his modesty and learning. Writers. JOHN CANON. Some will have him so called, because Canon of some Cathedral Church, and if so, there were Hundreds of John Canons besides himself: others, because he was Doctor of Canon Law, which leaves as great a Latitude as the former, for hun∣dreds (with equall right) to justle with him for the same Surname. I have cause to con∣ceive, untill I shall be clearly convinced to the contrary, that he was born at Canonsby in this County, By being set by for brevities sake. Bilious Bale bespattereth him more then any of his Order. Hear how he ranteth, He turned a Cent. 5. num. 3. Minotaure, (I should say Minorite) and with his Thrasonicall Boasting, &c. But I am not bound to believe him, the rather, because Trithemius a Forraign, Judicious and Moderate Writer, giveth him great commendation. Whence I collect that his worth was not like a Candle in the House, onely burning at Home in England, but a Torch, blazing abroad beyond the Seas, the University of Paris and other places taking signall notice of his Learning. He flourished under K. Edward the second 1320. WILLIAM EGREMONT. He hath almost lost his true Surname amongst the various writing thereof. e cript. Brit. . 7. Num. 12. Bale calleth him Egumonde, (though no such place in all England,) Pits, reduceth it to a Saxon Name, and calleth him De Ang. scrip. 1390. Egmund; Leland, (for a reason immediately following) nameth him William of Stamford, but Egremont is the Ortho∣graphy of his name, from a small Market-town (yet a Barony of the late Earls of Sussex,) in this Shire where he was born. Quitting this cold Country, he took his Progress into the South, and fixing himself at Stamford, became an Augustinian Eremite, and proceeded Doctor of Divinity. Going beyond the Seas, he was by the Pope made Episcopus Pissinensi, (some poor pitifull Bishoprick, so that one would scarce trouble himself to find it out to have the profit theref, and therewith held the Suffragane-ship under Henry Beaufort Bishop of Lincoln.
Indeed that voluminous Diocess (a full fourth part of England, before Eli, Peterbo∣rough and Oxford, were cantoned out of it) required a Co-adjutor. Many are the learn∣ed works written by him, and (seeing he is Doubly qualified) I thought fitter to repose him under the Topick of Writers then of Prelates, being confident that he got more credit by his Books, then profit by his Bishoprick. He flourished under King Richard the second, anno 1390. JOHN SKELTON was a younger branch of the Skeltons of Skelton in this County. I crave leave of the Reader, (hitherto not having full instructions, and) preserving the undoubted Title of this County unto him, to defer his character to Norfolk, where he was Beneficed at Diss therein. Since the Reformation. RICHARD CRAKENTHORP D. D. was descended of an Ancient Family in this County, as appeareth by their frequent being Sheriffs thereof. He was bred Fellow of Queens-colledge in Oxford, and afterwards in the first of King James went over Chaplain to the Lord Evers, sent Embassadour to the King of Denmark, and other prime Princes of Germany. Here by use he got an easiness in the Latine tongue, and correspondency with several persons of eminent Learning. He was an excellent Logicia, (witness his work in that kind) and became Chaplain in Ordinary to King James, Rector of Black-Notley in Essex, greater preferments ex∣pecting him, had not his death prevented it. Pliny observeth, that Posthume Children born after the death of their Father, and Caesars, (understand such, who are cut out of the womb of their Mother) prove very happy in success. What reason soever Naturalists assign hereof, Divines justly impute it to Gods goodness, graciously remembring those Orphans, which cannot remember their own Parents. The Observation may be applyed to the Books of this worthy Doctor, set forth after his death, one called▪ Vigilius Dormitàns, in defence of the Emperour Justinian, and a generall Councill held by him Anno 553. set forth by his Brother George Craken∣thorp; the other being an answer to the Manifesto of the Arch-bishop of Spalato, set forth by that Learned Antiquary Dr. John Barkham, and both of these Books finding an universall and gratefull reception among the Learned and Religious. I cannot cer∣tainly fix the date of his death, and be it here solemnly entred that Westmerland shall be unprejudiced, if he were born (as a most credible person hath informed me) at New∣Biggin in this County. —SALKELD was a branch of a Right Worshipfull Family in this County, bred a Divine beyond the Seas, but whether  or Secular Priest I know not. Coming over into England to Angle for Proselites, it seems his Line broke, and he was cast into prison. Hence he was brought out and presented to K. James, by whose Arguments (and a Benefice bestowed on him in Somersetshire,) he became a Protestant. This he used in all companies to boast of, that he was a Royall Convert, —Nobisque dedit solatia victor And was it not a Noble thing, Thus to be conquer'd by a King? Indeed His Majesty in some of his works styleth him the Learned Salkeld, which the other much vaunted of, often telling it to such who well knew it before, for fear they might forget it. His preaching was none of the best, and he retained some Popish (though not Opinions) Fancies to the day of his death. I have heard much of his dis∣course more of his own praise, then to his own praise in my judgement. But his true character may be taken out of the Book he wrot of Angells. He died about the year, 1638. GERARD LANGBAIN D. D. was born at Kirk-Banton in this County, bred first Fel∣low in, then Provost of Queens-colledge in Oxford. A skilfull Antiquary, ingenious, in∣dustrious and judicious in is Writings, as by his Works will appear. Who so shall read over the History of th Councill of Trent, translted out of Italian by Sir Nathaniel Brent, will conceive it so compleat a Narration of all the concernments in that Council, that nothing of consequence can be added thereunto. Yet this his mis∣take will be confuted, by perusing the Works set forth by Doctor Langbain, of the
dissent of the Gallican Churches from severall conclusions in that Council. As his Brain was the Mother of some, so was it the Midwife to other good books, which he procured to be published. Especially a book made by Sir John Cheeke, concerning Rebellion and Loyalty, seasonably reprinted in the beginning of our Civil Wars. But alas, such then was the noise of mens Animosities, that the Still voice of Truth could not be heard amongst them. More Excellent Tracts were expected from him, (particularly an Edition of Brian Twine, with Additions concerning the Antiquity of Oxford,) when God was pleased almost in the midst of his days to put an end to his life, Anno 1657. Benefactors to the Publick. ROBERT EAGLESFIELD born in this County, was a pious and learned man ac∣cording to the rate of that age, Chaplain and Confessor to Philippa, Queen to King Ed ward the third. He founded a fair Colledge in Oxford, by the name of Queens-colledge, for a Provost and twelve Fellows, whom he ordered to sit in the Hall in purpura, and that they should be attended on more Curiali. He appointed that those of Cumberland and Westmerland should be proper for perferment in his Foundation, rendring this rea∣son why he reflected most on those Northern Counties, Propter insolitam vastitatem, & melioris literaturae infrequentiam. But prevented by death, he finished not his intentions, leaving onely to the Col∣ledge the Mannor of Renwick in this County, with the impropriation of Burgh under Stanmore, and, which I assure you was considerable, most excellent Statutes. To shew himself both Courtier and Scholar, he ordered that in the Hall they should speak either Latine or French. He bequeathed his Colledge to the honorary Patronage of the Queens of England, and his Sur-name is still extant in this County in persons of quality, but how to him related to me unknown. He dyed about the year of our Lord 1370. Memorable Persons. MAUD the Daughter of Thomas Lord Lucy, Sister and Heir of Anthony Lord Lucy, and Baron of Cokermouth, the Widow of Gilbert Humfrevile, Earl of Angus, was the second Wife of Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. Who, when she saw that she should dye without Issue, gave to Earl Henry her husband, the Castle and Honour of Cokermouth, with many other Mannors in Copeland and Westmerland, with condition, that his Issue should bear her Armes of the Lucies, [viz. Gules, three Lucies [or Pikes] Hauriant Argent,] quartered, with their own Armes of the Percies. And for it levyed a Fine, in the Court of King Richard the second. Hitherto verbatim out of Master Catalog. of Honour pag. 719. Mills. But, by his favour, his words are not suf∣ficiently expressive of the agreement betwixt them. The Earl conditioned, not onely to quarter the Armes of the Lucies, (as the Percies now quarter many more besides, viz. Poynings, Fitz-Pain, Brians, &c.) but he also covenanted (as in the words of the In∣strument) Deferre quateriatim, To bear them quarterly with his own Armes, incorpo∣rated into one Coat in effect. This promise the Percys have bona fide perform'd, pre∣serving so near a relation between the two Coats, that in a manner, Mutuò se ponunt & auferunt; so that, if Either, Both always appear together. This Lady is entred amongst Memorable Persons, partly, because of her harmless de∣vice, to perpetuate her memory; partly, because of her great affection to her Hus∣band; She but a second, and no wife of his youth, bringing him no children, and having (no doubt) heirs of her own name and blood, though she were barren, would be boun∣tifull to endow that Family with possessions, which she could not enrich with posterity. Say not the Percys profit, was the Lucies loss; for, what saith the Mat. 21. 15. Scripture? Is it not law∣full for me to doe what I will with mine own? She died about the year of our Lord 1382. Lord Mayors. I find none of this County, nor is the wonder great if it be true what Credible persons have informed me, that there are no Carriers (the Post from Carlile is excepted,) which immediately come from this County to London. It seems Cumberland is Terra suis con∣tenta bonis, neither proud of the Gayety, nor covetous of the Money of London.
The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. Marmaduke Bishop of Carlile, Commissioners. Thomas de Dacre de Gilsland. William Legh Chivaler, Knights for the Shire. William Laton Armiger. Knights for the Shire. Tho. Barnby Prioris Carlioli Will. Reddekar Ab∣batis de Holm Tho. Stanley Abbatis de Wederhill Rog. Kirkeby Prioris de Seynt Beys Alex. Walton Prioris de Lanecost Rich. Hodleston Crist. Culwan, Sheriff Pet. Tilioll Ioh. Penyngton Ioh. Skelton Ioh. Lamplewe Nich. Radclyff, Mil. Hen. Fenwyk Hug. de Louther Will. Stapleton Ioh. Broughton Tho. Culwen Tho. Delamore Geor. Warthwyk Will. Twates Ioh. Eglisfeld, sen. Will. Martindale, sen. Ioh. Hoton Hug. Forster Ioh. de Skelton Will. Thirskeld Will. Louther de Rosa Ioh. de Denton Will. Arlosch Rich. de Kirkebride Will. Dykes Tho. de Stanewikes Ioh. Blanerhasset Tho. Aglanbly Tho. Appulby Tho. Salkeld Tho. Beuchamp Rol. Vaux Ade de Denton Tho. Grane Tho. Hethryngton Tho. de Sandes Ioh. Swynburn Ioh. Eglisfeld, junio. Rich. Eglisfeid Will. Martyndail, ju∣nioris Ioh. Culwen Tho. Senenhans Will Osmonderlawe Will. Lowther de Crok∣daile Nich. Irton Alex. Heighmore Ioh. Rybton Rob. Bristow Will. Aglanby Ioh. Louther de Al∣wardby Nioh. Stanle Tho. Wodhall Will. Hodliston de Copland Rob. Scot de Calde∣beke Will. Denton Majoris Karlioli Will. Cardoile Tho. Frankyssh Bal∣livi ibidem Tho. Delmore Will. Kelet Ioh. Graneson Galf. Barre Ioh. Middilham Ioh. Person de Lows∣water Pet. Iakson de eadem Rich. Bristow Leo. Howchonson Will. Redman Tho. Rickman de Cokyrmouth, Baker This is a comfortable Catalogue, for one delighting in Ancient Families to pra∣ctice upon. It is the observation of Vitruvius (alledged and approved by Master In his Eliz. Anno 1489. Cambden) that Northern-men advancing Southward, Non possunt durare sed disolvuntur, Cannot endure the heat, but their strength melteth away and is disolved, whilst Southern-people removing Northward, Non modo, non laborant immuta∣tione loci, valetudinibus, sed etiam confirmantur, Are not only, not subject to sickness through the change of place, but are the more confirmed in their strength and health. Sure I am, that Northern Gentry transplanted into the South, by Marriage, Purchase or otherwise, doe languish and fade away wihin few generations. Whereas Southern men on the like occasions removing Northward acquire a setlement in their Estates with long continuance. Some peevish natures (delighting to comment all things into the worst sence) impute this to the Position of their Country, as secured from sale by their di∣stance from London, (the staple place of pleasure,) whilst I would willingly behold it as the effect and reward of their discreet thrift and moderate expence, Two thirds of this Catalogue of Cumberland being still extant, and the third extinct, for lack of Issue and not Estate. Sheriffs of Cumberland. HEN. II. Anno 1 Hildretas Anno 2 RECOR∣DA MANCA. Anno 3 Anno 4 Anno 5 Rob. Fitz. Troit for 14 years. Anno 19 Idem & Adam filius ejus. Anno 20 Adam filius Rob. Trutts Anno 21 Rob. de Vaus Anno 22
Anno 23 Rob. Tutt. Adam filius jus pro eo. Anno 24 Rob. de Vallibus Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Rob. de Vallibus & Rog. de Legeire Anno 27 Rob. de Vallibus or 4 years. Anno 31 Hug. de Morwich Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. & Nich. Frater ejus. RICH. I. Anno 1 Will. de Aldelin for 9 years. JOH. REX. Anno 1 Will. de Stuteivill & Johan▪ Laleman Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. de Stutevill & Phus. Escrar Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rog. de Lasy Constabut. Cestrie. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Rog. de Lasy Constabut. Cestrie, & Walt. Marescallus for 4 years. Anno 12 Hug. de Nevill for 4 years. Anno 16 Rob. de Ros, & Alanus Candebe. HEN. III. Anno 1 Walt. Mauclere for 7 years. Anno 8 Walt. Ephus. Carliol. & Rob. filius Will. de Hamp∣ton for 7 years. Anno 15 Walt. Ephus. Carliol. & Tho. filius Johannis Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Tho. de Muleton for 4 years. Anno 21 Will. de Dacre for 12 years Anno 33 Ioh. Daylock for 8 years. Anno 41 Will. Com. Albemarl. & Remigius de Todington for 5 years. Anno 46 Eustachius de Bayloel for 5 years. Anno 51 Eustachius de Baylloet & Mathe. de Ebor. for 4 years. Anno 55 Rad. de Dacre EDW. I. Anno 1 Rob. Carliol. Ephus. Math. Cordil. & Roger. de Pock∣lington Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rob. de Hampton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Ioh. de Windeburne & Anno 7 Mich. de Neilbigging Ad. Newbegin. Gil. Cureweune Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rob. de Brus for 4 years. Anno 14 Mich. de Arcla (Arcla) for 12 years. Anno 26 Will. de Mulecaster for 5 years. Anno 31 Ioh. de Lucy Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Will. de Mulcaster Anno 34 Idem. EDW. II. Anno 1 Alex. de Wastwenthoyte Anno 2 Andreas. de Harcla for 4 years. Anno 6 Andr. de Harcla & Alex. de Bastenthwayt Mi. for 7 years. Anno 13 Nul. Titulus, Comitis in hoc Rotulo Anno 14 Anno 15 Anno 16 Anno 17 Hen. de Malton & Rob. le Brum. Anno 18 Hen de Malton EDW. III. Anno 1 Pet. Tilloll & Rob. & Brun Anno 2 Anno 3 Pet Tilloll Anno 4 Rad. de Dacre (Ranulphus) for 6 years. Anno 10 Ric. de Denton Anno 11 Anth. de Lucy & Roul. Vaux Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Anth. de Lucy Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Hug. de Moriceby, & Anth. de Lucy Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Hug. de Moriceby Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Tho. de Lucy, & Hug. de Moriceby Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Tho. de Lucy Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Rich. de Denton Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Hug. de Louthre Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Nul. Titulus Comitis in Rotulo Anno 30 Will. de Thirkeld Anno 31 Rob. Tillioll Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Will. de Lancaster Anno 34 Chri. de Moriceby Anno 35 Rob. de Tillioll Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Chri. de Moriceby Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Will. de Windesor Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Adam. Puinges Anno 44 Idem Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Ioh. de Denton Anno 47 Rob. de Moubray Anno 48 Ioh. de Derwentwater Anno 49 Ioh. de Denton Anno 50 Ioh. de Derwentwater Anno 51 Ioh. Bruyn
King Henry II. 21 ROBERTUS de VAUS.] Alias de Vaux or de Vallibus, a right ancient name (still extant) in this County. There is a Cross in the Church-yard of Beu-castle, about twenty foot in height, all of one square stone carved with the Armes of Vaux, whence Master Cambden concludeth it, (though otherwise the inscription thereon not legible) of their erection. I behold this Robert as Father to John de Vallibus, of whom In hi Histo∣ry Anno 1263. Mathew Paris saith, that he was one of those, that, muneribus excaecati, à fidelitate, quam Baronibus in commune juraverant, re∣cesserunt: Blinded with bribes, they went back from the (some will say, such breach no breach of) fidelity, which they had jointly sworn to the Barons. Indeed the same Author reckoneth him amongst those whom Ibid m Anno 1364. he termeth, Clarissimos milites, on whose loyal∣ty and valour King Henry the third relied. The Lord Vaux of Harrowden in Northamp∣tonshire, doth hence fetch his Extraction. King Henry III. 8 WALT. EPIS. CARLIOL. & ROB. filius WILL. de HAMPTON.] This Walter Bishop of Carlile, was he, who commonly was called Male-Clerk, English it as you please, Bad-scholar or Clergy-man. It seems to me a strange Transposition, that Henry the first King of England, should be termed Beau-Clerk, a Good-scholar, and our Walter a Bad One, who was a Bishop in Orders. However though Male-Clerk, had he been Bon-Homme a Good-Man, the matter had been much mended. But I find little praise of his manners. Indeed he was Lord Trea surer of England, and found false both in Word and Deed, avowing his Accounts even, when he was justly charged with an hundred pound (a summe in that age, in the purse of a poor King) debt to the Exchequer. This cost him much molestation, so that at last he resigned his Bishoprick, which by my Godwin in the Bishops of Carlile. Author is beheld as no kindly act of mor∣tification, but that he came unjustly by his place, and was afraid to lose, though a∣shamed to keep it any longer. He afterwards became a Friar at Oxford, as if lacking learning in his Youth, he would recover it in his Old Age, where he dyed October 28. 1248. Edward II. 2 ANDREAS de HARCLA.] Had his latter end answered his beginning, he might deservedly have been ranked, a∣mongst the Worthies of Westmerland, (where he was born at Harcla,) whereas now it shall suffice, to make this oblique mention of him in this place. He behaved himself right handsomely in the service of King Edward the second, many years together, especially at the battle of Borough-brigge, where he killed Hum∣phrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and took Thomas Plantagenet, Earl of Lancaster, with many others of the Nobility prisoners, and delivered them to the King. In reward whereof he was Created in the 19. ear of that King, Earl of Carlile, and had the Isle of Man bestow'd upon him. Next year, I know not upon what discontentment, he fell into private confederacy with the Kings foes the Scots, for which he was taken and condemned. Now lest the Nobility of others should by secret sympathy suffer, in his disgracefull death, the Earl was first parted from the Man, and his honour severed from his person, by a solemn degradation, having his knightly spurs hewed off from his heels, which done he was hang'd, drawn and quartered. Sheriffs. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Io. Derwentwater   Ar. 2 barrs G.  a Canton of the second, a Cinqsoile of the first. 2 Wil de Stapleton*     3 Gilb. de Culwen † ▪ Argent a Lion rampant Sable. 4 Io. de Dewērwater ut prius † Arg. Frettee G. a Cheif Azure. 5 Ama. Mounceaux     6 Rober. Parning     7 Ama. Mounceaux     8 Ioh. Therlwall     9 Ama. Mounceaux     10 Ioh. Therlwall     11 Pet. Tillioll    
12 Ioh. Ireby   Agent, Frettee a Canton Sable. 13 Rich. Redman   G. 3 Cussions Erm. buttoned and Tasselled Or. 14 Chri. Moriceby     15 Ioh. de Ireby ut prius   16 Tho. de Musgrave   Azure, six Annulets Or. 17 Rich. Redman ut prius   18 Pet. Tiliot     19 Ioo. de Ireby ut prius   20 Ricq. Redman ut prius   21 Wil. Culwen ut prius   22 Rich. Redman ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Will. Leigh     2 Will. Louther   Or. six Annuletes Sable. 3 Rich. Redman, & Wil. Osmunderlaw ut prius Arg a Fess between 3 Martlets Sable. 4 Pet. Tillioll     5 Idem.     6 Rch. Skelton   Fess  3 Flower de  Or. 7 Will. Louther ut prius   8     9     10 Ioh. Delamore     11 Rob. Rodington     12 Rich. Redman, m. ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno     1 Ia. Harington▪ m.   Sable, Frettee Argent. 2 Will. Stapelton ut prius   3 Chri Culwen, m. ut prius   4 Ioh. Lancaster   Arg. 2 Bars G. on a Canton of the same a Lion passant Or. 5 Wil. Osmunder law ut prius   6 Rob. Louther, mi. ut prius   7 Ioh. Lamplough   Or, 2 Cross floury Sable. 8 Will. Stapilton ut prius   9 Will. Stapleton & ut prius   Rich. Ratcliffe Darwent∣water. Arg. a Bend engrailed Sable. HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Will. Leigh, mil.     2 Chri. Gulwen, m. ut prius   3 Chri. Moresby, m.   Arg. a Cross S. in the first quar∣ter a  of the second. 4 Nich. Ratcliffe, m. ut prius Or, five Fusils in Fess, Az. 5 Io. Penington, m.     6 Chri. Culwen ut prius   7 Chri. Moresby ut prius   8 Tho. Delamore   Argent, 6 Mattlets 3, 2. & 1. Sable. 9 Ioh. Penington ut prius   10 Ioh. Skelton     11 Ioh. Lmplow, m. ut prius   12 Chri. Culwen ut prius   13 Io. Penington, m. ut prius   14 Ioh. Broughton   Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 mullets G. 15 Hen. Fenwick, m.   Per Fess G. & Arg. six Mart∣lets counterchanged 16 Chri. Culwen, m. ut prius   17 Chri. Moresby ut prius   18 Hug. Louther ut prius   19 Ioh. Skelton, ar.     20 Will. Stapilton ut prius   21 Tho. Beauchamp   AMP. 22 Tho. Delamore ut prius   23 Chri. Curwen ut prius   24 Ioh. Skelton, ar. ut prius   25 Ioh. Broughton, ut prius   26 Tho. Delamore ut prius   27 Th. Crakenthorp,   Or, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mul∣lets pierced Az. 18 Tho. Curwen, m. ut prius   29 Ioh. Skelton, ar. ut prius   30 Roul. Vaux, ar.   Chekee, Or and Gules. 31 Tho. Delamore ut prius   32     33 Ioh. Hodilston, ar.   Gules Frettee Argent. 34 Hug. Louther, ar. ut prius   35 Tho. Curwen ut prius   36 Rich. Salkeld   Vert. Frettee Argent. 37 Hen. Fenwick, m. ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Rich. Salkeld, ar. ut prius   2 Roul. Vaux, ar. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 oh. Hudleston, m. ut prius   5 Th. Lamplough, a. ut prius   6 Rich. Salkeld, ar. ut prius   7 Roul. Vaux, ar. ut prius   8 Ioh, Hodilston, m. ut prius   9 Idem. ut prius   10 Will. Leigh, mil.     11 Chri Moresby, m. ut prius   12 Will. Parr, mil. WESTM. Arg. 2 Bars Az. a Border  S. 13 Ioh. Hodilston, m. ut prius   14 Will. Leigh. mil.     15     16 Ric. Dux. Glouc. & Io. Hodilstō, m. Sub. ut prius France and England, on a Label of 3 Erm▪ as many Can∣tons Gules. 17 Idem.     18 Rich. Dux. Glouc. ut prius   19 Nul. Titulus Co∣mit is in Rotulo.     20 Rich. Dux. Glou. ut prius   21 Idem. ut prius   22 Idem. ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Rich. Salkeld ut prius   2     3     HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Chri. Moresby, m. ut prins   2 Nul. Titulus Co∣mitis in Rotulo.     3 Chri. Moresby, m. ut prius   4 Th. Beauchamp, a. ut prius   5     6 Nul. Titulus Co∣ in Rotulo.     7 Ioh. Musgrave, m. ut prius   8 Nul. Titulus Co∣mitis in Rotulo.     9 Edw. Redman ut prius   10 Rich. Salkeld, m. ut prius   11 Chri. Moresby, m. ut prius   12 Tho. Beachamp ut prius   13 Chri Dacre, ar.   Gu. 3 Fscalop-shells Argent. 14 Idem. ut prius   15 Idem. ut prius   16 Idem. ut prius   17 Idem. ut prius   18 Idem. ut prius   19 Idem. ut prius   20 Hug. Hutton, ar.   AMP. 21 Chri. Dacre, ar. ut prius   22 Io. Hudleston, m. ut prius   23 Ioh. Ratcliffe, ar. ut prius   24 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Curwen, m. ut prius   2 Io. Penington, mi. ut prius   3 Ioh. Shelton, mil. ut prius   4 Io Crakenthorp, . ut prius   5 Idem & Edward. Musgrave ut prius   6 Ioh. Radcliffe, m. ut prius   7 Ioh. Louther, m. ut prins   8 Tho. Curwen, mi. ut prius   9 Gawin. Eglesfeld   Or, 3 Eglets displaied Gules.
10 Ioh. Radciffe, mi. ut prius   11 Edw. Musgrave ut prius   12     13 Christ Dacre ut prius   14     15 Ioh. Ratcliffe, mi. ut prius   16 Chri. Curwen, mil. ut prius   17 Chri. Dacre, mil. ut prius   18 Ioh. Ratcliffe, mi. ut prius   19 Edw. Musgrave, m. ut prius   20 Wil. Peningtō, m. ut prius   21 Tho. Wharton, m.   Sable, a Maunch Argent. 22 Rich▪ Ireton   Arg. a Fess S. 3  in Chief Gules. 23 Christ. Dacre, m. ut prius   24 Wil. Musgrave, m. ut prius   25 Christ. Curwen ut prius   26 Cut. Hutton, ar. ut prius   27 Tho. Wharton, m. ut prius   28 Tho. Curwen, m. ut prius   29 Ioh. Lamplo, mil.     30 Ioh. Thwaits, ar.   Arg. a Cross S. Frette Or. 31 Tho. Wharton, m. ut prius   32 Tho. Dalston, ar. Dalston Arg. a Cheveron between 3 Ra∣vens-heads S. billed Or. 33 Wil. Musgrave, m. ut prius   34 Ioh. Louther, mi. ut prius   35 Tho. Salkeld, ar. ut prius   36 Edw. Aglyonby, a.   Azu. 2 Bars and 3 Martlits in Cheif . 37 Rob. Lamplo, ar. ut prius   38 Tho. Sandford   Per Cheveron S. and Erm▪ two Boars-heads in Chief coopedOr. EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Tho. Wharton, m. ut prius   1 Ioh. Leigh, ar.     3 Ioh. Lamplow, ar. ut prius   4 Ioh. Louther, mil. ut prius   5 Ric. Eglesfeld, ar. ut prius   6 Will. Penington ut prius   REG. MARI.     Anno     1 Tho. Leigh, ar.     PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     1, 2. Rich. Musgrave ut prius   2, 3. Tho. Sandford, a.     3, 4. Rob. Lamplow, a. ut prius   4, 5. Ioh. Leigh, ar. ut prius   5, 6. Will. Penington ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Th. Dacre, sen mi. ut prius   2 Th. Lamplough, a. ut prius   3 Hug. Ascough, m & Hen. Curwen, a. ut prius S. a Fess Or,  3 Asses pas∣sant, Ar. mained & unguled of the second. 4 Will. Musgrave ut prius   5 Ant. Hudleston, a. ut prius   6 Chri. Dacree, ar. ut prius   7 Wil: Penington, a. ut prius   8 Rich. Louther, ar. ut prius   9 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius   10 Cut. Musgrave, ar. ut prius   11 Sim. Musgrave, ar. ut prius   12 Hen. Curwen ut prius   13 Geo. Lamplough ut prius   14 Ioh. Lamplough ut prius   15 Will. Musgrave ut prius   15 Will. Musgrave ut prius   16 Anth. Hudleston ut prius   17 Ric. Salkeld, ar. & Hen. Tolston, ar. ut prius Vert, on a Cheif Azu.  Mart∣lets Or. 18 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius   19 Geo. Salkeld, ar. ut prius   20 Fr. Lamplough, a. ut prius   21 Ioh. Lamplough ut prius   22 Hen. Curwen, ar. ut prius   23 Chri. Dacre, ar. ut prius   24 Wilfr. Lawson, ar.   Per Pale, Arg. and S. a Chev. counterchanged. 25 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius   26 Ioh. Midleton, ar.     27 Geo. Salkeld; ar. ut prius   28 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius   29     30 Rich. Louther, ar. ut prius   31 Hen. Curwen, . ut prius   32 Chr. Pickering, ar.   Ermin a Lion Rampent Azure Crowned Or. 33 Ioh. Southwike, a▪     34 Will. Musgrave, a. ut prius   35 Ger. Louther, ar. ut prius   36 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius   37 Lau. Salkeld, ar. ut prius   38 Chri. Dalston, ar. ut prius   39 Wilfri. Lawson ut prius   40 Tho. Salkeld, ar. ut prius   41 Ios. Penington, ar. ut prius   42 Nich. Curwen, ar. ut prins   43 Will. Orfenr, ar.     44 Edm. Dudley, ar.   Or a Lion rampant duble queve Vert. 45 Will. Hutton, ar. & prim. Jac. ut prius   JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Will. Hutton, ar. ut prius   2 Ioh Dalston, ar. ut prius   3 Chri. Pickeing, a. ut prius   4 Wilf. Lauson, m. ut prius   5 Chri. Pickering m. ut prius   6 Hen. Blencow, ar.   Sable on a Bend 3 Chaplets G. 7 Will. Hutton, m ut prius   8 Ios. Penington, ar. ut prius   9 Chr. Pickering, m. ut prius   10 Wilf. Lawson, m. ut prius   11 Th. Lamplough, a. ut prius   12 Edw. Musgrave, m. ut prius   13 Rich. Flecher, ar. Hutton Arg. a Salter engrailed betwixt 4 Roundlets each chrged with a Pheon of the field. 14 Will. Musgrave, m. ut prius   15 Wil. Hudleston, a. ut prius   16 Geo. Dalston, ar. ut prius   17 Hen. Curwen, mi. ut prius   18 Io Lamplough, a. ut prius   19 Hen. Fetherston   G. a Chev. betwixt 3 Oestridges feathers. 20 Fran. Dudley vid. Admi. Tho. Dudley, ar. & Edw. Dudley, ar. defund. & Tho. Lamplough, mil. ut prius     ut prius     ut prius   21 Rich. Samford, m▪ ut prius   22 Rich. Fletcher, m. ut prius   CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Hen. Blencowe, m. ut prius   2 Pet. Senhouse, ar. Scascall Arg. a  proper. 3 Chri. Dalston, ar. ut prius   4 Will. Layton, ar.     5 Wil Musgrave, m. ut prius   6 Chr. Richmond, a.     7 Leon. Dykes, ar.   Or, 3 Cinquefoils Sable. 8 Ioh. Skelton, ar. ut prius   9 Will. Orfener ar.     10 Rich. Barvis, ar. ut prius   11 Will. Lawson, ar.     12 Patri Curwen, ar. ut prius   13 Tho. Dacre, ut prius   14 Ti. Fetherston, ut prius   15     16 Chri. Louther, ar. ut prius   17 Hen. Fletcher, bar. ut prius   18     19     20     21     22 Hen. Tolson, ar. ut prius  
Edward IV. 16 RICHARD DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.] He is notoriously known to Posterity, without any Comment or Character to describe him. In his Armes, it is observable, that the younger sons of Kings, did not use our Common Modern manner of differences, by Cressants, Mullets, Martilets, &c. but as∣sumed unto themselves, some other differencing devices. Wonder not that his Difference being a Labell (disguised with some additions) hath some Allusion to Eldership therein, whilst this Richard was but the Third son, seeing in his own Ambition, he was not onely the Eldest, but Onely Child of his Father, as appeareth by his Project, not long after, to Basterdize both his Brethren. And now did he begin to cast an Eye on, and forecast a way to the Crown, by securing himself of this County, which is the Back (as Northumberland the Fore) Door into Scotland. In the mean time, Cum∣berland may count it no mean Credit, that this Duke was for six years together, and at that very time, her High-Sheriff, when he was made, (or rather made himself) King of England. Henry VIII. 21 THOMAS WHARTON.] This must needs be that worthy person, whom King Henry the eighth, afterwards created first, L. Wharton, of Wharton in Westmerland, and who gave so great a defeat to the Scots at Solemn Moss, that their King James the fifth, soon after died for sorrow thereof. Indeed the Scotish Writers conceiving it more creditable to put their defeat on the ac∣count of Anger, then of Fear, make it rather a Surrender then a Battle, as if their Coun∣try-men were in effect unwilling to Conquer, because unwilling to Fight. Such their Disgust taken at Oliver Sentclear, a man of Low Birth, and High Pride, obtruded on them that day, by the King for their Generall. And to humor their own discontent∣ment, they preferred rather to be taken Prisoners by an Enemy, then to fight under so distasted a Commander. As for the Lord Wharton, I have read, (though not able presently to produce my Author,) that for this his service, his Armes were augmented, with an Orle of Lions paws in Saltier Gules, on a Border Or. The Farewell. I understand two small Manufactures are lately set up therein, the one of course Broad∣cloath at Cokermouth, (vended at home.) The other of Fustians some two years since at Carlile, and I wish that the Undertakers may not be disheartned with their small encou∣ragement. Such who are ashamed of Contemptible beginnings, will never arrive at con∣siderable endings. Yea, the greatest Giant was (though never a Dwarfe) once an Infant, and the longest line commenced from a little point at the first.
DERBY-SHIRE. DERBY-SHIRE hath York-shire on the North, Nottingham-shire on the East, Leicester-shire on the South, Stafford and Cheshire on the West. The River South Darwent falling into Trent, runneth through the middle thereof. I say South Darwent, for I find three more North thereof. Darwent which divideth the West from the East riding in Yorkshire. Darwent which separateth the Bishoprick of Durham from Northumberland. Darwent in Cumberland which falleth into the Irish Ocean. These I have seen by Critical Authors written all alike, enough to perswade me, that Dower, the Brittish word for water had some share in their denomination. The two extreams of this Shire from North to South, extend to thirty eight miles, though not fully twenty nine in the broadest part thereof. The South and East thereof are very fruitful, whilest the North part (called the Peak) is poor above, and rich beneath the ground. Yet are there some exceptions therein. Witness the fair pasture nigh Had∣don (belonging to the Earl of Rutland) so incredibly battling of Cattel, that one prof∣fered to surround it with shillings to purchase it; which because to be set side-ways, (not edge-ways) were refused. Natural Commodities. Lead. The best in England (not to say Europe) is found in this County. It is not churlish, but good natured Metal, not curdling into knots and knobs, but all equally fusil; and therefore most useful for Pipes and Sheets, yea, the softnesse thereof will receive any artificial impressions. The Miners thereof may be called a Common-wealth within our Common-wealth, governed by Laws peculiar to themselves, often confirmed by Act of Parliament, and take a few of them. 1. If any of this Nation find a 3 & 4. Phil. & Mar. Act▪ 4. Rake, or Sione, or Leading to the same, he may set in any ground to get Lead Oar. 2. But Churches, Houses and Gardens are free from this Custom of the Minery. 3. All Miners ought to commence their suits for Oar-debt, in the Bargemoot-Court, O∣therwise they must lose their 3 Edw. 6. Act. 9. debt, and pay cost too. 4. The Barge-Master keeps his two great Courts twice a year in Barge-Moot-Hall, the Steward under him once in three weeks to decide Controversies, and punish offences betwixt Miners. 5. Plaintiffs or Defendants having three Verdicts passed against them, are bound up for ever. 6. He that stealeth Oar twice, is 16 Edw. 1. c. 2. fined, and the third time struck through his hand with a Knife unto the haft into the Stow, and is there to stand until death, or loose him∣self by cutting off his hand. 7. The Lord for Lot, hath the thirteenth dish of Oar, within their Mine, and six pence a load for Cope. This Manual (as other Liberal) Art, hath Terms peculiar to it sef, which will not be understood without an Interpreter of their own profession. Composed by Edward Manlove, Esq heretosore Steward of the Barge-∣Court, for the Lead Mines▪ within the said VVapentake. Bunnings. Polings, Stemples, Forks, and Slyder, , Yokings, Soletrees, Roach and Rider, Water holes, Wind holes, Veyns, Coe-shafts, and Woughs, Maine Rakes, Cross Rakes, Brown henns, Buddles, and Soughs, Brek-offs, and Buckers, Randum of the Rake, Freeings, and chasing of the Stole to th' Stake,
Starting of Oar, Smilting, and driving drifts, Prim-gaps, Roof-works, Flat-works, Pipe-works, shifts, Cauke, Spar, Lid-stones, Twitches, Daulings and Pees, Fell, Bous, and Knock-bark, Forstid-Oar and Tees, Bing-place, Barmoot Court, Barge-master and Stowes, Crosses, Holes, Hange-benches, Turntree and Coes, Founder-meers, Taker-meers, Lot, Cope, and Sumps, Stickings, and Stringes of Oar, Wash-Oar, and Pumps, Corfe, Clivies, Deads, Meers, Groves, Rake-soil the Gange, Binge-Oar, a Spindle, a Lampturne, a Fange, Fleaks, Knockings, Coestid, Trunks and Sparks of Oar, Sole of the Rake, Smitham, and many more. Let me adde, that whereas Miners complain, that Lead in Somerset-shire (as the Tinne in Cornwall) doth dayly decay, here it doth improve and encrease. For, as if Phoebus himself had been their Vulcan, massy pieces of Lead are frequently found (whereof late∣ly I had one in my hand) so well ripened in the bowels of the Earth, that they seemed refined, such the original purity thereof. Manufactures. Mault. Though commonness causeth contempt, excellent the Art of the first inventing there∣of. I confesse it facile to make Barley Water, an invention which found out it self, with little more than the bare joyning the ingredients together. But to make Mault for Drink, was a master-piece indeed. How much of Philosophy concurred to the first Kill of Mault, and before it was turned on the Floor, how often was it tossed in the Brain of the first inventer thereof. First to give it a new growth more than the earth had bestowed thereon. Swelling it in the water to make it last the longer, by breaking it, and taste the sweeter by corrup∣ting it. Secondly, by making it to passe the fire, the grain (by Art fermented) acqui∣ring a lusciousnesse (which by nature it had not) whereby it doth both strengthen and sweeten the water wherein it is boyled. ALE. Ceres being our English Bacchus, this was our Ancestors common drink, many im∣puting the strength of their Infantry (in drawing so stiff a Bow) to their constant (but moderate) drinking thereof. Yea, now the English begin to turn to Ale (may they in due time regain their former vigorousness:) and whereas in our remembrance, Ale went out when Swallows came in, seldom appearing after Easter; it now hopeth (ha∣ving climed up May Hill) to continue its course all the year. Yet have we lost the Pre∣servative, what ever it was, which (before Hops was found out) made it last so long in our land some two hundred years since, sor half a year at the least after the brewing thereof; otherwise of necessity they must brew every day, yea pour it out of the Kive into the Cup, if the prodigious English Hospitality in former ages be considered, with the multitude of menial Servants and strangers entertained. Now never was the Wine of Sarepta better known to the Syrians, that of Chios to the Grecians, of Phalernum to the Latines, than the Canary of Derby is to the English thereabout. Buildings. Chatsworth erected by the magnificent Lady Elizabeth Cavendish Countess of Shrewsbury, is a stately Structure thus described by the Mr. Hobbs de Mirabilibus Pcci. Poet, Stat Chatsworth praeclara domus, tū mole superba, Tum Domino magnis, celerē Deroëntis ad undā. Miranti similis portam praeterfluit Amnis Hic tacitus, saxis, infra, supra{que} sonorus. Chatsworth which in its bulk it self doth pride And Lord (both great) stands Derwens bank beside. Which slides still by the gate, as full of wonder, Though loud with stones above the house & under
The Garden on the backside, with an artificial Rock and Wilderness, accomplisheth the place with all pleasure. Wonders. God who is truely , the onely Worker of Wonders, hath more manifested his might in this than in any other County in England; such the heaps of Wonders there∣in, amongst which we take special notice of Maim Tor, or Mam-Tor. Tor is a Hill ascending steep as Glassenbury-Tor. Maim, saith Mr. Hobbs de Mirabilibus pecci. one, because maimed or broken in the top thereof. Others following the vulgar pronounciation will have it Mam-Tor (that is) the Mother Hill, because it is always delivered, and presently with child again: for incredible heaps of sandy earth constantly fall thence, yet is it not vi∣sibly diminished, having, it seems, (as a constant stream) such a spring of matter whence it is recruited. It may pass for the Embleme of the liberal man, never impo∣verished by his well-bounded and grounded charity, his expences being re-supplyed by a secret providence. Medicinal Waters. Buxton Well, dedicated to St. Anne, sending forth both cold and warm water, is little less than miraculous in the effects, thus described by our Idem ibidem. Author. Haec resoluta senum confirmat membra trementum, Et refovet nervos lotrix haec lympha gelatos, Huc infirma regunt baculis vestigia claudi, Ingrati referunt baculis vestigia spretis. Huc, Mater fieri cupiens, accedit inanis, Plena{que} discedit, puto, nec veniente marito. Old mens numb'd joynts new vigor here acquire, In frozen Nerves, this Water kindleth Fire. Hither the Creples halt, some help to find, Run hence, their  unthankt left behind. The barren Wife here meets her The Transla∣tor durst not be so bold as the Author. Husbands love, With such success she strait doth Mother prove. This Well is also famous for the abode of Mary Queen of Scots thereby, who found much refreshing by the waters thereof. Princes. I find no Prince since the Conquest, who saw his first light in this County, probably because our English Kings never made any long residence therein. Saints. St. ALKMUND, son to Alred, King of Northumberland slain in a Battel, on the be∣half of Ethelmund Vice-Roy of Worcester, pretending to recover Lands against Duke Wolstan, who detained them, was therefore reputed Saint and Martyr. It would pose a good Scholar to clear his Title to the later, who lost his life in a quarrel of civil con∣cernment. On which account in all Battels betwixt Christians, such as are slain on one side, may lay claim to Martyr-ship. However it befriendeth his Memory, that his bo∣dy translated to Derby, was believed to do miracles, being there with great veneration interred in a Church called Saint Alkmunds (on the right hand) as Passengers (from the South) go over the Bridge, whither the Northern people made many Pilgrimages, till discomposed by the Reformation. What relation Alkmundsbury a Town in Hantingdon∣shire hath unto Him, is to me unknown. Martyrs. JOAN WAST was a blind Woman in the Town of Derbey, and on that account the object of any mans Alms, rather than the Subject of his cruelty. Besides, she was seemingly a silly Soul, and indeed an Innocent, though no Fool. And what saith our Ioh. 9. 39. Saviour, For judgement am I come into this world, that they which see not might see, and that they which see, might be made blind. This poor Woman had a clear apprehension of Gods Truth, for the testimony whereof she was condemned, and burnt at the Stake, by the command of Bishop Baines, who as he began with the Extreams, Mistress Joyce
Lewis, one of the best; and this Joan Wast, one of the basest birth in his Diocess: So no doubt (had not Queen Mary died) he would have made his cruelty meet in per∣sons of a middle condition. Cardinals. ROGER CURSON was born, saith my John Bale de script. Brit. Author, ex nobili quodam Anglorum genere, of Worshipful English extraction. Now I find none of his sirname out of this County, (except some branches lately thence derived) but in the same, two right ancient Fami∣lies, one formerly at Croxton (whose heir general in our age was married to the Earl of Dorset) the other still flourisheth at—in this County; which moves me to make this Roger a Native thereof. Bred he was first a Scholar in Oxford, then a Do∣ctor in Paris, and lastly a Cardinal in Rome, by the Title of Saint Stephen in Mount Ce∣lius. When the City of Damiata in Egypt was taken under John Brenn King of Jeru∣salem, our Cardinal Curson was there accompanying Pelagius the Popes Cardinal: He* Mat. Paris in Anno 1228. wrote many Books, and came over into England as the Popes Legate in the raign of King Henry the third. The certain time of his death is unknown. PHILIP de REPINGDON took, no doubt, his name and birth from Repingdon (commonly contracted and called Repton) in this County: and I question whether any other in England of the same name. He was bred, and commenced first Batchelor, then Doctor of Divinity, in Oxford, where he became a great Champion and Assertor of the Doctrine of John VVickliff, which caused him much trouble, and many strict ex∣aminations. But, alas, he became like the seed on Mark 13. 20. stony ground, which not having root in it self, endured but for a while, and withered away in persecution: for he solemnly recanted his opinions, Fox. Act. & Mon. pag. 444. Novemb. 24. Anno 1383. And to give the better assurance that he was a true Anti-VVickliffite, from a Professor he became a perscutor, and after∣wards was termed Rampington by those poor people, whom he so much molested. Then preferment flowed in thick and threefold upon him, from a Canon, he became Abbot of Leicester; and Anno 1400. he was made Chancellor of Oxford, 1405. Bishop of Lincoln, 1408. by Pope Gregory the twelfth, he was created Cardinal of Saint Nerius and Achilleius; though that Pope had solemnly sworn he would make no more Cardi∣nals, till the Schisme in Rome were ended. The best is, the Pope being Master of the Oath-Office may give himself a Pardon for his own perjury. What moved this Re∣pington willingly to resign his Bishoprick 1420. is to me unknown. Prelates. WILLIAM GRAY, was son to the Lord Gray of Codnor in this County. He suf∣fered* Godwin in the Bishops of Eely out of Bale and Pits. not his Parts to be depressed by his Nobility; but, to make his mind the more proportionable, he endeavoured to render himself as able as he was honourable. He studied first in Baliol Colledge in Oxford, then at Ferrara in Italy, where he for a long time heard the Lectures of Guarinus of Verona, that accomplished Scholar. No man was better acquainted with the method of the Court of Rome, which made our King appoint him his Procurator therein. It is hard to say, whether Pope Nicholas the fifth, or our King Henry the sixth, contributed most to his free Election to the Bishoprick of Eely; whilest it  out of doubt, his own deserts concurred most effectually thereunto. He sate in that See twenty four years, and wrote many Pitscus in Appen. Viror. illustrum. Books, which the envy of time hath denied to posterity. Bishop Godwin by See Sir Hen. Spelmans Ca∣talogue in his Gloss. and Jo. Philpots, pag. 75. mistake maketh him Chancellor of England, whereas indeed, he was Lord Treasurer in the ninth of King Edward the fourth, Anno 1469. Let me adde, he was the last Clergy-man that ever discharged that Office, until Bishop Juxton in our days was preferred thereunto. He died Aug. 4. 1478. and lies buried between two Marble Pillars in his Church, having bestowed much cost in the reparation of the famous Bellfrie thereof. Since the Reformation. GEORGE COOKE, D. D. Brother to Sir John Cooke Secretary of State, was
born at Trusley in this County, bred in Pembroke Hall in Cambridge. Afterwards he was beneficed at Bigrave in Hertford-shire, where a lean Village (consisting of but three Houses) maketh a fat Living. Hence, he was successively made Bishop of Bristol and Hereford. A meek, grave and quiet man, much beloved of such who were subjected to his jurisdiction. He was in the same condemnation with the rest of his Brethren for subscribing the PROTEST in Parliament in preservation of their Priviledges. The times trod so heavily upon him, that (though he ever was a thrifty person) they not onely bruised the Foot, but brake the Body of his Estate: so that he had felt want, if not relieved by his rich relations, dying about the year 1650. States-Men. Sir JOHN COOKE, younger Brother to Sir Francis Cooke was born at Trusley (in the Hundred of Appletree) in this County, of ancient and Worshipful Parentage, allied to the best Family in this County. He was bred Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cam∣bridge, and being chosen Rhetorick Lecturer in the University, grew eminent for his Ingenious and Critical Readings in that School on that Subject: He then travailed be∣yond the Seas for some years; returning thence rich in foraign Language, Observati∣ons, and Experience. Being first related to Sir Fulk Grivell Lord Brook, he was thence preferred to be Se∣cretary of the Navy, then Master of the Requests, and at last Secretary of State for twenty years together. He was a very zealous Protestant, and did all good Offices for the advancement of true Religion: and died the eighth of Septemb. 1644. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. JOHN STATHOM. He was born in this County, in the Raign of King Henry the sixth, and was a learned man in the Laws, whereof he wrote an Abridgement, much e∣steemed at this day for the Antiquity thereof. For otherwise, Lawyers behold him (as Souldiers do Bows and Arrows, since the invention of Guns) rather for sight than service. Yea, a Grandee in that Profession hath informed me, that little of Stathom (ifStathom Tit. Toll. last case of the Title▪ any at all) is Law at this day, so much is the practice thereof altered, whereof the Learned in that faculty will give a satisfactory accompt; though otherwise it may seem strange that reason continuing alwayes, the same Law grounded thereon, should be ca∣pable of so great alteration. The first and last time that I opened this Author I light∣ed on this passage, It is the Go∣spel appointed for the day. Molendinarius de Matlock tollavit bis ò quod ipse audivit Rectorem de eadem vil∣la dicere in Dominica Ram. Palm. Tolle, tolle. The Miller of Matlock took toll twice, because he heard the Rectour of the Parish read on Palme It is the Go∣spel appointed for the day. Sunday, Tolle, Tolle, i. e. crucifie him, crucifie him. But, if this be the fruit of Latine Service, to encourage men in Felony, let ours be read in plain English. Sir ANTHONY FITZ-HERBERT, Son of Ralph Fitz-Herbert, Esquire, was born at Norbury in this County. He was first the Kings Serjeant at Law, and was after∣wards, in the fourteenth of King Henry the eighth, made one of the Justices of the Com∣mon Pleas; so continuing until the thirtieth year of the said King, when he died. He wrote the excellent Book De Natura Brevium, with a great and laborious Abridgement of the Laws, and a Kalendar and Index thereunto; Monuments which will longer con∣tinue his Memory, than the flat blew Marble stone in Norbury Church under which he lieth interred. Sea-Men. Sir HUGH WILLOUGHBY was Camb. Brit. in Derby-shire. extracted from a right worthy and ancient stock at Riseley in this County. He was in the last year of the raign of King Edward the sixth employed for the North-East passage, and by the King and Merchants of London, made
Captain General of a Fleet for Discovery of Regions, and places unknown. Their Fleet consisted of three Ships, the Bona Esperanza Admiral, of one hundred and twenty Tun; the Edward Bonaventure (whereof Richard Chancelour Pilot-Major) of one hundred and sixty Tun; and the Good Confidence of ninety Tun. A large Com∣mission was granted unto them, which Commission did not bear date from the year of our Lord, but from the year Exemplified in Hackluits Voyages, Vol. 1. pag. 231. of the World, 5515. because in their long Voyage they might have occasion to present it to Pagan Princes. They departed from Debtford, May 10. 1553. and after much foul weather, steered up North-North-East. But on the second day of August a tempest arose, and their ships with the violence of the Wind were much shattered, and the Bonaventure, scattered from the other two ships, which never after saw it again. Sir Hugh, holding on his course, descried a Land (which for Ice he could not ap∣proach) lying from Synam (an Island belonging to the King of Denmark) one hundred and sixty leagues, being in Latitude seventy two Degrees. This was then called Wil∣loughby-land, as well it might, seeing it had neither then, or since, any Owner or Inha∣bitant pretending to the propriety thereof. It appeareth by a Will found in the ship which was the Admiral, in the pocket of a person of quality, how in January 1554. Sir Hugh and most of his Company were then in health, though all soon after froze to death in a River or Haven, called Arzina in Lapland. We are bound in charity to believe them well prepared for death, the rather because they had with them a Minister, Hackluit ut , pag. 230 Mr. Richard Stafford by name, (one of the twelve Councellors to manage the design) who read constantly every morning and eve∣ning the English Service, to those who were in the Admiral, with the Bible and Para∣phrases thereon. So that this may be termed, the first reformed Fleet, which had the English Prayers and Preaching therein. However seeing Nocumenta, Documenta, and, that the Ship-wrecks of some are Sea∣marks to others; even this Knights miscarriage proved a direction to others. As for the Bonaventure, which answering its name, was onely found by losing it self, it re∣turned safe, and performed afterwards most excellent service, in opening the Traffick to Muscovy. Thus, as the last Dog most commonly catcheth the Hare, which other Dogs have turned and tired before; so such who succeed in dangerous and difficult enterprises, generally reap the benefit of the adventures of those who went before them. As for Sir Hugh and his Company their Discoveries did thaw, though their Bodies were fro∣zen to death; the English the Summer following finding a particular account of all pas∣sages of their voyages remaining entire in the Ship wherein they perished. Lapland hath since been often surrounded (so much as accosts the Sea) by the En∣glish, the West part whereof belongeth to the King of Sweden, but the East moity, to the Muscovite. They were generally Heathen, as poor in knowledge as estate, paying their Tribute in Furres, whose little Houses are but great oles, wherein gene∣rally they live in the ignorance of Money. Here let me insert a passage (to refresh the Reader after this long and sad story) of a Custom in this barbarous Country, from the mouths of credible Merchants, whose eyes have beheld it. It is death in Lapland to marry a Maid without her Parents or Friends consent. Wherefore if one beare affection to a young Maid, upon the break∣ing thereof to her friends, the fashion is, that a day is appointed for their friends to meet, to behold the two young parties to run a Race together. The maid is allowed in starting, the advantage of a third part of the race, so that it is impossible, except wil∣ling of her self, that she should ever be overtaken. If the Maid overrun her Suitor, the matter is ended, he must never have her, it being penal for the Man again to renew the motion of Marriage. But if the Virgin hath an affection for him, though at the first running hard, to try the truth of his love, she will (without Atalantaes Golden Balls to retard her speed) pretend some casualty, and make a voluntary hault before she cometh to the mark, or end of the race. Thus none are compelled to marry against their own wills; and this is the cause that in this poor Countrey the married people are richer in their own contentment than in other lands, where so many forced Matches make fained Love, and cause real unhappinesse.
Physicians. THOMAS LINACER Doctor of Physick, was born in the Town of Weavers Fun. Mon. pag. 370. , bred in Oxford, whence, he afterwards travelled beyond the Seas, residing chiefly at Rome and Florence. Returning into England, he brought Languages along with him, and was the first restorer of Learning in our Nation. It is questionable. whether he was a better Latinist or Grecian, a better Grammarian or Physician, a better Scholar or Man for his moral deportment. By his endeavours, Galen speaks better Latine in the Translation, than he did Greek in the Original. The last Volume whereof Lina∣cer promised to dedicate to Arch-Bishop Warham, and excuseth his failing therein by a Latine Letter, which for several reasons I have here exemplified. First, for the quicknesse of conceit and purity of style therein. Secondly, because never formerly Printed. Thirdly, because there is but one Copy thereof writren with Linacers own hand, prefixed to that numerical Book, which he presented to the said Arch Bishop bestowed by my old Friend Doctor George Ent on the Colledge of Physicians. Lastly, be∣cause Doctor Christopher Merrick hath been pleased carefully to compare it with the Original. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, Domino Gulielmo Dei gratiâ Cantuariensi Archi-episcopo, toti∣us Angliae Primati, & Apostolicae sedis Legato, Thomas Linacrus Medicus, salutem cum debita dicit Observantia. QUod tibi (Archiepiscope Clarissime!) opus hoc, sicuti pro∣miseram, non dedicavi, sed ejus duntaxat exemplum ad Te misi, nolis, obsecro, pro spectatâ humanitate Tuâ, me magis aut promissi putare immemorem, aut ejus levem habuisse curam, quin id implere maximè cupientem, facere tamen non potuisse. Nam cùm in eâ sententiâ sic perstitissem, ut ex ea me, praeter unum, nemo hominum dejicere potuisset, is profectò, nec alius, eam mutavit. Quippe Rex ipse, cùm ex certorum hominum sermone, qui nimio studio mei, mea omnia nimio plus praedicant, intellexisset, è tribus partibus, quibus tota Medicinae ars inte∣gratur, hanc, quae hoc codice continetur, esse reliquam; eam quoque, veluti justam sibi, nec à reliquis nuncupatione distrahen∣dam, vendicavit: justitque Domino Iohanni Chambre, ob∣servantissimo Paternitatis Tuae famulo, tum praesenti atque au∣dienti, ut sibi eam inscriberem. Itaque cùm Te perspicere non dubitem, quantum apud me valere, quamque legis instar haberi debeat ejus voluntas; non difficulter, ut spero, à Te impetrabo (id
quod etiam magnis precibus contendo) ut alio quopiam, ex iis, quae in manibus sunt, opere, & studiosis (ut opinor) futuro non ingrato, oppigneratam Tibi fidem reluere liceat. Quod si conce∣des, utrumque per Te simul fiet, ut & voluptate, quam ex re∣quisitis à tanto principe vigiliis meis concepi, eâ fruar; & solici∣tudine, quâ pro redimenda fide angebar, eâ liberer. Nec eò spectat (Reverendissime Praesul!) haec tam sedula excusatio, quasi ullas meas nugas sic censeam, ut Tibi usquam expetitas, ex∣petendasve putem. Sic eam potius intelligi postulo, cum Tu mi∣hi primus ad otium literarium beneficiis aditum aditum patefeceris, justissimum existimâsse me, Tibi ejus otii rationem aliquam esse reddendam, ex qua me intelligeres non omnino id frustrà contere∣re: Sed cùm id, partim instituendis quibusdam, partim his qua∣liacunque sunt, ad usum studiosorum scribendis impendam, hoc agere imprimis, ut qui ex eo audientes legentésve fructum aliquem percipient, Tibi, quem non minimum ejus autorem ubique profite∣or, bonam ejus partem acceptam referant. Quod utique tum in his, quae jam edidimus, velim faciant, tum quae alias unquam scribam; nedum quae Tibi nominatim (modò vita supersit) dicabuntur. Diu valeas, Pater Amplissime. No Englishman in that age had so learned Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 65. & J. Pits in Anno 1524. Masters, viz. Demetrius, Politian, and Hermolaus Barbarus; so noble Patrons, viz. Laurence Medices Duke of Florence, whilest he was beyond the Seas, King Henry the Seventh and Eighth (to whom he was chief Physician) after his return into England; so high born Scholars, Prince Arthur, with many Lords Sons his Contemporaries; so learned Friends, Erasmus, Melancthon, Vives, &c. This Linacer founded two publick Lectures in Oxford, and one in Cambridge (duti∣fully his respect to his Mother, double above his Aunt) for the study of Physick, and that Students of that faculty of both Universities may meet the more conveniently to∣gether, he founded the Colledge of Physicians in London. I much wonder at what I find in good Idem ut prius Authors, that Linacer a little before his death turned Priest, and began to study the Scripture, with which he formerly was un∣acquainted, in so much, that reading the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of Saint Matthew, he vowed, That either this was not the Gospel, or We were not Christians, which speech (though much condemned by the Johan. Check. de Pronuncia∣tione Grca. Relater thereof) is capable of a charitable sense, as taxing mens Practice so much different from Gods Precepts. He died Anno Dom. 1524. on the twelfth of October, and lieth buried in Saint Pauls, under a stately Monument built to his Memory by Doctor John Caius, and a Phenix is erected on the top thereof. Yea, I may call these two Doctors, the two Phenixes of their Profession in our Nation, and justifie the expression, seeing the later in some sort sprang of the Ashes of the former, and Caius came not into general credit till after the decease of Linacer. Writers. THOMAS ASHBURNE was born at that well-known Market Town in this County,
(and not in Stafford shire, as both Bale and Pits mistake) and became an Augustinian therein; going afterwards to Oxford he was doctorated in Divinity. He was a great Ad∣versary to Wickliff, and in that Synod wherein his Doctrines were condemned for Here∣sie, by ten Bishops, twenty Lawyers, and four and forty Divines, our Ashburne made up one of the last number. Yet once he did some good, or rather diverted much evil. It happened that one Peter Pateshul an Augustinian preaching in London, had some passages in favour of Wickliff, which so displeased those of his own Order, that they plucked him out of the Pulpit, dragged him into the Covent of Augustines (near Broadstreet) intending more violence to his person. This allarumed the Londoners (amongst whom a considerable party of Wickliffites) to rescue poor Pateshul, who in their rage had burnt the Covent about the Friers ears, had not our Thomas Wal∣singham & ex illo Bale Gent. 6. Num. 77. Ashburne with his prayers and tears seasonably interceded. He flourished under King Richard the Second, 1382. Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. ELIZABETH HARDWICK was Daughter to John Hardwick of Hardwick in this County, Esquire. A Lady of an undaunted spirit, and happy in her several Marriages to great persons. First, to Sir William Cavendish, then to Sir William Saintloo, and at last to George Earl of Shrewsbury. She left two sacred (besides civil) Monuments of her Memory in this County; one that I hope will not [Her Tomb in All-Hallows] the other, that I am sure cannot be taken away, as registred in the Court of Heaven: Her stately Alms-House for twelve poor people in Derby. It will not be amiss here to relate a passage which is reported of this Countess. Mary Queen of Scots being committed to the keeping of her husband George Earle of Shrewsbury, the custody of so great a Princess on the Earls cost, was found not onely chargeable, but dangerous; the Popish party daily practising her enlargement. Now it happened that this In my com∣putation of time, this is more proporti∣onable that some ascribe this passage to Girtude the fist Wife of George Earl of Shrewsbury. Countess coming to Court, Queen Elizabeth demanded of her, how the Queen of Scots did. Madam (said she) she cannot do ill, while she is with my Husband, and I begin to grow jealous, they are so great together. The Queen, who disliked any familiarity of that royall Prisoner with so great a Peer, presently ordered her re∣moval thence into the custody of others. This Countess died, Anno Dom.— There is a Free Schoole in the Town of Derby, built as I understand by that Corpora∣tion, and endowed with threescore pounds a year, and I conjecture Mr. R. Fletcher thrice Bayliff of the Town, I say, by his laudatory Epitaph, I conjecture him very in∣strumental to this Work. I understand also that the said Town hath large Priviledges, in so much that Lndoners in some cases pay Toal at Derbey, but Derbey men in no case Toal at London. I grudge them not their great Priviledges, so long as they employ their publick stock to pious uses. To conclude this Topick, I meet with this memorable passage in one, who continu∣eth the Work of an industrious Stows Sur∣vey of London▪ pag. 67. Author, which I will not, yea must not omit. Divers well disposed Citizens of London, desirous (as yet) not to be named, being born in or near to Ashburne in the Peak, in the County of Derbey, combining their loving benevolence together, have builded there a fair School-House, with convenient lodgings for a Master, and liberal maintenance allowed thereto. I hope that their forwardnesse hath since provoked many, and that their Charity (to allude to their staple Commodity of this County) but in the Oar, in the times of our Fa∣thers, hath since been refined to perfection.
The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. William Bishop of Coventrie and Lich∣field. Commissioners to take the Oaths. Henry de Grey de Codnore. Richard Vernon. Knights for the Shire. John Cokayne. Knights for the Shire. Roberti Carrington. Nicholai Maysham. Thome Stokkes Iohan. Wyther Thome Henster Rog. Wolley. Iohan. Strelley Iohan. Allibon Iohan. Chester Iohan. Wandell Iohan. Houghton Will. Orme Will. Burton Will. Rossel. Hen. Sanky Thome Hye Will. Peek Thome Peek Thome Roberd, Bra∣sier. Roberti Warpeley Iohan. Fassakirley Hen. Bancroft Iohan. Hegge Rob. Shore Hen. Crabbe Iohan. Cooke Rich. Peek Rob. Hewster Iohan. Tykhull Edm. Iohnson Iohan. Stretton Hen. Shepherd Thome Draper VVill. Thorstell Iohan. Burton VVill. Maskyr VVill. Satteby Rob. Stanley, Smith Tho. Stanley, Iron∣monger Hen. Cook Edm. Lacy Iohan. Pesall Johan. Peek, Cur∣riour Johan. Benet, Bra∣sier Nicholai Lacy Iohannis By Watyr Johannis Spicer Johannis Lockyer, sen. Iohannis Lockyer, jun. Richardi Baker Iohannis Dunston Thome Stanley, Smith Williel. Smith, Tai∣lor. Johannis Wodecok Roberti Clerk, Smith Iohannis Manyashe, Glover. Nicholai Cust Roberti Hudgray Iohannis Greaterler Richardi Walker Iohannis Butler Johan. Chestirshire Johan. Bower, Se∣nioris Johan. Bower, Ju∣nioris Johannis Halom Nicholai Baxter Williel. Cartwright. Rich. Brown Skin∣ner Henrici Derley Roberti Potter Hankeston Johannis Potter Richardi Whitehalls Johannis Wede Pla∣sterer Johan. Persal, Tai∣lour Iohannis Hoke Rich. Wright Iohannis Somer Rad. Batesson Johan. Litlechirch Willielmi Johnson Richardi Talliour Richardi Colleman Roberti Nundi Iohannis Hegge Iohannis Hatton Willielmi Goldsmith Willielmi Bullock Rogeri Spicer. Richardi Mody Willielmi Seler Iohannis Stone Henrici Shore Willielmi Walker Iohannis West Johannis Pen Willielmi Cutteler Richardi Keye Willielmi Shepherd Johan. Deye, Cou∣per Roberti Euyngton Henrici Perpoint, Chivalier Thome Folliambe, Armigeri Nicholai Johnsill, Armigeri Iohannis Leek, Ar∣migeri Williel. Ulkerthorpe, Armigeri Iohannis Lynacre, Armigeri Simonis Ulgerthorpe, Gent. Thome Caus, Gentle∣man Rob. Newbolt, Gent. Rad. Clappewell Willielmi Hardwick Gent. Willielmi Lynacre; Gent. Williel. Ulgerthorp, Gent. Johan. Halmworth de Stanley Iohannis Whitington Gent. Iohannis Bothe de Elmeton, Gent. Iohannis Barker de Dore, Gent. Rich. Seliok, Gent. Roberti Wennesley, Gent. Joh. Marshal de E∣gynton, Gent. Thome Marshal de Onlecotes, Gent. Will. Smith de Egyn∣ton, Gent. Rob. Parker de Nor∣ton. Tho. Fox de Aston. Johannis Noble de Hohneffeld Ioh. Parker de Norton Tho. Cook de eadem Will. Del More de Grenhul Williel. Botonne Willielmi Parker de Shirlond Rich. Stykland, de Ashover Rad. Huchonson, de eadem Roberti Seriount de Dronfield VVilliel. Outrem de
Holmfeld Iohannis Fox de Barleylees Rad. Atte Wode Iohannis Shanghe de Somersale Iohannis Shagheuoc Will. Roudolf Williel. Budde Iohannis Capronn Iohannis Brailesforth Roberti Shoter Richardi Callcroft de Chesterfeld Richardi Delkere de eadem Ely Dikkesson de ea∣dem Thome Callcroft de eadem Henrici de Bryth∣rechefold, Arm. Thome Hugate de Chesterfeld Johan. Harison de Egynton Johan. Spynkhull Roberti Hasellherst Willielmi Grene de Ken Walmersho Sannyer Atkin de eadem Thome Walshe de Stanley Roberti Bishangh de Sutton Johan. Webster de Bellesouer Thome Mariori de eadem Iohan. Wodeword Thome Withwyth Willielmi Aleyn de Norton Willielmi Bullok de eadem Rogeri Pynder de Pilleslay Willielmi Pynder de eadem. Johan. Amori Thome Gresley, Chi∣valer Roberti Francys, Ar∣migeri Iohannis Curson de Croxhale Henrici Holland de Caldwale Iohannis Abbeny Thome Stokes Iohannis Franceys de Tykenall Will. Lymster Iohannis Waren Iohannis Perfy Richardi Eyton Thome Tronche Nicholai Chaloner Johannis Elton Johannis Godhale, Senioris Johannis Elton, Ju∣nioris Willielmi Pont Richardi Twigg Thome Paynter Johannis Moseley Johan. Smith Fer∣rour. Johan. Smith, Ba∣ker. Johannis Elyson Johannis Sharp Richardi Madley Johannis Baker Rad. Gyles Rogeri Wilkinson Johannis Bate Johannis Pees Roberti Vernonn Rogeri Cowhope Richardi Smalley Roberti Twyforth Walteri Twyforth Iohannis Stathum Thome Makworth Johan. Lathebury Johan. Welbek Iohan. Leymestyr Richardi Keys Ingram Frannceys Jerardi Moynell Hen. Makworth Roberti Smalley Rich. Frannceys de Stanton Roberti Cokfeld Gilberti Keys de Spondon Iohann. Grandon de eadem Iohannis Grandon de Denby Henrici Slack de Stanley Roberti Winter Tho. Babyngton Joh. Sancheverell Will. Lemestre Roberti Kneton Iohannis Roleston de Lee Walteri Wolley Iohannis Gretray de Elton Ioh. Richardeson de Alsop Rogeri Hawe de El∣ton. Nicholai Mountgo∣mery Chiv. Hen. Kneton, Ar∣migeri Rad. Shirley. Armi∣geri Henrici Bradbourne. Henrici Bothe, Ar∣migeri Iohannis Curson, Ar∣migeri Thome Kneton de Mircaston Willielmi Dethyk de Braidesall Nicholai Fitz-Her∣bert Iohannis Fitz-Her∣bert Willielmi Mountgo∣mere Rob. Shanghe Iohannis Ronyngton. Iohannis Roleston de Swarston Willielmi Lemestyr. Iohannis Crewker Henrici de Sale Galfridi de Sale Rob. Miller de Rod∣desley Rob. Millner de Rod∣desley Thome Prynce de Trusseley Thome Saperton Ioh. Dantre de Hat∣ton illielmi de Crosse de Hilton Roberti Weyke de Hatton Rich. Slater de Brai∣lesforth Rob Bradshaugh de Wyneley Thome Prince de ea∣dem. Richardi Millner de Hagge Petri de la Pole Radulphi de la Pole Henrici de la Pole Johannis Mountgo∣mery Henrici Rolleston Iohannis Rollesley, Senioris Iohannis Rollesley, Junioris Iohannis Northwode Johannis Cooke de Edensore Rogeri Calton de ea. Willielmi Hikedonne Sen. de eadem Will. Hikedonne, jun. Rogeri North de B∣bynhall Willielmi Jackson de Hassop Rogeri Cok de Eden∣sore Io. Stafford de Midle∣ton Johan. Stafford de Eyham Rich. Cobyn de Ey∣ham Io. Shakerley de par Longesdon Oliveri Halley de Aston Iohannis Balgy de Aston Rob. Hayr de Padley Rad. Leche de Pad∣ley Willielmi Hayr de eadem Thurstam de Hall Thome Woderoffe Nicholai Scaley Nich. del Eyre de
Hope Will. Kingesson Roberti Ratcliff de Mellehour Iohannis Hide de Longlee Nich. Hollond de Lyes Thome Wolley de Chalesworth Willialmi Wolley de eadem Iohan. del Bothe de Chalesworth Thome Wagstaffe de Glossop Nich. Wagstaffe de eadem. Rad. Bradbury de Oldresset. Rogeri Bradbury de eadem Iacobi de Lye de Fernely Iohan. Shaleros de Shaleros VVill. Ragge de Bon∣don Edwardi Bradshaugh de eadem Nicholai Bronn de Mershe Egidii Claybrook, Vicarii Ecclesiae de Castelton Thome Claybrook de eadem. Rad. Newham de eadem Thome Newham de eadem Thome Newham de Flixton Rich. Newham de Castelton Thome Nedham de Foxlowe Roberti Woderof de VVormhill Iohannis Tunsted de eadem Iohannis Nedham de eadem Hug. VVillesson de Lytton Richardi Ropere de eadem VVillel. Bradshaugh de Tiddeswall Hugonis Strelley de Burg VVill. Manyashe de Manyashe Thome Fletcher de eadem. Iohannis Delmere de eadem Rich. None de Hur∣delow Nich. Bradshaugh de Tiddeswall Henrici Bradshaugh de eadem Henrici Bradshaugh de eadem Rog. Massy de High∣lowe Rich. Stafford de ead. Henrici Stafford de Derley Thome Fox de Ban∣ford Rad. Bagshaugh de Cunbes Willielmi Bagshaugh de capella supra le Fryth. Thome Bagshaugh de Rigge Radul. Stanley per∣sonae de Kirke-Ire∣ton Iohannis Stepyng∣stones Capellani & Vicarii Ecclesiae de Penteryche. Sheriffs of Derby and Nottingham Shires. HEN. II. Anno 1 Osbertus Silvan Anno 2 Radulph. filius Engelrami Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Radus filius Engelrami, for five years. Anno 12 Rob. filius Radulph. for four years. Anno 16 Will. filius Radulph. for eight years. Anno 24 Will. filius Rad. & Serlo de Grendon Anno 25 Serlo de Grendon Anno 26 Will. filius Rad. & Serlo de Grandon Anno 27 Radul. Mordach, for seven RICH. I. Anno 1 Rad. Murdach Anno 2 Null. Tit. Com. in Rotulo. Anno 3 Anno 4 Anno 5 Anno 6 Willel. Breewerre, for five years. Reg. JOHAN. Anno 1 Williel. Bryewerr Anno 2 Anno 3 Hugo. Bardulph. & Willel. de Lech Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hugo. Bardul. & Regin. de Carduill Anno 6 Rob. de Veteri ponte & Rich. de Bello Campo Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Ut Custos. Anno 10 Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Ph. Marc. & Pet. Markes, for four years. Anno 12 Ph. de Marc. & Eustach. de Ludenham. Anno 17 Ph. de Marc. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Ph. Marc. for six years. Anno 8 Radulph. filius Nicholai Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Rad. filius Nich. & Hugo. le Bell, for 8. years. Anno 19 Rad. filius Nich. & Will. de Derley Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Hugo. filius Rad. & Rob. le Vavesor Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Williel. de Cantilupo, & Bald. de Pannton Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Baldwin. de Pannton, for five years.
Anno 31 Rob. de Vavesor, for eight years. Anno 39 Roger de Lunetal. Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Simon. de Heydon Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Simon. de Aslacton Anno 45 Johan. de Baylloel & Si∣mon. de Heidon. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Will. fil. Herberti ut Custos Hen. filius ejus. Anno 47 Hugo. de Stapilford Cle∣ric. ejus. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Regin. Grey & Hugo de Stapelford, for 5. years. Anno 54 Hugo. de Stapilford, Cle∣ricus. Anno 54 Walterus Ebora. Archi∣episcopus. Anno 55 Idem. EDW. I. Anno 1 Walt. Ebora. Archiep. Anno 2 Walt. de Stirchesley, for 5. years. Anno 7 Gervasius de Clifton, for 7. years. Anno 14 Johan. de Arasle, for five years. Anno 19 Will. Chetworth Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Ph. de Pannton Anno 22 Walt. Goufle, for 4. years. Anno 26 Johan. de Harington Anno 27 Rad. de Shirle Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Rich. de Turneaus Anno 30 Rad. de Shirle Anno 31 Petrus Picot, for 4. years Anno 35 Will. de Chelardeston EDW. II. Anno 1 Petrus Picot & Williel. de Chelaston Anno 2 Johan. de Strichesley Anno 3 Rad. de Crophul Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. & Johan. de la Beach Anno 6 Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. de Bellaside, for 4. years. Anno 12 Idem. & Hugo de Stokes Anno 13 Johan. Darcy Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno 17 Hen. de Taucombye Anno 18 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Rob. Ingram Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Johan. Greet & Mundus Cressey Anno 3 Tho. Languilers Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rob. de Jorce Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Anno 8 Johan. de Oxon. Anno 9 Tho. de Bickeringe, & Joh. de Oxon. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Tho. de Beckeringe Anno 12 Egid. de Meyguil, & Joh. de Oxon Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Egidius de Meyguil. Anno 15 Hugo de Hercy Anno 16 Nich. de Langforde Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Johan. de Musters & Nich. de Langford Anno 19 Gervasius de Clifton Anno 20 Tho. de Bickeringe Anno 21 Johan. de Vaux Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Johan. Walleys, for five years. Anno 29 Walt. de Monte Gomeri, & Johan. Walleys Anno 30 Rog. Michal Anno 31 Rich. de Grey & Rogerus Michael Anno 32 Johan. de Gresley Anno 33 Hen. de Bralesford Anno 34 Rob. de Morton Anno 35 Rog. Beler. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Rich. de Bingham Anno 38 Simon. de Leykes Anno 39 Rob. de Twiford Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Sampson de Strelley Anno 43 Roger. Belor, for five years. Anno 48 Johan. Francis Anno 49 Samp. de Strelley Anno 50 Anno 51
Sheriffs of Derby and Nottingham Shires. Name Place Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     I     All the reign of this King.   RECORDA MANCA. IV.     Anno     I     From the first to the last year of this King.   RECORDA MANCA. HEN. V.     Anno     I     This Kings whol raign.   RECORDA MANCA. HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Ioh. Gokain, Mil. A shdown. Arg. three Cocks, Gules. 2 Tho. Chaworth, m. Wiverton. Azure, 2 Chverons, Or. 3 Rich. Vernon, mil. Haddon. Arg. Fretty, Sab. a Canton, G 4 Ioh. la Zouch, mil. Haringw. Gul. 10. Bezants, a quarter Er. 5 Tho. Greisly, mil. Greisly C. Varry, Erm. and Gules. 6 Norm Babingt  a. Dethlck. Arg. ten Torteauxes, 4. 3. 2. & 1. 7 Ioh. Cokain, mil. ut prius.   8 Ioh. Cakfeld, ar.     9 Hug Willoughby, Risly. Or, on 2 Bars, Gul. 3 water Bougets, Arg. 10 Nich. Montgom. m*     11 Will. Meringe.   *G. achev. bet. 3 flow. de lys Or. 12 Rob. Markham, m▪   Az. in a chief, Or, a Lion is∣suant Gul. and Border, Arg. 13 Ioh. Kokain, mil▪ ut prius   14 Tho. Darcy.     15 Ioh. Curson. Kedliston Arg. on a Bend, Sab. 3. Popin∣gaies, Or, collared Vert. 16 Ioh. Hikeling.     17 Will. Meringe.     18 Ioh. Cockfeld.     19 Tho. Stnnton.   Vorry, Arg. and S. a Canton, G. 20 Io. Walbyes.     21 Io. Pole. Radburne Per pale, Or, and Sab. a saltire engrailed counterchanged. 22 Tho. Nevil. *   *Gules, a saltire, Ermin. 23 Io. Stathum.     24 Rob. Strelley.     25 Tho. Blount.   Bar Nebulee of six, Or, and S. 26 Nich. Fitz-Herbert Norbnry. Arg. a Chief Vairee, Or, and Gules, a bend, Sable. 27 Tho. Stannton ut prius   28 Rich. Willough by. ut prius   29 Rob. Clifton. Clifton N Sable, seme de Cinque foils, a Lion rampant, Arg. 30 Rob. Strelley.     31 Will. Plumpton, m.     32 Ioh. Grisley, mil. ut prius   33 Ioh. Stanop. Shelford Quarterly Ermine and Gules. 34 Will. Babington. ut prius   35 Ioh. Wastneis. Hendon Sable, a Lion rampant, Arg. collared, Gules. 36 Will. Chaworth, ar. ut prius   37 Will. Fitz-Herbert. ut prius   38 Rob. Clifton ar: ut prius.   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Rich. Willoughby ut prius   2 Ioh. Stanhop, ar. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 Rob. Strelley, mil.     5 Ph. Okere, mil.     6 Nich. Fitz-Herb. ar ut prius   7 Nich. Kniveton, ar. Mercasto Gul. a Chev. Vairee, Arg. and Sable. 8 Rob Clifton, mil. ut prius   9 Hen. Perpoint, mil. Halm Per. Arg. a Lion rampant, Sable, in an Orle of cinque foyles, Gules. 10 Will. Blount, ar. ut prius   11 Hen. Perpoint, mil. ut prius   12 Ger. Clifton, ar. ut prius   13 Ioh. Curson, ar. ut prius   14 Ph. Oker.     15 Hen. Stathum, ar.     16 Will. Basset, ar. Brailesf. Or, three piles, Gules, a can∣ton, Ermin. 17 Rad. Pole, ar. ut prius   18 Gerv. Clifton, ar. ut prius   19 Ioh. Babington, ar. ut prius   20 Rob. Markham, mil. ut pris   21 Rob. Eyre.     22 ar. Pilkinton.     RICH. III.     Anno     1 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius   2 Ioh Curson, ar. ut prius   3 Nich Montgomery. ut prus   HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Byron, mil.     2 Ioh. Curson, ar. ut prius   3 Gerv. Clifton. ut prius   4 Ioh. Leeke, ar. Sutton D. Arg. on a Saltyr engrailed, Sable, 9. Annulets, Or. 5 Nich. Knifton, sen. ut prius   6     7 Iacobus Savage, ar.     8 Nich. Byron, ar.     9 Nich. Knifton, jun. ut prius   10 Bri. Stamford, ar.     11 Hen. Willoughby, m ut prius   12 Rad. Shirley, mil. Shirley D. Paly of six, Or, and Azure, a canton, Erm. 13 Tho. Babington. ut prius   14 Wil. Bothe, ar.     15 Humf. Hercy, ar.     16 Rad. Longford, m.     17 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius   18 Will. Perpoint, ar. ut prius   19 Hen. Vernam, mil. ut prius   20 Simon. Digby, ar.   Azure, a flower de lys, Arg. 21 Will. Mering, mil.     22 Idem.     23 Edw. Stanhope, m. ut prius   24 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno.     1 Br. Stapulton, mil.     2 Will. Zouch, ar. ut prius   3 Rich. Basset, ar. ut prius   4 Geo. Chaworth, ar. ut prius   5 Roger Minars:     6 Will. Mering, mil.    
7 Ioh. Zouch, mil. ut prius   8 Rob. Browne, ar.     9 Br. Stapulton, mil.     10 Ioh. Markham, m. ut prius   11 God. Fuliamb, mil. ut prius   12 Ioh. Cokain, mil. ut prius   13 Will. Perpoint, mil, ut prius   14 Ioh. Vernon, ar. ut prius   15 Ioh. Byron, mil.     16 Godf. Fuliamb, mil. ut prius   17 Ioh. Markham, mil. ut prius   18 Ioh. Vernon, ar.     19 Iohn Byron, mil.     20 Nich. Strelley, ar.     21 Tho. Cokain, mil. ut prius   22 Hen. Sachenerel, m.   Argent, a Saltire, Azure, 5. water Bougets, Arg. 23 Will. Coffin, ar.     24 Ioh. Hercy, ar.     25 Anth. Babing ton, m ut prius   16     27 Rad. Langford, mil     28 Godf. Fuliamb mil. ut prius   29 Nich. Strelley, mil.     30 Ioh. Markham, mil. ut prius   31 Will. Basset, mil. ut prius   32 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius   33 Hen. Sachenerel, m. ut prius   34 Ioh. Byron, mil.     35 Ioh. Hercy, arm.     36 Ioh. Zouch, ar. ut prius   37 Ioh. Markham. mil. ut prius   38 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Fran. Leeke ut prius   2 Ioh. Hercy, mil.     3 Tho. Cokain, mil. ut prius   4 Hen. Sotton, mil.     5 Ioh. Byron, mil.     6 Anth. Nevil, mil. ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     M. 1 Ioh. Port, mil.     1. 2. Geo. Clifton, mil. ut prius   2. 3. Ia. Fuliamb, mil. ut prius   3. 4. Io. Chaworth. mil ut prius   4. 5. Will. Hollis, mil. Houghton Erm. 2. Piles, Sable. 5. 6. Gerv Perpoint, m. ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Kockeyne, mil. ut prius   2 Will. Mering, mil.     3 Ioh. Zouch, mil. ut prius   4 Tho. Stanhop, mil. ut prius   5 Humf. Bradborn,     6 Fr. Molineux, ar.   Azure, a Cross moline quarter pierced, Or. 7 Tho. Gerard, mil.     8 Godf. , m. ut prius   9 Fr. Curson, arm. & Anth. Strelly. ut prius   Sheriffs of Derby-shire alone. EIZ. REG.     Anno     10 Nich. Langford.     11 Tho. Kokayn, mil. Ashburne Arg. three Cocks, Gules. 12 Pet. Frechvile, ar.   Azure, six scallops Argent. 13 Ioh. Zouch, mil.   Gul. ten Bezants, a quarter Er. 14 Fra. Leke, ar. Sutton Arg. on a saltire, engrailed, Sab. 9. Annulets, Or. 15 Humf. Bradborn.     16 Germ. Pole. ar.     17 Ioh. Manners, ar. Haddon Or, two Bars, Az. on a Chief quarterly, 2 flower de lys of France, and a Lion of . 18 Fran. Wortley, ar.* York shire   19 Will. Basset, ar. †     20 Godf. Fuliamb, ar.* Walton * Arg. a Bend with 3 Besants betwixt 6 Martlets, Gul. 21 Tho. Cockain, mil. ut prius   22 Ioh. Zouch, mil. ut prius † Or, 3 Piles, Gul. a Canton Er. 23 Ioh. Harper, ar. † Calke • S. a Bend bet. 6. scallops, Or. 24 Hen. Cavendish. ar* Chatswo. † Arg. a Lion rampant within a border engrailed, S able. 25 Fran. Curson, ar. † Kedlifton   26 Ioh. Vernon, ar. *   * Sable, 3 Bucks Heads cabo∣sed, Arg. attired, Or. 27 Tho. Cockayn, mil. ut prius   28 Fran. Leake, ar. ut prius † Arg. on a bend, Sab. 3. Po∣pingais Or, collered, Vert. 29 Will. Kniveton, ar. Mircaston   30 Ioh. Manners, ar. ut prius * Arg. frettee Sab. a canton, G. 31 Godf. Fuliamb, ar. ut prius   32 Humf. Dethick, ar.   Arg. a Fesse Varr, Or, and Gul. bet. 3. water bougets, Sa. 33 Tho. Gresley, ar. † Greisly C.   34 Will. Basset, ar. ut prius † Varry, Ermin and Gules. 35 Fran. Cockain, ar. ut prius   36 Ioh. Rodes, ar. Balbrough Arg. a Lion passant, bend-ways, Gul. dotfessed Ermin, betw. 37 Will. Cavendish, ar. ut prius   38 Geo. Curson, ar. ut prius 3. Acorns, Azure. 39 Ioh Manners, ar. ut prius   40 Hen. Sacheverel, ar   Arg. a saltire, Az. 5. water Bougets, Argeet. 41 Io. Willoughby, ar* Riseley   42 Edw Cockain, ar. ut prius * Or, on two Bars, Gul. 3. water Bougets, Argent. 43 Pet. Frechvile, ar. ut prius   44 Fran Fitz-Herbert. Norbury Argent, a Chies Varry, Or, and Gules, a , Sable. 45 Tho. Gresley, mil. ut prius   JACOBUS.     Anno     1 Tho. Gresley, mil t prius   2 Fran. Leake, mil. t prius   3 Ioh. Harper, mil. ut prius   4 Hen Willoughby. a ut prius   5 Rich Harpe, ar. ut prius   6 Hen. Cavendish, ar ut prius   7 Ioh. Curson, ar▪ ut prius   8 Tho. Burdet, ar.   Az on 2 , Or, 6. Martlets, Gules. 9 Geo. Fulwood mil.     10 He. Leigh, mil.   Gul. a Cross engrailed, in the first quarter a Lozenge, Arg. 11 Tho. , mil.*     12 Will Knivton, bar. ut prius * Gul. on a Bend, Argent, 3. 13 Ioh. Bullock, ar.   Crosses patee, Sable. 14 Hen. Agard, ar.     15 Fran. Munday, ar.     16 Rog. Manners. mil. ut prius   17 Godf. Tacker, ar.     18 Ioh. Milward, ar.   Erm. on a fess, Gules, 3. plates 19 Tho. Eyre, ar.     20 Iacinth Sacheverel,   Argent, on a Saltyre, Azure, 5. water Bougets of the field. 21 . Kniveton, m. ut prius   22 Ioh. Fitz-Herbert. ut prius   CAROL. I.     Anno     1 Hen. Harper, ar. ut prius   2 Ioh Fitz Herb. mil. ut prius   3 Edw. Vernon, mil. ut prius   4 To. Burton, ar.     5 Ioh. Stanhope, mil. ut prius   6 Fran. Bradshaw, ar.     7 Humf. Oakeover, ar.     8 Ioh. Manners, ar. ut prius   9 Fran. Foliamb, br. ut prius   10 Ioh. Gell. ar.     11 Ioh. Millward, ar. ut prius   12 Ioh. Harpur, mil. ut prius   13 Ioh. Harpur, bar. ut prius   14 Ioh. Curson, bar. ut prius   15 Ioh. Agard, ar.     16     17 Ioh. Harpur, bar. ut prius   18     19     20 Edw. Cooke, bar.   Partee per , Gules and Azure, 3. Eagles, Argent. 21     22 Mich Bartonar.    
Hen. VIII. 18. JOHN VERNON, Arm.] Indeed I meet with many Vernons in this Catalogue of Sheriffs, Henry, John, &c. but cannot find him I seek for, viz. Sir George Vernon of Haddon in this County. I assign my self this reason, that he never executed that Office, because it was beneath a Prince to be a Sheriff; and such his vast revenues and retinue, that in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, he was called the King of the Peak. This Sir George left two Daughters, Co∣heirs, Elizabeth married to Sir John Manners, Ancestor to the present Earl of Rutland, and Margaret to Sir Thomas Stanley, younger Son of the House of Derby, deriving a vast Inheritance to their Husbands. How this Sir John, this year Sheriff, stood to him related, is to me unknown: sure I am, some of his surname and alliance still flourish in this and the neighbouring Counties, where they have a fair Estate. Yet will they remember their Motto, Ver non semper floret, so ill it is to trust in the fading Spring of humane felicity. The Farewell. I understand that it is fashionable in this County for Adventurers to begin a Mine with this solemn expression, Edward Manlow, Esq in his customs of the Barge∣Moot-Court. For the Grace of God, and what I there can find. By the grace of God understanding good success, otherwise saving Grace is not to be sought for by mining of Earth, but mounting up to Heaven by Faith and Repentance. This their expression I approve, the Earth being the Lords, and the fulness thereof (both be∣neath and above ground) belongeth unto him. I have read, that the Vicars in that Country doe receive every tenth Dish of Oar for their due, being obliged thereby to pray heartily for the Miners. Now though no such place or profit belongeth unto me, yet, treating of this subject, I conceive my selfe bound (if not in Conscience) in Courtesie, to wish these Work-men a good speed in their lawful endeavours, whilest they only undermine the Earth, and not their Neighbours right by fraudulent practices. May their Lot prove a Prize unto them, that they may gain, at the least no Blank to lose thereby. Particularly, may Divine Providence fecure the Persons of their Labourers from Damps and other casualties, which have happened to many, when the Earth (though cruel to kill) was courteous to bury them by the same mischance.
DEVON-SHIRE. DEVON-SHIRE hath the Narrow Sea on the South, the Severn on the North, Cornwal on the West, Dovset and Somerset-Shire on the East. A goodly Province, the second in England for greatnesse, clear in view without measuring, as bearing a square of fifty miles. Some part thereof, as the South-Hams, is so fruitful, it needs no art; some so barren, as Dart-more, it will hardly be bettered by art; but generally (though not running of it self) it an∣swers to the spur of industry. No Shire showes more industrious, or so many Husband∣men, who by Marle (blew and white) Chalk, Lime, Sea-sand, Compost, Sope∣ashes, Rags, and what not? make the ground both to take and keep a moderate fruit∣fulnesse; so that Virgil, if now alive, might make additions to his Georgicks, from the Plough-practice in this County. As for the Natives thereof, generally they are dex∣terous in any imployment, and Queen Elizabeth was wont to say of their Gentry, They were all born Courtiers with a becomming confidence. Natural Commodities. Silver. This formerly was found in great plenty in the Parish of Comb-Martin (Miners be ing fetcht out of Derby-shire for the digging thereof) in the Reign of King Edw. 1. (which as appeareth by Extant in the Tower, in the years here no∣ted. Record on the account of those trusted therein) turned to a considerable profit. In the two and twentieth Year of the Raign of King Edward the first, William Wy∣mondham accounted for two hundred and seventy pounds weight of Silver. It was forged for the Lady Elianor Dutchesse of Barr, and Daughter to the said King, mar∣ried the year before. In the twenty third year of the said King, was fined five hundred and twenty one pounds ten shillings weight. In the four and twentieth year of his Raign, there was brought to London in fined Silver in Wedges, seven hundred and four pounds three shillings and one peny weight. In the twenty fifth year of his Raign, though three hundred and sixty Miners were impressed out of the Peak and Wales, great was that years clear profit in Silver and Lead. In the Raign of Edward the third, it appeareth by the Record of particular Accoun∣tants, that the profits of the Silver were very considerable towards the maintainance of the Kings great expences in the French War. These Mines long neglected (as I conjecture, by reason of the Civil Wars bewixt York and Lancaster) were re-entred on by an Artist in the Raign of Queen Elizabeth, who presented a Silver Cup made thereof to the Earl of Bath, with this Inscription: In Martins-Comb ng lay I hid, obscure, deprest with grossest soil. Debased much with mixed Lead, till Bullmer came, whose skill and Toil Reformed me so pure and clean, as richer no where else is seen. These Mines have not as yet recovered their former credit: Though I understand that some are still pursuing this design, and I do wish well to their endeavours. Not that Private Men should lose by their Lead▪ But the publick gain by their Silver. Tinn. God said to Israel by the mouth of his Isaiah 1. 25. Prophet, And I will take away all thy Tinn. Sad the case of this County, if so served. But what went before? 1. 22. Thy Silver is become
Drosse. It seemeth the Kings of Israel, being reduced to poverty, debased their Coine (the last refuge of Princes) adulterating it with Tinn, and herein God pro∣mised, that their Coine should be refined to the true Standard. This th litteral mean∣ing of the Promise, mistically importeth; that God would restore the Primitive Purity of his Service, purged from Errours and Vices. In this mistical sense, it will not be amisse to wish, that God would take away the Tinn from Devon-shire, seeing such taking it away may consist with the Continuance and Advance of the Metal therein. As for their Litteral Tinn, so plentiful herein, I wish some Artifice might be found out (hitherto unknown) to sever the Gold and Silver from the Tinn, without waste∣ing: Till this be done, I desire some invention might prepare Sea-coals for the melt∣ing thereof; hereby much Wood would be saved, and the Product of the Tinn not diminished, and not so much wasted in the Blast, which now they are fain to run over three or four times: I am incouraged in the Feasibility thereof, because aDoctor Ior∣dan in his Hi∣story of Baths. Page 60. Learned Chymist (no Emperick, but well experimented) affirmed, that it may be done, on his own knowledg, by many trials which he hath made upon it. Herrings. These still are taken in great, and were formerly in greater plenty in this County. For I read of great quantities of them for six or seven years together, taken at Lim∣mouth, until theManuscript of Baronet Northcolt. Proctor (as is said) not contented with reasonable and indifferent Tythes, vexed the Poor Fisher-men, with unusual and extraordinary payments. Whe∣ther since the God of Nature, to condemn such covetousnesse, hath with-drawn such store of Fish, or whether the Fisher-men disheartned with such exactions, with-drew their own Industry, I know not. This I know, that light gains, as in all other commo∣dities, so especially in Tythes of this nature, make the heaviest purses. But we shall speak more conveniently of Herrings in Norfolk. Strawberries, In Latine Fraga, most toothsome to the Palate, (I mean if with Claret Wine or sweet Cream) and so plentiful in this Coun∣ty, that a Traveller may gather them, sit∣ting on Horse-back in their hollow High∣wayes; they delight to grow on the North side of a bank, and are great coolers. These small and sowre, as growing wild (having no. other Gardiner then Nature) quickly acquire greatnesse and sweetnesse, if trans∣planted into Gardens, and become as good as those at Porbery in Somerset-shire, where twenty pounds per annum (thank the vi∣cinity of Bristol) have been paid for the Tythe thereof. I would not wish this County the increase of these Berries, ac∣cording to the Proverb; Cut down an Oak, and set up a Strawberry. Hurtberries, In Latine Vaccinia, most wholsome to the Stomack, but of a very astringent Na∣ture, so plentiful in this Shire, that it is a kind of Harvest to poor people, whose Children nigh Axminster, will earn 8 pence a day for a Moneth together, in gathering them. First they are green, then red, and at last a dark blew. The whitest hands amongst the Romans did not disdain their Blacknesse, witnesse theVirg. Eclog. 2. Poet, —Vaccinia nigra leguntur. Nothing more have I to observe of these Berries, save; that the Antient and Martial Family of the Baskervills in Here∣ford-shire give a Cheveron betwixt three Hurts proper, for their Arms. Manufactures. Bone-lace. Much of this is made in and about Honyton, and weekly returned to London. Some will have it called Lace, à Lacinia, used as a fringe, on the borders of cloaths; Bone∣lace it is named, because first made with bone (since wooden) bobbins. Thus it is usual for
such utensills both in the Latine and English Names, gratefully to retain the memory of the first matter they were made of; as Cochleare, a Spoon, (whether made of Wood or Metal) because Cockle-shells were first used to that purpose. Modern the use thereof in England, not exceeding the middle of the Raign of Queen Elizabeth: Let it not be condemned for a superfluous wearing, because it doth neither hide nor heat, seeing it doth adorn: Besides; (though private persons pay for it) it stands the State in nothing, not expensive of Bullion, like other Lace, co∣sting nothing save a little thread descanted on by art and industry: Hereby many children, who otherwise would be burthensome to the Parish, prove beneficial to their Parents: Yea, many lame in their limbs, and impotent in their arms, if able in their fingers, gain a lively-hood thereby; Not to say, that it saveth some thousands of pounds yearly, formerly sent over Seas, to fetch Lace from Flanders. The Buildings. Bediford Bridg is a stately Structure, and remarkable in many respects. 1 It standeth out of and far from any publick Road, in a corner of the County, so that Bediford Bridg is truly Bediford Bridg, intended solely for the convenience of that Town. 2 It is very long, consisting of twenty four Peares, and yet one William Alford (an∣other Milo) of Bediford carried on his back for a Wager, fourA Busnel is two strikes in this County. Bushel, Salt-water-mea∣sure, all the length thereof. 3 It is very high, so that a Barge of sixty Tuns may passe and repasse (if taking down her Masts) betwixt the Peares thereof. 4 The Foundation is very firmly fixed, and yet it doth (or seem to) shake at the slightest step of a Horse. 5 The Builder of so worthy a Work, is not (the more the pity) punctually known. Yet Tradition (the best Authour where no better is to be had) maketh that finished by the Assistance of Sir Theobold Greenvill, the Goldneyes and Oketenets, (Persons of great Power in those parts) Peter Quivill Bishop of Exeter granting Indulgencies to all such as contributed to the forwarding thereof. As for the Houses of the Gentry in this County, some may atract, none ravish the Beholder, except it be Wenbury the House of the Heales near Plimouth, almost cor∣rival with Greenwich it self, for the pleasant Prospect thereof. The Wonders. Not to speak of a River about Lidford, whose stream sinketh so deep, that it is alto∣gether invisible, but supplying to the Eare that it denies to the Eye, so great the noise thereof. There is in the Parish of North-Taunton (near an House called Bath) a Pit, but in the Winter a Pool, not maintained by any spring, but the fall of rain water (in Sum∣mer commonly dry.) Of this Pool it hath been observed, that before the death or change of any Prince, or some other strange accident of great importance, or any Invasion or Insurrection, (though in an hot and dry season) it will without any rain o∣verflow its Banks, and so continue till it be past that it prognosticated. Be the truth hereof reported to the Vicenage (the most competent Judges thereof) seeing my Au∣thourManuscript of Baronet Northcott. (who finished his Book 1648.) reporteth, that it over-flowed four times within these last thirty years. Some will be offended at me, if I should omit the Hanging Stone, being one of the Bound Stones which parteth Comb-Martin from the next Parish. It got the name from a Thief, who having stoln a Sheep and tyed it about his own neck to carry it on his back, rested himself for a while upon this Stone, which is about a foothigh, until the Sheep strugglingFrom the same Authour▪, slid over the Stone on the other side, and so strangled the man. Let the Lawyers dispute whether the Sheep in this case was forfeited to the Kings Almo∣ner as a Deo-Dand: It appeareth rather a Providence, then a Casualty, in the just execu∣tion
of a Malefactor. To these Wonders, I will add, and hazard the Readers displea∣sure for the same, The Gubbings. So now I dare call them (secured by distance) which one of more valour durst not do to their Face, for fear their fury fall upon him. Yet hitherto have I met with none, who could render a reason of their Name. We call the Shavings of Fish (which are little worth) Gubbings; and sure it is they are sensible that the Word importeth shame and disgrace. As for the suggestion of my worthy and learnedMr. Joseph Maynard. Friend, borrowed fromIn his Tal∣mudical Rabi∣nical Dictio∣nary, Verbo  Buxtorfius, that such who did inhabitare Montes Gibberosos, were called Gubbings, such will smile, at the Ingenuity, who dissent from the truth of the Etymology. I have read of an England beyond WalesSee Camdens Brit. in Pem. broke-shire.; but the Gubbings-Land is a Scythia within England, and they pure Heathens therein. It lyeth nigh Brent-Tor in the edg of Dart∣more. It is reported, that some two hundred years since, two Strumpets being with child, fled hither to hide themselves, to whom certain lewd Fellows resorted, and this was their First Original. They are a Peculiar of their own making, exempt from Bi∣shop, Arch-Deacon, and all Authority either Ecclesiastical or Civil: They live in Cotts (rather Holes than Houses) like Swine, having all in common, multiplied without Mar∣riage into many Hundreds: Their Language is the drosse of the dregs of the Vulgar De∣vonian; and the more learned a man is, the worse he can understand them. During our Civil Wars, no Souldiers were quartered amongst them, for fear of being quartered amongst them. Their Wealth consisteth in other mens goods, and they live by steal∣ing the Sheep on the More, and vain it is for any to search their Houses, being a Work beneath the pains of a Sheriff, and above the Power of any Constable. Such their Fleetnesse, they will outrun many Horses; Vivaciousnesse, they out live most men, li∣ving in the Ignorance of Luxury, the Extinguisher of Life: They hold together like Burrs, offend One, and All will revenge his Quarrel. But now I am informed, that they begin to be civilized, and tender their Children to Baptisme; and return to be men, yea Christians again: I hope no Civil peopl amongst us will turn Barbarians, now these Barbarians begin to be civilized. Proverbs. To Devon-shire ground.] It is sad when one is made a Proverb by way of derision; but honourable to become proverbial, by way of imitation, as here Devon-shire hath set a Copy of Industry and Ingenuity to all England. To Devon-shire land is to pare off the surface or top-turffe thereof, then lay it together in heaps and burn it, which ashes are a marvailous im∣provement to battle barren ground. Thus they may be said to Stew the land in its own liquor, to make the same ground to find compost to fatten its self; An Husbandry, which where ever used, retains the name of the place where it was first invented, it being usual to Devonshire land in Dorset-shire, and in other Counties. A Plimouth Cloak.] That is a Cane or a Staffe, whereof this the occasion. Many a man of good extra∣ction, comming home from far Voiages, may chance to land here, and being out of sorts, is unable for the present time and place to recruit himself with Cloaths. Here (if not friendly provided) they make the next Wood their Drapers shop, where a Staffe cut out, serves them for a covering. Ho may remove Mort-Stone. There is a Bay in this County called Mort-Bay, but the Harbour in the entrance thereof is stopped with a huge Rock, called Mort-Stone, and the People merrily say that none can remove it, save such who are Masters of their Wives. If so, wise Socrates himself (with all men who are , under Covert-feme (as I may say) will never attempt the removal thereof. —First hang and draw, Then hear the cause by Lidford Law.] Lidford is a little and poor (but antient) Corporation in this County, with very
large priviledges, where a Court of the Stanneries was formerly kept. This Libellous Proverb would suggest unto us, as if the Towns-men thereof (generally mean persons) were unable to manage their own Liberties with necessary discretion, administring preposterous and preproperous Justice. I charitably believe, that some Tinners, justly obnoxious to censure, and deserved∣ly punished (by fine or otherwise) for their misdemeanors, have causelessely traduced the proceedings of that Court, when they could not maintain their own innocence. Saints. WENFRIDE BONIFACE was born at Cediton (corruptly Kirton) once an Episcopal See in this County, bred a Monk under Abbot Woolhard in Exeter. Hence he went to Rome, where Pope Gregory the second (perceiving the ability of his parts) sent him to Germany, for the converting of that stiffe-necked Nation. This service he commend∣ably performed, baptising not fewer than a Hundred Thousand in Bavaria, Thuringia, Hassia, Friesland, Soxony, &c. But here I must depart fromDe Script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 13. Bale, because he departeth (I am sure) from Charity, and I suspect from Verity it self. Charity, who (according to his Bold and Bald Aocaliptical Conjectures) maketh him the Other Beast assending out of the Earth with twoRevel. 19. Horns. And why so? Because forsooth he was made by the Pope Metropolitan of Mentz, and kept the Church of Colen in Commendam therewith. Secondly Verity, when saying that he converted men terrore magis quam Doctrinâ, it being utterly incredible; that a single man should terrifie so many out of their opinions. And if his words relate to Ecclesiastical Censures (with which Weapons Boniface was well provided) such were in themselves (without Gods wonderful improving them on mens consciences) rather ridiculous then formidable to force Pagans from their former perswasions. But if Bale (which is very suspitous) had been better pleased with the Germans continuing in their Pagan Principles, than their conversion to cor∣rupted Christianity; he will find few wise and godly men to joyn with his judgment therein. Yet do I not advocate for all the Doctrines delivered and Ceremonies impo∣sed by Boniface; beholding him as laying the true Foundation, Jesus Christ, which would last and remain, but building much hay and stubble of Superstition thereon. But he himself afterwards passed a purging fire in this life, killed at Borne in Fries∣land, with fifty four of his companions, Anno Dom. 755. in the sixty year of his age, after he had spent thirty six years, six moneths, and six dayes in his German im∣ployment. WILLIBALD, descended of high Parentage, was born in thisBale De Scipt. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 16. County, Nephew to St. Boniface aforesaid, whom he followed in all respects; later in time, lower in parts, lesse in pains, but profitable in the German Conversion; wherein he may be termed his Uncles Armour-Bearer, attending him many a mile, though absent from him at his death. Herein he was more happy than his Uncle, that being made Bishop of Eystet in Germany, as he lived in honour, so he died in peace, Anno Dom. 781. Martyrs. AGNES PIREST or PREST, was the sole Martyr under the Raign of Queen Mary; Wherefore as those Parents which have but one Child, may afford it the bet∣ter attendance as more at leasure: So seeing by Gods goodnesse, we have but this sin∣gle Native of this County, yea of this Diocesse; we will enlarge our selves on the Time, Place, and Cause of her suffering. 1. Her Christian Name, which Mr. Fox could not learn, we have recovered from another ExcellentMr. Vowell in Hollinshed. Pag. 1309. Authour. 2. I am informed by the Inhabitants thereabouts, that she lived at Northcott in the Parish of Boynton, in the County of Cornwall, but where born, is unknown.
3 She was a simple woman to behold, thick, but little and short in stature; about fifty four years of age. 4 She was indited on Monday Idem, ibidem. the fourth Week in Lent, An. Phil. and Mar. 2 & 3. before W. Stanford Justice of the Assize (the same as I conceive, who wrote on the Pleas of the Crown:) So that we we may observe more legal formality was usd about the condemnation of this poor Wo∣man, than any Martyr of far greater degree. 5 Her own Fox Acts and Monum. Pag. 2050. Husband and Children were her greatest persecutors, from whom she fled, because they would force her to be present at Masse. 6 She was presented to James Troublefield Bishop of Exeter, and by him con∣demned for denying the Sacrament of the Altar. 7 After her condemnation she refused to receive any money from well affe∣cted people; Saying, Idem, Pag. 2052. She was to go to that City where Money had no mastery. 8 She was burnt without the Walls of Exeter, in a place called Sothenhay, in the Moneth of November 1558. She was the onely person in whose persecution Bishop Troublefield did appear; and it is justly conceived that Black-stone his Chancellour was more active than the Bishop, in procuring her death. Confessors. This County afforded none either in or before the Raign of Q. Mary; But in our Age it hath produced a most Eminent One, on an account peculiar to himself. JOHN MOLLE was born in or nigh The ensuing Relation I had from his son, Mr. Henry Molle, late O∣rator of Cam∣bridge. South-Mollton in this County, bred in France, where he attained to such perfection in that Tongue, that he made a Dictio∣nary thereof for his own use: After his youth spent in some military imployments of good trust, he was in his reduced Age made, by Thomas Lord Burgley and President of the North, one of the Examiners in that Court. Going afterwards Governour to the Lord Ross, he passed the Alps (contrary to his own resolution) prizing his Fidelity to his charge above his own security. No sooner were they arrived at Rome, but the young Lord was courted and feasted, Mr. Molle arrested and imprisoned in the Inquisition. I hus at once did he lose the comfort of his Wife, Children, Friends, own land, and liberty, being kept in most strict restraint. Adde to all these vexations, visits of importunate Priests and Jesuits, daily hacking at the Root of his Constancy with their Objections; till finding their Tools to turn edge, at last they left him to his own Conscience. What saith the Holy Spirit? Revel. 18. 4. Come out of Babylon my Teople. But here alas was he, who would, but could not come thence, detained there in durance for thirty years together: How great his sufferings were, is onely known to God, who permitted, his Foes, who inflicted, and himself, who endured them; Seeing no friend was allowed to speak with him alone. He died in the 81. year of his Age, a∣bout the year of our Lord 1638. Cardinals. VVILLIAM COURTNEY was born (probably at Okehampton) in this Coun∣ty,* Godwin in the Arch-Bi∣shops of Can∣terbury. son to Hugh Courtney Earl of Devon-shire, successively Bishop of Hereford, Winche∣ster and Canterbury; The credit of T. Walsingham an exact Historian (and born before Courtney was buried) maketh me confident, that the Pope made him a Cardinal, and Ciaconius and Onuphrius two Italians, confirm the same; that a Bishop of London (though mistaking his Name, Adam for William) was at this time rewarded with a Red Hat.
How stoutly he then opposed John of Gaunt (Wickliffe his Patron) in his Church of St. Paul is largely related in my Church History, and I can add nothing thereunto. For if the men of Laconia (whose work was to study concisenesse) punished him severe∣ly, for speaking in Three, what might have been said in Two Words; Criticks will se∣verely censure me, for such tedious repetition. Onely we may observe; that when Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, his Metropolitical Visitation charged through and through, every Diocesse in his own Province, no resistance being of Proof against him, all Opposers giving some trouble to him, but disgrace to themselves; soon suppressed by his high bloud, strong brains, full purse, skill in Law, and plenty of powerful friends, in the English and Romish Court. The difficulty which he underwent herein, made the work easie to his Successors ever after. He deceased July 31. Anno Domini 1396. Prelates. ROBERT CHICHESTER. Here I had been at a perfectlosse, had I not met with a good Guide to direct me: For I had certainly from his Sirname concluded him born at Chichester in Sussex, according to the Custome of other Clergy-men. But this single swallow (which makes no Summer) had a Flight by himself, retaining his Paternal Name, descended from a Noble and Ancient Family (saith my Author*;) Still flourishing [at† Godwin in the Bishops of Exeter. Rawleigh] in this County. He was first Dean of Sarisbury, then Anno 1128. Conse∣crated Bishop of Exeter; highly commended by many VVriters, for his Piety, though the Principal thereof consisted in his Pilgrimages to Rome, and procuring Reliques thence. He bestowed much money in building and adorning his Cathedral, and ha∣ving sate therein two and twenty years, died and was buried 1150, on the South side of the High Altar, nigh a Gentleman of his own Sirname, whose inscribed Arms are the best Directory to this Bishops Monument. GILBERT FOLIOT was born at Tamerton Manuscript of Baronet Northcott. Foliot in this County, Abbot of Glo∣cester, (Bale saith Exeter) then successively Bishop of Hereford and London. He was observed when a Common Jo. Sarisbu∣ in Poli∣cratic. cap. 7. Brother of his Covent, to inveigh against the Prior; when Prior, against the Abbot; when Abbot, against the pride and lazinesse of Bishops; but when he himself was Bishop, all was well, and Foliots mouth when full, was silent: Whether because all things do rest quiet in their center, or because Age had abated his juvenile Animosity; or because he found it more facil to find faults in others, then mend them in himself. Indeed, oft times meer Morosness of Nature, u∣surps the reputation of Zeal, and what is but a bare disgust of mens persons, passeth for dislike of their vices. However our Foliot, the lesse he had in Satyrs, the more he had of Elegies afterwards, secretly bemoaning the badnesse of the Age he lived in: Hear a Passe betwixt him and a strange voice, Satans Challenge. Godwin in the Bishops of London. O Gilberte Foliot Dum revolvis tot & tot, Deus tuus est The God∣desse of the Zidonians. ASHTAROT. Foliots Answer. Mentiris Daemon, qui est Deus Sabaoth, est ille meus. He finds little favour from our Historians of his Age, because they do generally Becketize; whilst Foliot was all for the King, being a professed Enemy to the (not per∣son, but) pride of that Prelate*. This wise and learned Bishop died Feb. 18. 1187. ROBERT FOLIOT Arch-Deacon of Oxford, was neer Cosen Bale de Scrip▪ Brit. Cent 3. Num. 8. (and therefore is placed Country man) to Gilbert aforesaid. He was bred first in England, then in France, where he got the Sirname of Robertus Melundinensis, probably from the place of his longest abode. He was first Tutor to Becket, and Becket afterwards was Patron to him, by whose procurement he succeeded his Kinsman in the See of Hereford. He wrote several Books, whereof One of the Sacraments of the Old Law is most re∣markable. Hitherto we have followed Bale with blind obedience, until Bishop Godwin, whom we rather believe, hath opened our eyes in two particulars:
1 That Robert de Melune (Bishop also of Hereford) was a distinct person from our Robert. 2 That our Foliot was advanced Bishop after theGodwin in the Bishops of Hereford. death of Becket, probably for the affection he bore unto him, not the assistance he received from him. His deah happened Anno 1186. Nor must we forget, there was also one Hugh Foliot Arch∣Deacon of Shrewsbury, afterwards Bishop of Hereford; of whom nothing re∣mains, but his Name and the date of his Death 1234. WILLIAM BREWER, was born in this County (or in Somerset-shire) whereof William his Father was several years Sheriffe under King Henry the Second,See our Ca∣talogue of Sheriffes in Henry the Se∣cond. where we shall insist on the occasion of his Sirname. Bishop Godwin informeth us, that he was Brother to Sr. William Brewer Knight, if there be not an errour therein, seeing Two Brethren surviving their Parents together; both of a Name, are seldome seen in the same Family. He was preferred Bishop of Ex∣eter Anno 1224. A Great Courtier, and employed in suchGodwin in the Bishops of Exeter. Embassies proper for a Person of Prime Quality, as when he was sent to conduct Isabel Sister to King Henry the Third, to be married to Frederick the Emperour; whom he afterwards attended to the Holy Land▪ Returning to his See, he set himself wholly to the adorning and enriching thereof, founding a Dean and 24 Prebendaries, allowing the later the Annual Stipend of Four Pounds, which they receive at this day. But I am lately informed that the Dean and Resi∣denciaries of Exeter have since augmented the Salary of all the Prebendaries at large to twen∣ty pounds a year: Which Intelligence if false, they are not injured, if true, they are courteously used. This Bishop died Anno Domini 1244. WILLIAM de RALEIGH, was born at that well known Town in this County, preferred first Canon of St. Pauls, then successively Bishop of Norwich andThe effect of what follow∣eth is taken ot of Bishop Godwin, in his Bishops of Winchester. Winchester: The last of which cost him much trouble, his Election being stiffely opposed by King Henry the Third, intending a Valentinian (Uncle to the Queen) for that Bishoprick; whom the Monks of Winchester refused; terming him, Vir Sanguinum, A man of Bloud. Whether in that sense wherein David is so termed (and on that account prohibited the building of the Temple) because a Martial Man; or whether onely because de∣scended of high bloud, whose Descent was all his Desert, so that they ridgidly adhered to the election of Raleigh. King Henry who seldome used to be angry, and more seldome to swear; sware in his anger, That he would have his will at last, or they should never have Bishop; and how his Conscience came off vvithout Perjury herein, his own Confssor vvas best able to satis∣fie him. Raleigh had (beides his own merits) two good friends, his Purse and the Pope, the former procuring the later. He presented his Holynesse with six thousad Mark, which effected his Work. Here two persons were at once deceived, the Pope not expecting so great a sum should be tendred him, and Raleigh not suspecting he would take all; but leave at least a morsel for manners. But his hands will take what ever is tendred him, if not too Hot or too Heavy. Raleigh thus runin debt, could never creep out thereof, though living very privately, and dying very penitently: For when the Priest brought the uchrist unto him, ly∣ing on his Death-Bed; Raleigh expressing himself in language like to that of John Bap∣tistMatth. 3.: I have need to come to thee, and comest thou to me; would rise out of his Bed to meet him. His death happened Anno Dom. 1249. RICHARD COURTNEY was one of greatBishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of Nor∣wich. linage (allied to the Earl of Devon∣shire) and no lesse Learning (excellently skilled in the Knowledg of both Laws:) So that at the instant suit of K. Henry the Fifth; He was preferred Bishop of Norwich, Anno 1413. His person (the Inne of his Soul, had a fair Sign) was highly favoured by his Prince, and beloved by the people; Yet all this could not prolong his life: So that he died of a flux at the siege of Harflew in Normandy, in the second year of his Consecration, and his Corps brought over, was honourably entombed in West∣minster.
JAMES CARY, was born in this County, his name still flourishing nt Cockington therein: He was at Rome made Bishop of Lichfield, and travailing thence homewards towards England, did again light on the Pope at Flornce, just at the news of the va∣cancy of Exeter, and the same See was bestowed on him, the more welcome, because in his Native County. Say not this was a Degradation; For though in our time Lich∣field is almost twice as good as Exeter, xeter then was almost four times as good as Lichfield. This appeareth by their valuations of their Income intoCompa e Bishop God∣win pag. 331. with pag. 415. First-Fruits; Exe∣ter paying the Pope six thousand Ducats, whilst Lichfield paid onely seventeen hundred at the most. But what ever the value of either or both was, Cary enjoyed neither of them; dying and being buried in Florence. Thus, though one may have two Cups in his hand, yet some intervening accident may so hinder, that he may taste of neither. He died 1419. JOHN STANBERY, was (saithDe Sc ip. Brit. cent. 8. Num. 34. Bale out of Leland) in Occidentali  parte natus. But the Western parts, being a wide Parish, thanks to our Authour, who hathMannse ipt of Baronet . particularized the place of his Nativity, viz. the Farm of Church-hill, within the Parish of Bratton or Broad-Town in this County, where some of his Name and Kin∣dred remain at this day. He was bred a Carmelite in Oxford, and bcame generaly as learned as any of his Order, deserving all the dignity which the niversity did or could confer upon him. King Hn. the sixth highly favoured and made him the first Provost of Eaton, being much ruled by his advice in ordering that his new Foundati∣on. He was by the King designed Bishop of Norwich, but William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk (See the presumption of a proud Favourite or Minion rather) got it from him for his own Chaplain, and Stanbery was for to stay his stomack on the poor Bi∣shoprick of Bangor, till Anno 1453, he was advanced Bishop of Hereford. Leland doth condemn him for his over compliance with the Pope in all his intolle∣rable taxes, and others commend him as much for his fidelity to his Master King Hen. whom he deserted not in all his adversity; so that this Bishop was taken prisoner in the Battail of Northampton. Say not to this Prelate, as Eliab to David,1 Sam. 17. 28. Why camest thou down hither? with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the Wildernesse? I know the pride and the malice of thy heart, for thou art come down to see the Battail; For Stanbery being Con∣fessor to King Henry, he was tyed by his Oath to such personal attendance. After long durance in Warwick Castle, he was set at liberty, and dying Anno 1474, was buried in the Convent of Carmelites at Ludlow; where his barbarous and tedious Epi∣taph (ill suiting with the Authour of such learned and pithy Books) is not worth the inserting. PETER COURTNE son to SirGowin in the Bishop of Wincher. Phillip Courtney, was born at Powderham in this Shire. He was first preferred Arch-Deacon, then Bishop of xeter, expending very much money in finishing the North Tower, giving a great (called Peter) Bell thereunto. He was afterwards Anno 1486, translated to Winchester; where he sat five years. It is much one of so Illustrious Birth should have so obscure a Burial, Bishop Godwin con̄∣fessing that he knew not whereabouts in his Church he lyeth interred. Since the Reformation. JOHN JEWEL bearing the Christian Name of his Father, Grandfather, and Great Grandfather, was born at Buden (a Farm possessed more than two hundred years by his Ancestors) in the Parish of , nigh Illfracombe in this County, on the 24th of May 1552. His mothers Sirname was Bellamy, who with her husband John Jewel lived happily fifty years together in Holy Wedlock, and at their death left ten children behind them. It may be said of his Sirname; Nomen, Omen, Jewel his Name, and Pretious his Ver∣tues: So that if the like ambition led us English men, which doth Foraigners, speciously to render our Sirnames in Greek or Latine, he may be termed Johnnes Gemma, on better account then Gemma Frisius entituleth himself thereunto. He was chiefly bred in the School of Barstable, where John Harding afterwards his Antagonist, was his School fellow, and at 15 years of age was admitted in Merton Colldge, under the tuition of John Parkhurst, afterwards Bishop of Norwich. Such
his sedulity, rising alway at 4 of the Clock, and not going to bed till 10; that he was never punished for any exercise; and but once for absence from Chappel. Hence he was removed to Corpus Christi Colledge, where he proved an Excellent Poet (having all Horace by heart) Linguist, and Orator. Thus having touched at all Humane Arts, he landed at Divinity, being much assisted by Peter Martyr the Kings Professor therein. St. In his Apolo∣gia, adversus . Jerome telleth us that so great was the intimacy betwixt Pamphilius that worthy Martyr, a Priest, and Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea, ut ab uno alter nomen acceperet; that they mutually were sirnamed the one from the other, Pamphilius Eusebii, and Eusebius Pamphilii: No lesse the unity of affections be twixt these two, who accordingly might be called Martyrs Jewell, and Jewells Mar∣tyr; as seldome in body, and never in mind asunder. What eminent changes afterwards befel him in the course of his life, how he fled into Germany, lived at Zurick, returned into England, was preferred Bishop of Salisbury, wrote learnedly, preached painfully, lived piously, died peaceably, Anno Dom. 1572. are large∣ly related in my Ecclesiastical History, and I will trouble the Reader with no repetitions. JOHN PRIDEAUX was born at Hartford in the West part of this County, bred Scholar, Fellow, and Rctor of Exeter Colledg in Oxford, Canon of Christ-Church, and above thirty years Kings Professor in that University. An excellent Linguist, but so that he would make words wait on his matter, chiefly aiming at expressivenesse therein; he had a becomming Feivity, which was Aristotles, not St. Pauls . Admirable his memory, retaining what ever he had read. The Welch have a Proverb (in my mind somewhat uncharitable) He that hath a good memory, giveth few Alms; be∣cause he keepeth in mind, what and to whom he had given before: But this Doctor cross'd this Proverb, with his constant charity to all in want. His learning was admired by Forreigners, Sextinus Amma, Rivet, &c. He was not Vindicative in the least degree: One Mr. Josph Maynard Fel∣low of Exeter Colledg. intimate with him, having assured me, that he would forgive the greatest injury, upon the least show of the parties sorrow, and re∣store him to the degree of his former favour; and though Politicians will thence col∣lect him no prudent man, Divines will conclude him a good Christian. Episcopacy in England being grievously wounded by malevolent persons, King Charles the First conceived that the best Wine and Oil that could be powred into those wounds, was, to select persons of known Learning and unblameable Lives to supply the vacant Bi∣shopricks; amongst whom Dr. Prideaux was made Bishop of Worcester. But alasse, all in vain, such the present fury of the Times. He died of a Feaver 1650, and I have perused a Manuscript Book (But alasse not made by Oxford, but Worcester-shire Muses) of Verses on his Funeral. Amongst which I take notice of these, Define mirari caecos errasse tot Ignes, In prompt causa est, lux Prideauxus obit. Mortuus est Prideaux? scriptis post funera vivit; Aufertur Letho Mitra, Corona datur. To these we may add the Chronogram, which I meet with amongst the same Verses. Iohannes PrIDeaVXVs  VVIgornIae MortVVs, est. 1650. He was buried at Bredon in Worcester-shire, August the 1th. Such as deny Bishops to be Peers, would have conceived this Bishop a Prine, if present at his Interment, such the Number and Quality of Persons, attending his Funeral. States-men. Sir ARTHUR CHICHESTER Knight, was descended of a right ancient Fa∣mily, dwelling at Rawley in this County. He spent his youth first in the University, then in the French and Irish Wars; where by his valour he was effectually assistant, first to plough and break up that barbarous Nation by Conquest, and then to sow it with seeds of civility, when by King James made Lord Deputy of Ireland. Ind ed good Laws and provisions had been made by his Predecessors to that pur∣pose, but alas they were like good lessons set for a Lute out of tune, uselesse untill
the Instrument was fitted for them. Wherefore in order to the civilizing of the Irishry, in the first year of his Government he established two new Circuits for Justi∣ces of Assize, the one in Connaught, the other in Munster. And whereas the Circuits in former times onely encompassed the English Pale (as the Cynosura doth the Pole) henceforward, like good Planets in their several Spheres, they carried the influence of Justice, round about the Kingdom. Yea, in short time, Ireland was so cleared of Theeves and Capital Offenders, that so many Malefactors have not been found in the Two and Thirty Shires of Ireland, as in Six Sir John Da∣vis in his Dis∣course of Ire∣land. pag. 270. English Shires in the Western Cir∣cuit. He reduced the Mountains and Glinns on the South of Dublin (formerly thorns in the sides of the English-Pale) into the County of Wicklowe, and in conformity to the English Custome, many Irish began to cut their Mantles into Cloaks. So observant his eye over the actions of suspected persons; that Tyrone was heard to complain that he could not drink a full carouso of Idem, pag. 21. sack, but the State was within few hours advertised thereof. After he had been continued many years in his Deputy-ship, and deservedly made a Lord, King James recalled him home, and (loath to leave his abilities unimployed) sent him Embassadour to the Emperour, and other German Princes. Being besieged in the City of Mainchine (a place much indebted to his prudence, for seasonable vi∣ctualling it:) by Count Tilley; he sent him word that it was against the Law of Nati∣ons to besiege an Embassadour: Tilley returned, that he took no notice that he was an Em∣bassadour. The Lord Chichester replied to the Messenger; Had my Master sent me with as many hundred men, as he hath sent me on fruitlesse Messages, your General should have known, that I had been a Souldier, as well as an Embassadour. King James at his return, entertain'd him with great commendation, for so well discharging his trust, and he died in as great honour as any English-man of our age, Anno Dom. 162.. Capital Judges. Sir WILLIAM HERLE Knight, was made by King Edward the Third, Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, in Hillary Term, the first year of his Raign, and before the Term ended, (viz. Jan. the 29.) was made Chief Judge of the Common Pleas, by his own free consent, as I have cause to conceive; he standing fair in the Kings favour. For, whereas sixty marks was in that age the annual salary of that place, the King 1 of Edw. 3. Pat. 4. Parl. 1. Memb. 35. granted him an augmentation of two hundred and forty marks a year, so long as he kept that Office. This was some four years, for I find Sir John Sir Hen. Spel∣mans Gloss. tit. Justic. pag. 417. Stoner put into his place, in the Fourth of the Kings Raign, yet so, that this Sir William was his Successor the year after, such alterations being usual in that age. I collect him to die in the ninth of King Edward the Third (the mention of him sink∣ing that year) and is placed here; because, if not born at (which is most probable) he was owner of Illfracombe in this County, the Mannor whereof was held by his issue till the Raign of King Henry the Seventh; and I understand that a Family of his Name, and I believe of his linage, hath still a Worshipful existence in Cornwall. Sir JOHN CARY Knight, was born at Cockington in this County, and applying himself to the Study of the Laws, was made Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the tenth year of King Richard the Second. The greatest fault I find charged on him, was Loyalty to his Lord and Master, which, if any dare call a disease: I assure you it is a catching one, among conscientious people. On this honourable account this Judge lost his Office, Goods, and Lands, in the first of King Henry the Fourth; whose losses, not long after providence plentifully repayed to his Posterity; On this occa∣sion. A Knight Errant of Arragon comming into England, and challenging any to tilt with him, was undertaken by Sir Robert Cary, son to Sir John aforesaid; who van∣quished the vain glorious Don; So that King Henry the Fifth out of a sympathy of va∣lour, restored all his estate unto him. This Judge dyed about the year of our Lord 1404. Sir WILLIAM HANKFORD was born at Amerie in this County (a
Mannor, which from owners of the same name by their daughter and heir descended to the Hank fords) bred in the study of the Laws, till he became Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the first of King Henry the Fifth; which place he adorned with great Learning and Integrity, though doleful the manner of his death; on this occa∣sion: Coming home discontented from London, he expressed extream anger (somewhat trespassing on his judicial gravity) against his Keeper; for that (as he said) his Deer were stolen, and charged him to shoot any man in the Park whom he should find there, and stood not being spoken unto, and he would discharge him. The next night being dark, he presents himself, and refusing to stand, the Keeper according to his Injunction, shot and killed him. The stump of the Oak, nigh which this sad accident happened, hath been shewn to some eminent Lawyers riding that Circuit, which are yet alive. However no violent impression is intimated in this his peaceable Epitaph on his Monument in Amerie Church: Hic jacet Will. Hankford Miles, quondam Capitalis Justiciarius Domini R. de Banco, qui obiit duodecimo Die Decembris Anno Domini 1422. cujus, &c. His Figure is portraied kneeling, and out of his mouth in a Label, these two sen∣tences do proceed; 1 Miserere mei Deus secundum magnam misericordiam tuam. 2 Beati qui custodiant judicium, & faciunt justitiam omni tempore. No charitable Reader, for one unadvised act will condemn his Memory, who, when living, was habited with all requisites for a person of his place. Sir JOHN FORTESCUE was born of a right Ancient and Worthy Fa∣mily in this County, first fixed at Wimpstone in this Shire; but since prosperously planted in every part thereof. They give for their Motto Forte Scutum Salus Ducum, and it is observable that they attained eminency in what Profession soever they apply∣ed themselves. In the Field. In Westminster Hall. In the Court. Sir HEN FORTESCUE a valiant and fortunate Commander under King Henry the Fifth in the French Wars, by whom he was made Governour of Meux in Berry. Sir HEN. FORTESCUE was Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, and justly of great esteem for his many ver∣tues; especially for his sin∣cerity in so tempting a place. Sir JOHN. FORTESCUE that wise Privy Councel∣lor, Overseer of Queen E∣lizabeth her Liberal Studies; And Chancellor of the Ex∣chequer, and Dutchy of Lancaster. Sir ADRIAN FORTESCUE Porter of the Town of Calice, came over with King Henry the Seventh, and ef∣fectually assisting him to re∣gain the Crown, was by him deservedly created Knight Banneret. Sir JOHN FORTESCUE our present Subject, Lord Chief Justice and Chan∣cellour of England, in the Raign of King Henry the Sixth, whose learned Com∣mentaries on the Law, make him famous to all posterity.   Sir LEWIS POLLARD of Kings Nimet in this County, Sergeant of the Law, and one of the Justices of the Kings Bench in the time of King Henry the Eighth, was a man of singular knowledg and worth; who by his Lady Elizabeth had,
Eleven Sons, whereof four attained the honour of Knighthood: Sir Hugh. Sir John of Ford. Sir Richard. Sir George, who got his honour in the defence of Bullen. All the rest, especially John Arch Dea∣con of Sarum, and Canon of Exeter, were very well advanced. Eleven Daughters married to the most potent Families in this County, and most of them Knights: So that (what is said of Cork in Ireland, that all the Inhabitants therein are Kinne) by this Match almost all the Ancient Gentry in this County are allied. The Portraiture of Sir Lewis and his Lady, with their two and twenty Children, are set up in a Glasse Window at Nimet-Bishop. There is a Tradition continued in this Family; that the Lady glassing the Window in her husbands absence at the term in London; caused one child more then she then had, to be set up, presuming (having had one and twenty already, and usually conceiving at her husbands coming home) she should have another child; which inserted in expectance, came to passe accord∣ingly. This memorable Knight died Anno 1540. Sir JOHN DODERIDG Knight, was born at...... in this County, bred in Exe∣ter Colledg in Oxford; where he became so general a Scholar, that it is hard to say, whether he was better Artist, Divine, Civil, or Common Lawyer, though he fixed on the last for his publick Profession; and became second Justice of the Kings Bench. His soul consisted of two Essentials, Ability and Integrity, holding the Scale of Justice with so steady an hand, that neither love nor lucre, fear or flattery, could bow him on either side. It was vehemently suspected that in his time, some gave large sums of money, to purchase places of Judicature. And Sir John is famous for the expression, That as old and infirm as he was, he would go to Tyburn on foot to see such a man hang'd; that should proffer money for a place of that nature; For certainly those who buy such Offices by whole sale, must sell Justice by retail, to make themselves savers. He was commonly called the Sleeping Judg, because he would sit on the Bench with his eyes shut, which was onely a posture of attention, to sequester his sight from distracting objects, the better to lissen to what was alledged and proved. Though he had three Wives successively, out of the respectful Families of Germin, Bamfield, and Culme, yet he left no issue be∣hind him. He kept a Hospital House at Mount-Radford neer Exeter, and dying Anno Domini 1628. the thirteenth day of September; (after he had been seventeen years a Judg) in the seventy third year of his age, was interred under a stately Tomb in our Ladys Chappel in Exeter. To take my leave of the Devonian Lawyers, they in this County seem innated with a Genius to study Law, none in England (Northfolk alone excepted) affording so ma∣ny; Cornwal indeed hath a Famine, but Devon-shire makes a Feast of such, who by the practice thereof have raised great Estates. Three Sergeants were all made at one Call, Sergeant Glanvil [the Elder] Dew, and Harris, of whom it was commonly said (though I can nor care not to appropriate it respectively:) One Gained as much as the other two. Spent Gave One Town in this Shire, Tavistock by name, furnisheth the Bar at this present, with a Constellation of Pleaders, wherein the biggest Stars Sergeant Glanvil, who shineth the brighter, for being so long eclipsed; and Sergeant Maynard, the Bench seeming sick with long longing for his sitting thereon. As it is the Honour of this County to breed such able Lawyers; so is it, its happinesse, that they have most of their Clients from other Shires, and the many Suits tried of this County, proceed not so much from the Litigiousnesse, as Populousnesse of her Inhabitants.
Souldiers. Sir RICHARD GREENVIL Knight, lived and was richly landed at Bediford in this County. He was one of the Twelve Peers which accompanied Robert Fitz-Haimon in his expedition against the Welsh; when he overthrew Rhese ap Theodore, Prince of South-Wales, and Justine Lord of Glamorgan; and divided the conquered Countrey betwixt those his Assistants. This Sir Richard in my apprehension appears somewhat like the Patriarch Gen. 14. Abraham: For he would have none make him rich, but God alone, though in his partage, good land was at Neath, (Nidum a City in Antoninus) in Glamorgan-shire allotted unto him. Indeed Abraham gave the tenth to God in Melchisedeck, and restored the rest to the King of Sodom, the former proprietary thereof. This Knight (according to the De∣votion of those darker dayes) gave all to God, erecting and endowing a Monastery (dedicated to the Virgin Mary) at Neath, for Cistertians, bestowing all his military Acquests on them for their maintenance, so that this Convent was valued at 150 li. per. annum at the dissolution. Thus having finished and setled this foundation, he return∣ed to his own Patrimony at Bediford in this County, where he lived in great repute, 1100. under the Raign of King William Rufus, (and may seem to have ntailed He∣reditary Valour on his Name and still flourishing Posterity. JAMES Lord AUDLEY is challenged by several Counties, (Stafford-shire, Hereford∣shire, Dorsetshire, &c.) And that with almost equal probability, to be their Native: But my Authour, well verst in the Antiquities of this Shire, clearly adjudgeth his birth there∣unto: Avouching the Castle of Barstable the place of his principal Mansion and In∣habitance. This is that Lord Audley, so famous for his valiant service in France, at the Battail of Poictiers, where the Black Prince rewarded him with a yearly Pension of 500 Marks, which presently the Lord Audley gave as freely to his four Esquires; having (as he said) received this Honour by their means. The news of this Largesse being quickly brought to the Prince his Ears, he questioned the Lord, whether he conceived his Gift not worthy his esteem; as beneath his acceptance? To whom the Lord replyed, Thse Squires have done me long and faithful service, and now especially in this Battail, with∣out whose assistance I being a single man, could have done little. Besides, The fair Estate left meb my Ancestors, enableth me freely to serve your Highnesse; whereas these my men may stand in need of some support; onely I crave your pardon forgiving it away without your licence: The Prince highly pleased thereat, praised his Bounty as much as his Valour, and dou∣bled his former Pension into a thousand Marks. This noble Lord by my computation di∣ed about the beginning of the Raign of King Richard the Second. THOMAS STULEY. Were he alive, he would be highly offended to be ranked under any other Topick than that of Princes; whose memory must now be content and thankful too, that we will afford it a place amongst our Souldiers. He was a younger brother, of an ancient, wealthy, and worshipful Family, nigh Illfracombe in this County, being one of good parts, but valued the lesse by others; because over-prized by himself. Having prodigally mis-spent his Patrimony, he en∣tred on several projects (the issue general of all decaied estates) and first pitched on the peopleing of Florida, then newly found out in the West Indies. So confident his am∣bition, that he blushed not to tell Queen Elizabeth, that he preferred rather to be Soveraign of a Mole-hill, than the highest Subject to the greatest King in Christendome; adding moreo∣ver, that, he was assured he should be a Prince before his death: I hope (said Queen Eliza∣beth) I shall hear from you, when you are stated in your Principality: I will write unto you (quoth Stukely.) In what Language? (said the Queen) He returned, In the Stile of Princes; To our dear Sister. His fair project of Florida being blasted for lack of money to pursue it, he went over into Ireland, where he was frustrate of the preferment he expected, and met such Physick, that turned his Feaver into Frensie. For, hereafter re∣solving treacherously to attempt, what he could not loyally atchieve, he went over into Italy.
It is incredible how quickly he wrought himself thorough the notice into the fa∣vour, through the Court into the Chamber, yea Closet, yea bosome of Pope Pius Quintus.; so that some wise men thought his Holinesse did forfeit a parcel of his in∣fallibility, in giving credit to such a Glorioso, vaunting that with three thousand soul∣diers he would beat all the English out of Ireland. The Pope finding it cheaper to fill Stuckleys swelling sails, with aiery Titles, than real Gifts, created him Baron of Ross, Viscount Murrough, Earl of Wexford, Mar∣quesse of Lemster, and then furnished this Title-top-heavy General, with eight hundred souldiers paid by the King of Spain for the Irish Expedition. In passage thereunto Stuckley lands at Portugal, just when Sebastian the King there∣of, with two Moorish Kings, were undertaking of a voyage into Affrica. Stuckly scorning to attend, is perswaded to accompany them. Some thought he wholly quitted his Irish design, partly because loath to be pent up in an Island (the Conti∣nent of Affrica affording more elbow-room for his Atchievements) partly because so mutable his mind, he ever loved the last project (as Mothers the youngest child:) best. Others conceive he took this Affrican in order to his Irish design; such his con∣fidence of Conquest, that his Break-fast on the Turks, would the better enable him to dine on the English in Ireland. Landing in Affrica, Stuckley gave counsil, which was safe, seasonable and necessa∣ry; namely, that for two or three dayes they should refresh their land Souldiers▪ whereof some were sick, and some were weak, by reason of their tempestuous pas∣sage. This would not be heard, so furious was Don Sebastion to engage; as if he would pluck up the bays of Victory out of the ground, before they were grown up▪ and so in the Battail of Alcaser their Army was wholly defeated: Where Stuckley lost his life. A fatal fight, where in one day was slain, Three Kings that were, and One that would be fain. This Battail was fought Anno 1578. Where Stuckley with his eight hundred men be∣haved himself most valiantly, till over-powered with multitude. I hope it will be no offence, next to this Bubble of Emptinesse, and Meteor of Ostentati∣on, to place a precious Pearl, and Magazine of secret merit, whom we come to de∣scribe. GEORGE MONCK. Some will say he being (and long may he be) alive; belongs not to your Pen, according to your Premised Rules. But know he is too High to come under the Roof of my Regulations, whose merit may make Laws for me to observe. Besides, it is better that I should be censured, than he not commended. Passe we by his High Birth (whereof hereafter) and ard breeding in the Low-Countreys, not com∣mencing a Captain per saltum (as many in our Civil Wars) but proceeding by degrees from a private Souldier, in that Martial University. Passe we also by his Imployment in Ireland, and Imprisonment in England for the King; his Sea service against the Dutch; Posting to speak of his last performanc, which should I be silent, would speak of it selfe. Being made Governour of Scotland, no power or policy of O. C. could fright or flat∣ter him thence. Scotland was his Castle, from the top whereof he ook the true pro∣spect of our English affairs. He perceived that since the Martyrdom of King Charls, seve∣ral sorts of Goverment (like the Sons of Jesse before Samuel) pafsed before the En∣glish People; but neither God nor our Nation had chosen them. He resolved therefore to send for despised David out of a Forreign Field; as well assured that the English Loy∣alty would never be at rest, till fixed in the center thereof. He secured Scotland in faith∣full hands, to have all his Foes before his , and leave none behind his back. He entreth England with excellent Foot, but his Horse so lean, that they seem∣ed tired at their first setting forth. The chiefest strength of his Army consisted in the Reputation of the strength thereof, and wise conduct of their General. The Loyal English did rather gaze on, than pray for him, as ignorant of his intentions, and the Apostle observeth that the private man knoweth not how to say Amen to what is spoken in an unknown Language.
Now the scales began to fall down from the eyes of the English Nation (as from Saul, when his sight was received) sensible that they were deluded, with the preten∣ces of Religion and Liberty, into Atheisme and Vassallage. They had learnt also from the Souldiers (whom they so long had quartered) to cry out One and All, each Shire setting forth a Remonstrance of their grievances, and refusing farther payment of Taxes. Lambert cometh forth of London, abounding with more outward advantages than General Monk wanted; Dragon like he breathed out nought but fire and fury, chiefly against the Church and Clergy. But he met with a Saint George, who struck him neither with sword nor spear; but gave his Army a mortal wound, without wounding it. His Souldiers dwindled away, and indeed a private person (Lambert at last was little more) must have a strong and long hand on his own account to hold an whole Army to∣gether. The Hinder part of the Parliament sitting still at Westminster, plied him with many Messengers and Addresses. He returned an answer neither granting nor denying their desires; giving them hope, too little to trust, yet too much to distrust him. He was an absolute Riddle, and no ploughing with his Heifer to expound him. Indeed had he appeared what he was, he had never been what he is, a Deliverer of his Countrey. But such must be as dark as midnight, who mean to atchieve Actions as bright as Noon-day. Then was he put on the unwellcome Office to pluck down the Gates of London, though it pleased God that the Odium did not light on him that acted, but those who imployed him. Hence forward he sided effectually with the City: I say the City, which if well or ill affected, was then able to make us a happy or unhappy Nation. Immediately followed that TURN of our TIMES, which all the World with wonder doth behold. But let us not look so long on second causes, as to lose the sight of the Principal, Divine Providence. Christ on the Crosse said to his Beloved Disciple behold thy Mother; and said to her behold thy Sonne: Thus was he pleased effectually to speak to the hearts of the English, Behold your Soveraign, which inspirited them with Loyalty, and a longing desire of his presence; saying likewise to our Gracious Soveraign, Behold thy Subjects, which encreased his ardent affection to return; and now, blessed be God, both are met together, to their mutual comfort. Since the Honours which he first deserved have been conferred upon him, compleat∣ed with the Title of the Duke of Albemarle, and Master of his Majsties Horse, &c. Nor must it be forgotten that he carried the Scepter, with the Dove thereupon (the Emblem of Peace) at the Kings Coronation. But abler Pens, will improve these Short Memoires into a large History. Sea-men. WILLIAM WILFORD was a Native nigh Plymouth in this County, a valiant and successeful Sea-man. It happened in the Raign of King Henry the Fourth, that the French out of Britain by a sudden Invasion burnt sixteen hundred Houses in Plymouth, if there be not a mistake in the figures, which I vehemently suspect. Sure it was a most sad desolation, remembred at this day in the division of Plymouth, whereof the one part is called the Britons-side, the other the Old-Town. But let the French boast their gain, when the Game is ended, which now was but began. This fire enflamed all the English, and especially our Wilford, with desire of revenge. Within a short time he made them to pay besides costs and charges, more than sixfold damages, by taking forty ships on the Coast of Britains, and burning as many at Penarch; besides many Towns and Villages for six leagues together. I col∣lect the death of this W. Wilford, to be about the beginning of the Raign of King Hen∣ry the Fifth▪ Sr. HVMPHREY GILBERT, or Jilbert, or Gislibert, was born at Green-way in this County, the pleasant Seat of his Family for a long continuance. He was famous for his knowledg both by Sea and Land. In the year 1569 he valiantly and fortunately served in Ireland: Afterwards he led nine Companies to the assistance of the Hollan∣ders. In the year 1583 he set forth with five ships to make discoveries in the North
of America, where he took Sezin and Possession of New-Found-Land (according to the Ancient Solemn Ceremony of cutting a Turf) for the Crown of England. He resolved to adventure himself in his Return in a Vessel of sorty Tun. And with two ships (the onely remains of five) did make for England. In the instant of their winding about (I may confidently report what is generally in this County averred and believed:) A very great Lion, not swimming after the manner of a Beast, with the motion of his feet; nor yet diving sometimes under water, and rising again; (as Porpyces and Dolphins do) but rather gliding on the water with his whole body, except legs in sight, shunned not the ship, nor the Marriners, who presented them∣selves in view; but turning his head too and fro, yawning and gaping wide, made a horrible roaring. It is conceived no Spectrum or Apparition, but a real fish, seeing we read that such like a Lion, in all lineaments was taken at Sea Anno 1282. and pre∣sented to Pope Martin the Fourth. Instantly a terrible Tempest did arise, and Sir Humphrey said cheerfully to his com∣panions, We are as neer Heaven here at Sea as at Land. Nor was it long before his ship sunck into the Sea withal therein, though the other recovered home like Jobs Mes∣sengers, to bring the tydings of the destruction of their companions. This sad acci∣dent happened 158. . . . . . . . COCK. I am sorry I cannot add his Christian Name, and moreAMP. sorry that I cannot certainly avouch his Nativity in this County (though inclined with many motives to believe it) being a Cock of the Game) indeed. For in the Eighty eight, Solus Cam. Eliz. boc Ann. Cockus Anglus in sua inter medios hostes navicula, cum laude periit. And whereas there was not a noble Family in Meteran in Historia Belgi∣ca. Spain, but lost either Son. Brother, or Ne∣phew in that Fight; this Cock was the onely man of note of the English, who fighting a Volanteer in his own ship, lost his life to save his Queen and Countrey. Unus homo nobis pereundo restituit rem. Pity it is his memory should ever be forgotten, and my Pen is sensible of no higher preferment, then, when it may be permitted, to draw the Curtains about those who have died in the bed of Honour. Sir FRANCIS DRAKE. Having formerly in my Holy State written his life at large, I will forbear any addition; and onely present this Tetrastrick, made on his Corps when cast out of the Ship (wherein he died) into the Sea. H. Holland▪ Herologia An∣glia pag. 110. Religio quamvis Romana resurgeret olim. Effoderet Tumulum non puto Drake tuum. Non est quod metuas, ne te combusserit ulla Posteritas, in aqua tutus ab igne manes. Though Romes Religion should in time return, Drake none thy Body will ungrave again: There is no fear Posterity should burn Those bones which free from fire in Sea remain. He died (as I am informed) unmarried, but there is of his Alliance a Worshipful Family extant in this County, in the condition of a Baronet. Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH. The sons of Heth said unto Abraham, thouGen. 23. 6. art a great rince amongst us, In the choice of our Sepulchres bury thy dead, none shall withold them from thee. So may we say to the memory of this worthy Knight, repose your self in this our Catalogue underwhat Topick you please, of States-man, Sea-man, Souldier, Learned Wri∣rer, and what not? His worth unlocks our closest Cabinets, and provides both room and wellcome to entertain him. He was born at The House its Name was called Hayes. Budeley in this County, of an Ancient Family, but decaied in Estate, and he the youngest brother thereof. He was bred in Oriel Colledg in Oxford, and thence comming to Court, found some hopes of the Queens favours reflecting upon him. This made him write in a glasse Window, obvious to the Queens eye, Fain wauld I climb, yet fear I to fall, Her Majesty either espying, or being shown it, did under-write, If thy heart fails thee, climb not at all.
However he at last climbed up by the stairs of his own . But his Introduction into the Court bare an elder date. From this occasion: This   coming cut of Ireland to the English Court in good habit (his  being then a considera∣ble part of his estate) found the Queen walking, till meeting with a Plashy place, she seemed to scruple going thereon. Presently Raleigh cast and spred his new Plush Cloak on the ground whereon the Qeen trod gently, rewarding him afterwards with ma∣ny Suits, for his so free and seasonable tender of so fair a foot . Thus an advantagi∣ous admission into the first notice of a Prince, is more than half a degree to . It is reported of the Women in the Balear Islands, that to  their Sons expert archers; they will not, when children, give them their break-fast before they had hit the mark. Such the dealing of the Queen with this Knight, making him to earn his Ho∣nour, and by pain and peril, to purchase what places of credit or profit were bestow∣ed upon him.  it was true of him, what was said of Cato ; That he seemed to be born to that onely which he went about: So dexterous was he in all his undertakings, In Court, in Camp, by Sea, by Land, with Sword, with Pen, witnesse in the last his History of the World; wherein the onely default or (defect rather) that it wanteth one half thereof. Yet had he many enemies (which worth never wanteth) at Court, his cowardly Detractors, of whom Sir Walter was wont to say, If any man accuseth me to my face, I will answer him with my mouth; but my tail is good enough to return an answer to such who  me behind my bak. Civilians. JOHN COWEL was born at Yarnesborow in this County, bred first at Eaton, then in Kings-Colledg in Cambridg. He was Proctor thereof 1586. Doctor of the Law, Master of Tri∣nity Hall, Vice-Chancellour in the year 1603 and 1614, Doctor of the Arches, & Vicar General to Archbishop Bancroft. Though Civil was his Profession, such his skill in Common Law, he was as well able to practice in Westminster Hall as Doctors Commons. In his time the contest was heightned, betwixt the Civilians and Common Lawyers, Cowell being the Champion of the former, whom King James countenanced as far as he could with conveniency. Indeed great were his abilities, though a grand Oracle of the Common Law, was pleased in derision to call him Doctor Cow-heele; and a Cow-heele (I assure you) well dress'd is good meat, that a Cook (when hungry) may lick his fin∣gers after it. Two chief Monuments he hath left to Posterity, his Book intituled Institutiones  Anglicani, and his Interprerer of the hard words in the Common-Law. Indeed he had both the essentials of an Interpreter, who was both gnarus and sidus. Many slighted his Book, who used it; it being questionable whether it gave more information or offence. Common Lawyers beheld it as a double trespasse, against them; first pedi∣bus ambulando, that a Civillian should walk in a Profession several to themselves; Se∣condly, that he should pluck up the Pales of the bard terms, wherewith it was inclosed, and lay it open and obvious to common capacities. But an higher offence was charged upon him, that he made the King to have a double Prerogative, the one limited by Law, the other ; which being com∣plained of in Parliament, his Book was called in and condemned. Some other ad∣vantages they got against him, the grief whereof (hearts sunk down are not to be boyed up) hastened his death Anno Domini 1611. and he lieth buried in Trinity-Hall Chappel. ARTHVR DVCK, was born of wealthy parentage at Heavy-tree in this Coun∣ty. He was bred in Oxford, Fellow of All-souls-Colledge, and wrote the life of Arch Bishop Chicheley the Founder thereof, in most elegant Latine. Proceeding Doctor of Law, he became Chancellour of Wells and London, and Master of the , de∣signed also Master of the Roles, had not an intervening accident diverted it. One of most smooth Language, but rough speech: So that what the in . Comedian faith of a fair  in Mean Apparel, was true of him. In ipsa inesset forma, vestes formam . Had there not been a masculine strength in his matter, it had been marred with
the disadvantage of his utterance. He died on the Lords Day, and (in effect) in the At   Middlesex. Church, about 1648: Leaving a great estate to two Daughters, since married to two of his Name and Kindred. Writers. ROGER the CISTERTIAN, Lived (neer the place of his birth) at Ford Abbey in this County. Here the judicious Reader will please himself to climb up the two fol∣lowing Mountains of extreams (onely with his eye) and then descend into the Vale of Truth, which lieth betwixt them. Leland. Bale Cent. 3. Num. 23. Doctis artibus & , insolito quodam a∣nimi ardore, noctes atque dies invigilavit. Invigilavit fallaciis atque imposturis Diabo∣licis, ut Christi gloriam obscuraret. I believe that Bilius Bale, would have been sick of the yellow Jaundies, if not venting his choller in such expressions. But to speak impartially, the works of this Roger con∣cerning the Revelations of Elizabeth Abbesse of Schonaugh, and the Legend that he wrote of St. Ursula, with her Thousands of Maids kill'd at Colen, are full (to say no worse) of many fond falsities. He lived mostly in the Low Countries, and flourished 1180 under King Henry the Second. JOHN de FORD was probably born at, certainly Abbot of Ford in this County; esteemed insignis Theologus in his age; following the foot-steps of his friend and Pa∣tron Baldwin, Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. He travailed into Forrain parts, which he did not, as too many, weed, but gathered the Flowers; returning stored with good Manners, and stock'd with good Learning. He endeavoured, that all in his Convent should be like himself, and Ford-Abbey in his time had more Learning therein, than three Convents of the same bignesse. He was Confessor to King John, wrote many pious Works, and dying, was buried in his own Convent, without any Funeral Pomp, about the year 1215. RICHARD FISHAKER or FIZACRE (Matthew In Anno Domini 1248. pag 747. Paris termeth him FISHACLE) was, saith De Scrip. Brit . 4. num. 6. , born in Exoniensi Patria, which I english, in Devonshire. He was bred first in Oxford, then in Paris, and became a Dominican Friar: For his Learning and Preach∣ing as highly esteemed as any of that age. He was (saith Learned Leland) as fast linked in Friendship to Robert Bacon (of whom In the Wri∣ters of Oxford Shire. hereafter) as ever  to Bacchius, or Thesus to Perithous: So that one may say ofthem, there was two friends. This Richard disdaining to survive Robert aoresaid, hearing of his death, expired in the same year 1248. and was buried at Oxford. JOHN CUT- was born at the Manor of Gammage in this County, where his Name and Family do continue Owners thereof. Now, because that which is pretty is pleasing, and what is little, may be presumed pretty; we will insert the short (and indeed all the) information we have of him. Manuscript of Baronet Northcott. In the time of King Edward the Third, Johannes Rupe-Scissanus, or de Rupe scissa [Cutclif] being a very sincere and learned man, opposed himself against the Doctrine and Manners of the Clergy, and wrote against the Pope himself. I see Baleus non vidit omnia, for Pitzeus, it is no wonder if he be pleased to take no notice of a Writer of an opposite judgment to himself. When we receive, then will we return more Intelligence of this Authour. RICHARD CHICHESTER was not born at Chichester in Sussex, as his Name doth import, but was an Manuscript of  Northcott. extract of that Ancient Family, still flourishing at Raleigh in this County. He became a Monk in Westminster, seldome spending any spare time in vanity; but laying it out in reading Scripture and good History. He wrote a Chronicle from Hengisius the Saxon, to the year of our Lord 1348. done indeed fide Historica. His death happened about the year 1355. ROBERT PLYMPTON was born in Plypmton in this County, and bred an Augusti∣nian in the Town of his Nativity. He was afterwards preferred Arch-Deacon of Totnesse, conscientiously discharging his place: for perceiving people extreamly , he was another John Baptist in his painful preaching repentance unto them, which Ser∣mons he caused to be written; and it is conceived they wrought a very good  on the Devonians. The time wherein he flourished is not certainly known.
NICHOLAS UPTON was born in this County, of an Ancient Family, still flourishing therein at........... He was bred Doctor in the Canon-Law, and be∣came Canon of Salisbury, Wells and St. Pauls. Humphrey Duke of Glocester, the Me▪ coenas. General of goodnesse and learning, had him in high esteem, and gave him great rewards: Hereupon Upton, in expression of his gratitude, presented his Patron with a Book (the first in that kind) of Heraldry, and the Rules thereof; a Book since set forth in a fair impression, by Edward Bish Esquire, a Person composed of all wor∣thy accomplishments. He flourished under King Henry the Sixth 1440. Since the Reformation. RICHARD HOOKER was born at Manuscipt of  onet . Heavy-tree nigh Exeter, bred in Corpus Chri∣sti Colledg in Oxford, and afterwards was preferred by Arch-Bishop Whitgift Master of the Temple, whilst at the same time Mr. Walter Travers was the Lecturer thereof. Here the Pulpit spake pure Canterbury in the Morning, and Geneva in the Afternoon, until Travers was silenced. Hooker his Stile was prolixe, but not tedious, and such who would patiently attend and give him credit all the reading or hearing of his Sentences, had their expectation over-paid at the close thereof. He may be said to have made good Musick with his fiddle and stick alone, without any Rosin; having neither Pronunciation nor gesture to grace his matter. His Book of Ecclestiastical POLITIE is prized by all generally, save such who out of Ignorance cannot, or Envy will not understand it. But there is a kind of People who have a Pike at him, and therefore read his Book with a prejudice; that as Jephtha vowed to sacrifice the first living thing which met him, these are resolved to quarrel with the first word, which occurreth therein. Hereupon it is, that they take exception at the very Title thereof, Ecclesiastical Politie; as if unequally yoked; Church with some mixture of City-nesse, that the Discipline Jure Divino, may bow to Humane Inventions. But be it reported to the Judicious, whether when all is done, a Reserve must not be left for prudential Supplies in Church Government. True it is, his Book in our late Times was beheld as an Old-Almanack grown out of date; but blessed be God, there is now a Revoluion, which may bring his Works again into reputation. Mr. Hooker leaving London (no inclination of his own, but obedience to others, put him on so publick a place) retired to his small Benefice in Kent, where he put off his Mortality Anno 1599, leaving the Memory of an humble, holy, and learned Di∣vine. Here I must retract (after a St. Augustine. Father no shame for a Child) two passages in my Church History. For, whereas I reported him to die a Bachilour, he had From the mouth of his Sister latly li∣vng at Hogs∣den nigh Lon∣don. Wife and Children, though indeed such as were neither to his comfort, when living, nor cre∣dit when Dead. But Parents cannot stamp their Children from their Heads or Hearts. Secondly, his Monument was not erected by Sir Edwin Sandys (a person as probable as any man alive for such a performance) but by Sir William Cooper, now li ving in the Castle of Hartford, and let the good Knight have the due Commendation thereof. JOHN REINOLDS was born in this County, bred in Corpus-Christi-Colledge in Oxford, of whom I have spoken plentifully in my Church-History. NATHANIEL CARPENTER, Son to a Minister, was born in this Coun∣ty, bred Fellow of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford. He was right-handed in the Cyclopedy of all Arts; Logick, witnesse his Decades, Mathematicks, expressed in the Book of his Geo∣graphy, and Divinity, appearing in his excellent Sermons called Achitophel. As for his Opticks it had been a Master-piece in that kind, if truly and perfectly printed. I have been informed, that to his great grief, he found the written Preface thereof Ca∣Christmass Pies in his Printers House (Pearles are no Pearles, when Cocks or Coxcombs find them) and could never after from his scattered Notes recover an Original thereof. He went over into Ireland, where he became Chaplain to James Usher Arch-Bishop
of Armagh, and School-Master of the Kings Wards in Dublin. A place of good profit, great credit, greatest trust, being to bring up many Popish Minors in the Protestant Religion, who under his Education grew daily out of the Nonage of their Years and Vassallge of their Errours. He died in Dublin, Robert Usher (soon after Bishop of Kildare) preached his Funeral Sermon, on that Text, Behold a true Israelite, wherein there is no guile, shewing how he was truly a Nathaniel, Gods Gift, and a Carpenter, a Wise Builder of Gods House, un∣til the Dissolution of his Own Tabernacle, about the year 1636. Benefactors to the Publick. PETER BLUNDELL of Tiverton in this County, was a Clothier by his Profession, and through Gods Blessing on his Endeavours therein, raised unto himself a fair E∣state. Nor was he more painful and industrious in gaining, then Pious aud Prudent in disposing thereof; erecting a fair Free-School in the Town of his Nativity: By his Will he bequeathed thereto a competent maintenance (together with conveni∣ency of Lodging) for a Master and Usher. And lest such whose Genius did encline, and Parts furnish them for a further Progresse in Learning, should through want of a Comfortable Subsistency be stopped or disheartned, he bestowed two Scholarships and as many Fellowships on Sidney Colledge in Cambridge; carefully providing that the Scholars bred in his School at Tiverton, should be elected into the same. I cannot attain to a certainty in the Time of his Death, though it be thought to have hap∣pened about the year 1596. WILLIAM BURGOIN Esquire must not be forgotten, finding this his Epitaph on his Marble Stone in the Church of Arlington. Here lies Will. Burgoin a Squire by discent, Whose death in this World many People lament. The Rich for his love; The Poor for his Almes; The Wise for his Knowledge; The Sick for his Balmes. Grace he did love, and Vice conroul: Earth hath his body, and Heaven his Soul. He died on the Twelfth day of August in the Morning, 1623. as the Inscription on his said Tomb doth inform us. Memorable Persons. HENRY de LA POMERAY lived at, and was Lord of Berry-Pomeray in this County. This Henry taking heart at the imprisonment of Richard the First by Leopal∣dus Duke of Austria, surprized and expulsed the Monkes out of Michaels-Mount in Cornwal, that there he might be a petty Prince by himself. But, being ascertained of his Soveraignes inlargement, and fearing deserved death, to prevent it, he laid vio∣lent hands on himself, as Roger Hoveden doth report. But the Carews Sur∣vey of Corn∣wal, pag. 155. Descendants from this Pomeray make a different relation of this accident; affirming, that, a Serjeant at Armes of the Kings came to his Castle at Berry-Pomeray, and there received kind entertainment for certain dayes together, and at his depar∣ture, was gratified with a liberal reward. In counter-change whereof he then, and no sooner, revealing his long concealed errand, flatly arrested his Host, to make his immediate appearance before the King, to answer a capital crime. Which unex∣pected, and ill carried Message, the Gentleman took in such despight, that with his Dagger he stabbed the Messenger to the heart. Then despairing of pardon in so superlative an offence, he abandoned his home, and got himself to his Sister, abiding in the Island of Mount-Michael in Cornwal: Here he bequeathed a large portion of his land to the religious people dwelling there, to pray for the redeeming of his soul; and lastly (that the remainder of his estate might descend to his heir) he caused himself to be let blood unto death. JOHN de BEIGNY Knight, lived Lord of Ege-Lifford in this County, who having been a great Travailer and Souldier in his youth, retired home, married, and
had three Sons in his reduced Age. Of these, the third put himself on Forraign Acti∣on, in the War against the Saracens, in Spain; whereof Fame made a large report, to his Fathers great contentmnt, which made him the more patiently dispence with his absence. But after that death had bereft him of his two elder Sons, he was often heard to say, Oh that I might but once embrace my   : Son, I would be contented to die pre∣sently. His Son soon after returning unexpectedly, the old man instantly expired with an extasie of Joy. An English Father I see can be as passionate as the Italian Mo∣ther, which died for      . Joy, after the return of her Son from the Battail of . Thus, if all our randome desires should hit the Mark, and if Heaven should alwayes take us at our word, in our wishes; we should be tamed with our Wild prayers granted unous us, and be drowned in the Deluge of our own Passions. This Knight (as I take it) flourished under King Edward the Third. CHILD, (Whose Christian Name is unknown) was a Gentleman, the last of his Family, being of ancient extraction at Plimstock in this County, and great Pos∣sessions. It happened that he hunting in Dart-More, lost both his Company and way in a bitter Snow. Having killed his Horse, he crept into his hot bowels for warmh, and wrote this with his bloud; He that findes and brings meto my Tombe, The Land of Plimstock shall be his doom. That nght he was frozen to death, and being first found by the Monkes of Tav∣stock, they with all possible speed hasted to interre him in their own Abby. His own  of Plimstock hearing thereof, stood at the Ford of the River to take his Body from them. But they must rise early, yea not sleep at all, who over-reach Monkes in matter of profit. For they cast a slight Bridge over the River, whereby they carried over the Corps and interred it. In avowance whereof, the Bridge (a more Premeditate Structure (I believe) in the place of the former Extempore Passage) is called Guils Bridge to this day. And know Reader, all in the Vicinage will be highly offended with such who either deny or doubt the credit of this common Tradition. And sure it is, that the Abbot of Tavistock got that rich Manor into his Possession. The exact Dae of this Childs Death I cannot attain. NICHOLAS ANDREW TREMAINE were Twins and younger Sons to Thomas Tremaine of  in this County Esquire. Had they preceded Hypocrates in time, poste∣rity would have presumed them the sympathising Twins, whereof he maketh so large mention. Such their likenesse in all lineaments, they could not be distinguished but by their several habits, which, when they were pleased on private confederacy to ex∣change for disport, they occasioned more mirthful mistakes, than ever were acted in the Amphitruo of Plautus. They felt like pain though at distance, and without any intel∣ligence given, they equally desired to walk, travail, sit, sleep, eat, drink together, as many credible Gentry of the Vicinage (by relation from their Father) will attest. In this they differred, that at New-haven in France, the one was a Captain of a Troop, the other but a private Souldier. Here they were both slain 1564, death being pitiful to kill them together, to prevent the lingering languishing of the Surviver. Lord-Mayors. Never one of this Office was a Devon-shire man by birth, on my best enquiry: Whereof some assigne these reasons. 1 The Distance of the Place, whose Western part is removed from London Two hundred Miles. 2 Because the Devonians have a Little London (understand it Exeter) in their own County; (Besides other Haven Towns) wherein Wealth is gained near at hand. But what ever be the cause, this County hath made so little use of the Exchange in London: No English Shire-men have applyed themselves more profitably to the
Kings Court, and Innes of Court therein; or hath attained greater Wealth and Ho∣nour by living in those places. The Names of the entry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the 12 year of King Henry the Sixth. 1433. E. Bishop of Exeter   Roger Champernounce Knight. Knights for the Shire. Commissioners to take the Oaths. Phillip Cary Knight. Philip. Courtney chiv.. Nicholai Carru chiv. Thomae Brrok chiv. Dynham chi. Roberti Chalonns chi. Herle chiv. Thomae Carmynowe ar. Roberti Hille armig. Johannis Chichester ar. Chuddelegh ar. Roberti Cornn armig. Baldewini Foleford ar. Speake armig. Johannis Wise arm. Johannis  arm. arm. Hille armig. Walteri Reynell armig. Holand arm. Johannis Bamfield ar. Nicholai Keynes arm. Johannis  de  armigeri Johan. Prideaux de (Adeston arm. Johannis Gorges arm. Thomas Denys armig. Philip. Lacy armig. Ricardi Yard armi. Walteri Polard arm. Johannis Holand arm. Johannis  ar. Thomae Werthe armig. Willielmi Malerbe ar. Johannis Malerbe ar. Johannis Yeo armig. Edwardi Saint John ar. Thomae Boneville arm. VVillielmi Wanard Johannis Copleston. Nicholai Radeford. Johannis Mulys. Henrici Fortescu. Henrici Drewe. Johannis Lauerance VVillielmi Mey. Henrici VVhiting. Ricardi Piperoll Johannis Marshal Rogeri Baron. Stephani Giffard Willielmi Byshop. Nicholai Coterell. Willielmi Blenche Johannis Bolter. Nicholai Trebarth ar. Petri Frie. Ricardi Yeo. Nicholai Tyrant. Johannis Gambon Sen. Walteri Whitelegh ar. VVillielmi Hleway. Thomae Kyngeslond. Thomae erot Petri Eggecombe ar. Johannis Harry. Thomae Prons. Thomae Latom. Willielmi Colyn. Johannis Cokeworthy. Henrici  ar. Walteri Elyot. Johannis  ar. Beard. Edwardi Pomeray ar. Roberti Kirkham. Sheriffs of Devonshire. HN. II. Anno 1 Galfridus de Furnell. Anno 2 Richardus Com. Anno 3 Richardus de Ridner, & Williel. Boterell, Anno 4 Anno 5 Williel. de Botterell. Anno 6 Anno 7 Hugo de Ralega, for 4 years. Anno 11 Robertus filius Bernardi, & Hugo de Ralega. Anno 12 Robertus filius Bernardi. Anno 13 Hugo Ralega. Anno 14 Robertus filius Bernardi, for 4 years. Anno 18 Comes Reginaldus. Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Comes Regin. Paganus, Capels & Alan. de Furnell. Anno 22 Williel. Ruffus. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 ugo de Gunds. Anno 25 dem. Anno 26 Anno 27 Bruer for 7 years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Willielmus de Brewere. Anno 2 Henry de Furnell for 9 years. JOHAN. Rex Anno 1 Willielmus de Wratham. Anno 2 Osbt. filius Willielmi. Anno 3 Radulp. Morin. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Willielmus Brieuere & Radus de Mora. Anno 6 Willielmus Brieuere. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Williel. Brieuere, & Ra∣dus de Mora, for 4 years. Anno 12 Robertus de Vetere Ponte, & Guido de Bello-campo. Anno 13 Anno 14 Robertus de Vetere Ponte, & Guido de Bello-campo. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 HEN. III. Anno. 2 Robertus de Currency. Anno. 3 Idem. Anno. 4 Robtus de Courtney. Anno. 5 Robtus de Courtne: Walter de Pohier. Anno. 6 Anno. 7 Anno. 8 Walter de Trererd: Walter de Pohier. Anno. 9 Regin. de villa torta. Anno. 10 : Raleg. Anno. 11 Williel: de Boleia. Anno. 12 Idem. Anno. 13 Rogerus: La Zouch. Anno. 14 Tho. de Cicencester & Tho. de Lawill. Anno. 15 Idem. Anno. 16 Idem. Anno. 17 Tho de La: Wile. Anno. 18 Robtus de valibus et Ric.
de Langford. Anno 19 Ncus de Molis et Walter de Bada. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 VValterus de Bada, for 13 years. Anno 34 VValterus de Bathond. Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 VVilliel. de Englefeurd. Anno 37 Idem. Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Radus de VVilton. Anno 40 Ger. de Horton, & Hen. de Horton filius. Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 VVillielmus de Cu rcen say Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Radus Lodescomb. Anno 45 Idem & Johan. de Muscegros. Anno 46 Radus de Esse. for 7 years. Anno 53 VVilliel. de Bikels. EDVV. I. Anno 1 Thomas Delpin. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Anno 4 Anno 5 Matthew de Egglesheill. Anno 6 Thomas Delpin. Anno 7 VVarinus de Sechevile. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Thomas Delpin, for 6 years. Anno 15 VVilliel. de Munketon et Rog. de Ingepen. Anno 16 Robtus de VVodton. Anno 17 Mathew Filius Johannis. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem et. Tho. de Scobhull. Anno 20 Mathew et Tho. Anno 21 Gilber. de Knovill for 8 years. Anno 29 Thomas de Ralegh for 6 years. Anno 35 EDVV. II. Anno 1 Thomas de Ralegh. Anno 2 Nich. de Kirkham. Anno 3 Nich. de Tukesbury for 3 years. Anno 6 Idem, & Mathew Ferneaux. Anno 7 Mathew de Furneaux. Anno 8. Math. de Furneaux, et Robt. de Horton. Anno 9 Anno 10 Mathew de Clivedon. Anno 11 Math. de Clivedon, et Robt. de Bendon. Anno 12 Robt. de Bendon Joh. de Bikkebur. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Rob. Bendon, & Nic. Cheigne Anno 15 Nul. Tit. Com. in Rotulo. Anno 16 Anno 17 Matheus de Crowthorne. Anno 18 Math. de Crowthorne, & Ja∣cob. de Cokington. EDVV. III Anno 1 James de Cokington. Anno 2 VVilliel. de Chiverston. Anno 3 Anno 4 VVilliel. de Fawconbge. Anno 5 Mathew de Crowthorne. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Regin. de Moveforti. Anno 8 VVillielmus de Alba Marla. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Anno 11 Johanes de Ralegh de Grandeport. Anno 12 Johan. Ralegh de Grandport. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Anno 15 Johan. Ralegh de Charles. Anno 16 VVillil. Pupard. Anno 17 Anno 18 Edward. Dux Cornubiae, & VValt. Horton. Anno 19 Hen. Tirell, Johan. Childston. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Radus Brit. Rad. Peaupell. Anno 22 Anno 23 Almaricus Fitz. VVarren. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Robtus Atte Haach. Anno 26 VVilliel Auncel. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Ricus Chambeuon. Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Johan. Daubernonn. Anno 32 VVilliel. Yoo. Anno 33 Ricus de Brankescomb for 3 years. Anno 36 Almaricus Fitz. Warren. Anno 37 Martin. Fitzacre. Anno 38 Williel. de Brighele. Anno 39 Johanes Boyes. Anno 40 Williel. de Servington. Anno 41 Anno 42 Ricus de Brankescomb & Ric. Channbuon. Anno 43 Anno 44 Tho. Chavubuon. Anno 45 Ricus Beaumond. Anno 46 Nichus Whitting. Anno 47 Ricus Chusden. Anno 48 Johanes Damuarle. Anno 49 Richus de Brandescomb. Anno 50 Nichus La Pomeray. Anno 51 Johan. de Ralege. I cannot deny, but I have a Catalogue of the Sheriffs of this County (beginning but Anno 1349. the 24th of King Edward the third) whence and by whom collected to me unknown, somewhat differing from this List, now by us exemplified, though I shall forbeare the nominating of them, as sticking to the Catalogue communicated unto me out of the Pipe Office. HENRY the Second. 2. RICHARDUS COMES.] This is but a blind and lame Indication Richard the Earle, not telling us, whereof, as if there had been but one English Earle Richard in that Age. Whereas there was Rich. Fitz-Gilbert, Earle of Clare, and Rich. de Ripariis, [or Rivers] both flourishing at this Time. But here, the Letters of these must be meant, who was Earl of this County, the self same who married Avis, Daughter and Heir of Reginald Earl of Cornwal, the base Son of King Henry the first.Cam. Brit. in Somerst. 27. WILLIELMUS BREWER] His Mother unable (to make the most Charitable Con∣structions) to maintain, cast him in Brewers, (whence he was so named) or in a Bed of An ld Eng∣lish word. Brakes, in New Forrest. In him the words of David found performance, When my Fa∣ther and Mother forsake me, the Lord taketh me up. King Henry the Second riding to rousea
Stag, found this Child, and caused him to be nursed and well brought up till he became a man, and (the Honour of all Foundlings) a prime Favourite to King Henry and Richard the first, made Baron of Odcomb, and his Issue Male failing, his large Inheritance was by Daughters derived to Breos, Wake, la Fort, and Percy. EDVVARD the Third. 32. WILLIAM YOO.] His family is still extant in this County, in a worshipfull condition, on the same token that they give for their Arms, Gwillim his Display of He∣raldry, pag. 161. Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Turky-Cocks in their prideproper. Let no over-critick causlesly cavill at this Coat, as but a moderne bearing, because Turky-Cocks came not into England till about the tenth Stows Chro. pag 1038. year of the Reign of King Henry the eighth, being here formerly shown as rareties, though not fed on as Table∣foule till that time. Besides, Heraulds have ever assumed that priviledge to themselves, to assigne for Arms, both those Creatures which are found only in forraign Countries The Crest of the Mar∣quess of Hert∣ford. (Leopards, Tigers, &c.) and those, whose sole existence is in the fancie of Poets and Painters, as a* Phenix, Harpey and the like. Sheriffs. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno.     1 Joh. Damerell Throwley   2 Joh. Fitzpayn   Or, three Piles Azure. 3 Joh. Strech     4 Wal. Corn   Arg. a Chevron betwixt 3 bu∣gle horns, Garnished Sab. 5 Ric. Champernoun Modberie Gules, a Saltire varee, betwixt 12 Billeis Ar. 6 Ric. Kendall   Argent a Cheveron betwixt 3 Dolphins Sable. 7 Wil. de Hasthorpt.     8 Ja. Chudleygh   Ermin, three Lions Ramp. Gu. 9 Ric. Whitiley   Azure on a bend, Or 3 Tor∣teauxes. 10 Ric. Champernoun ut prius   11 John Pawlet.   Sab. 3 Swords in pyle Ar. 12 Nic. Kerckham.   Erm. 3 Lyons Ramp. G. within a Border engrailed S. alias ar. 13 Will. Bonevile. VViscombe Sab. 6. Mullets Arg. Pierced Gules. 14 Will. Carminow   Az. a Bend Or, a Label of 3 points Gule. 15 Joh. Greenvile Bediford Gules 3 Rests Or. 16 Tho. Rawleigh Rawleigh Gules, à Bend Lozingee Arg. 17 Tho Brook     18 Will. Ferers   Arg. a bend Gu. on a chief Vert∣rect 2 Cinque foiles the field. 19 VVil. Maleheb   Or a Cheveron Gules between 3 Nettle leaves proper. 20 Tho. everell   Gules a Fess Arg. betwixt six Crosses Patee Or. 21 VVill. Beaumont   Azure Seme, Or, Flower de lis, a Lion Ramp. Or 22     23     HEN. IV.     Anno.     1 Joh. Keynes     2 Tho. Pomeroy. Pery Pom. Or. a Lion Rampant Gules. 3 John Herle, Miles Ilfarcombe Arg. a Fess Gules betwixt 3 Sheldrakes proper. 4 John Keneys     5 John VVike Northwick   6 John Bvil Cornwal Arg. a Bul Passant G. armed and tripped, Or. 7 John Cheeldon     8 Phil. Cole   Arg. a Bull passant Sab. arm∣ed, Or, within a border of the second Bezantee. 9 Joh. Herle, miles ut prius   10 Edw Pine   Gules a Cheveron Ermine be∣between 3 pine Apples, Or, 11 VVill. Cheney Pineho Gules on a Fess of four Lozen∣gies, Arg. as many Escalops Sab. 12 Robert     13 Ric. Pomeroy ut prius   14 Ric. Peveril ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno.     1 Tho. Beaumond ut prius   2 Tho. Pomeroy ut prius Sab. Sixe Swallows in Pile Argent. 3 Joh. Arundell Cornwall   4 Joh. Bevill ut prius   5 VVil. Talbot Talbots∣wick.   6 Ste. Dumeford     7 Hug. Courtnay Powder∣ham Or, 3 Torteauxes. 8 Tho. Beumont ut prius   9 Rob. Challons     10 Tho Beaumond ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno. ut prius   1 Tho. Beaumond & Sr. VVil. Bon∣vile. ut prius   2 Ric. Hanckford     3 Tho, Brook     4 VVil. Palton do Umberl.   5 Joh. Bampyld Polmoe Or, on a bend Gules 3 Mul∣lets Arg. 6 Tho. Beaumond ut prius   7 Rob. Hill     8 la. Chudleigh ut prius   9 Ioh. Bozome   Argent 3 bolts Gulcs. 10 Edw. Pemeroy ut prius   11 Edw. Pine ut prius   12 Ioh. Cheynede ut prius   13 Tho. Stowell   Gules. A Cross Lozenges, Argent. 14 Rog. Champer∣noun ut prius   15 Tho. Beaumont ut prius   16 Tho. Arundell ut prius   17 Ja. Chudleigh ut prius   18 VVil. Beauchamp   Gules a Fess betwixt six Martlets, Or. 19 Rob. Burton   Argent, 3 palmer slaves, in Fess Az. 20 VVil. VVadham SOMER Gules, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Roses Arg. 21 Rich. Yeard YeardCol. Arg. a Chev. G. bewixt 3 water-Bougts of the ▪ 22 Ioh. Cheny ut prius   23 Ioh. Bluet   Or. a Cheve.   Ea∣gls displaied Guls. 24 Nic. Boughton   Arg. a Chev.  3 Mullets Gules. 25 Hen. Fortescue.   Azure, a Bend Ingrailed Ar.  O.
26 Th  Budeokshed St. Bdeox Sa. 3 Loenges, in Fes. between 3  eads cabossed, arg. 27 Hugh Affeton 3 Pears, Or. 28 Jer. ut prius   29     30 .     31 Hen. ut prius   32 Iohn ut prius   33 Rich Hles   Arg. a .  3 Griffins Heads erased. ▪ 34 And. Hillingdon     35 Edw. Landford     36 John Nanan     37 Rich. Hales ut prius   38 Bald. Sutford Miles     39 John Dinham   Gul. 3 Fuils in Fess, within a Border, ▪ 40 Walt. Dennis Holcombe . 3 Battle-Axes, Gules EDWARD IV.     Anno     1 John Cheney ut prius   2 Idem ut prius   3 John Chicheer   Checky Or and Gules, a Chie varry. 4 John Arundle ut prius   5 Christop. Wolsey     6 Will. Dynis, . ut prius   7 Phil. Beaumont ut prius   8 Rich. Chichester ut prius   9 Nich. Carew, Arm.   Or. 3 Lions passant Sab. armed and langued, Gules. 10 Phil. Courtny ut prius   11 Phil. Copleston Warley Aar. a Cheveron ingraild, Gules between 3 Leopards heads, . 12 John Cheney ut prius   13 Rich. Pomeray ut prius   14 Rich. Chichester ut prius   15 Otho Glbert   Arg. on a Cheveron Sab. three Roses, of the Field. 16 Cha. Dinham ut prius   17 John Sapcote   Sable, 3 Dove-coats, 18 Edw. Courtnay ut prius   19     20 Rob. Willoughby     21 Giles Daubeney   gules, 4  in Fess. arg. 22 Will. Courtnay ut prius   RICHARD III.     Anno     1 VVill. Courtney ut prius   2 Hamath▪ Malevorer Yorkshire Sable, three  cursant, in  argent. 3 Tho. Malevorer . Maheel ut prius   HENRY VII.     anno     1 John Hawell, Miles   Or, on a Bend Sable, 3 Goats passant  of the field. 2 Rich. Edgcombe M. , on a Bend, er. betwixt 2 , Or, 3   coped, Arg. 3 Robert     4 Roger Holand   Azure, 5 Flower de Lis, a Lion  gardant, arg. 5 John Hallywell ut prius   6 VVill▪ ,     7 VValter Enderby     8 Rich. Pomeray, . ut prius   9 Roger Holand, Arm ut prius   10 Peter Edgcombe ut prius   11 . Fortescue, arm. ut prius   12 VVil. Carew, miles ut prius   13 Per▪ Edgcomb, ut prius   14 Roger Holand, arm ut prius   15 James Chudleigh, a ut prius   16 Rich. VVhytley, ar ut prius   17 Rich. VVadham, a. ut prius   18 Rich Hallywell, . ut prius   19 John Fortescue, ut prius   20 VVil. Norwood, ar     21 John Kyrcham ut prius   22 John ut prius   23 Thom. Denys, arm. ut prius   HENRY VIII.     Anno     1 Tho. , armiger ut prius   2 John Crocker, arm. Linam Arg. a Chev. engrailed betwixt 3 Crowes proper. 3 Thom. Goodman     4 Thom. Denys, Miles ut prius   5 VVil. Carew, armiger ut prius   6 Nich. VVadham. . ut prius   7 John Clifton, miles   Sab. Semee of Cinquefoiles, a Lion rampant, argent. 8 John Speak, miles   Arg  Barrs azure, over all an Eagle displayed Gules. 9 Peter Edgcombe ut prius   10 Thom. Dennys ut prius   11 Ralph Paxsal     12 Tho. Stukley, arm. ut prius   13 VVilliam Courtney ut prius   14 Thomas Dennis ut prius   15 John Kirckham, mi. ut prius   16 John Basset, Miles   Arg. three  wavee 17 VV. Courtnay, Mil. ut prius   18 Phi. Champernoun ut prius   19 Tho. Dennys, Miles ut prius   20 Peter Edgcomb, M. ut prius   21 Joh. Chamond, Ar. Cornwal Arg. a Cheveron betwixt three Flower de Lis, gules. 22 Georg. St. Leoger   Azure, Fretee arg. a chief- gules 23 Tho. Dennys, Miles ut prius   24 Rich. Grenvile ut prius   25 VVil. Courtney vt prius   26 John Fullford   Gules, a cheveron arg. 27 Hugh Pollard ut prius Arg. a cheveron Sab. between 3 Escalop-shells, gules. 28 Geor. Carew, Arm. ut prius   29 Rich. Pollard ut prius   30 Hugh Chamond ut prius   31 Hugh Pollard ut prius   32 John Fulford, Mil. ut prius   33 Hugh Paulet, Mil. ut prius   34 George Carew ut prius   35 Rich. Edgcombe ut prius   36 Hugh Stukeley ut prius   37 Hugh Pollard ut prius   EDVVARD VI.     Anno     1 Peter Carew, Miles ut prius   2 Gwin. Carew, Miles ut prius   3 Peter Courtney ut prius   4 Tho. Dennys, miles ut prius   5 John Chichster ut prius   6 Rich▪ Chudleigh, ar. ut prius   PHIL. Reg. MA. Regin.     Anno     1 Rich. Edgcombe ut prius   1.2 Tho. Dennys, miles ut prius   2.3 Iames Cortenay, a. ut prius   3.4 Rob. , armig. Cockington ut prius 4.5 Iohn Fullford, . ut prius   ELIZABETH, Regin.     Anno     1 Rob. Dennys, miles ut prius   Tho. Southcoat, ar.   Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt three Coots, Sab. 3 Arth. Champernoun ut prius   4 John St. Leger, miles ut prius   5 Christ. Coppleston, a ut prius   6 Richard Fortescue, a ut prius   7 Richard Duke, arm. Partee per fess. Arg. and Azure 3 Chaplets counterchanged. 8 Thomas Mounck, ar.   Gules, a Ceveron▪ betwixt 3 Lions Heads erased, Arg. 9 Per. Edgcombe, arm. ut prius   10 Lewis , ar. ut prius   11 Robert Dennys, ar. ut prius   12 VVill. Stroade, ar.   Arg. 3 Conyes Sab. 13 John Mallet armig.   Azure 3 Escalops Or. 14 Tho. Southcote, ar. ut prius  
15  , armig Burrington   16 John , miles ut prius   17 Tho. Carew armig. ut prius   18 Arthur ut prius   19     20 Richard Bampfiel ut prius   21 ohn Chichester a. ut prius   22 Rog. Prideaux, ar.   Arg. a Cheveron Sab. a Label Gules. 23 VVil. Cortenay, mi ut prius   24 John , miles ut prius   25 John Fitz. .   Arg. a Crosse, Gul.  de Sang. 76 Hugh Fortescue ut prius   27 Ed. Seimour, miles Bury- Gules, 2 Angels-wings pale∣wayes , Or, 28 Richard Reynell   Masonry, Arg. a Chief▪ indented Or, on a Bend Gules, 3 Mill∣▪ Arg. 29 Humph▪ Specote     30 Will. Kyrcham, ar. ut prius   31     32     33     34 Ric. Champernoun ut   35 Will. Sttowd, arm. ut prius   36 Tho. , mile ut   37 Ed. Seimour, armig▪ ut prius   38 VVill. Stowd,   Arg. 3 Balls Heads, cabossed, Sab. armed, Or. 39 Iohn Coplestone,     40 VVill. Fortescue ar. ut prius   41 Henry Roll ut   42 Tho. Rugway, arm. Torre   43 ▪ Parker, .   Sab. 3 Bucks heads cabossed, between 2 Flanches, Or. 44 Thom. Heal, armig.   Gules, a bend Lozengie ermine. alias Arg. 5  in Pale. 45 VVilliam Pool, ar. Shute Gules, on the middlemost a Le∣opards head, Or. 46 Amic. Bamfield, ar. ut prius   King JAMES.     Anno     1 Ami▪ Bamfield, a. ut prius   2 Iohn Drake, a. Ash ut Infr, 3 Edward Semour, a. ut prius   4 Iohn Abbot, a.   Gules, a cheveron betwixt 3 Pears, Or. 5 Robert Rolles, a. ut prius   6 Iohn Acland, mils   Checky, Arg. and Sab a Fess. Gules. 7 VVill. Grymes, a.     8 Hugh Acland, armig. ut prius   9 Thomas VVise, Sable, three-Cheverons, Ermine Per Cheveron, Arg. and purple a Lion Rampant counterchanged 10 Edw Gyles,     11 George Smith, miles     12 John Specot, miles ut prius   13 John Gefford, arm.   Sab. 3 Lozenges in Fess, . 14 George Southcoate, ut prius   15 Thomas Heale, ar. ut prius   16 War. Heale ut prius   17 Christ Savo y, miles     18  Heale, ut prius   19 Edmond Parker, ar. ut prius   20 Edm. , ut prius   21 Henry Tottle, arm.   Azure, on a bend Argent cotti∣sed, Or. a Lion passant, Sa. 22 Simon Leach     King CHARLES I.         1  Fry, armig. Yarty Vert, 3 Horses in pale cur. arg. 2 John Northcoate, A.   Arg. 3 Croslets bendwaise, 3 Waler Young, arm.     4 Henry Rouswel, mil. Fordabbey   5 John Davy, armiger   Arg. a Cheveron Sab.  3 Mullets Gules, peirced. 6 Henry Ashford, arm. Ashforde Arg. three Pine-apples Vert, twixt 2 Cheveronels, Sable. 5 Edward , Anery arty per Cheverons Azu, and Erm▪  Stags heads, cabos. 8  Drake, Bar. Buckland Sab. a Fess.  between the 2 pole Starrs Arg. alias, a  wings elevated.  Ermine, a Lion passant, Gules. ut prius. 9 ohn , ar. ut prius   10 Thomas Drew, miles     11 Thomas Heale, Ba. Fleet   12 Dennys Roll, . ut prius   13 Thomas VVise, arm. ut prius   14 John Poole, ut prius   15 Nichol▪ , m Oxon Or, 2 Barrs, Gules. 16 Nicholas Putt Arg. a Lion rampant, impound∣ed within a Muscle, Sable. Richard Collums, a   Azure, a Cheveron Ermine, be∣betwixt 3 Pellicans vulning themselvs, Or. 17 Edmond ut prius   18 Henry Careye ut prius   19 John Acland, armi. ut prius   20 Richard Greenvile, ut prius   21 Francis Drake, miles ut prius   22     RICHARD II. 1. JOHN DAMEREL] Throwely in Dartmore, his chief , came to his Family by match with the eldest Daughter and coheir of , (who married AVIS, sole Heir to Sr. William le Prouze, in the raign of K. Edward the second) her Two younger Sisters being married to North-coat and Wibery, amongst whom a great Inheritance was divided. And by Writ of Particion (sued out in the 14 of K. Edward the third) *Throwley fell to the share of Damerel. HENRY VII. 2. RICHARD EDGECOMB.] He was a Knight and memorable in his Generation. For, being zealous in the Cause of Henry Earl of Richmond, (afterwards K. Henry the 7.) he was in the time of K. Richard the 3. so hotly persued and narrowly searched for, that he was forced to hide himself in his thick Woods, at his House at  in Cornwal. Here extremity taught him a suddain Policy, to put a stone in his cap, and tumble the same into the water, whilest these Rangers were fast at his heels, who looking down after the noise, and seeing his cap swimming thereon,Carew Sur∣vey of Cornw. fol. 114. supposed that he had desperately  himself, and (deluded by this honest fraud) gave over their farther persuit, leaving him at liberty to shift over into Britain. Nor was his gratitude lesse than his ingenuity, who in remembrance of his delivery, after his return, built a Chappel (lately extant) in the place where he lurked, and lived in great repute with Prince and People. King Henry the seventh rewarded his Loyalty by bestowing the Castle of Totnes in this.  in Devonshire. Countyupon him.
EDWARD VI. 1. PETER CAREW, Miles] This active Gentleman had much adoe to expedite himself, and save his life, being imprisoned for his compliance with Sr. Thomas Wyate Afterwards he did signal service in the Irish Warrs. This Memorial remaineth for him Viro Nobilissimo, D. PETRO CAREW; Equiti Aurato: Est hoc structum Monumentum: Qui obiit Rosae in Laginiâ Hyberniae 27 Novembris, Sepultus autem Waterfordiae, 15 Decembris, 1575. Terra Cadavr habet. The rest of the Epitaph is not legible. Queen ELIZABETH. 11. ROBERT DENNIS, Miles] This worthy Knight, Anno 1592. erected a fair Almes-House in the Suburbs of Exeter, for 12 poor Aged Men, allowing to each a plot of ground for an Herber, and 12 Pence weekly. This Family so ancient in this Coun∣ty (deriving its Name and Original from the DANES) is now extinct, the Heir-general being married into the House of the ROLLES. 45. AMIAS BAMPFIELD, Arm.] Right ancient and worthy his extraction, especially since one of his Ancestors married one of the Daughters and Co-heirs of the Lord Semaur, or de sancto Mauro, whereby a fair Inheritance at South-Molton, in this County, accrewed into this Family, in which Church this Amias with his Father lyeth interred: and their joynt-Epitaph will acquaint us with the numerosity of their Issue then living or dead. Twelve of Seventeen are not, of Fifteen are Eleven Proceeding from this stock, praise be to God in Heaven. However Pottimore near Exeter is their prime Habitation, and hath been ever since the time of K. Edward the first, witnesse this Inscription on a Monument in that Church, Hic acet Joh. Bampfield, & Agnes Uxorejus, Pater & Mater Will▪ Bampfield, qui hanc Ecclesiae Maximam Campanam fieri fecerunt, 1310. As for Sr. Coplestone Bampfield (now Sheriffe of this County) and so cordial to the Kings Cause in the worst of times, he doth by his Vertues add a New Lustre to his ancient extraction. King CHARLES. 12 DENNIS ROLLS Arm.] His Mother was Coheir to Sr. Thomas Dennis, Knight, of right ancient extraction. As for this worthy Esquire, I remember the old Sentence, Praestat nulla quam pauca dicere de Carthagine, on which account I forbear further praise of him. He was the last of his House, not in the sence wherein Salust is called altimus suae domus, because he lavished away all his Lands in Luxury, but God denyed his Male-Issue to attain to Mans estate. The Farewell. I am most credibly informed, that a Rock, lately (so lately that as yet it is not named) hath been discovered by an Hamburger being Master of a ship, who made the first report thereof (on his own Oath, and the oaths of all in his company) to the Corporation of Sea∣men at the Trinity-house nigh London. It lyeth one league off from the START in Devon∣shire. It is more then suspicious, that many hundreds have here had their silent Deaths, never landing to relate the cause of their destruction. For it is very dangerous for a Ship that draweth above eleven or twelve foot water, if it should chance to strike upon it at a low water, with an indifferent Sea. It is the more dangerous because: Picked the form thereof, so that if you chance to heave one cast upon it, the next cast shall be no less than fourteen or fifteen fathome water. I am sorry if the Discoverer hereof met not with a proportionable Reward, under∣standing that he had made a better Bargain if he had addressed himself first to the Dutch, (most bountifull in such cases) though our Nation be most concerned therein. Let all ships passing thereby be fore-armed because, fore-warned thereof, seeing this Rock can no otherwise be resisted than by avoiding.
EXETER. EXETER▪ It is of a circular (and therefore most capable) form, sited on the top of an Hill, having an easie assent on every side thereunto. This  much to the cleannesse of this City, Nature being the chief Scavenger thereof, so that the Rain that falleth there falleth thence by the declivity of the place. The Houses stand sidewaies backward into their Yards, and onely  with their Gables towards the Street: the City therefore is greater in content than appearance, being bigger than it presenteth it self to  through the same. Manufactures. Cloathing is plyed in this City, with great Industry and Judgment. It is hardly to be believed what credible Persons attest for truth, that the return for Serges alone in this City amounteth weekly, (even now when Trading though not dead is sick) to three Thousand Pounds, not to ascend to a higher proportion. But the highest commendation of this City is for the Loyalty thereof, presenting us with a pair-Royal of Services herein; when besieged by 1 Perkin Werbeck, in the Reign of King Henry the seventh. 2 The Western Rebels, in the Raign of King Edward the sixth. 3 The Parliament Forces, in the Raign of King Charles the first. There Valour was in vincible in the two first, and their Loyalty unstained in the last, rewarded by their Enemies with the best made, and best kept Articles, yea in the very worst of times, a depressed party therein were so true to their Principles, that I meet with this epitaph in the Chancell of St. Sidwells. Hic jacet Hugo Grove in Comitatu Wilts, Armiger, in restituendo Ecclesiam, in asserendo Regem, in propugnando Legem ac Libertatem Anglicanam, captus & decollatus 6 Maii, 1655. The Buildings. The Cathedrall dedicated to St. Peter is most beautifull, having the West end thereof adorned with so lively Statues of stone, that they plainly speak the Art of those who erected them. There is in this City a Castle, whitherto King Richard the Usurper repaired, and for some dayes reposed himself therein. He demanded of the Inhabitants, how they called their Castle, who returned the name thereof was RUGEMONT, though I confesse it a Rarity, that the castle in a City should be called by any other name than a Castle. Here∣at the Vsurper was much abashed, having been informed by Wizards, that he should never prosper after he had met a thing called Rugemont. It seems Sathan either spoke this Oracle low or lisping, desirous to palliate his fallacy and ignorance; or that King Richard (a guilty conscience will be frighted with little) mistook the word, seeing not Rugemont but Richmond, (the title of King Henry the seventh) proved so formidable to this Vsurper. As for Parish-Churches in this City, at my return thither this year I found them fewer than I left them at my departure thence 15 years ago. But the Demolishers of them can give the clearest Account, how the plucking down of Churches conduceth to the setting up of Religion; besides I understand that thirteen Churches were exposed to sale by the publick Cryer, and bought by well-affected Persons, who preserved them from destruction. The Wonders. When the City of Exeter was besieged by the Parliaments Forces, so that only the southside thereof towards the Sea was open unto it, incredible number of Larks were found in that open quarter, for multitude like Quails in the Wildernesse (though blessed be God) unlike them both in cause and effect, as not desired with Mans de∣struction, nor ent with Gods anger, as appeared by their safe digestion into wholesome nourishment: hereof I was an eye and mouth witnesse. I will save my credit in not conjecturing any number, knowing, that herein though I should stoop beneath the truth,
I should mount above belief: they were as fat as plentifull, so that being sold for two Pence a dozen, and under, the Poor (who could have no cheaper, as the    meat) used to make pottage of them, boyling them down therein. Seveal natural Causes were assigned hereof: 1. That these Fowl frighted with much shooting on the Land,  to the Sea-side for their Refuge. 2. That it is familiar with them in cold winters (as that was) to shelter themselves in the most  parts. 3. That some sortes of Seed were lately fown in those parts which invited them thither for their own repast. However the Cause of causes was Divine , thereby providing a Feast for many poor people, who otherwise had been pinched for provision. Princes. HENRIETTA youngest Childe of King Charles and Queen Mary, was born at Bedford∣House in this City, Anno 1644. on the sixteenth day of June. After her long and sad night of Affliction, the day dawn'd with her, in her Brothers happy returne. Since she is marryed to the Duke of Orleance. I hope that I once related unto her as a Chaplain, may ever pray for her, that her soul may be sanctified with true Grace, and she enjoy both the Blessings of this and a Better life. Prelates. BARTHOLOMEUS ISCANUS, born in this * City, was accounted in that age theGoodwin, in his Catalogue of Bishop. Oracle of Learning and Religion, so that in all Conventions to that purpose his suffrage clearly carried it. He became afterwards Bishop in the place of his nativity, being intimate with his City-man, whose Character next followeth, Baldwin of De∣vonshire, then but Abbot of Ford, afterwards advanced to higher preferment. These mutually dedicated Books each to others Commendation so that neither wanted praise nor praised himself. This Leland calleth pulcherimum certamen. Indeed this Alternation of reciprocal Encomiums, became them the better, because it was merit in both, flattery in neither. This Bartholomew was an opposer of Becket his insolence: and having sate Bishop 14 Years ended his life, Anno 1185. BALDVINUS DEVONIUS was born in this City, of poor Parentage, save that in some sort a worthy man may be said to be Father to himself. His preferment encreased with his Learning and deserts, being first a School-master, then an Arch-deacon, then Abbot of Ford: afterwards Bishop of Worcester, and lastly Arch-bishop of Canterbury. An eloquent Man, and a pious Preacher, according to the Devotion of those dayes, so that the errours which he maintained may justly be accounted the Faults of the tims, and in him but infirmities. When King Richard the first went to Palestine, he conceived himself bound both in conscience and credit, to partake of the pains and perils of his Soveraign, whom he attended thither but not thence, dying there, and being buried at Tyre, Anno Dom. 1190. WALTER BRONSCOMBE was Son to a very mean * man in this City, and thereforeHooker, alias , in  Catalogue of the Bishops of EXETER. the more remarkable, that taking no rise from his extraction, he raised himself by his own industry to be Bishop of Exeter. Here he built and endowed an Hospital for poor people, and also founded a fair Colledge at Perin in Cornwall. The Angel Gabriel was very much beholding to him, for instituting an Annual Festival unto Him, (observed, as I humbly conceive, only in his own Cathedral, or own Diocesse at the most) and least people shold complain of the dearnesse of their Devotion, he left good Land to defray the cost of that Solemnity. He is much blamed for compassing the Mannour of Bishops∣Clift to his Church by indirect means, to which I can say nothing, but only observe, that this small City, within eighty Years did afford three eminent Prelates (whereof two Episcopi in Patria) the Natives thereof, which will scarcely be paralell'd in any Place of the same proportion, He died Anno 12.. Writers. JOSEPHUS ISCANUS was born at this City, anciently called Isca, from the River Isk, (now named Eske) running thereby. A golden Pot in a leaden Age, so terse, and elegant were his Conceipts and expressions,. This our English Maro had for his Mecenas Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury. But I revoke my words, and desire to turn Maro into Cornelius Nepos, under whose name the Dutch-men have lately printed a Poem, made by
this Josephus, debello Trojano. It soundeth much to a Mans honour, even to be mistaken for another Man of eminency: for though there may be much of error in the mistake, there must be something of truth in the error, especially with the judicious: Yea in such case a general conformity betwixt the Persons is not enough to build the mistake on, without some  ; as here the affinity of phrase, and fancy betwixt these two Poets. This  Nepos under whose name the Poems of this Josephus were printed, flourished in the time of Tully. Indeed I finde not any Poems made by him, though having to that purpose perused all Scaliger, de Arte , as a most probable Authour. But most sure it is, that this Cornlius was most judicious in that Art, because Valerius Catullus dedicated his Poem unto him, as best able to psse a learned censure thereon, this Josephus Iscanus flourished under King John, Anno 1210, being Arch-Bishop of Burdeaux. I have nothing more to observe of him, save what, with the Readers pardon, I cannot omit, viz. that this Josephus alwayes minded me of another Josephus Iscanus, I mean Joseph Hall, lately Bishop of Exeter, a witty Poet, when young, a painfull Preacher, and solid Divine in his middle, a patient-Sufferer in his old age, of whom God willing, more See Writers in Lecestershire. in due place. WILLIAM of Exeter was Bale, de scrip. Brit. cent. 5. p. 405. & Piz. anno 1330. born in this City, bred a Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and afterwards became  of the  in the place of his nativity. Now in his age fome Franciscan Friers so praised the perfectiou of Poverty, that they touched the Popes Coppy-hold of Inheritance, For if Poverty was so essential to Piety, Papal pomp, and plenty must needs argue prophaneness: In confutation hereof, this William of Exeter undertook William of Ockam, though indeed impar congressus betwixt them; for Exeter, a fair City did not more exceed Ockam a smal village in Surrey in beauty, and building, than that Ockam William excelled this Exeter William in parts and Learning; however what he wanted in brains, he had in a good back to assist him: and William of Exeter with John the three and twentieth Pope of Rome was able to undertake any Authour of that age, He flourished in the Year of our Lord 1330. under the Raign of King Edward the third. Since the Reformation. RICHARD MARTYN was born in this City, and bred partly in the Court, partly in the Inns of Court; and at last etook himself to the Study of the Law, He was accounted one of the highest Witts of our Age and his Nation, King James being much delighted with his facetiousnesse, a quality (which with other of his Abilities) commended him to be chosen Recorder of London; He is eminent, as for many Speeches, so especially for that he made in Parliament in the tenth year of King James, when account was taken of Forty Gentlemen in the House, which were not twenty, and some of them not sixteen years of age: Formerly (said this Rorder Martyn) it was the custome of Old men to make Lawes for Young ones,: But now Nature is invaded and inverted, seeing Young men enact Lawes to govern their Fathers: He had an excellent Pen, and wrote very much, and the more the pitty that they are suppressed from publick use; his death happened about the year 1616. WILLIAM MARTIN Kinsman to the aforesaid Recorder was born in this City, and bred a Student in the Lawes of the Land: He wrote a short and clear of the Kings of England since the conquest. I have been credlbly informed, that King James took some exceptions at a Passage therein, sounding either to the derogation of his own Family, or of the Scotch Nation, which he took so tenderly that Mr. Martin was brought into trouble for the same; and though he wethered out the Kings displeasure, and was reconciled to his Majesty, yet he never rcovered his former chearfulnesse. It seems that a Princes Anger is a disease which though cured, is not cured, grief for the same being conceived to hasten his death, which happened about the year 1616. WILLIAM TUCKER, was born in this N. Colledge Register. in an. 1577. City, bred fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford, and after became Doctor in Divinity, Canon of Sarisbury, Arch-deacon of Barnstable, and Dean of Lichfield,. The purity of his Latine Pen procured his preferment, writing, and
dedicating a Book to Queen Elizabeth, de Charismate, of our Kings of England their gracious healing the Evil, being the best that I have seen on that Subject, vindicating such cures from all imposture, unlawfull Magick, and from some French Writers bold usurpations, who lay claim to it, as originally belonging to their Kings alone; Whereas, under correction I conceive, that the word Soveraign which properly importeth the Supream Majesty, doth also in our English Tongue, in a secondary sence signiie, what is cordial to cure and heal Diseases or sores, ever since such sanative power hath been annexed to the Crown of England. This Doctor may be said to have worn half a Miter, seeing his Congee de-lire was signed (if not sent) to elect him Bishop of Glocester, but afterwards by Order fom King James it was revoked, on what occasion I list not to enquire. I conjecture the date of his death was much about the Year 1617. JOHN BARKHAM, born in this City, was bred in Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, whereof he was Fellow, Chaplain afterwards to Archbishop Bancroft, and Parson of Bocking in Essex. Much his Modesty and no lesse his Learning; who, (though never the publique Parent of any) was the carefull Nurse of many Books, who otherwise had expired in their Infancy, had not his care preserved them. He set forth D.▪ Cracken∣chorp his Posthume Book against Spalato, and was helpfull to John Speed, in the composing of his English History; yea, he wrote the whole Life of the Raign of King John, (which is the King of all the Raigns in that Book, for profound penning) discoverable from the rest of the different style, and much Scripture scited therein: Mr. Guillim in his Heraldry, was much beholden to this Doctors Emendations. He was a greater Lover of Coyns than of Money, rather curious in the stamps, than Covetous for the Mettall thereof. That excellent Collection in Oxford Library was his Gift to the Arch-bishop, before the Arch-bishop gave it to the University. He dyed March 25. 1641. Benefactors to the Publick. JOAN TUCKVILE, a Merchants Widdow in this City, first procured the possession, then the consecration of a parcel of Ground which she had fairly compassed about, for the Interment ofsuch as were executed at Hevie-tree hard by, allowing Land to buy a shrone for every one of them; that such as dyed Malefactors might be buried as men, yea as Christians; who having passed under the hand of Justice, received a Boon from her hand, who was mercifull to the dead: This I may call exemplary Charity indeed, as which set a coppie for others, but such as hitherto hath not (to my knowledg) by any been transcribed. She dyed about the beginning of the Raign of Queen Elizabeth. The Farewel. Malice knoweth no other Heaven than to do mischief to others, though thereby no good to it fels: Such the spite of the Cornish Rebels besieging Exeter, who to damnifie the City, damned and stopped up the Channel of the River EX (near to a Village thence called Camd. Brit. in Cnsh. Weare at this day) to such a degree that thereby the accesse of lesser Vessels is much hindred, and of the greater ships wholly debarred. Some knowing Sr. Simon Baskervile, (a Physician and native of this place) to have a plentifull purse, and publick Spirit, wished he would have taken the work in hand, to cure this Obstruction: but it was no Physicians work to meddle therewith, nor is it either powder of Steel, or gilded pils which can do the deed, but onely pills of massy gold and silver, so expensive is the performance. Indeed several Acts of* Parliament have ordered the removeal of these Stoppages,† Idem ibidem. but nothing is effected in this kinde, these real Remoraes remaining as before. It is urged as an Argument of Aristotle, against the conceit of Plato his having all Women in common, and their Children to be brougbt up on the publique charge, that then the Education of such Children will be neglected, because wht is ever mans work, is no manswork: The truth hereof appeareth in the slow avoiding of these steam-. I could heartily wish, that one Act of Parliament more [an Eunuch, yet not barren] may be made, eunuch, that it may beget no more Acts to cause the retarding and elonga∣tion of this work; yet not barren, that it may effectually remedy this Grievance, and that a general good be no longer postponed to mens private profit.
DORCET-SHIRE. DORCET-SHIRE. It hath Devonshire on the West, Somerset and Wilt-shire on the North, Hant shire on the East, and the Narrow Sea on the South, extending from East to West about forty miles, though not past six and twenty the broadest part thereof. It hath a self-sufficiency of all Commodities necessary for mans temporal well-being, and needs not be beholding to any neighbou∣ring County; for it can 1. Feed it self with fine Wheat, fat Flesh, dainty Fowle, wild and tame, fresh Fish from Sea and Rivers. To this meat it yieldeth that sawce, without which all the rest is little worth, I mean Salt, made here in some measure, but which hath been and may be in more abundance. 2. Cloathe it self with its own Wooll, and Broad-cloath made thereof; and it is belie∣ved, that no place in England affordeth more Sheep in so small a compass as this Coun∣ty about Dorchester. And as they are provided for warmth in their Woollen, so for cleanliness, with their Linnen-cloath, great store of good Flax and Hemp growing therein. 3. Build its own Houses with good Timber out of Black-more Forrest, and with (if not better, I am sure more) Freestone out of Portland, most approaching that of Normandy (as in position so) in the purity thereof. Nor wanteth it veins of Marble in the Isles of Purbeck. And to all this an excellent Air, and the conveniency of a Sea, to export for their profit, and import for their pleasure, as whose necessities were provided for before. Natural Commodities. Tenches. Plenty hereof are bred in the River Camb. Brit. in this County. Stowre, which is so much the more observable, because generally this Fish Mr. Walton his Complete Angler, pag. 245. loveth Ponds better than Rivers, and Pits better then ei∣ther. It is very pleasant in taste, and is called by some the Physician of Fishes. Though in my opinion may better be styled the Surgeon; for it is not so much a disease as a wound that he cureth, nor is it any potion but a playster which he affordeth, viz. his Natural unctuous glutinousness, which quickly consolidateth any green gsh in any fish. But the Pike is Camb. Brit. in Midlesex. principally beholding unto him for cures in that kind, and some have observed, that that Tyrant, though never so hungry, forbeareth to eat this Fish which is his Physician; not that Pikes are capable (which many men are not) of gratitude: but that they are indued with a natural policy, not to destroy that which they know not how soon they may stand in need of. Tobacco-Pipe-Clay. This is a fine Clay, which will burn white (while others turn red) found in several parts of England; but so far from the Sea, it will not quit cost of portage to London, save from two places, 1. Poole, in this County. 2. Isle of Wight. This wrought alone makes an hard Pipe, but so shrunk and shriveled, it is unhand∣some to the eye. This wrought alone, makes a fair and full Pipe, but so brittle, that it is uncer∣viceable for use. Both compounded together make these Utensils both hard and handsome. This Clay brought to London by Ship for Ballast, is there worth about Thirty shillings the Tun. Hemp. England hath no better than what groweth here betwixt Remister and Byrdport, the use whereof is of absolute necessity for cordage, cloathing, &c. So that a man may ad∣mire
that the seed being so profitable, and our Land affording so much strong and dèep ground proper for the same, so little is sown thereof. The rather, because Hemp in effect secureth it self, first against Cattel, against which it is its own fence, seeing none (Deer only excepted) will offer to eat thereof. Second∣ly, from thieves, not because it is ominous for them to steal that which is the instrument of their execution, but because much pains (which idle persons hate at their hearts) is required to reduce Hemp to profit: whilest Wheat and Barley left in the field, are more subject to Felony, as which, when threshed will render a present profit. But see more of this Commodity in Lincoln-shire. To these we may adde Rubia Silvestris, VVild Madder, which groweth at Hodhill in this County, on the next side of the River at Stur-paine (two miles from Blanford) at War∣ham likewise, and at other places, and at a place called Somervill near to Chappel, which by the landing place, as ye come from Altferr to Chesil, is in Parkingson, pag. 285. great abundance. It is an assured remedy for the Yellow Jaundice, openeth the obstructions of the Spleen, &c. Buildings. The Houses of the Gentry herein are built rather to be lived in, than to be looked on, very low in their scituation (for warmth and other conveniencies▪) Indeed the rhime holds generally true of the English structures, The North for Greatness, the East for Health, The South for Neatness, the West for Wealth. However amongst the Houses in this County, Lullworth Castle, and Sherburn-Lodge are most eminent, escaping pretty well in the late war, so that they have cause nei∣ther to brag nor complain. Proverbs. As much a kin as Lenson-hill to Pilsen-pen.] That is no kin at all. It is spoke of such who have vicinity of habitation or neighbour∣hood, without the least degree of consanguinity or affinity betwixt them. For these are two high hills, the first wholy, the other partly in the Parish of Broad Windsor, where∣of once I was Minister. Yet, Reader, I assure thee, that Sea-Men make the nearest Relation betwixt them, calling the one the Cow, the other the Calf; in which forms it seems they appear first to their fancies, being eminent Sea-marks to such as sail along these Coasts. And although there be many Hills interposing betwixt these and the Sea, which seem higher to a land Traveller, yet these surmount them all: so incompetent a Judge, and so untrue a Surveyor is an ordinary eye of the Altitude of such places. Stab'd with a Byrdport Dagger.] That is, hang'd, or executed at the Gallowes. The best, if not the most Hemp (for the quantity of ground) growing about Byrdport a Market Town in this County. And hence it is, that there is an ancient Statute (though now disused and neglected) that the Cable Ropes for the Navy Royal were to be made there abouts, as affording the best Tackling for that purpose. Dorset-shire Dorsers.] Dorsers are Peds or Panniers carried on the backs of Horses, on which Haglers use to ride and carry their Commodities. It seems this homely, but most useful imple∣ment was either first found out, or is most generally used in this County, where Fish∣Jobbers bring up their Fish in such contrivances above an hundred miles, from Lime to London. Saints. EDWARD, son to Edgar King of England, was in his Child-hood bred under the cruel correction of Elfrida his Mother-in-law, who used for small faults to whip him
with Wax-Candles. In so much, that it is reported, it made such an impression in this young Princes memory, that, when a man, he could not endure the sight of Rab. Glouc. cited by Mr. Selden in his notes upon Polyolbion in his notes upon the 12. Song. Wax∣Candles. But Edward afterwards outgrew his Mothers tuition, and succeeded his Father in his Throne. However, such her ambition, that, advantaged with the others easiness of nature, She managed most matter of State, leaving her Son in-law little more than the bare title of Soveraign. Not contented herewith, and to derive the Scepter to her own Son Ethelred, caused him to be stab'd at Corfe Castle, in this County, co∣ming in a civil visit unto her. His hidden ody being miraculously discovered, was first buried at Warham, and thence removed to Shaftsbury, which Town for a time was termed Malmes. lib. de Pnotific. 2. Saint Edwards, from his interment. His murder hapned about the year of our Lord, 978. Cardinals. JOHN MORTON was born at Saint Andrews Milborne in this County, of a right Worshipful Family still extant therein. He was bred in Oxford, and after many me∣diate preferments, made Bishop of Ely, Anno 1578. Not long after, when many groa∣ned under the Tyranny of King Richard the third, this Prelate first found out the de∣sign of marrying Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edward the fourth of the House of York, to Henry Earl of Richmond, the last who was left of the line of Lancaster. Indeed the Earls title to the Crown, was not enough to make a countenance therewith, much less a claim thereto; but, as the Lady had a Title, and wanted a man to manage it; the Earl was man enough to manage any design, but wanted a Title; and pursuing this advice, by Gods blessing, he gained the Crown, by the name of Henry the seventh. In expression of his gratitude, he made this Bishop Chancellor of England, and after∣wards Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. He was a great instrument in advancing a voluntary Contribution to the King through the Land; perswading Prodigals to part with their money, because they did spend it most; and the Covetous, because they might spare it best. So making both extreams to meet in one medium, to supply the Kings necessities; who, though prodigiously rich, may be said always to need, because never-satisfied. This Bishop with vast cost, cut a new Channel in the Fennes, for the publick good, but it neither answered his expectation nor expence. He was magnificent in his build∣ings, and bountiful to poor Scholars, enjoyning his Executors to maintain twenty poor Scholars in Oxford, and ten in Cambridge twenty years after his death, which hap∣ned in October, 1500. Prelates. JOHN STAFFORD, Son to Humphrey Stafford, sixth Earl of Stafford, was born at Gdwin in his Catal. of Arch-Bishops of Canterbury. Hooke in this County (then a most stately House belonging to this Family) and bred a Doctor of the Laws in Oxford▪ he was afterwards Dean of the Arches, and Dean of Saint Martins. This was a fair Colledge near Aldersgate in London, founded Anno 1056. by Ingelricus, and Edvardus his Brother, priviledged by our Kings of England with great immunities; the cause of many and high contests betwixt this Colledge and the City of London. Afterwards he was made Bishop of Wells, and for eighteen years (a continuance, hardly to be parallel'd) was Chancellor of England. At last he was ad∣vanced Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and no Prelate (his Peer in Bith and preerment) hath either less good, or less evil recorded of him. He died at Maidstone, 1452. and lies buried in Canterbury. ROBERT MORTON was God. in the Bishops of . Brothers Son to Cardinal Morton (of whom before) whose Father had a fair Habitation at Saint Andrews Milborne in this County. His re∣lation to so good an Uncle, mixed with his own merits, preferred him to the Bishoprick of Worcester. Of whom we have little more than the date of his consecration, 1486. and of his Death 1497. He lieth buried in the body of Saint Pauls Church in London. JAMES TURBERVIL, or De turbida villa, was born of a worshipful Family, who long have lived in great account in this At Bere. Gam∣ . in . County  First a Monk, but afterwards
brought up in New-Colledge in Oxford. He was consecrated Bishop of Exeter 1556. and deserved right well of that See. When he entred thereon, it was most true what hisBishop Hall in his assrting Episcopacy. Successor therein since said, That the Bishop of Exeter was a Baron, but a Bare one: so miserably that Cathedral had been pilled and polled. But Bishop Turbervil reco∣vered some lost lands, which Bishop Voysey hadDriven a∣may, in the dialect of the West. vezed: and particularly obtained of Queen Mary the estitution of the fair Manor of Crediton. But, who can stay what will away? It was afterwards alienated again in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. This Bishop Turbervil carried something of trouble in his name, though nothing but mildnesse and meeknesse in his nature. Hence it was, that he staved off persecuti∣on from those in his Jurisdiction, so that not so many as properly may be called some, suffered in his Diocesse. He being deprived in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, li∣ved peaceably for many years in great liberty, the privacy of whose life caused the ob∣scurity of his death, and the uncertainty of the date thereof. Since the Reformation. THOMAS WINNIFFE was born at Sherborne in this County, and was bred con∣temporary with Doctor Hackwell in Exeter Colledge in Oxford, and we may observe a three-fold parallel betwixt these two eminent persons. First they were Fellows of the same foundation. Secondly Chaplains to the same illustrious Master, Prince Henry. Thirdly, both out of (indiscretion at the worst) no ill intent, ran on the same Rock, though not to the same degree of damage. Dr. Hackwel, for opposing the Spanish Match, was un-Chaplain'd, and banished the Court; Doctor Winniffe, for a passage in his Ser∣mon (not against, but) about Gondomer, was committed close prisoner to the Tower, and there for some days remained. During which time, a great Lord (who shall pass nameless) with great importunity endevoured to beg away all his Church preferment, to dispose of at his pleasure. No (said King James) I mean not thus to part with the man. The Lord perceiving his suit hopeless, vowed most solemnly, that he did it only to try his royal resolution, pro∣testing that his Majesty had not one of more merit amongst all his Chaplains. Indeed he was observed to run (with emulation without envy) in the race of vertue even with any of his Order, striving to exceed them by fair industry, without offering proudly to justle their credit, much less falsly to supplant their reputation. He was first Dean of Gloucester, afterward of Saint Pauls, and lastly was chosen Bishop of Lincoln, 1642. being one of those six choice persons elected, Ut nutantis Episcopatus molem, pietatis ac probitatis suae fulcimine sustentarent. All in vain, being borne down under the ruines thereof. Since that government hath been happily resumed, and long may it flourish in its full lustre. He died Anno Dom. 1654. and was buried at Lamburne in Essex, having formerly been the painfull Minister thereof. He was seventy eight years of age, and hath a handsome Monu∣ment erected to his Memory, the Epitaph whereof being too long to transcribe, thus beginneth; Effare marmor silens Quid & quem Luges; Funus non privatum, sed publicum, Anglicanae Ecclesiae (nisi Deus antevertat) penè cadaver, Thoman Wynnyffum, &c. I would adde more in his just Commendation, but because I am prohibited by his Epitaph, whereof this the conclusion, Anima haec in Coelos recepta non Laudationem quaerit Sed Imitationem.
Nor will we forget that for some years before his aged Father was buried in the same Grave. Souldiers. THOMAS BASKET, Esquire, of Divelish in this County. How much King Hn∣ry the eighth confided in his Wisdom and Valour, will plainly appear by the Letter he wrote unto him, exemplified by us in our Observations of the Sheriffs of this County in the twelfth year of the reign of the King aforesaid. He was commonly called Little Mr. Basket the great Souldier. He died about the year of our Lord 1530. JOHN RUSSEL, son of—Russel, Esq was born atThe inheri∣tance whereof is still posses∣sed by his Fa∣mily. Kingston-Russel in this County, and being bred beyond the Seas, arrived at great accomplishments, and re∣turned home about the time when Philip King of Castile (Father to Charles the fifth Emperour) was forced by foul weather into the Haven of Weymouth. But, it is an ill wind that blows no body profit, this accident proving the foundation of Mr. Russels pre∣ferment. For when Sir Thomas Trenchard bountifully received this Royal Guest, Mr. Russel was sent for, to compleat the entertainment; King Philip taking such delight in his company, that at his departure he recommended him to King Henry the seventh, as a person of abilities fit to stand before Princes, and not before mean men. Indeed he was a man of spirit, carrying a badge of Valour (no blemish, but a beauty) in his face, the loss of an eye at the siege of Montrule. King Henry the eight much favoured him, making him Controller of the Houshold, and Privy Councellor, and Anno 1538. created him Lord Russl, and made him Keeper of the Privy Seal. A good share of the golden showre of Abby Lands fell into his lap; two Mitred ones, viz. Tavestock in Devonshire, and Thorney in Cambridge-shire, being conferred upon him, and at this day possessed by his posterity. King Edward the sixth (who made him Earl of Bedford) sent him down to suppress the Western Commotion, and relieve the besieged City of Exeter, which difficult service he performed with no less Wisdom than Valour, Success than either. This worthy Lord died in the month of March, 1554. and lieth interred at Cheineys in Buckingham shire. Sir RIRD BINGHAM was born at Binghams-Melcolm in this County, of as ancient a Family as any therein, having my self seen an Inquisition of Lands taken ou of the Tower Rolls, which William de Bingham his Ancestor, held in Dorset shire in the reign of King Henry the third. In his youth he traced most parts of the World, to search for service, and find fit objects for his valour. He was at the siege of Saint Quin∣tin in France, the sacking of Lieth in Scotland, served in Candia under the Ventian a∣gainst the Turk; then returned into the Netherlands, being obseved to be fortis & foe∣lix in all his undertakings. His judgement was much relied on in Eighty eight, about ordering the Land Army in Tilbery Camp. After long travelling, his feet were fixed in Ireland, where he was not bebogg'd (as some otherwise his equals) with ill success; but being president of Connaugh, conque∣red and drove away O Rorke, that most dangerous Rebel. Sir William Fitz-VVilliams, Lord Deputy of Ireland, was offended at that service, though he could find no fault therewith, save that it was not done byPro  in∣dignante hanc gloriam sibi a∣reptam. amb. Eliz. Anno 1590. hmself. In∣deed Bingham met with that which all men of merit must expect (except they will be surprized unawares) envy from others, suspecting that their own Bays did wither, be∣cause his did seem so verdant. Hereupon they accused him of cruelty, to the Queen and her Council, who being employed in Connaugh (the very Ireland of Ireland in that age) was necessitated into severity for his own security. For this cause he was brought over into England outed his Offices, and kept for some timeCamb. Eliz. Anno 1598. in restraint, all which he being inured to hardship, as who had not eat his bread (nor fasted neither) all in a place, bare with invincible courage. But neglected worth will come into fashion once in seven years. Tyrone begins to trouble Munster, and none found fit for to order him but Sir Richard Bingham, who is sent over with more honour and power, Marshal of Ireland, and General of Lmster, to undertake that service, whereof no doubt he had given a good account, had not
death overtaken him at Dublin. Wherever buried, he hath a Monument of mention in the South side of Westminster Abbey. Sea Men. RICHARD CLARK ofHic  English Voy∣ages, Vol. 3. pag. 163. VVeymouth in this County was a most knowing Pilot, and Master of the Ship called the Delight, which Anno 1583. went with Sir Humphrey Gil∣bert for the discovery of Norembege. Now it happened (without any neglect or de∣fault in the same Richard) how that Ship struck on ground, and was cast away in the year aforesaid, on Thursday August 29. Yet wave followed not wve faster than wonder won∣der, in the miraculous preservation of such as escaped this Shipwrack. 1.Idem. pag. 164. Sixteen of them got into a small Boat, of a Tun and half, which had but one Oar to work withal. 2. They were seventy leagues from Land, and the weather so soul, that it was not possible for a Ship to brook half a course of Sail. 3. The Boat being over-burdened, one of them, Mr. Hedly by name, made a motion to cast Lots, that those four which drew the shortest, should be cast over-board, provided, if one of the Lots fell on the Master, he notwithstanding should be preserved, as in whom all their safety were concerned. 4. Our Richard Clark their Master disavowed any acceptance of such priviledge, re∣plying, they would live or die together. 5. On the fifth day Mr. Hedly (who first motioned Lot-drawing) and another died, whereby their Boat was somewhat allightned. 6. For five days and nights they saw the Sun and Stars but once, so that they onely kept up their Boat with their single Oar, going as the Sea did drive it. 7. They continued four days without any sustenance, save what the Weeds which swam in the Sea, and salt water did afford. 8. On the seventh day, about eleven a clock they had sight of, and about three they came on the South part of New found land. 9. All the time of their being at Sea, the wind kept continually Soth, (which if it had shifted on any other Point, they had never come to land) but came con∣trary at the North within half an hour after their arrival. 10. Being all come safe to Shore, they kneeled down, and gave God praise (as they justly might) for their miraculous deliverance. 11. They remained there three days and nights, having their plentiful repast, upon Berries and wild Peason. 12. After five days rowing along the shore, they hapned on a Spanish Ship of Saint▪ John de Luz, which courteously brought them home to Biskay. 13. The Visitors of the Inquisition coming aboard the Ship, put them on examinati∣on, but by the Masters favour, and some general Answers, they escaped for the present. 14. Fearing a second search, they shifted for themselves, and going twelve miles by night, got into France, and so safely arrived in England. Thus we may conclude with the Psalmist, They which do go down into the Sea, and* Psal. 107. 23 occupy in the great waters: These men see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. GEORGE SUMMERS, Knight, was born in or near Lyme, though on my best en∣quiry (living some years within seven miles of the place) I could not attain the exact∣ness thereof. He afterwards was a successful Voyager into far distant Countries, and first discovered the Bermuda's, from and by him named the Summer Islands. A Plan∣tation, though slighted of late, (whether for want of industry in the Planters, or staple Commodities, I hnow not) yet were it in the hand of the Spaniard (as by Gods bles∣sing never shall) it would be over-considerable unto us. Yea, that which now is quar∣relled at for not feeding us with any provision, might then stop the mouths, yea knock out the teeth of such who now so undervalue it. I say, they were called the Summer Islands from this Knight, which I conceive necessary to observe. For, I find, that though the County of Somerset is undoubtedly so called from
Sommerton, once the principal Town therein, yet because that Town at this day is mean and obscure, some have strongly fancied, and stifly defended it so named from the Summer, the fruitfulnesse whereof so appeareth therein. Possily in processe of time, (with a more probable cover for their mistake) these Summer Islands may be con∣ceived so named, because there Winter doth never appear. This Sir George Summers was a Lamb on the Land, so patient that few could anger him, and (as if entring a ship he had assumed a new nature) a Lion at Sea, so passionate, that few could please him. He died (modest conjectures are better than confident un∣truths) about the year of our Lord, 1610. Before we take our final farewell of the Seamen in this County, I conceive fit, that the following Note should not be forgotten. Anno 1587. when Tho. Cavendish, Esq was in the pursuit of his Voyage about the world, some of his men August 1. went a shoar at Cape Quintero to fetch fresh water, when two hundred Spanish Horsemen came poudring from the Hills upon them. They being hard at work, in no readiness to re∣sist, suddenly surprized, and over-powered in number, were slin, to the number of twelve men, a third of which losse fell on this county, whose names ensue; 1. William Kingman of Dorset-shire in the Admiral. 2. William Biet of VVeymouth in the Vice Admiral. 3. Henry Blacknals of Weymouth. In the Hugh-Gallant. 4. William Pit of Sherborne. In the Hugh-Gallant. But their surviving Country-men, (being but fifteen in number who had any weapons on the shoar) soon revenged their death, who coming from the works, not only rescu∣ed the rest, but also orced the enemy to retire with the losse of 25. of his men, and then watered there in despight of all opposition. Civilians. Sir THOMAS RYVES, Doctor of the Laws, was born atThe Regi∣ster of New Colledge. Little Langton in this County, bred in New Colledge in Oxford. A general Scholar in all polite learning, a most pure Latinist (no hair hanging at the neb of his Pen) witness his most critical Book of Sea-Battels; a Subject peculiar, I think, to his endeavours therein. He was at last made the Kings Advocate, & indeed he formerly had been Advocate to the King of hea∣ven, in his poor Ministers, in his Book entituled, The Vicars Plea, wherein much Law, and Learning, and Reason, and Equity is shewen in their bhalf. A grievance  camplained of than heard, oftner heard than pitied, and oftner  than redressd, so unequal is the contest betwixt a poor Vicars Plea, and a wealthy Impropriators Purse. He was a man of valour as well as of much learning, and gave good evidence therof (though wel stricken in years) in our late wars. He died in his native County, about the year 1652 Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. ROBERT ROGERS, born atStow in his Survey of Lon∣don (continu∣ed by How) pag. 97. Poole in this County, was afterwards a Leather-seller in London, and dying a rich Batchelor, bequeathed a great part of his estate to pious uses, viz. For the building of Alms∣Houses in Pool 333 l. For the relief of poore Prisoners (neither Atheists nor ) each man, at the sum of twenty No∣bles, 150 l. For poor Preachers (al∣lowing to each man ten pound) 100 l. To decaied Artificers, charged with wife and chil∣dren 100 l. To the Merchant Adven∣turers, for the relief of old, and support of young free∣men, 400 l. To Christs Hospital 500l To erect Alms-Houses in and about London, 600 l. For a weekly dole of bread to the poor, 200 l. For the maintaining of two Scholars in each Uni∣versity, intrusting the Lea∣ther-sellers with the mana∣ging thereof, 400 l. I have only gathered the greatest clusters of his Charity which the top boughs thereof did produce, purposely concealing the smaller bunches of his bounty, growing on the under branches. He died Anno Dom.Idem. pag. 347. 1601. and lieth buried in Christ-Church in London.
Memorable Persons. THOMAS de la LYND, a Gentleman of a fair Estate in this County killed a white Hart in Blackmore Forrest, which King Henry the third by expresse will had reserved for his own chase. Hereupon a mulct was imposed upon him and the whole County (as accessary for not opposing him) which is paid, called White-Hart- Silver to this day into the Exchequer. My self hath paid a share for the sauce, who never tasted any of the meat; so that it seems Kings Venison is sooner eaten than digested. Let the La∣tine Proverb, Albo gallo, &c. in Dorset-shire, be turned into Albo cervo ne manum ad∣moliaris. ARTHUR GREGORY of Lyme in this County had the admirable Art of Forcing the Seal of a Letter, yet so invisibly, that it still appeared a Virgin to the exactest beholder. Secretary Walsingham made great use of him, about the Pacquets which passed from Forraign parts to Mary Queen of Scotland. He had a pension paid unto him for his good service out of the Exchequer; and died at Lyme about the beginning of the reign of King James. WILLIAM ENGLEBERT, born at So was I in∣formed by Mr. William Swet∣tenham (being himself born in ) eminently known an Un∣der-teller in the Exchequer, who for many years paid this pension. Sherborne, was an incomparable Ingeneere, and much used in the Eighty eight. Queen Elizabeth, (an excellent House-wife of her Treasure) allowed him a pension of one hundred Marks per annum, which was paid him until the day of his death. He requested of King Iames his Privy Councel leave to serve Foreign Princes and States (long peace rendring him useless in England) proffering to wave his Pension on that condition, but they utterly denied him licence to depart, who lived and died in Westminster about the year, 1634. The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. William Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chan∣cellor of England. Commissioners to take the Oaths. William de Botreaux, Chivaler.   John Chedyok, Knight. Knights for the Shire.   William Turbervill. Knights for the Shire.   Humf. Stafford, Chiv Ioh. Newburgh, sen. Radulph. Bush Iohan. Latymer Iohan. Neburgh, jun. Williel. Bronning Roberti Frampton Nicholai Latymer Walteri Gonis Thome Manston Iohan. Cammel Iohan. Frantleroy Henrici Sherard Will. Anketill Iohan. Hering Iohan. Carent Roberti Turbervile Richardi Fitton Iohannis Mone Iohannis Peterel Rich. Strode Iohannis de la Lynde Roberti Rempston Will. Gerrard Will. Godwyn Will. Dakcombe Roberti Savage Roberti Bannet Edw. Stone Roberti Larkestoke Iohannis Frampton de Dorchester Rogeri Rochford Iohannis Stampford Roberti Hymerford Stephani Russel Henrici Russel Roberti Tredosa Willi. Chetil Walt. Hayngstrigge Ioh. Talbot Simonis Talbot Richardi Byle Williel. Hornsbow Radulphi Belton Iohannis Phillippe Thome Anketill Willielmi Clavil de Ferne Willielmi Morton de Chestesbury Willielmi Cole Willielmi Bontley Iohan. Butt Rogeri Grogge de Lyme Willielmi Warner de Pole Roberti Bertram de Dorchester Tho. Tinam de Lyme Rob. Abbot de Mel∣combe Regis Richardi Kaynell Iohan. Hillary de Shirborn Iohan. Scryveyn de Shirborn.
Sheriffs of Dorset and Somerset Shires. HEN. II. Anno 1 Warinus Anno 2 Rich. de Raddona Anno 3 Warinus de Lisoris Rich. de Raddona Anno 4 Anno 5 Rich. de Raddona Warinus de Lisoris Anno 6 Anno 7 Warinus de Lisoris Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Robertus de Bello Cam∣po. Anno 10 Gilbertus Percy Anno 11 Rich. de Raddon Gilb. de Percy Anno 12 Rob. de Pucherel, for four years. Anno 16 Alud. de Lincolne, for six years. Anno 22 Rob. de Bello Campo, for seven years. Anno 29 Will. de Bendenger Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Rob. filius Pag. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. RICH. I. Anno 1 Hugo Bardulph Anno 2 Rob. Anno 3 Willielmus de Chahaignes Rad. de Chahaignes, for 4. years. Anno 7 Will. Chahaignes Walt. de Giffardus Anno 8 Anno 9 Will. de Chaignes Pet. de Schidemore Anno 10 Will. de Cahaignes. Reg. JOHAN. Anno 1 Pet. de Schidemore Anno 2 Rob. Belet Hen. de Stokes Anno 3 Hubert. de Burge Alanus de Wigton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will. de Monte Acuto, for four years. Anno 10 Will. Briewre Rad. de Brey Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. Mallet, sive Malet, for four years. Anno 16 Rich. de Marisco Rog. de Pealton HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Pet. de Malo Lacu. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rog. de Forda Ralph. Clericus Anno 6 Rog. de Forda Ralph. Clericus. Anno 7 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire. Radus Germein Ermegundus de Wenham Sheriffs of Somerset-Shire Rob. de Ford. Rich. Abbas de Michelem. Anno 8 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire. Radus Germin Rich. Episcopus Saresb. Gilbert. de Staplebigg. Sheriffs of Somerset-Shire Johan. Russel, & Radus Russel. Joscelin. Bathon. Episcopus. Lucas Rupel. Anno 9 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire. Ricus Episcopus Saresb. Gilbert. de Staplebig. Sheriffs of Somerset-Shire Joscelin. Bathon. Episcopus. Lucas Russel. Anno 10 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire. Rich. Episcopus Saresb. Gilbert. de Staplebigg. Sheriffs of Somerset-Shire Joscelin. Bathon. Episcopus. Will. de Schorewell. Anno 11 Will. filius Henerici Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Tho. de Cirencester Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. & Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 16 Tho. de Cirencester Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 17 Tho. de Cirencester Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem. & Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 20 Tho. de Cirencester Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 21 Tho. de Cirencester Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Jordan Oliver.
Anno 25 Hugo. de Vinon for six years. Anno 31 Hugo. de Vinon. Barth. Peach, for four years. Anno 35 Hen. de Derleg. Anno 36 Elias de Cabian. Anno 37 Idem. Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. & Walterus de Bur∣ges. Anno 40 Steph. de Hasseton Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Walt. de Burges Anno 43 Williel. Everard. Humf. Chaehet. Will. Lecombe Clericus Anno 44 Phil. de Cerve Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Johan. Basset Anno 46 Johan. Basset Hen. Aultun Anno 47 Phil. Basset Hen. Aulton, for five years. Anno 53 Tho. de Sancto Vigor. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Joh. de Sancto Waller Tho. de Sancto Vigore EDW. I. Anno 1 Joh. de Sancto Valerno. Anno 2 Rich. de Coleshul. for five years. Anno 7 Joh. de Cormailess Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Joh. de Cormailes Pet. de Bolemer Anno 11 Joh. de Cormailes Anno 12 Joh. de Sancto Laudo, for six years. Anno 18 Rich. de Burghunt Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Walt. de Lovene Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Walt. de Glouc. for five years. Anno 27 Nich. de Chednoy Anno 28 Joh. Gerbert Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Joh. de la Lee. Anno 31 Joh. Gerberte Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Math. Fornius Johan. de Monte Acuto Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Nich. de Langland EDW. II. Anno 1 Nich. de Cheney Walt. de Easthidmore Anno 2 Rich. de Chiseldon. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Walt. Esquidemor Tho. de Marleberge Anno 6 Walt. de Esquidemore Anno 7 Joh. de Chidiokes Anno 8 Joh. de Earle Anno 9 Math. de Furneaux. Anno 10 Joh. de Kingston Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Tho. de Marleberge Nich. de Cheigney Anno 13 Tho. de Marleberge Nich. de Cheigney Anno 14 Joh. Tichburne Anno 15 Tho. de Marleberge Anno 16 Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1. Will. de Whitfeld, for four years. Anno 5 Will. de Whitfeld Hugo. de Langland Anno 6 Joh. de Wraxhale Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hildebrand de London Joh. de Wroxhall Anno 9 Hildebrand. de London Joh. de London Anno 10 Walt. de Rodney Hildebrand. de London Walt. de Rodney Anno 12 Walt. & Hildebrand. Wal∣terus Anno 13 Walt. & Hildebrand. Wal∣terus Anno 14 Walt. & Hildebrand. Wal∣terus Anno 15 Joh. de Durburgh Anno 16 Hugo Tirell Anno 17 Edw. de Stradlinge Anno 18 Tho. de Cary, for 8. years. Anno 26 Johan. de Palton Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Joh. de Sancto Laudo. Joh. de Palton Anno 30 Joh. de Sancto Laudo Anno 31 Rich. de Turbuil Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Joh. de Raleigh Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Theobald. de Gorges Edrius de Chivedon Anno 36 Tho. de Bridport Anno 37 Joh. Atte Hall Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Joh. Langland, for four years. Anno 43 Edw. Cheyne Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Will. de Winterborne Anno 46 Roger. Mamugford Anno 47 Joh. Hameley Anno 48 Hugo. de Durburgh Anno 49 Will. Latymer Anno 50 Edw. Fitz-Herbert Anno 51 Hugo. Burburgh
Sheriffs of Dorset and Somerset Shires. Name Place Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Ioh. de la Mare. Nonny C. Gul. 2. Lions passant gard. Arg. 2 Will. Stafford.   Gul. 3. Oak leaves, Arg. 3 Ioh. Burgherst.   Ga ion ramp. with 2 tails, O 4 Will. Latymer▪   Gul. across Patance, Or. 5 Will. Bonevile. Chuton Sab 6. mullets, Arg. pierced, G. 6 Edw. Fitz-Herb.   Per pale, Az. and Gul. 3. Lyons rampant, Arg. 7 Joh. Streche.     8 Ioh. Burgherst. ut prius * Arg. a Chev. engrailed, Gul. betw. 3. Leopards heads, Az. 9 Ioh. Copleston.* Devon.   10 Humf. de Stafford Hoke D. Or, a Chev Gul on a cant. Er. 11 Ioh. Rodney Rodney Or, 3. Eaglets displayed; Purp. 12 Joh. Moygne   Ar. 2. Bars, & 3. Mull. in Chi. S 13 Tho. Brooke.   Gul. on a Chev. Arg. a Lion ramp. Sab. crowned, Or. 14 Ioh. Berkeley. *     15 Humf. de Stafford. ut prius. * Gul. a Chev. betwixt ten Crosses sormee, Arg. 16 Ioh. Beach.     17 Theob. Wickham.     18 Tho. Berkeley ut prius   19 Ioh. Mogyne. ut prius   20 Ioh. Rodnev. ut prius   21 Tho. Dacombe Stepleton Vert, a  surgeant, Arg. 22     HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Tho. Arthur, mil.     2 Rich. Boyton, & Ioh. Lutterel, mil. Dunster C. Or, a bend betw. 6. Martets, 3 Ioh. Frome.     4 Will. Worth.     5 Idem. ut prius   6 Rich. Boyton.     7 Walt. Rodney. ut prius   8 Ioh. Horsey. Clifton D Azure, 3 Horses heads coped, Or, bridled, Argent. 9 Math. Coker. † Coker   10 Rich. Boyton.   † Arg. on a bend, Gul. 3. Leo∣pards heads, Or. 11 Humf. Stafford, mil. ut prius   12 Ioh. Horsey. ut Horsey   HEN. V.     Anno     1 Walt Hungerford.   Sab. 2. Bars and 3. Plaes, Ag. 2 Ioh. Warre.     3 Humf. Stofford, m. ut prius   4 Rich. Boyton     5 Math. Coker. ut prius   6 Ioh. Flory. Comb Flo   7 Rob. Hill.   Gul. a Chveron engrailed, Erm. betwixt 3. Garbs, Or. 8 Ioh. Neuburgh.     9 Rob. Hill. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Rob. Hill, & ut prius   1 Rob Coker. ut prius   2 Humf. Stafford. ut prius   3 Edw. Stradling.   Pale ways of 6. Arg. and Az. 4 Egid. Daubeny a S. on a bend, G. 3. cinque foils, Or 5 Will. Fynderne. b   a Gul. 4. Lozenges in fess, Ar. 6 Will. Carrant. c   b Arg.  Chev. betwixt 3 cros∣ses pateee fitchee, Sable. 7 Ioh. Stourton, mil. d Candel.   8 Ioh. Warre   c Arg. three round Cheverony of 6 Gules and Azure. 9 Ioh. Pawlet. e Nonny C▪   10 Ioh. Stourton. ut prus d Sable, a bend, Or, betwixt 3. Fountains proper. 11 Ioh. Seyndowe.     12 Ioh. Seymor. f Haahbech e Sable, 3. swords in Pyle, Arg. Hills and Pomels, Or. 13 Will. Carrant. ut prius   14 Tho. Thame.   f Gules, two Angels wings pale ways inverted, Or. 15 Ioh. Sentelo.     16 Will. Stafford. ut prius g Arg. a Chev. engrailed betw, 3 Talbots heads erased, Sab. 17 Edw. Hall. or Hull. g     18 Walt. Rodney. ut prius   19 Will. Carrant. ut prius   20 Will. Stafford. ut prius   21 Ioh. Saint Lowe.     2 Edw. Hall, mil. ut prius   23 Rob. Capps.     24 Ioh. Norys   Quarterly, Arg. and Gules, a Fret, Or, with a fess, Az. 25 Will. Carrant. ut prius   26 Tho. Chidiokes ChidiokD Gul. an In-escoucheon betw. an Orle of Martilets, Arg. 27 Edw. Hall, mil. ut prius   28 Ioh. Austil.   Ag. a Saltire Ragule, Vert. 29 Will. Carrant, ar. ut prius   30 Tho. Tame.     1 Rich. Warre     32 Nich. Latymer. ut prius   33 Ioh. Cheney, ar. Plume Checky, Or, and Azure, afess Gul. frettee, Ermin. 34 Io. Willoughby, ar. †     35 Nich. Saint Low, ar.   † S. b. a cross engrailed, Or. 36 Rob. Warre, ar.     37 Ioh. Scintbarbe     38 Ioh. Carrant, jun. ar. ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Humf. Stafford. ut prius   2 Tho. Hebert, ar. ut prius   3 Idm. ut prus   4 Will. Browinge, ar▪     5 Chistoph. Wosley   Arg. a Chev. S. betw. 3. Cornish choughs proper. 6 Io. Sydenham, sen.* Brimptn   7 Geo. Darrel, mil. †   * Sab. 3. Raens, A gent. 8 Rob. Stwel, ar. * Stowel † Az. a Lyon rampnt, Or, crownad, Arg. 9 Rog. Stourton, mil. ut prius   10 Christop. Worsly. m ut prius * Gut. a cross Lozenge, Arg. 11 Nich. Latimer, mil ut prius   12 Ioh. Cheverel, ar.   Arg. on a saltire, Az. 5. Wa∣ter bougets, Or, a Chief, Gul. 13 Ioh. Baconell.     14 Rob. Palmer, ar.     15 Egid Daubency ut prius   6 Will. Colingborne     17 Tho. Norton, ar.   Vert, a Lion rampant, Or, ali∣bi, Arg. 18 Will. Beckly.     9 Will Say, am.     20 Edw, Hardgile.     21 Egid. Daubney, ar. ut prins   22 Rich. Moeton. S. Anch. Milborne. , Gul. and Emin, a Gots head erased, Ag. on th fist and last qurter. RICH. III.     Anno     1 Nich. Crowmer.     2 Edw. Redwaine.   Gu. 3. Cushions, Em. but∣oned and tasselled, Or. 3 Tho Fulford. *         * Gules, a Cheveron, Arg. HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Amic. Paulet. ut prius   2 Ioh. Tu bevile. Bere Do. Erm, a Lion rompant, Gules, crowned, Or. 3 Iam. Daubney. ut prius   4     5 Will. Maruen. Pertword   6 Amic. Pauler, mil. ut prius Arg. a demi Lion rampant couped, Sab. charged on the shoulder wth a flow▪ de lys, 7 Will. Knole, ar.     8 Walt. Enderby.     9 Edw. Carew. Devonsh. Or, 3. Lions passant gardant. S. armed and lanued, Gul. 10 Samp. Norton, ar. ut prius   11 Edw. Gorges, mil.   , Or, and Azure. 12 Rog. Newbourgh, ut prius   13 Rich. Pudsey, mil.     14 Nich. Wadham, ar. . Gules, a chveron betwixt 3▪ Roses, Arg. 15 Amic. Paulet, mil ut prius   16 Will. Marrin, ar. ut prius   16 Will. Carew, mil. ut prius  
17 Ioh. Trevilion, mil. Nettle C. Gul. a demi-Horse Arg. issuing out of the waves of the sea. 18 Edw. Wadham, ar. ut prius   19 Hen. uedale, ar.   Arg. a Cross moline, Gul. 20 Ioh. Horsey, ar. ut prius   21 Ioh. Sidenham, ar. ut prius   22 Ioh Carew, mil. ut prius   23 Ioh. Williams, mil. Oxfordsh. Azure, an Organ-pipe in bend sinister Saltire wise surmoun∣ted of another Dexter betw. 4. 24 Rich. Weston, ar.     HEN. VIII.   Crosses pattee, Arg. Anno.     1 Tho. Trenchard, m. Wotton D Per pale Arg. & Az. 3 palets, S 2 Ioh. Speake, mil. Whitlack. Arg. 2 bars, Az. over all, an Eagle displayed, Gul. 3 Walt. Rodney. ut prius   4 Egid. Strangways Melbury Sab. 2. Lions passant, Arg. 5 Will. Compton, m.   Sab. a Lion passant, Or, inter three Helmets, Arg. 6 Edw. Gorges, mil. ut prius   7 Ioh. Seymor, mil. ut prius   8 Tho. de la Lynd, m.   Gul. 3. Bucks heads cooped, Argent. 9 Egid. Strangways. ut prius   10 Edw. Hungerford. ut prius   11 Ioh. Bourchier, ar.   Arg. a Cross engrailed, Gules, betw. 4. water Bougets, Sab. 12 Will. Wadham, ar. ut prius   13 Ioh. Rogers, mil.     14 Will. Carrant, ar. ut prius   15 Tho. Trenchard, m. ut prius   16 Egid. Strangways. ut prius   17 Geo. Speke, ar. ut prius   18 Ioh. Seymor, mil. ut prius   19 Ioh. Russel, mil. Kingston. Arg. a Lion ramp. Gules, on a Chief, S. 3. scalops of the first. 21 Andr. Lutterel, m. *     21 Edw. Gorges, mil. ut prius * Arg. a fess betw. 3. Otters, S. 22 Tho. Arundel, ar. Wiltshire Sab. 6 Swallows 3. 2. & 1. Arg 23 Edw. Seymor, mil. ut prius   24 Tho. More, mil. Melplash Ermin on a Cbeveron betwixt 3. Mores heads proper, two swords, Arg. 25 Egid. Strangways, m ut prius   26 Nich. Wadham, m. ut prius   27 Pran. Dawrel, ar. ut prius   28 Hugo. Pawlet, mil. ut prius   29 Tho. Horsey, mil. ut prius   30 Hen. Long. mil. Wiltshire. Sab. a Lion rampant betwixt 8. Crosses crossed, Arg. 31 Tho. Speke, mil. ut prius   32 Tho. Arundel, mil. ut prius   33 Egid. Strangways, m ut prius   34 Hugo. Pawlet, mil. ut prius   35 Ioh. Pawlet, mil. ut prius   36 Ioh. Horsey, mil. ut prius   37 Nich. Fitz-James, a. RedLinch Azure, a Dolphin naiant im∣bowed, Argent. 38 Ioh. Sidenham, ar. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Hugo. Pawler, mil. ut prius   2 Ioh. Thinn, mil. Wiltshire Barry of ten, Or, and Sab. 3 Tho. Speke, mil. ut prius   4 Gor. de la Lynd, ar. ut prius   5     6 Ioh. Rogers, mil. ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     Ioh. Tregonwel, mil. Midleton. Arg. 3. Ogresses bet. 2. Cotises in fess, Sable, as many Cor∣nish Choughes proper. 2 Ioh. Sidenham, mil ut prius   3 Hen. Ashley, mil. * S. G. Win.   4 Ioh. Wadham, ar. ut prius * Azure, a cinque foile, Ermin, a Border engrailed, Or. 5 Humf. Colles, ar.     6 Ioh. Horssey, mil. ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Dyer, mil.   Or, a Chief indented, Gul. 2 Ia. Fitz-Iames, mil ut prius   3 Ioh Wadham, mil. ut prius   4 Geo. Speke, mil. ut prius   5 Ioh. Horner, ar. Melles Sab. 3. Talbots passant, Arg. 6 Hen. Ashley, mil. ut prius   7 Hen. Uuedall, ar. ut prius   8 Tho. Morton, ar. ut prius   Sheriffs of Dorcet-shire alone. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     9 Rob. Coker, ar. * Maypoud. * Arg. on a Bend, Gul. 3 Leo∣pards heads, Or. 10 Rob. Williams, ar. a Herringst   11 Ioh. Young, ar.   a Arg. a grey-hound current betw. 3 Birds within a bor∣der engrailed, Sab. 12 Will. Hadeley, ar.     13 Hen. Uudall, ar. b     14 Ioh. Strode, ar. c Parnham b Arg. a cross moline, Gules. 15 Rich. Rogers, ar. d Brianston c Ermin, on a Canton, Sable, a Crssant, Argent. 16 Ioh. Horsey, mil. e Clifton   17 Math. Arundel, m. f Wiltshire d Arg. a Mullet, S. on a Chief, Gul. a flower de lys, Or. 18 Will. Web, ar. g Motcomb   19 Nich. Turbervil, ar. h Bere e Az▪ 3. Horses heads coped, Or, bridled, Argent. 20 Tho. Mullins, ar.     21 Tho. Chafin, ar. Chettle f S. 6. Swallows. 3. 2. &. 1. Ar. 22 Geo. Trenchard, ar. i VVoolton g Gul. a cross betw. 4. Eaglets close, Or. 23 Nich. Martin. ar. k     24 Ioh. Williams, ar. ut prius h Erm. a Lyon rampant, Gul. crowned, Or. 25 Tho. Strangways, a. ut prius   26 Hen. Coker, ar. ut prius i Per pale, Arg. and Azure, in the first 3. palets, Sablo. 27 Ioh. Horsey, ar. ut prius   28 Christ. Percy, ar. m   k Az. 3. bendlets, Arg. a Chief, Ermine. 29 Rich. Rogers, ar. ut prius   30 Rob. Frampton, ar. n   m Or, a Lion ram. Az. quar∣tered with G. 3 lucies hauri∣ant, Argent. 31 Ioh. Brown, ar. Frampton   32 Tho. Chaffin, ar     33 Radus Horsey, ar. ut prius n Sab. 2. Lions paws issuing out of the Dexter and sinister base points erected in form of a Cheweron, Argent, ar∣med, Gules. 34 Ioh. Williams, ar. ut prius   35 Geo. Morton. ut infra   36 Rob. Strod, ar. ut prius   37 Tho. Hussy, ar. o Shopwick   38 Geor. Trenchard, m ut prius o Barry of 6. Erm. and Gul. 39 Tho. Freke, ar. Shrowton   40 Gor. Moton, ar. Clenston Quarterly, Gul. & Er. a goats head errased, Arg. in the first and last quarter. 41 Rob. Miller, ar. * Briddie   42 Tho. Uudall, ar. ut prius   43 Ioh. Stoker, ar.   * Azure, four Mascles, Or. 44 Ioh. Rogers, ar. ut prius   JACOB.     Anno     1 Ioh. Fitz-Iames, ar. Lewston Az. a Dolph. naiant imbow. Ar. 2 Ioh. Tregonwel, ar. Milton   3 Ioh. Ryves, ar. Blanford   4 Rob. Napper, mil. Middle M. Arg. a salt. S. bet. 4. roses, Gul. 5 VVill. VVeb, mil. ut prius   6 Christ. Auketil, ar.   Arg. a saltire ragule, Vert. 7 Edr. Uuedall, mil. ut prius   8 Ioh. Henig, ar. Pokeswell Barry Wavy of six pieces on Chief, Gul. 3. plates. 9 Tho. Freke, mil.     10 Ioh. Strangways, m ut prius   11 Rob. Coker, a. ut prius   12 Ioh. Hanham, mil. Wimborn   13 Ioh. Brewyne, ar. Addle-M. Azure, a Crossmoline, Or. 14 Ioh. Tregonwel ar. ut prius   15 Ioh. Browne, mil.     16 V Valt. Earl, mil. Charboro. Gal. 3. escalops & a border engrailed, Arg. 17 Anth. Ashly, mil. * S. G. Wim.   18 Nath. Napper, mil. ut prius * Az. a cinque foil, Ermin, a border engrailed, Or. 19 Edw. Lawrence, m. †     20 Ioh. Harbyn, ar.   † Ermin, a Cross Ragulee, Gul. a Canton, Erminess. 21 VVill. Francis, ar. * Combflor.   22 Bam. Chafin, ar.   * Ar. a Che. bet. 3. mull. G. pierc.
CAROL. I.     Anno     1 Fran. Chaldecot, a.     2 VVill. Uuedell, mil ut prius   3 Fitz-James, ar.   Azure, a Dalphin naiant im∣bowed, Arg. 4 Tho. Still, ar. Redlinch   5 Angel. Grey, ar. Stnsford   6 Joh. Mellet, mil. ut prius   7 Bria. VVilliams, m. ut prius   8 Joh. Brown, ar.     9 VVill. Colyer, ar. Pidle * Per pale, Arg. and Azure, 3. Palets, Sab. 10 Tho. Trenchard, *     11 Joh. Feele. ar.     12 Rich. Rogers, arm. ut prius   13     14 Rich. Bingham, ar. Melcombe Azure, a bend cotized betw. six Crosses pattee, Or. 15 VVil. Churchil, a. *     16   * Sab. a Lyon ramp. Arg. de∣bruised with a bend, Gul. 17 Ed. Lawrence, mil. ut prius   18     Bllum nobis haec otia secit.     19     20     21     22     Hen. V. 8. JOHN NEWBURGH.] This Family of the Newburghs, or De Novo Burgo, is right ancient, as which derive their Pedigree from a younger Son of Henry the first Earle of Warwick of the Norman line. Yea, Master Cambden saith, that they held Winfrot with the whole Hundred, by the gift of King Henry the first, Per servitium Camerarii in Capite de Domino Rege, that is, in service of Chamberlaine in chiefe from the King, though afterwards under the reigne of King Edward the first it was held by Ser∣geanty, namely, by holding the Lauer or Ewre for the King to wash in, upon his Coronation Day. Hen. VIII. 4. EGIDIUS STRANGWAYES.] Thomas Strangways was the first advancer of this Family in this County, who though born in Lancashire, was brought into these parts by the first Marquess of Dorcet, and here raised a very great Inheritance. Nor was it a little augmented through this Marriage with one of the Daughters and Inheritrices of Hugh Stafford of Suthwich, by whom there accrued unto him Woodford, where Guy Brent, a Baron and re∣nowned Warriour once had a Castle. The Heirs of this Thomas built a fair seat at Milbery. 24. THOMAS MORE, Mil. He dwelt at Melplash in the Parish of Netherbury, and by Tradition is represented a very humerous person. Aged folk have informed me (whilest I lived in those parts) by report from their Fathers, that this Sir Thomas, whilest Sheriffe, did in a wild fro∣lick, set open the Prison, and let loose many Malefactors. Afterwards considering his own obnoxiousness for so rash a fact, he seasonably procured his pardon at Court, by the mediation of William Pawlet Lord Treasurer (and afterward Marquess of Winche∣ster) and a Match was made up betwixt Mary this Sheriffs Daughter, and Co-heir, and Sir Thomas Pawlet, second Son to the said Lord, by whom he had a numerous Issue.
The Farewell. And now being to take our leave of this County, I should according to our usual manner wish it somewhat for the compleating of its Happiness. But it affording in it self all necessaries for mans subsistance; and being through the conveniency of the Sea supplyed with forraign Commodities, I am at a loss what to begge any way additi∣onal thereunto. Yet seeing great possessions may be diminished by Robbery, may the Hemp [The Instrument of common Execution] growing herein, be a constant Monitor unto such who are thievishly given whither their destructive ways tend; and mind them of that end which is due unto them, that they leaving so bad, may embrace a better [some industrious] course of living.
DURHAM. DURHAM. This Bishoprick hath Northumberland on the North (di∣vided by the Rivers Derwent and Tine) York-shire on the South, the German Sea on East and on the West (saith Mr. Speed) it is touched by Cumberland (touched he may well say, for it is but for one mile) and Westmerland. The form thereof is triangular, the sides not much differing, though that along the Sea-coasts is the shortest, as not exceeding twenty three miles. However this may be ranked amongst the  Shires of England: And yet I can remember the time when the people therein were for some years altogether unreprosented in the Parliament; namely, in the Interval after their Bishop was depved of his Vote in the House of Lords, and before any in the House of Commons were appointed to appear for them. Princes. CICELY NEVIL. Though her Nativity cannot be fixed with any assurance (whose Fathers vast estate afforded him a Mansion House for every week in the year) yet is she here placed with most probability, Raby being the prime place of the Nevils residence. She may pass for the clearest instance of humane frail felicity. Her Happiness. Her Miseries. She was youngest Daughter and Child to Ralph Earl of Westmerland (who had one and twenty) and exceeded her Sisters in honour, being married to Richard Duke of York. She saw her Husband kill'd in battel; George Duke of Clarence, her second Son, cruelly murdered; Edward her eldest son, cut off by his own intemperance, in the prime of his years; his two sons butcher∣ed by their Uncle Richard, who himself, not long after, was slain at the bartel of Bosworth. She was blessed with three Sons (who lived to have issue) each born in a several Kingdom, Edward, at Bourdeaux in France; George, at Dublin in Ireland; Richard, at Fotheringhay in England. She saw her own reputation murdered publickly at Puls-Cross, by the procure∣ment of her youngest son Richard, taxing his eldest Brother for illegitimate. She beheld her eldest Son Edward, King of England, and enriched with a nu∣merous posterity.   Yet our Chronicles do not charge her with elation in her good, or dejection in her ill success, an argument of an even and steady soul in all alterations. Indeed she sur∣vived to see Elizabeth her grand child married to King Henry the seventh, but little comfort accrued to her by that conjunction, the party of the Yorkists were so depressed by him. She lived five and thirty years a widow, and died in the tenth year of King Henry the seventh, 1495. and was buried by her Husband in the Quire of the Collegiate Church of Fotheringhay in Northampton-shire, which Quire being demolished in the days of King Henry the eighth, their bodies lay in the Church-yard without any Monument, until  . in . Queen Elizabeth coming thither in Progress, gave order that they should be interred in the Church, and two Tombs to be erected over them. Hereupon, their bodies lapped in Lead, were removed from their plain Graves, and their Coffins o∣pened. The Duchess Cicely had about her neck hanging in a Silver Ribband, a   Gen∣, pag. , ▪ Pardon from Rome, which penned in a very fine Roman Hand, was, as fair and fresh to be read as if it had been written but yesterday. But alas, most mean are their Monuments, made of Plaister, wrought with a Trowell, and no doubt there was much daubing therein, the Queen paying for a Tomb proportionable to their Personages. The best is, the memory of this Cicely hath a better and more lasting Monument, who was a bountiful Benefactress to Queens Colledge in Cambridge.
Saints. BEDE, And (because some Nations measure the worth of the person by the length of the name) take his addition, Venerable. He was born at Camb. Brit. in this Bisho∣. Girwy (now called Yar∣row) in this Bishoprick, bred under Saint John of Beverly, and afterwards a Monk in the Town of his Nativity. He was the most general Scholar of that age. Let a Sophister begin with his Axioms, a Batchelor of Art proceed to his Metaphysicks, a Master to his Mathematicks, and a Divine conclude with his Controversies and Comments on Scripture, and they shall find him better in all, than any Christian Writer in that age, in any of those Arts and Sciences. He expounded almost all the Bible, translated the Psalms and New Testament into English, and lived a Comment on those Words of the * Apo∣stle,Phil. 2. 15. shining as a light in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation. He was no gadder abroad, credible Authors avouching that he never went out of his Cell; though both Cambridge and Rome pretend to his habitation. Yet his Corps after his death, which happened Anno 734. took a journey, or rather were removed to Durham and there enshrined. Confessors. JOHN WICKLIFFE. It is a great honour to this small County, that it produced the last maintainer of Religion (before the general decay thereof) understand me, Lear∣ned Bede, and the firm restorer thereof, I mean this Wickliff, the subject of our pre∣sent discourse. True it is, His Nativity cannot be demonstrated in this Bishoprick, but if such a scientia media might be allowed to man, which is beneath certainty, and above conje∣cture, such should I call our perswasion, that Wickliff was born therein. First, all confess him a Northern man by extraction. Secondly, the Camb. Brit. in this Bisho∣prick. Antiquary allows an ancient Family of the Wickliffs in this Coun∣ty, whose Heir general, by her match, brought much wealth and honour to the Brakenburies of Celaby. Thirdly, there are at this day in these parts, of the name and alliance, who con∣tinue a just claim of their kindred unto him. Now he was bred in Oxford, some say in Baliol, others more truly in Merton Col∣ledge: and afterwards published opinions distasteful to the Church of Rome, writing no fewer than two hundred Volumns (of all which largely in our Ecclesiastical History) be∣sides his translating of the whole Bible into English. He suffered much persecution from the Popish Clergy. Yet after long exile, he, by the favour of God and good Friends returned in safety, and died in quietness, at his living at Lutterworth in Leicestershire, Anno 1387. the last of Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 6. Num. 1. December, whose bones were taken up and burnt 42. years after his death. Disdain not Reader, to learn something by my mistake. I conceive that Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments had entred the Names of our English Martyrs, and Confes∣sors, in his Kalender, on that very day whereon they died. Since I observe he obser∣veth a Method of his own fancy, concealing the reasons thereof to himself; as on the perusing of his Catalogue will appear. Thus VVickliff dying December the last, is by him placed January Master Fox would not put out the Feast of the Circum∣cision. the second, probably out of a design to grace the new year with a good beginning: though it had been more true, and (in my weak judgement) as ho∣nourable for VVickliff to have brought up the rear of the old as to lead the front of the new year in his Kalender. Prelates. The Nevills. We will begin with a Quaternion of Nevils, presenting them in Parallels, and giving them their Precedency before other Prelates (some their Seniors in time) because of their
Honourable Extraction. All four were born in this Bishoprick, as I am informed by my worthy Friend Mr. Charles Nevil, Vice-Provost of Kings in Cambridge, one as knowing  Universal Heraldry as in his own Colledge; in our English Nobility, as in his own Cham∣ber; in the ancient, fair, and far branched Family of the Nevils, as in his own Study. All the re∣markable pas∣sages of these four Lives are taken out of Bishop God∣ in his re∣spective Ca∣talogue of Bi∣shops. RALPH NEVIL was born at Raby in this Bishoprick, was Lord Chancellour under King Henry the third (none dis∣charging that Office with greater integri∣ty and more general commendation) and Bishop of Chichester, 1223. He built a fair House from the ground in Chancery Lane, for himselfe and successors for an Inne, where they might repose them∣selves, when their occasions brought them up to London. How this House was afterwards ali∣ened, and came in∣to the possession of Henry Lacy, Earl of Lincoln (from whom it is called Lincolns Inne at this day) I know not. Sure I am, that Mr. Moun∣tague (late Bishop of Chichester) intended to lay claim therun∣to, in right of his see. But alas, he was likely to follow a cold scent (after so many years distance) and a colder suit, be∣ing to encounter a Corporation of Lear∣ned Lawyers so long in the peaceable possession thereof. Bishop Nevil was afterwards canoni∣cally chosen by the Monks (and confir∣med hy King Henry the third) Arch-bi∣shop of Canterbury, being so far from rejoycing thereat, that he never gave any , (or reward for their good news) to the two Monks which brought him ti∣dings, nor would allow any thing to∣ward the dischar∣ging their costly journey to Rome; foreseeing perchance that the Pope would stop his Consecration. For some infor∣med his Holiness, that this Ralph was a Prelate of High Birth, haughty Sto∣mach, great Court∣ship, gracious with the King, and a per∣son probable to dis∣swade him from paying the Pension (promised by his Father K. Iohn) to the Court of Rome, & then no wonder if his Consecration was stopped theron. But was it not both an honor & happiness to our Nevil thus to be crost with the hands of his Holiness him∣self? yea it seems that no Crosier (save only that of Chiche∣ster) would fit his hand, being after∣wards elected Bish. of Winchester, & then obstructed by the K. who formerly so highly favor'd him. He built a Chappell without the east gate of Chichester, dedi∣cated to S. Michael; and having merited much of his own Cathedral, died at London, 1244. ALEX. NEVIL, third Son of Ralph Lord Nevil, was born at Raby, be∣came first Canon, then Arch-Bishop of York, where he beautified and forti∣fied the Castle of Cawood with many Turrets. He was highly in Honour with King Richard the second, as much in hatred with the party opposing him. These designed to imprison him (put∣ting Prelates to death not yet in fa∣shion) in the Castle of Rochester, had not our Alexander pre∣vented them by his flight to Pope Ur∣ban to Rome, who partly out of pity (that he might have something for his support) and more out of policy, (that York might be in his own disposal upon the removal of this Arch-Bishop) trans∣lated him to Saint Andrews in Scotland, and so dismissed him with his Bene∣diction. Wonder not that this Nevil was loth to go out of the Popes blessing into a cold Sun, who could not accept this his new Arch- Bishoprick, in point of credit, profit, or safety. 1. Credit. For this his translation was a Post-Ferment, seeing the Arch-Bishoprick of Saint Andrews was subjected in that age unto York. 2. Profit. The Revenues being far worse than those of York. 3. Safety. Scot∣land then bearing an Antipathy to all En∣glish (and especially to the Nevils, re∣doubted for their victorious valour in those northern parts) and being in open hostility against them Indeed half a loaf is better than no bread, but this his new translation was rather a stone, than half a loaf, not fil∣ling his Belly, yet breaking his Teeth, if feeding thereon. This made him pre∣ferre the Pastorall Charge of a Parish Church in Lovaine, before his Arch-no∣Bishoprick, where he died in the fifth year of his Exile, and was buried there in the Convent of the Carmelites. ROB. NEVIL, sixth Son of Ralph, first Earl of West∣merland, by Joane his second VVife, Daughter of Iohn of Gaunt, bred in the University of Ox∣ford, and Provost of Beverly, was pre∣ferred Bishop of Sarisbury, in the sixth of King Henry the sixth, 1427. During his conti∣nuance therein, he was principal Foun∣der of a Convent at Sunning in Berkshire (anciently the Bi∣shops See of that Diocess) valued at the dissolution (saith Bishop Godwin) at 682 l. 14 s. 7 d. ob. which I rather ob∣serve, because the estimation thereof is omitted in my (and I suspect all other) Speeds Catalogue of Religious Houses. From Sarisbury he was translated to Durham, where he built a place called the Exchequer, at the Castle gate, and gave (in allusion of his two Bishopricks, which he succes∣sively enjoyed) two Annulets innected in his Paternal Coat. He died, Anno Dom. 1457. GEO. NEVIL, fourth Son of Rich. Nevil Earl of Sa∣lisbury was born at Midleham in this Bi∣shoprick, bred in Baliol Colledge in Oxford, consecrated Bishop of Exeter, when he was not as yet twenty years of age, so that in the race not of age, but youth, he clear∣ly beat Tho. Arun∣del, who at twenty two was made Bi∣shop of Ely. Some say this was contra∣ry not only to the Canon Law, but Ca∣nonical Scripture. S.* 1 Tim. 3. 6. Paul forbidding such a Neophyte or Novice admission into that Office, as if because Rich. the make-King Earl of Warwick, was in a manner a∣bove Law, this his Brother also must be above Canons. His Friends do plead that Nobility and Ability supplyed age in him; seeing five years after, at 25. he was made Lord Chancellor of Eng∣land, and discharged it to his great com∣mendation. He was afterwards made Arch-bishop of York, famous for the prodigious Feast at his Installing, wherein, besides Flesh, Fish, and Fowle, so many strange Dishes of Gellies. And yet amongst all this ser∣vice I meet not with these two. But the inverted Proverb found truth in him, One Glutton∣Meal makes many hungry ones: for some years after fal∣ling into the dis∣pleasure of King Edward the fourth, he was flenderly dy∣etted, not to say fa∣mished in the Castle of Calis; and being at last restored by the Intercession of his Friends, died heart-broken at Blyth, and was buried in the Cathedral of York, 1476.
Besides these, there was another Nevil (Brother to Alexander aforesaid) chosen Bi∣shop of Ely, but death, or some other intervening accident hindered his Consecration. Since the Reformation. ROBERT HORN was born in this Bale de scrip. A g. Cent. 9. Num. 95. Bishoprick, bred in Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge. Going thence under the raign of King Edward the sixth he was advanced Dean of Durham. In the Marian days he fled into Germany, and fixing at Frankford, became the head of the Episcopal party, as in my Ecclesiastical History at large doth appear. Returning into England, he was made Bishop of VVinchester, Feb. 16. 1560. A worthy man, but constantly▪ ground betwixt two opposite parties, Papists and Se∣ctaries. Both of these in their Pamphlets sported with his name, as hard in Nature, and crooked in Conditions, not being pleased to take notice, how Horn in Scripture im∣porteth Power, Preferment, and Safety; both twitted his person, as dwarfish and de∣formed, to which I can say nothing, (none alive remembring him) save that such taunts, though commonly called ad Hominem, are indeed ad Deum, and though shot at Man, does glance at Him, who made us, and not we our selves. Besides it shews their ma∣lice runs low for might, (though high for spight) who carp at the Case when they cannot find fault with the Jewel. For my part, I mind not the Mould wherein, but the Metal whereof he was made, and lissen to Mr. In his Eliz.  1559. Cambden his Character of him, Valido & foe∣cundo ingenio, of a sprightful and fruitful wit. He died in Bishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of VVin∣chester. Southwark, June 1. 1589. and lyeth buried in his own Cathedral near to the Pulpit. And now Reader, I crave leave to present thee with the Character of one who (I confess) falls not under my Pen according to the strictness of the Rules which we proposed to follow, as not being of the number of those Bishops, who may not unfit∣ly be termed (with Noah) righteous in their Generations, having seen two Sets (if I may so speak) of their Order, but preferred to that Dignity since our late happy Revolution. He is here fixed (though no Native of this County) because the fittest place, I conceive (it is happy when the Antidote meets the Poyson where it was first suck'd in) seeing formerly treating (in my Church History) of this Cathedral, I delivered his Character (to his disadvantage) very defectively. JOHN COSEN, D. D. was born in the City of Norwich, bred in Cays Colledge in Cambridge, whereof he was Fellow. Hence was he removed to the Mastership of Peter-House in the same University. One whose abilities, quick apprehension, solid Judgement, variety of Reading, &c. are sufficiently made known to the world in his learned Books, whereby he hath perpetuated his name to posterity. I must not pass over his constancy in his Religion, which rendereth him aimable in the eys not of good men only, but of that God with whom there is no variableness, nor shdow of changing. It must be confessed that a sort of fond people surmised as if he had once been declining to the PopishPerswasion. Thus the dim sighted complain of the darkness of the room, when alas, the fault is in their own eyes: and the lame of the unevenness of the floor, when indeed it lieth in their unsound leggs. Such were the silly folk, (their understandings (the eys of their minds) being darkned, and their affections (the feet of their soul) made lame by prejudice,) who have thus falsly con∣ceited of this worthy Doctor. However, if any thing that I delivered in my Church History (relating therein a Charge drawn up against him, for urging of some Ceremonies, without inserting his Purgation, which he effectually made, clearing himself from the least imputation of any fault) hath any way augmented this opinion, I humbly crave pardon of him for the same. Sure I am, were his Enemies now his Judges (had they the least spark of ingenuity) they must acquit him, if proceeding according to the evidence of his Writing, Li∣ving, Disputing. Yea, whilest he remained in France, he was the Atlas of the Protestant Religion, supporting the same with his Piety and Learning, confirming the wavering therein, yea dayly adding Proselytes (not of the meanest rank) thereunto.
Since the return of our gracious Soveraign, and the reviving of swooning Episcopa∣cy, he was deservedly preferred Bishop of Durham. And here the Reader must pardon me, if willing to make known my Acquaintance with so eminent a Prelate. When one in his presence was pleased with some Propositions, wherein the Pope condescended somewhat to the Protestants, he most discreetly returned (in my hearing,) We thank him not at all for that which God hath always allowed us in his Word: adding withall, He would allow it us so long as it stood with his Policy, and take it away so soon as it stood with his Power. And thus we take our leave of this Worthy Prelate, praying for his long life, that he my be effectual in advancing the settlement of our yet distracted Church. Civilians. RICHARD COSIN Doctor of Law was born at Hartly Poole (a well known har∣bour for the safety) and some observe a providence that he who afterwards was to prove the grand Champion of Episcopacy, should (amongst all the counties of England) be born in  ishoprick. His Father was a person of quality, a Captain of a Compa∣ny in Mustborough field, whence his valour returned with victory and wealth; when crossing the River Tweed [O the uncertainty of all earthly happiness!] was drowned therein, to the great losse of his Son Richard: and greater, because he was not sensible thereof, as left an infant in the cradle. His Mother afterwards married one Mr. Meddow, a York-shire Genleman, who bred this his Son-in-law at a Schoole at Scypton in the Craven; wherein, such his profici∣ency, that before he was twelue years old, [little less than a wonder to me in that age from so far a Country] he was admitted in Trinity Colledge in Cambridge: Some of his Friends in Queens Colledge in that University had a design to fetch him thence, had not Doctor Beamont prevented the Plot, in making him Scholar and Fellow as soon as by his Age, Degree, and the Stattes he was capable thereof. He was a general Scholar, Geometrician, Musician, Physician, Divine, but chiefly Civil and Canon Lawyer. By Arch-Bishop Whitgift, he was preferred to b first Chancel∣lor of Worcester [in that age a place non tam gratiosus, quam negotiosus] and afterwards Dean of the Arches, wherein he carried himself without giving (though many took) of∣fence at him. Of these one wrote a Book against him called the Abstract [abstracted saith my Au∣thor from all Wit, Learning, and Charity] to whom he returned such an answer in the defence of the High Commission, and Oath ex officio, that he he put his Adversary to silence. Others lay to his charge, that he gave many Blank Licences, the common occasions of unlawful marriages, and the procurer herein is as bad as the thief, robbing many a pa∣rent of his dear child thereby. But always malice looks through a multiplying glasse. Euclio complained, Intromisisti sexcentos Coquos, Thou hast let in six hundred Cooks,. in Au∣ria. when there was but two truely told [Anthrax and Congrio] so here was there but one which a fugitive servant stole from the Register to make his private profit thereby. God in his sickness granted him his desire which he made in his health, that he might be freed from torture, which his corpulency did much suspect, bestowing  upon him, a sweet and qutet departure, pious his dying expressions; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ▪ Phil. 1. The wages of sin is death, Rom. 6. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Revel. 12. and his last words was these, Farewell my surviving friends, remember your mortality and eternal life. He gave forty pound to the building of a Chamber in Trinity Colledge, and fifteen pound per▪ annum for the maintenance of two Scholar-ships therein: a good gift out of his E∣state, who left not above fifty pound a year clear to his Heir; a great argument of his integrity, that he got no more in so gainful a place. Dying at Doctors Commons, he was buried by his own appointment in Lambeth Church, and Doctor Andrews preached his Funeral Sermon. Amongst the many verses made by the University of Cambridge, this (with the allowance of poetical Licence) came from no bad Fancy.
Magna Deos inter lis est exorta: creatas Horum qui lites dirmit, ille deest. Cosinum petiere Dii componere tantas Lites, quod vero jure peritus erat. It must not be forgotten that Doctor Barlow (afterwards Bishop of Lincoln) was bred by Doctor Cosen, at his charge in his own Family, who in expression of his Thank∣fulness, wrote this Doctor Cosen's Life, out of which most of our aforesaid Character hath been excerped. Writers. WILLIAM SHIRWOOD was born in this J. Pits de Ag. scrip. in Anno 1249. Bishoprick (being otherwise called William of Durham) bred first in University Colledge in Oxford, then in Paris, and after∣wards was made Chancellor of Lincoln. In his time the University of Oxford was Inter∣dicted for some affronts offered to the Popes Legate, and had lain longer under that burden, had not the hands of this Joh. Rouse of VVarwick. William helped to remove it, shewing therein no less his love to his Mother, than his power with the Pope. In that age the English Clergy did drive a great Trade of preferment in France (King Henry the third having large Dominions therein) and amongst the rest this William was advanced Arch Bishop of Roan, where he died Anno Dom. 1249. JOHN of DARLINGTON was born in this Bishoprick, at a Town so called, nee∣ding no other Indication, than the Rode passing thorow it into Scotland. He was bred a Dominican, and a great Clerk. Ad Annum 1256. Mat. Paris giveth him this Testimony, that he was one, qui literatura pollebat exellenter & consilio. King Henry the third made him his Confessor (which argueth his Piety, that so devout a Prince used him in so consci∣encious an Office) and afterwards he became Arch-Bishop of Dublin in Ireland on this occasion. The Prior and Sr   in his Arch-Bishops of Dublin. Covent of Trinity Church, chose William de la Corner the Kings Chaplain, whilest the Dean and Chapter of Saint Patricks elected Fomund le Brun, the Popes Chaplain into that See. Hence ensued an hot and high contest, and Pope John 21. unwilling to engage therein cated both their Elections, and pitched on our Darlington as a good ex∣pedient. A person in whom King and Pope met in some equal proportion, seeing he was (as we have said) Confessor to the one, and to the other his Collector of Peter-pence, (as also to his two Successors Nicholas the third, and Martin the fourth) thorow all Ireland. Many Books he wrote to Reckoned up b .  and J. Pits. Posterity, and returning into England, sickned, died and was buried in Preaching Friers in London, 1284. WILLIAM SIVEYER was born at Shinkley in this Bishoprick, where his Father was a Bishop God∣win in his Ca∣talogue of Bishops. Siveyer or Sive-maker; and I commend his humility in retaining his Fathers Trade for his Surname, to mind him of his mean extraction. He was bred in Merton Colledge, whereof he became Warden, and Provost of Eaton, and afterward Bishop of Carlile, 1496. whence five years after he was tralated to Durham. His Sur-name so contemptible in English, sounds erially, and Episcopally when latinized. In which language he is rendred, Gulielmus Severus, severity well agreeing with the gravity of his Function. He died Anno Dom 1505. All I will ad is this, that England neither before nor since saw two ieve-makers Sons at the same juncture of time advanced to so high dignity, this William in the Church, Sir Richard Empson in the Common wealth. the Reformation. THOMAS JACKSON, born of a good Family in this County was designed to be a Merchant in New-Castle, till his Parents were diverted by Ralph Lord , and per∣swaded
to make him a Scholar. He was admitted first in Queens Colledge in Oxford, and then became Candidate of a Fellowship in Corpus Christi; knowing of the election but the day before, he answered to admiration, and was chosen by general con∣snt. Soon after, in all likelihood, he lost his life, being drowned in the River, and taken out rather for desire of decent burial, than with hope of any recovery: He was wrap'd in the Cowns of hs fellow Students (the best shrowd which present love and need could provide him) and being brought home to the Colledge, was revived by Gods bles∣sing on the care of Doctor Chenil, equally to all peoples joy and admiration. His gratitude to the Fisher-men (who took him up) extended to a revenue unto them u ring his life. Thus thankful to the Instrument, he was more to the Principal, striving to repay his life to that God who gave it him. He was afterwards Vicar of New Castle (a Factor for Heaven, in the place where he was designed a Merchant) a Town full of men and opinions wherein he endeavoured to rectifie their Errors, and unite their Affections. At this distance was he chosen President of Corpus Christi Colledge, never knowing of the vacancy of the place, till by those Letters (which informed him) it was refilled with his electon. Here he lived piously, ruled peaceably, wrote profoundly, preached painfully. His Charity had no fault, if not of the largest size, oftentimes making the Receiver richer, than it left him that was the Donor thereof. Learn the rest of his praise from the Learned Writer of his Life, in whom nothing wanting, save the exact place of his birth, and date of his death, which hapned about the year, 1640. SAMUEL WARD was born at Bishops Middleham in this County, his Father being a Gentleman of more Ancientry than Estate. He was first Scholar of Christs, then Fel∣low o Emanuel, and afterwards Master of Sidney Colledge in Cambridge, and Margare Professor therein for above twenty years. Now, because the Pen of a Pupil may pro∣bably be suspected of partiality; of an Historian I will turn a Translator, and only en∣deavour to English that Character, which, Dr. Thomas Goad in hs dnsing his Sermon cal∣led Gratia dis∣. one who knew him as well as most men, and could judge of him as well as any man, doth bestow upon him. Age, perge Cathedram ornare (quod facis) sacram Subtilitate non levi, rapidâ, vagâ, Sed Orthodoxa quam coronat veritas, Et justa firmat soliditas, patiens librae: Antiqu at is, crypta tu penetras frequens, Scholasticorum tu profundos vortices, Te'nulla fallit, nulla te scium latet Distinctionum tela, rationum stropha Tam perspicacem mente, judicio gravem; Linguis peritum, tamque nervosum stylo, His addo genium temperatum, , Placidum, modestum, lite rixosâ, procul. Go to, go on, deck (as thou doest) the Chaire, With subtilty not light, slight, vage ás air, But such as Truth doth crown, and standing sure, Solidly fix'd will weighing well endure. Antiquities hid depths thou oft doest sound, And School-mens whirl-pools which are so profound. Distinctions threads none can so finely weave, Or Reason wrench, thy Knowledge to deceive, None thy quick sight, grave judgement can beguile, So skill'd in Tongues, so sinewy in style; Add to all these that peaceful Soul of thine, Meek, modest, which all brawlings doth decline.
He turned with the Times as a Rock riseth with the Tide; and for his uncomply∣ing there with, was imprisoned in Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge. In a word, he was counted a Puritan before these times, and Popish in these times, and yet being al∣wayes the same, was a true Protestant at all times. He died Anno 1643. and was the first man buried in Sidney Colledge Chappel. Memorable Persons. ANTHONY Lord GRAY, and eighth Earl of Kent of that Surname, Son of George Gray,  and  Salvam his Wife, Son to Anthony Gray, Esq and Briget Hol∣land his Wife, Son to Gorge Gray second Earl of Kent of that Family (who died in the twentieth year of King Henry the seventh) was born at Out of his pvate pedi∣gr commu∣nicated unto me. Branspath in this Bishoprick. If any ask what occasion drew his Ancestors into the North, know that his Grand∣Father was invited thither to enjoy the company of his Friend and Kinsman, the Earl of Westmerland. This Gentleman being bred in the University of—applyed himself to the study o Divinity, and became Rector of Burbach in Leicester-shire, where he preached conantly, and kept an hospitable house for the poor according to his estate. It hap∣ned  by the death of Henry Gray his Kinsman, and the seventh Earl of Kent, that Earldom descended upon him, Anno Dom. 1639. We read of Sigismund the Emperour, that when he had knighted a Doctor of the Laws, the Knight Doctor sequested himself from the company of Doctors, and associ∣cited wholly with Knights; whereat the Emperor smiled, and taxed his folly, For 1 (said he) can make many Knights at my pleasure, though indeed I cannot make one Doctor. Not so this good Lord, who after the accession of his Title did not in the least degrte disdain the society of his fellow Ministers, to converse with the Nobility; yea, he bated nothing in the constancy of his preaching, so long as he was able to be led up into the Pupit. He had read in Scripture this Character given to the Acts 17. 11. Bereans, These were more noble than these in Thesslonica, in that they received the Word with all readi∣ness, and counted it most noble to labour in Gods Vineyard, and to deliver his Word to others. However a Diamond is best when set in Gold, and Goodness is most Illu∣strious when supported with Greatness. He was summoned as a Peer to Parliament, but excused himself, by reason of In∣disposition and Age. Such his humility, that Honours did not change Manners in him. Thus a mortified mind is no more affected with additions of Titles, than a Corps with a gay Coffin. By Magdalene Purefoy his Wife, he had (besides other Children) Henry ninth Earl of Kent. He died Anno Dom 164— Sheriffs. Expect not that to make this Bishoprick Uniform with other Counties, I should pre∣sent a Catalogue of the Sheriffs thereof. For the Princely Prelate of this Bishoprick (his Sl not Oval like others, but round, the more Princely proportion; and as I remem∣ber, gave a crowned Mitre for his Crest) was himself always Paramount Sheriffe, depu∣ting one, (often his own Servant) under him to execute the Office. This Deputy ne∣ver accunted at the Exchequer, but made up his Audit to the Bishop, to whom all perquisites and profits of this place did belong. Since after a long discontinuance this County hath obtained its ancient Sheriff, the Bishop thereof, of whom formerly. The Farewell. I understand that there is an intention of erecting an University in Durham, and that some hopeful progress is made in order thereunto, which I cannot but congratulate; For I listen not to their Objection, alledging it monstrous for one Face to have three Eyes, [one Land three Universities] seeing I could wish that Argus-like it had an hundred in it.
Would all men were Num. 11. 28. Moses minded, that all the people of God might prophesie, the rather because I am sure, that ignorance is no more the Mother of Devotion, than the Lying Harlot 1 King. 3. 22. which pleaded before Solomon, was Mother to the living Child. I confess I was always much affected with their fears, who suspect that this Conve∣nience for the North would be a Mischief for the South, and this new one in process of time prove detrimental to the old Universities. Nor were these jealousies, when moved, removed in my serious consideration, not being well satisfied of the intentions and de∣sign of some prime persons undertaking the same. But since this Fresh-man Colledge lived not to be matriculated, much less (not lasting seven years) graduated, God in his wisdom seeing the contrary fitter. The worst I should have wished this new spring (if continuing) was pure water, pious and or∣thodox Professors to have Principled and Elemented the Members therein with Learning and Religion.
ESSEX. ESSEX hath Kent on the South, divided by the River Thames; Suffolk on the North, severed by the River Stoure, Cambridge, Hertford shire and Middlesex on the West, the two later generally parted by the River Ley, and the German Ocean on the East. A fair County, bearing the full proportion of five and thirty miles square, plentifully affording all things necessary to mans subsistance, save that the Eastern part is not very healthfull in the Aire thereof. These parts adjoyning to the Sea are commonly called the Hundreds of Essex, and are very fruitfull in Cattle. However the Vulgar wits of this County much astonish strangers with the stock of poor people in these parts, five hundred Cows, nine hundred Sheep, wch indeed are but five Cows, and nine Sheep, in this part of the County called the Hundreds. Naturall Commodities. Saffron. Plenty hereof in this County growing about Walden a fair Market Town, which Saffron may seem to have coloured with the name thereof. It is called (as Serapione affirmeth) Sahafaran by the Arabians, whence certainly our English word is derived. In it self it is atmost admirable Cordiall, and under God I owe my life, when sick of the small pox, to the efficacy thereof. Now because our own writers may probably be challenged of partialty, hear what forraigners speak in the praise of English Saffron. Anglia Johannes Bauhinus hst. plant. univers. Tom. 2. lib. 19 cap. 5. & Hibernia laudatissimum Crocum ferunt, quo Belgium, Germania aliique, vicini cibos condiunt ac medicamentis miscent. Johannes Bo∣deus in Theo∣phrastum. Propagatur (inter alia loca) etiam in Britanniae insulae meridionali parte, quam An∣gliam vocant. Natus ex altera vero & septentrionali, quam Picti & Scoti tenent reprobus est. No precious drug is more adulterated with Cartamus, the inward pilling of Willow, and generally all yellow flowers, when it is bought in great parcells, which ought to quick en the care of Chapmen herein. In a word, the Soveraign Power of genuine Saffron, is plainly proved by the Antipathy of the Crocodiles thereunto. For the Crocodiles tears are never true, save when he is forced where Saffron groweth, (whence he hath his name of , or the Saffron-fearer,) knowing himself to be all Poison, and it all Antidote. Oysters. The best in England, Fat, Salt, green-finn'd, are bred near Colchester, where they have an excellent art to feed them in Pits made for the purpose. King James was wont to say, he was a very valiant man, who first adventured on eating of Oysters; most probably meer hunger put men first on that tryal. Thus Necessity hath often been the Purveyor to provide diet for delicacy it self, famine making men to find out those things which afterwards proved not onely wholesome, but delicious. Oysters are the onely meat which men eat alive, and yet account it no cruelty. Sometimes Pearls conside rable both in bulk and brightness have been found within them. Hops. In latine Lupulus, or the little-wolf, which made a merry man complain, that this Wolf did too often devour the innocent Malt in beer. Gerard observes they grow best in those Countries where Vines will not grow, intimating, that nature pointeth at their use therein. They are not so bitter in themselves as others have been against them, accusing Hops for noxious, preserving beer, but destroying those who drink it. These plead the Pe∣tition
presented in Parliament, in the raign of King Henry the sixth, against the wicked weed called Hopps. Their back-friends also affirm, the Stone never so epidemicall in England, as since the generall reception and use of Hops in the beginning of King Henry the eighth. But Hops have since out-grown and over-topped all these accusations, being ad∣judged wholesome, if Statutable and unmixed with any powder, dust, dross, sand, or other soyl whatsoever, which made up two partsSee the Sta∣tute 1. Jacobi cap. 18. of three in forraign Hops formerly im∣ported hither. They delight most in moist grounds, no commodity starteth so soon and sinketh so suddainly in the price, whence some will have them so named from hopping in a little time betwixt a great distance in valuation. In a word, as Elephants, if orderly, were themselves enough alone to gain, if disorderly; to lose a victory; so great parcells of this commodity, well or ill bought in the Crisis of their price, are enough to raise, or ruine an estate. Puits. There is an Island of some two hundred Acres, near Harwick in the Parish of Little∣Okeley, in the Mannour of Matthew Gilly Esquire, called the Puit Island, from Puits in effect the sole inhabitants thereof. Some affirm them called in Latine Upulae, whilst others maintain, that the Roman Language doth not reach the Name, nor Land afford the Bird. On Saint▪So am I in∣formed by Capt. Farmer of Newgate∣Market, Copy∣holder of the Island. George his day precisely they pitch on the Island, seldome laying fewer then four, or more then six Eggs. Great their love to their Young ones. For though against foul weather they make to the main land, (a certain Prognostick of Tempests,) yet they always Weather it out in the Island, when hatching their young ones, seldome sleeping whilst they it on their Eggs, (afraid it seems of Spring-tides) which signifieth nothing as to securing their Eggs from the Inundation, but is an Argument of their great Affection. Being young they consist onely of Bones, Feathers and Lean-flesh, which hath a raw Gust of the Sea. But Roulterers take them then, and feed them with Gravel and Curds, (that is Physick and Food,) the one to scour, the other to fat them in a fortnight, and their flesh thus recruted is most delicious. Here I say nothing of Eringo Roots, growing in this County, the candying of them being become a Staple commodity at Colchester. These are Soveraign to strengthen the Nerves, and pity it is, that any vigor acquired by them should be otherwise imploy∣ed then to the Glory of God. Manufactures. This County is charactred like the good wife described byPro. 31. 19. Bathshebah. She layeth her hand to the spindle, and her hands hold the distaffe. Bays, and Says, and Serges, and severall sorts of Stuffes, which I neither can or doe desire to name, are made in and about Colchester, Coxal, Dedham, &c. I say, desire not to name, because hoping that new kinds will daily be invented, (as good reason) and by their Inventers intituled. I know not whether it be better to wish them good Wares to Vent, or good Vent for their Wares, but I am sure, that both together are the best. It will not be amiss to pray that the Plough may go along, and wheel around, that so being fed by the one▪ and clothed by the other, there may be by Gods blessing, no danger of starving in our Nation. Gun-Powder. Why hereof in this, rather then in other Counties? Because more made by Mills of late erected on the river Ley, betwixt Waltham and London, then in all England besides. Though some suppose it as antient as Archimedes in Europe, (and antienter in India,) yet generally men behold the Frier of Mentz the first founder thereof, some three hundred years since. It consisteth of three essentiall ingredients: 1. Brimstone, whose office is to catch fire and flame of a suddain, and convey it to the other two.
2. Char-coal pulveriz'd, which continueth the fire, and quencheth the flame, which otherwise would consume the strength thereof. 3. Salt-petre, which causeth a windy exhalation, and driveth forth the bullet. This Gun-powder is the embleme of politick revenge, for it biteth first, and barketh afterwards, the bullet being at the mark before the report is heard, so that it maketh a noise, not by way of warning, but triumph. As for white▪powder which is reported to make no report at all, I never could meet with Artist who would seriously avouch it. For, though perchance the noise may be less and lower, yet no sound at all is in∣consistent with the nature of Salt-petre, and the ventosity thereof causing the violent explosion of the bullet. It is questionable, whether the making of Gun-powder be more profitable or more dangerous, the Mills in my Parish having been five times blown up within seven years, but, blessed be God, without the loss of any one mans life. The Buildings. This County hath no Cathedrall, and the Churches therein cannot challenge to themselves any eminent commendation. But as for privae houses, Essex will own no Shire her superior, whereof three most remarkable. 1. Audley-End, built by Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk and Treasurer of Eng∣land, as without compare the best Subjects house in this Island. Yet is the structure better then the standing thereof, as low on one side, so that it may pass for the embleme of modest merit, or concealed worth; meaner houses boasting more, and making greater show afar off in the eyes of passen∣gers. 2. New▪Hall, built by the Ratcliffs, Earls of Sussex, but bought from them by George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham; surpassing for the pleasant shady ap∣proach thereunto, and for the appurtenances of Parks round about it. 3. Copt▪Hall, (in Records Coppice-Hall, from the Woods thereabouts,) highly seated on an hill in the mid'st of a Park, built by the Abbot of Waltham, en∣larg'd by Sir Thomas Heneage and others; and it is much that multiform fan∣cies should all meet in so uniform a fabrick. Herein a Gallery, as well fur∣nish'd as most, more proportionable then any in England, and on this a story doth depend. In the year of our Lord 1639. in November here happened an Hirecano or wild wind, which entring in at the great East-window, blew that down, and carried some part thereof, with the picture of the Lord Coventry (singled from many more, which hung on both ides untouch'd) all the length of the Gallery (being about 56. yards) out of the West-window, which it threw down to the ground. It seems the wind, finding this room in form of a trunk, and coarctated therein, forced the stones of the first window, like pellets, clean thorough it. I mention this the rather, because pious Doctor Jack∣son, Head of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, observed the like wind about the same time as ominous, and presaging our civil dissentions. The Wonders. This Shire affordeth none properly so called, unless some conceive the bones re∣ducible thereunto digged out of thisCamdens Brit. in Ess. County at the Ness near Harwich, which with their bigness and length amazed the beholders. I cannot see how such can maintain them to be the bones of men, who must confess that according to the proportion of the doors and roofs of antient building, (either as extant or read of) they must Ingredi & incedere proni, go in Stooping, not to say Lye along. Except the Avouchers be as Incurious of their Credit as the Travellor was, who affirming that he saw Bees as big as Dogs, and yet their Hives of our ordinary size; and being demanded what shift they made to get in; Let them (said he) look to that. More probable it is, that those were bones of Elephants, store whereof were brought over into England by the Emperour Claudius. Indeed some Sciolists will boast
to distinguish bones of Beasts from Men by their Porosity, which the learned deride as an undifferencing difference. Indeed when a Scull may be produced of such magni∣tude, (which by its form is secured from mistake as appropriate to man alone,) then the wonder will begin indeed: Till which time I behold these Shanks and Thigh bnes pretended to Men, to be of Elephants. To these Wonders it will not be amiss to adde the ensuing relation written by the Pen of Master Thomas Smith of Sewarstone, in the Parish of Waltham Abby, a discreet person not long since deceased. It so fell out that I served Sir Edward Denny, (towards the latter end of the raign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,) who lived in the Abbey of Waltham-Crosse in the County of Essex, which at that time lay in ruinous heaps, and then Sir Edward began slowly now and then to make even and re-edify some of that Chaos. In doing whereof, Tomkins his Gardner, came to discover (among other things) a fair Marble Stone, the Cover of a Tombe hewed out in hard Stone: This Cover, with some help he removed from off the Tombe, which having done, there appeared (to the view of the Gardner, and Master Baker Minister of the Town, (who died long since) and to my self and Master Henry Knagg, (Sir Edwards Bayliffe,) the Anatomy of a Man lying in the Tombe abovesaid, onely the Bones remaining, Bone to his Bone, not one Bone dislocated: In observation whereof, we wondred to see the Bones still remaining in such due order, and no Dust or other Filth besides them to be seen in the Tomb: We could not conceive, that it had been an Anatomy of Bones only laid at first into the Tomb; yet if it had been the whole Carcass of a It is general∣ly conceived the body of King Harold. Man, what became of his Flesh and Entrals? for (as I have said above) the Tomb was clean from all Filth and Dust, besides the Bones. This when we had all well observed, I told them, that if they did but touch any part thereof, that all would fall asunder, for I had onely heard somewhat formerly of the like accident. Tryall was made, and so it came to pass. For my own part, I am perswaded, that as the Flesh of this Anatomy to us became invisible, so likewise would the Bones have been in some longer continuance of time. O what is Man then, which vanisheth thus away, like unto Smoak or Va∣pour, and is no more seen? Whosoever thou art that shalt read this passage, thou mayst find cause of humility sufficient. Proverbs. Essex Miles.] These are cryed up for very long, understand it Comparatively to those in the Neigh∣bouring County of Middlesex, otherwise the Northern Parts will give Essex odds, and measure Miles therewith. The truth is this, good way, and a good horse, shorten Miles, and the want of either, (but both especially) prolong them in any Country whatsoever. Essex Stiles.] See the Proverbs in Suffolk.] Essex Calves.] A Festus lib. 9. see Mercators Atlas p. 298. learned Authour telleth us that Italy was so called, quasi vitalae, because the best Calves were bred therein. Sure this will be condemned as a far fetched and forced Deduction; but if true, Essex may better pretend to the Name of Italy, producing Calves of the fattest, fairest and finest flesh in England, (and consequently in all Eu∣rope,) and let the Butchers in Eastcheap be appealed unto as the most Competent Judges therein. Sure it is a Cumberland-cow may be bought for the Price of an Essex-calfe, in the beginning of the Year. Let me adde that it argueth the goodness of Flesh in this County, and that great gain was got formerly by the Sale thereof, because that so many stately monuments were erected antiently therein for Butchers, (inscribed Carnifices in their Epitaphs) in Cogshall, Chelmsford, Church and elsewhere, made of Marble, inlaid with Brass, (befitting, saith my Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 641. Author a more eminent man,) whereby it appears, that these of that trade have in this County been richer, (or at least prouder) then in other places. The Weavers Beef of Colchester.] These are Sprats caught hereabouts, and brought hither in incredible abundance,
whereon the poor Weavers (numerous in this City) make much of their repast, Cut∣ting Rands, Rumps, Surloyns, Chines, and all Joynts of Beef out of them, as lasting in season well nigh a quarter of a year. They are the Minums of the Sea, and their cheap∣ness is the worst thing, (well considered the best) which can be said of them. Were they as dear, they would be as toothsome (being altogether as wholesome) as Ancho∣vies, for then their price would give a high gust unto them in the judgement of Pallat Men. True it is, that within these last sixteen years, better Men then Weavers have been glad of worse meat then Sprats, (and thankfull to God if they could get it) in the City of Colchester. Jeering Alias Cogshall. Coxhall.] How much truth herein, I am as unable to tell, as loth to believe. Sure I am, that no Town in England of its bigness, afforded more Martyrs in the raign of Queen Mary, who did not jeer or jeast with the fire, but seriously suffered themselves to be sacrificed, for the testimony of a good Conscience. If since they have acquired a jeering quality, it is time to leave it, seeing it is better to stand in pain, till our legs be weary, then sit with ease in the chair of the scorners. He may fetch a flitch of Bacon from Dunmoe.] This proverb dependeth on a custome practiced in the Priory of Dunmow, which was founded saith In his Catal. of Religious houses in Essex. Speed, by Juga, a noble Lady, Anno IIII. for black Nuns. But it seems, afterwards the property thereof was altered into a Male-Monastery, the mor∣tified men wherein were mirthfull sometimes, as hereby may appear. Any person, from any part of England, coming hither, and humbly kneeling on two stones at the Church-door, (which are yet to be seen,) before the Prior or Convent, might demand at his own pleasure a Gammon or Flitch of Bacon, upon the solemn taking of the ensuing oath, You shall swear by the custome of our confession, That you never made any nuptiall transgression, Since you were married man and wife, By houshold brawles, or contentious strife; Or otherwise in bed or at bord, Offended each other in deed or word: Or since the Parish-Clerk said Amen, Wished your selves unmarried agen; Or in a twelve-moneth and a day, Repented not in thought any way; But continued true and in desire, As when you joyn'd hands in holy Quire. If to these conditions without all fear, Of your own accord you will freely swear; A Gammon of Bacon you shall receive, And bear it hence with love and good leave. For this is our custome at Dunmow well known, Though the sport be ours, the Bacons your own. It appeareth in an old Now in the possession of the Earl of Warwick. book on record, that Richard Wright of Badesnorth in Nor∣folk, in the twentieth third of Henry the sixth, when John Canon was Prior; that Stephen Samuel of Little-Easton in Essex, the seventh of Edward the fourth, when Roger Rull∣cot was Prior; and that Thomas Lee of Coxhall in Essex, the second of Henry the eight, when John Taylor was Prior, demanded their Bacon on the premisses, and receiv'd it accordingly. Princes. HENRY FITZ-ROY naturall son to King Henry the eight. Here we confess our Trespass against our own Rules, who confined our selves to the Legitimate Issue of Kings; presuming that the worth of this Henry will make amends for our breach of
order herein. He was begotten on the Body of the Lady Talbois, and born at J  .  703. Black∣more-Mannor in this County, Anno 1519. being afterwards Created Earl of Noting∣ham, and Duke of Richmond. He confuted their Etymology who deduced Bastard from the Dutch words boes and art, . that is an abject Nature, and verifyed their de∣duction deriving it from Kilianus. besteaerd, that is the best disposition: Such was his forwardness in all Martiall Activities, with his knowledge in all Arts and Sciences; Learned Le∣land dedicating a book unto him. He married Mary daughter to Thomas Duke of Nor∣folk, and dying Anno 1536. (in the seventeenth year of his age,) was buried at Fram∣lingham in Suffolk with great lamentation. Saints. Saint HELEN was born at Colchester in this County, daughter to Coel King thereof, as all our British Authors unanimously doe report. She was Mother of Constantine the first Christian Emperour, and is famous to all ages for finding out Christ's Cross on Mount Calvary. Hence it is, that in memoriall hereof, the City of Colchester giveth for its Arms a Camden in Essx. Cross enragled between four Crowns. A scandal is raised on her name that she was Stabularia, A Stableress, whereof Ric. Vtus Basing. ad lib. 5. . Bt. . 26. one rendreth this witty rason, be∣cause her Father was Comes Stabuli (an high office, equivalent to the Constable in France) unto the Emperour. Others (more truly) make her so nick named by Pagan malice, for her officious devotion in finding out the Stable of Christs Nativity. Heathen pens have much aspersed her, calling her , whose tongues are no slander, seeing the Disciple is not above his Master. More was I mov∣ed, when first finding thispassage in Paulinus the pious Bishop of Nola, Paulin. Epist. 11. ad Severum This englished ad verbum. Prompto filii Imperatoris adsensu mater Augusta, patefactis ad opera sancta thesauris, toto abusa fisco est. She being Mother Emperess, the treasuries being set open to pious works, by the ready consent of her Son the Emperor, she wholly abused the exche∣quer. I wondred to see Paulinus charging such abuses upon her, being a person so prodigi∣ously charitable, that he is said to have sold himself to redeem a widows son from capti∣vity; but consulting the best of See Nizolius in Obs. on Tul∣ly, on the word abuti. Orators, I find abuti sometimes fixing no fault, and importing no more then Thus Saint erome, Apo∣stolicis stolic testimoniis abu∣ quae jam  ia gn∣tibusdivulgata. uti; so that abusing the Exchequer, signifieth no more then a full & free usage thereof. She died at Rome being eighty years of age, Anno Domini 337. Saint CONSTANTINE son to the aforesaid Saint Helen, was born also at Colchester, one sufficiently known to all posterity by the meer mentioning of him. My pen shall now do penance with its silence, to expiate its tediousness in describing his character in our Ecclesiasticall History. He died Anno Domini 339. Saint Ethelburgh Hildetha Theorithoid Edilburge Wolfhild Sister to Erken∣wald Bishop of London was by him appointed first Abbess of the Nunnery of Barking in this County, by him built and endow∣ed. Here she led a very austere life, and obtained the veneration of a Saint after her death, which hap∣pened 676. Sister to St. Ethelburgh a∣foresaid, suc∣ceeded her in the govern∣ment of the said Nunnery for the term of four and twenty years, so that she di∣ed very aged with the re∣putation of a Saint. Anno 700. (The first of whose name sound∣eth Greek, the se∣cond Saxon,) was in this respect inferior to the two former, because no Abbess but onely a Nun of Barking. Yet did she equall them in some sort in the ho∣liness of her life, and her memory may go a breast with them in the Classis of Sts. She died 678. Wife to Ina K. of the West-Saxons, by the consent of her husband (who went a Pilgrim to Rome) became a Nun at Barking, & after her death Anno 740. room was made for her memory a∣mongst the rank of Saints. Afterwards Barking - Nunnery destroyed by the Danes, was rebuilt by King Edgar. Daughter to Wulf∣helme E. of the West∣Saxons, (born after the 18. year of her Mothers barrenness) was by King Edgar made Abbess of Bark∣ing, which was the first Nunnery of Eng∣land, the richest (va∣lued at above 1000l. of year rent at the dissolution) and the fruit fullest of Saints as by this parallel doth appear. St. Wolf∣hild died Anno 989.
Saint OSITH. She was daughter to the King of the East-Angles, and wife to Suthred last King of East-Saxons; by whose consent forsaking the world, she was veiled, and at last became Abbess of a Monastery of her own founding at Chich in this Coun∣ty; untill the Danes infesting these fea-coasts, cut off her head in hatred of Reli∣gion. Yet this her head, after it was cut off was carried by Saint Osith [oh wonder! oh lie!] three EnglishMar∣tyrolog. on Octob. 7. pag. 272. furlongs, and then she fell down and died. The same mutatis mutandis is told of Saint Dionys in France, Saint Winefride in Wales and others, such being the barren∣ness of Monkish invention, that unable to furnish their severall Saints with variety of fictions, their tired fancie is fain to make the same miracle serve many Saints. She was martyred about the year of our Lord 870. Saint NEOTS (why Sir-named Adulphius I know not) was born (saith De script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 23. Bale,) ei∣ther in Essex or Kent, but De Ang. script. in Anno 883. Pitz. who wrote sixty years after him, saith positively he was born in Essex. It seemeth he met with some evidence to sway down the even beam to preponderate on the side of this County. Waving the pleasures of the world, he lived long an Eemite in Cornwell, and then leaving his solitary life, he became a painfull and profitable Preacher of the Gospell. He was a Zacheus for his Stature, and with him tall in Piety and Charity. He moved King Alfred to found (or restore) the University of Oxford, on which account his memory is sacred to all posterity. He died Anno Dom. 883. whose body was buried by one Barry his Scholar in Eynsebury, (since St. Neots) in Huntington-shire, and some say was afterwards removed to the Abby of Crou∣land. Martyrs. Of the forty four Martyrs in this Shire, Three were most Remarkable. 1. JOHN LAURENCE who at the Stake was permitted a These as the following ob∣servables are taken out of Mr. Foxes Acts and Mon. in their respe∣ctive Martyr∣domes. Posture peculiar to himself; For being so infeebled with long durance and hard usage, that he could not stand; he had a Chair allowed him, and had the painfull ease to sit therein. Nor must we forget, how little Children being about the fire, Cied unto him, God strengthen you, God strengthen you, which was beheld as a product of his providence, who out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings ordained Strength, as also it evidenced their Pious Education. To say Hosanna is as soon learnt by children, as go up thou Bald head, if it be as surely taught unto them. 2. THOMAS HAWKES Gentleman, first brought into trouble for refusing to Christen his Child after the Popish fashion. This man going to the Stake promised his friends to give them some solemn token of the clearness and comfort of his Consci∣ence. In performance where of, whilst his body was burning he raised up himself; and though having the sence, having no fear of the Fire, joyfully clapp'd his hands over his head, to the admiration of all the beholders. 3. ROSE ALLIN a Virgin, who being in her Calling, (fetching Beer for her Bedrid Mother,) was intercepted by Justice, or rather un-justice Tyrrell, who with a Candle most cruelly burnt her wrists, which her Fire-proof patience most constantly endured: What was said of the Roman scaevola, when he burnt his hand before Porcenna, is more appli∣able to this Maid, Manum amisit, sed Palmam retinuit▪ Tyrrell did this meerly by the Law of his List; otherwise no statute (except written on the back-side of the book) did authorize him for so Tyrannicall an act: Some days after, the fire which here took Li∣very and seisin of her hand, brought her whole body into the possession thereof. Confessors. RICHARD GEORGE Labourer, of West-Barfold, is most eminent amongst the many Confessors in this Shire. For he had successively three wives, whereof Fx Acts & Mon. p.  two were burnt, and the third imprisoned for Religion, viz. 1. Agnes George, burnt at Stratford-Bow, June 27. 1556. 2. Christian George, burnt at Colchester, May 26. 1558. 3. ........... George, imprisoned in Colchester, and escap'd by Queen Maries death Novemb. 17. 1558.
Some who consult the dates of his wives deaths, will condemn him for over-speedy marriage; and the appetite to a new wife is not comely, before the grief for the for∣mer be well digested. Such consider not, that their glorious death in so good a cause, was the subject rather of his joy then grief, and that being necessitated (for his children sake) to marry, he was carefull, as it appears, to marry in the Lord. Nor did he thrust his wives into the fire, and shrink back from the flames himself, who being imprisoned Fox Acts and Mon. p. 2037. in Colchester, had followed his two first, and gone along with his last to the Stake, had not Divine Providence by Queen Maries death prevented it. Cardinalls. THOMAS BOURCHIER was son to Sir William Bourchier, who (though but an English Knight) was a French Earl of Ewe in Normandy, Created by King Henry the fifth, and had a great▪estate in this County, with many Mansion-houses, Camdens Brit. in Essex. Hawsted be∣ing the place of their▪principall residence, where I presume this Prelate was born. He was bred in the University of Oxford, whereof he was Chancellour 1454. Dean of Saint Martins, then successively Bishop of Worcester, Ely, Arch-bishop of Cater∣bury, and Cardinall by the title of Saint Cyriacus in the Baths. A Prelate, besides his high birth aforesaid, and brotherhood to Henry Bourchier, first Earl of Essex of that Surname, remarkable on many accounts. First, for his vivacity, being an old man, and proportionably, an older Bishop. 1. Being consecrated Bishop of Godwin in his Catal. of Bishops. Worcester 1435. the fourteenth of Henry the sixth. 2. Dying Arch-bishop of Canterbury 1486. the second of K. Henry the seventh. Whereby it appeareth, that he wore a Mitre full fifty one years, a term not to be paral∣leld in any other person. Secondly, he saw strange revolutions in State, the Civil-wars between Lancaster and York, begun, continued, and concluded. For, though Bishop Morton had the hap∣piness to make the match, Arch-bishop Bourchier had the honour to marry King Henry the seventh, to the Daughter of King Edward the fourth, so that his hand first solemn∣ly held that sweet posie, wherein the White and Red Roses were tied together. Thirdly, for his wary compliance, that he lost not himself in the labyrinth of such intricate times, applying himself politiquely to the present predominant power. However it may be said of him, Praestitit hic Praesul nil tanto sanguine munere tempore dignum. He left no monument to posterity proportionable (what was an hundred pounds, and a chest given to Cambridge?) to his great blood, rich place, and long continuance therein. But this my Idem in the Arch-bishops of Canterbury. Author imputeth unto the troublesomeness of the times, seeing peace was no sooner setled, and the land began to live, but he died March 30. 1486. I know not what generous planet had then influence on the Court of Rome, this I know, that England never saw such a concurrence of noble Prelates; who, as they were Peers by their places, were little less by their descent. I behold their birth a good buttress of Episcopacy in that age, able in Parliament to check and crush any Antipre∣laticall project, by their own relations. But let us count how many were contemporaries with Thomas Bourchier, from his first consecration at Worcester, till the day of his death. John Stafford, son to the Earl of Staf∣ford, Arch-bishop of Canterbury. Robert Fitz-Hugh Bishop of Lon∣don. Henry Beauford, son to John Duke of Lancaster, Bishop of Winchester. William Gray, son to the Lord Gray of Codnor, Bishop of Ely. Marmaduke Lumley, extracted from the Lord Lumley, Bishop of Lin∣coln. Richard Beauchamp, brother to the L. Saint Amand, Bishop of Sarum. Lionel Woodvile, son to the Earl of Rivers, Bishop of Sarum. Peter Courtney, extracted from the Earls of Devon, Bishop of Exeter. Richard Courtnee, of the same extra∣ction, Bishop of Norwich. John Zouch, descended of the Lord Zouch, Bishop of Landaffe. George Novile, brother to the Make∣King Earl of Warwick, Arch-bi∣shop of York. William Dudley, son to the Lord Dud∣ley, Bishop of Durham. William Piercy, son to the Earl of Northumberland, Bishop of Carlile.
But after the death of Bourchier, I meet with but three Bishops of noble extraction, viz. James Stanley, Edmond Audley and Cardinall Pole. However, they were, though of lower image, of no less learning and religion. Prelates. RICHARD de BARKING took his name (according to the Clergy-mens Heraldry in that age) from that well noted Town in this County. In process of time he be∣came Abot of Vit Abb. West. M. S. Westminster for twenty four years. He was so high in favour with King Hnry the third, that he made him one' of his speciall Councellours, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, nd for a short time J. Philipot Cat. of Trea∣surers pag. 13. Lord Treasurer of England. He died Anno. 1246. buried in Westminster-Church, whose marble tombe before the middle of the Altar, was afterwards pulled down (probably because taking up too much room,) by Frier Combe, Sacrit of the House, who laid a plain marble stone over him, with an Epitaph too tedious and barbarous to be transcribed. JOHN de CHESILL. There are two Villages so called in this County, where the North-west corner thereof closeth with Cambridge-shire. I will not define in which this John was born, time having left us nothing of his actions, saving the many preferments thorough which he passed, being Dean of Saint Pauls, successively Arch-Deacon and Bishop of Godwin in the Bishops of London. London, and twice Chancellor of England. viz. Anno Domini 1264. in the 48. of King Henry the third▪ viz. Anno Domini 1268. in the 53. of King Henry the third▪ He was afterward also J. Philiot Car. of Trea∣surers pag. 17. Lord Treasurer of England, and died Anno Domini 1279. in the seventh year of the raign of King Edward the first. JOHN of WALTHAM was so named from the place of his nativity, and at∣tained to be a prudent man, and most expert in government of the State, so that he became Master of the Rolls, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and Anno 1388. was consecrated Bishop of Salisbury. But he miss'd his mark, and met with one, who both matched and mastered him, when refusing to be visited by Courtney Arch-bishop of Canterbury, on the Godwin in the Arch-bi∣shops of Cant. in the life of Courtney. criticisme, that Pope Urbane the sixth, who granted Courtney his Commission was lately dead, till the Arch-bishop excommunicated him into more knowledge and humility, teaching him that his Visitations had a self-support, without assistance of Papal power, cast in onely by the way of religious complement. This John of Waltham was afterwards made Lord Treasurer, and Richard the second had such an affection for him, that dying in his Office, he caused him to be buried (though many muttered Tho. Walsing∣ham in Anno 1395. thereat) amongst the Kings, and next to King Edward the first in Westminster. His death happened 1395. ROGER WALDEN, taking his Name from his Birth, in that Eminent Market-Town in this County, was as considerable as any man in his Age, for the alternation of his for∣tune. First he was the son of a poor man, yet by his Industry and Ability, attained to be Dean of York, Treasurer of Calis, Secretary to the King, and Treasurer of England. Afterwards, when Thomas Arundell Arch-bishop of Canterbury fell into the disfa∣vour of King Richard the second, and was banished the land, this Roger was by the King made Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and acted to all purposes and intents, calling of Synods, and discharging of all other offices. However, he is beheld as a Cypher in that See, because holding it by Sequestration, whilst Arandell the true Incumbent was alive, who returning in the first of King Henry the fourth resumed his Arch∣Bishoprick. And now Roger Walden was reduced to Roger Walden, and as poor as at his first begin∣ning. For though all maintained that the Character of a Bishop was indelable, this Roger found that a Bishoprick was delable, having nothing whereon to subsist, untill Arch-bi∣shop Arundell, nobly reflecting upon his Worth, or Want, or Both, procured him to be made Bishop of London. But he enjoyed that place onely so long, as to be a testimony to all posterity of Arundell his Civility unto him, dying before the year was expired 1404.
He may be compared to one, so Jaw-fallen with over long asting, tha e cannot eat meat when brought unto him, and his spirits were so depressed with his former ill fortunes, that he could not enjoy himself in his new unexpected happiness. Why he was buried rather in Saint Bartholomews in Smithfild, then his own Cathedrall Church, is too hard for me to resolve. Since the Reformation. RICHARD HOWLAND was born at  Selt. . M. S in the Msters of St. Johns. Newport-Pnds in this County, first Hellow of Peterhouse, then chosen 1575. Master of Magdalen, and next year Master of Saint Johns∣Colledge in Cambridge. He was twice Vice-chancellor of the University, in the year 1584. he was Consecrated Bishop of Godwin in the Bishops of Peterborogh. Peterborough, in which place he continued sixteen years, and died in June 1600. JOHN JEGON was born in this Parker ut prius. County at Coxhall, Fellow first of Queens, then Master of Bennet-colledge in Cambridge, and three times Vice-chancellour of the Uni∣versity. A most serious man and grave governour, yet withall of a most faceious dis∣position, so that it was hard to say whether his counsel was more grateful for the sound∣ness, o his company more acceptable for the pleasess thereof. Take one eminent instance of his genuity. Whilst Master of the Colledge he chanced to punish all the Under-graduates therein for some generall offence, and the penalty was put upon their Heads in the Buttery. And because that he disdained to convert the money to any private use, it was expended in new whiteing the Hall of the Colledge. Whereupon a scholar hung up these verses on the Skreen, Doctor Jegon, Bennet-colledge Master, Brake the Scholars head, and gave the walls a plaister. But the Doctor had not the readiness of his parts any whit impaired by his age for per∣using the paper ex tempore he subscribed, Knew I but the Wagg that writ these verses in a Bravery, I would commend him for his Wit, but whip him for his Knavery. Queen Elizabeth designed him, but King James confirmed him Bishop of Norwich, where if some in his Diocess have since bestowed harsh language on his memory, the wonder is not great, seeing he was a somewhat severe presser of Conformity, and dyed Anno Domini 1618. SAMUEL HARESNET was born at Colchester in the Parish of Saint Butolph, bred first Scholar, then Fellow, then Master, of Pembrock-hall in Cambridge. A man of grt learning, strong parts and stout spirit. He was Bishop first of Chichester, then of Norwich, and at last Arch-bishop of York, and one of the Privy Councill of King Charles, the 2. last dignities being procured by Thomas Earl of Arundell, who much favoured him and committed his younger son to his Education. Dying unmarried he was the better enabled for Publick and Pious uses, and at Chig∣well in this County, (the place of his first Church-preferment,) he built and endowed a fair Grammer School. He conditionally bequeathed his Library to Colchester where he was born, as by this passage in his Proved June 8. 1631. Will may appear: Item, I give to the Bayliffs and Corporation of the Town of Colchester, all my Library of Books, provided, that they provide a decent room to set them up in, that the Clergy of the Town of Colchester, and other Divines may have free access for the reading and studying of them. I presume the Town corresponding with his desire, the Legacy took due effect. He died Anno Domini 1631. and lieth buied at Chigwell aforesaid. AUGUSTINE LINSELL D. D. was born at Bumsted in this County, bred Scholar and Fellow in Clare-hall in Cambridge. He applyed himself chiefly to the Studies of Greek, Hebrew, and all Antiquity, attaining to great exactness therein. He was very knowing in the antient practices of the Jews, and from him I learned, that they had a Custome at the Circumcising of their Children, that certain Undertakers should make
a solemn stipulation for their pious education, conformable to our God-fathers in Bap∣tisme. He was afterwards made Bishop of Peterborough, where (on the joint-cost of his Clergy) he procured Theophilact on the Epistles (never printed before) to be fairly set forth in Greek and Latine. Hence he was remove to Hereford where he died 163.. States-men. Sir THOMAL AUDLEY Knight, where born, my best Industry and Inquiry cannotS N. attain. He was bred in the Studie of the Laws, till he became Atturney of the Dutchie of Lancaster, and Sergeant at Law, (as most affirme) then Speaker of the Parliament, Knighted, and made Keeper of the great Seal, June 4. 1532. being the twenty fourth of King Henry the eight, and not long after was made Lord Chancellor of England, and Baron Audley of Audley End in this County. In the feast of Abby Lands, King Henry the eight carved unto him the first cut (and that I assure you was a dainty morsell,) viz. the Stos survey of London, p. 146. Priory of the Trinity in Eald-gate Ward London, dissolved 1531. which as a Van Currier foreran other Abbeys by two years, and foretold their dissolution. This I may call (afterwards called Dukes-Place) the Covent Garden within London, as the greatest empty space within the Walls, though since filled, not to say pestered, with houses. He had afterwards a large Partage in the Abby Lands in severall Counties. He continued in his Office of Chancellour thirteen years, and had one onely daugh∣ter Margaret, who no doubt answered the Pearl in her name, as well in her precious qua∣lities, as rich Inheritance, which she brought to her husband Thomas last Duke of Nor∣folk. This Lord Audley died April 30. 1544. and is buried in the fair Church of Saf∣fron-walden with this lamentable Epitaph, The stroak of deaths Inevitable Dart, Hath now, alas! of Life bereft the Heart, Of Sir Thomas Audley, of the garter Knight, Late Chancellor of England under our Prince of might Henry the eight, worthy of high renown, And made him Lord Audley of this Town. This worthy Lord took care, that better Poets should be after then were in his age, and founded Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge giving good lands thereunto, if they might have enjoyed them according to his Donation. Sir RICNARD MORISIN Knight, was born in this County, as J. Bale his Fellow∣exileA M P. doth Bale (cript. Bt. Cent. oct. Num. 9 acquaint us: yet so, as that he qualifieth his intelligence with Ut fertr, which I have commuted into our marginall note of Sir R. Baker in his Chroni∣cl, pag. 469. saith he was born n Ox∣ford-shire. dubitation. Our foresaid Author addeth that, per celebriora Anglorum gymnasia artes excoluit: bred probably first in Eton or Winchester, then in Cambridge or Oxford, and at last in the Inns of Court. In those he attained to great skill in Latine and Greek, in the Common and Civil Law, insomuch, that he was often imployed Ambassadour by King Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth, unto Charles the fifth Emperor, and others Princes of Germany, acquitting himself both honest and able in those negotiations. He began a beautifull house at Cashobery in Hertford-shire, and had prepared materi∣alls for the finishing thereof; but alas, this house proved like the life of his Master who began it, I mean King Edward the sixth, broken off, not ended, and that before it came to the middle thereof. Yea, he was forced to fly beyond the Seas, and returning out of Italy died at Id ibidem. Strasburgh on the 17. of March, Anno Domini 1556. to the grief of all good men. Yet his son Sir Charles finished his fathers house in more peaceable times, whose great-grand daughter (augmented by matches with much honour and wealth) a right worthy and vertuous Lady lately deceased, was wife to the first Lord Capel, and Mother to the present Earl of Essex. Sir ANTHONY COOK Knight, great-grant child to Sir Thomas Cook Lord Mayor of London, was born at Giddy hall in this County, where he finished a fair house, begun
by his great-grand-father, as appeareth by this inscription on the frontispiece thereof, Aedibus his frontem Proavus Thomas dedit olim, Addidit Antoni caetera sera manus. He was one of the Governours to King Edward the sixth when Prince, and is chara∣ctered by Master Camdens Eliz. Anno 1576. Camden, vir antiquâ severitate. He observeth him also to be happy in his daughters, learned above their sex in Greek and Latine, namely 1. Mildred marryed unto 1. William Cecil Lord Treasurer of England. 2. Anne   2. Nicholas Bacon   Chancellor   3. Katherine   3. Henry Killigrew Knights.   4. Elizabeth   4. Thomas Hobby     5.   5. Ralph Rowlet     Indeed they were all most eminent Scholars, (the honour of their own, and the shame of our sex) both in prose and poetry, and we will give an instance of the later. Sir Henry Killigrew was designed by the Queen, Embassadour for France, in trouble∣some times, when the imployment always difficult, was then apparently dangerous. Now Katherine his Lady, wrot these following verses to her sister Mildred Cecil, to im∣prove her power with the Lord Treasurer her husband, that Sir Henry might be excused from that service, Si mihi quem cupio cures Mildreda remitti, Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola Soror. Sin malè cunctando retines, vel trans mare mittes, Tu mala, tu pejor, tu mihi nulla Soror, It si Cornubiam, tibi pax six, & omnia lta, Sin mare Cecili, nuntio bella, vale. We will endeavour to translate them, though I am afraid falling much short of their native elegancy, If, Mildred, by thy care he be sent back, whom I request, A Sister good thou art to me, yea better, yea the best. But if with stays thou keepst him still, or sendst where seas may part, Then unto me a Sister ill, yea worse, yea none thou art, If go to Cornwall he shall please, I peace to thee foretell, But Cecil if he set to Seas, I war denounce, farewell. This Sir Anthony Cook died in the year of our Lord 1576. leaving a fair estate unto his son, in whose name it continued untill our time. Sir THOMAS SMITH Kt. was born at Camdens Eliz. Anno 1577. Saffron Walden in this County, and bred in Queens-colledge in Cambridge, where such his proficiency in learning, that he was chosen out by Henry the eight, to be sent over, and brought up beyond the Seas. It was fashionable in that age, that pregnant Students were maintained on the cost of the State, to be Merchants for experience in forraign parts, whence returning home with their gainfull adventures, they were preferred (according to the improvement of their time) to offices in their own Country. Well it were if this good old custome were resumed; for if where God hath given Talents, men would give but Pounds, I mean encourage hopefull Abilities with helpfull Maintenance, able persons would never be wanting, and poor men with great parts would not be excluded the Line of prefer∣ment. This Sir Thomas was afterwards Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth, and a grand benefactor to both Universities, as I have formerly declared In my histo∣ry of Cam∣bridge. at large. He died Anno Domini 1577. THOMAS HOWARD, wherever born, is justly reputed of this County, whereinS N. he had his first honour, and last habitation. He was second son to Thomas last Duke
of Norfolk, but eldest by his wife Margaret, sole heir to Thomas Lord Audley. Queen Elizabeth made him Baron of Audley, and Knight of the Garter; and King James (who beheld his father a State-Martyr for the Queen of ots,) in the first of his raign, advanced him Lord Chamberlain, and Earl of Suffolk, and in the twelfth of his raign July 12. Lord Treasurer of England. He was also Chancellour of Cambridge, loving and beloved of the University. When at his first coming to Cambridge, Master Francis Nethersole Orator of the University, made a Latine Speech unto him, this Lord returned, though I understand not Latine, I know the Sence of your Oration is to tell me that I am wellcome to you, which I believe verily, thank you for it heartily, and will serve you faithfully in any thing within my power. Doctor Hasnet the Vice-chancellour laying hold on the Handle of so fair a Proffer, re∣quested him to be pleased to Entertain the King at Cambridge, a Favour which the Uni∣versity could never compass from their former great and wealthy Chancellours, I will do it (saith the Lord) in the best manner I may, with the speediest conveniency. Nor was he worse then his word, giving his Majesty not long after so Magnificent a Treat∣ment in the University, as cost him five thousands pounds and upwards. Hence it was, that after his death, Thomas his second son, Earl of Bark-shire, not suing for it (not knowing of it) was chosen to succeed him, losing the place (as some suspected) not for lack of voices, but fair counting them. He died at Audley end, Anno Domini 1626. being Grand-father to the right Honourable James Earl of Suffolk. RICHARD WESTON. I behold him son to Sir Jerome Weston, Sheriff of thisA M P. County in the one and fourtieth of Queen Elizabeth, and cannot meet with any of his relations, to rectifie me if erronious. In his youth he impaired his estate, to improve himself with publique accomplishment, but came off both a saver and a gainer at the last, when made Chancellor of the Exchequer, and afterwards (upon the remove of the Earl of Marlburrough) July 15. in the fourth of King Charles Lord Treasurer of Eng∣land. But I hear the Cocks crow proclaiming the dawning day, being now come within the ken of many alive; and when mens memories do arise, it is time for History to haste to bed. Let me onely be a Datary, to tell the Reader, that this Lord was Created Earl of Portland, February 17. in the eight of King Charles, and died Anno Domini 163.. being father to the right Honorable Jerome now Earl of Portland. Capitall Judges. Sir JOHN BRAMSTONE Knight, was born at Maldon in this County, bred up in the Middle-Temple in the study of the Common-law, wherein he attained to such emi∣nency, that he was by King Charles made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench. One of deep learning, solid judgement, integrity of life, gravity of behaviour; in a word, accomplished with all qualities requisite for a Person of his place and profes∣sion. One instance of his integrity I must not forget, effectually relating to the Foundation wherein I was bred: Serjeant Bruerton (of whom Benefactors to the Publick in Cheshlre. formerly) bequeathed by Will to Sidney-colledge well nigh three thousand pounds, but (for haste or some other accident) so imperfectly done, that (as Doctor Samuel Ward informed me) the gife was invalid in the Rigour of the Law. Now Judge Bramstone, who married the Serjeants Widdow, gave himself much trouble (gave himself indeed, doing all things gratis,) for the speedy payment of the money to a Farthing, and the legal setling thereof on the Col∣ledge, according to the true intention of the dead. He deserved to live in better times; the delivering his judgement on the Kings side in the case of Ship oney cost him much trouble. The posting Press would not be perswaded to stay till I had re∣ceived farther instructions from the most Hopefull sons of this worthy Judge, who died about the year 1646.
Souldiers. ROBERT FITZ-WALTER. It is observable what I read in my Stows Annals in the raign of K. John. Author, that in the raign of King John, there were three most eminent Knights in the land,  for their prowess, viz. Robert Fitz-Roger, Richard Of Standed∣Mont-Fitchet in this Coun∣ty. Mont-Fchet and this Robert Fitz-Walter. Two of which three (a fair proportion) fall to be natives of this County. This Robert was born at Woodham-walters, and behaved himself right  on all occasions, highly beloved by King Richard the first, and King John, untill the later banished him the land, because he would not prostitute his daughter to his pleasure. But worth will not long want a Master, the French-King joyfully entertained him, till King John recalled him back again on this occasion: five-years truce being concluded betwixt the two Crowns of England and France, an English-man challenged any of the French, to just a course or two on horse-back with him, whom Fitz-Walter (then o the French party) undertook, and at the first Stow ut prius. course, with his great spear, fell'd horse and man to the ground. Thus then and ever since English-men generally can be wor∣sted by none but English-men. Hereupon the King, next day sent for him, restored his lands with license for him to repair his Castles, (and particularly Bainards-castle in London,) which he did accordingly. He was styled of the common-people, The Mar∣shall of Gods Army and Holy-Church. He died Anno Domini 1234. and lieth buried in the Priory of Little-Dunmow. Sir JOHN HAWKEWOOD Knight, Son to Gilbert Hawkewood Stow ut prus. Tanner, was born in Camd. Brit. in Essex. Sible heningham. This John was first bound an apprentice to a Stow ut prius. Taylor in the City of London, but soon turned his needle into a sword, and thimble into a shield, being pressed in the service of King Edward the third for his French Wars, who rewarded his valour with Knighthood. Now that mean men bred in manuall and mechanick trades, may arrive at great skill in Martiall performances, this Hawkewood, though an eminent, is not the onely instance of our English nation. The heat of the French Wars being much remitted, he went into Italy and served the City of Florence, which as yet was a Free State. Such Republiques preferred for∣rainers rather then natives for their Generalls, because, when the service was ended, it was but disbursing their pay, and then disbanding their power, by cashering their Com∣mission; such Forraigners having no advantage to continue their command, and ren∣der themselves absolute, because wanting an interest in alliances and relations. Thus a single Stake if occasion serves, is sooner plucked up then a tree fastned to the earth, with the many fibrae appendant to the root thereof. Great the gratitude of the State of Florence to this their Generall Hawkewood, who in testimony of his surpassing valour and singular faithfull service to their State, ador∣ned him with the Statue of a man of armes, and sumptuous Monument, wherein his ashes remain honoured at this present day. Well it is that Monument doth remain seeing his Coenotaph or honorary tombe, which sometimes stood in the Parish Church of Sible-heningham (arched over, and in allusion to his name berebussed with Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 623. Hawkes flying into a Wood,) is now quite flown away and abolished. This Sir John Hawkewood married Domnia daughter of Barnaby the warlike brother of Galeasius Lord of Millain, (father to John the first Duke of Mallain,) by whom he had a son named John born in Italy, made Knight and naturalized in the seventh year of King Henry the fourth, as appeareth by the In Bib. Cot. & in Arch Tar∣ris Lond. 1 Pars Pat. An. 8. H. 4. m. 20. Record, Johannes, filius Johannis Haukewood, Miles, natus in partibus Italiae factus indigena Ann. 8. Hen. 4. mater ejus nata in partibus transmarinis. This valiant Knight dyed very aged Anno 1394. in the eighteenth of King Richard the second, his friends founding two Chantreys to pray for his and the souls of John Oliver and Thomas Newenton Esquires, his military companions, and, which probably may be presumed, born in the same County. THOMAS RATCLIFF Lord Fitz-walter second Earl of Sussex of that Surname, twice Lord Deputy of Ireland, was a most valiant Gentleman. By his prudence he caused that Actuall Rebellion brake not out in Ireland, and no wonder if in his time it Rained not war there, seeing his diligence dispersed the clouds before they could ga∣ther
together. Thus he who cures a disease may be the skilfubest, but he that prevents it is the safest Physician. Queen Elizbeth called him home to be her Lord Chamberlain, and a constant Court faction was maintained betwixt him and Robert Earl of Leicester, so that the  and the Leicesterians divided the Court, whilst the  as neuters did look upon them. Sussex had a great Estate left him by his Ancestors, Leicester as great given or re∣stor'd  by the Queen:  was the hones man and greater Souldier,  the more faceit  and deep Politician; not for the generall good, but his parti∣cular profit. Great the  betwixt them, and what in vain the Queen endea∣voured, death performed, taking this Earl away, and so the competition was . New∣Hall in this County was the place if not (as I believe) of his Birth, of his principall Habitation. He dyed Anno Domini.... And lyeth buried in the Church of Saint Olives Hartstreet London. Sir FRANCIS and Sir HORACE VERE sons of Geffrey Vere. Esquire, who was son of John Vere the  Earl of Oxford, were both born in this County, though se∣verall places (Hengham Castle, Colchester, Tilbury juxta clare,) be by sundry men assigned for their Nativity. We will first consider them severally, and then compare them together. Sir FRANCIS was of a fiery spirit and rigid nature, undaunted in all dan∣gers, not over valuing the price of mens lives, to purchase a victory there∣with. He served on the Scaene of all Christendome where war was acted. One masterpiece of his valour was at the Battle of Newport, when his Ragged Regiment (so were the English then cal∣led from their ragged Cloths,) help'd to make all whole, or else all had been lost. Another was, when for three years he defended Ostend against a strong and numerous Army, surrendering it at last a bare skeliton to the King of Spain, who paid more years purchase for it, then probably the world will endure. He dyed in the beginning of the raign of King James, about the year of our Lord 16... Sir HORACE had more meekness, and as much valour as his Brother, so pious, that he first made his peace with God, before he went out to war with man. One of an excellent temper, it being true of him what is said of the Caspian Sea, that it doth never  nor Flow; observing a constant Tenor, neither  nor depressed with success. Had one seen him r∣turning from a victory, he would by his silence have suspected that he had lost the day; and had he beheld him in a retreat, he would have collected him a Conqueror, by the chearful∣ness of his spirit. He was the first Baron of King Charles his Creation. Some years after coming to Court he fell suddenly sick and speechless, so that he dyed before night Anno Domini 163.. No doubt he was well prepa∣red for death, seeing such his vigilancy, that never any Enemy surprised him in his quar∣ters. Now to compare them together, (such their Eminency, that they would hardly be parallell'd by any but themselves:) Sir Francis was the elder Brother, Sir Horace lived to be the older man, Sir Francis was more feared, Sir Horace more loved, by the Soul∣diery: The former in Martiall discipline was oftimes Rigidus ad ruina; The later seldome exceeded Adterrorem. Sir Francis left none, Sir Horace no Male issue, whose four Co-heirs are since matched into Honorable families. Both lived in War, much Ho∣nored; dyed in Peace, much Lamented. HENRY VERE was son of Edward Vere the seventeenth Earl of Oxford, and Anne Trentham his Lady, whose principall habitation (the rest of his patrimony being then wasted) was at Heningham Castle in this County. A vigorous Gentleman, full of cou∣rage and resolution, and the last Lord Chamberlain of England of this Family. His sturdy nature would not bow to Court-Compliants who would maintain what he spake, spake what he thought, think what he apprehended true and just, though sometimes dangerous and distastefull. Once he came into Court with a great Milk-white Feather about his hat, which then was somewhat unusuall, save that a person of his merit might make a fashion.
The Reader may guess the Lord, who said unto him in some jeer, My  you weare a very fair feather; it is true (said the Earl,) and if you mark it there's e'r a Tint in it. Indeed his family was ever Loyall to the Crown, deserving their Motto, VERO NIL VERIUS. Going over one of the four Engish Colonells into the Low Countries, and endea∣vouring to raise the Siedge of Bxeda, he so over-heat himself with Marching, Fight∣ing and Vexing, (the design not succeeding) that he dyed few days after Anno Domini 16... He married Diana one of the Co-heirs of William Earl of Exeter, (afterwards married to Edward Eal of Elgin,) by whom he left no issue. Physicians. WILLIAM GILT was born in I received the ensuing intelligence from his near Kinsman Mr. William Gilbert of Brental-Ely▪ in Suffolk. Trinity Parish in Colchester, his Father being a Counsellour of great Esteem in his Profession, who first removed his family thither from Clare in Suffolk, where they had resided in a Gentile Equipage some Centuries of Years. He had (saith my informer) the Clearness of Venice Glass without the Brittleness thereof, soon Ripe and long Lasting in his Perfections. He Commenced Doctor in Physick, and was Physician to Queen Elizabeth, who Stamped on him many Marks of her Favour, besides an Annuall Pension to encourage his Studies. He addicted him∣self to Chemistry, attaining to great exactness therein. One saith of him that he was Stoicall, but not Cynicall, which I understand Reserv'd, but not Morose, never married, purposely to be more beneficiall to his Brethren. Such his Loyalty to the Queen, that, as if unwilling to survive, he dyed in the same year with her 1603. His Stature was Tall, Cplexion Cheerfull, an Happiness not ordinary in so hard a Student and re∣tired a Person. He lyeth buried in Trinity Church in Colchester, under a plain Monu∣ment. Mahomets Tombe at Mecha is said strangely to hang up, attracted by some invisible Load-stone, but the Memory of this Doctor will never fall to the ground, which his in∣comparable Book De Magnete will support to Eternity. Writers. GERVASE of TILBURY born at that Village in this County, (since famous for a Cmpe, against the Spaniards in 88.) is Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. pag. 250. & Pitz. de Illstr. Ang. Aetat. 13. pag. 274. reported Nephew to King Henry the se∣cond. But though Nepos be taken in the Latitude thereof (to signify Son, to Brother, Sister, or Child,) I cannot make it out by the Door, and am loth to suspect his coming in by the Window. This Gervase may be said by his Nativity, to stand but on one foot (and that on tip toes) in England, being born on the Sea side, at the mouth of Thames, and therefore no wonder if he quickly convayed himself over into Forraign Parts. He became Courtier and favorite to his Kinsman Otho the fourth Emperour, who con∣ferred on him the Marshal-ship of the Arch-bishoprick of Arles, (which proveth the Imperiall Power in this Age, over some parts of Province,) an office which he excellent∣ly discharged. Though his person was wholly conversant in Forraign Aire, his Pen was chiefly resident on English Earth, writing a Chronicle of our Land, and also adding illustrations to Gffrey Monmouth. He flourished Anno 1210. under King John. ADAM of BARKING (no mean market in this County) was so termed from the Town of his Nativity. Wonder not, that, being born in the East of England, he went West-ward as far as Sherborn (where he was a Benedictine) for his education; it being as usuall in that age for Monkes, as in ours for Husbandmen, to change their soil for the seed, that their grain may give the greater encrease. He was a good Preacher and learned Writer, and surely would have soared higher, if not weighed down with the ignorance of the age he lived in, whose death happened Anno 1216. RALPH of COGSHALL in this County, was first Canon of Barnewell nigh Cam∣bridge, and afterwards turn'd a Cistertian Monke. He was a man Pitz. de script. Angl. Anno 1218. Incredibilis fruga∣litatis & parsimoniae, but withall of great learning and abilities. These qualities com∣mended▪
him to be Abbot of Cogshall (the sixth in order after the first foundation thereof,) where he spent all his spare hours in writing of Chronicles, and especially of additions to Radulphus Niger. Afflicted in health he resigned his place, and died a pri∣vate person about the year 1230. ROGER of WALTHAM was so called from the place of his Nativity. I confess there be many Walthams in England and three in Essex: but as in Herauldry the plain Coat speaks the bearer thereof to be the best of the house, whiles the younger Brethren give their Armes with differences; so I presume that Waltham here without any other ad∣dition, (of Much▪Waltham, Wood-Waltham, &c.) is the Chief in that kind, viz. Waltham in this County within twelve Miles of London, eminent in that Age for a wealthy Abby. The merit of this Roger, being (saith De script. Brit. Cent. 4. p. 302. Bale) tersè, nitidè & eleganter eruditus, endeared him to Fulke Basset Bishop of London, who preferred him Canon of Saint Pauls. He wrot many worthy works, flourishing under King Henry the third, Anno Domini 1250. JOHN GODARD (wherever born) had his best being at Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 11. com∣pared with Pitts in Anno 1250. Cogshall in this County,S. N. where he became a Cistercian Monke. Great was his skill in Arithmetick, and Mathe∣maticks, a Science which had lain long asleep in the World, and now first began to open it's eyes again. He wrot many certain Treatises thereof, and dedicated them un∣to Ralph Abbot of Cogshall. He flourished Anno Dom. 1250. AUBREY de VERE extracted from the right Honorable Earls of Oxford, was born (saith my Bale Num. 13. & Pitz. 1259. Authors) in Bonaclea Villa Trenovantum, Three miles srom Saint Osith, by which direction we find it to be Great Bentley in this County. Now although Sir John Suc∣ling his verses on the right honorable and learned Earl of Monmouth. a witty Gentleman saith, that Noble-men have seldome any thing in Print save their Cloths, yet this Aubrey so applyed his studies, that he wrote a Learned Book of the Eucharist. In his old age he became an Augustinian of Saint Osiths, preferring that before other places, both because of the pleasant retireness thereof, and because his kindred were great Benefactors to that Covent, witness their Donation de septem Mills his Cat. of honour p. 677. Libratis terrae thereunto. This Aubrey, the most learned of all Honorable Persons in that Age, Flourished Anno Domini 1250. THOMAS MALDON was born at J. Bale J. Pitz. Maldon, no mean Market Town in this Coun∣ty, anciently a City of the Romans called Camulodunum. He was afterwards bred in the University of Cambridge, where he Commenced Doctor of Divinity, and got great reputation for his Learning, being a Quick Disputant, Eloquent Preacher, Solid in De∣fining, Subtle in Distinguishing, Clear in Expressing. Hence he was chosen Prior of his own Monastery in Maldon, where he commendably discharged his place till the day of his death, which happened 1404. THOMAS WALDENSIS was son to John and Maud Netter, who declining the Sur∣name of his Parents, took it from Bale de script: Brit. Cent. 7. Num. 84. Walden the noted place in this County of his Na∣tivity; so much are they mistaken, that maintain, that this Waldensis his name was Vuedale, and that he was born in Hant-shire. In some sort he may be termed Anti-Waldensis, being the most professed Enemy to the Wicklevites, who for the main revived and maintained the Doctrine of the Walden∣ses. Being bred a Carmelite in London, and Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, he became a great Champion of, yet Vassall to, the Pope; witness his sordid Complement, consisting of a conjunction, or rather confusion and misapplication of the words of Ruth to Naomi, and David to Goliah. Perge Domine In lib de sacramentis, cap. 17. Papa, perge quò cupis: & ego tecum ubicunque volueris, nec dese∣ram, in Authoritate Dominorum meorum incedam, & in armis eorum pugnabo. He was in high esteem with three succeeding Kings of England, and might have changed his Coul, into what English Miter he pleased, but refused it. Under King Hen∣ry the fourth, he was sent a solemn Embassadour 1410. about taking away the Schism, and advancing an Union in the Church, and pleaded most eloquently before the Pope, and Segismund the Emperour. He was Confssor and Privy▪Councellour to King Henry the fifth, (who died in his Bosome) and whom he taxed for too much lenity to the Wick∣levites, so that we behold the Breath of Waldensis, as the Bellows which Blew up the Coals, for the burning of those Poor Christians in England, under King Henry the sixth,
he was employed to provide at Paris all necessaries for his solemn Coronation, and dying in his journey thether Anno 1430. was buried at Roan. He was 16 years Pro∣vinciall of his Order, throughout all England, and wrot many books against the Wick∣levites. Bale citeth four (all sorraign) Authors, which make him solemnly Sainted, whilst De Ang. script. in Anno 1430▪ Pitzeus more truly and modestly onely affirmeth, that he died, non sine sanctitatis opinione. Indeed, as the Pagans had their Lares and Penates, Dii Minorum Gentium, so possibly this Thomas, (though not publickly Canonized) might pass for a Saint of the lesser Size, in some particular places. Since the Reformation. THOMAS TUSSR was born at Riven-hall in this County, of an ancient family (since extinct) if his own In his hist. at the end of his Boo of Hus∣bandry. pen may be believed. Whlst as yet a Boy he lived in many Schools, Wallingford, Sint Pauls, Eaton, (whence he went to Tinity hall in Cambridge,) when a Man, in Stafford-shire, Suffolk, Northfolk, Cambridge-shire, London, and where not? so that this Stone of Sisiphus could gather no Moss. He was succes∣sively a Musitian, School master, Servingman, Husbandman, Grasier Poet, more skilfull in all, then thriving in any Vcation. He traded at large in Oxen, Sheep, Dairies, Grain of all kinds, to no profit. Whether he bought or sold, he lost, and when a Renter im∣poverished himself, and never inriched his Landlord. Yet hath he laid down excellent Rules in his Book of Husbandry and Houswifery, (so that the Observer thereof must be rich▪) in his own dfence. He spread his Bread with all sorts of Butter, yet none would stick thereon. Yet I hear no man to charge him with any vicious extravagancy, or vi∣sible carelssness, imputing his ill success to some occult cause in Gods counsel. Thus our English , might say with the Poet, ——Monitis sum minor ipse meis, None being better at the Theory, or worse at the Practise of Husbandry. I match him with Thomas -yard, they being mark'd alike in their Poeticall parts, living in the same time, and  alike in their Estates, both low enough I assure you. I cannot find the certain date of his death▪ but collect it to be about 1580. FRANCIS QUARLES Esquire, son to James Quarles Esquire, was born at Swards, in the Parish of Ruford in this County, where his son (as I am inform'd) hath an Estate in expectancy. He was bred in Cambridge, and going over into Ireland, became Secretary to the Reverend James Usher Arch-bishop of Armagh. He was a most ex∣cellent Poet, and had a mind by assed to devotion. Had he been contemporary with Plato, (that great back-friend to Poets,) he would not onely have allowed him to live, but advanced him to an office in his Common wealth. Some Poets, if debarr'd proess, want oness, and Satyricalness, (that they may neither abuse God, themselves, nor their neighbours,) have their tongues cut out in effect. Others onely trade in wit at the second hand, being all for translations, nothing for invention. Our Qarles was free from the fts of the first, as if he had drank of Jordan in stead o Helicon, and slept on mount Olivet for his Pernassus, and was happy in his own invention. His visible Poetry (I mean his Emblems) is excellent, caching therein the eye and fancy at one draught, so that he hath out Aleiated therein, in some mens judgement. His Verses on Job are done to the life, so that the Reader may see his sores, and through the the anguish of his soul. The troubles of Ireland, where his losss were great, forced his return hither, bear∣ing his crosses with great patience; so tha (according to the advice of Saint Hierome,) Verba vertebat in opera, and practiced the Job he had described, dying about the year 1643. JOSEPH MEDE was born in this County, a little east of Bishop-Startford. Men in cripture generally are notified by their Fathers, as Johnadab the Son of Rechab, Si∣mon the Son of Jona. Some few are described by their Sons, as Simon of Cyren, the Father of Mark 15. 2. Alexander and Rufus, wherein it is presumed that their Sons were most
eminent, and their Branches not known by the Root, but the Root by the Branches. Such the case here, where the Parents obscure in themselves, may hereafter be known for having Joseph Mede to their Son. He was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, where he attained to great Learning by his own industry. R. was Shiboleth unto him, which he could not easily pronounce, so that a set-speech cost him the double pains to another man, being to fit words as well to his Mouth as his Matter. Yet by his Industry and Observation, He so conquered his Imperfection, that though in private discourse, he often smiled out his stammering into silence, yet chusing his words, he made many an excellent Sermon, without any consi∣derable Hesitation. The first fruits of his Eminent Studies, was a written Treatise, de sanctitate Relati∣va, which he presented to Bishop Andrews, who besteded him with the Kings favour, when his election into his Fellow-ship met with some opposition. He afterwards be∣came an Excellent Linguist, Curious Mathematician, Exact Text-man; happy in make∣ing Scripture to expound it self by Parallel places. He was charitable to poor people with his Almes, and to all people with his candid censure. Of one who constantly kept his Cell, (so he called his Chamber) none Travailed of∣tener and farther over all Christendome. For things past he was a Perfect Historian; for things present, a Judicious Novilant; and for things to come, a Prudentiall (not to say Propheticall) Conjecturer. To his private friends he would often insist on the place of Scripture, Judges 3. 30. and the land had a rest Four score years, which was the longest term of Peace which he ever observed the Church of God to enjoy, after which many troubles did ensue. And seeing the same lease of Halcion days was expired in England since the first of Queen Elizabeth, he grievously suspected some strange Concussion in Church and State, which came to pass accordingly. I confess his Memory hath suffered much in many mens Judgements, for being so great a Fauter of the fancifull opinion of the Millenaries. Yet none can deny but that much is found in the Ancient fathers tending that way. Be∣sides, I dare boldy say, that the furious Factors for the fift Monarchy hath driven that Nail which Master Mede did first enter, farther then he ever intended it, and doing it with such violence, that they split the truths round about it. Thus when ignorance begins to build on that Foundation, which learning hath laid, no wonder if there be no Uniformity in such a Mungrell Fabrick. He died in the fifty third year of his age Anno Domini 1638. leaving the Main of his Estate to the Colledge, about the value of 300l. a large sum to Issue out of the purse of a Scholar. Benefactors to the Publick. RICHAED BADEW born of a Knightly family at R. Parker in Sceletos Canta∣brigiensis in manuscript. Great Badew▪ (commonly called Great Baddow nigh Chelmesford,) was bred in the University of Cambridge. He so pro∣fited in literature, that by generall consent Anno 1326. the Scholars therein chose him their Chancellour; in which year this Richard purchased two Tenements in Milne∣street, and in their place erected a small Colledge, by the name of University-hall, wherein Scholars living under a Principall had their Chambers gratis, (a great favour in that age) though otherwise maintaining themselves on their own expences. Sixteen years after by a sad accident this Colledge was casually burnt down to the ground, whereupon Doctor Badew with the consent of the University resigned all his interest therein, into the hands of Elizabeth Countess of Clare, who fayrely refounded this Colledge as in See Suffolk in the title of Benefactours. due place here after God willing shall be related. Since the Reformation. WALTER MILDMEY Knight, was born at Chelmesford in this County, where he was a younger Son to Thomas Mildmey Esquire. He was bred in Christs-Colledge in Cambridge, where he did not (as many young Gentlemen) study only in Complement, but seriously applyed himself to his book. Under King Henry the eighth and King Edward the sixth, he had a gainfull Office in the Court of Augmentations during the Raign of Queen Mary, he practised the po∣litick precept, Bene vixit qui bene Latuit. No sooner came Queen Elizabeth to the
Crown, but he was called to State-imployment, and it was not long before he was made Chancellour of the Exchequer. It is observed, that the Exchequer never fareth ill, but under a good Prince; such who  of Conscience will not oppress their people, whilst Tyrants pass not for what they  out of their Subjects. Indeed Queen Elizabeth was very carefull not to have her Coffer swell'd with the Consvmption of her Kingdom, and had Consciencious Officers under Her, amongst whom Sir  was a principall. This Knight sensible of Gods blessing on his Estate and knowing that, Omne Bene∣ficium requirit Officium, cast about to make his return to God. He began with his Be∣ to Christs▪ Colledge in Cambridge, only to put his hand into practise, then his bounty embraced the generous resolution (which the painfull piety of St. Paul  to himself, viz.) not to build on another mans foundation, but on his own  he  a new Colledge in Cambridge by the name of Emanuel. A right Godly Gentleman he was, though some of his baek friends suggested to the Queen,  he was a better  then Subject, and that he was over-popular in Parliaments, insomuch, that his life did set Sub nubeculd under a Cloud of the Royal displeasure. Yet was not the Cloud so great, but that the beams of his Innocence,  those of the  ▪ had easily dispelled it, had he survived longer, as appeared by the great grief the Queen professed for the loss of so grave a Councel∣our, who leaving -Sons and three▪ Daughters; dyed Anno Dom. 1589. PETRE, Daughter to Sir William Petre Secretary of State, and Sister to Iohn Lord Petre was certainly born in this County, but uncertain whether at ,  or Engerstone, three fair houses in Essex of that wealthy family. Thus variety of habitations  the nativities of great persons doubtfull, whilest we are led with more assurance to the cradles of meaner people. She was marryed to Nicholas Wadham of Merrifield in -shire Esq. We read of1 Kings 2. 25. Ahab▪ that he sold himself to work wiekedness, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up: but this worthy man gave himself over to all actions of bounty and charity, whom, his Wife answering her name (A gift of God indeed) encouraged therein. He founded, she finished, both  endowed Wadham Colledge in Oxford, by whose joynt bounty it is become as rich as most, more uniform than any Colledge in England. THOMAS EDEN D.L. was born in the South-part of Sudberry within this County, where his Name and Family are continued in a Worshipfull degree in Ballington Hall. He was bred Fellow and then Master of Trinity Hall in Cambridge, a singular good Advocate, Chancellour of Ely, Commissary of  and Westminster, Professor of Law in Gresham∣Colledge, &c. But leaving his ability in his own Profession to be praised by others, his Charity here comes under our Cognizance, who bestowed one thousand pounds on Trinity Hall, therewith purchasing Lands to maintain Wax Candles in the Chappel, an Annual Com∣memoration with a Latin Speech, and other excellent Benefactions. He dyed Anno ∣moni 164. leaving a considerable Estate, and making Mr. Iames Bunce Alderman of London his Executor (though an utter stranger unto him) on this occasion. The Al∣derman repaired to him for his Advice on a Will wherein he was Executor, desiring from him the true meaning of a Clause therein: the Doctor returned that the Passage in Question was equally capable of two several senses; but tell me (said Mr. ) what do you believe in your Conscience was the very mind of the Testator, being my Resolu∣tion to perform it what ever it cost me. A Speech which stayed with the Doctor after the Speaker thereof was departed, making such impression in his spirit; that hence he concluded the Alderman a  Person, and deputed him the Executor to his own Will. I am informed that since the Doctors death, a Match hath been made between their nearest Relations. Memorable Persons. MATILDA FITZ▪ WALTER, by some surnamed The Faire; by others▪ The Chast; (qualities admirable when united) was Daughter to that  Knight
Sir Robert Fitz Walter, of Woodham▪ Fitz▪ Walter in this County of whomIn the title of Souldiers. before. Some would perswade us, that as the Trojan-war was occasioned by Helena in re∣venge of her wantonness: so the Barons-war, in the Raign of King Iohn by this Ma∣tilda, in reward of her chastity, which the King in vain did assault; though surely the same was too private and personal to cause a national ingagement; especially the fact being only attempted, not effected. The King banishing her father beyond the Seas (in hope by his absence the  to compass his desire) renued his  with more earnestness, and the same success. For Matilda still answered her Anagram, Tal Maid, both in stature and  of her vertuous resolution; till at last the King, quia noluit consentireAbstract of the Chron▪ of Dunm. in Bib∣lioth. Cottón. toxicavit , procu∣ring one to poyson her in a poach'd egge; meat which in the shell may safely be eaten after a , out of it, not after a malicious hand. I much admire she was not made a Saint, (a dignity in those dayes conferr'd on some of less desert) and conceive she had surely been Sainted  , and found the less favour for being no Votarie, but a Virgin at large. She was murdered 1213. and ly∣eth buryed betwixt two pillars in the Quire of Little-Dunmo-Church. I have nothing to adde to this story, save to observe that he who procured her poysoning in her , was poysoned in his own drink afterwards. SIMON LYNCH, Son of William Lynch Gentleman, was born at Groves in the Parish of  in , . 1562▪ bred a Student in Queens Colledge in Cambridge, and afterwards Bishop Aylmere his kinsman bestowed on him a small living (then not worth above 40. per ) at North Weale nigh Epping  this County, and ∣ly said unto him, Play Cousin with this a while, till a better comes. But Mr. Lynch conti∣nued therein (the first and last place of his Ministry) sixty four years. The Bishop ∣terwards  him Brent-Wood Weale, three times better  North-, to whom Mr. Lynch (to use his own words) return'd this answer, That he  the weal of his  souls before any other weal whatsoever. He lived sixty one years in wedlock with Elizabeth eane his wife. He was an excellent house keeper,  yet provided well for his ten children. He was buryed at North-Wale Annò . 1656 Lord Mayors. Name Place Company Time 1 William Edwards William Edwards Hoton Grocer 1471 2 Robert Basset Robert Basset Billenkei Salter 1475 3 Iohn Shaa Iohn Shaa Rochford Goldsmith 1501 4 Laurence Aylmer Draper 1507 5 William Baily Iohn Thackstead Draper 1524 6  Allen Richard Thackstead Mercer 1525 7 Richard Martin Thomas Martin Saffron Walden Goldsmith 1593 8 Thomas Skinner Walden Clothworker 1596 9  Dean George Deane MuchdunMowe Skinner. 1628 The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the  year of King Henry the sixth 1433. Ralph Bishop of London or his  generall, the Bishop being absent beyond the . Commissioners to take the Iohn Earl of Oxford. Henry  Chivaler. Knights for the Shire. Iohn Tyrill Chivaler. Knights for the Shire. Ioh. Mongom. chiv. Nich. Thorle, chiv. . , chiv. Edm. Benst. chiv. Ioh. Fitz-Sim. chiv. Will. Golingh. chiv. Ludov. Ioh. ar. Ioh , ar. Rob. Darey, ar. Tho. , ar. Edvar. Torell, ar. Will. , ar.
Tho. Rolf. Ioh. Teye, arm. Tho. Knevet, ar. Hen. Langley, ar. Georgii Langham ar. Ricardi Fox, ar. Ioh. Helyon ar. Tho. Batyll, ar. Tho. Henenyngh. ar. Ioh. Godmanston, ar. Rob. Hunte, ar. Ioh. Leventhorp, jun. arm. Tho. Barington, ar. Tho. Pynthon, ar. Tho. Pykenham, ar. Galf. Robell, ar. Hen. Chateron, ar. Tho. Storkedale, ar. Will. Senklere, ar. Ioh. Godeston, ar. Rogeri Spyce, ar. Tho. Bendysh, ar. Hug. Nayllingh. ar. Tho. Rigedon Ricardi Priour Ioh. Green Ioh. Basset Rogeri Deyncourt Ioh. Poynes Ioh. Santon Ioh Malton Tho. Basset Ioh. Walchif Edm. Prest on Rob. Sudbury Ioh. Baryngton Wll. Ardale Nich. Mortimer Hen. Aleyn Rob. Weston Ioh. Chamber Tho. Chittern Will. Aleyn Ioh. Beche Rob. Priur Ballivi Burgi Colcesteri Rich. Beamond Will. Gorge Balivi Burgi de Maldon Rob. Simond de Hat∣field Tho. Hardekyn Tho. Mullyng Ioh. Gale de Farn∣ham Ioh. Stodehawe Tho. Aldres Egidii Lucas Ioh. Stanford Rob. Wade Tho. Blosme Will. Gaton Rob. Wright de Thur∣rok. Ioh. Barowe Rob. Brook de Ded∣ham Ioh. Stephnede de Elmestede Tho. Andrew Rich. Dykeleygh Will. Cony Ioh. Rouchestre Ioh. Marlere Rob. de Bury Tho. Stanes Ioh. à Benham de Witham Rich. Jocep Ioh. Berdefeld Tho. Brentys Tho. Selers Ioh. Boreham Rob. Seburgh Hen. Maldon Ioh. Caweston Th. Mars. de Dunmow. Ioh. Hereward de Thapstede Ioh. Fil. Will. Atte Fan▪ de eadem Reg. Bienge de eadem Walt. Goodmay Will. Spaldyng Hug. Dorsete Rich. Atte More Radul. Bonyngdon Tho. Barete Radul. de Uphavering Ioh. Gobyon Will. Scargoyll Ioh. Shyunyng VVill. Higham Ioh. Riche Ioh. Veyle senioris Ioh. Hicheman Edm. Botere Ioh. VVestle VVill. Admond Ioh. Campion Rich. Sewale VValt. Tybenham Ioh. Marshant de Pel∣don Rich. Eylotte Ioh. Baderok Ioh. VVayte de Bran∣ketre Ioh. Parke de Gest∣myngthorp Will. Manwode Hen. Hoberd Rog. Passelewe Will. Atte Cherche Will. Reynold Ioh. Sailler Rich. Billingburgh Allani Bushe Ioh. Wormele Ioh. Glyne Rob. Ferthyng Mart. Stainer Rob. Beterythe Rob. Smyth de Waltham. Observations. Some part of this County lyeth so near London, that the sound of Bow-bell (befriend∣ed with te wind) may be heard into it. A Bell that ringeth the Funerall Knell to the ancient Gentry, who are more healthfull and longer-liv'd in Counties at greater di∣stance from the City. R. Bishop of London being absent beyond the Seas, was Robert Fitz-Hugh, who was twice sent Goodwin in his Catalogue of Bishops. Embassadour into Germany, and once unto the Pope. John Earl of Ox∣ford, was John de Vere second of that name, and eleventh Earl of Oxford; beheaded af∣terwards Anno 1462. in the fifth of King Edward the fourth for his Loyalty to the House of Lancaster. HENRY BOURCHIER] Here additioned Chivaler, appears by all proportion of time and place the self same person, who marryed Elizabeth sister to ichard Plantaganet Duke of York, and who by his Nephew King Edward the fourth was created Earl of Essex▪ He dyed an aged person 1483▪ I conceive that his Father William Lord Bourchier (Earl of Ewe in Normandy) was living when this Henry Bourchier was chosen Knight for the shire; a place usually conferred on the Eldest Sons of Peers, in the life-time of their Fathers. JOHN TERYLL Chivaler] Was chief of that family, rich andnumerous in this County, of exemplary note and principall regard. Great Thorndon was the place of their sepulture, where their Mo∣numents
to the Church, both ruinous. This name (if still alive) lies gasping in this County, but continuing healthull in Buchingham shire. JOHN MOUNTGOMERY, Chivaler.] I find him Supervisor to the Will of Sir Robert Darcy, Anno 1469. and conceive that Surname since utterly extinct. MAURICE BRUYN, Chivaler.] He had his seat at South-Okenton. From the two heirs generall of this family often mar∣ried, Charles Branden Duke of Suffolk, the Tirells, Berners, Harlestons, Heveninghams, and others are descended. A branch of the Heir-male removed into Hant-shire, since in∣to Dorset-shire, where they subsist in a right Worshipfull equipage. WILLIAM GOLDINGHAM, Chivaler.] Though the great tree be blasted, a small sprig thereof still sprouteth in this County. JOHN DOREWARD, Esq.] He lived at Bocking-Doreward, in this County, and was Patron of the rich Parsonage therein, which no ingenious person will envy to the worthy Incumbent Doctor John Gauden. This John Doreward lieth buried in the Church with this inscription, Hic jacet Johannes Doreward Armiger, qui obiit xxx. die Januar. Anno Domini Mil. cccc. lxv. & Blancha uxor ejus quae obiit... die Mens... Anno Dom. Mil. cccc. lx. quorum animabus propitietur Deus, Amen. Claviger Aethereus nobis sit janitor almus. ROBERT DARCY, Ar.] An ancient name in this County, having Danbury (whilst living) for their residence; and the Church in Maldon (when dead) for their Sepulture, where there be many of their shamefully defaced Monuments. This Robert Darcy afterwards Knighted, by his Will made the fifth of October 1469. bequeathed his body to be buried in Alhallows-church in Maldon before the Alter, where his father lyed in a Tombe of Marble. He willed that forty marks should be disposed for Two thousand Masses (four pnce a Masse) to be said for his soul, an the souls of his Relations, within six weeks after his discease; willing also that every Priest in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, should have a share of that money, &c. He made Eli∣zabeth his Wife, and others his Executors: the Earl of Essex, the Lord Dinham, Thomas Mountgomery, Thomas Terryll, supervisors of his Will, beseeching them to help his Son Thomas and all his children. He willed the Earl of Essex and the Lord Dinham should have a Butt of Malmsy, Sir Thomas Mountgomery and Sir Thomas Terryll a Pipe of Red wine for their pains. Thomas Darcy his son, Esquire of the body to King Henry the sixth and Edward the fourth, married Margaret, one of the Dughters and Heirs of John Harelton of Suffolk, Esquire. He dyed 25. of September 1485. as appears by his Epitaph on his Tombe in the Church aforesaid. HENRY LANGLEY, Esq.] He lived at Langley-Wilebores in the Parish of Rickling, in the Church whereof he lyeth buried with this Inscription, Hic jacet Henricus Langley, Armiger, qui obiit xx. Septemb. M. cccc. lviii. & Margareta uxor ejus una filiarum, & Haredum Johannis Waldene, Armiger. quae obiit v. Martii M. cccc. liii. There is in the same Church a Monument for his Son, the more remarkable, because the last of his Family. Here lyeth Henry Langley, Esq. and dame Catherine his wife, which Henry de∣parted this life, ii. April M. cccc. lxxxviii. and Dame Katherine died.... the year of our Lord God M...... It is not usuall for the wife of an Esq. to be styled Dame, except she was daughter
to an Earl, or Relict to a Knight. This Hnry left three daughters, (portracted on his Marble Tombe) betwixt whom his Inheritance was divided. THOMAS HENENINGHAM,] His family flourisheth in Norfolk. JOHANNES LEVENTHORP, Jun. Ar.] His posterity flourisheth in Hertford-shire. THOMAS BARYNGTON, Ar.] He lived at Barington-hall in the Parish of Hatfield-Brad-Oake, and lyeth buried in the Church with this Inscription. Hic jacent Thomas Barington, Armig. & Anna uxor ejus, qui quidem Thomas obiit v. Aprilis M. cccc. lxxii. & Anna proximo die sequenti, quorum Anima∣bus propitietur Altissimus. See here a sympathizing wife, dying the next day after her husband, of whom it may be said, He first deceas▪d, he for few hours try'd To live without him, lik'd it not, and dy'd. The family is of signall nativity, enriched with large possessions in the raign of King Stephen, by the Barons of Montfitchet; and since received an accession of honour and estate, by marrying with Winifred, daughter and co-heir of Henry Pole Lord Montague, son of Margaret Plantagenet Countess of Salisbury, descended of the bloud Royall. At this day there is a Baronet thereof, with other branches of good account. THOMAS BENDYSH, Ar.] Bomsted in this County was and is the habitation of his Family. EGIDIUS LUCAS.] The name is honourable at this day, and hath a seat with fair possessions near Colchester, but how related to this Giles, I know not. Sure I am, that it appeareth on a window, in the North-side of the Church of Saxham-parva in Suffolk, that Anno Domini 1428. (five years before this return of Gentry) one Thomas Lucas (kneeling there with his wife in their Coat-Armours) was Servant, Secretary and one of the Council, to Jasper Duke of Bedford and Earl of Pembroke. THOMAS BARRET,] Was an Esquire of signall note, and the ensuing nameless Exemplefied in Weavers Fu∣nerall Monu∣ments pa. 417. Manuscript will acquaint us with the Time of his death, Thomas Barryt Squr to Kyng Harry the sixt, oftentimes imployed in the French warrs, under the command of John Du of Bedford; as also John Duc of Norfolk, being alway trew leige man to his Soveraign Lord the King; having taken Sanctuary at Westminstre to shon the fury of his and the Kings enemyes, was from these hayled forth, and lamentably hewyn a peces, about whilke tym or a lityl before, the Lord Skales late in an evening entrying a Wherry Bolt with three persons, and rawghing toowards Westminstre, there likewise too have taken Sanctu∣ary, was discride by a woman, where anon, the wherry man fell on him, murthered him, and cast his mangled corpes alond by Saint Marie Overys. As for the date of his death, we may learn it out of his Epitaph on his Tombe in the Church of Saint Martins in the fields London. Hic jacet Thomas Barret prenobilis Armiger, qui quidem Thomas erat abstractus de sanctuario Beati Petri Westmonasterii, & crudeliter Interfectus per manus Impiorum contra Leges Anglie, & totius universalis Ecclesie privilegia & jura, Anno Domini 1461. & Anno Illustrissimi Regis Edward. quarti post conquestum primo. Sub eodm quoque marmoreo Lapide Johannes Barret ejusdem Thome primogenitus sepelitur, qui quidem Johannes obiit..... die..... Anno....
This family of the Barrets received much wealth by the daughter and heir of Bell house, of Bellhouse (an ancient and fair seat in the Parish of Avely in this County) and some few years since determined in Sir Edward Barret Knight, Lord Baron of Newburg in Scotland, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, A Hospitall house-keeper, and founder of an Almes-house in Avely aforesaid. He adopted Lennard Esquire (son to the Lord Dacres by the daughter of the Lord North,) heir to his estate, on condition he should assume the Surname of Barret. Sheriffs of Essex and Herford shire. HEN. II. Anno 1 Rich. Basset & Albericus de Verr. Anno 2 Rich. de Lucy. Anno 3 Mauricus Anno 4 Anno 5 Mauricus de Tireter, for 5 years. Anno 10 Tullus-Bovilla Anno 11 Nich. Decanus, for 4 years. Anno 15 Nich. Decanus & Steph. de Bell. Campo dimid. Anno Anno 16 Rob. Mantellus, for 12 years. Anno 28 Oto. filius Willielm. for 6 years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Oto. filius Willielm. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Galf. filius Petri Anno 4 Galf. filius Petri & Rich. Heriett Anno 5 Anno 6 Galf. filius Petri & Simon. Pateshalla Anno 7 Will. de Long. Campo. Canc. Dom. Regis Anno 8 Reginall. de Argento. Anno 9 Regind. de Argent▪ & Hug. de Nevil. & Hum. de Bar∣ton. Anno 10 Hugo de Nevill & Iohan. de Nevill JOHAN. REX. Anno 1 Hugo. de Nevill & Iohan. de Nevill Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rich. de Montfitchet & Ioh. de Cornheard Anno 4 Rich. de Montfitchet Anno 5 Rich. de Montfitchet & Ioh. de Cornheard Anno 6 Math. Mantell Com. for 4 years. Anno 10 Ioh. Mantell Anno 11 Albic. Willielm▪ filius Ful∣conis Anno 11 Comes. Albericus & Idem Willielm. for 4 years. Anno 16 Math. Mantell & Galf. Roinges Anno 17 Rob. Mantell fr. & H. Matheus Mantell HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. Marescallus & Ioh. de Cornerd Anno 3 Walt. de Udon Anno 4 Rob. Mantell Anno 5 Steph. de Segne & Ra. filius Reginal. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Steph. de Segne & Petr. de S•o Edward. Anno 8 Rich. de Argentoem▪ & Will. de Culcword, for 9 years. Anno 17 Rob. de Walsh Anno 18 Will. de Hollewell Anno 19 Will. de Coleworth Anno 20 Petr. de Tany for 4 years. Anno 24 Bartr. de Crioll Anno 25 Ioh. de Walton Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Rich. de Munfitchet, for 4 years. Anno 31 Will. filius Regind. for 4 years. Anno 35 Rich. de Whitsand Anno 36 Hen. de Helegton Anno 37 Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Rad. de Ardene Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Tho. de Cameden Anno 42 Hub. de Monte Cam. Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Rich. de Taney Anno 45 Rich. de Taney & Math. de la Mare Anno 46 Math. de la Mare Anno 47 dem. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Nich. le Epigornell Anno 50 Nich. de Sathrich Anno 51 Idem. Anno 52 Idem. Anno 53 Ioh. de Kammell & Walt▪ de Essex. Anno 54 Will. de Blunvill Anno 55 Idem. Anno 56 Walt. de Essex EDW. I. Anno 1 Walt. de Essex Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Tho. de Sandivic. Anno 4 Laur. de Scio Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Will. de San. Caro Anno 8 Regin. de Ginges for  years. Anno 13 Idem & Will. de Lamburne Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Hugo. de Blound Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Rad. de Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Hen. Grapill Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Will. le Grose Anno 22 Will. de Suton Anno 23 Idem.
Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Simon. de Bradenham Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Ioh. de Le Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Will. de Harpden Anno 31 Ioh. de Bassenburne Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Ioh. de la Le Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Ioh. de Harpessend EDW. II. Anno 1 Walt. de Bauds Anno 2 Alanus de Goldingham Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Gafr. de la Le, & Ioh. de la Hay Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Ioh. Aignell Anno 7 Ioh. Ward de Hoo Anno 8 Rich. Perers, for 4 years. Anno 12 Iohan. de Vouret & Rad. Giffard Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Nich Engayn Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Adam. Frances Anno 17 Tho. Gobium Anno 18 Rich. de Perers Anno 19 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Rich. Perers Anno 2 Will. Baud Anno 3 Rich. de Perers. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Ioh. de Wanton Anno 6 Ioh. de la Hay & Ioh. de Wanton Anno 7 Ioh. de la Hay & Adam de Bloy Anno 8 Will. Baud & Adam Bloy Anno 9 Ioh. de Coggeshall, for 5 years. Anno 14 Idem, & Will. de Wan∣ton Anno 15 Will. Atte Moore Anno 16 Hen. Gernet Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Ioh. de Cogeshall Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Ioh. de Cogeshall, for 4 years. Anno 24 Pet. de Boxstede Anno 25 Tho. Lacy Anno 26 Ioh. de Cogeshall Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Hugo. Fitz Simond Anno 30 Will. de Enefeld Anno 31 Tho. de Chabham Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Roger. le Louth Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Hugo. Blount Anno 36 Will. de Leyre Anno 37 Guido. de Boys Anno 38 Tho. Fittling Anno 39 Ioh. Iernoun Anno 40 Tho. de Helpeston Anno 41 Ioh. Oliver Anno 42 Tho. Chardlowe Anno 43 Ioh. Heuxteworth Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Tho. Basingborn Anno 46 Will. Baud Anno 47 Ioh. de Broumpton Anno 48 Ioh. Filiol Anno 49 Edw. Fitz Simond Anno 50 Ioh. Battail Anno 51 Rob. Fitz Williams Richard I. 7 WILL. de LONGO CAMPO CANCELLARIUS DOMINI REGIS.] This is that insolent Bishop of Ely, our Chroniclers having so much anger at his pride, and no pity at his downfall. He seems a Riddle to me, who was Lord∣Chancellour of England, (a Norman by birth) and could not speak a word of Godwin in Ep Elien. Ang∣licanae linguae omninoignarus. English. It seems Chancery-suits in that age were penned and pleaded in French. King John. 1 HUGO. de NEVIL, & JOHAN. de NEVIL.] Hugh was he who attended King Richard the first, and slew a Lyon in the Holy∣land; a great Benefactour to Waltham-Abby, in which Church, he was Mat. Paris Anno . bu∣ried. John was his son, to whom Mat. Ad Annum 1245. Paris giveth this testimony, Non ultimus inter Angliae nobiles patris sui pedetentim seques vestigia. These worthy persons in my Ecclesiasticall History I mistook for the Ancestors of (who were but the allies to) the honourable family of the Nevills, being since informed, that the issue-male of this Hugh and John is long since extinct. Edward II. 1 WALTER de BAUD.] This ill-sounding-surname, is both ancient and honorable. Verstgan in names of Con∣temp. Some do deduce it from Baden a Marquisate in Germany, and most sure it is, that they here have flourished 12. Generations, as followeth.
1. Sir Weavers Fun Mon. pag. 602. Simon Baud or Bauld Knight, died in the Holy-land, 1174. 2. Sir Nicholas Baud Knight, died in Galli∣cia in Spain, 1189. 3. Sir Walter Baud Knight, died at Coring∣ham (in this County,) 1216. 4. Sir William Baud Knight, died at Co∣ringham, 1270. 5. Sir Walter de Baud Sheriff this year, died at Coringham, 1310. 6. Sir William de Baud died at Coringham, 1343. 7. Sir John de Baud Knight, died in Gas∣coigne 1346. 8. Sir William de Baud Knight, died at Hadham-parva, 1375. thrice Sheriff un∣der King Edward the third. 9. Thomas Baud, (the first Esq. of his line) died at Hadham aforesaid 1420. 10 Thomas Baud, the second Esq. died at Hadham, 1449. he was Sheriff in the 25. of King Henry the sixth. 11. Sir Thomas Baud Knight, died in Lon∣don, 1500. 12. John Baud Esq. died at Coringham, 1550. The Bauds held land in this County, of the Dean and Chapter of Saint Pauls, by paying a Fee-Buck and Doe in their seasons. They were brought (alive, as I take it) in Procession to the High-altar in the Church, where the Dean and Chapter met them, apparalled in Copes (embroydered with Bucks and Does, the gift of the Bauds to their Church) with garlands of Roses on their heads, and then the Keeper who brought them Stows Survey of London in Faringdon∣ward. blowed their deaths, which was answered by the Company of Horners in Lon∣don, resounding the same. Other ceremonies were used better befitting their Mouths, who cried out Acts 19. 28. Great is Diana of the Ephesians, then the Ministers of the Gospell. Some seem'd to excuse it as done in commemoration of the property of that place Camdens Brit. in Middlesex. altered to a Christian-church, from a Temple of Diana. I suspect the Bauds extinct in Essex, and understand them extant in Northamton-shire. Sheriffs of Essex and Hertford-shire. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Rob. Goldington   Argent, 2 Lions passant Azure. 2 Ioh. Fitz-Simonds   Argent, 3 Escoucheons Gules. 3 Edw. Bensted     4 Ioh. Seawale   S. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Gadd∣bees Argent. 5 Will. Godmanston     6 Galf. de Dersham     7 Tho. Battaile   G. a Griffon Sergriant within a border engrailed Or. 8 Ioh. Walton   Argent, a flower de luce G. 9 Galf. Brockhole     10 Ioh. Rigwin     11 Idem.     12 Hen. English     13 Walt. atte Lee     14 Galf. Michell     15 Will. Cogeshall, m. Cogshal Arg. a Cross between 4 Escalops Sable. 16 Adam. Frances     17 Tho. Cogeshall ut prius   18 Tho. Sampkin     19 Will Bateman   Sab. 3 Lions Dormant Argent. 20 Idem. ut prius   21 Idem. ut prius   22 Idem. ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Edw. Bensted     2 Ioh. Heward, & Will. Marvy     3 Helmingus Legett   Ermine, a Lion ramp. Gules. 4 Tho. Swinborn   Gul. 3 boars-heads couped and Crusyle of Crosses Argent. 5 Idem. ut prius   6 Edw. Bensted     7 Gerar, Braibrooke   . 6 Mascells conjoyned, 3, 2. and 1. Gules. 8 Elming. Legett ut prius   9 Will. Loveney     10 Ioh. Walden     11 Tho. Aston   Per Fess Arg. and Sa. in Fess 2 flower de luces, lying each to other betw. 3 Mullets counter∣changed. 12 Will. Cogeshall ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno     1 Ioh. Tirrel Heron Arg. 2 Cheverons Az. within a border engrailed G, 2 Ioh. Hayward, mil.     3 Tho. Barre, mil.     4 Lodow. Johan.     5 Regin. Malyns     6 Ioh. Haward, mil.     7 Rob. Darcy Danbury Argent, 3 Cinquefoiles Gules 8 Lodov John.     s9 Idem, & Will. Loveny     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Ioh. Tirrell ut prius   2 Maur. Bruyn, mil: S. Okentō Azure, a Cross Molin Or. 3 Ioh. Barley   Ermine, 3 Barrs wavey Sable. 4 Ioh. Doreward Bocking   5 Conandus Aske     6 Tho. Tirrell ut prius   7 Ioh. Hotoft     8 Nich. Rikhull     9 Hen. Langley Rickling   10 Nich. Thorley, mil.     11 Ioh. Durward     12 Rob. Whittington     13 Galf. Rokhill     14 Maur. Bruyn, mil. ut prius  
15 Edw. Tirrell ut prius   16 Rich. Alread     17 Rob. Whittington     18 Rich. Whitherton     19 Ioh. Tirrell ut prius   20 Rad. Astley     1 Nich Morley   Arg. a Lion ramp. S. Crown'd 'Or. 22 Ioh. Hende     23 Tho. Tirrell ut prius   24 Tho. Pigot     25 Tho. Baud Coringham Gules, 3 Cheverons Argent. 26 Ioh. Hende, jun.     27 Geo. Langham   Arg. a Fess G. and a Label of 3 points Az. 28 Galf. Rockhill     29 Phil. Bottiller Wood-hall Gu. a Fess compone Ag. and S. betwixt 6 Crosses croslets O, 30 Tho. Barington, ar. Barringtō-h. Arg. 3 Cheverons Gul. a Label of 3 points Azure. 31 Ioh. Godmanston     32 Tho. Cobham, mil.     33 Hum. Bahun     34 Rich. Bothe     35 Ioh. Hnde, jun.     36 Lodovi. Jon     37 Rad. Darcy ut prius   38 Tho. Tirrell, mil. ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Tho. Ju     2 Tho. Langley, ar.     3 Idem.     4 Ioh. Clay, mil.     5 Rog. Ree, ar.     6 La. Rainford, mil.     7 Hen. Barley, ar. ut prius   8 Will. Firlon, mil.     9 Walt. Writell, ar.     10 Rad Bamde, ar.     11 Walt. Writell, ar.     12 Rog. Ree, mil.     13 Alur. Cornbrugh, ar.     14 Ioh. Sturgion, ar.     15 Rich. Hant, ar.     16 Hen. Langley, ar.     17 Will. Green, ar.   Arg. a Cross ingrailed Gules. 18 Alur. Cornburgh     19 Ioh. Wode     20 Ioh. Sturgion     21 Tho. Tirrell ut prius   22 Ioh. Fortescu, ar.   Azu. a Bend Engrailed Argent Cotissed Or. RICH. III.     Anno     1 Will. Say   Quarterly Or and Gules. 2 Ioh. Sturgeon     3 Rob. Percy, mil. & Ioh. Fotelcu, mil. ut prius   HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Fortescu, mil. ut prius   2 Hen. Marny, ar.   Gul. a Lion ramp. gardant Arg. 3 Will Pirton, mil.   Ermine. on a Cheveron ingrailed Az. 3 Leopards-heads Or. 4 Hen. Teye, ar.   Arg. a Fess betw. 3 Marets in Chief, and a Chev. in base Az. 5 Ioh Bottiler, ar. ut prius   6 Rob. Turbervile DORSE. Ermin a Lion ramp. G. Crowd Or. 7 Ioh. Berdefeild, ar.     8 Hen. Marny ut prius   9 Rich. Fitz-Lewis, m. Thorndō E. Sab. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Tre∣foiles Arg. 10 Rob Plummer     11 Will. Pulter Hitching Argent, a Bend voided Sable. 12 Rob. Newport, ar. PethāFurnis   13 Tho. Perient, ar. Diggswell Gules, 3 Cresents Argent. 14 Ioh. Verney, mil.   Az. on a Cross Arg. 5 Mullets G. 15 Rog. Wentworth, m.   Sa. a Chev. betwixt 3 Leopards∣heads Or. 16 Hen. Teye, mil. ut prius   17 Will. Pirton, ar. ut prius   18 Hum. Torrell, ar.   G. 3 Bulls-heads Couped Or. 19 Will. Skipwith, ar. LINCO. Arg. 3 Barrs G. in Chief a Grey∣hound cursant S. 20 Idem. ut prius   21 Rob. Darcy, ar. ut prius   22 Ioh. Broket, ar. Brocket-ha. Or, a Cross Patonce Sable. 23 Idem. ut prius   24 Hum. Torell, ar. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Levinthorpe, ar.   Arg. a bend Gobonated G. & S. betw. 2 Cotisses of the second. 2 Will. Litton, ar. Kebworth Ermin, on a chief indented Az. 3 crowns Ducal Or. 3 Anth. Darcy, ar. ut prius   4 Edw. Tirrell, ar. ut prius   5 Ioh. Seintler, ar.     6 Will. Fitz-Williams   Lozeng, Argent and Gules. 7 Ioh Veer, ar.   Quarterly G. and Or in the first a Mullet Argent. 8 Wist. Browne, mil.     9 Tho Tirrell, mil. ut prius   10 Ioh Cut, mil.   Arg. on a Bend ingrailed Sa. 3 plates. 11 Ioh. Veer, mil. ut prius   12 Tho. Bonham, ar.     13 Tho. Teye, mil. ut prius   14 Ioh. Christmas, ar.     15 Hen. Barley, ar. ut prius   16 Ioh. Veer, mil. ut prius   17 Tho Leventhorp, ar. ut prius   18 Tho. Bonham, ar.     19 Edw. Tirrell, ar. ut prius   20 Egid. Capell, mil. Hadham G. a Lion ramp. betwixt 3 Crosses Botonie Fitchie Or. 21 Ioh. Bollis, ar. Wallingtōh. Arg. on a Cheveron betwixt 3 Boars-heads Cooped S. as many Scallops Or, within a Border Vert Bantee. 22 Ioh. Broket, ar. ut prius   23 Ioh. Smith, ar.     24 Phil. Butler, mil. ut prius   25 Bri. Tuke, mil.   Partee per Fess indented Az. & G. 3 Lions Passant in Pale Or. 26 Will. West. mil.     27 Tho. Perient, sen. ar. ut prius   28 Hen. Parker, mil.   Arg. a Lion Passant G. between 2 Bars S. thern 3 Besants, in hief as many Bucks-heads cabosed of the third. 29 Ioh. Rainsford, m.     30 Ioh. Smith, ar.     31 Phil. Butler, mil. ut prius   32 Ioh. Mordant, mil. BED. SH. Arg. a Cheveron inter 3 Estoiles Sable. 33 Rad. Rowlet, ar. St. Albansh.   34 Ioh. Bowles, & Ioh. Sewstes ut prius   35 Ioh. Wentwarth, ar. ut prius   36 Anth. Cook, ar. Gidy-hall. E. Or. a Cheveron Chekee Gu. and Az. betwixt 3 Cinque-foiles of the last. 37 Rob. Litton, ar. ut prius   38 Ioh. Coningsby & * South mim.   Edr. Broket ut prius * G. 3 Conies Seiant within a Border ingrailed Argent. EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Edw. Broket, ar. ut prius   2 Ioh. Cook, ar. ut prius   3 Ioh. Gates, mil. High Easter   4 Geor. Norton, mil.     5 Hen. Tirrell, mil. ut prius   6 Tho. Pope, mil.   Partee per Pale Or ad Az. on a Cheveron between 3 Griffins∣heads Erazed, 4 flower de luces all Counter-changed. PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     1 Ioh. Wentworth, m. ut prius   2 Edw. Broket, ar. ut prius   3 Will. Harris, ar. & Tho. Sylesden, ar.   Or, on a bend Az. 3 Cinque∣foils of the field. 4 Ioh. Botler, mil. ut prius   5 Tho. Pope, mil. ut prius   6 Tho. Mildmay, ar. Chelmes∣ford Argent, 3 Lions rampant Az. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Rad. Rowlet, mil.     2 Edw. Capell, mil. ut prius  
3 Tho. Golding, mil.   Gul. a cheveron Or enter 3 Be∣sants. 4 Tho. Barington, ar. ut prius   5 Hen. Fortescu, ar. ut prius   6 Will. Ayliffe, ar.   Sab. a Lion ramp. Or. Coller'd Gul. between 4 Crosses Patee o the second. 7 Rob. Chisler, ar.     8 Ioh. Buket, ar.     Sheriffs of this Shire alone. Name Place Armes ELIZ. REG.     9 Geor. Tuke, esq. ut prius   10 Tho. Lucas, esq. Colchester Arg. a Fess betwixt 6 Annulets Gules. 11 Tho. Golding, kni. ut prius   12 Iam. Altham, esq. Mark-hall   13 Edw. Barret, esq. Bel-house   14 Tho. Mildmay, kni ut prius   15 Arth. Harris, esq. ut prius   16 Edw. Pirton, esq. ut prius   17 Ioh. Peter, kni. Writtle Gul. a Bend between 2 Escalops Argent. 18 Wistan. Brown, esq.     19 Gab. Pointz, esq.   Barry of eight Or and Gules. 20 Edw. Huddleston, es. CAMBR. Gules, Frettee Argent. 21 Hen. Capell, esq. ut prius   22 Tho. Barington, kn. ut prius   & Tho. Darcy, esq. ut prius   23 Ioh. Wentworth ut prius   24 Thomas Tay, esq. ut prius   25 Tho. Lucas, kni. ut prius   26 Hen. Apleton, esq.   Arg. a Fess ingrailed betwixt 3 Apples G. sliped Vrt. 27 Bria. Darcy, esq. ut prius   28 Arth. Harris, esq. ut prius   29 Rob. Wroth, esq. Loughton Arg. on a Bend Sa. 3 Leopards∣heads erased of the first, crown∣ed Or. 30 Edm. Hudleston, k. ut prius   31 Gabr. Poyns, esq. ut prius   32 Rad. Wiseman, esq.   S. a Cheveron Ermine betwixt 3 Cronells of spears Arg. 33 Ric. Warren, esq.     34 Ioh. Wentworth, es. ut prius   35 Hum. Mildmay, esq. ut prius   36 Will. Ayloffe, esq. Braxted Ut prius. 37 Edw. Saliard, esq.     38 Geo. Harvey, esq.     39 Tho. Mildmay, esq ut prius   40 Will. Harris, esq. ut prius   41 Ier. Weston, esq.   Or, an Eagle displayed Sab. the Head regardant. 42 Tho. Meade, kni.   Gu. a Cheveron Ermine betwixt 3 Trefoiles Arg. 43 Hen. Smith, esq.     44 Rich. Franke, esq.     45 Hen. Maynard, kni. & 1. Iac. Easton Arg. a Cheveron Az. betwizt 3 Hands Gules. JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Hen. Maynard, kni. ut prius   2 Tho. Rawlins, esq.   S. 3 swords Barrways blads Ar. hilts Or. 3 Ioh. Sammes, kni. *     4 Gam. Capel, kni. ut prius * Or a Lion ramp. S. vulnerated in the mouth. 5 Hen. Maxey, kni †     6 Rog. Apleon. esq. ut prius † Gu. a Fess betwixt 3 Talbots∣heads erased Arg. 7 Tho. Mildmay, kni. ut prius   8 Ioh. Dean, kni.   Sable, a Fess Ermine betwixt 3 Chaplets Arg. 9 Tho. Wiseman, kni. ut prius   10 Hen. Leigh, kni.     11 Ro. Worth, Mort. & Edrus. Elrington, es.* ut prius *Ar. a fess Duncette S.  between 5 Cornish-choughs 3 above 2 below. 12 Har. Gimston, kn. † Bradfield   13 Will. Smith, esq.   † Arg. on a Fess S. 3 Spur-rowels Or. 14 Tho. Lucas, esq. ut prius   15 Pau. Bayning, k & b. Bentley   16 Tho. Bendish, bar. Bumsted Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Rams∣heads rased Azure. 17 Will. Smith, kni.     18 Will. Pert, esq.   Arg. on a Bend Azu. 3 Mascalls Or. 19 Ste. Soame, kni.     20 Tho. ourney, kni.     21 Caro. Prat, esq.     2 Edr. Btelar, esq. ut prius   CHAR. REX.     Anno     1 Arth. Harris, kni. ut prius   2 Hug. Everard, esq Much-walt. Ar. a Fess  betw. 3 Sta G. 3 Tho. Nightingale, . Newport-p. Ermine, a Rose Gules. 4 Hen. Mildmay, kni. Graces Ut prius. 5 Edr. Allen, bar. Hateld Pri. Sab. a Cross potent Or. 6 Tho. Bendish, bar.   Ut prius. 7 Ioh Mede, kni. ut prius   8 Hen Smith, esq.     9 Ric. Saltonstall, kn. Woodham-Mortimere   10 Cran. Harris, kni.   Ut prius. 11 Hum. Mildmay, kni. Danbury Ut prius. 12 Ioh. Lucas, esq. ut prius   13 Will. Lucking, bar. Waltham Sable a Fess indented betwixt 2 Leopards-heads Or. 14 Will. Wiseman, bar. Canfield-h. Ut prius. 15 Marl. Lumley, esq. Bardfield m.   16 Rob. Luckin, esq. ut prius   17 Rob. Smith, esq.     18     19 Tim. Middleton, esq     20 Rich. Everard, bar. ut prius   21 Ric. Harlakenden, e.   Azure a Fess Ermine betwixt 3 Lions-heads reased Or. Az. on a Fess Or. a Lion passant G. in Chief 3 Bezantis. 22 Ioh. Pyot, esq.     Henry VI. 29 PHILIP BOTTILLER.] He was son to Sir Philip Bottiller Knight, who lieth buried in Walton-church in Hertford∣shire, with the following inscription, Hic jacet corpus Domini Philippi Butler militis, quondam Domini de Woodhall, & hujus Ecclesie Patroni, qui obiit in Festo Sancti Leonardi, Anno Domini M. cccc. xxi. & Regis Henrici quinti post conquestum ultimo. Cujus anime propi∣tietur Deus, Amen. These Butlers are branched from Sir Ralph Butler Baron of Wem in Shropshire, and his wife heir to William Pantulfe, Lord of Wem, soon after the entry of the Normans; and still flourish in deserved esteem, at Wood-hall in Hertford-hire.
Henry VII. 2 HENRY MARNY, Ar.] Till disproved with clear evidence to the contrary, this Henry Marny Esquire, shall pass with me for him who was then Servant, afterwards Executor to the Kings Mo∣ther, the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond. The very same, who afterwards was Knighted, made Chancellor of the Dutchy, and Created Lord Marny by King Henry the eighth, and whose daughter and sole heir Elizabeth, was with a fair inheritance married to Thomas Howard Viscount Bindon. 14 JOHN CHRISTMAS, Ar.] Such will not wonder at his Surname, who have read the Romans cognominated Ja∣arius, Aprilis, &c. Yea, Festus Acts 24. 27. himself is well known in Scripture, probably so called from being born on some solemn festivall, the occasion, no doubt, of this Sheriffs Surname at the first. If the name be extinct in Essex, it remaineth in other Counties, and the City of London, where...... Christmas Esquire (a great promoter of my former and present en∣deavours) must not by me be forgotten. Henry VIII. 6 WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS, Ar.] I cannot exactly design his habitation, but conceive it not far from Waltham Abby, in the South west part of this County; because, he bequeathed Stows Survey of London pag 90. 50. pounds to mend the High-ways, betwixt Chigwell and Copers-hall. He was afterwards Knighted by King Henry the eighth, on a worthy occasion, whereof hereafter, in his Sheriffalty of North∣hampton-shire in the 15. of King Henry the eight. He bequeathed 100. pounds to poor Maids Marriages, 40. pounds, to the University, &c. and delivering a Catalogue of his Debtors into the hands of his Executors, he freely forgave all those, over whose names he had written Idem Ibidem. Amore Dei remitto. 25 BRIAN TUKE, Knight.] He was Treasurer of the Chamber to King Henry the eight, (as appears by his Epi∣taph) and dying Anno 1536. lyeth buried with Dame Grissel his wife (deceasing two years after him) under a fair Tombe in the North Isle of the Quire of Saint Margarets in Lothbury, London. Lealand giveth him this large commendation, that he was Angli∣cae linguae eloquentiâ mirificus. In his book intitled, Scrip∣tores nostri tempores. Bale saith, that he wrot observations on Chaucer; as also against Polidore Virgill, for injuring the English, of whom then still alive, he justly and generously demanded reparations, though since his unresponsable memory can make us no satisfaction. Edward VI. 3 Sir JOHN GATES.] He was descended from Sir Geffry Gates Knight, who, as appears by his Epitaph in the Church of High-Eastern, bought the Mannor of Garnets in that parish of one Koppen∣den, Gentleman. This Sir Geffry was six years captain of the Isle of Wight, and Marshall of Callis, and there kept with the Pikards worschipfull Warrys: (Reader it is the Language of his Epitaph) And died Anno Dom. 1477. As for this Sir John Gates Knight, descendant from the said Sir Jeffry, he is heavily charged with Sacriledge in our Histories, and ingaging with John Dudley Duke of Nor∣thumberland in the Title of Queen Jane, he was beheaded the 22. of August the first of Queen Mary 1553. Queen Elizabeth. 1 RALPH ROWLET, Knight.] He married Camdens Eliz. in Anno 1576. one of the learned daughters of Sir Anthony Cook, Sister to the wives of the Lord Chancellour Bacon and Treasurer Cecill. His family is now Extinct, one of his daughters marrying into the then Worshipfull (since honorable) family of the Mainards, and with her devolved a fair inheritance.
12. JAMES ALTHAM, Esq.] His Armes (casually omitted in our List) were, Pally of six, Ermin and Azure, on a Chief Gules, a Lyon rampant, Or. His Name-sake, and direct Descendent, now living at Mark∣hall, made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King Charles the second, addeth with his accomplished civility to the Honor of his Ancestors. King James. 1. HENRY MAINARD, Kt.] He was Father to William Maynard, bred in Saint John's Colledge in Cambridge, (where he founded a Logick Professor) created Baron of Wicklow in Ireland, and Easton in this County, whose Son William Lord Maynard hath been so noble an encourager of my Studies, that my Hand deserveth to wither, when my Heart passeth him by without a prayer for his good successe. 15. PAUL BANNING, Kt. and Bar.] No doubt the same Person, who afterwards was created Viscount Banning of Sud∣bury. His Son was bred in Christ-Church, of most hopeful parts (descended from the Sackvils by the Mother-side) and promising high Performance to his Country; but alas cut off in the prime of the prime of his life. He left two Daughters which (though mar∣ried) left no Issue; so that his large estate will be divided betwixt the children of his four Sisters, Wives to the Marquess of Dorchester, Viscount Grandison, the Lord Dacres of the South, and Henry Murrey, Esq of the Bed-Chamber to King Charles. King Charles 12. JOHN LUCAS, Esq] This worthy Person equalling his Extraction with his Vertues, was at Oxford, made Ba∣ron by King Charles the first. I understand he hath one sole Daughter (to whom I wish a meet Consort, adequate to her Birth and Estate) seeing the Barony, began in this Lord, is suspicious in him to determine. The Battels. Though none in this County, (the heart of the Eastern Association) yet the siege [Anno 1648.] of Colchester must not be forgotten. Know then that the Remnant of the Royalists routed in Kent, with much difficulty recovered this County, the Parli∣liaments Forces pursuing them. March much farther they could not, such their wea∣riness and want of Accommodation: bid Battel to their numerous Foes they durst not, which was to run in the Jaws of ruine, wherefore they resolved to shelter them∣selves for a time in Colchester. Reader, pardon a Digression▪ Winchester Castle was by the Long-Parliament ordered to be made UNTENABLE; but the over-officious malice of such who executed the Order (wilfully mistaking the word) made it UNTENANTABLE. To apply the Distinction to ; All men beheld it as Tenantable, full of faire Houses, none as Tenable in an hostile way for any long time, against a great Army. But see what Diligence can do: in few days they fortified it even above imaginati∣on. Indeed the lining of the Wall was better than the faceing thereof, whose Stone out∣side was ruinous, but the in-side was well filled up with Earth, which they valiantly maintained. Nor was it General Fairfax they feared so much, as General Famine, (that grand Conqueror of Cities) having too much of the best Sauce, and too little of the worst Meat. Insomuch, that they were fain to make Mutton of those Creatures which kill Shep, and Beefe of Cattel which never wore Horns, till they were forced to submit to the worst, (but best they could get) of Conditions. Here those two worthy Knights, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle (the one eminently a whole Troop of Horse, the other a Company of Foot) were cru∣elly sentenced and shot to Death; whose bodies have since had a civil Resur∣rection, restored to all possible outward Honour, by publick Funerall Solem∣nities.
The Farewell. I wish the sad casualties may never return, which lately have happened in this Coun∣ty. The one 1581. in the Hundred of Stow. Chro anno citat. Dengy, the other 1648. in the Hundred of Roch∣ford and Isle of Foulness (rented in part by two of my credible Parishoners, who at∣tested it, having paid dear for the truth thereof,) whe an Army of Mice, nesting in Ant-hills, as Conies in Burroughs, shaved off the grass at the bare roots, which wither∣ing to dung was infectious to Cattle. The March following, numberless flocks of Owls from all parts flew thither, and destroyed them, which otherwise had ruined the Coun∣try, if continuing another year. Thus, though great the distance betwixt a Man and a Mouse, the meanest may become formidable to the mightiest creature by their multi∣tudes; and this may render the punishment of the Philistines more clearly to our ap∣prehensions, at the same time pestered with 1 Sam 6. 11. Mice in their barns, and pained with eme∣rods in their bodies.
GLOUCESTER-SHIRE. GLOUCESTER-SHIRE hath Worcester and Warwick-shire on the North, Oxford and Wilt-shire on the East, Somerset-shire on the South, Hereford-shire, with the River Wye on the West, extending from her South to North Avon 48. miles, but lessened in her broadest part from East to West, to twenty eight. The Severne runneth through it, entring this County as a River encreasing in it to an Eastuary, and be∣cometh little lesse than a Sea before it departs out of it. Some From whom Mr. Cmbden in his Brit. doth dissent. affirm that this County was anciently like the land of Gerar, wherein Gen. 26. 12. Isaac sowed and reaped an hundred fold (the greatest proportion of encrease which the good ground in the Ma h. 13. 8. Parable brought fourth.) But the same men seem to insinuate, that this Shire tired out with its over▪ fruitfulnesse, hath become barren in these later times. True it is, as Lions are said to be tamed by watching, not suffering them to take any sleep; so the most generous and vigorus land, will in time be imbarrened, when always pinched with the Plough, and not permitted to slumber at all, and lie fallow some com∣petent time; otherwise with moderate respite and manuring, some Tillage in this County is as fruitful as in any other place. As for Pasturage, I have heard it reported from credible persons, that such the fruitfulness of the land nigh Slimbrige, that in Spring time let it be bit bare to the roots, a Wand laid along therein over night, will be covered with new-grown grasse by the next morning. Natural Commodities. Tobacco. This lately grew in this County, but now may not. It was first planted about Winchcomb, and many got great estates thereby, notwithstanding the great care and cost in planting, replanting, transplanting, watering, snailing, suckering, topping, crop∣ping, sweating, drying, making and rowling it. But it hath been prohibited of late by Act of Parliament, as hindering our English Plantation in the West Indies, abating the Revenues of the State in Customs and Impost, and spoiling much of our good ground, which might be employed for Corn or Cattel. As for the praise of Tobacco, with the vertues thereof, they may better be performed by the Pens of such Writers, whose pallates have tasted of the same. Oak. England hath the best in the World, not for finenesse, but firmnesse. Indeed Out-lan∣dish Oaks have a smaller grain, and therefore fitter for Wainscot; and whilest they make the best linings, our English Oak is the substantial out-side. The best in England is in Dean Forrest in this County, and most serviceable for Shipping; so tough, that when it is dry, it is said to be as hard as Iron. I have Hartlibs Le∣gacy, pag. 49. read, that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Spaniard sent an Embassador over purpose∣ly to get this wood destroyed (by private practices and cunning contrivances) who had he effected his Embassie, deserved a good reward at his return. It is suspicious if not time∣ly prevented, carelesness and waste will gratifie the Spaniard, with what then he could not accomplish. Steele. It is Eldest Brother of Iron, extracted from the same Oare, differing from it not in kind, but degree of purity, as being the first running thereof. It is more hard and brittle (whilest Iron is softer and tougher) useful for the making of English Knives, Sites, Si∣sers, Shears, &c. but fine edges cannot be made thereof, as Lancets for letting of blood, Incision Knives, Dissecting Knives, Razors, &c. I have been informed that Sir Bafil Brooke (the great Steele-maker in this County) his Patent to prohibit the importing of Forraign Steele, was revoked on this account, because that no Artist could make the aforesaid Instruments of English Steele, but must have it from Damascus, Spain,
Flanders, &c. As for Iron, though plentiful in this, it may be treated of in another County with more conveniency. Manufactures. Cloathing. As good as any in England for finenesse and colour, is wrought in this County, where the Cloathiers have a double advantage. First, plenty of the best Wooll grow∣ing therein on Cots wold-Hills; so that whereas Cloathiers in some Counties fetch their Wooll far off, with great cost, it is here but the removing it from the Backs of the Sheep into their Works Houses. Secondly, they have the benefit of an excellent water for colouring their Cloath, being the sweet Rivolet of Strowd, which arising about Branfield, runneth crofs this Shire into the Severn. Now no rational man will deny Occult qualities of perfection in some above other waters (whereby Spanish Steele non natura sed tinctura, becomes more tough than ours in England) as the best Reds (a colour which always carried somewhat of Magistracy therein) are died in Strowd water. Hence it is, that this Shire hath afforded many weal∣thy Cloathiers, whereof some may seem in their Loomes to have interwoven their own names into the Cloaths, called (Webs-cloath and Clutterbucks) after the names of the first Makers of them, for many years after. Mustard. The best in England (to take no larger compasse) is made at Tewksberry in this Coun∣ty. It is very wholesome for the clearing of the Head moderately taken, and I believe very few have ever surfeited thereof, because not granted time, but demanded present payment for the penalty of excesse, turning Democritus himself presently to Heraclit, as the Columella in bortulo. Husband-man Poetdoth observe, Seque lacessenti fletum factura sinapis. It is generally used in England, and the Jest is well known of two Serving-men, contesting about Superiority; My Master (saith the one) spends more in Mustard, than thine does in Beefe; whereunto the other returned, the more sawcy men his followers. But seriously this should raise our gratitude to God for the plentiful provisions of Flesh and Fish spent in this Land, when Mustard, a meer complement to both, amounteth to more thousands of pounds by the year than will be believed. Wine. This formerly grew in this County, but now doth not, witness the many places therein still called Vineyards, whereof one most eminent nigh Gloucester, the palace of the Bishop; and it appears by ancient Records, that some Towns in this Shire paid Rent-Wines in great proportions; so that England, though it doth not ferre vinum, is ferax vini, capable (especially in a hot Summer) to produce it to good per∣fection. But in later ages this commodity hath been disused, partly because better and cheaper may be procured from beyond the Seas, and partly because experience proveth other Native Liquors more healthful for our English bodies. Sider. We must not forget Sider, anciently a Native of this, since a free Denizon of all o∣ther Counties, made of Apples here grown in hedge-rows (which both fence and feed) in great abundance. Such J. Minshew in his Dicti∣onary in the word. who deduce Sider from the Latine Sicera as that from the Hebrew  (signifying any liquor which immoderately taken doth intoxicate) make a more proper allusion therein, than true deduction thereof. The Portugal calls it Vinho contrafeyto, and surely much Claret and White is vended in England which grew in no other Grapes than what Apple-trees afford. Some maintain, that the coldness and windiness (easily correctable with Spice) is recompenced by the temperate looseness
caused by the moderate drinking thereof. But the staple use of Sider is at Sea, where it quencheth thirst better than other liquor, and if subject to corrupt in hot Coun∣tries, quickly purgeth it self to a pure constitution. Buildings. The Abbey (since Cathedral) Church of Gloncester, is a beautiful building, advanced by several successive Abbots. It consisteth of a continued Window-work, but hath the loudest praises from the Whispering-place therein. Take its manner from that learned Author, who (though it seems never seeing it) hath by his steady aim in Philosophy, better guessed and described it than I, who have been an eare and eye witnesse thereof. Sir Francis Bacon in his Natural Hist. Cent. 2. Numb. 148. There is a Church at Gloucester (and as I have heard, the like is in some other places) where, if you speak against a wall, softly, another shall hear your voice better a good way off, than near hand. Enquire more particular of the Frame of that Place. I suppose there is some Vault, or Hollow, or Isle behind the Wall, and some passage to it, towards the farther end of that wall, against which you speak; so as the voice of him that speak∣eth, slideth along the wall, and then entreth at some passage, and communicateth with the Air of the Hollow; for it is preserved somewhat by the plain wall, but that is too weak to give a sound Audible, till it hath communicated with the back Air. The Church in all the siege of the City, and our Civil Wars was decently preserved; which I observe to his commendation, who was the Governor thereof. Since I have read that by Act of Parliament it was setled on the City to maintain and repair, and hope their practice hath proved precedential to other places in the same nature. As for civil structures in this County, our late Wars laid a finger on Barkley, their arme on Sudeley Castle (seated where the Vailes and VVoulds meet) and the fair clasp to joyn them together being in part pluck'd down. But their loynes have been laid on Cambden-House (one of the newest and neatest in England; built by Baptist Hicks Vis∣count Cambden) pressed down to the very foundation. Wonders. There are frequently found (at Alderley in this County) Oysters, Cockles, and Pe∣riwincles of stone. Such, who conceive these were formerly real Shell fish, brought so far by some accident into the Land, engage themselves in a Sea of inextricable diffi∣culties. Others more probably account them to be Lusus Naturae; and know, that as 1 Cor. 1. 15. The Foolishnesse of God is wiser than men, and the weaknesse of God is stronger than men: so the disportings of the God of Nature are more grave than the most serious employ∣ment of men. For, such riddles are propounded on purpose to pose those profound∣shallow Rabbies, counting themselves of the Cabinet, when they are scarcely of the Common Councel of Nature; so unable to read such Riddles, that they cannot put the letters thereof together, with any probability. The Higre. Men as little know the cause of the name, as the thing thereby signified. Some pronounce it the Eagre, as so called from the keennesse and fiercenesse thereof. It is the confluence or encounter (as supposed) of the salt and fresh water in Severne, equal∣ly terrible with its flashings and noise to the seers and hearers, and oh how much more then to the feelers thereof. If any demand, why the Thames hath not an Higre as well as the Severne, where we find the same cause, and therefore why meet we not with the same effects? I re-demand of them, why is there not an Euripus with the same re∣ciprocation of Tides, as well about the other Cyclides, as Euboea alone? Thus in cases of this kind, it is easier to ask ten, than answer one question with satisfaction. But hear how the Mich. Dray∣ton in his Po∣. Poet describeth this Higre; —Until they be imbrac't In Sabrins Soveraign Armes: with whose tumultuous waves, Shut up in narrower bounds, the Higre wildy raves;
And frights the stragling flocks, the neighbouring shores to fly A far as from the Main it comes with hideous cry. And on the angry front, the curled oam doth bring The Billows 'gainst the banks, when fiercely it doth fling, Hurles up the slimy Ooze, and makes the scaly Brood Leap madding to the Land, affrighted from the Flood; Oreturns the toyling Barge, whose Steers-man doth not lanch, And thrusts the furrowing beak into her ireful panch. As when we haply see a sickly Woman fall Into a fit of that which we the Mother call; When from the grieved Womb she feels the pain arise, Breaks into grievous sighs, with intermixed cries, Bereaved of her sence; and strugling still with those That 'gainst her rising pain their utmost strength oppose, Starts, tosses, tumbles, strikes, turns, touses, spurns, and sprauls, Casting with furious Limbs her holders to the Walls: But that the horrid pangs torments the grieved so, One well might muse from whence this sudden strength should grow: All that I will adde is, that had this been known to the Roman Horatius. Poet, when he thus envied against his Shee-friend, Tu levior cortice, & improbo Iracundior Adria— Thou art more light, more angry than The Cork, and uncouth Adrian. I say, had it been known, he would have changed Adria into Higrea, the former being a very calme in comparison of the later. We will conclude all with that, which at first was a Wonders fellow, until the strange∣ness thereof abated by degrees. There is a kind of Bird as yet not known by any pro∣per name, which cometh in great companies, but seldom in this County. Yet oftner than welcome. In Bulk not much bigger than a Sparrow, which may seem to carry a Saw, or rather a Sithe on his mouth, for with his Bill which is thwarted crosse-wise at the end, he will shave or cut an Apple in two at one snap, eating only the kernels thereof, spoyling more than he doth devour. They come about Harvest time, when Apples be∣gin to be ripe; so that these Birds may be said to drink up many Hogs-heads of Sider, as destroying them in their Causes, and preventing the making thereof. The like have been seen in Cornwall, where at first they were taken (saith my Carews Sur∣vey of Corn∣wall, fol. 25. Author) for a forbo∣den token, understand him for a presage of ill success. Proverbs. As sure as God's in Gloucester-shire.] This Proverb is no more fit to be used than à Toad can be wholsom to be eaten, which can never by Mountebancks be so dieted and corrected, but that still it remains rank poyson. Some I know seek to qualifie this Proverb, making God eminently in this (but not exclusively out of other) Counties; where such the former fruitfulness thereof, that it is William of Malmsbury in his Book of Bishops. said to return the seed with increase of an hundred fold. Others find a superstitious sense therein, supposing God by his gracious presence more peculiarly fixed in this Country, wherein there were more and richer mitred Abbeys than in any two Shires of England besides▪ But when all is done, the best use of this Proverb is totally and finally to banish it out of the mouths and minds of all mankind. You are a man of Duresley.] It is taken for one that breaks his word, and faileth in performance of his promises, llel to Fides Graeca, or Fides Punica. Duresly is a Market and cloathing Town in  ounty, the inhabitants whereof will endeavour to confute and disprove this , to make it false now, whatsoever it was at the first original thereof. , the worst places, in the midst of epidemical viciousness, have afforded
some exceptions from the wickled rule therein, Titu. 1. . The Cretians are always lyars, was the observation of a Poet, and application of the Apostle; yet we find some Cretians whom the Holy Spirit alloweth for Act .  Devout men. Thus sure I am, there was a man of Dursley, who was a man of men, Edward Fox by name, a right godly and gracious Prelate, of whom In the  of Prelates. hereafter. However the men of Duresly have no cause to be offended with my inserting this Proverb, which if false, let them be angry with the Author, the first man that made it; if true, let them be angry with the Subject, even themselves who deserve it. It is long in coming as Cotswold Barley.] It is applied to such things as are slow but sure. The Corn in this cold County on the Wowlds exposed to the winds, bleak and shelterless, is very backward at the first, but afterwards overtakes the forwardest in the County, if not in the Barn, in the Bushel, both for the quantity and goodness thereof. He looks as if he had liv'd on Tewksbury Mustard.] It is spoken partly of such who always have a sad, severe, and tetrick countenance. Si ecastor hic homo Plautus in . Sinapi victitet, Non censeam tam tristem esse posse. Partly on such as are snappish, captious, and prone to take exceptions, where they are not given, such as will crispare nasum, in derision of what they slight or neglect. The Traces have always the wind in their faces.] This is founded on fond and false Tradition, which reporteth that ever since Sir William Tracy was most Active amongst the four Knights, which killed Thomas Becket; it is im∣posed on Tracies for miraculous Penance, that whether they go by Land or by Water, the Wind is ever in their faces. If this were so, it was a Favour in a hot Summer to the Females of that Family, and would spare them the use of a Fan. But it is disproved by daily experience, there being extant at this day in this County two Houses, the one Honourable, the other Worshipful, growing from the same root; so that we see it is not now, and therefore believe that it was never true. If any say that after so many Genera∣tions this curse at last is Antiquated, know, that according to Popish Principles, it deserved rather to be doubted of late, seeing no Gentile Family in England since the Reformati∣on have more manifested their cordial disaffection to Popery by their sufferings and wri∣tings, as hereafter will appear. Princes. I cannot discover any Prince who took his first andsel of life in this County. Let not my unhappinesse discourage the industry of others in their enquiry herein. Saints. KENELME, Son of Kenwolfe, King of Mercia, succeeded his Father therein, being a Child but of seven years old, so that his harmless years had not attained to any worldly guile, and his vertuous inclination promised great hopes, when Quenrid his ambitious Sister, caused him to be kill'd, as standing in her way to the Crown. Solomon Eccles. 10. 20 saith, Curse not the King (much less kill him) no not in thy thought, for a Bird in the air shall carry the voice, and that which hath wings shall tell the matter, that is, a discovery shall surely and swiftly be made, by remote, unsuspected, and impro∣bable means, whereby it is thought the murder of this infant-King was reveled. But I cannot belive what the Golden Legend relates, how a white Dove (which belike had seen the deed done) got it engrossed in Parchment, and posting to S. Peters in Rome, laid it on the high Altar to be read, where in the Saxon Character it was thus found, At Clenc in a Cow-pasture Kenelme the Kings child lieth beheaded under a Thorn. Others Engl. Mar y∣. in the 17 of July. say (agreeing in all other particulars) the discovery was made by an Angel, and for fear they should fall out, it may be thus accommodated, that the Angel was in a Dove-like apparition. As for his Sister Quenrid, she was so far from getting the
Crown, that she is said to have lost her eyes, which fell out of her head, and bloodied her Primer (a Womans Book, as it seems, in that age) whilest her Brothers Corps was solemny buried at Winchcomb, and had in holy veneration. Martyrs. JAMES BAYNAM, Esquire, Son to Sir Fox Act. and Mon. pag. 1027 Alexander Baynam, Knight, was born at—in this County, bred in learning and knowledge of the Latine and Greek Tongues. He afterward became a student of the Law in the Middle Temple, and when a Pleader, was charitable to the poor, in giving; to the rich, in moderating his Fees; and what was the Crown of all the rest, a true lover of the Gospel, in the dawning of Reformation. Saint Paul saith, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for all men once to dye, and yet the same Apostle saith of himself, 2 Cor. 11. 28 in deaths often, so many and great his pains and perils. And truly our Baynam encountered often with death, so that a little Book of Martyrs might be made of his sufferings. First, Sir Thomas Moore sent for him to Chelsey, and tying him to a tree in his Gar∣den, (called by him the Tree of Truth) caused him to be most cruelly scourged, to make him renounce his Opinion. This not succeding, Sir Thomas himself saw him cru∣elly racked in the Tower, till at last he was perswaded to abjure, and solemnly carried a Torch and a Faggot in the Church of St. Pauls. Hereby he rather exchanged than escaped the fire, finding such a fire in his own con∣science, he could not be at quiet, till in the Church of St. Augustines, the next Parochial Church to St. Pauls, (that the Antidote might be brought as near as he could conve∣niently to the place of the Poison) he publickly recanted his Recantation: For which he was afterwards kept a fortnight in stocks in the Bishop of Londons Cole house, with Irons upon him, chained again by Sir Thomas More to a post two nights, cruelly handled for a seven-night at Fulham, scourged for a fortnight in the Tower, and at last sent to a second Tree of Truth, I mean, to the Stake; Whereat he was burned in Smithfield, April 30. 1532. Here Pag. 1030. Mr. Fox reports a passage, which I cannot with credit insert, or omit, but take it as I find it; When his Armes and Legs were half consumed in the fire, he spake these words; O e Papists, behold, ye look for miracles, and here now you may see a miracle, for in this fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a Bed of Downe; but it is to me as sweet as a Bed of Roses. Soft and sweet both, to please the touch and smell, a double wonder. I believe it might be a falshood, but no lye in the Author reporting it, who possibly might be abu∣sed in his intelligence. Secondly, it is possible that this good man, feeling so much pain before, might through Gods goodnesse have none at his death. Thirdly, this story may be kept on the deck, to counterpoise the scales, against that of Father Sand. de Schism. Ag. in his Diary, Anno 1581. month of March. Briant a Popish Priest, who reported himself cruelly racked in the Tower, and yet, se nihil quicquam doloris sensisse, That he felt not any pain at all. Lastly, though our Sa∣viour july taxeth those, who were Luke 24. 25. , slow in heart to believe such things as were revealed in the Scripture, yet neither God nor Man wll be offen∣ded with the incredulous in such reports, attested onely with Humane suspicious Au∣thority. Prelates. TIDEMAN de WINCHCOMBE was born in this County, at the Market Town formerly famous for a rich Abbey, now for plenty of Poore therein. He was preferred first Abbot of Benle, then Bishop of Landaffe, and lastly of Worcester by King Richard the second his importunity to the Pope, notwithstanding one John Green was fairly elected thereunto. This Tideman was the Kings Physician, and very well skilled in that Faculty. Be it observed by the way, that I am dayly more confirmed in my opinion, that till the last two hundred years, Physick in England was not a distinct profession from Divinity,
and the same persons Physicians and Confessors to Princes. Say not these Functions were inconsistent, the former uually departing, the later commonly coming to dying men; for the several Professions did not justle, but succeed one another, so that when Potion did end, Unction did begin. A practice continued by Popish Priests in England at this day, gaining commodity and concealment by being such Pluralists in their profession, ha∣ving the most, best, and last privacy with their Patients. This Tideman died Anno Dom. 1400. JOHN CHEDWORTH, was born in this Godwin in the Bshops of Lincoln. County, and bred in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, being the third Hatches M. S. in Anno 1444. Scholar that came thereinto, by election from Eaton Schoole, though some (I confesse) for a short time, make him admitted into Merton Colledge in Oxford. He afterwards was the third Provost of Kings Colledge, possessing the place six years, till at last he was elected Bishop of Lincoln. He was joyned in Commission, by King Henry the sixth, with Bishop Wainfliet of Winchester to revise and regulate the Statutes of Eaton and Kings Colledges. He sate Bishop about eighteen years, and dying 1471. lies buried in his own Cathedral, under a Marble Monu∣ment. JOHN CARPENTER was (as my Goodwyn in the Bishops of Worcestr. Author rationally collecteth) born at Westbury in this County, bred in Oriall Colledge in Oxford, whereof he became Provost, and Chancellor of the University, thence preferred Prefect of Saint Anthonies in London, and at last Bishop of Worcester. He was so indulgent to Westbury, the place of his Nativity, that of a mean he made it a magnificent Convent, more like a Castle than a Colledge, wal∣ling it about with Turrets, and making a stately Gate-house thereunto. He had an hu∣morous intent to style Himself and Successors (in imitation of Bath and Wells) Bishops of Worcester and VVestbury, which Title (though running cleverly on the tongues end) ne∣ver came in request, because therein Impar conjunctio, the matching of a Collegiate and Cathedral Church together. He died Anno Dom. 1475 and was buried in his Native Town of VVestbury. His Tomb since his Death (I will use my Authors Idem. Ibid. words, hoping their ignorance if alive understands no Latine) A stolidis quibusdam nebulonibus pudendum in morem mutulatur. As for the Colledge of VVestbury it is the inheritance of the Right VVorshipful and Hospital House-keeper, Ralph Sadler, Esq▪ and was in these Civil Broils, unhappily burnt down, though those, who esteemed themselves judicious in war, apprehended neither necessity thereof, no advantage thereby. THOMAS RUTHAL born at Cicester in this County, bred in Cambridge, where he commenced Doctor of the Laws, was by King Henry the Seventh for his great Abili∣ties preferred to be Bishop of Durham, King Henry the Eighth made him of his Privy Councel, notwithstanding the hatred which Cardinal VVolsey bare unto him. It happened King Henry employed him as a politick person, to draw up a Breviate of the State of the Land, which he did, and got it fairly transcribed. But it fell out that in stead thereof, he, deceived with the likenesse of the cover and binding, present∣ed the King with a Book containing an Inventory of his own Estate, amounting to an inviduous, and almost incredible summe of Godwyn in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Durm. One hundred thousand pounds. VVolsey, glad of this mistake, told the King, he knew now where a masse of money was, in case he needed it. This broke Ruthall his heart, who had paid the third part of the cost of making the Bridge of New-Castle, over Tyne, and intended many more Benefactions, had not death (1523.) on this unexpected occasion surprised him. Since the Reformation. EDWARD FOX was born in Dr. Hatchr his Manuscript Catalogue of the Masters and Fellows of K. Colle▪ Duresley in this County, bred first in Eaton, then in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, whereof he was chosen Provost, which place he kept un∣til his death. He was afterwards Almoner to King Henry the Eighth. He first brought Doctor Cranmer to the knowledge of the King, which Doctor first brought the King to the knowledge of himself, how he stood in matter of marriage with the Widow of his Brother. This Doctor Fox was after Bishop of Hereford, and was (saith my Godwin in his Catalogu of the Bishops of Herford▪ Author) Refor∣mationis Ecclesiasticae illius tempore coeptae clanculum fautor. Let me adde, he was the principal pillar of the Reformation, as to the managery of the Politick and Prudential
part thereof; being of more activity, and no less ability then Cranmer himself. Martin Bucer dedicated unto him his Comment on the Gospels; yea, this Bishop wrote ma∣ny Books, whereof that, De differentia utriusque potestatis was his Master-piece. He was employed by the King on several Embassies into France and Germany, and died to the great loss of Gods Church, May 8. 1538. States-men. Sir RALPH BUTLER, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Sudeley in this County, was Lord Treasurer of England about three years, viz. from the seventh of July in the 22. year of King Henry the Sixth, being the year of our Lord 1544. until the 25. year of that Kings raign. This Lord built Sudeley Castle in this County, which of Subjects Castles was the most handsome Habitation, and of Subjects Habitations the strongest Castle. King Ed∣ward the Fourth ent for him with such summons, that this Lord conjectured (and that truly enough) that it was but a Preface to his imprisonment: whereupon going to London, and resting himself on a Hill, whence he did behold his own Castle; It is thou Sudeley, it is thou (said he) and not I that am a Traytor, and so resigned the same at last into the hand of the King, to procure his own liberty. So true it is, whatProv. 13 8. Solomon saith, The ransome of a mans life are his riches, but the poor heareth not rebuke. I find not the certain date of his death. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. ANTHONY FITZ-HERBERT, for a long time Justice of the Common Pleas, was,David Pow∣el in his Hi∣story of Wales. as a good Antiquary will have it, born about Dean Forrest in this County; but is byCamb. Brit. in Derby-shire. another (no whit his inferiour) on better evidence referred to Derby-shire, where formerly we have placed his Nativity. Yea, I have been informed from excellent hands; the Natives of this County, that no Capital Judge of the three Great Courts (though many of the Marches) was ever born in this County: yet are they here as litigious, as in other places. Sure I am, that Glou∣cester-shire did breed, if no Judge, yet a Plaintiff and Defendant of the primest quality, which betwixt them (with many alternations) traversed the longest suit that ever I read in England; for a suit was commenced betwixt the Heirs of Sir Thomas Talbot, Vis∣cout Lisle on the one party, and the heirs of——Lord Barkley on the other, a∣bout certain possessions lying in this County not far from Wotton-under-edge, which suit begun in the end of King Edward the Fourth, was depending until the beginning ofCamb. Brit. in Gloucestershire. King James, when (and was it not high time?) it was finally determined. But the long barrenness of this County in Judges may be recompenced with fruitful∣ness at last, the rather because Gloucestershire at this day sheweth two eminent ones, Mr. Justice Adkins, and Mr. Justice Hales, which grace the Court of the Common Pleas with their known ability and integrity. EDWARD TROTMAN, Son of Edward Trotman, Esquire, was born at Cam nigh Duresly in this County, bred a Student of the Law till he became a Bencher in the Inner Temple. He wrote an Abridgement of Sir Edward Coke his eleven Volumes of Reports, for the benefit of those who had not money to purchase, or leisure to peruse them at large. Yea, such as have both may be profitted thereby: for in my owne profession, and in the Book of Books, even those who are best acquainted with the Chap∣ters, make also use of the Contents. This Gentleman in his Title page ingeniously wish∣eth that his Compendium might not prove Dispendium to the Reader thereof. And I verily believe he hath had his desire: being informed that his endeavours are well esteemed by the Learned in that profession.Register of the Burial in the Temple. He was buried in the Temple Church, May 29. Anno Dom. 1643. Souldiers. Sir WILLIAM TRACY of Todington in this County, was a Gentleman of high Birth, State, and Stomach, much in favour with King Henry the second, on whom he was a daily attendant. One fact hath made his Memory, call it famous or infamous,
because he was the first and forwardest of the four Knights, who (at the encourage∣ment if not command, at leastwise, at the connivance, if not encouragement of the a∣foresaid King) Imbrewed their hands in the blood of Thomas Becket. In his old age he went into Devon-shire, where he had large possessions, as may ap∣pear by so many Towns bearing his surname. 1. Wollocomb-Tracy. 2. Bovi-Tracy. 3. Nimet-Tracy. 4. Bradford-Tracy, &c. It is reported that he intended a penitential Pilgrimage to Jerusalem; but setting to Sea, was ever crost with adverse Winds. He is conceived to lie buried in the Parish Church of Mort in Devonshire, dying about the year of our Lord, 1180. Seamen. This is scarcely a Maritine-shire, rather bordering on the Severn than on the Sea, having therein no considerable Haven, (Bristol being beheld as a City entire of it self) and therein eminent Seamen cannot be expected: yet one Family herein hath been most fortunate in such voyages, having their chief Seat at Lydney, in the Forrest of Dean, which hath afforded, WILLIAM WINTER, Knight, and Vice Admiral of England, famous in his Gene∣ration for severalSee Camb. Eliz in these respective years. performances. 1. Anno 1559. being then but Machinarum classicarum praefectus (English it as you please) he frighted the French in Edenborough Frith, assaulting their Fort in the Island of Inchkeith. 2. Anno 1567. he was sent with Sir Thomas Smith, with the sound of the Trum∣pet, and shooting of some Cannons, to demand the restitution of Callis of the French King. 3. Anno 1568. he conducted a great Treasure of the Genoan Merchants safely in∣to the Netherlands, in despight of the French opposing him. 4. Anno 1576. he, with Robert Beale, Clerk of the Councel, was employed into Zeland, to demand the restitution of our Ships, which they had either taken, or did detain. 5. Anno 1588. he did signal service in the station appointed him, coming in (though not in the heat) in the coole of the day, when the Spanish Fleet was fallen towards the shore of Zeland, and were sadly sensible of his valour. I conceive him not to survive long after, because, if in life, he would have been in action; and if in action, I should have found him in Cambden's Elizabeth; And there∣fore from no mention, I conclude no motion, that about this time he departed. Besides others of this Family unknown to me, and justly referred to this County, as their chief habitation: And were the phrase as proper of Men sailing, as Fishes swim∣ming in the Sea, I should say that Lydney-House hath brought forth a shole of Mariners, So happy have they been in Sea voyages. One wondring how the English durst be so bold, as to put to Sea in all weathers, it was returned, that they were provided to saile in all seasons, having both Winters andSir George Summers, of whom in Dor∣set-shire. Summers on their side. The more the pity that this worthy Family of the Winters did ever leave the Element of Water, to tamper with Fire, especially in a destructive way to their King and Country. Writers. OSBERNUS CLAUDIANUS, or Osbern of Gloucester, was bred a Benedictine Monk in the famous Convent in that City. He was learned, saith Leland, Praeter iliius aetatis sortem, above the Standard of that age. He was a good Linguist, Philosopher, Divine, he used to give clearness to what was obscure, facility to what was difficult, politeness to what was barbarous. Nor wanted he a becoming facetiousness in his Dialogues. He wrote many Books, dedicating them to Gilbert Foliot Bishop of Hereford, as a Comment on the Pentateuch Dialogue-wise, as also on the Incarnation, Nativity, Passion, and Resur∣rection of our Saviour. He wrote also a Book calledBle descrip. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 78. & Pits in Anno 1140. Pan-Ormia, dedicating the same to Hamelin Abbot of Gloucester. The Title of this Book minds me of a pretty passage inIn his Book Declaris Ora∣toribus, other∣wise called Brutus, toward, the later end. Tully. At a publick Plea in Rome, Sisenna an Orator who defended his Client, affirmed, that the crimes laid to
his charge, were but Crimina Sputatilica: To whom Rufius (the Orator who managed the accusation) rejoyned, that he feared some treachery in so hard a word, quid Sputa sit scio, quid Tilica nescio. But I am at a worse loss in this uncouth word, though knowing both the parts there∣of. I know what Pan is, All, what Ormia is, a Line or Hook, but of what subject Pan∣Ormia should treat, is to me unknown. But well fare the heart of J. Bale, who (I believe out of Leland) rendreth it a Dictionary, or Vocabulary, ooking all words, it seems, within the compass thereof. This Osbern flourished under King Stephen, Anno 1140. ROBERT of GLOUCESTER, so called, because a Monk thereof. He is omitted (whereat I wonder) both by Bale and Pits, except disguised under another Name, and what I cannot conjecture; they speak truly, who term him a Rhimer, whilest such speak courteously, who call him a Poet. Indeed such his Language, that he is dumb in effect to the Readers of our age without an Interpreter, and such a one will hardly be procu∣red. Antiquaries (amongst whom Mr. Selden) more value him for his History than Poetry, his lines being neither strong nor smooth, but sometimes sharp, as may appear by this Tetrastick, closing with a pinch at the panch of the Monk, which coming from the Pen of a Monk is the more remarkable. In the Citie of Bangor a great Hous tho was, And ther vndyr vij. Cells or Por∣tions. Cellens and ther of ther Ruler or Governor, sed quaere. Nas That C.C.C. Moncks hadde othur mo And alle by hure travayle lyvede▪ loke now if they do so. He flourished some Four hundred years since under King Henry the second, and may be presumed to have continued till the beginning of King John, 1200. ALAN of TEUXBURY, probably born in this Country, though bred at Canterbury, where he became first a Monk of Saint Saviours, and afterwards Prior thereof. Very intimate he was with Thomas Becket, having some reputation for his Learning. In his old age, it seems, he was sent back with honour into his Native Country, and for certain was made Abbot of Teuxbury, when Stephen Langton so much endeavoured, and at last accomplished the canonizing of Thomas Becket. Four Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. Num. 46. & Pits in An. 1200. Authors were employed (Becket his Evangelists) to write the History of his Mock-passion and Miracles. And our Allan made up the Quaternion. He flourished under King John, Anno 1200. ALEXANDER of HALES was bred up in the famous Monastery of Hales, foun∣ded by Richard King of the Romans. After his living some time at Oxford, he went over to Paris, it being fashionable for the Clergy in that (as for the Gentry in our) age, to travail into France, that Clerk being accounted but half learned, who had not studied some time in a Forraign University. But, let Paris know, that generally our English men brought with them more Learning thither, and lent it there, than they borrowed thence. As for this our Alexander, as he had the name of that great Conqueror of the world, so was he a grand Captain and Commander in his kind. For as he did follow Peter Lom∣bard, so he did lead Thomas Aquinas, and all the rest of the Schoole-men. He was the first that wrote a Comment on the Sentences, in a great Volumn, called the Summe of Divinity, at the instance of Pope Innocent the fourth, to whom he dedicated the same, for this and other of his good services to the Church of Rome, he received the splendid Title of Doctor Irrefragabilis. He died Anno Dom. 1245. and was buried in the Fran∣ciscan Church in Paris. THOMAS de la MORE, was, saith my Pits de Illust. Ang. script. Anno 1326. Author, born of a Knightly Family, Pa∣tria Gloucestrencis, a Gloucester-shire-man by his Country; For which his observation I heartily thank him, who otherwise had been at an utter losse for his Nativity. He thus further commendeth him. Pacis & Armorum vir artibus undique clarus. A man whose fame extended far For Arts in Peace, and Feats in War. Indeed he was no Carpet Knight, as who brought his honour with him out of Scotland
on his swords point, being knighted by King Edward the first, for his no less fortu∣nate than   therein. Nor less was his fidelity to his Son Edward the se∣cond, though unable to help him against his numerous enemies. But though he could not keep him from being deposed, he did him the service aithfully to write the man∣ner of his deposition, being a most rare Manuscript extant in Oxford Library. This worthy Knight flourished Anno Dom. 1326. THOMAS of HALES came just an hundred years after Alexander of Hales in time; but more than a thousand degrees behind him in ability, and yet following his Foot steps at distance. First they were born both in this County, bred Minorites in Hales Mona stery; whence for a time they went to Oxford, thence to Paris, where they both pro∣ceeded Doctors of Divinity, and applyed themselves to Contravertial Studies, till this Thomas finding himself not so  for that Imployment, fell to the promoting positive, or rather fabulous poynts of Popery, for the maintainance of Purgatory. He flourished under King Edward the third, Anno Dom. 1340. THOMAS NEALE was born at New Coll. Reg. Anno 1540. Yate in this County, bred first in Winchester, then New Colledge in Oxford▪ where he became a great Grecian, Hebritian, and publick Pro∣fessor of the later in the University. He translated some Rabins into Latine, and dedi∣cated them to Cardinl Pole. He is charactered a man Pitseus de Angl. script. pag. 770. Naturae mirum in modum tim∣dae, Of a very fearful nature, yet always continuing constant to the Roman perswasion. He was Chaplain, (but not Domestick, as not mentioned by Mr. Fox) to Bishop Bon∣ner, and resided in Oxford. In the first of Queen Elizabeth, fearing his Professors place, would quit him, for prevention he quitted it, and built himself an House over against Hart hall, retaining the name of Neals House many years after. Papists admire him for his rare judgement, and Protestants for his strange invention, in first  the im∣probable lye of Matthew Parker is Consecration at the   in , since so Mason de Mnst. Ang. substantially confuted. He was living in Oxford 1576. but when and where (here o beyond the Seas) he died, is to me unknown. Since the Reformation. RICHARD TRACY, Esquire, orn at Todington in this County was Son to Sir William Tracy Confessor, of whom before. He succeeded to his  , in the defence whereof he wrote Bale de scrip. Bt. Cent. 9. Num. 58. several Treatises in the English tongue, and  mo∣markable, which is entituled,  to the Crosse. This he  , having suffered much himself in his Estate for his  reputed   also he wrote prophetically Anno 1550. few years before the beginning of Queen  many being , and so  armed by his useful . It must not be forgotten, how during my abode in Cambridge on   1626. a Book was ound in the belly of a Cod (brought into the    containing therein three , whereof the  and largest was ,  to the Crosse. It was wrapped about with Canvas and    Fish, plundred plndred out of the pocket of some Ship-wracked Seaman. The Wits of the  made themselves merry thereat, one making a long Copy of   on, whereof this Dysti, I remember; Tho Rndolph. If   do bring us Books, then we May hope  Bodlyes Library▪ But whilest the   themselves herewith, the   beheld i as a sad ▪ And some, who then little looked for the  have  found it in that pl. This Book was  , and the Page 18.       the Author   But no such Book  in Bale, (though y accurate to Cent. Octav. Nu. 71. give s a Catalogue of his Writings. Whereby we , it was the same made by this Richard , to which another Treatise was annexed,  one to die, made  by our Tracy, who himself  about an hundred years since. Sir THOMAS OVERBURY, Knight, Son to Sir Nicholas Overbury, one of the Judges
of the Marches, was born at Borton on the Hill in this County, bred in Oxford, and at∣tained to be a most accomplished Gentleman, which the happiness of his Pen, both in Poetry and Prose doth declare. In the later he was the first writer of Characters of our Nation, so far as I have observed. But if the great parts of this Gentleman were guilty of Insolency and Petulancy, which some since have charged on his Memory; we may charitably presume that his reduced age would have corrected such juvenile extravagancies. It is questionable, whether Robert Carre Earl of Somerset were more in the favour of King James, or this Sir Thomas Overbury in the favour of the Earl of Somerset, until he lost it by disswading that Lord from keeping company with a Lady (the Wife of an∣other person of Honour) as neither for his credit here, or comfort hereafter. Soon after Sir Thomas was by King James designed Embassadour for Russia. His false friends perswaded him to decline the employment, as no better than an Honou∣rable Grave. Better lie some dayes in the Tower, than more months in a worse prison. A Ship by Sea, and a barbarous cold Country by land. Besides they possessed him, that within a small time, the King should be wrought to a good opinion of him. But he who willingly goes into a prison out of hope to come easily out of it, may stay therein so long till he be too late convinced of another judgment. Whilest Sir Thomas was in the Tower, his Refusal was represented to the King as an Act of high contempt; as if he valued himself more than the Kings service. His strict restraint gave the greater liberty to his enemies to practise his death, which was by poyson performed. Yet was his Blood legally revenged, which cost some a violent, and others a civil death, as deprived of their Offices. The Earle was soon abated in King Jame's affecti∣on, (O the short distance betwixt the cooling and quenching of a Favourite!) being con∣demned and banished the Court. The death of this Worthy Knight did happen Anno Dom. 1615. JOHN SPRINT was bred a Student in Christ Church in Oxford, and was after∣ward beneficed at Thornbury in this Coun∣ty, a grave and godly Divine, but for a long time much disaffected to the Ceremo∣nies of the Church. It happeened that Mr. Burton, Arch-Deacon of Gloucester his Collegiate and Contemporary, took him to task, perswading him seriously to study the point, which he promised, and perfor∣med accordingly. He put In the one Scle In the other The Wo pronounced to such who preach  the Gospel; and dissert their Flocks on pretended scru∣pulosity. The nature of Ce∣remonies when things indifferent are en∣joyned by lawfull Authority. Weighing both exactly in the ballance of his judgment, he found the former to preponderate, concluding it unlawful for any on such count to leave or lose the exercise of his Minierial Function. Hereupon) he not only conformed for the future,  also wrote a Book (dedi∣cated to Arch-Deacon Burton) called Cas∣der Anganus, to perswade others to conformity. He died, as I am informed, bout thirty years ago. JOHN WORKMAN was born about Lasbury in this County, where his Father was a servant to Sir Tho. Escourt. He was bred in Oxford, and afterwards became for many years the pios and painfull Preacher at Gloucester, being conformable to Church Discipline, both in judgement and practise; and in very deed. It hap∣pened that some pressed super-nonical Ceremonies, and such sesqui-Conformists made Mr. Workman turn first but a semi∣Conformist, and then by degrees to re∣nounce all Conformity. He was prosecuted by G. G. his , for preaching to the disparagement of the Blessed Virgin Mary, though he pleaded his words were only these, That the Papists painted her more like a Cur∣tesan, than a modest Maid. Hereupon he was silenced, and not suffered to teach Schoole; seeing She and Lambs differ not in hind, but age. At last his good Prind Dr. Baud (furnishing him with in∣structions) he turned Phy, and  un∣able to preserv his Pattents in lie, he could well prepare them for death. He died about the year 1636.
We have put them in Parallels, not so much because living at the same time in the same County, as because the one from disliking came to approve; the other, from ap∣proving to dislike Conformity; though both, no doubt, did follow the dictates of their consciences. RICHARD CAPEL was born, as I am informed, in the City of Gloucester, whereof his Father was Alderman, and left him a good temporal estate; he was bred Fellow of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, where he had many Pupils of good qualitie; and a∣mong the rest Mr. William Pemble, whose Books he set forth, and as I remember, fi∣nished his imperfect Comment on Zachary. Leaving the Colledge he was presented by Mr. Stephens to a good benefice in this County, where he made his excellent Book Of Temptations; full fraught with pra∣ctical Piety: so that what judicious person soever readeth it, will experimentally say un∣to him, as once the Lawyer to our Saviour, Master thou hast well spoken: it carrieth in it such a Truth by the confession confession his Conscience. One thing he hath irrefragably proved, That there is no Temptation which a man is subject to, but what might be suggested by our own corruption, without any injection of Satan. We have an English expression, The Devil he doth it, the Devil he hath it, where the addition of Devil amounteth only to a strong denial, equivalent to, he doth it not, he hath it not. My opinion is, if the phrase took not the original from, yet is it applyable to our common and causeless accusing of Satan with our own faults, charging him with those Temptations, wherein we our selves are always chiefly, and sometimes solely guilty. When the reading of the Book of sports on the Lrds day was pressed upon him, he refused the same, as not comporting with his Conscience, and willingly resigned his benefice, living afterwards on his temporal means, and preaching gratis in neighbou∣ring Congregations. He died Anno Dom. 165— Benefactors to the Publick. KATHARINE CLYVEDON, better known by the name of Dame KATHA∣RINE BERKLEY, was Daughter unto Sir John Clyvedon, richly landed in this Coun∣ty. She was first married to Sir Peter Le Veale, and after to Thomas third of that Chri∣stian name, Baron of Berkley, whom she survived, living a constant Widow for four and twenty years; great her Ineritance, augmented with a large Joynture, and yet she expended the profits thereof in Hospitality and prous es; amongst which, the Patent. 7. Rich. 2. part 2. Memb. 2. Founding of the fair Schoole of Wootton-under-edge was most remarkable. I have sometimes wondered with my self, to see the vast Donations which the Family of the Berkleys bestowed on Monaeries: So that there was no Religious House with in twenty-miles of their Castle (besides others at greater distance) which did not plen∣tifully partake of their Liberality. All these now are lost and extinct, whilest the en∣dowment of Wootton Schoole doth still continue▪ whereof I render this private reason to my own thoughts, Because Monks were not of Gods planting, whilest-teaching of Youth is Iure Divino by a positive precept, Teach a Child in the Trade of his Youth, and he will remember  when e is old: I behold Wootton Schoole as of great Seniority, after Winchester, but before Eaton in standing. Iohn Smith late of Nibley, Esquire, was ef∣ctually instrumental in recovering the Lands to this School, which since hath been happy in good School. Masters, as they in pregnant Scholars. This Lady died March 13. 1385. and is buried by her Husband in Berkley Church, in a Monument grated about with Iron Bars. Sir WILLIAM HAMPTON, son to Iohn Hampton, was born at Minchen Hampton in this County, bred after a Fish-mnger in London, where he ved so well, that he became Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1472. He was the first that set up Stocks in every Ward, for the punishment o Vagas and Smpets; on which account I enter him a publick Benefactor. For, an House of Correction is a kind of Alms-House, it be∣ing as charitable a work to reclaim the wicked, as to reieve the wanting; and, were it not for Prisons, all the Land would be but a Prison.
Since the Rformation. THOMAS BELL born in this County, was twice Mayor of the City of Gloucester, and raised his estate by Gods blessing on his Industry and Ingenuity, being one of the first, that brought the trade of Capping into the City. Hereby he got great wealth, suffici∣ent to maintain the degree of Knighthood, which King Henry the eight (as I take it) be∣stowed on him. He bought from the Crown Black-Friers by the South gate in this Ci∣ty, and reformed the ruines thereof into a beautiful house for himself, and hard by it erected an Alms-house, and endowed it with competent Revenues. His Daughter and sole Heir brought a fair Estate into the Families of Dennis. This Sir Thomas died in the beginning of the raign of Queen Elizabeth. EDWARD PALMER, Esquire, (Uncle to Sir Thomas Overbury) was born at Li∣mington in this County, where his Ancestry had continued ever since the Conquest. Of his breeding I can give no exact account, for as the growing of Vegetables towards perfe∣ction is insensible; so, (for want of particular information) I cannot trace his Gradual motions, but find him at last, answering the Character given by Mr. In his De∣scription of Gloucestershire. Cambden, A curious and a diligent Antiquary. Great his store of Coins, Greek and Roman, in Gold, Silver, and Brasse, and greater his skill in them. His plentiful Estate afforded him opportunity to put forward the ingenuity impressed in him by nature for the publick good, resolving to erect an Academy in Virginia; in or∣der whereunto he purchased an sland, called Palmers Island unto this day, but in pur∣suance thereof, was at many thousand pounds expence (some instruments employed therein not discharging their trust reposed in them, with corresponding fidelity) he was transplanted to another world, leaving to posterity the memorial of his worthy but unfinished intentions. He married one of his own name and neighbourhood, the Daughter of Palmers of Compton Schorfin, Esquire. Palmero Palmera nobit sic nubilis Amnis,—Auctior adjunctis Nobilitatis aquis. By her he had many Children, but most of them desceased, amongst whom, Muriel mar∣ried to Michael Rutter of this County, Esquire, inheriting her Fathers parts and piety, left a perfumed Memory to all the Neighbourhood. This Edward Palmer died at London, about the year, 1625. HUGH PIRRY was born in Wootton under-edge, a known Market Town in this County, bred a Merchant in London, whereof he was Sheriff, Anno Dom. 1632. He brought the best Servant, that ever hath, or will come to the Town of Wootton, I mean the Water, which in his life time, on his own cost, he derived thither, to the great benefit of the Inhabitants. He had read, how Job 31. 20. Job had warmed the poor with the Fleece of his Sheep, and obser∣ved what sheep Job had left, he lost; and what he had laid out, was left him; that wooll onely remaining his, which he had expended on the poor. Master Pirry there∣fore resolved on pious uses, but prevented by death, bequeathed a thousand pounds and upwards, for the building and endowing of a fair Alms-House in Woon aforesaid▪ which is persormed accordingly. God hath since visibly blessed him in his fair posterity, four Daughters, the eldest married to the Lord Fitz Williams of Northampton, the second to Sir—of Glamorgan, the third to Sir Robert Bewes of Lancaster▪ and the youngest (the Relict of Viscount Camden's second son) to Sir William Fermoure of Nor∣thampton-shire. He died Anno Dom. 163
Lord Mayors. Name. Father. Place. Company. Time 1 Will. Hampton. John Hampton. Minchen Hamptō. Fish-monger. 1472 2 John Brug or Bruges. Thomas Brug or Bruges. Dymmock. Draper. 1520 3 Leon. Holliday. William Holliday. Redborough. Merchant Taylor 1605 4 Richard Ven. — Wottō under-edg — — 5 Thomas Viner. Thomas Viner. — Gold-smith. 1653 The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. The Keeper of the Spiritualties of the Bi∣shoprick of Worcester, sede vacante. Commissioners for taking the oaths. James de Berkeley. James Greyndore. Knights for the Shire. Robert Stanshaw. Knights for the Shire. Guidonis Whitington Richardi Norman Iohannis Hurtesley Thome Hoke Johannis Joce Johannis Anne Johannis Panncefote Chivaler Johannis Cassy Edwardi Brugge Rob. Whitington Willielmi Boteler Willielmi Moryn Johannis Stoughon Roberti Vobe Johannis Morvan Clementis de Mitton Johannis Moryn Johannis Sll Willielmi Penock Johan. Gifford, Chi∣valer Reginaldi Machyn, Walteri Frsh Thome Sloughter Nicholai Eynesham Radulphi Bottiller, Chivaler. Johannis Grennell Baldewini Rouse Willielmi Somervile Johannis Harewel Walteri Eode Rob Bushel Willielmi Ashton Richardi Grevell Willielmi Tracy, jun. Mauricii Berkeley de Beverston Chev. Iohannis Langley. Egidi Brugge Iohannis de la Mare Will. Prelat Iohannis Lymk Galfred. Hide Johan. Solers Johan. Hampton Thome Lyney Ioh. Kendale Henrici Clifford Iohan. Trye Thome Harsefeld Edmundi. Rodebergh Thome Stanton Thome Sky Richardi Venables Johan. Polyn Roberti Volpenne Joh. Lingescote Ioh. Stanre Thome Ocle Thome Bamvile Roberti Clavile Thome Skey Johan. Roddely Thome Berkeley de Glaucestria Roberti Frompton Roberti Stronge Richardi ichards Maurici Berkeley de Uly, Chivaler Nicholai Poyntz Joh. Kemmys Joh. Coderington Nicholai Stanshaw Nicholai Alderley Iohan. Blunt Thome Bradston Iohan. Westow ohan. Burnel, Ju∣niois Willielmi Fourde Thome Tanner de Dorfoleye Iohannis Basset de Naylesworth.
Sheriffs. HEN. II. Anno 1 Milo de Gloucester. Anno 2 Walter de Hereford Anno 3 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Will. Pypard, for four years. Anno 14 Gilb. Pypard, for four years. Anno 18 Radus filius Stephan. Anno 18 Will. frater ejus. Anno 19 Idem, for fifteen years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Wll. filius Stephani. Will. Marescallus. Anno 2 Rich. de Muegros. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Will. Marescallus. Anno 4 Nich. de Avenel. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Herbertus filius Herberti. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. & Will. de la Pomeray Anno 10 Herbertus filius Herberti. Rex JOHAN. Anno 1 Comes Will. Marescallus. Anno 1 Johan. Avenell. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. Marescallus. & Tho. de Rochford. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will. Marescallus & Rich. de Haseburn. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Rich. de Muegros. Anno 8 Reginal. Pintevolt. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Gerard. Atia. Anno 10 Rich Burgies. Anno 11 Engelard. de Cicomato. Anno 11 Rich. Burgies. Anno 12 Idem. for five years. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Radus. Musard, for 4. years. Anno 6 Radus. Musard. Petrus Egeword. Anno 7 Radus Musard. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Will. Putot, for 7. years. Anno 17 Hen. de Bada. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Will. Talbot. Anno 19 Petrus de Egeword. Anno 19 Tho. de Sancto Martino. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Wll. Talbot. Anno 22 Thurstan. de Despenser. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Johan. filius Galfri. Anno 24 Galfri de Derhurst. Anno 25 Johan. filius Galfri. Anno 25 Marsdatus Canoni. Anno 26 Johan. filius Galfri, for five years. Anno 31 Rob. de Valeram. Anno 31 Galf. de Derherst. Anno 32 Rob. de Valeram Anno 32 Nicus de Monte Acuto. Anno 33 Rob. Valeram. Anno 33 Reginal. de Eide. Anno 34 Rob. Valeram. Anno 35 Johan. de Fleminge. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Adam de Hittested, for four years. Anno 41 Will. de Lesseberowe. Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Rob. de Maysy. Anno 44 Johan. de Brun. Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Matheus Werill. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Idem. Anno 50 Regin. de Acle & Roger: de Anno 50 Chedney Pet. de Chavent. Anno 51 Idem. for five years. EDW. I. Anno 1 Petrus de Chavent. Anno 1 Walt. Bockking Clicus. Anno 2 Reginald. de Acle. Anno 3 Adam de Buttiller, for 5 years Anno 8 Rich. de Ripariis. Anno 9 Walter de Stuchesley, for four years. Anno 13 Rogerus de Lakington. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Galfrid. de Mandriacre. Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Fulco de Locy. Anno 19 . Anno 20 Fulco de Locy. Anno 20 Tho. de Gardinis. Anno 21 Idem. for six years. Anno 27 Johan. de Langley. Anno 28 Rich. Talebot. Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Johan. de Novo Burgo. Anno 31 Tho. de Gardinis, for 5 years EDW. II. Anno 1 Johan. Langley. Anno 2 Nich. de Kingston, & Johan. de Aunesley. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Johan. Aunesley, & Johan. de Acton. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will. Mannsel, & Rob. Darcy Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Rich. de la River. for 4. years. Anno 12 Johan. de Hampon, for 4. years. Anno 16 Anno 17 Johan. Besmaunsel & Will. Tracy. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Tho. de Rodberg.
Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Will. Gamage, & Tho. Rod∣bergh. Anno 5 Tho. Berkeley de Cobberly. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Rich. de Foxcot, for 5. years. Anno 12 Tho. Berkeley de Cuberley Rich. de Foxcot. Anno 13 Tho. de Berkeley. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Walter Dastin. Anno 16 Simon Basset, for 9. years. Anno 25 Walt. Dastin. & Ph. Mare∣schall. Anno 26 Johan. de Weston. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Will. de Ledene. Anno 29 Tho. de Berkeley de Cob∣berly, & Will. Ledene. Anno 30 Tho. de Berkely, de Coberl. Anno 31 Rob. de Herdesle. for 4 years. Anno 35 Thomas Moygne. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Idem. Anno 38 Johan. Tracy, for 5 years. Anno 43 Johan. Points. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Johan. Tracy. Anno 46 Johan. Clifford. Anno 47 Tho. de Ocle. Anno 48 Johan. Ioce. Anno 49 Nich. de Berkeley. Anno 50 Petrus de Veel. Anno 51 Johan. Ioce. Anno 51 Petrus de Chavent. Edw. I. 9. WALT. de STUCHESLY.] The King directed his Letters to this Sheriff, enjoyning him, o take an exact account of the number and names of all the Villages, within the several Hundreds of the County, with the Persons, the present Possessors thereof, and return his Collection with speed and safety, into the Exchequer, according to this Tenor. Edwardus Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, & Dux Aquitaniae, Vice-Comi∣ti Glouc. salutem. Quia quibusdam certis de causis Certiorari volumus, qui & quot Hun∣dredi sunt in Balivatua, & Quorum sunt. Et quae & quot Civitates, Burgi, & Villae, sunt in quolibet Hundredorum illorum, & qui sunt Domini eorundem. Tibi praecipimus, firmiter injungentes, quod modis, & vis omnibus, quibus plenius ac diligentius poteris, te informes de praemissis. Ita quod super. proxim▪ fafr. tentum apud Scaccarium nostrum. Thesaurarium, & Barones nostros de eodem Scaccario poss is plen informare, & tu ip∣se, in propria persona tua, sis ad dictum Scaccar. super prox. fafr. tentum ex hac causa, nisi tunc licentiam à nobis habueris absens esse. Et tunc per illum quem super perfr. tuum per te mittes ad Scaccar. praedictum Thesaurum & Barones praedictos de praemissis plenius facias informare. Ita quod in te, vel in ipso, quem pro te, ad dictum Scaccar. sic mittes defectus aliquis non inveniatur, per quod ad te graviter capiamus. Et habeas ibi tunc hoc breve. Teste meipso apud Clypston, quinto die Marit, An Regni nostri Nono. In obedience to the Kings command, this Sheriff vigorously prosecuted the design, and made his Return accordingly on the same token, that, it thus began, Nulla est Civitas in Comitat. Gloucest. There is no City in the County of Gloucester. Whence we collect, that Gloucester in that age (though the seat of a mired Abby) had not the reputation of a City, untill it was made an Episcopal See by K. Hen. 8. The like Letters were sent to all other Sheriffs in England, and their Returns made into the Ex∣chequer, where it is a kind of Dooms-day-Book, junior, but commonly passeth under the name of Nomina Villarum. I have by me a Transcript of so much as concerneth Glou∣cester-shire (the reason why this Letter is here exemplified) communicated unto me, with other rarities (advancing this Subject) by my worthy Friend Mr. Smith of Nibley. It must not be omitted, that though the aforesaid Catalogue of Nomina Villarum was begun in this year, and a considerable progresse made therein, yet (some unexpressed ob∣stacles retarding) it, was not in all particulars completed, until 20 years after, as by this passage therein may be demonstrated; Bertona Regis juxta Gloucester. & ibidem Hun∣didum, & Hundr. Margarettae Reginae Angliae. Now this Margaret Queen of England, Daughter to Philip the Hardy King of France, and second Wife to this King Edward the First, was not married unto him, until the 27 of her Husbands reign, Anno 1299. Edw. III. 5 THO. BERKELEY de COBBERLEY.] He is commended in our Stows An∣nals, pag. 327. Histories for his civil▪usage of K. Edw. 2. when pisoner at Berkeley Castle, at this day one of the seats of that right ancient Famiiy. And right ancient it is indeed, they being descended from Robert Fitz-Harding, de∣rived
from the Kings of Denmark; as appeareth by an Inscription on the Cambden in  set-shire. Colledge-Gate at Bristol. Rex Henricus secundus & Dominus Robertus filius Hardingi filii Regis Daciae, hujus Monasterii primi Fundatores extiterunt. This Robert was entirely beloved of this King, by whose means his Son Maurice mar∣ried the Daughter of the Lord of Berkeley, whereby his posterity retained the name of Berkeley. Many were their Mansions in this County, amongst which Cobberley accrued unto them by matching with the Heir of Chandos. Their services in the Holy War, alluded unto by the Crosses in their Arms, and may seem to be their Benefactions, (whereof in my Church History) signified by the Mitre in their Crest. Of this Family was descended William Lord Berkeley, who was honoured by King Edward the fourth with the Title of Viscount Berkeley, created by K. Rich. 3. Earle of Nottingham, (and in the right of his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Mowbray) Duke of Norfolk. Henry the sventh made him Marquess Berkeley, and Marshal of England. He died without Issue. At this day there flourisheth many Noble stems sprung thereof, though George Lord Berkeley, Baron Berkeley, Lord Mowbray, Segrave, Bruce be the top Branch of this Fa∣mily. One who hath been so signally bountiful in promoting these (and all other) my weak endeavours, that I deserve to be dumb, if ever I forget to return him publick thanks for the same. 43. JOHN POINTS.] Remarkable the Antiquity of this Name and Family (still continuing in Knightly degree in this County) for I read in Dooms-day-Book, Drugo filius Ponz tenet de Rege Frantone. Ibi decem Hide Geldant de hoc Manerio. And again, Walterus filius Ponz tenet de Rege Lete. Ibi decem Hide Geldant. I behold them as the Ancestors of their Family, till I shall be informed to the contra∣ry, though I confess they were not seated at Acton in this County, until the days of King Edward the second, when Sir Nicholas Points, married the Daughter and Heir of Acton, transmitting the same to his posterity. Sheriffs. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Tho. Bradwell.     2 Johan. Tracy. Todingtō Or, a scallop Sab. betw. two Bends, Gules. 3 Radulph. Waleys.* Sodbury   4 Tho. Bradewell.   * Azure, 6. Mullets, Or. 5 Joh. de Thorp. mil.   Argent, a Fess Nebule, Sable, betw. 3. Trefoiles, Gules. 6 Tho. Fitz Nichol.     7 Radus Waleys. ut prius   8 Tho. Berkeley. Cobberley Gules, a Cheveron betwixt ten Crosses formee, Argent. 9 Tho. Burgg. †     10 Tho. Bradewell. ut prius † Azure, three flower de lys, Ermine. 11 Tho. Berkeley. ut prins   12 Laur. Seabrooke.     13 Tho▪ Burgg. ut prius   14 Maur. de Russell. Derham Argent, on a Chief, Gules, 3. Bezants. 15 Hen. de la River.     16 Joh. de Berkeley. ut prius.   17 Gilbertus Denis.   Gules, a Bend ingrailed, Az. betw. 3. Leopards heads, Or, essant flower de lis of the 2d 18 Will. Tracy. ut prius   19 Maur. Russel. ut prius   20 Rob. Poyns. Acton Barry of eight, Or, and Gul. 21 Johan▪ Berkeley. ut prius   22 Johan. Bronings.     HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Hen▪ de la River.     2 Maur. Russel, & ut prius   2 Rob Sommerville     3 Rob▪ Whittington.   Gules, a Fess checkee, Or, and Argent. 4 Wil. Beauchamp, m     5 Idem     6 Johan. Grendore.   Per pale Or, and Vert, 12. gut∣tees or drops, counterchanged. 7 Maur. Russel. ut prius.   8 Rob. Whittington. ut prius   9 Rich. Mawrdin.     10 Alex. Clivedon.     11 Will. Wallwine.   Gules, a Bend within a Br∣der, Ermine. 12 Joh. Grendore, mil. ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno     1 Will. Beauchamp Powkes.   2 Joh. Berkley, mil. ut prius   3 Joh. Grevel. Campden Or, on a Cross engrailed with∣in the like border, Sab. ten Annulets of the First, with a Mullet of five poynts in the Dexter Quarter. 4 Idem. ut prius   5 Will. Tracy. ut prius   6 Will. Bishopeston:     7 Joh. Brugg, arm. ut prius   8 Joh. Willecots.     9 Idem.     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Joh. Panfote.   Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Arg. 2 Joh. Blacket, mil.     3 Steph. Hatfild, mil.     4 Joh. Grevil, arm. ut prius   5 Joh. Panfote. ut prius   6 Guido Whittington ut prius   7 Rob. Andrew.   Sab. a Saltire engrailed, Er∣min, on a Chief, Or, 3. flower de lys of the First. 8 Egidius Brigge. *     9 Maur. Berkeley, mil ut prius   10 Steph. Hatfield.   * Arg. on a Cross, Sab. a Leo∣pards head, Or. 11 Joh. Towerton.     12 Cuido Whittington ut prius   13 Joh Panfote. ut prius   4 Maur. Berkeley, mil ut prius   15 Idem. ut prius  
16 Joh. Beauchamp, m.     17 Will. Stafford. Thornb. Or, a Cheveron, Gules. 18 Joh. Stourton, mil.   Sable, a Bend Or, between 3. Fountains propr. 19 Idem. ut prius   20 Joh. Boiller.     21 Rob. Leversey,     22 Will. Traey. ut prius   23 Idem. ut prius   24 Will. Gifford.     25 Joh. Botiller.     26 Hen. Clifford. Frampton Checky, Or and Az. on a bend G. 3 Lioncels ramp. of the fist 27 Joh. Trye. * on Severn   28 Joh. Gise. † Elmor * Arg. a Bucks head Gules. 29 Will. Tracy. ut prius Or, abend, Azure. 30 Jac. Clifford. ut prius † Lozengy Varry and Gul. on a Caton, Or, a Mullet of 6. points, Sable. 31 Joh. Vele. *     32 Egidius Brigge. ut prius   33 Joh. Gise. ut prius * Arg. on a Bend, Sab. three Calves, Or. 34 Wal. Devereux. m. †     35 Jh. Barre, mil.   † Arg. a Fesse Fules in Chief, three Torteauxes 36 Edw. Hūgerford, m*     37 Nich. Latymer. †   *S.  bars Ar. 3 plates in Chif 38 Tho. Hungerford. ut prius † Gules, a Cross Patance, Or. EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Grivel, arm. ut prius   2 Maur. Denis. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 Maur. Berkley, ar. ut prius   5 Ed. Hungerford, m. ut prius   6 Joh. Huggford, at.     7 Joh. Newton, ar     8 Joh. Grivel, mil. ut prius   9 Rob. Poynts, mil. ut prius   10 Joh. Cassy, arm.   Arg. a Cheveron betwixt three Griffons heads erased, Gul. 11 Rich. Beauchamp, m     12 Idem.     13 Humph. Forster.     14 Joh. Botiller. mil.     15 Tho. Whitington, a. ut prius   16 Tho. Norton. ar.     17 Rob. Poines. ut prius   18 Tho. Baynam, ar.   Or, a . betwixt 3. Bull heads, Arg▪ 19 Edw. Langley. †     20 Walt. Denis. ut prius † Or, a cross saltire, Gul. 21 Jo. St. Lowe, mil.     22 Rob. Poyntz, ar. ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Alex. Baynam. ut prius   2 Joh. Hudleston, ar.     3 Will. Berkley, m. ut prius   3 & Rob. Poynts. ut prius   HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Rob. Poyntz, mil, ut prius   2 Joh. St. Low, mil.     2 Joh. Welsh, ar. ut prius   3     4 Tho. Moreton.     5 Christ. Tortworth Gul. on a chveron Arg. 3. Bars Gemelle, Sable. 5 Tho. Hungerford, m. ut prius   7 Rich. Pole, arm.   Az. semee de flower de Lize, Or, a Lion rampant, Arg. 8 Rob. Miles.     9 Walt. Denis, mil. ut prius   10 Edw. Berkley. mil. ut prius   11 Joh. Whitington, a ut prius   12 Rob. Poynts, mil. ut prius   13 Rich. Pole, ar. ut prius   14 Alex. Baynam, mil. ut prius   15 Egidius Brugge, m. ut prius   16 Joh. Huddleston, m.     17 Rob. Poynts, mil. ut prius   18 Alex. Bay nam, mil. ut prius   19 Idem. ut prius   20 Egidius Genel.     21 Jh. utiller. ar.     22 Edw. Tame, ar.     23 Joh. Panneffot. ut prius   24 Anth. Poyntz. ar. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Maur. Berkley, mil. ut prius   2 Th. Poyntz, ar. ut prius   3 Christ. Baynam, ar. ut prius   4 Rob. Moron, mil.     5 Will. Tracy, mil. ut prius   6 Will, Kingston, mil Misterden Azure, a plain crosse between 4 Lopards eads, Or. 7 Man. Berkley, mil. ut prius   8 Alex. Baynam, mil. ut prius   9 Christ. Baynam, m. ut prius   10 Ioh. Whittington, a. ut prius   11 Will. Denis, mil. ut prius   12 Egidius Tame, mil.     13 Tho. Poyntz, ar. ut prius   14 Tho Berkley, mil. ut prius   15 Antho. Poyntz, mil ut prius   16 Edw. Tame, mil.     17 Edw. Wadham, mil   Gules, a  betwixt 3. Roses, Arg. 18 Ioh Walsh, mil. ut prius   19 Will. Denis, mil. ut prius   20 Anth. Poyntz, mil. ut prius   21 Wil. Throgmorton a ut prius   22 Ioh. Wlsh, mil. ut prius   23 Edw. Wadham, mi. ut prius   24 Walter Denis, mil. ut prius   25 Anth. Kingston, ar. ut prius   26 Rich Legon, mil.   Argent, 2 Lions passant, Gul. 27 Ioh. Walsh, mil. ut prius   28 Ioh. St. Lo▪ mil.     29 Edw. Tame, mil.     30 Wal. Dens, mil. ut prius   31 Nich. Poyntz, mil. ut prius   32 Ioh. Walsh, mil. ut prius   33 dw. Wadham, m. ut prius   34 Edw. Tame, mil.     35 Walt. Denis, mil. ut prius   36 Geo. Baynham, mil. ut pius   37 Nich. Poyntz, mil. ut prius   38 Nich. VVkes, ar.   Az. a Lion  checkque Argent an Gules. EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Milo Pertrich, mil.   Checkee, Ar. & S. on a bend. G. 3 scallops, Or. 2 Ath. Porter, ar. * Newmark   3 Tho. Briges, mil. ut prius * Gules, 5. Marlions wings in saltire, Arg. 4 Ant. Kingston, mil ut prius   5 Walt. Denis, mil. ut prius   6 Hugo Denis, ar. ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     M 1. An. Hungerford, m ut prius   1. 2. Nich. Wikes, ar, ut prius   2. 3. Walt. enis, mil. ut prius   3. 4. Nich. Pannfort. ut prius   4. 5. Nich. Brayne. ar. Little De. Az▪ a Boar head Gles, on a Fesse betwixt three Hun∣ters horns, Arg. 5 6. Th. , ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Rich. Arnold, mil.     2 Rich. Tracy, ar. ut prius   3 Nich. Walsh, ar. ut prius   4 Geo. Huntley, ar. . Arg. on a chev. betw. 3 Stags heads couped, Sable, as many Bugles stringed of the first. 5 Will Read, ar. †     6 Rich. Berkley, ar. ut prius   7 Egidius Pole, mil. ut prius † Azure, a Griffon Ramp. Or. 8 Will. Palmer, ar.     9 Wil. Hungerford, ar ut prius   10 Rob. Brane, ar. ut prus   11 Nich. Poynts, mil. ut prius   12 Rich. Baynam, ar. ut prius   13 Tho. Smith, ar.     14 Ioh. Bigford, ar.     15 Rob. Strange, ar.     16 Tho. Porter, mil. ut prius  
17 Tho. Wye, ar.     18 VValt. Campton, ar Harthry   19 Tho. Chester. Almondsb   20 Ioh Tracy, mil. ut prius   21 Will. Read, ar. ut prius   2 Rich. Pate, ar.     23 Tho. Porter, mil. ut prius   4 Tho. Baynham, ar. ut prius   25 Tho. Smith, ar. Nibley Sab. on a Chev. engrailed, be∣twixt 6 Crosses patee Fitchee Or, 3 flowers de lys Az. each charged on the top with a plate. 26 An. Hungerford, ar. ut prius   27 Ioh, Higford, ar. Dixton   28 Paul. Tracy, ar. Stanway   29 Th. Throgmortō, m. ut prius   30 Hen. Pole, mil. ut prius   31 Tho. Lucy, ar.     32 Will. Dutton, ar.   Quarterly Arg. and Gul. in the 2d. and 3d. quarter a Fret, Or. 33 Ioh Poyntz, mil. ut prius   34 Will. Chester, ar.     35 Ioh. Davers. mil, Cinencest Gul. a Chev. inter 3 Mullets, Or. 36 Ioseph Benham, ar.     37 Hen. Winston, mil.     38 Ioh. Chamberlain, a. Prestbury Gul. an Inescoucheon Arg. an Orle of mullets, Or. 39 Ioh. Hungerford, m ut prius Cheokey, Or and Sab. a Fesse, Gul. 40 Edw. Winter, mil. Lidney   41 Geo. Huntley.     42 Th. Throgmortō, m ut prius   43 Will. Dutton, ar. ut prius   44 Tho. Baynham. ar. ut prius   JACOBUS.     Anno     1 Hen. Pole, mil. ut prius   2 Egid. Read, ar. ut prius   3 Tho. Seymer, mil. Button G. 2 wings conjoyned, Or, with in a border gobonated, Arg. 4 VVill. Norwood. * Leckhāpt.   5 Tho. Estcourt, mil. † Lasbury * Ermin,  cross engrailed, Gu. Anno 6 Rob Woodroff, m   † Erm. on a Chief indented G. 3. Stars, Will. Guyes, ar. ut prius   7 Ioh. Tracy, mil. ut prius   8 Paul. Tracy, ar. ut prius   9 Rob. Bathurst, ar. Lechlade   10 Ioh. Carter, ar. Charlton   11 Will. Kingston, ar. ut prius   12 Rich. Brent, ar.     13 Hen. Finh, ar.     14 Radus Ctton, ar.   Az. a Cheveron between three Cotton weeks, Arg. 15 Tho. Chester, ar. Knolle   16 Rich. Hill, mil.     17 Ph. Langley, ar. Mangotsfi ut prius. 18 Tho. Baker, mil.     19 Tho. Thynn, mil. Wiltshire Barry of ten, Or and Sable. 20 Tho. Hodges, ar. Shipron   21 Rich. Rogers, mil. Eastwood   22 Ioh. Dowle, ar.     CAROL. I.     Anno     1 Will, Sandys, mil. Misterden   2 Tho. Nicholas, ar Prestbury   3 VVill. Masters, mil Grencest.   4 Rich. Tracy, m. & b. ut prius   5 Hen. Dennis ar. Paule Ch. ut prius. 6 Radus Dutton, mil. Standish ut prius. 7 Geo. VVinter, mil.     8 Hen. Poole, am. ut prius   9 Egid. Fetiplace, m. Coln Alin Gul. two Cheverons, Arg. 10 Edw. Stephens, ar. L. Sodbury   11 Will Leigh, ar.     12 Rich Ducy, Bar. Frowcest. Or, two Lions passant, Gults. 13 Ioh. Poyntz, mil, ut prius   14 Rob. Codrington, ar Codering ton Arg. a Fes imbattled, Sable, between 3. Lions passant, Gu. 15     6     17 Fr. Creswick, ar. Bristol   8     19     12     21   Or, on a Fess, Gul. 3. chess∣Rooks of the first, as many Martlets in Chief, Sab. 22 VVill. Brown, ar. Hasfield   Hen. VIII. 6. WILLIAM KKNGSTON, Mil.] I read in an industrious Burton in de∣scription of Leicester-shire, pag. 320. Author, that Sir Will. Kingston was created by K. Hen. 8. Knight of the Garter, which I humbly conceive to be a mistake, having several exact Catalogues of all admitted into that Order, amongst whom he doth not appear; yet was he Lieutenant of the Tower, and Captain of the Guard to K. Hen. 8. by whom he was much trusted and employed. Cardinal Wolsey had it given him in advice, to beware of Lord Howard in his Defen∣sative against Prophesies, fol 130. Kingston, which he mistook for the Market Town in Surry well known, and therefore declined going thither, though many miles his nearer way, in passage to the Court. But at last he found this our Sir Anthony his formidable & fatal Kingston, when sent to fetch him out of the North, with some of the Guad. And, though he treated the Card. most cour∣teously (saluting him on his Lord Herbert ut prius. knees) yet the sight of him went to his heart, dying with∣in few days after. Edw. VI. 4. ANTHONY KINGSTON, Mil.] This was that terrble Provost Marshal of the Kings Army in the execution of the We∣stern Rebels, whose memory I find accused by In his life of K. Edw. 6. Sir Iohn Heywood for his cruelty, and de∣fended by In his Survey of Cornwall. Mr. Carew. This Sir Anthony, so frightful to all guilty persons, fell himself into the same fear, in the reign of Q. Mary, on this occasion. Some were said to have a design to raise war against the Queen, and resolved to provide the sinews before the bones of war, money before men. In order whereunto their design was to rob the Exche∣quer, then furnished with 50000. . This being discovered, mane were accused as Plot∣ters, more as Privy, amongst whom Sir Anthony Kingston, being sent for to come up, he died (for fear of death, some suppose) in his Holingshed in the fourth of Q Mary. pag. 1132. way to London. The Farewell. I congratulate the Felicity of this County in the return of the Episcopal See to the chief City threof; the ra∣ther seeing some questioned its Charter, and would have had it Un Citied, because Un Bishoped in our Civil Wars, though (with their leave) by the courtesie of England, once a City and ever a City. May the same hereafter ever re∣main there to take away all suspicion in that kind for the future.
HANT-SHIRE hath Berk-shire on the North, Surrey and Sussex on the East, the Sea on the South, Dorcet and Wilt-shire on the West. From North unto South it extendeth unto fifty foure miles, not stretching above thirty miles from the East to the West thereof. A happy Countrey in the foure Elements, if Culinary fire in Courtesie may pass for one, with plenty of the best wood for the fuel thereof; most pure and peircing the aire of this Shire; and none in England hath more plenty of clear and fresh rivulets of [troutful] water, not to speak of the friendly Sea conveniently distanced from London: As for the Earth, it is both fair and fruitful, and may pass for an Expedient betwixt Pleasure and Profit; where by mutual consent they are mode∣rately accommodated. Yet much of the Arable therein is stony ground, though not like that in the Gospel, where the grain grew up and withered so soon, having no Matth. 13. 5. deepness of earth, this bringing plenty of corn to perfection. Indeed, that in the Parable may be pre∣sumed inwardly a rock onely faced over with superficial earth, whereas this hath solid earth enough, but abounding with little loose stones lying above it, which are con∣ceived to keep the Corn the warmer; and therefore some skilfull in Husbandry have maintained, that the taking of them away, doth more hurt than good to the ground. The South-West part of this County is called the New Forrest, not in the same sense as New Colledge in Oxford, then at the founding the Newest, which since hath gained many Puis nes thereunto; but because the Junior of all Forrests in England, many having been Dis- none In-forrested since the Conquest. True it is, King Henry the 8th. made a Forrest about his Palace of Hampton in Middlesex by the name of Hampton∣forrest; but it never obtained peaceable possession in publique pronunciation, (blame not the people thereabout if in point of Profit their tongues would not cross their hearts) as this New-Forrest did. Whereof hereafter. Natural Commodities. Red Deer. Great store of these were lately in New Forrest, so called because Newly made by K. William the Conqueror, Otherwise ten years hence it will be six hundred years old: Indeed, as Augustus Csar is said to have said of Herod King of Judaea, that it was better to be his Hog than his Childe: So was it most true of that King William, that it was better to have been his Stag than his Subject; the one being by him spared and pre∣served, the other ruined and destroyed: Such was the Vastation he made of Townes in this County to make room for his game. And it is worth our observing the opposition betwixt the Characters of K. EDGAR. K. WILLIAM. Camden's Brit. in Somer∣setshire. Templa Deo, Templis Monachos, Monachis dedit agros. Idem in Hant-shire. Templa adimit Divis, fora Civibus, arva Colonis. And now was the South-West of this County made a Forest indeed, if as an Sir Ro. Cotton (under the name of Mr. Speed in Huntington∣shire.) Anti∣quary hath observed, a Forest be so called, quia foris est, because it is set open and abroad. The Stags therein were stately creatures, jealous, revengeful; insomuch, that I have been credibly inform'd, that a Stag unable for the present to master another, who had taken his Hinde from him, waited his opportunity, till his enemy had weakned himself with his wantonness, and then kill'd him. Their Flesh may well be good, whose very Horns are accounted Cordial. Besides, there is a concave in the neck of a green-headed Stag, when above his first crossing, wherein are many worms some 2. inches in length, very useful in Physick, and therefore carefully put up by Sir Theodore Mayerne, and other skilful Physicians. But I beleive there be few Stags now in New∣Forest, fewer Harts, and not any Harts-Royal (as escaping the chase of a King) though in time there may be some again.
Hony. Although this Countie affordeth not such Lakes of Honey, as someP. Jovius de legatione Mus∣covitarum, &  de . Authors relate found in hollow Trees in Muscovy, nor yieldeth Combes equal to that which PlinyNat. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 24. reporteth seen in Germany, eight foot long, yet produceth it plenty of this necessary and profitable Commoditie. Indeed Hantshire hath the worst and best Hony in England, worst, on the Heath hardly worth five pound the Barrel, best, in the Champian where the same quantity will well nigh be sold for twice as much. And it is generally observed, the finer the Wheat and Wooll, both which very good in this County, the purer the Hony of that place. Hony is useful for many purposes, especially that Hony which is the lowest in any Vessel. For it isNaturae liquor iste novae cui summa natat faex. Auson. an old and true rule, the best Oyle is in the top; the best Wine in the middle, and the best Hony in the bottome. It openeth Obstructions, cleareth the Breast and Lights from those humors which fall from the head, loosneth the belly, with many other soveraign qualities, too many to be reckoned up in a Winters day. However we may observe three degrees, or kinds rather of Hony. 1. Virgin Hony, which is the purest, of a late Swarm which never bred Bees. 2. Chaste Hony, for so I may term all the rest which is not Sophisticated with any addition. 3. Harlot Hony, as which is adulterated with Meal, and other trash mingled therewith. Of the first and second sort I understand the Counsel of Salomon, MyProv. 24. 13. Sonne eat Hony for it is good, good absolutely in the substance, though there may be excess in the quantitie thereof. Wax. This is the Cask, where Hony is the Liquour, and being yellow by Nature, is by Art made white, red and green, which I take to be the dearest colours, especially, when appendant on Parchment. Wax is good by Day and by Night, when it affordeth light, for Sight the clearest, for Smell the sweetest, for Touch the cleanliest. Use∣ful in Law to seal Instruments, and in Physick, to mollifie Sinewes, ripen and dissolve Ulcers, &c. Yea, the Ground and Foundation of all Cere-cloath (so called from Cera) is made of Waxe. Hoggs. Hantshire Hoggs, are allowed by all for the best Bacon, being our English Westphalian, and which well ordered hath deceived the most judicious Pallats. Here the Swine feed in the Forrest on plenty of Acorns, (Mens meat in the golden,Olim commu∣nis pecori cibus atque homini Glans. Auson. Hogs food in this iron Age,) which going out lean, return home fat, without either care or cost of their Owners. Nothing but fulness stinteth their feeding on the Mast falling from the Trees, where also they lodge at liberty, (not pent up, as in other places, to stacks of Pease) which some assign the reason of the fineness of their flesh, which though not all Glorre (where no bancks of lean, can be seen for the Deluge of fat) is no less delicious to the taste, and more wholsome for the stomack. Swines-flesh by the way is observed most nutritive of mens bodies, because of its assi∣milation thereunto. Yet was the eating thereof forbidden to the Jewes, whereof this Reason may be rendred, (besides the absolute Will of the Law-giver,) because in hot countries Mens bodies are subject to the Meastes and Leprosies, who have their greatest repast on Swines-flesh. For the Climate of Canaan, was all the year long as hot, as England betwixt May and Michael-mass, and it is penal for any Butch∣ers with us in that Term to kill any Pork in the Publick Shambles. As for the Manufacture of Clothing in this County, (diffused throughout the same) such as deny the goodness of Hant-shire Cloath, and have occasion to wear it, will be convinced of its true worth by the price which they must pay for it.
The Buildings. The Cathedral in Winchester yeildeth to none in England for venerable magni∣ficence. It could not be Opus unius saeculi, perfected by the contributive endeavours of several successive Bishops, whereof some lie most sumptuously interred in their Chappel-like-Monuments. On the walls of the Quire on each side, the dust of the Saxon-Kings, and ancient Bi∣shops of this Church were decently Intombed (many hundred years after) by Richard Fox Bishop of this See, till in the beginning of our Civil Wars, they were barbarously thrown down by the Souldiers. Josephus reports (what some hardly believe) how Herod took many talents of Trea∣sure out of the Sepulchre of David; sure I am they met with no such wealth here in this Mine of Mortality amongst the ashes, which did none any injurie, and therefore why Malice should scratch out that, which did not bite it, is to me unknown. As for Civil Structures, Basing, built by the first Marquess of Winchester, was the greatest of any Subjects House in England, yea larger than most (Eagles have not the biggest Nests of all Birds) of the Kings Palaces. The Motto Love Loyaltie, was often written in every window thereof, and was well practised in it, when for resistance on that account, it was lately levelled to the Ground. Next Basing, Bramsell, built by the last Lord Zouch in a bleak and barren place, was a stately Structure, especially before part thereof was defaced with a casual fire. The Wonders. There is an Oake in this County, which by most credible people is generally re∣ported to put forth green leaves yearly on, or about, Christ-mas day. It groweth nigh Lindhurst in the New Forrest, and perchance I could point more exactly at the position thereof, but am loath to direct some ignorant Zealot, lest he cut it down under the notion of superstition, and make Timber of this Oake, as some lately have made Fewel of the Hawthorn at Glassenburie. Proverbs. Manners makes a Man, Quoth William Wickham. This generally was his Motto inscribed frequently on the places of his Founding, so that it hath since acquired a Proverbial Reputation. We commonly say In the 1. Church, God makes a Man, as who truly created him. 2. Court, Clothes make a Man, as which habit and adorn him. 3. Change, Money makes a Man, which puts him in a solvable condition. 4. Schools, Manners make a Man, as which compleat and accomplish him. Grant the two middle Expressions, the extravagancy of our Pride and Covetous∣ness, the first and last must be allowed proportionable to Piety and Truth. Without manners one is but a Man-beast or Centaure. Now seeing no man without Manners, no Manners without some Learning, no Learning without Teaching, no teaching of Youth to that in a Grammer Free-school; of men to that in a Colledge, in an Universitie; How much thanks doth Posteritie owe to this VVickham's memory. Canterbury is the higher Rack, but Winchester is the better Manger,] W. Edington,Bishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of Win∣c hester. Bishop of Winchester, was the Authour of this Expression, rendring this the reason of his refusal to be removed to Canterbury, though chosen thereunto. Indeed though Canterbury be Graced with an higher Honor, the Revenues of Winchester lying entirely, are more advantagious to gather riches thereon. The Proverb is ap∣pliable to such, who prefer a wealthy Privacy, before a less profitable Dignity. Yet know that that Manger did once partly maintain that Rack, viz. When John White Bishop of Winchester was injoyned by Queen Mary, to pay a thousand pound a year to Cardinal Poole, Archbishop of Canterburie, for the better support of his Estate. The Isle ofCam. Brit. in the Isle of Wight. Wight hath no Monks, Lawyers, nor Foxes.] This Speech hath more mirth, than Truth in it. That they had Monks I know,Speeds Cat of Religious Houses. Black ones, at Carisbrook; White ones, at Quarter in this Island. That they have Lawyers they know, when they pay them their Fees; and that they have Foxes their Lambs know. However, because perchance they have fewer in proportion to places of the like extent, (and few or none are often coupled in common discourse) let not that which was pleasantly spoken be frowardly taken, but pass as we found it to Posteritie.
Princes. HENRY Eldest Son of King John and his Wife ISABEL, born at Winchester Anno 1208. was one (besides the account of Longaevity) Eminent in his Genera∣tion. He was a most pious King, Son to a prophane Father [King John] A very poor King, brother to a most wealthie [Richard King of the Romans.] A very weak King, Father to a most wise Son, Edward the First. The Tragi-Comedie of his life was Emi∣nent in many particulars. 1. He had scarce half a Kingdome in the beginning of his Reign, Lewis of France, being brought in to be King by the English in their hot, and cast out in their cold Bloud. 2. He had no part of a Kingdome in the middle of his Reign, Imbroyled with War with his Barons, Beaten in Battle, Imprisoned, and no King in effect. 3. He had all the Kingdome in the end of his Reign. For as soon as Prince Edward began to Man it, This His Son may be accounted his Father, by whom he attained a comfortable Old Age. He was not so weak, but that he knew who were wiser then himself, and would be governed by them, One main cause which procured his Death in Peace, and Burial in Pomp, In the Abbey of Westminster of his own foundation, Anno Dom. 1273. ELEANOR tenth Daughter, sixteenth and youngest Child of King Edward the First, was born at Speeds Chro. Page 565. Winchester the 6. of May 1306. and died in her Infancy, So that the Epitaph which I find elsewhere of an Infant of meaner birth may be ap∣plyed unto her. (She lieth buried at Saint Peters VVestminster, having her Picture upon her Monument with three of her Brothers.) ARTHUR, Eldest son to King Henry the Seaventh, and Queen Elizabeth, was born, (being partus Lord Veru∣lam in his Hen. the 7. octomestris, yet vital and vigorous, contrary to the rules of Physicians) at Speeds Chro. Page 763. Winchester the 20. day of September 1486. Some will wonder at his name, whereof no Alliance, nor English Prince, since the unhappy Arthur Duke of Britain, supposed to be made away by King John, his cruel Uncle. But because this Prince by his Fathers side, was, with King Arthur of British extraction, and because born at Winchester where King Arthur kept his Court, and His [pretended] Round Table still to be seen, that name was bestowed upon him. He died at Ludlow, in the sixteenth year of his Age, Anno 1502. and is buried in the Cathedral of Worcester, more known to Posterity by the Widow he left, the Lady Katherine Dowager, (and the effects ensuing thereon) then by any of his own personal performances. Saints. EDBURGH eight Daughter of King Edward the Elder and his first by Queen Ed∣giva gave when but three years of Age a great Hen. Higgd. & Polick. lib. 6. cap. 4. Augury of her future Pietie, Her Father presenting before her, and leaving to her choyce, On the one hand the New Testament and a Flowers of the English Saints, Page 570. June the 15. Challice. On the other, Jewels, Rings and Bracelets. She took the New Testament and the Challice (conceive it not because of Massy Silver, but) acted with the Principal of Infant Pietie; Hereupon her Parents left her to her own disposal, who became a Nun at Winchester after the Order of Saint Benedict under-going the Austeritic of that Order. It is reported of her, (Forgive me Reader, though I would not write these things they are so Absurd, I cannot but write them they are so Absurd;) That she would by night play the part of a Idem Ibidem. Pious Thief and steal the Socks of all the other Nuns, and having carefully washed and annointed them, restore them to their beds sides. This Saint EDBURG died on the 15. of June 920. Some of her bones being kept at Winchester, others say The English Martyrologie in the 15. of June. at Wilton, (So facile the mistakes in Latine betwixt WILTONIA and WINTONIA) and the rest were translated to Pershore, an Abbey in the Diocess of WORCESTER.
Martyrs. This County being in the Diocesse of VVinchester, escaped very well in the MARIAN DAYES from any visible persecution. Under God it might thank Stephen Gardener, or rather Gardners policy. This Bishop like a Cunning Hunter preserved the GAME fair at home, and Killed it in the WALKES of other Keepers: It was not he, but bloody Bonner, who procured the death of, JOHN PHILPOT Son of Sir J. Bale De∣script. Brit. Cent. 8. num. 89. Peter Philpot Knight, was born in this County, whose Family had an Ancient habitation at therein. He proceeded Mr. of Arts in New Colledge in Oxford; And afterwards being Arch-Deacon of Lincoln, was a Zealous Promoter of the Protestant Religion. In the first of Queen Mary, being a member of the Convocation, his heart was hot within: And while he was musing, the fire kindled, and he spake with his tongue, which afterwards occasioned his Martyrdome. If Papists account him a Distracted Man, none will wonder, who consider how the prophane Captaines of Israel, called the Son of the Prophet, a 2 King. 9. 11. mad fellow: And if some vehement expressions fell from him during his imprisonment, his enemies Cruelty was the Cause thereof. Seing ill usage, which once made a dumb beast to Numb. 22. 28. speak, may make a Sober man Overspeak in his passion. But all his sufferings are reported by Mr. Fox so perfectly, (Perfectum est cui nihil addi potest) that it is presumption for any to hope to make an essential Addition thereunto. He was Martyred Anno Dom. 1555. Decemb. 18. KATHARINE GOVVCHES. GUILLEMINE GILBERT. PEROTINE MASSEY whose husband, a Minister of Gods word, was for fear fled out of the Island. The first of these was the Mother, a poor widdow of St. Peters Port, in the Isle of Guernsey; the other two her Daughters (but maried women) These in the reign of Queen Mary, were noted to be much absent from the Church; for which they were presented before Jaques Amy then Dean of the Island, who finding them to hold opinions against the real presence in the Sacrament of the Altar, condemned them to be burnt for Hereticks, which was done accordingly, July 18. 1556. Add to these an Infant without a Christian name, and no wonder it is never named, seeing properly it was never born; but by the force of the flame burst out of his mothers belly, Perotine Massey aforesaid. This Babe was taken up by W. House a by-stander, and by the Command of Elier Gosselin the Bailiff (supreme Officer in the then absence of the Governour of the Island) cast again into the fire, and therein consumed to Ashes. It seems this bloody Bailiff, was minded like the Cruel Tyrant, Commanding, Canis pessimi ne catulum esse relinquendum, though this indeed was no Dogge but a Lamb, and that of the first minute, and therefore too young by the Levitical Law to be sacrificed. Here was a Spectacle without precedent, a Cruelty built three generations high, that Grandmother, Mother, and Grandchild, should all suffer in the same Flame. And know Reader, these Martyrs dying in the Isle of Guernsey, are here reckoned in Hampshire, because that Island with Jersey (formerly subordinate to the Arch-Bishop of Con∣stance in Normandy) have since the reign of Queen Elizabeth, been annexed to the Diocess of Winchester. Prelates. William Wickham was born at VVickham in this County, being the Son of John Perot, and Sibel his wife, (over whose graves he hath erected a Chappel at Titchfield in this County) and bred in the University of Oxford. He was otherwise called Long, from the height of his stature (as my Godwin in the Bishops of Winchest. Authour conceives) though since it may be applied to the perpetuity of his memory, which will last as long as the world endureth, for his two fair Foundations at
OXFORD, WINCHESTER. Begun Those dates are exactly Transcribed out of the Re∣cords of New∣Colledge. 1379. Finished 1386. Begun 1387. Finished 1393. The Charter of the Foundation of St. Ma∣ries-Colledge in Oxford, was dated the 26. of November, 1379. in his Manour in Southwarke, snce called VVinche∣ster-House. The Scholars entred thereunto about nine a clock on the 14. day of April in the same year. The first Stone was laid, March 26. at nine a clock in the morning, in the 69. year of the age of the Founder.   He died in the 37th. year of his Consecration, and 80th. of his Age, in the 5th. year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, and his Benefaction to Learning is not to be paralleld by any English Subject, in all particulars. JOHN RUSSELL was born in this County, in the Parish of Register of New-Colledge, in Anno 1449. Saint Peters in the Suburbs of VVinchester. He was bred Fellow of New-Colledge, and when Doctor of Canon-Law, was chosen Chancellor of Oxford. Yea, that Office annual before, was first fixed on Godwin in Catalogue of Bishops of Lincolne. him (as in Cambridge on Bishop Fisher) for term of life. By King EDWARD the Fourth, he was advanced Bishop of Lincolne, and by Richard the Third J. Philpot in Catalogue of Chancellors, page 65. Ld. Chancellor of England, having ability enough to serve any, and honesty too much to please so bad a King. And because he could not bring him to his bent, when the Lord Hastings was killed, this Bishop (saith my Harps field, Hist. Eccl. Ang. dcimo quinto saeculo. c. 24. Author) was for a time imprisoned. He died January the 30. Anno 1490. Leaving this Character behind him, Vir fuit summa Idem ibid. pietate, & ex rerum usu oppidò quàm prudens, doctrina etiam singulari. WILLIAM WARHAM was born at New-Colledge Register in the year. 1475 Ockley of Worshipful Parentage in this County, bred Fellow and Doctor of the Lawes in New-Colledge, imployed by King Henry the Seventh (who never sent sluggard or fool on his errand) to Marga∣ret Dutches of Burgundy, and by him advanced Bishop of London, then Archbishop of Canterbury, living therein in great lustre, till eclipsed in power and profit by Thomas VVolsey, Archbishop of Yorke. It may be said, that England then had ten Arch-Bishops, if a figure and cypher amount to so many, or else, if it had but two, they were Arch-Bishop Thomas, and Arch-Bishop VVolsey, drawing all causes to his Court-legatine, whilest all other Eccle∣siastical Jurisdictions in England kept a constant vacation. This, VVarham bare with much moderation, contenting himself, that, as he had less honour, so he had less envy, and kept himself coole, whilst VVolsey his screene, was often scorched with just and general hatred. In the case of K. Henry His divorce, he was the Prime Godwin in the Arch-bi∣shops of Can∣terbury. Advocate for Queen Katherine, and carried it so cautiously, that he neither betrayed the cause of his Client, nor incurr'd the Kings displeasure. Nor will any wonder, that an Arch-Bishop of Canterbury did then plead before an Arch-Bishop of York, seeing the King at the same time was summoned before His Subject. He survived VVolsey's ruine, but never recovered his former greatness, blasted with a PRAEMUNIR with the rest of the Clergy, and the heavier, because the higher in dignity. He is said to have expended thirty thousand pounds in the repair of his Palaces, the probable reason, why he left no other publick Monuments, though Arch-bishop twenty eight years, dying Anno Domini 1533. ROBERT SHERBORN was born in this ew Coll. Re∣gister in the year 1474. County, and bred first in VVin∣chester, and then in New Coll. was a great Schollar, and prudent Man, imployed in several Embassies by K. Henry the seventh, and by him preferred Bishop first of St. Davids, then Chichester: Which Church he decored with many Ornaments and Edifices, especially the South-side thereof, Where On the one side On the other The Cambdens Brit. in Sussex. History of the foundation of the Church, with the Images of the Kings of* Godwin in his Bishops of Chichester. England. The Statues of all the Bishops of this See, both those of Selcey, and of Chi∣chester.
He often inscribed for his Motto, Dilexi decorem domus tuae Domine; I have loved the beauty of thy House, ô Lord: and sometimes Godwin in his Bishops of Chichester. Credite operibus, Trust their works. Now al∣though some may like his Almes better then his Trumpet, Charity will make the most favourable construction thereof. Being 96. years of age he resigned his Bishoprick, and died in the same year, Anno Dom. 1536. JOHN WHITE was born in this County of a Sir J. Har∣rington in the Bishops of Winchester. worshipful House, began on the floor, and mounted up to the roof of Spiritual Dignitie in this Diocess. First Scholar in VVinchester, then Fellow of New-colledge in Oxford, then Master of VVinchester∣School; then VVarden of that Colledge, and at last, (taking Lincoln Bishoprick in his passage) Bishop of VVinchester, all composed in Made by Christopher Johnson after∣wards School∣master of Winchester. this Distick. Me puero Custos, Ludi paulo ante Magister, VITUS, & hac demum Praesul in Urbe fuit. I may call the latter a Golden Verse, for it cost this VVhite many an Angel to make it true, entring into his Bishoprick on this condition, to pay to Cardinal Pole, a yearly Pension of a thousand pounds. Now though this was no better then Simony, yet the Pre∣lats Pride was so far above his Covetousness, and his Covetousness so farre above his Con∣science, that he swallowed it without any regreet. He was a tolerable Poet, and Pis de ill. Ang. Script. page 763. wrote an Elegy on the Eucharist to prove the corporal presence, and confute Peter Martyr; the first and last I believe, who brought controversial Divinity into Verses. He preached the Funeral Sermon of Queen Mary (or if you will of publique Popery in England) praising Her so beyond all measure, and slighting Queen Elizabeth without any cause, that he justly incurr'd Her displeasure. This cost him deprivation and imprisonment, straiter then others of his Order (though freer than any Protestant had under Popish Persecutours) until his death, which hap'ned at London about the year 1560. Since the Reformation. THOMAS BILSON was born in the City of Nw Colledge Register, Anno 1565. Winchester, bred first Scholar in Winchester-School, then (taking New-Colledge in his passage) School-master thereof, afterwards Warden of the Colledge, and at last (taking Worcester in his way) Bishop of Winchester. As reverend and learned a Prelate as England ever afforded, witness his worthy Works, Of the perpetual Government of Christs Church, and of Christs Descent in∣to Hell, not Ad 1. Patiendum, to Suffer, which was concluded on the Cross with it is John 19. 30. finished. Nor, 2. Praedicandum, to Preach, useless where his Auditory was all the forlorn hope. Neither, 3. Liberandum, to Free any, Pardon never coming after Execution. But, 4. Possidendum, to take possession of Hell which he had conquered. And 5. Triumphandum, to Triumph, which is most honourable in Hostico, in the Enemies own Country. The New Translation of the Bible was by King James his command ultimately committed to his, See the life of Dr. Smith prefixed to his Sermon. and Dr. Smiths (Bishop of Gloueester) perusal, who put the com∣pleating hand thereunto. His pious departure out of this life hapned 1618. HENRY COTTON was born at Warblington in this County, being a younger son unto Sir Richard Cotton, Knight, and privy Councellor to King Edward the Sixth. Queen (whilest yet but Lady) Elizabeth, being then but twelve years of age was his God-mother: He was bred in Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, and was by the Queen pre∣ferred Bishop of Salisbury. When she pleasantly said, That formerly she had blessed many of her God-sons, but now her God-son should bless her: Reflecting on the Solemnity of Episcopal Benediction. He was consecrated, November the 12. 1598. at which time William Cotton (of another Family) was made Bishop of Exeter. The Queen merrily saying, (alluding to the plenty of clothing in those parts) that she hoped that now she had well Cottoned the West. By his wife whose name was Patience, he had nineteen children, and died, May the 7. 1615. ARTHUR LAKES was born in the Parish New-Colledge Register, An∣no 1589. wherein he was admitted. of Saint Michael, in the Town of Southampton, bred first in VVinchester-School, then Fellow of New-Colledge. In his own
nature he preferred the fruitfulness of the Vine, and fatness of the Olive (painfulness in a private Parish) before the government of the Trees, had not immediate Provi∣dence without his suit and seeking, preferred him successively Warden of New-Col∣ledge, Prefect of Saint Crosses nigh VVinchester, Dean of VVorcester, Bishop of Bath and VVells. He continued the same in his Rochet, what he was in his Scholars-gown, and lived a real comment upon Saint Pauls character of a Bishop. 1. Blameless.] Such as hated his Order, could not cast any aspersion upon him. 2. The Husband of one VVife,] He took not that lawful Liberty, but led a single Life, honouring Matrimony in his brethren, who embraced it. 3. Vigilant,] Examining Canonically in his own person all those whom he ordained. 4: Sober, of good behaviour.] Such his austerity in diet (from his University-Com∣mons, to his dying day) that he generally fed but on one (and that no daintie) dish, and fasted four times a week from supper. 5. Given to Hospitality.] When Master of Saint Crosses, he encreased the allowance of the poor-Brethren, in diet and otherwise. When Bishop, he kept 50. servants in his Family, not so much for state or attendance on his Person, but pure charity in re∣gard of their private need. 6. Apt to teach.] the Living with his pious Sermons, in his Cathedral and neigh∣bouring Parishes; and Posterity with those learned Writings he hath left behinde him. 7. Not given to VVine,] His abstemiousness herein was remarkable. 8. No striker, not given to filthy lucre.] He never fouled his fingers with the least touch of Gehazi's reward, freely preferring desert. 9. One that ruleth well his own House.] The rankness of House-keeping brake not out into any Riot, and a Chapter was constantly read every Meal, by one kept for that purpose. Every night (besides Cathedral and Chappel-Prayers) he prayed in his own Person with his Family in his Dining-room. In a word, his Intellectuals had such predominancy of his Sensuals, or rather Grace so ruled in both, that the Man in him being subordinate to the Christian, he lived a pat∣tern of Piety. I have read of one Arthur Faunt, a Jesuite, who entring into Orders, renounced his Chri∣stian name, De∣scription of Leicester-shire, page 105. because (forsooth) never Legendary Saint thereof, and assumed that of Laurence. This gracious Arthur was not so superstitiously scrupulous, (and if none be∣fore) may pass for the first Saint of his name, dying in the fifty ninth year of his age. Anno Domini, 1602. States-men. RICHARD RICH Knight, was in the words of my AuthorJ. Philpot in his Car. of Chancellors, page 73. A Gentleman well descended and allied in this County: Bred in the Temple in the study of our Common Law, and afterwards became Sollicitor to King Henry the eighth. His Deposition on Oath upon words spoken to him in the Tower, was the sharpest evidence to cut off the head of Sir Thomas More. He was under Cromwel a lesser hammerto knock down Abbeys, most of the Grants of which Lands going through his hands, no wonder, if some stuck upon his fingers. Under King Edward the Sixth, he was made Lord Chancellour of England, discharge∣ing his place with Prudence and Equity for the terme of five years. Foreseeing he should be outed of his Office, (being of the Anti-faction to Duke Dudley) to prevent stripping, he politickly put off his Robes of State, (resigning his Office:) Which done, no danger of catching cold his own Under-suit was so well lined, having gotten a fair Estate about Lees Abbey in Essex, whereof he was created Baron. He died in the begin∣ning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, being direct Ancestour unto the right Honou∣rable Charles Rich, now Earl of VVarwick. WILLIAM POWLET (where ever born) had his largest Estate, and highestS. N. Honour, (Baron of Basing, and Marquess of VVinchester) in this County. He was descended from a younger house of the Powlets of Hinton Saint George in Sommerset∣shire, as by the Crescent in his Arms is acknowledged. OneSir Robert  in his  . telleth us, that he being a younger brother, and having wasted all that was left him, came to Court on trust,
where, upon the bare stock of his wit, he traffick'd so wisely, and prospered so well, that he got, spent, and left, more than any Subject since the Conquest. Indeed he lived at the time of the dissolution (of Abbeys, which was the harvest of Estates; and it argued idleness, if any Courtier had his Barnes empty. He was servant to K. Henry the seaventh, and for Thirty years together Treasurer to K. Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Qu. Mary, and Qu. Elizabeth. The , in some , owed their Crowns to his Counsel: his policy being the principal  of Duke Dudleys Designe, to disinherit them. I behold this Lord  like to aged Adoram, so often mentioned in Scripture, being over the Tribute in the dayes of K.2 Sam. 20. 24. David, all the Reign of1 King. 4. 6. K. Solomon, untill the firstKing▪ 12. 18. Year of . And though our Lord Powlet enjoyed his place not so many years, yet did he serve more Soveraigns, in more mutable times, being (as he said of himself) no , but an . Herein the Parallel holds not, The honry hairs of Adm were sent to the Grave, by a violent death,Ibidem. slain by the people in a : This Lord had the rare happiness of , setting in his full splendour, having lived 97 years, and seen 103 out of his body: he dyed, anno Domini 1572. Sr. THOMAS LAKES was born in the Parish of St. Michael, in the Town of South∣Hampton, and there bred in Grammer-Learning, under Doctor Seravia. By several under Offices he was at last deservedly preferred Secretary of Estate to K. James: Incredible his dexterity in dispatch, who at the same time would indite, write, discourse, more exactly than most men could severally performe them. Men resembled him to one of the hips-Royal of Qu. Elizabeth, called the Swift-sure, such his celerity and solidity in all Affairs. No lesse his secresie in concealing, and what was credited to his Counsel was alwayes found in the same posture it was left in. Add to all these, he was a good man, and a good mans Brother, Dr. Arthur Lakes, Bishop of Bath-and-Wells. King James (who allwayes loved what was facile and fluent) was highly pleased with his Latine Pen, who by practice had made Tullie's phrase his own. He was one of the three noble hands, who at the Court first led Mr. George Villers into the favour of King James. At last he fell, for the faults of others, into the Kings displeasure, being punished for the Offences of one of his nearest Relations, and of all them fin'd in the star∣chamber, he was the only person generally pittied for his suffering: yet even then K. James gave him this publick Eulogie in open Court, That he was a Minister of State fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe. He was outed his Secretaries place, which needed him more than he it, having atchieved a fair fortune, which he transmitted to posterity. How long he lived afterwards in a private life, is to me unknown. Souldiers. BEAVOIS an English man was Earle of South-Hampton, in the time of the Conquerer, and being unable to comport with his Oppression, banded against him with the Fragments of the English men, the strength of Hastings the Dane, and all the assistance the VVelch could afford. In whose Country a Battel was fought, near Carcliffe, against the Normans, anno Domini 1070. wherein Three Nations were conquered by One. Beavois being worsted (Success depends not on Valour) fled to Carlile, (a long step from Carcliffe:) And afterwards no mention what became of him. This is that Beavois whom the Monks cryed up to be such a man, that since it hath been questioned, Whether ever such a man, I mean, whether ever his person was in rerum natura: So injurious those are, who in the Reports of any mans performances exceed the bounds of probability. All I will add is this, that the Sword preserved and shewed to be this Beavoises in Arundel. Castle, is lesser (perchance worn with age) than that of King Edward the third, kept in Westminster-Church. Seamen. Sr. JOHN WALLOP, born in this County, of a most ancient and respected Family, was directed by his Genius to Sea-service, at what time our Coasts were much infested
with French-Piracies. For, there was a Knight of Malta, passing in our Chronicles, by the name of Prior John (more proper by his Profession, to be employed against the Turks, lately so victorious in Hungary) who liv'd by pickeering, and undoing many English Merchants. But our Sr. John made the French pay more than treble Dammages, who with Eight Hundredh Men landed in Normandy, burntHolinshead, Stow, Ed. Herbert. in this Year. One and Twenty Towns, with divers Ships in the Havens of Traport, Staples, &c. and safely returned with wealth and Victory. Methinks the ancient Armes of the Wallhops appear propheticall herein, viz. argent a Bend-unde Sable, interpreted by myGwillim, his Display of Heraldry. pag. 50. Authour, a wave, or sourge of the Sea, raised by some turbulent flaw of wind and tempest, prognosticating the activity of that Family, in Marine Performances. ROBERT TOMSON, Merchant, was born atHatkluit, his Voyages, Volume 3. pag. 437. Andover in this County, bred much at Bristol in Sea-Imployments. Hence anno 1553. he sailed into Spain, and thence two Years after shipped himself for Nova Hispania, to make a discovery thereof, on the same token, that in his passage thither, in a Spanish Ship, a light like a canle (being nothing else but a Meteor frequent by Sea and Land) sell on their main Mast, which the Spaniards on their knees worshiped for St. Elmo, the Advocate of Saylers. He* Idem, pag. 450. afterwards wrote the Description of New Spain, with the City of Mexico, giving a good, and the first account thereof, of any Englishman. During his abode many Months in Mexico, at dinner he let fall some Discourse against Saint-worship, for which he was imprisoned in the holy-House, and enjoyned solemn Penance by the Arch-Bishop of Mexico, This Tomson, being the first (reputed) Heretick, which was ever seen in America on a penitential Scaffold. Hence he was sent into Spain, and after three Years durance in the Inquisition, discharged. Here a Spanish Merchants Daughter, Mary de la Barrera by name, fell in love with him, and became his Wife, worth to him in Barrs of Gold and SilverIdem, pag. 451. two Thousand five hundred Pounds, besides Jewells of great price. Returning into England, he lived with great comfort, and credit therein, so that it may truly be said of him, He had been unone, if (by the cruelty of his Enemies) he had not been undone. Writers. LAMFRID of Winchester was bred a Benedictine therein, Congregationis Giribenne, saith myPitz., aetate decima, Num. 149. Authour, wherein I am not ashamed to confess my ignorance. Such his Learning in those Dayes, that he got the general name of Doctor Eximius, though his few works still extant answer not the proportion of so high a Title. He flourished anno 980. WOLSTANUS of Winchester, bred a Benedictine, therein attained to the reputation of a great Scholar. I listen attentively to the words ofLibro secundo, de gestis Reg. Angliae. VV. Malmsbury, (who could ken a Learned man) giving him this Caracter, Vir fuit eruditus, homo etiam bonae vitae & castigatae eloquentiae. But it seemeth, his Eloquence was confined to Poetry, my Author observing, that Oratione soluta nunquam politè scripsit. He flourished anno 1000. JOHN of HIDE, was a Monk in the famous ABBY of Hide, in the Suburbs of Winchester, and became a competent Historian, according to the rate of those times, writing certain Homilies,Pitz. aetat. undecima, Num. 154. a Book of the Patience of Job, and the Story of his own Convent: He flourished anno 1284. JOHN of Basingstoak, so called from a fair Market Town in this Conty, where he was born. We have a double Demonstration of his signal worth, first, because Robert Grosthead that pious and learned Bishop, (who would not advance any thing which was under eminency) preferred him Arch-deacon of Leicester: secondly, The Pens of Bale and PitzDescrip. Brit. Cent. quarta. pag. 302. diametrically opposite one to the other, meet both in his commendation. Being bred first in Oxford, then in Paris, thence he travailed into Athens, (Athens as yet was Athens, not routed by Turkish Tyranny) where he heard* de scrip. Brit. the Learned Lecturs of oneIdem Constantina a Noble Woman, (not fully TwentyIdem. Years old) of the abstruse Mysteries of Nature. Coming home, he brought back many precious Books, and had good skill in the Greek Tongue, (whereof he wrote a GRAMMAR, and is justly reputed
the first restorer thereof in England. He was the Author of many worthy works, and died, Anno 1252. on whomIn    ▪ M. Paris bestoweth this Eulogy, Vir in trivio & quatri∣vio ad plenum eruditus. JOHN of   . HIDE, was a Monk in the Famous Abby of Hide in the Suburbs of Winchester, and became a competent Historian according to the rate of those times, writing certain Homilies, a book of the Patience of Job, and the Story of his own Covent. He flourished, Anno 1284. WILLIAM ALTON, a Native of a known Market-Town in this County was a Dominican or Preaching Frier, famous even amongst Forreiners for his Sermons and sound judgement, avouching the Virgin Mary tainted with Original Corruption. He flourished, Anno 1330. WILLIAM LILLI, was born atBale de Script. Britt. Cent. 8. Numb. 64. Odiam a Market-Town in this County and travelled in his youth as far as Jerusalem. In his return he stayed at Rhodes and studied Greek, which will seem strange to some, Rhodes not being Rhodes in that Age (except casually some great Critick was there) seeing otherwise to find Elegant in Mo∣dern Greek (sowred with long continuance) is as impossible, as to draw good Wine out of a vessel of Vinegar. Hence he went to Rome, where he heard John Sulpitius and Pomponius Sabinus great Masters of Latine in those dayes. After his Return Dean Collet made him the first Ma∣ster of St. Pauls School, which place he commendably discharged for 15. years. Here he made his Latine Grammar, which this great School-Master modestly submitted to the correction of Erasmus, and therefore such, who will not take it on the single bond of Lillie, may trust on the security of Erasmus. Some charge it for surfeiting with variety of examples, who would have had him onely to set down the bare Rules, as best for Childrens remembrance. But they may know that such, who learnt Grammar in Lillies time, were not School-boyes, but School-men; I mean arrived at mens Estate. Many since have altered and bettered his Grammar, and amongst them my worthy Friend Dr. Charles Scarborough, calculating his short, clear and true Rules for the Meridian of his own son; which in due time may serve for ge∣neral use.Stowes Sur∣vey of London, page 370. Our Lillie died of the plague, and was buried in the Porch of Saint Pauls, Anno Dom. 1522. Since the Reformation. MICHA RENEGER, was born in thisBale de Script. Brit. Cent. 9. Num. 78. County, and bred Fellow in Mag∣dalen-Colledge in Oxford, where he gained great credit for his skill in Learning and Lan∣guages. He wrote a Book in the Defence of Ministers marriage. THOMAS STERNHOLD, was born in thisBale de Script. Britt. Cent. 9. Num. 79. County, and was afterwards a servant to King Henry the Eighth. I find him a Legatee in his Will thus mentioned. Item, To THOMAS STERNHOLD, Groome of our Robes a hundred Mark. He was afterwards (saith my Author) ab intimo cubiculo to King Edward the Sixth,* Idem Ibidem. Though I am not satisfied whether thereby he meant Gentleman of his Privie-Chamber, or Groom of his Bed-Chamber. He was a principal instrument of Translating of the Psalmes into English-Meeter; The first twentie six (and seven and thirty in all) being by him performed. Yet had he other assistance in that work. Many a bitter scoffe hath since been past on their endea∣vours by some Wits, which might have been better imployed. Some have miscal∣led these their Translations Geneva Gigs, and which is the worst, Father, (or Mother rather) the Expression on our Virgin Queen, as falsly as other things have been charged upon her. Some have not sticked to say, that David hath been as much persecuted by bungling Translators, as by Saul himself. Some have made Libellous verses in abuse of them, and no wonder if Songs were made on the Translators of the Psalms, seeingPsal. 69. 12. Drunkards made them on David the Author thereof. But let these Translations be beheld by unpartial eyes, and they will be allowed to go in Equipage with the best Poems in that age, However it were to be wisht that some bald Rimes therein were bettered, till which time such as sing them, must endeavour to amend them, by singing them with Understanding heads, and Gratious hearts, whereby that, which is but bad Meter on Earth, will be made good Musick in Heaven. As for our Thomas Sternhold, it was happy for him that he died before his good Master,
Anno 1549. in the moneth of August. So probably preventing much persecution, which would have hapned unto him, if surviving in the Reign of Queen Mary. DAVID WHITEHEAD, (where born to me unknown) is here placed, Because I find a worshipful and ancient Family of his Name in this County. He was bred a Batchelour of Divinity in Oxford, and flying into Germany in the Reign of Queen Mary, was in high esteem at Franckford with the English Congregation. After his re∣turn, Queen Elizabeth profered him great preferment. And it seems in the first of her Reign, the Archbishop of Canterbury, went a wooing to accept thereof, viz. to 1. JOHN Rinerius in Histor. Bene∣dictinor. FECKENHAM, refusing it upon a Popish account, be∣cause he would not subscribe to the Queens Supremacie. 2. NICHOLAS WOTTON, Holling sheads Cron. p. 1403. Doctor of Law, and Dean of Can∣terbury, refusing it on a politique account, suspecting the Queens short life, and fearing alterations in the State. 3. This WHITEHEAD, Heroologia Angliae, p. 173. who declined it out of his desire of privacy, though some causelesly suspected him for disaffection to Church Discipline. For he was by Queen Elizabeth offered the Mastership of the Idem Aut. Ibid. Hospital of the Savoy, which he might have accepted without any subscription, but would not, affirming he could live plentifully on the preaching of the Gospel; a rare example of Moderation. He was a deep Divine, and was chosen one of the Disputants Primo Elizabethae, against the Popish Bishops. His many Books, still extant, testifie his Learning and Religion. Queen Elizabeth highly valued his company, the rather because of his consciencious bluntness, wherin one Repartee may be remembred. The Queen, who ever was Iniquior in Sacerdotes Maritatos, said unto him, Lord Veru∣lam, In his A∣pophgms. Whitehead, I love thee the better, because thou art unmarried, In truth Madam (said he) I love you the worse because you are unmarried. He died Anno Dom 1571. NICHOLAS FULLER, was as I have cause to conceive born in this Coun∣ty, and when a Youth was Amanuensis or Scribe to Dr. Horne Bishop of Winchester; Af∣terwards he attended (as Tutor servant) on Sir Henry Wallop to Oxford, and returning thence was made Minister of Allington nigh Salisbury in Wiltshire, where he had a Be∣nefice rather then a Living, so small the Revenues thereof. But a contented mind ex∣tendeth the smallest Parish into a Diocess, and improveth the least Benefice into a Bishop∣rick. Here a great Candle was put under a Bushel (or peck rather) so private his place and imployment; here he applyed his studies in the Tongues, and was happy in pitching on (not difficult Trifles, but) useful Difficulties tending to the understanding of Scripture. He became an excellent Linguist, and his books found good regard beyond the Seas, where they were reprinted. DRUSIUS, the Belgian Critick grown old, angry, and jealous that he should be outshined in his own sphear, foully cast some drops of Ink upon him, which the other as fairly wiped off again. He charged Master Fuller for being his Plagiary, taking his best Notes from him without any acknowledgement thereof; Master Fuller confest himself alwayes desirous of Drusius his works, but never able, (such his poverty) to purchase them, and therefore he could not steal out of those books which his eye ne∣ver beheld, (And not to be partial to my name-sake) let the world judge whether Fuller his Miscelane be not as good as Drusius his Wheat. Bishop Andrewes came to him as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, to pose him with hard Questions, bringing with him a heap of Knots for the other to Untie, and departed from him with good satisfaction; he afterwards bestowed on him a great Living in this County which Master Fuller did not long enjoy. He was most eminent for that Grace which is most worth, (yet costeth the least to keep it) I mean Humility, who in his Writings doth as fairly dissent from, as freely concur with any mans opinions. He dyed about the year of our Lord, 1626. THOMAS JAMES, was born in the Isle New Col∣ledge Regi∣ster, Anno 1593. of Wight, bred first in Winchester, then at New-Colledge in Oxford, and afterwards proceeded Doctor in Divinity. He was chosen by Sir Thomas Bodley the Keeper of his inestimable Library in Oxford. And on serious consideration one will conclude the Library made for him, and him for it, like Tal∣lies they so fitted one another. Some men live like Mothes in Libraries, not being better for the books, but the books the worse for them, which they only soile with their fin∣gers.
Not so Dr. James, who made use of Books for his own and the publique good. He knew the age of a Manuscript, by looking upon the face thereof, and by the form of the Character could conclude the time wherein it was written. He was a Member of the Convocation held with the Parliament of Oxford, Primo Ca∣roli, where he made a Motion, that some might be Commissioned to peruse the Manuscript Fathers, in all publique and private English Libraries, that thereby the Forgery of for∣reign Popish Editions might be detected. I believe his design had formerly been by him pursued for many years as appears by this passage in Mr. Britt. in Monmouth∣shire. Camden, Tho. James Oxoniensis vir eruditus, & vere , qui se totum literis & libris, involvit, & jam publici boni studio in Angliae, Bibliothecis excu∣tiendis (Deus opus secundet) id molitur, quod Reipublicae literariae imprimis erit usui. He never attained higher preferment than the Subdeanary of Wells, and dying 1628. was buried in the Chappel of New-Colledge in Oxford. CHARLES BUTLER, was bred Master of Arts in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford,S. N. and afterwards Beneficed in this County. An excellent Musician, who wrote a Book of the Principles of Musick, in singing and setting with the twofold use thereof (Ecclesiasti∣cal and Civil) and a critical English man, having composed a Grammar of our Language; He also wrote a Book of Bees, wherein as if he had been their Secretary, he appears most knowing in the State-Mysteries of their Common-wealth, whence In the Ver∣ses ad Autho∣rem. one not unhandsomly on his Book. Aut à consiliis Apibus, Butlere, fuisti; Aut à consiliis est Apis ipsa tuis. Butler he'l say (who these thy writings sees) Bees counsel'd thee, or els thou counselst Bees. I behold these his Books as the Receptacle of the Leakage and Superfluities of his Study, and it is no Trespass on Grace for one to walk and take a turn in the Field of Nature; He was also a pious man, a painful Preacher, and a Solid Divine. Witnesse his Excellent Book of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, approved and commen∣ded by Doctor Prideaux as the best ever written on that Subject, I conjecture he dyed about the year 1640. Romish Exile Writers. RICHARD WHITE was born at He writeth himself in his Book of Ba∣sing-stoak. Basing-Stoake in this County, bred first in Winchester School, then in New Colledge in Oxford. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth leaving the Land, he lived first at Lovain, then in Padua in Italy, where he procee∣ded Doctor of the Laws. Afterwards he became Regius Professor thereof at Doway, for the space of thirty years and more. He wrote many books, and amongst the rest, a Brittish and English History, which hitherto I have not been so happy as to see, save at the second hand, as often cited by Mr. Selden, which makes me believe much merit therein. Surely he was better employed in the writing thereof, then in the large Comment he hath made on the Aenigmatical Epitaph set up at Bononia. Aelia Laelia Crispis, &c. Which many think meerly made by a conceited Brain on design to puzzle Intellects, to create sense by their Ingenuity and Industry which was never intended therein. For I am clearly of his opinion, who said, Qui ea scribit legi, quae non vult intelligi, debet negligi. I have nothing else to observe of this Richard White, save that after he had succes∣sively married two Pitts de Ill. Ang. Scrip. pag. 06. Wives, He was made a Priest by the special dispensation of Pope Clement the eight, and that he was alive at Doway, 1611. JOHN PITS was born in this County, nigh the Market Town of Aulton, wit∣ness his words in Pits in the life of William Aulton in an∣no 1330. Vicinio cujus Oppidi natus sum ego. Son he was to Henry Pits and Eli∣zabeth his Wife, Sister to Nicholas Idem in his own life, pag. 817. Sanders. It is hard to say whether his hands took more pains in writing, or feet in travelling, if the List of his Laborious Life be perused, whereby he will appear a very aged person.
At 11. years of Age he went to the school of Winchester. 11 Seven years he staid there, until chosen un∣to New-Colledge. 18 Two years he lived in Oxford, and then went beyond the Seas. 20 One year he stayed and studied in the Col∣ledge of Rhemes. 21 Thence going to Rome, he lived 7. years there in the English∣Colledge, and was or∣dained Priest. 28 Returning to Rhemes two yeares he there taught Rhetorick and Greek. 30 Then lived in Lor∣rain and in Triers two years. 32 Three years at In∣golstad in Bavaria, where he was made D. D. 35 Made Canon of Verdun in Lorrain, and lived there two years. 37 Then for twelve years he was Con∣fessor to the Dutches of Cleve. 49 Here he wrote many Volumes of several Subjects, one of the Apostolical men, an∣other of the Kings and Bishops in England, but because he survived not to see them set forth, He was as good as his word, mecum morientur & sepelientur, with him they died and were buried. Onely that his book is brought to light, which is Intituled, de Illustri∣bus Angliae Scriptoribus, a Subject formerly handled by many, so that some stick not to say, J. Leland is the industrious BEE working all. J. Bale is the angry WASP stinging   J. Pits is the idle DRONE stealing   For my part I have made much use of his endeavours to help me with many Wri∣ters, especially with such English Papists, as have been since the Reformation. Nor will I pay him with rayling, from whose pen I have borrowed much information. Some wonder at his invectiveness: I wonder more, that he inveigheth so little; and seeing he was sisters son to blackmouth'd Sanders, it is much that he doth not more Avunculize in his bitter∣ness against Protestants. After the death of Anthonia Dutches of Cleve, he returned the third time into Lor∣rain, where the Bishop of Toul, (who formerly had been his Scholar) gave him the Deanary of Liverdune, a place of good credit and revenue, where quietly he reposed himself for the remainder of his life for many years, and dying Anno 1616. was there buried. Benefactors to the Publick. Besides Bishop Wickham (of whom before) who alone may pass for Ten, I meet with none of grand remark before the Reformation; since it, besides many of meaner note, I find Two of signal Charity. Sir WILLIAM DODDINGTON Knight, High Sheriffe of this County in the Third of King James, kept a bountiful House at Bremer therein. Succeeding to an unexpected Estate, he had the words of David frequent in his mouth; What am I? or what is my Fathers House? that thou hast brought me hitherto. Having a godly jealousie, that some former Dysasters in his Family had been caused by Gods displeasure on his Ancestors for holding so many Impropriations, he freely and fully restored them to the Church, setling them as firmly as Law could devise to a greater yearly value, than many will believe, or any imitate. Yet was he a man of Mourning, or son of Affliction all the dayes of his life. No sooner had he seen Herbert his eldest son, a most hopeful Gentleman, married to a considerable Co-heir in Somer set-shire, but he beheld him snatcht away by an untimely death. What Tragedies have since happened in his house∣hold, is generally known. All these he bare with Saint-like Patience, Micah. 6. 9. hearing the Rod, (that is, understanding and obeying it) and him who appointed it. In a word, God the skilful Lapidary polished him with sharp Instruments, that he then did glister as a Pearle here, who now shineth as a Starre in Heaven. He died about the year of our Lord, 1638. JOSEPH DIGGONS Esquire, was of Dutch extraction (whose Father was aS. N. Sea-man of Trinity-House) but had his longest Habitation in this County in a house of his own building at Whetham in the Parish of Lisse. He was bred a Fellow-Commoner
of Clare-hall in Cambridge, and afterwards became a Barrester in the Temple. By his Will he gave to Clare hall (where none knew his Face, nor remembred his Name, save the Worthy Master Dr. Pask) all his Estate in Land, of very improveable Rents, to the Value of One Hundred and Thirty Pounds per annum; for the founding of Fellowships and Scholarships, at the discretion of the Master and Fellows. He made Mr. Pickering an Attourney of Clements-Inn (living at Oldham in this County) an Overseer of his Will, who faithfully gave the Colledge notice thereof, and was very usefull and assistant to them in the settling of the Lands aforesaid. Mr. Diggons died, anno 1658. Memorable Persons. We must not forget ONE (better known to me by his Invention than his Name) who, dwelling at Stockbridge, in this County, made so artificial a Plough, that by the help of Engins, and some Contrivances, it might be drawn by Doggs, and managed by one Man, who would plough in one day, well nigh an Acre of the Light Ground in this County. This Plough I saw (some thirty Years since) at Stockbridge aforesaid. But the roject was not taking, beheld rather as pretty than profitable, though in the judgment of Wise Men this Groundwork might have been built upon, and Invention much improved by the skilfull in Mathematicks: For I have heard, that some Polititians are back Friends (how justly I know not) to such Projects, which (if accomplish'd) invite the Land to a Losse, the fewer Poor being thereby set awork, that being the best way of Tillage, which imployeth most about it, to keep them from stealing and starving. So that it would not be beneficiall to State, might a Plough be drawn by Butterflies, as which would draw the greater Burden on the Common wealth, to devise other wayes for the Maintenance of the Poor. The mentioning of these plow  Doggs mindeth me (one Rarity attracteth another) of other Doggs in this County, more usefull for the Common-wealth, meeting with this Passage in a * Modern Authour. It is reported, that about Portsmouth is a Race of small Doggs, like Beagles, that they use their to hunt Moles which they hunt as their proper natural Game. If this be true, I wish the continuance and Encrease of the breed of this kind of Canes Venatici. And though the pleasure be not so much as in hunting of Hares, the profit is more in destroying those Malignant Pioneers, mischievous to Grasse, more to Grain, most to Gardens. Lord Majors. Brittania Baconica in Hantshire, Pag. 51. It is no less true the strange, that this County, so large in it self, so near to London, weekly changing Cloth for Money therewith, is , I mean, hath not contributed one to this Topick. Such as suspect the truth thereof will be satisfied on their exact survey of Stow's Survey of London. The Names of the Gentry in this Shire, returned into the Tower by the Commissioners in the 12th Year of K. Henry the sixth, anno 1445. H. Epus VVinton, Cardinalis Angliae.   Commissioners to take the Oath. Reginaldus le Warre, Miles.     Johannes Lysle. Knights for the Shire.   Johannes Brewe, de Stapule.     Walter. Sandes, Chivaler. Johannes Popham, Chivaler. Johannes Uvedale. Willielm. Warbleton. Thome Tame. VVilliam Fanconer. Roberti Dyngle. Steph. Popham, Chivaler. Willielm. Brokays. Willielm. Ryngebourne. Walter. Veere. Iohannes Hampton. Iohannes Gyffard. Iohannes Brinkeley.
Petri Condraye. Iohannes Skilling. Thome Ringewood, senior. Willielm. Persh. Iohannes Hacket. Iohannes Haymowe. Roberti Fursey. Roberti Tylbourgh. Willielm. Astel. Iohannes Balon. Iohannes Bray. Iohannes Purbyke. Iohannes Catevan. Willielm. Clive. Willielm. Chellys. Iohannes Faukoner. Iohannes Mofunt. Willielm. Tested. Richard. Rumsey. Willielm. Burton. Roberti VVhittehede. Richard. Spicer. Johannes atte Berwe, de Charleford. Johannes Lawrence. Thome Rockley. Thome Yardly. Thome Benebury. Willielm. Wellis. Iohannes Escote. Iohannes Rotherfield. Richard. Parkere. Iohannes Kybbyll. Iohannes Barbour. Symonis Almayn. William Farcy. Richard Punchardon. Nicholas Bernard. Nicholas Banestre. Thome Wayte. It will be worth our enquiry, who this chief Commissioner Henry Bishop of Winchester was, with his insolent Title of CARDINAL of ENGLAND. I finde many eminent Epithets (but none of the Quorum of St. Pauls Bishops) meeting in his person, viz. Noble, Rich, Valiant, Politique, and long-lived. Noble, being Son of JOHN à GAUNT, by KATHARINE SWINFORD (born at Beaufort in France, whence he had his Name) rother to King Henry the Fourth, Uncle to King Henry the fifth, great Uncle to King Henry the Sixth. Rich, commonly called the Rich Cardinal. In his time the King and Courtiers cast a covetous eye on Church-Endowments, but were diverted from longer looking on them by the Councel of Arch-Bishop Chickly, and Coin of this Bishop Beaufort. The former putting the King upon the War with France, the later lending him, on good security, twenty thousand Pounds, a Sum sounding high in those dayes: He was also called , the Cardinal of England, though we had another (and his Senior) at the same time of the same Order, viz. Thomas Langley, Bishop of Durham. Valiant, being the Pope's Legate, (in plain English, the Pope's General) leading his Army into Bohemia, in which service he behaved himself, fortius quam Episcopum decebat. Worldly olitick, venting words on his Death-bed to this purpose, That if all England (some Reporters take a longer Circuit) would preserve his Life, he was able by his Purse to purchase, or by Policy to procure it. Long Life, having been Bishop of Lincolne and Winchester fifty Years, yet was he so far from being weaned from the world, he sucked the hardest (as if he would have bit off the Nipples thereof) the nearer he was to his Grave, Dying anno 1447. He was in his Generation (by a charitable Antiperistasis) fixed betwixt Bishop Wickham and Wanfleet, but did not equall them in his Benefactions to the publick, though he founded a fair Hospital in VVinchester, a work (no doubt) more acceptable to God, than when he anno 1417 undertook and performed a dangerous Voyage to Jerusalem. It is in my apprehension very remarkeable, that the 3 aforesaid Bishops of Winchester, Wickham, Beaufort and Wanfleet sate successively in that See, six score years, lacking two, not to be parallel'd in any other Bishoprick. To take our leave of this great Cardinall, we read of K.2 Chron. 35. 26. Josiah, Now the rest of the Acts of K. Iosiah and his GOODNESS, &c. But as for this Prelate, the rest of his acts and his GREATNESS we leave to such as are desirous thereof, to collect them out of our English Hystorians.
Sheriffs of Hantshire. HEN. II. Anno 1 Anno 2 Turcinus vic Anno 3 Turcinus vic Anno 4 Anno 5 Turcinus vic Anno 6 Anno 7 Rich. fil. Turcini, for 9 years. Anno 16 Hugo. de Gundevill, for 4 years. Anno 20 Herudus de Stratton. & Hugo. de Gundevill, for 5 years. Anno 25 Hen. de Stratton, & Hugo. de Gundevile Anno 26 Galf. fil. Aze, for 8 years RICH. I. Anno 1 Galf. fil. Azon Anno 2 Ogerus fil. Ogeri Anno 3 Joh. de Rebez Anno 4 Will. Briewere Anno 5 Ogerus fil. Ogeri Anno 6 Hugo. de Bosco, for 5 years. JOH. REG. Anno 1 Hugo. de Basco Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. Briewere, & Rad. de Bray Anno 4 Galf. fil. Petri, & Will. Stokes Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rog. fil. Ade, for 4 years. Anno 10 Walt. Briewere, & Alan. de Bockland Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. Briewere Anno 13 Hugo. de Nevill, & Galf. de Salvaozins Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Will. de Sto. Johanne Anno 17 Will. Briewere, & Will. de Sto. Johanne HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Pet. Winton Epis. & Will. de Schorewell, for 7 yearr. Anno 9 Rich. Epis. Saresb. & Bartholomew de Kemes Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Rich. Epis. Saresb. & Gilb. de Staplebrigg Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Nich. de Molis, & Walt. de Romsey Anno 14 Nich. de Molis, & Hen. de Bada Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Pet. Winton Epis. & Rog. Wascelin Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Hen. fil. Nicholai Anno 20 Hen. fil. Nich. & Rob. de Mara Anno 21 Galf. de Insula Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Emueus de Lacy Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Rob. Passelewe, for 6 years. Anno 33 Rob. Passell Anno 34 Hen. Facull, for 6 years. Anno 40 Hen. de Farneleg Anno 41 Ja. le Savage Anno 42 Joh. le Jac. Savage Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Will. de Wintershull Anno 45 Regin. fil. Petri, & Joh. de Flemer Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Regin. fil. Petri, & He∣reward de Marisco Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Joh. de Botele Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Gerar. de Grue Anno 52 Joh. le Botele Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. de Wintershull Anno 56 Idem. EDW. I. Anno 1 Will. de Wintershull Anno 2 Hen. de Shote broke Anno 3 Joh. de Havering, for 4 years. Anno 7 Will. de Braybofe Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Phil. de Foynil Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Simon. de Winton Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Will. de Bremschete, for 4 years. Anno 18 Ingeramus de Waleys Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Rich. Aston Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Hugo. de Chickenhull, for 4 years. Anno 26 Tho. de Warblington, for 4 years. Anno 30 Joh. de Gerbg. Anno 31 Tho. de Warblington Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Phil. de Foynil Anno 35 Idem. EDW. II. Anno 1 Tho. de Warblington, for 5 years. Anno 6 Ja. de Norton, & Jo. de la Bech Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Joh. de la Bech Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Rich. Byflett Anno 12 Rob. de Norton Anno 13 Ja. de Norton Anno 14 Joh. de Tichburne Anno 15 Nul. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo Anno 16 Anno 17 Joh. de Scures Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III. Anno 1 Joh. de Scures, for 12 years. Anno 13 Rob. Daundelin Anno 14 Rob. de Popeham, & Rob. de Daundelin Anno 15 Joh. de Palton, & Tho. de Chisenhall Anno 16 Joh. de Palton Anno 17 Th. de Apsall, for 5 years. Anno 22 Hen. Sturmy Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Joh. de Winchester, for 4 years. Anno 29 Will. de Overton Anno 30 Joh. de Palton. Anno 31 Walt. de Haywood, for 4 years. Anno 35 Tho. de Hampton, for 5 years Anno 40 Nich. Woodlocke Anno 41 Rad. Thurnbarne Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Petr. Brugg Anno 44 Joh. Bottiller Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Tho. Warner Anno 47 Phil. de Popham Anno 48 Laur. de Sto. Martino Anno 49 Rich. Pauncefott Anno 50 Theob. de Gorges. Anno 51 Tho. Boklands Sheriffs of Hantshire. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Rad. de Norton   Vert a Lion rampant Or. 2 Joh. Butteshorne     3 Walt. Ramsey     4 Will. Kingborne     5 Hugo. Crane     6 Joh. Sandes   Arg. a Cross ragulee Truncked G. 7 Joh. Shownes     8 Joh. de la Zouch     9 Joh. Showne     10 Rob. Cholmleigh   Gul. 2  in Chief and a Garb in Base proper. 11 Joh. Uvedale   Argent, a cross moline Gules. 12 Hen. Popham   Arg. on a Cheveron Gul. 2 Bucks∣heads cabosed Or. 13 Nic. Dabrichcourt*     14 Phil. Baynard   * Ermine 3 Bars Humetts Gules. 15 Rob. Cholmleigh ut prius   16 Rob. Dynlye     17 Rob. Atteme     18 Johan. Sands, & Tho. Warner ut prius   19 Tho. Warner     20 Joh. Waytes     21 Will. Audley     22 Idem.     HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Dovedale     2 Joh. Waterton, & Joh. Chamfloure     3 Joh. Barkley   G. a Cheveron 'twixt 10 Crosses sormee Argent. 4 Edw. Cawdrey   Sab. 10 Billes Or. 4, 3, 2, 1. 5 Idem. ut prius   6 Joh. Tichbourne   Varry a Chief Or. 7 Joh. Berkeley, m. ut prius   8 Will. Marshull   Sab. 3 Bars Arg. and a Canton G. 9 Tho. Uvedall ut prius   10 Will. Bremsheete     11 Walt. Sands, mil. ut prius   12 Will.     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Tho. Chaucer BARKS. Parted per pale Arg. and Gul. a Bend Counterchanged. 2 Joh. Uvedale ut prius   3 Will. Brokes     4 Tho. Wickham, m.     5 Edw. Cowdrey ut prius   6 Will. Bremsbeth     7 oh. Uvedale ut prius   8 Will. Kingborne     9 Idem.     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Joh. Uvedale ut prius   2 Walt. Sands, mil. ut prius   3 Joh. de Boys, m.   Ar. a Cheveron S. 'twixt 3 Acorns Gul. on a Canton Az. a pair of wings Conjoyned Or. 4 Mauric. Brown SURREY Sab. 3 Lions passant Gardant 'twixt 2 Bends Gemeros Arg. 5 Joh. Uvedale ut prius   6 Steph. Popham ut prius   7 Will. Brokes     8 Tho. Thme     9 Joh. Seymoure   Gul. 2 Angels wings paleways in verted Or. 10 Walt. Veere   Quarterly Gul. and Or, in the first a Mullet Arg. 11 Joh. Giffard     12 Joh. Uvedale ut prius   13 Rob. Domley     14 Will. Brokes     15 Joh. Seymor, mil. ut prius   16 Will. Fauconer   Sab. 3 Falcons Close Argent. 17 Tho. Uvedale ut prius   18 Joh. Lisle, mil.   Or, a Fess 'twixt 2 Chevbrons S. 19 Steph. Popham, m. ut prius   20 Joh. Rogers     21 Tho. Thame     22 Hen. Trencard DORSE. Per pale Arg. & Az. 3 pallets S. 23 Tho. Mountgomery   Gul. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 flower de lice Or. 24 Tho. Molegues     25 Hen. Brum     26 Tho. Uvedale ut prius   27 Rob. Fenns     28 Rich. Dalingrug     29 Tho. Warbleton     30 Tho. Uvedale ut prius   31 Tho. Thame     32 Joh. Seymor, m. ut prius   33 Joh. Wallop, ar.   Argent, a Bend Wave Sable. 34 Mau. Berkeley ut prius   35 Ber. Brokes     36 Joh. Paulett   Arg. 3 Swords in Pile Sab. Hilts Or. 37 Hen. Brum     38 Joh. Philpot   Sable, a Bend Ermine. EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Wallop, ar. ut prius   2 Joh. Paulett, ar. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 Tho. Uvedale ut prius   5 Edw. Berkeley, ar. ut prius   6 Galf. Gate, mil.     7 Mau. Berkeley, ar. ut prius   8 Joh. Roger, ar.     9 Joh. Whiteheed     10 Rich. Darel, mil.   Az. a Lion rampant Arg. Crowned Or. 11 Mau. Berkeley, m. ut prius   12 Edw. Berkeley ut prius   13 Joh. Rogers     14 Carol. Bulkley   Sab. 3 Bulls-heads cabossed Arg. 15 Tho. Troys, ar.     16 Edw. Bekeley ut prius   17 Will. Berkeley, ar. ut prius  
18 Edw. Hardgill     19 Joh. Cooke     20 Will. Uvedal ut prius   21 Edw. Berkeley ut prius   22 Joh. Brokes     RICH. III.     Anno     1 Rob. Pointz   Barry of 6 Or and Vert, a Bend Gules. 2 Joh. Roger     3 Rob. Carr, & Edw. Berkeley. ut prius   HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Joh. Cooke     2 Will. Uvedale ut prius   3 Joh. Tichborne ut prius   4 Joh. Pound, ar.     5 Tho. Troys, ar.     6 Edw. Berkeley, m. ut prius   7 Joh. Paulet, jun. ut prius   8 Will. Uvedale, m. ut prius   9 Joh. Dudley, ar.     10 Joh. Giffard, ar.     11 Joh. Poundes, ar.     12 Tho. Troys, ar.     13 Will, Sands, mil. ut prius   14 Dau. Owen, mil.     15 Joh. Paulett, ar. ut prius   16 Joh. Philpot, ar. ut prius   17 Rich. Wallop, ar. ut prius   18 Joh. Waller, ar. Winch, Cast. Sab. 3 Walnut-leaves Or, 'twixt 2 Bendlets Argent. 19 Joh. Pound, mil.     20 Joh. Puterham, m.   Sab. an Helmet 'twixt 6 Croslets in Pale Argent. 21 Rob. White, ar.   Azu. a Fess 'twixt 3 flower d▪ liz Or. 22 Joh. Lisle, mil. ut prius   23 Joh. Leigh, mil.     24 Idem.     HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Rob. Wallop, ar. ut prius   2 VVill. Sands, mil. ut prius   3 VVill. Paulett ut prius   4 Will. Compton, m. Prierseen Ermin on a Bend Sab. 3 Helmets porper. 5 Ar. , m.     6 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius   7 Rob. VVallop, ar. ut prius   8 Joh. , m.   Az. a lozenges in Fess Argent. 9 Joh. Lisley, mil. ut prius   10 VVill. Paulett, ar. ut prius   11 Joh. Kaleway     12 VVill. Frost     13 VVill. Giffard, m.     14 VVill. Paulett, ar. ut prius   15 Rob. VVallop, ar. ut prius   16 Pet. Philpor, ar. ut prius   17 Ant. VVilloughby   Sable, a Cross engrailed Or. 18 Tho. Lisley, mil. ut prius   19 Will. Berkeley, m. ut prius   20 Rich. Andrews. ar.     21 Lion. Morres     22 Tho. Lisley, m. ut prius   23 Rich. Pexall, ar.     24 Jo. Kaleway, mil.     25 Jo. Paulett, ar. ut prius   26 Ant. VVinsore, m.     27 Pet. Philpot, mil. ut prius   28 Will. Berkeley, m. ut prius   29 Tho. Lisley, mil. ut prius   30 Joh. Kingshall, ar.     31 Ant. VVinsore, m.     32 Rich. Andrews, ar.     33 Joh. Kalevary, m.     34 Regi. Williams, ar. OXFOR. Az. an Organ-pipe in Bend sinister salterwise surmounted on ano∣ther dexter 'twixt 4 Crosses pate Argent. 35 Joh. Kingsmil, ar.   Arg. Croslettee fitched a Chev. Erm. 'twixt 3 Millrondes Sa. and a Chief of the second. 36 VVill. VVachā, a.     37 Mich. Lister, mil.   Ermine, on a Fess Sab. 3 Mullets Or. 38 Geor. Paulett, ar. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Nich. Tichborn ut prius   2 Fran. Dawtrey, m. ut prius   3 Mich. Lister, mil. ut prius   4 Nich. Pexall, m.     5 Joh. S. Lowe, mil.     6 Joh. Norton, mil. ut prius   PHIL. REG. & MAR. REG.     Anno     1 Nich. Tichborn ut prius   1, 2 Joh. Brain     2, 3 Joh. VVhite, ar. ut prius   3, 4 Joh. Norton, ar. ut prius   4, 5 Nich. Pexall, m.     5, 6 Oliu. VVallop, m. ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Pace, ar.     2 VVill Pawle, m. ut prius   3 Joh. Berkelty, m. ut prius   4 Geor. Mills▪ ar. SUSSEX. Per Fess Argent, and Sab. a Pale Counterchanged 3 Bars of the last saliant, Musled Or. 5 VVill. Kingsmil, a. ut prius   6 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius   7 Rich. Pexall, m.     8 Mil. Bulkley, ar. ut prius   9 Rob. Oxenbridge   Gul. a Lion ramp. double Queeve Or, withtn a Border Az. charged with an entoir of Escalops Gold. 10 Hen. Seymor, m. ut prius   11 Joh. VVorsley, ar. Apledercomb Argent, a Cheveron Sab. 'twixt 3 Cornish-choughs proper, 12 Gilb. VVells, ar.     13 VVill. Vvaller, ar. ut prius   14 VVill. Jepham, ar.     15 Edw. VVhite, ar. ut prius   16 Edw. Aboroe, ar.     17 Rich. VVhite, ar. ut prius   18 VValt. Sands, ar. ut prins   19 Jo. Thurnburgh, .   Arg. Fretty and a Chief Gules. 20 Hen. Giffard, ar.     21 Ben. Tichburne, a. ut prius   22 Ja. Paget, ar.     23 Hen. Ughtread, ar.     24 Rob. VVhite, ar. ut ▪prius   25 Tho. Dabridgcourt ut prius   26 VVill. VVright, a.     27 Tho. VVest, ar.     28 Fra. Relway, ar.     29 VVill. St. John, ar.   Arg. on a Chief Gul. 2 Mullets pierced Or. 30 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius   31 Edw. Goddard, ar.     32 Rich. Paulett, ar. ut prius   33 VValt. Sands, m. ut prius   34 Joh. Seymor, m. ut prius   35 Nich▪ Mills, ar. ut prius   36 VVil. de Uvedal, a. ut. prius   37 Rob. Oxenbridg ut prius   38 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius   39 Mar. Styward, ar.     40 Joh. Whte, ar. Southwick   41 VVill. VVallop, a. ut prius   42 Fran. Palmes, ar. Oreton Gul. 3 flower de liz Arg. a Chief parted Bar ways lozengee coun∣ter-lozengee Silver and Azu. ali within a Border of the first. 43 VVil. Kingsmil, m. ut prius   44 Ben. Tichbourn, m. ut prius   & He. VVallop, m. ut prius   JACO. REG.     Anno     1 Hen. VVallop, m. ut prius   2 VVill. Abarrow, m.     3 VVill. Dodington     4 VVil. Oglander, m.   Azu. a Storke etwixt 3 Crosses patee  Or. 5 Dan. Norton, m. ut prius  
6 Jo. Knight, ar.     7 He. Whitehead, m.     8 Tho. Stukeley, m. DEVON. Azure, 3 Pears Or. 9 Will. Sandys, m. ut prius   10 Will. Kingsmil, m. ut prius   11 Rich. Norron, m. ut prius   12 Joh. Paul, mil. ut prius   1 Edw. Richards, ar.     14 Ri. Worseley, m. b. ut prius   15 Hen. Clarke, mil.     16 Joh. Compton, ar. ut prius   17 Tho. Neele, mil.     18 Tho. Lambert     19 Geor. Philpot, m.     20 Step. Knight, ar.     21 Hen. Hook, ar.     22 Arth. Willmot, ar.     CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Dan. Norton ut prius   2 Em. Gadder     3 Joh. Mills, bar. ut prius   4 Fran. Douse, mil.   Or a Cheveron Lozengee Arg. and Az. betwixt 3 Grey-hounds cur∣rant Sable. 5 Hen. Wallop, mil. ut prius   6 Tho. Coele     7 Rob. Pain, mil.     8 Tho. Stewkly, m. ut prius   9 Edw. Hooper, ar.     10 Will. Beonsaw, m.     11 Ric. Whitehead, a.     12 Jo. Button, ar.   Ermine a Fess Gules. 13 Joh. Oglander, m. ut prius   14 Jac. Hunt, ar.     15 Rich. Mayor, ar.   Gul. an Anchor Arg. on a Chief Or, 3 Roses of the first. 16     17 Joh. Feilder, ar.     18     19     20     21     22 Rich. Bishop, ar.     The Farewell. When some five years since I visited Winchester, it grieved me at the heart to be hold that stately structure so far run to ruin, yea my thoughts then interpreted those sad Schismes and Gaping Chincks the Heraulds of its downfall, deeming with my self that I discovered (as Physicians in our Bodies do cadaverosam) faciem ruinosam therein. But it rejoyced me when coming there this last year to find it so well amended, by the soveraign medicine of Gold or Silver, charitably applyed by ▪its good Bishop. I wish all Cathedrals in England, sick of the same distemper, as quick and happy a recovery.
HARTFORD-SHIRE is so called from Hartford the chief Town therein, as Hartford so termed from the ▪ . in this Coun∣ty. Ford of Harts, a Sed in his Map of this County. Hart Couchant in the waters, being the Armes thereof; Which convinceth me that HART, not HERTFORD-SHIRE is the Orthography of this County. It hath Essex on the East, Middlesex on the South, Buckingham shire on the West, Bedford and Cambridge shire on the North thereof. It might be allowed a Square of 20. miles, save that the Angular Insinuations of other Counties prejudice the En∣tireness thereof. I have been informed from an ancient stice therein, that one cannot be so advantagiously placed in any part of this Shire, but that he may re∣cover another County within the riding of five miles. It is the garden of England for delight, and men commonly say that such who buy a house in Hartfordshire pay two years purchase for the aire thereof. It falls short in Fruitfulness of ESSEX adjoyning thereunto, to which it was also annexed, under one Sheriff (and one Eschetor till after the Reign of King Edward the Third.) And Paynfull In his de∣scription of Hartford-shire, Page the 2d. Norden writes a bold Truth. For deep feedings, or Sheep pastures, I take notice of few, and those especially about Knebworth. To speak of the Soyle, as indeed it is most generally, for my part I take it but a barren Countrey in respect of some other Shires. Indeed this Forrestie-Ground would willingly bear nothing so well as a Crop of Wood. But seeing Custome is another Nature, it hath for many years been contented to bring forth good Grain, perswaded thereunto by the Industrious Husbandman. Sure∣ly no County can shew so fair a Bunch of Berries, for so they term the fair Habitations of Gentlemen of remark, which are called Places, Courts, Halls and Mannors in other Shires. This County affording no peculiar Commodity nor Manufacture, We may safely pro∣ceed to other Observations, when first we have given the due commendation to the Hor∣ses of this Shire. Their Teames of Horses (oft times deservedly advanced from the Cart to the Coach) are kept in excellent equipage, much alike in colour and stature, fat and fair; such is their care in dressing and well-feeding them. I could name the place and per∣son, (Reader be not offended with an innocent digression) who brought his servant with a Warrant before a Justice of Peace for stealing his grain. The man brought his five horses tailed together along with him, alledging for himself, That if he were the Theefe, these were the Receivers, and so escaped. The Buildings. THEOBALDS, did carry away the credit, built by Sir William, beautified by Sir Robert Cecil his Son, both Lord Treasurers of England. The last exchanged it (too wise to do it to his Losse) with King James for Hatfield-house, which King deceased there∣in, March 27. 1625. Yea, This House may be said to decease about its grand Clima∣cterical, some sixty three years from the finishing thereof, taken down to the ground (for the better partage among the Soldiery) Anno 1651. and from the seat of a Mo∣narch is now become a little Common-wealth; so many intire Tenements, like Splinters have flown out of the Materials thereof; Thus our Fathers saw it built, we be∣hold it unbuilt, and whether our Children shall see it re-built, he only knows who hath written Eccles. 3. 5. There is a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together. Hatfield-house was first the Bishops of Ely, then the Kings, afterwards by exchange the Earls of Salisbury: For Situation, Building, Contrivance, Prospect, Air, and all accommodations, inferiour to none in England. Within a little mile thereof lyeth a place called the Vineyard, where nature by the Midwifery of Art, is delivered of much pleasure; So that the Reader must be a Seer, before he can understand the per∣fection thereof. Had this place been in Graecia, or nigh Rome, where the luxuriant fancies of the Poets, being subject-bound, improve a Tree into a Grove, a Grove into a Forrest, a Brook into a River, and a Pond into a Lake; I say, had this Vineyard been there, it had disinherited Tempe of its honour, and hence the Poets would have da∣ted all their delights as from a Little Paradise, and Staple-place of earthly pleasure.
Medicinal Waters. One hath lately been discovered neer Barnet in a Common, as generally sanative springs are found in such places, as if nature therein intimated her intention, designing them for publique profit, not private employment; it is conceived to run thorough veines of Alome by the taste thereof. It coagulateth milk, and the curd thereof is an excellent plaister for any green wounds, besides several other operations. But, as Alexander was wont to applaud Achilles, not as the most valiant but the most fortunate of men, having Homer to trumpet forth his actions: so are these waters much advantaged with the vicinitie of London, whose Citizens proclame the praise thereof. And indeed London in this kind is stately attended, having Tunbridge, Epsham, Barnet three Medicinal Waters within one dayes Journy thereof. The Catalogue of the Cures done by this Spring, amoun∣teth to a great number, in so much that there is hope, in process of time, the Water rising here will repaire the blood shed hard by, and save as many lives as were lost in the fatal Battel at Barnet betwixt the two houses of Yorke and Lancaster. Hartford-shire Proverbs. HARTFORD-SHIRE Clubs and clouted shoon.] Some will wonder how this Shire lying so near to London, the Staple of English Civilitie, should be guiltie of so much Rusticalness. But the finest Cloth must have a List, and the pure Pesants are of as course a thread in this County, as in any other place. Yet though some may smile at their clownishness, let none laugh at their Industry, the rather because the high-shoon of the Tenant payes for the Spanish-Leather-Boots of the Landlord. HARTFORD-SHIRE Hedge-Hogs.] Plenty of Hedge-Hogs are found in this High▪woodland-County, where too often they suck the Kine, though the Dayry-maid conne them small thanks for sparing their pains in milking them. A creature alwayes in his posture of defence, carrying a Stand of Pikes on his back, so that if as well victualled as armed, he may hold out a seige against any equal opposition. If this Proverb containeth any further reflection on the People in this Coun∣ty, as therein taxed for covetousness, and their constant nudling on the Earth; I will not so understand it, as hoping and believing this to be a false Application. WARE and WADES-Mill are worth all LONDON.] This I assure you is a Master-piece of the Vulgar wits in this County, wherewith they endeavour to amuse Travellers, as if WARE a thorough-fare-Market, and WADES-Mill (Part of a Village lying two miles North thereof,) were so prodigiously rich as to countervail the wealth of LONDON. The Fallacy lieth in the Homonymy of WARE, here not taken for that Town so named, but appellatively for all vendible Commodities. We will not discompose the wit of this Proverb, by cavilling that WEARE is the pro∣per name of that Town, (so called anciently from the Stoppages, which there obstruct the River.) But leave it as we found it, and proceed. HARTFORD-SHIRE Kindness.] This is generally taken in a good and grateful sense for the mutual return of favours received, It being [belike] observed that the people in this County at entertain∣ments drink back to them who drank to them, parallel to the Latine Proverbs, Frican∣tem refrica; Manus manum lavat; par est de merente bene, bene mereri. However some∣times Hartford-shire kindness may prove Hartford-shire cruelty, and amount to no less then a Monopoly, when this reciprocation of Favours betwixt themselves is the exclusion of all others from partaking thereof. Princes. WILLIAM, second Son of King Edward the Third, and Philip his wife, took his Christian-name from his Grandfather, William Earle of Henault, and his Sirname
of Hatfield from the place of his Nativity in this County, where he was born the ninth of his Fathers Reign, Anno Domini 1335. and expired within few dayes afer. So that what I find written on the late Monument of On Charles Blunt, son to the Earle of Newport in St. Martins in the Fields. a Noble Infant, may also serve for his Epitaph. Vivus nil poteram fari, quin mortuus Infans Nunc loquor, ut mortis sis memor, at{que} vale. Living I could not speak, now dead I tel Thy duty, think of death, and so farewel. It is uncertain where he was interred, but most believe him buried at Westminster. EDMUND of LANGLEY, Fifth son to King Edward the Third, and Queen Philip, Was so sirnamed from Kings-Langley in this County the place of his Nativi∣ty. He was created Earle of Cambridge, in the Thirty sixth year of the Reign of his Father, and Duke of York in the ninth year of his Nephew King Richard the Second. He married Isabel, daughter and Co-Heir of Peter King of Castile: and lie buried at Langley together. He had (besides other Children of both Sexes) to his eldest Son Richard Duke of York; and he died, Anno Dom. 1402. EDMUND of HADDAM, Reader, I presume thee to be so much a Gentleman, as in courtesie to allow him a Prince, who was Son to Queen Katherine by Owen Theodor, her second husband, womb-brother to King Henry the Sixth, and Father to King Henry the Seventh. That he was born in this County one may well be confident, seeing there is no Haddam in any Shire of England save As appeareth in Villare An∣glicanum. Hartford-shire alone. I confesse therein three Villages of that name, but sure no lesse then Great Haddam was the place of so emi∣nent a Native. He was solemnly created Earle of Richmond at Reading, in the 31. of King Henry the Sixth. Many good works no doúbt he did, when living, whose corps when buried, saved from destruction the fair Cathedral of Saint Davids. For his Monument in the midst of the Quire, saith my Speed in the Description of Pembrokeshire. Author, (as the Prebendaries told him) spared their Church from defacing in the dayes of King Henry the Eighth. I could wish all King Henries nearest re∣lations had after their decease been severally so disposed preservatives from ruine & ra∣pine, as the corps of Q. Katherin Dowager did, as some say, save the Church of Lord Herbert in the life of King Henry the Eighth. Peterburgh But this ill agreeth with that which In the Earle of Richmond. Brookes reporteth, viz. That this Earl was buried in Carmarthen; and because Vincent his professed adversary (finding fault with him al∣wayes when any, sometimes when no cause) taketh no exception thereat; I the more rely on his Testimony. Onely it is possible that this Earle first enterred in Carmarthen, might be afterwards for the more eminence of Sepulture removed to Saint Davids. He died, Anno Domini, 1456. Saints. Saint ALBAN, though (as Acts 22. 25. Saint Paul) a Roman by priviledge, but Britton, by Parentage, was born in this County (though many hundreds of years before Hartford∣shire had its modern Name and Dimensions) in the City of Verulam, and was martyred for Christianity under Dioclesian An. 303. The cause and manner whereof, (with the Mar∣tyrdome of Saint Amphibalus hard by Rudborn,) I have so largely related in my Cent. 4. pag. 17, &c. Ec∣clesiastical History, that, as I will repeat nothing, I can add nothing of consequence there∣to. Except any will conceive this to be remarkable, that good Liquoras groweth natu∣rally out of the ruinous walls of Verulam, an old City, (the Mother of the New Town of Saint Albans) as a skilful eye-witness Norden in his description of this County, pag. 29. Antiquary and zealous Protestant hath observed. Had some Papist taken first notice hereof, he might probably have made it a Miracle, and assign the sanctitie of this place for the root of this Liquoras. Martyrs. It appeareth by the Maps, that Africa lieth partly in the Torrid, and partly in the Temperate Zone, Nor is the wonder any at all, considering the vastness thereof, extend∣ing it self through many Degrees. More strange it is that this small County should be partly in a Temperate, viz. the Western part thereof subjected to the Bishop of Lincoln, and partly in the Torrid Climate, namely the Eastern Moity belonging to the Dioces of London, which under Bonner was parched with persecution. Yet not to make this Mon∣ster
worse then he was, though many in his Jurisdiction were much molested, and though Tradition points the very place in Bishops Stortford, where poor people were burnt at the stake, yet my Book of Martyrs, or Eyes, or both be defective, where∣in I cannot recover the name of any particular person. Pope. NICHOLAS Son to Robert Break-spear (a Lay brother in the Abbey of St. Albans) fetcht his Name from Break-speare a place in Camd. Brit. in Middlesex. Middlesex, but was born at Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. Se∣cund. numero. 90. & Piseus in anno 1159. Abbots-Lang∣ley a Town in this County. When a Youth, he was put to such servile work in St. Albans Abbey, that his ingenious Soul could not comport therewith. Suing to be ad∣mitted into that house, he received the repulse, which in fine proved no mis-hap, but a happy-miss, unto him; for, going over into France, he studied so hard and so happi∣ly at Paris, that for his worth he was preferred Abbot of St. Rufus neer Valentia, and afterward by Pope Eugenius the Third, was made Bishop of Alba nigh Rome: Adnata∣lis soli memoriam, saith my Author, that he, who was refused to be Monachus Alba∣nensis in England, should be Episcopus Albanensis in Italy. He was employed by the Pope for the conversion of the Norwegians, and though Bale saith (he were not Bale if he were not bitter) Anti-christiano charactere Norwegios signavit; yet his reducing them from Paganisme to Christianity in the Fundamentals was a worthy work and de∣serves true commendation. He was afterwards chosen Pope of Rome, by the name of Adrian the fourth. There is a mystery more then I can fathome in the changing of his name: Seeing his own font-name was a Papal one; Yet he preferred rather to be Adrian the fourth, then Nicholas the third. He held his place four years, eight moneths, and eight and twenty dayes: and Anno 1158. as he was drinking, was choakt with a Fly: Which in the large Territory of St. Peters patrimony had no place but his Throat to get into: But since a Flye stopt his Breath, fear shall stop my Mouth, not to make uncharitable Conclusions from such Casualties. Cardinal. BOSO (confessed by all an REM. English-man) is not placed in this County out of any certainty, but of pure Charity, not knowing, where elswhere with any Proba∣bility* Bale de Scrip. Brit. to dispose him. But seeing he was Nephew to the late named Nicholas, or Pope Adrian, we have some shadow and pretence to make him of the same Coun∣ty: This is sure, his Unckle made him Godwin in Cat. of Cardin. Pag. 164. Cardinal in the Moneth of December, 1155. and he was a great Change-Church in Rome, being successively, 1. Cardinal Deacon of Sts. Cosma & Damiam. 2. Cardinal Priest of St. Crosses of Jerusalem. 3. Cardin. Pr. of St. Prudentiana. 4. Cardin. Pr. of Pastor. He was more than Instrumental in making Alexander the third Pope with the suf∣frages of 19. Cardinals, who at last clearly carried it against his Anti-Pope Victor the fourth. This Boso dyed, Anno Dom. 1180. Prelates. RICHARD de WARE for this is his true name, as appears in his On his Tomb yet well to be seen in West∣minster Abbey on the North∣side of the Tomb of Amer de Valens Earl of Pembroke. Epitaph, though some (pretending his honour, but prejudicing the Truth thereby) sirname him Warren. He was made Abbot of Westminster 1260, and twenty years after Treasu∣rer of England, under King Edward the first. This Richard going to Rome, brought thence certain Work-men, and rich Purphury. And for the rest hear my J. Philipot, in his Treasu∣rers of England collected Ann. Dm. 1636. p. 19. Author. By whom and whereof he made the rare Pavement to be seen at Westminster, before the Communion Table, containing the Discourse of the whole World, which is at this day most Beautiful; a thing of that Singularity, Curiousnesse and Rarenesse, that England hath not the like again. See Readers, what an Enemy Ignorance is to Art. How often have I trampled on that Pavement, so far from admiring, as not observing it. And since, upon serious Survey,
it will not, in my Eyes, answer this Character of Curiosity, However I will not add malice to my Ignorance (qualities which too often are Companions) to disparage what I do not understand, but I take it on the trust of others more skilful, for a Master∣peece of Art. This Richard dyed on the second of December, 1283, the 12. of King Edward the first, and lyeth buryed under the foresaid Pavement. RALPH BALDOCK So called from the Place of his Nativity (A Moungrel∣Market)* Godwin in his Bishops of London. in this County, was bred in Merton Colledge in Oxford. One not unlearned, and who wrote an History of England, which Leland at London did once behold. King Edward the first much prised and preferred him Bishop of London. He gave two hun∣dred pounds whilst living, and left more when dead, to repair the East part of St. Pauls, on the same token, that upon occasion of clearing the Foundation, an incredible number of Heads of Oxen were found buried in the Ground, alledged as an argument by Camd. Britt. in Middlesex. some to prove That anciently a Temple of Diana. Such who object that heads of Stagges, had been more proper for her, the Goddesse of the Game, may first satisfie us, Whether any Creatures ferae Naturae (as which they could not certainly compass at all seasons) were usually offered for Sacrifices. This Ralph dyed July the 24. 1313. Being bury∣ed under a Marble Stone in St. Maries Chappel in his Cathedral. JOHN BARNET had his Name and Nativity from a Market-Town in this County, sufficiently known by the Road passing thorough it. He was first by the Pope preferred 1361. to be Bishop of Worcester, and afterwards was translated to Bath and Wells. Say not this was a Retrograde motion, and Barnet degraded in point of profit by such a Removal. For though Worcester is the better Bishoprick in our age, in those dayes Bath and Wells▪ (before the Revenues thereof were reformed un∣der King Edward the sixth) was the richer preferment: Hence he was translated to Ely, and for 6. years was Lord Treasurer of England, He dyed at Bish. Godw. in Bishops of Ely. Bishops Hatfield, June 7. 1373. and was buried there on the South-fide of the high Altar, under a Mo∣nument, now miserably defaced by some Sacrilegious Executioner, who hath beheaded the Statue lying thereon. THOMAS RUDBURNE, no doubt, according to the fashion of those dayes, took his Name from Rudburne a Village within four miles from St. Albans. He was bred in Oxford, and Proctor thereof Anno Godwin in Cat. of Bishops of St. Davids. 1402. and Chancellour 1420. An excel∣lent Scholar, and skilful Mathematician; of a meek and mild temper (though at one time a little tart against the Wic-livites) which procured him much love with great persons. He was Warden of Merton Colledge in Oxford, and built the Tower over the Colledge Gate. He wrote a Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 7 n. 53. & Pits. An. 1419. Chronicle of England, and was preferred Bishop of St. Davids. He flourished Anno Domini, 1419. though the date of his Death be unknown. Reader, I cannot satisfie my self, that any Bishop since the Reformation was a Native of this County, and therefore proceed to another Subject. Statesmen. Sir EDVVARD WATERHOUSE Knight, was born at Helmsted-bury in this County, of an ancient and worshipful Family, deriving their discent lineally from Sir Gilbert VVaterhouse of Kyrton in Low▪ Lindsey in the County of Lincoln, in the time of King Henry the third. As for our Sir Edward, his Parents were, John Waterhouse Esquire, a man of much fide∣lity and Sageness. Auditor many years to King Henry the Eighth, of whom he obtained (after a great entertainment for him in his house) the grant of a Weekly Market for the Town of Helmsted. Margaret Turner of the ancient house of Blunts-Hall in Suffolk, and Can∣nons in Hartfordshire. The King at his Departure, honoured the Children of the said John Waterhouse, being brought before him, with his praise and encouragement, gave a Benjamins portion of Dignation to this Edward, foretelling by his Royal Augury, That he would be the Crown of them all, and a man of great Honour and Wisdome, fit for the Service of Princes.
It pleased God afterwards to second the word of the King, so that the sprouts of his hopeful youth, only pointed at the growth and greatness of his honourable age. For, being but twelve years old, he went to Oxford, where for some years he gliste∣red in the Oratorick and Poëtick Sphear, until he addicted himself to conversation, and observance of State affairs, wherein his great proficiency commended him to the favour of three principal patrons. One was Walter Devereux Earl of Essex, who made him his bosome-friend, and the said Earl, lying on his death-bed, took his leave of him with many kisses, Oh my Ned (said he) farewell, thou art the faithfullest and friendliest Gentleman that ever I knew. In testimony of his true affection to the dead Father in his living Son, this Gentleman is thought to have penned that most judicious and elegant Epistle (recorded in Holin∣sheds History pag. 1266.) and presented it to the young Earl, conjuring him by the co∣gent arguments of example and rule, to patrizate. His other Patron was Sir Henry Sidney (so often Lord Deputy of Ireland) where∣by he became incorporated into the familiarity of his Son Sir Philip Sidney, between whom, and Sir Edward, there was so great freindlinesse, that they were never better pleased then when in one anothers Companies, or when they corresponded each with other. And we find after the Death of that worthy Knight, that he was a close-concern∣ed Mourner at his Obsequies, as appeareth at large in the printed Representation of his Funeral Solemnity. His third Patron was Sir John Perot Deputy also of Ireland, who so valued his Counsel, that in state-affairs he would do nothing without him. So great his employ∣ment betwixt state and state, that he crossed the seas Thirty seven times, until deservedly at last he came into a Port of Honour, wherein he sundry years anchored, and found safe harbour. For he received the Honour of Knighthood, was sworn of her Ma∣jesties Privy Council for Ireland, and Chancellour of the Exchequer therein. Now his grateful soul coursing about how to answer the Queens Favour, laid it self wholly out in Her service, wherein two of his actions most remarkable. First he was highly instrumental in modelling the Kingdome of Ireland into shires as now they are; shewing himself so great a Lover of the Politie, under which he was born, that he advanced the Compliance therewith (as commendable and necessary) in the Domi∣nions annexed thereunto. His second service was, when many in that Kingdome shrowded themselves from the Laws, under the Target of power, making force their Tutelary Saint, he set himself vigorously to suppress them. And when many of the Privy Council terrifi∣ed with the greatness of the Earl of Desmond, durst not subscribe the Instrument, wherein he was proclaimed Traitor, Sir Edward among some others boldly sign∣ed the same (disavwing his, and all treasons against his Prince and Country) and the Council did the like, commanding the publication thereof. As to his private sphear God blessed him, being but a third Brother, above his other Brethren. Now though he had three Wives, the first a Viliers, the second a Spilman, the third the Widow of Herlakenden of VVood-church in Kent Esquire, and though he had so strong a Brain and Body, yet he lived and dyed Childlesse, enter∣commoning therein with many Worthies, who are, according to Aelius Spartianus, either improlifick, or have Children in genitorum vituperium, & famarum laesuram. God thus denying him the pleasure of posterity, he craved leave of the Queen to retire himself, and fixed the Residue of his life at VVood-church in Kent, living there in great honour and repute, as one who had no designe to be popular, and not prudent; rich, and not honest; great, and not good. He dyed in the fifty sixth year of his age, the 13. of October 1591. and is buried at VVood church under a Table Marble-Monument, erected to his memory by his sorrow∣ful Lady surviving him. Reader, I doubt not but thou art sensible of the alteration and improvement of my Language in this Character, owing both my Intelligence and expressions unto Edward VVaterhouse now of Syon Colledge Esquire, who, to revive the memory of his Namesake and great Uncle, furnished me with these instructions.
HENRY CARY Viscount of Falkland in Scotland, and Son to Sir Edw. Cary, was born at Aldnam in this County. He was a most accomplished Gentleman, and compleat Courtier. By King James he was appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and well discharged his Trust therein. But an unruly Colt will fume and chafe (though neither switcht nor spur'd) merely because backt. The rebellious Irish will complain only because kept in Subjection, though with never so much lenity; the occasion why some hard Speeches were passed on his Government. Some beginning to coun∣terfeit his hand, he used to incorporate the year of his Age, in a Knot flourished be∣neath his Name, concealing the Day of his Birth to himself. Thus by comparing the date of the Month, with his own Birth-day (unknown to such Forgers) he not only discovered many false Writings which were past, but also deterred dishonest Cheaters from attempting the like for the future. Being recalled into England, he lived ho∣nourably in this County, until he by a sad casualty brake his Leg on a Stand in Theobalds Park, aud soon after dyed thereof. He married the sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Lawrence Tanfield, Cheif Baron of the Exchequer, by whom he had a fair estate in Oxfordshire. His Death happened Anno Dom. 1620. being Father to the most accomplished Statesman, Lucius; Grandfather to the present Henry Lord Falkland, whose pregnant parts (now clarified from Juvenile Extravagancies) perform much, and promise more useful service to this Nation. Souldiers. Sir HENRY CARY Son to Sir William Cary, and Mary Bollen, his Wife, was (where∣everS. N. born) made by Queen Elizabeth, Lord Chamberlain, Baron of Hunsdon in this County. A Valiant man, and Lover of Men of their hands, very cholerick but not malicious. Once one Mr. Colt chanced to meet him coming from Hunsdon to London, in the Equipage of a Lord of those dayes. The Lord on some former grudge gave him a Boxe on the Ear; Colt presently returned the principle with Interest, and there∣upon his Servants drawing their Swords swarmed about him. You Rogues (said the Lord) may not I and my Neighbour change a blow, but you must interpose? Thus the Quarrel was begun and ended in the same minute. It was merrily said, that his Latine and his Dissimulation were both alike,Sir R. Nan∣ton in his Fragment Re∣gal. and that his custome in swearing, and obscenity in speech, made him seem a worse Christian than he was, and a better Knight of the Carpet then he could be. He might have been with the Queen, whatsoever he would himself, but would be no more then what he was, preferring enough above a Feast in that nature. He hung at Court on no mans Sleve, but stood on his own Botome till the time of his death, having a competent estate of his own given him by the Queen. Who bestowed on him, in the first of her Reign, Hunsdon house in this County, with four thousand pounds a year (according to the valuation in that age) in fair Demesnes, Parks, and Lands lying about it. Yet this was rather Restitution than Liberality in her Majesty: See∣ing He had spent as great an estate, (left him by his father) in her Service or rather Releif during her persecution under Queen Mary. This Lord suppressed the first Northern Commotion, (the sole reason why we have ranked him under the Title of Soldier) for which, This Letter of Thanks was solemn∣ly returned unto him. By the QUEEN. Right Trusty and Wellbeloved Cousin, We greet you well. And right glad we are, that it hath pleased God to assist you in this your late Service, against that cankred subtil Traytor Leonard Dacres, whose force being far greater in Number than yours, we per∣ceive you have overthrown, and how he thereupon was the first that fled, having (as it seemeth) a heart readier to shew his unloyal falshood and malice, than to abide the fight. And though the best we could have desired, was to have him taken: Yet we thank God that he is in this sort overthrown and forced to flye or Realm, to his like company of Rebells, whom no doubt, God of his favourable justice will confound with such ends as are meet for them. We will not now by words express how inwardly glad we are, that
you have such success, whereby both your courage in such an unequall match, your faithful∣nesse towards us, and your Wisdome is seen to the World, this your Act being the very first that ever was executed by fight in field, in our time, against any Rebell: But We mean also in Deed by just Reward, to let the world see How much we esteem and can con∣sider such a service as this is: And so we would have your self also thank God heartily, as we doubt not but you do, from whom all Victories do proceed, and comfort your self with the assurance of our most favourable acceptation. VVe have also herewith sent our Letter of Thanks to Sir John Foster, and would have you namely thank our good faithful Soldiers of Barwick, in whose worthy service we do repose no small trust. 26. of February. 1569. Thus far was written by the Secretary of State, but the ensuing Postscript was all the Queens own hand; The Original being preserved by the Right Honourable Hen∣ry Earl of Monmouth (Grandchild to the Lord Hunsdon) by whose noble favour I carefully copied it forth as followeth, I doubt much, my Harry, whether that the Victory given me more joyed me, or that you were by God appointed the Instrument of my Glory, and I assure you for my Countries good the first might suffice, but for my hearts contentation, the second more pleaseth me; It likes me not a little, that with a good testimony of your faith, there is seen a stout courage of your mind, that more trusted to the goodnesse of your Quarrel, thn to the weakness of your Number. VVell, I can say no more; Beatus est ille servus quem, cum Dominus venerit, inveniet facientem sua Mandata. And that you may not think that you have done nothing for your profit (though you have done much for your Honour) I in∣tend to make this journey, somewhat to increase your Livelyhood, that you may not say to your self, Perditur quod sactum est ingrato. Your Loving Kinswoman. ELIZABETH REGINA. Three times was this Lord in Election to be Earl of VViltshire, a Title which in some sort belonged unto him, in the right of Mary his Mother, but still some intervening Accident retarded it. When he lay on his Death bed, The Queen gave him a gra∣cious visit, causing his Patent for the said Earldom to be drawn, his Robes to be made, and both to be laid down upon his bed, but this Lord (who could dissemble neither well nor sick) Madam (said he) Seeing you counted me not worthy of this honour whilst I was Living, I count my self unworthy of it now I am Dying. He departed this life Ann. Dom. 1596. and lyeth buryed in a most magnificent Monument in VVestminster Abbey, being the direct Ancestor to the Earls of Dover and Monmouth. Physicians. JOHN GILES, or of St. Giles, was born at Bale & . de Scrip. Angl. St. Albans, probably in the Pa∣rish of St. Giles, long since (as some more in that Town) demolished. He was bred beyond the Seas, where he became so great a Scholar, that he not only was Physician in ordinary to Philip King of France, but also Professour of that faculty in Paris and Montpelier. Then waving the care of Bodies, he took on him the cure of Souls, and was made Doctor of Divinity. He afterwards became a Dominican, and was the first Englishman that ever entred into that order. In his old age he was famous for his Divinity-Lectures read in Oxford. But which most perswades me to a venerable reception of his memory, is what I read of him in In An. 1253. Matth. Paris, how Robert Grosthead, the pious and learned Bishop of Lin∣coln being sick on his Death-bed, sent for this Mr. John Giles, learned in Physick and Divinity, that from him he might receive comfort both for body and soul. How long this Phy∣sician surviv'd his Patient (dying in Octob. 1253.) is to me unknown. JOHN de GATESDEN was undoubtedly born in this County, wherein two Villages, the Greater and Lesse of that name; Such who except that they are writ∣ten Gadesden, will soon be satisfied in their Sameness from those who know the Sym∣pathy betwixt T. and D. He was bred in Merton Colledge in Oxford, where he so pro∣fited
in the Study of Physick. That a Symphorianus Champerius in his fift Tract. de medi Art. script. Forraigner compiling a Catalogue of men eminent in that faculty, acknowledgeth him a Writer of high esteem therein. By Mathaeus Sil∣vaticus in Lex∣ico. one who hath made a List of Learned men, he is styled Johannes Anglicus. I am in∣formed that lately his Books have been printed in Italy in a Folio; No small Honour (I assure you) Seeing in Physick the Italians account all Tramountain Doctors but Apo∣thecaries in comparison of themselves. The first Treatise in his Book is termed Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 5. n. 7. & Pits. in an. 1320. Rosa Anglica, The English Rose, and I doubt not, but as it is Sweet in the Title, so it is Soveraign in the matter therein contained. This John flourished in the year of our Lord 1320. Writers. ALEXANDER NEQUAM, or Bad in English, was born in St. Albans. Many conceived themselves wondrous Witty in making Jests (which indeed made themselves) on his Sirname. Whereof one eminent instance, Nequam had a mind to become a Monk in St. Albans, the Town of his Nativity, and thus Laconically wrote for leave to the Abbot thereof. Si vis, veniam. Sin autem, tu autem. To whom the Abbot returned. Si bonus sis, venias; Si Nequam, nequaquam. Whereupon Nequam (to discompose such conceits for the future) altered the Or∣thography of his Name into Neckam. Another Pass of wit there was (saith my Bish. Godw. in Cat. of the Bish. of Lincoln Author) betwixt him, and Philip Reping∣ton Bishop of Lincoln, the latr sending the Challenge. Et niger & nequam cum sis cognomine Nequam, Both black and bad, whilst Bad the Name to thee. Nigrior esse potes, Nequior esse Ne∣quis. Blacker thou may'st, but worse thou can'st not be. To whom Nequam rejoyned. Phi nota foetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis. Stinks are branded with a Phi, Lippus Latin for Blear-eye. Phi malus & Lippus, totus malus ergo Philippus. Phi and Lippus bad as either, Then Philippus worse together. But by the leave of my learned Author, this Nequam must be much younger than* Bale & Pits. de script. Angl. our Alexander, or that Philip much older than Bishop Repington, all agreeing that Alexander Nequam dyed 1227. under King Henry the third, whereas Philip Repington was made Bishop of Lincoln 1405. under King Henry the fourth. But leaving Nequam his name, he is known to posterity by the Title of Ingenii miraculum, being an excellent Philosopher, Rhetorician and Poet, so true it is what Tully observeth, Omnes artes, quae ad humanitatem pertinent, habent quoddam commune vinculum, & quasi cognatione quadam inter se continentur: Besides he was a deep Di∣vine, as his Books do evidence. He was Canon of Exeter, and (upon what occa∣sion I know not) came to be buryed at Worcester, with this Epitaph, Eclipsim patitur sapientia sol sepelitur: Cui si par unus, minus esset flebile funus. Vir bene discretus, & in omni more facetus, Dictus erat Nequam, vitam duxit tamen aequam. Wisdom's eclips'd, Sky of the Sun bereft, Yet less the loss if like alive were left. A man discreet, in manners debonair, Bad name, black face, but carriage good and fair. Others Weavers Fun. Mon. in Hart∣ford-shire. say he was buryed at St. Albans, where he found repulse when living, but repose when dead. WILLIAM of WARE born in that thorough fair Town twenty miles from London, was a Franciscan bred first in Oxford, then in Paris. Now because some may slight the praise of Bale or Pits (as testes domesticos, Englishmen commending Englishmen) know that John In suo heptu∣lo. pious Mirandula, highly extolleth this de Ware, though miscalling him John, as ambitious to have him his Name-sake. He was Instructor to John Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 4. p. 323. & Pits. p. 349. Duns Scotus.
And if the Scholar to such height did reach, Then what was he who did that Scholar teach? He flourished under King Henry the third, Anno 1270. and is supposed to be buryed in Paris. JOHN MANDEVILE Knight, born at St. Albans in this Weavers Fun. Mon. in this County. County, Heir to a fair estate, he applied himself first to the reading of the Scriptures, then to the study of Physick (wherein he attained to great perfection) afterwards to travel for thir∣ty four years together, and at last like another Ulysses returning home, was quite grown out of Knowledge of all his friends. He wrote a Book of his own Itinerary tho∣rough Africa, the East and North part of Asia, containing variety of Wonders. Now though far Travellers are suspected in their relations to wander from the Truth, yet all things improbable are not impossible, and the Readers ignorance is sometimes all the Writers falshood. He used to complain of the Church corruptions in his Age, being wont to say, Bale de scrip. Brit. Virtus cessat, Ecclesia calcatur, Clerus errat, Daemon regnat, Simonia Domi∣natur. He dyed Anno Dom. 1372. buryed say some in the Convent of the Williamites, at Leige in Germany, which St. Albans will not allow, claiming his Burial, as well as his Birth, where a Ryming Epitaph is appendant on a Pillar neer the supposed place of his Enterment. NICHOLAS GORHAM a Dominican. We cannot blame the Frenchmen, if desirous to gain so great a Scholar to be their Countryman; nor must the French blame us, if loath to lose what is duly and truly our own. Three things are pretended to countenance his French Nativity, 1. His Long living (and dying at last) in that Land. 2. The preferment e got there, being Confessor to the King of France, which may seem a Place of too much Privacy to be conferred on a Forraigner. 3. The great credit and esteem which his Writings have gained in France, where his Manuscript-works, are extant in many Libraries. These Pleas are over-ballanced with a like Number to attest his English Extraction. Ham in Gorham, is notoriously known for no French, but a Saxon ordinary termination of a Town. 2. Gorham was a Village nigh St. Albans in this County; where Gorham∣berry (the Mannor-house thereof) is extant at this day. The Register of Merton Col∣ledge in Oxford mentioneth the admission of this Nicholas Gorham a student in their Foundation. Add to all these, that Learned Leland and other English Antiquaries have always challenged him for their Countryman. Indeed He was an English-man Francised, who going over into France a young man, spent the rest of his life there. Many and Learned are his Books, having Commented almost on all the Scriptures; and give me leave to say, no Hands have fewer spots of pitch upon them who touched the superstition of that Age he lived in. He dyed, and was buryed at Paris, about the year of our Lord 1400. I will only add that since we have had another Nicholas of Gorham (though not by his birth, by his habitation) as fa∣mous for a States-man as the former for a Divine. I mean Sir Nicholas Bacon, whose dwelling was at Gorham-berry aforesaid. HUGH LEGAT born in this Pit. de Illust. Ang. Scrlp. an. 1400. County, bred in Oxford, at last became a Benedictine in the Abbey of St. Albans. Being much delighted in Meditation, he wholly employed himself in commentary on, 1. John of See Writers in Middlesex. Hanwell his Books of Lamentation. 2. Boetius of Consolation. Thus his Soul may be presumed well poized betwixt plumbum & plumam, a Weight and a Wing to supresse and support it. He flourished Anno 1400. JOHN WHETAMSTEAD was born at Wheatamstead in this County, not so famous for the production of the best Wheat, whence the place hath its Name, as for this John VVhetamsted, who hath his Name from that place. He was bred at the Priory at Tinmouth in Northumberland (a long stride I assure you from the place of his Birth) to which Waver Fun. Monum. p. 569 he bequeathed a Challice of Gold. He was afterwards Abbot of St. Albans, and the sixth of that Christian name. Vast were his expences in adorning of that Church, exceeding six thousand pounds. * Two Criticismes in his Buildings I cannot omit, one, that on the North-side of hisManusc. Sir R. Cottons Libra∣ry. Church (which he enlightned with new VVindowes) he set up the statues of those
Heathen Philosophers, which had testified of the Incarnation of Christ. 2. That in a little Chappel he set up the similitudes of all the Saints whose Christian names were John, with his own picture, and this Prayer in a Distick, that though unworthy he might have a place with his Namesakes in Heaven. Besides he procured from Humfrey the good Duke of Glocester, his great Mecenas who was buried at St. Albans, a suite of Vestments worth 3000. Marks and the Man∣nor of Pembroke in South-wales. Many are the Books which he left to posterity, being counted no fewer then fourscore and odd several Treatises, and dyed about the year 1440. JOHN BOURCHIER Baron Berners, was Son of John Bourchier Baron BernersAMP. in the Right of Margery his Wife Daughter of Sir Richard Berners of Mills in hls Catal. of Ho∣nour Pag. 855. VVesthorsley in Surrey. Yet had that Honourablo Family of the Berners, an ancient Habitation at Cambd. Brit. in Hartford sh. Tharfield in this County, which with some probability insinuateth the Birth of this noble Gentleman therein. He was a martial man well seen in all Military Discipline, and when Michael Joseph the Black-Smith lead the Cornish Rebells against King Henry the seventh, Anno 1496. no man did better service then this Lord in their suppression, for which he was made cheif Governour of Calice. Having there gotten a repose, who formerly had been a far Traveller, and great Linguist, He * translated many Books out of French, Spanish, and Italian, besidesBale de Script. Brit. Cent. 7. n. 1. & Pits. in Anno 532. some of his own making. I behold his as the second (accounting the Lord Tiptoft the first) noble hand which since the decay of Learning took a Pen therein, to be Author of a Book. He dyed on the 16. of March 1532. and is buryed in the great church in Calice. And I have Mills Catal. Pag. 256. read that the estate of the Berners is by an Heir-general descen∣ded to the Knyvets of shwelthorp in Norfolk. Since the Reformation. ROGER HUTCHINSON was born in this Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 9. n. 95. County, and bred Fellow of St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, where he was very familiar with Mr. Roger Askam, who disdained Intimacy with Dunces. And as this is euough to speak him Scholar, so it is a sufficient Evidence to an Intelligent Jury, to prove him Protestant, that being commended by Bale for writing a book in English of the Image of God; he is wholly omitted, by John Pits. He flourished Anno Dom. 1550. and probably dyed in the hap∣py Reign of Edward the sixth, before the following persecution. THOMAS CARTVVRIGHT was born in this Sam. Clerk in his Lives of English Di∣vines. p. 367. County, and was admitted in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge Anno 1550. In the Reign of Queen Mary he left the University (being probably one of those Scholars, which as Mr. Fox observeth went (alias were driven) away from this Colledge all at one time) and betook him∣self to the service of a Counsellour. Here he got some skill in the Common-Law, which inabled him afterwards to fence the better for himself by the advantage thereof. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, he returned to Cambridge, was chosen Fellow first of St. Iohns, then of Trinity: How afterwards he was made Margaret Professour, outed thereof for his Non-conformity, travelled beyond Seas, returned home, became the Champion of the Presbyterian partie, is largely related in our Eccle∣siastical History. Onely I will add that the Non conformists not a greeing which of them (where there is much choice, there is no choice) should answer Dr. Whitgifts Reply, I read that Mr. Cartwright at last was chosen Sam. Cleark pag. 399. by lot to undertake it. It seems the Brethren con∣cluded it of high and holy concernment, otherwise I know what Mr. Cartwright hath In his Com∣ment on Prov. 1633. written of the appeal to Lots, Non nisi in rebus gravioribus, & alicjus magni mo∣menti ad sortis judicium recurrendumm, maxime, cum per sortem Deus ipse in judicio sedeat. One Sam. Cleark pag. 272. saith for riches he sought them not, and ▪Sr. G. Paul in his Life of  p. 54. another saith, that he dyed rich, and I beleive both ay true, God sometimes making Wealth to find them, who seek not for it, seeing many, and great were his Benefactors. He dyed and was buryed in Warwick, where he was Master of the Hospital. Anno. 1603. DANIEL DIKE was born at Hempstead in this County, where his Father was a Minister silenced for his Non-conformity. He was bred in....... Colledge in
Cambridge, and became afterwards a profitable Labourer in Gods Vineyard. Witness (besides his Sermons) his worthy books, whereof that is the Master-peice which treateth of the deceitfulnesse of mans heart, wherein he layes down directions for the Discovery thereof. As also how in other Cases one may be acquainted with his own Condition, seeing many men lose themselves in the Labyrinths of their own hearts: so much is the Terra incognita therein. This Book he designed for his pious Patron John Lord Harrington: But alas when the Child was come to the Birth, there was no strength to bring forth! before the Book was fully finished, the Author thereof fol∣lowed his honourable Patron into a better World; so that his Surviving brother (of whom immediately) set it forth. And to the Lady Lucy, Countesse of Bedford, the Lords Sister, the same was dedicated. A Book which will be owned for a Truth, whilst men have any badness, and will be honoured for a Treasure, wilst men have any goodnesse in them. This Worthy man dyed about the Year 1614. JEREMIAH DIKE his Younger Brother was bred in Sidney Colledge in Cam∣bridge, beneficed at Epping in Essex, one of a chearful Spirit. And know Reader, that an Ounce of Mirth, with the same degree of Grace, will serve God farther then a pound of Sadnesse. He had also a gracious heart, and was very profitable in his Ministry. He was a Father to some good Books of his own; and a Guardian to those of his Brother, whose Posthume Works he set forth. He was one peaceable in Israel. And though no Zelot in the practice of Ceremonies, quietly submitted to use them. He lived and dyed piously, being buryed in his own Parish-Church. Anno Dom. 1620. ARTHUR CAPEL Esquire, of Hadm in this County, was by King Charls the first created a Baron. 1641. He served the King with more Valour and Fidelity then Success, during the Civil Wars, in the Marches of Wales. After the Surrender of Ox∣ford, he retired to his own house in this Shire, and was in some sort well cured of the [so then reputed] Disease of Loyalty, when he fell into a Relaps by going to Col∣cbester, which cost him his life, beheaded in the Palace Yard in Westminster 1648. In his Life time he wrote a book of Meditation (published since his death) where∣in much judicious piety may be discovered. His mortified mind was familiar with afflictions, which made him to appear with such  Resolution on the Scaffold, where he seemed rather to fright Death, then to be frighted with it. Hence one not un∣happily alluding to his Arms (a Lyon Rampant in a Field Gules betwixt three Crosses) thus expresseth himself. Thus Lion-like Capel undaunted stood: Beset with crosses in a Field of Blood. A Learned Dr. in Physick (present at the opening and embalming of him and Duke Hambleton) delivered it at a publike Lecture, that the Lord Capels was the least Heart (whilst the Dukes ws the greatest) he ever beheld. Which alo is very pro∣portionable to the Observation in Philosophy, that the Spirits contracted in a lesser model, are the cause of the greater courage. God hath since been the Husband to His Widow, (who for her goodnesse may be a Pattern to her Sexe) and Father to his Children, whom not so much their Birth, Beauty, and Portions, as Vertues married to the best Bloods, and Estates in the Land, even when the Royalists were at the lowest condition. EDVVARD SYMONDS born at Cottered in this County, was bred in Peter House in Cambridge, where he commenced Master of Arts, afterwards Minister of Little Rayne in Essex, a man strict in his Life and profitable in his preaching, wherein he had a plain and piercing faculty. Being sequestred from his Living for siding with the King, with David 1 Sam. 23. 13. He went wheresoever he could go, to Worcester, Exeter, Barnstable, France, and lastly returned to London. He wrote a Book in VINDICATION OF KING CHARLES and was Instrumental in setting forth his Majesties book, called . Pens were brondished betwixt him and Mr. Stephen Marshal, though all was fair betwixt them before his Death. For Mr. Symonds visited him, lying in his bed at Westminster, told him, Had I taken you for a Wild Beast, I would not have rouzed you in your Den. He was very conscientious in dis∣charging his calling. Being once requested by me, to preach for me, he excused himself for want of competent warning, and when I pleaded, that mine being a
Country Parish would be well pleased with his performance; I can (saith he) content them, but not mine own conscience to preach with so little preparation, he dyed ahout Anno Dom. 1649. and was buryed in St. Peters Pauls Wharf in London. Benefactors to the Publique. NICHOLAS DIXON, Parson for thirty years together of Cheshunt in this County. He was also Clerk of the Pipe-Office belonging to the Exchequer. See we here why the Officers of that place (as also those of the Chancery) were called Clerks, because Priests in Orders with Cure of Souls did formerly discharge those Offi∣ces. He was also Under-Treasurer, and at last Baron of the Chequer, when partly by his own bounty, and partly by Collection of others, He builded the Parish Church of Cheshunt (and that I assure you is a very fair one) with a Chancel to the Virgin Mary. Now for an Affidavit for the proof hereof, The Reader is referred to this his Epitaph inscribed in Cheshunt Chancel, more to be respected for the truth, then wit thereof. O miserere Jesu famuli Dixon Nicolai, ui brevis hospitium tumulus pstat satis amplum. Istud qui Fanum ter denis Rexerat annis Ad cujus fabricam Bursas proprias, alienas, Solvit & allexit: quo crevit in ardua Templum. Pulchrum cancellum, tibi dat, pia Virgo novellum: Dum laudaris eo, famulo suffragia praestes. Clericus hic Pipae, subthesaurarius, inde Baro Scaccarii, se iuste gessit ubique Pacem pauperibus dans▪ VVere not that O. thogra∣phy, Pseudogra∣phy, which al∣tereth the O∣riginal Copy. I had writ e∣dat with an S for so it ought to be written. cedat divitis iras. Larga manus relevat quos pauperies fera pressit. Anno Milleno: C. quater, bis bis deca Christi Octavo moriens, mutans terrestria caelis, Octobris Luce ter denâ transit ad astra, Auxiliare prece qui perlegis haec Nicholao, Ut sibi cum sanctis praestetur vita perennis. The word Rexerat doth intimate that Cheshunt was then a Rectorie or Parsonage, though since impropriated and made a Vicarage. What a deal of doe does this piti∣ful Poet make with words at length, and Figures▪ and Latine, and Greek, to describe the date of his death? which (if I understand his signes aright) was October the thirtieth, one thousand four hundred fourty eight. Sir RALPH JOSCELINE, son to Jefferie Josceline was born at Sowes sur∣vey of London, page 569. Sabridgworth in this County, bred a Draper in London, whereof he was twice Mayor. Once Anno 1464, and ere the end of that year, was made Knight of the Bath by King Edward the Fourth, in the Field saith my Idem, Ibid. Author. But seeing there is more of the Carpet then of the Camp in that Order, it is more probable what Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 550. another writes, that he was invested Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of Elizabeth, Queen to the King aforesaid. He was Mayor again, Anno 1476. when he corrected the Bakers and Victuallers of the City, and by his diligence were the walls thereof repaired. Walls now a mere complement, serving more for the dividing then the defending of the City;  that as some forreign Cities cannot be seen for the walls, here the walls cannot be seen for the City. Sad were the case of London, if not better secured with bones within, then stones about it. Ths Sir Ralph died October the 25. Anno 1478. and was buried in the Church of Sabridgeworth. JOHN INCENT, son of Robert Incent, and Katharine his wife was born at  Brit. in Hartford shire. Berk∣hamsted in this County. He was afterwards a Doctor of Law, and advanced Anno 1543. (when Richard Sampson was preferred Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield) Dean of Saint Pauls. This John, probably invited by the example of another John (his mediate predecessour) Collet Dean of Pauls, Founded a fair Free-school in the Town of his Nativity, procuring it confirmed by act of Parliament, allowing the Master twenty, the Usher ten pounds Per annum. He died, as I collect, in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
Sir THOMAS WHITE, son to Thomas White was born at Rixmansworth in this County, and afterwards bred a Merchant-Taylor in London, of which Citie he was Lord Mayor An. Dom. 1553. He first built Glocester-Hal, and afterwards built and endowed St. Johns Colledge in Oxford the Seminarie of many flourishing wits. He bestowed also a va summe of money on several Corporations to be imployed circularly for the be∣nefit of the poor Freemen therein. Ionce intended to have presented the Reader with an exact particular of his Benefactions, till seasonably I reversed my Resolution on this con∣sideration. Amongst the Jewes it was an injury for one removed further off in blood to do the Office of a Kinsman to the childless Widow, until the next of Kin had first disclaimed his interest therein; as in the Case ofRuth 4. 4. Ruth most plainly appeared. A son, I am sure is nearer then a Nephew, therefore it is a more proper performance for one bred in Ox∣ford, to Collect the particulars of his Bounty (who whither soever he went, left the Finger-marks of his Charity behind him;) Then for me distanced a degree farthrr off by my Education in another Universitie. Since the Reformation. RICHARD HALE Esquire, was born at Cudicot in this County, and bred a Gro∣cer in the Ciry of London; Where his industrious Endeavours were so blessed, that in a little time he got a great Estate. Wherefore in Expression of his Gratitude to God the giver thereof: He Founded a very fair School, allowing fourty pounds a year to the Master thereof at Hartford in this County. A place very prudently chosen for such a purpose. First because the prime Town in his Native Shire. Secondly, great the want of a School in that populous place. And lastly, because most pure the Aire thereof, so that Parents need not fear their Childrens loss of health for the gaining of Learning. He died Anno Dom. 16—0. Whose wealthy Family do still flourish with worth and worship at Kings-Walden in this County. EDWARD BASH Knight, was born at Aldnam in this County, in the Mannor∣House then belonging to the noble Family of the Caries, (whereof Francis his Mother afterwards married to George Earle of Rutland was descended He was an hearty Gen∣tleman, and a good English Housekeeper, keeping a full Table with solid dishes on it, and welcome guests about it. And one may tearm him a valiant man, who durst be Ho∣spital in these dangerous dayes. Whilest living he was a Benefactor to Peter-house in Cambridge, wherein he was bred a Fellow Commoner. And at his death bequeathed more thereunto, the particulars whereof I have not yet attained. He gave also twenty ponnds per annum, for the maintenance of a Schoolmaster at Stansted in this County, where he had his constant habitation. He died Anno Dom. 1605. Many other Benefactours this Shire hath of late afforded, and amongst them one born in Chessunt Parish, who Founded a School and Alms-house therein, whom we leave to be reckoned up by the Topographists of this County. Memorable Persons. THOMAS WATERHOUSE Priest, was born at Helmsted in ths County. His Will acquainteth us with the wardrobe of men of his Order, towards the end of the reign ofProbatum fuit hoc Testamen∣tum cor. VVilliam Cooke Leg. Doct. in cur. prerog. 17. July 1557. Q. Mary. In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen. I Thomas Waterhouse Priest of the Catholick Faith, whole of body, and of good and perfect remem∣brance, doe make and ordain my last Will and Testament the 25. day of May, in the year of our Lord 1557. in manner and form following. First, I bequeath my Soul to God Almighty the Father of Heaven, my Creator, and unto Jesus Christ, our Lord and God, my Redeemer. And I will my body be buried in the Chancel within the Parish Church of Hemelhemsted, near to the place where my Mother lieth. I bequeth to the Parish Church of Quainton, my vestment of crimson Sattin. I bequeath to the Parish Church of great Barkemsted, my vest∣ment of crimson Velvet. I bequeath to the Parish Church of great Hemelsted, my Stole and FANON set with Pearl. I bequeath to my cozen John Waterhouse, the Queens servant my standing cup of silver and gilt, with the cover. I bequeath to my servant Thomas Ashton, ten pound in money which I promised him. I bequeath to my PRIEST, Sr. Tho∣mas Barker, my black Gown faced with Taffata, &c. And  ordain and make my brother John Waterhouse, and my cozen Richard Combe Gentlemen, mine Executors, these being witnesses, &c.
Such as jeer him for his Gallantry, (as one of the Church Triumphant) may re∣member that besides his worshipful extraction (which might the better countenance his Clothes) these were not garments for his Wearing, but Vestments for his offici∣ating, and according to the opinion of that Age, nothing could be too costly in that kind. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time. 1 William Cromar John Cromar Aldenham Mercer. 1423. 2 Ralph Joceline Geffrey Joceline Sabridgworth Draper. 1464. 3 William Martin VValter Martin — Skinner. 1492. 4 Ralph Ostrich Geffrey Ostrich Hitchin Fish-monger. 1493. 5 Thomas Bradbury VVill. Bradbury Braughin Mrcer. 1509. 6 Thomas White Thomas VVhite Rickmansworth Marchant-Taylor 1553. 7 John VVats Thomas VVats Buntingford Clath-worker 1606. Reader, This is one of the Twelve Shires, whose Gentry were not returned by the Commissioners the Twelfth of Henry the sixth into the Tower. Sheriffes. This County had the same with Essex, until the Ninth year of Queen Elizabeth, when the Distin∣ction betwixt the two Shires did begin, and these following peculiar to this County. Name Place. Armes Q. ELIZ.     Anno,     9 G. Penruddock, ar.   G. a limb of a tree, ragguled and trunked in Bend Ar. 10. Row. Litton, Ar. Knebworth Erm on a chief indented Azure, 3 Crowns Or. 11 Hen. Conisby, ar. S. Mims Gules three coneys Seiant within a Border ingrailed Argent. 12. VVill.  Ar.     13 Edw. Bash Arm. Stansted Per Chev. Ar. & G. in Cheif 2. Martelets S. in Base a Saltir &c. 14 Georg. Horsey ar. Digswel Azure 3 horses heads couped Or, Brideled Argent. 15 T. Leventhorp. Shingle. hal Argent a Bend Gobonee, S. & G. cotised of the first 16 Hen. Cocke Ar. Brocksbor Quarterly Gules and Argent. 17 Johan. Gill. Ar. VVidjel S. 2 Chev. Ar. each with 3 mull. of the first, on a cant. O. a L. pass. G 18 Tho. Bowles, Ar. Wallington Ar. on a Chev.'tw. 3 Bores-heads coup. S. as many scallops O. with∣in a border Vert Bezantee. 19 Edw. Verney, Ar.   Az. on a Cross Ar. 5 mullets G. 20 Phil. Butler, Ar. VVatton Vide the last of Q. Elizabeth. 21 Char. Morison, ar. Cashobery O, on a chief G. 3 chap. of the first. 22 Th. Dockwray, ar. Putridge S. a Che. Engr. Ar. betw. 3 plates charged with as many Pallets G. 23 Joh. Brocket, Ar. Broket-Hal Or. a Crosse Patoncee Sable. 24 Hen. Conisby, ar. ut prius   25 Fran. Haydon, ar. Grove Quarterly Ar. & Az. a Cross en∣grailed counter-changed 26 Edw. Bash, Arm. ut prius   27 Hen. Capel, Arm. Hadham G. a Ly. Ramp. 'tw. 3 crosses Boto∣nie Fitchie Or. 28 Ed. Pawleter, ar. Wimondly Ar. a Bend voided Sable. 29 T. Leventhorp, ar. & Tho. Sadler, ar. ut prius     Standon Or, a Lyon Rampant  per Fess Azure & Gules. 30 Joh. Cutts, Miles. CAMB. sh. Ar. on a Bend Engrail. S. 3 Plates. 31 Edw. Verney, Ar. ut prius   32 Wal. Mildmay, ar. Pesso-bury Argent 3 Lyons Rampant Azure. 33 Th. Hanchet, ar. Hinkworth Sable 3. dexter hands Argent. 34 Arth. Capel, Ar. ut prius   35 J. Leventhorp, ar. ut prius   36 Row. Litton, Ar. ut prius   37 Th. Sadler, Arm. ut prius   38 R. Coningsby, ar. ut prius   39 Rich. Spencer, ar. Offley Quarterly Ar. & G. a Fret Or, on a Bend S. 3 Escal. of the first. 40 T. Popeblunt, ar.   Barry Formy Nebule of 6. Or, & S. 41 Rob. Chester, ar. Cakenhatch Per pale Ar. & S. a Chev. . 42 Th. Hanchet, ar. ut prius 3 Rams heads eras. within a bor∣der engr. roundelly all counterch. 43 Th. Bowles, Ar. ut prius   44 Edw. Denny, mil. & H. Boteler, m. ESSEX. G. a Saltir Ar. 'tw. 12 Crosses Or.   Hatfield∣woodhall Gules, a Fess Checky Ar. & S. between 6.  Or. K. JAMES.     1 Hen. Boteler ut prius   2 Geo. Puient, Ar. Dgswel Gules 3 Crescents Ar. 3 Tho. Docwray, ar. ut prius   4 VVa. Mildmay, ar. & Leon. Hide, Miles. ut prius     Albury Or, a Chever. between 3 Lezen∣ges Az. on a chief Gules an Eagle displayed of the fist. 5 J. Leventhorp, ar. ut prius   6 Nich. , Armig. Quick-set   7 Radu. Sadler, ar. ut prius   8 Ric. Anderson, m.   Ar. a Chever. betwixt 3 Crosses Formee Sable. 9 Rob. Boteler Mil. ut prius   10 Johan. VVild ar.     11 W. Franckland ar.   Arg. a Chever. Sable betwixt 3 12 Tho. Dacres, M. & Tho. Dacres, ar. Chesthunt Torteauxes charged with as ma∣ny Scallops of the first. 13 God. Pebert. m. & L. Pemberton, . Hartdforbury Ar. a Chev. betw. 3 Buckets S. 14 Tho. Newes, ar.   S. 2 Pallets Ar. a Canton Erm. 15 Edw. Brisco AbotsLangly Arg. 3 Greyhounds in Pale Sab. 16 Tho. Read, arm. Broket-hal G. a Saltir betwixt 4 Garbs, Or. 17 Nich. Hide, ar. ut prius   18 R. Pemberton, ar. ut prius   19 VVil. Hale, Ar. Kings-walden Az. a Chever. counterbattily, Or, 20 Edw. Newport, ar. Pelham   21 Cl. Skudamore, m   Gules 3 stirrups leather'd and buckl'd Or. 22 Rich. Sidley, Ar. Digswell Az. a Fesse Wavy betw. 3 Goats Heads erased Ar, attired, Or. K CHARLES.     Anno.     1 VVill. Litton, m. ut prius   2 Joha. Jenning, m. Hollywell Az. on a Fess G. 3 . 3 Th. Mide, Barr. ut prius   4 Edw. Gardner, ar. Thunderidge Per pale O, & G. on a F. 2 Mascles betw. 3 Hinds pass. . 5 VVill. Hoe, Ar. Hoe. Quarterly Sable and Argent. 6 Johan. Boteler, m. ut prius   7 Rich. Hale, arm. ut prius   8 Hen. Cogshil, ar,     9 VVill. Plomer, ar. Radwell Vert a Chev. betw. 3 Lions heads erased Or, Billited Gules. 10 VV. Prestley, ar.   S. a Chever. Ar. charged with 3 Anchors of the field betw. as ma∣ny Lions, Or, each issuant out of a Tower of the second. 11 VVil. Leaman ar. North-hal Az. a Fess betw. 3 Dolphins, Ar. 12 Rad. Freeman, ar. Aspden. Azure 3  Argent 13 T. Coningsby, . ut prius   14 Th. Hewet, ar. Pesso-bury Sable a Cheve, counter battellee betw. 3. Owles Argent. 15 Johan, Gore, ar. Gilsden Gules a Fess betwixt 3 16 Atth. Pulter ut prius Fitchee, Or. 17     18 Joh. Gerrard, Bar.     19 Joh. Gerrard, Bar.     20 Cha. Nodes, Ar.    
QUEEN ELIZABETH. 14. GEORGE HORSEY,] The Horseys had a free and competent estate at Digswell in this County, where they had lived long in good Esteem. It hapned that Sir John Horsey of Clifton in the County of Dorset (whose two daughters were married in∣to the Families of Mohune and Arnold) wanting an Heir-Male, settled the main of his estate, which was very great, on Ralph the son of this George Horsey. His Father advised this Ralph his son (newly augmented with the addition of so great an Estate) that in case he should have any occasion to sell lands, not to part with his Hartford-shire Inheritance, which had continued so long in the Family, but rather to make sale of some Dorset-shire land. But the young Gentleman ill-advised sold this his Patrimony first of all. For which the rest of his means probably prospered no whit the better; Not one foot thereof re∣maining at this day to his posterity. I write not this to grieve any of his surviving Re∣lations, but to instruct all in obedience to their Parents lawful commands. 16. HEN. COCK Arm.] He was afterward knighted and  to Q. Elizabeth and King Iames, who lay at his house May the second, at his first coming out of Scotland to London, where so abundant entertainment, that no man of what condition Sow Cro∣nicle, p. 822. soever, but had what his appetite desired, which made the K. at his departure heartily thank the good Knight for his great expences. This Sir Henry's daughter was married to the Lord Delaware. 44. EDWARD DENNY Knight.]: was High Sheriffe of this Countie, when King* Stow Cron. in 10. Jaco. Iames coming from Scotland passed through it, He was attended on by 140 men su∣tably apparell'd and well mounted, with whom he tendred his service to the King, pre∣senting also his Majesty with a gallant Horse, rich saddle and furniture. But before the year of his Shreivalty was expired, King James created him Baron Denny of Waltham, and another supplyed the remainder thereof. KING JAMES. 2. GORGE PURIENT Arm.] Let me doe my best• devoir, and last office to preserve the memorie of an ancient & now expired family. Digswell I presume was the place of their living, because of their interments therein, whereof this most remarkable. Hic jacent Joannes Perient Armiger, pro corpore Regis Richardi secundi, & Penerarius ejsdem Regis. Et Armiger etiam Regis Hen. quarti. Et Armiger etiam Regis Henrici quinti; & Magister Equitum Johanne filie Regis Navar, & Re∣ginae Angliae, qui obiit....... & Johanna uxor ejus, quondam capitalis Do∣micilla....... que obiit xxiv. Anno Dom. M. ccccxv........ Surely he was a man of merit, being Penon or Ensign-bearer to one Esquire, of the body to three successive Kings, and Mr. of the Horse to one of their Queens, to whom his wife was chief Lady of Honour. THOMAS DACRES Miles & mort.] He was one of the three Sheriffes in this County, who within the compasse of ten years died in their Shrievalties, as by this Catalogue may appear. He was Grand-child unto Robert Dacres Esqu. one of the Privy Council to King Henry the Eighth. THOMAS HOE] This most ancient name (which formerly had Barons there∣of) is now expiring in the Male line. This Gentlemans sole daughter being married unto....... Kete of London. THOMAS CONISBY Armiger] When one told him, that his potent adversarie had prevailed to make him Sheriffe, I will not (said he) keep a man the more, or a dog the fewer on that account. The Farewell, I am sorry to hear that the fair Font of solid Brasse, brought out of Scotland and be∣stowed by Sir Richard Lea on the Abbey Church in St. Albons is lately taken away: I could almost wish that the plunderers fingers had found it as hot as it was when first for∣ged, that so these theives, with their fault, might have received the deserved punish∣ment thereof. Had it bin return'd to the place whence it was taken, to serve for the same use, the mat∣ter had not bin so much; but by an usual Alchymy, this Brass, is since turned into Silver. But let us not so much condole the late losing of the Font, as congratulate our still keep∣ing of Baptisme, which if some men might have their minds, should utterly be denied to all Infants. I wish all Infants to be christned in this County, and elsewhere, though not so fair a Font, fair water, and which is the best of all, the full concurrence of Gods Spirit effectually to compleat the Sacrament unto them.
HEREFORD-SHIRE hath Worcester-shire and Shrop-shire on the North, Glocester shire on the East, Monmouth-shire on the South, Breck∣nock and Radnor-shires on the West. In form it is almost circular, being from North to South (measured to the best improvement) 35. miles, though from East to West not altogether so much. There cannot be given a more effectual Evidence of the healthful aire in this Shire, then the vigorous vivacity of the inhabitants therein; Many aged folk which in other countries are properties of the chimneyes, or confined to their beds, are here found in the feild as able (if willing) to work. The ingenious Serjeant Hoskin gave an intertainment to King Iames and povided ten aged people to dance the Morish before him; all of them making up more then a thousand yeares, So that what was wanting in one was sup∣plied in another. A nest of Nestors not to be found in another place. This County doth share as deep as any in the Alphabet of our English Commodities though exceeding in VV. for VVood, VVheat, VVooll, and VVater. Besides this Shire, better answereth (as to the sound thereof) the name of Pomerania, then the Dukedome of Germany so called, being a continued Orchard of Apple trees, whereof much Sider is made of, the use whereof we have treated of In the Com∣modities of Glocester-shire before. There is a Tract in this County called Gylden Vale, And if any demand how much gold is to be found therein know that even as much as in Chrusaroas or, Golden stream, the river of Damascus so called from the yellowness of their water as this vail is so named either because gilded with flowers in the spring, or because being the best of Molds as Gold is of Mettalls. Here I   Master Camden his cautious commendation of this County. Secunda   inter Angliae Provincias acquiescere, haud facile est contenta. It is not   to be accounted the Second shire for matter of fruitfulness But the foresaid Authour in his whole book never expresseth which is the first, too politick to adjudge so invidious a preheminence. And thus keeping the uppermost seate emptie, such competitour Counties are allowed leave, to put in their several claimes which pretend to the prime place of fertility. Reader, I am sorry that having not hitherto seen the Cathedral of Hereford, I must be silent about the building in this County. Natural Commodities, Wooll. Such as are ignorant of the qualities thereof may inform themselves therein from the common Proverbs. 1. VVhite as Revel. 1. 14. VVooll; a Scripture phrase, though there be thereof black by nature. 2. Soft as VVooll, and therefore our Judges antiently in the Parlia∣ment-House sat on Wooll packs, as well for the easier repose of their age, as to minde them to maintain this staple commodity in its legal priviledges. 3. As warm as VVooll. And one said merrily; VVooll must needs be warm, as consisting all of double letters. Our English garments from head to foot were formerly made thereof, till the beginning of the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth, when velvet caps becoming fashionable for Persons of prime Quality, discomposed the proverb, If his cap be made of VVooll, as formerly comprising all conditions of people how high and haughty soever. Great the plenty of Wooll in this County and greater Gods Goodness, that ge∣nerally our Northern Lands are well stored therewith. Cited by H. Stevens in his De of Herodotus. The Frier rather descanted then commented, and his interpretation not so much false, as improper for the place Dat nivem sicut Lanam, He giveth Snow like Psal. 147. 16. VVooll, That where most Snow falls those places (if habitable) are best provided with VVooll. It is well his wanton wit4 Moscovy, Po∣land, Norway. went no further, He scattereth his hoare frost like ashes; Freezing * Countries affording most Fewel to burn, so careful is Providence in dispensing necessaries to mankinde. As for the Wooll in this County, it is best known to the honour thereof by the name of Lempster Ore, being absolutely the finest in this County and indeed in all England,
equalling if not exceeding the Apulian or Tarentine in the South of Italy though it cost not so much charge and curiosity in the carefull keeping thereof. For good Var: de re . 2 cap. 2. Columell. l. 7. c. 4. Authors, inform us that there the Sheepherds put in effect a Fleece over their Fleece using to clothe their sheep with skins to preserve their Wooll from the injury of earth, bushes and weather. How well this requiteth their cost I know not, but am sure no such trouble is used on our sheep here. Salmons. A daintie and wholesome fish, and a double riddle in nature; first for its invisi∣ble feeding, no man alive having ever found any meat in the maw thereof. Secondly, for its strange leaping (or flying rather) so that some will have them termed Salmons, à saliendo. Being both bow and arrow, it will shoot it selfe out of the water an incre∣dible heighth and length. I might adde the admirable growth thereof, if true what is confidently affirmed, that it increaseth from a spawn to a full grown fish within the compasse of a year. Plenty of these in this County, though not in such abundance as in Scotland, where servants (they say) indent with their Masters, not to be fed there∣with above thrice a weeke. Some will say, Why Salmons in Hereford-shire, which are common to other Coun∣ties? It is answered, in other Counties suitably with the Buck, they are seasonable onely in Summer, whereas here with Buck and Doe, they are in season all the year long. This Countie may say. Salmo non aestate novus, nec frigore desit Salmon in Summer is not rare, In Winter, I of them do share. For the River of Wy affords brumal Salmons, fat and sound,  hey are sick and spent in other places. The Wonders. There is a little Fountain called Bone-Well nigh Richards Castle in this County the Water whereof is alwayes full of Bones of little Fishes Camden Brit. in Here∣fordshire. or as others conceive of little Frogs. Seeing it seems such their smalnesse they are hardly to be distinguished. It addeth to the Wonder, because this Spring can never be emptied of them, but as fast as some are drawn out, others instantly succeed them. To this permanent, let us add two transient wonders on the credit of excellent Quoted by Speed in his Maps of Eng∣land, in Here∣ford-shire. Au∣thors; when a battle was fought in this County, Anno Dom. 1461. betwixt Jasper E. of Pembrooke, and James Butler Earl of Ormond on the one side, and K. Edward the Fourth of the other, three Suns appeared together in the Firmament. Such a triple Sun (one real, two representations) were seen in heaven a little before the Roman Empire was rent betwixt three Competitours, Galba, Otho, and Vitellius▪ as also since, when the Kingdome of Hungarie was Cantoned betwixt John Vayvode, Ferdinand afterwards Emperor, and the great Turke; such Meteors being some∣times prognosticks of so many severall pretenders at once to the same Sovereignty. Inquiring into the natural cause hereof, we find it to be nothing else but the Image of the Sun represented in an equal, smooth, thick and watery Cloud, not opposite thereunto, (for then it would make the Rain-bow) nor under the Sun, for then it would make those circles called Crowns or Garlands) but on one or either side thereof, in a com∣petent or moderate distance. For if it be too far off, then the beams will be too fee∣ble to be reflected; if too near, the Sun will disperse it; but in such a middle distance, wherein many Suns may appear, as a mans face is expressed in all pieces of a broken glasse. To this wonder add a second of This kind of Earthquake is called Brasma∣tias. Marcley-Hill, which An. Dom. 1575. rouzed it selfCamdens Eliz. An. 1575. as it were, out of its sleep. Yea, in some sort it might seem to be in labour for three dayes together, shaking and roaring all that while, to the great terrour of all that heard or beheld it. It threw down all things that opposed it, and removed it self into an higher place. The best use we can make of such accidents, is to fear and not fear there∣at, with a reverential awe to God, no servile dread of the thing it self; Psal. 46. 2. Therefore we will not fear though the earth be removed; and though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.
Proverbs. Blessed is the Eye,] That is betwixt Severn and Wye.] Some will justly question the Truth hereof. True it is, the Eyes of those Inha∣bitants are entertained with a pleasant Prospect, yet such, as is equalled by other pla∣ces. But it seems this is a prophetical promise of Safety to such that live secured within those great rivers, as if priviledged from Martial impressions. But alas! Civil War is a vagrant, and will trace all corners, except they be surrounded with Gyges his ring. Surely some eyes in that place, besides the Sweet Rivers of Severn and Wye, running by them, have had Salt Waters flowing from them, since the beginning of our late Distractions. Camd. B rit. in Hereford-sh. Lemster bread, and Weabley Ale.] It seems both these are best in their kinds, though good in other places of the Land. Thus, though Palestine was universally termed a Deut. 8. 8. Land of Wheat, yet the Spirit of God takes signal notice of the Ezek. 27. 17. wheat of Minnith and Pannag, as finer than the rest. Yet is there Wheat in England, which justleth for pureness with that of Weabley, viz. What groweth about Heston in Middlesex, yeilding so fine floure, that for a long time the Camd. Brit. in Middlesex. Manchet for the Kings of England was made thereof, except any will say it is prized the more for the Vicinity to London. Saints. ETHELBERT was King of the East-Angles and went to Offa King of Mercia to treat of a marriage with his Daughter; but Queen Quendred Wife to Offa, more ambitious of her own unlawful, then her Daughters lawful advancement, practised his Death at a Village now called Sutton-Wallis, four miles from Hereford. His corps was afterwards removed by Milfred (a petit Prince of that Country) to Hereford, where he obtained the reputation of a Saint and Martyr. His suffering happened Anno Dom. 793. THOMAS CANTILUPE was of honourable extraction, whose Father William Lord Cantilupe had two fair habitations, Abergavenny Castle in Mon∣mouth, and Harringworth in Northampton-shire, which by an Heir-general of that Fa∣mily afterwards descended to the Lord Zouch. He was bred in Oxford (whereof at last he became Chancellour) and was preferred Bishop of Hereford. A charitable man may believe him a person of Holy Life and great Learning: But no wise man will cre∣dit what Walsingham writes of him, That he was never guilty of any mortal sin. Going to (others say returning from) Rome, to assert his Church from the encroachment of Peckam, Arch-bishop of Canterbury, he dyed at a City in Tuscany, where his flesh was taken off his Corps and buryed, whilst his bones were sent for Reliques into En∣gland, and enshrined at Hereford. Now, though different dates be assigned of his death, I adhere to Bishop Godwin, noting his Dissolution 1282. He was afterwards canonized by Pope John the twenty second, and no fewer then English Mar. October 2. four hundred twenty five miracles are registred in that Church, reported to be wrought at his Tomb. I say, just four hundred twenty five, which falls out sewer by five and twenty then the Prophets of 1 Kin. 18. 19. Baal, and more by five and twenty then the Prophets of the Groves, in a middle number betwixt both, and all of thm I beleive honest and true alike. Yea, it is recorded in his legend, that by his Eng. Martyr. ut prius. Prayers were raised from death to life threescore several persons, one and twenty Lepers healed, and three and twenty blind and dumb men to have received their sight and speech. No wonder then what Mr. Brit. in Here∣ford-shire. Camden observeth, that in process of time, parum abfuit quin pietatis opinione Regio Martyri Ethelberto praeluxerit; He lack'd but little to eclipse the Lustre of Ethelbert, the Royal Saint and Martyr, formerly buryed (as is afore∣said) in the same Cathedral: Indeed it is given to Superstition, alwayes to be fon∣dest of the youngest Saint. But long since King Henry the eighth hath put a period to all emulations betwixt their memories. The Bishops of Hereford, so highly honoured this Thomas, that (waving their ancient Arms) they assumed the paternal Coate of Cantilupe (viz. Gules 3 Leopards
heads inverted, each with a Flower de Luce in his Mouth, Or,) to be successively the Arms of their See. This Cantilupe lived the latest of any Englishman who was canonized, so that blind zeal may even close her Stomack, and make up her Mouth with the Sweet-meats of his memory. Martyrs. Sir JOHN (Son to Sir Thomas) OLDCASTLE was a Native of this County, whereof he was Sheriff in the seventh of Henry the fourth, Lord Cobham in the right of his Wife; a right valiant man, but great follower of VVickliffe, so that he lost his life on that account. As his body was hanged and burnt in an unusual posture at Tyburne, so his memory hath ever since been in a strange suspense betwixt Malefactour and Martyr: Papists char∣ging him with Treason against King Henry the fifth, and heading an Army of more then ten thousand men, though it wanted nine thousand nine hundred ninety and nine thereof, so far as it appears solidly proved. But it hath ever been the Practice of the Devil and his instruments angry with Gods Servants for their Religion, to accuse them for Sedition, perceiving Princes gene∣rally more jealous of their own honour then Gods Glory, and most careful to cut off such as oppose their power or persons; Thus Christ was accused for Disloyalty to Caesar; and St. Paul, for raifing of Tumults, though they (as it is plain in the Acts 23. 6. Text) either raised themselves, or were raised by the Pharisees and Saducees, Pauls professed Enemies. But I have so worne out the Neb of my Pen in my Church-History, about clearing the Innocency of this worthy Knight, that I have nothing to add new there∣unto. Marian Martyrs this Diocess affordeth none, such the Moderation of Robert Parfew the Bishop thereof. Cardinal. ADAM de EASTON. We were at a great losse, had we but his bare Sirname to direct us to the place of his Nativity, seeing scarcely one County in England, which hath not one or more Eastons or Three Eatons there are in this County. Eatons (the same in effect) therein. But thanks be to our Bish. Godwin in his Catal. of Cardinals, p. 173. out of whom this is collected. Author, who hath fixed his Birth (though but with an ut videtur) in this Shire. Pretenders to Skill in Palmestry would perswade us, that such, the Table in whose hands is narrow beneath and broad above, are marked out for Poverty in their youth, and plenty in their old Age. I will not say, such the Signature in the hands of our Adam, but sure I am such his successe. Mean his birth, homely his bree∣ding, hard his fare, till by his Industry he was advanced Dr. of Divinity in Oxford, wherein he became a great Scholar, skill'd in Greek and Hebrew (rare accomplish∣ments in that age) and was very dexterous in all civil Negotiations. He was after∣wards made Cardinal, with the Title of St. Cicilie, by Pope Urban, against whom Clement the seventh was elected and erected by others. Fierce the Fight between Bears and Boars, but far fiercer betwixt two Anti-Popes, giving no Quarter to the opposite party, if brought into their power. Urban suspect∣ing Treachery in some of his Cardinals, imprisoned seven of them at once, and put∣ing five of them into Sacks, sunk them into the Sea. Oh most barbarous Urbanity! Our Adam being the sixth hardly escaped with Life, and may be said in some sort put into a Sack, (though of a larger size) I mean a streight Dungeon, where he remained half starved for five years together, till the Death of Pope Urban. But Pope Boniface, his Successour, restored him to all his honours and dignities, sent him over into England, to King Richard the Second with most ample Commendation. Returning to Rome, he lived there in all plenty and pomp, and dyed September the seventeenth, 1397. Pity it is so good a Scholar should have so barbarous an Epitaph, scarce worth our Translation. Artibus iste Pater famosus in omnibus Adam, Theologus summus, Cardi que-nalis erat. Anglia cui patriam, titulum dedit ista Beatae Ceciliae{que}—mors{que} suprema polum. Adam a famous Father in Arts all, He was a deep Divine, Cardi-and-nall, Whom England bred, S. Cicilie hath given His Title—Death at last gave heaven.
He was interred when dead in the Church of St. Cicilie, which intituled him when alive, though no happiness; an honour, which no other English man (to my observation) of his Order ever Injoyed. Prelates. JOHN BRETON, aliàs BRITTON, D. of the Lawes. He meriteth a high place in this Catalogue; and yet I am at a perfect loss, where to fix his Nativity, and therefore am forced to my last Refuge, as the S. N. Marginal Character doth confess. He was a famous Lawyer, living in the Reign of King Edward the First, at whose Commandement, and by whose Authority he wrote a learned Book of the LAWES of ENGLAND, the Tenor whereof runneth in the Kings name, as if it had been penned by himself. Take one instance thereof. 12. Chapter. VVe will, that all those, who are fourteen years old, shall make Oath that they shall be sufficient and Loyall unto Us, and that they will be neither Felons, nor assent∣ing to Felons: and We will, that all be, &c. This Style will seem nothing strange to those, who have read Justinian his Institu∣tions, which the Emperour assumed unto himself, though composed by others. It is no small Argument of the Excellency of this Book, that notwithstanding the great variation of our Lawes since his time, that his work still is in great and general Repute. Thus a good face conquereth the disadvantage of old and unfashionable Clothes. He was preferred Bishop of Hereford, in the Reign of King Henry the Third. And although there be some difference betwixt Authors about the time, wherein he lived and died (some assigning a latter date) I confide in Bishop In his Cata∣logue of the Bishops of He∣reford. Godwin (his Suc∣cessour in the same See) computing his death to happen May 12. in the Third of King Edward the First, Anno 1275. ADAM de ORLTON, was born in the City of Hereford. Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops. Proceeding Doctor of Law, he became afterwards Bishop in the place of his Nativity. This is he so Infa∣mous in History for cutting off the life of King Edward the Second, with his Ridling Unpointed Answer. Edwardum Regem occidere nolite timere bonum est. To kill King Edward you need not to fear it is good. It is hard to say, which of these two were the Original, and which the Translation; It being equally probable that the English was Latined, as that the Latin was Englished by such Authors as relate this transaction. This mindeth me of a meaner passage (sic Canibus Catulos) which to refresh both the Reader and my self, I shall here insert. A Schoolmaster being shut out of his School at Christmass came to Composition with his Scholars, and thus subscribed the Arti∣cles tendred unto him; Aequa est conditio non nego quod petitis. But being readmitted into his house, He called all his Scholars to account for their Rebellion; they plead themselves secured by the Act of Oblivion he had signed. He calls for the Original, and perusing it thus pointed it. Aequa est Conditio? non; Nego quod petitis. Thus power in all ages will take the priviledge to construe its own Acts to its own advantage. But to return to de Orlton, he made much bustling in the Land, passing through the Bishopricks of Worcester and Winchester, and died at last not much lamen∣ted, July 18. 1345. JOHN GRANDESSON was born at Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Exter. Ashperton in this County, a person re∣markable on several accounts. For his 1. High Birth, his Father Gilbert being a Baron, and his Mother Sybill Coheir to the Lord Tregose. 2. Great Learning, being a good Writer of that age, though Bale saith of him that he was Orator animosior quàm facundior. 3. High Preferment attaining to be Bishop of Exeter. 4. Vivacity, sitting Bishop in his See two and fourty years. 5. Stout Stomack Resisting Mepham Archbishop of Canterbury vi & Armis, when he came to visite his Diocess. 6. Costly Buildings, Arching the Beautifull Roofe of his Cathedrall, Building and endowing a rich Colledge of Saint Mary Otterey.
He was the bettter inabled to do these and other great Benefactions by perswading all the secular Clergy in his Diocess to make him sole Heir to their Estates: He died July 15. Anno Domini, 1369. THOMAS BRADWARDINE Arch-bishop of Canterbury. See him more properly in Sussex. RICHARD CLIFORD Bishop of London. See him more conveniently in Kent. Since the Reformation. MILES SMITH, D. D. was born in the City of So Master Stephens his Secretary informed me. Hereford, which I observe the rather, because omitted in his Funeral Sermon. His Father was a Fletcher, and a man of no mean Estate, that Vocation being more in use formerly, then in our Age. He was bred first in Brasen-Nose-Colledge, then Chaplain of * Christ-Church in Oxford. A deep Divine, great Linguist, who had more then a single share in the last Translation of the Bible, as hereby will appear. 1. More then fourty See their names in our Church-Hist. Grave Divines were imployed in several places on that work. 2. When it had passed their hands, it was revised by a dozen select ones. 3. This done, it was referred to the final Examination of Bish. Bilston, and Dr. Smith. 4. Doctor Smith at last was injoyned to make the Preface to the Translation, as a comely gate to a glorious City, which remains under his own hand in the University Library in Oxford. Yet was he never heard to speak of the work with any attribution to himself more then the rest. He never sought any preferment he had, and was wont See the pre∣face of his works writ∣ten by Mr. Stephens. merrily to say of him∣self, that he was Nullius rei praeterquam Librorum avarus, Covetous of nothing but Books. King James preferred him Bishop of Glocester 1612. wherein he behaved him∣self with such meeknesse, that in all matters of doubt, the byass of his inclination did still hang . He wrote all his books with his own hand) in that faculty not being short of the professours thereof) and being seaventy years of age died and was buried in his own Cathedrall 1624. Souldiers. ROBERT DEVEREUX, Son of Walter Devereux Earle of Essex, was born at Thomas Mils in his Catal. of Honours, page 863. Nethwood in this County, November the tenth, 1567. Whilst his Father as yet was onely Viscount of Hereford. He was such a Master-piece of Court and Camp, and so bright a Light therein, that we will observe his morning, fore-noon, high-noon, afternoon and night. His morning began at his first coming to Court, the gates whereof he entred with four great advantages of Pitie, Kindred, Favour, and Merit: Pitie, on the account of his Father lately dead (to say no more) and generally lamented: Kindred by his Mothers side, Lettice Knowles, near allied to the Queen: Favour being son in Law to Leicester, and so was a Favourits Favourite at the first day, though he quickly stood on his own legs without holding: Merit, being of a Beautiful Personage, Courteous Nature, Noble Descent, Fair (though much impaired) Fortune. Fore-noon, when the Queen favourably reflected on him, as a Grand-Mother on a Grand-Child, making him the wanton to her fond and indulgent affection, as by this Letter written with her own hand, doth appear: ESSEX, Your sudden and undutiful departure from our presence, and your place of Attendance, you may easily conceive how offensive it is and ought to be unto Us. Our great Favours bestowed upon you without deserts, hath drawn you thus to neglect and forget your Du∣ty: For other Construction we cannot make of these your strange Actions. Not meaning therefore to tolerate this your disordered Part; We gave directions to some of Our Privy Councel to let you know our Express Pleasure for your Immediate Repair hitber, which you have not performed as your Duty doth bind you, Increasing thereby greatly your former of∣fence and undutiful behaviour, in departing in such sort without our Privity, having so special Office of Attendance and Charge near our Person. We do therefore Charge and Com∣mand you forthwith upon the Receit of these our Letters, all Excuses and Delayes set apart, to make your present and immediate Repair unto Us, to understand our further Pleasure. Whereof see you fail not, as you will be loth to incur our Indignation, and will Answer for the contrary at your uttermost Peril. The 15. of April 1589.
This letter angry in the first, and loving in the fourth degree, was written to him (sent by Sir Thomas Gorges) on this occasion. The Earle in pursuance of his own mar∣tial inclination, secretly left the Court to see some service in France. The Q. passionate∣ly loving his Person, grievously complained of his absence, and often said, We shall have this young fellow knockt on the head, as foolish Sidney was, by his own forwardness, and was restless till his return. I behold him in his high-noon, when he brought Victory with him home from Cadiz and was vertical in the esteem of the Souldiery, and may be said to awaken the Queens jealousie by his popularitie. His After-noon followed when he undertook the Irish action, too knotty service for his smooth disposition, being fitter for personal performance, then conduct and man∣aging of martial affaires. And now his enemies work was halfe done, having gotten such a Gulf betwixt him and the Queen. For, as Antaeus is said to have recruited strength; when he touched his Mother Earth: so this Earle, wrestling with his Ene∣mies, suppressed them, and supported himself by his dayly access to the Queen, which distance now denied him. His Night approached, when coming over without leave, he was confined by the Q. to his house, to reclaim, not ruine him. Hither a miscellaneous crew of sword-men did crowd, tendering him their service some of one perswasion some of another, some of all, some of no religion. Their specious pretence was to take evil Counsellors from the Queen, though it had been happie if they had been first taken away from the Earle. What his companie said they would doe, the Earle knew; but what would have been done by them, God knowes: The Earle rising, and missing of expected support from the City of London quickly sunck in the Queens final displeasure, Anno Domini 1600. He was valiant, liberall to Scholars and Souldiers, nothing distrustful, if not too confident of fidelity in others. Revengefulness was not bred but put into his disposi∣tion. 'Tis hard to say, whether such as were his Enemies, or such as should be his friends, did him more mischief. When one flattered him to his face for his Valour, no said he, my sins ever made me a coward. In a word, his failings were neither so foul, nor so many, but that the Character of a right worthy man most justly belongs to his memory. Writers. ROGER of Bale de scri. Brit. Cent. 3. Numb. 13. Anno 1170. HEREFORD born in that City was bred in the University of Cambridge being one of the prime Promoters of Learning therein after the Re∣foundation of the University by the Abbot of Crowland. He was an excellent Astro∣nomer, and Stars being made for signes, was a good Interpreter what by these signes were intended. He wrote a Book of Judicial Astrologie, whether to commend or condemn it, such onely can satisfie themselves that have seen his Book. He was al∣so skilful in all Mettals and Minerals and his pretty curiosities made him acceptable to the Nobility of England flourishing under King Henry the Second, An. Dom. 1170. WILLIAM LEMPSTR a Franciscan, and a Dr. of Divinity in Oxford, was born in that well known Town in this County. He wrote Collations on the Master of the Sentences, and Questions in Divinity, as In Appendice Ang. Script. J. Pits. informeth me, adding withall, Haec scripsit, novi, sed non quo tempore novi Well I know these works he wrot But for the time I know it not. And I am content (for companies sake) with him to be ignorant of the exact date thereof. Since the Reformation. RICHARD HACKLUIT, was born of an ancient extract in this County, whose Family hath flourished at...... in good esteem, He was bred a Student in Christ Church, in Oxford, and after was Prebendary of Westminster, His Genius incli∣ned him to the Study of History, and especially to the Marine part thereof, which made him keep constant Intelligence with the most noted Seamen of Wapping, until the day of his Death. He set forth a large Collection of the English Sea Voyages, Ancient, Middle, Modern, taken partly out of private Letters, which never were (or without his care
had not been) printed. Partly out of Small Treatises, printed, and since irrecove∣rably lost, had not his providence preserved them. For some Pamphlets are produ∣ced, which for their Cheapnesse and Smalnesse men for the present neglect to buy, pre∣suming they may procure them at their pleasure, which small Books, their first and last Edition being past, (like some Spirits that appear but once) cannot afterwards with any price or pains be recovered. In a word many of such useful Tracts of Sea Adventures, which before were scattered as several Ships, Mr. Hackluit hath imbo∣died into a Fleet, divided into three Squadrons, so many several Volumes. A Work of great honour to England, it being possible that many Ports and Islands in America which being base and barren, bear only a bare name for the present, may prove rich places for the future. And then these Voyages will be produced and pleaded, as, good Evidence of their belonging to England, as first discovered and denominated by English-men. Mr. Hackluit dyed in the beginning of King Iames his Reign, leaving a fair estate to an unthrift Son, who embezill'd it, on this token, that he vanted, that he cheated the covetous Usurer, who had given him Spick and Span new money, for the Old Land of his Great Great Grandfather. JOHN GVVILLIM was of VVelch extraction, but born in this See J. Davis of Hereford, challenging him for his Countryman. his Verses on his Display of Heraldry. County, and became a Pursuivant of Arms, by the name first of Portsmouth, then Rougecroixe, but most eminent for his methodical Display of Herauldry, (confusion being former∣ly the greatest difficulty therein) shewing himself a good Logician in his exact Divi∣sions, and no bad Philosopher, noting the natures of all Creatures given in Armes, joyning fansie and reason therein. Besides his Travelling all over the earth in beasts, his Industry diggeth into the ground in pursuit of the properties of precious stones, di∣veth into the Water in Inquest of the qualities of Fishes, flyeth into the Air after the Nature of Birds, yea mounteth to the very Skies about stars (but here we must call them Estoiles) and Planets their use and influence. In a word he hath unmyste∣ried the mysterie of Heraldry, inso much, that one of his own Sir W. Segar in his Verse be∣fore his Book. faculty, thus des∣canteth (in the Twilight of jest and earnest) on his performance. But let me tell you, this will be the harm In Arming others, you Your self disarm; Our Art is now Anatomized so, As who knows not, what we our selves do know? Our Corn in others Mill is ill apaid. Sic vos non vobis, may to us be said. I suspect that his endevours met not with proportionable reward. He dyed about the latter end of the Reign of King Iames. JOHN DAVIES of Hereford (for so he constantly styled himself) was the greatest Master of the Pen that England in his age beheld, for 1 Fast-writing, so incredible his expedition. 2 Fair-writing, some minutes Consultation being required to decide, whe∣ther his Lines were written or printed. 3 Close-writing, A Mysterie indeed, and too Dark for my Dimme Eyes to discover. 4 Various-writing, Secretary, Roman, Court, and Text. The Poetical fiction of Briareus the Gyant, who had an hundred hands, found a Mo∣ral in him, who could so cunningly and copiously disguise his aforesaid Elemental hands, that by mixing he could make them appear an hundred, and if not so many sorts, so many Degrees of Writing. Yet had he lived longer he would modestly have acknowledged Mr. Githings (who was his Schollar and also born in this County) to excel him in that faculty, whilst the other would own, no such odious Eminencie, but rather gratefully * So informed by Master Cox Draper in Lon∣don his Execu∣tor. return the credit to his Master again. Sure I am, when two such Transcendent Pen-masters shall again come to be born in the same shire, they may even serve fairly to engross the will & testament of the expiring Universe. Our Davies had also some pretty excursions into Poetry and could flourish matter as well as Letters, with his Fancy as well as with his Pen. He dyed at London in the midst of the Reign of King James, and lyeth buryed in St. Giles in the fields.
Romish Exile Writers. HUMPHRY ELY born in this Pitstate 17 Numero 1053. County, was bred in St. Johns Colledge in Oxford; Whence flying beyond the Seas he lived successively at Doway, Rome and Rheams, till at last he setled himself at Pont-Muss in Lorain, where for twenty years together, he was Professor of Canon and Civil Law, and dying 1604. Was buri∣ed therein with a double Epitaph. That in Verse my Iudgement commands me not to beleive, which here I will take the boldnesse to translate. Albion Haereseos velatur nocte, viator Desine Mirari, Sol suus hic latitat, Wonder not, Reader, that with Heresies England is clouded; Here her SUN he LIES. The Prose-part my Charity induces me to credit; Inopia ferme laborabat, alios ino∣pia sublevans; He eased others of Poverty, being himself almost pinched therewith. Benefactors to the Publick. JOHN WALTER was born in the City of Hereford. Know, Reader, I could learn little from the Mr. Richard Henchman of S. Mary  Minister which preached his funeral, less from his acquaintance, least from his Children. Such his hatred of vain glory, that (as if Charity were guil∣tinesse) he cleared himself from all suspicion thereof. Yet is our Intelligence of him though breif, true, as followeth; He was bred in London, and became Clerk of Drapers-hall: Finding the World to flow fast in upon him, he made a solemn Vow to God, that he would give the surplusage of his Above Ten Thousand pounds. estate (whatever it was) to pious uses. Nor was he like to those, who at first maintained ten thousand pounds too much for any man, which when they have attained, they then conceive ten times so much too little for themselves; but after his Cup was filled brim-full, to the aforesaid proportion, he conscienciously gave every drop of that which over-flowed, to quench the thirst of people parched with Poverty. I compare him to Elizabeth in the Gospel, who as if ashamed of her shame (so then reputed) taken from her hid her self five Luke 1. 24. Moneths, (so great her modesty;) such his concealing of his Charity, though pregnant with good works; and had not the Lanthorn of his body been lately broken, it is beleived the light of his bounty had not yet been discovered. He built and endowed a fair Almes house in Southwark, another at Newington (both in Surrey) on which, and other pious uses, he expended well nigh ten thousand pounds, whereof twenty pounds per annum he gave to Hereford the place of his Nativity. His Wife and surviving Daughters were so far from grudging at his gifts, and ac∣counting that lost to them, which was lent to God, that they much rejoyced there∣at, and deserve to be esteemed joint-givers thereof, because consenting so freely to his Charity. He dyed in the seventy fourth year of his age, 29. December, Anno Domini 1656. and was solemnly buried in London. Memorable Persons. ROSAMUND, that is saith my Veregan De∣cayed Intellig. pag. 269. Authour Rosemouth (but by allufion termed Rose of the World) was remarkable on many accounts. First, for her Father VValter Lord Clifford, who had large Lands about Cliffords-castle in this County. secondly, for her self, being the Mistress-peice of beauty in that Age. Thirdly, for her Para∣mour King Henry the second, to whom she was Concubine. Lastly, fot her Son VVilliam Longspee, the worthy Earl of Salisbury, King Henry is said to have built a Labyrinth at VVoodstock, (which Labyrinth through length of time hath lost it self) to hide this his Mistress from his jealous Iuno, Queen Eleanor. But Zelotypiae nihil impervium, by some device she got accesse unto Her, and caused her Death. Rosamund was buryed in a little Nunnery at Godstowe nigh Ox∣ford, with this Epitaph. Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa mundi non Rosamunda, Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet. This Tomb doth inclose the worlds fair Rose so sweet & full of favour And smell she doth now, but you may guess how, none of the sweetest savour. Her Corps may be said to have done penances after her Death. For Hugh Bishop of Lincoln, coming as Visitor to this Nunnery, and seeing Rosamund's body lying in the Quire, under a Silken Herse, with tapors continualy burning about it, thought the
Herse of an Harlot, no proper Object for the Eyes of Virgins to contemplate on, therefore caused her bones to be scattered abroad. However after his Departure, those Sisters gathered her bones together again, put them into a perfumed bag, and inclosed them in lead, where they continued until outed again in the reign of King Henry the 8. The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the Twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth, 1433. Thomas Bishop of Hereford   James de Audley   John Skudamore Chival. Knights for the Shire. Commissioners to take the Oaths. John Russell.   Dom. Grey de Whilton Chiv. VValteri Lucy Chivaler Radulphi de la Bere Chival. Roberti VVhiteney Chivaler. Johannis Baskervile Chival. ohannis Merbury Armiger. Richardi de la Mare Armig. Tho. Bromwich sen. Armig. Iohannis Brugge Armigeri Tho. Bromwich jun. Armigeri Iohannis Melborn Armiger. Iohannis Barre Armigeri Thomae Donton Armigeri Hugonis Mortimer Armigeri Tho. de Lastay senioris Arm. Iohannis Skudamore Armig. Richardi VVigmore Armig. VVillielmi Croft Armigeri VValteri Hackluit Armigeri VVillielmi Criketot Armig. Rich. VValwain de Mayde A. Maculmi VValwain Armig W. Walwain de Longford . Nicholai VVallwayn Armig. Thomae Walwain de Stoke Ar. R. Walweyn de Lugwardyn a. Willielmi Byriton Armigeri Iohannis Stapelton Armigeri VVillielmi Hereford Armig Richardi Habberhale Armig Iohannis Aberhale Armiger. Iohannis Deverose Aamiger. Richardi Deverose Armigeri Iohannis De la Bere Armig. VVillielmi de la Bere Arm. Rogeri Bodenham Armigeri Milonis VVatier Armigeri Radulphi Baskervile Armig. Thomae de La Hay Arm. jun. Rowlandi Lenthall Chivaler Henrici Oldcastlé Armigeri Henrici Slake Armigeri Richardi ap Harry Armigeri Johannis Dansey Armigeri Henrici ap Griffith Armig. Rogeri Wiggemore Armig. Hugonis Monyngton Ar. Iohannis Monyngton Ar. VValteri Monington Ar. Johannis VVise Armig. Wal. ap Rosser Vanghan A. Johannis Dumbleton Ar. Thomae Parker Armigeri Johannis Skellwick Ar. Johannis Harper VVillielmi Garnons Thomae Brugge de Leye Thom. Brugge de Brugge Thomae Smith de Webley Edmundi Gomond Johannis Alton. Johannis VVellynton Roberti Hunte Armigeri Boberti Bromwich VVillielmi Bromwich R. Watteis de Bedingwey Richardi Leon Iohanni Goure VVillielmi Smethecote VVillielmi Hackluit Hugonis Hackluit acobi Everard Tho. Brugge de Yuenton Richardi Upton Iohannis Upton Rogeri Erlyche Iohannis de Ey Egidii Hackluit Thomae Halle Hugonis VVarton Iohannis Bluwet Iohannis Luntelye Philippi Lyngeyn Iohannis Bevere VValteri Bradford Iohannis Bradford VValteri VValker Thomae Morton Iohannis Salisbury Iohannis VValker VVillielmi Rafes Iohannis Sherer Iohannis VValdbet Richardi VVindesley Io. Mortimer de Bromyerd Thomae Harlowe Iohannis Ragon Iohannis Broun Iohannis Smith Thomae Dovile Iohannis Panton jun. Thomae Petit Thomae Horsenet Richardi VVynne Iohannis VVinter Thomae Loveday Iohannis Sheref Thomae Everard Johannis Young Thomae Tomkins VVillielmi Shebrond Wil. Waleyn de Bickerton Milonis Skulle Rogeri dmonsham Roberti Priour. Johannis VVatts Richardi Rovenhal Johannis Comyn Richardi Gambdon Henrici Comyn VVillielmi Blanchard VVillielmi Monyngton Johannis Arundell Thomae Arundell Thomae Myntrick VVillielmi Gray Johannis Brugge de Rosse Henrici VVhite Richardi Coekes Johannis VVollrich Johannis de VVall. VVilliam Lanke Will. ap Thomas ap L. Will. Gerrard Richardi Trevays Hugonis Cola Richardi de La Hay Hugonis Hergest Johannis Pu VValteri Puy VVillielmi Huntington VVillielmi Carwardine Johannis Chabenore VVill. Smith de Tiberton VVillielmi Chamberleyn Howel ap Howel ap Wil∣miston Johan. Wiston Johan. Hunt de Snodhell Thomae Lightfoot Joh. ap Thom. de Dorston Galfredi ap Thomas Johannis Pychard Thomae Bruyn Georgii Braynton Majoris Civitatis Hereford. VValteri Mibbe Henrici Chippenham Johannis Fulk Draper Johannis Mey Johannis Fuister Thomae Hore Johannis Green Richardi Green Richardi Prat Thomae Bradwardyn Richardi Russell Richardi Barbour Johannis Orchard Jacobi Orchard Johannis Dudley Richardi Houghton Rogeri Collyng Johannis Collier Thomae Choppynham Henrici Cachepolle Thomae Knobelle Hugonis Clerk Thomae Combe Thomae Verbum Johannis Elynner Io. Heyward de Bodenham Ro. VVych de Ludwardyn.
Sheriffs of Hereford-Shire. HEN. II. Anno 1 Anno 2 Walt. de Hereford, for 5 years. Anno 7 Will. de Bello Campo, f or 9 years. Anno 16 Idem, & Walt. Clicums. Anno 17 Willielmus de la Lega. Anno 18 Gilbertus Pypard. Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Willielmus de Braiose. Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Radulphus Pulcherus, for 7 years. Anno 29 Milo de Mucegros, & VVillielmus Torelle. Anno 30 VVillielmus Torelle. Anno 31 Radul. Arden, Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. RICH. I. Anno 1 Radul. de Arden. Anno 2 Hen. de longo Campo. Anno 3 VVillielmus de Braiosa. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hen. de longo Campo, & Willielmus de Braiosa. Anno 6 Roger. Fitz-Mauricis. Anno 7 Willielmus de Braiosa. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Willielmus de Braiosa, & Williemus de Burchhull. Anno 10 Idem. JOHAN. Anno 1 Walter. de Clifford, & Gilbertus Clifford. Anno 2 Willielmus de Braiosa, & Willielmus Burchull. Anno 3 Hubert. de Burgo, & Rich. de Signes, for 3 years Anno 6 Willielmus de Cantulum, & Walter. de Puhier. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Walt. de Clifford, & Os∣bert. Pil. VVillielmi. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Gerer. de Atria, & Rich. de Burges. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Endebard. de Cicomato, & Rich. de Burges. Anno 13 Enozelcardus, de Cico∣mato, & Rich. Burgeis (sive Burzeis, for 4 years. HEN. III. Anno 1 Walt. de Lascy, & Anno 2 Tho. de Anesey. Anno 3 Walt. de Lascy, & War∣rinus de Grindon. for 3 years. Anno 6 Walt. de Lascy, & Tho. de Anesey. Anno 7 Walt. de Lascy. Anno 8 Radulph. fil. Nic. & Hen. fil. Nic. frater ejus, for 3 y. Anno 11 Radul. fil. Nich. & Hen. frat. ejus, & Jo. de East, for 3 years. Anno 14 Joan. de Fleg. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Johan. de Munemus. Anno 17 Williel. filus Warrini. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Amaricus de Sto. Aman. Anno 20 Amari, de Sto. Amando, & Ricard. de Fardingston. Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Amari, de Sto▪ amando, & Matth. de Coddray, for 3 years. Anno 25 Amaricus de Cancell, for 7 years. Anno 32 Waleranus. Anno 33 Waleranus de Bradlegh. Anno 34 Hugo de Kinardell. Anno 35 Hen. de Bradlegh. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Williel. de Sto▪ Omero. Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Joan. de Brekon (sive Brecon) for 3 years. Anno 42 Hen. de Penebrige. Anno 43 Idem & Ric. de Baggindin. Anno 44 Robertus de Meysy. Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Robertus de Meysy, & Adam. de Bideford, for 7 years. Anno 53 Barthol. de Buly, & A∣dam. de Botiler, for 3. years EDW. I. Anno 1 Barthol. de Stutely, & Adam de Botiler. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Joan. de Ware. Anno 4 Egid. de Berkel, for 3 years Anno 7 Roger. de Burghall. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Rog. de Burg. for 10 years Anno 19 Hen de Solers, for 3. ye. Anno 22 Johan. de Acton, for 6. ye. Anno 28 Milo Picard, for 6 years. Anno 34 Johan. de Acton. Anno 35 Tho. Rossal. EDW. II. Anno 1 Walt. de Halits, for 4 ye. Anno 5 Rog. de Chandos, for 3 ye. Anno 8 Richard. de Baskervil. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Hugo Hakluit. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Roger. de Elmerugge. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Roger Chandos, for 5 ye. EDW. III. Anno 1 Roger. deChandos, for 5 y. Anno 6 Johannes de Rous. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. Mauger. Robert Chandos, & Jo. le Rous Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rich. Walwayn, for 7 yea. Anno 17 Johan. Walwayn. Anno 18 Williel. de Radour, for 3 years. Anno 21 Tho Pichard. Anno 22 Joha. Sholle, & Tho. Pichard. Anno 23 Rich. Dansy, & Johan. Sholle. Anno 24 Rich. Dansy. Anno 25 Tho. de Aston. Anno 26 Rich. de Burges. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Rich. Bregg. Anno 29 Rich. de la Bere. Anno 30 Tho. Atte. Barre, & Ric. de la Bere. Anno 31 Ed. Hacklut, for 3 years. Anno 34 Thomas Chandois. Anno 35 Ric. de la. Bere, for 10. yea. Anno 45 Tho. Chandois. Anno 46 Will. Devereux de Rod. Anno 47 Tho. Chandois. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Edw. de Burges. Anno 50 Walter Devereux, & Tho. de la Bere. Anno 51 Idem.
This County had Sheriffs long before King Henry the Second, as may appear by the direction of this Writ, in the first of King Henry the First. Matth. Paris, Anno Dom. 1100. Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Hugoni de Boelande Vicecomiti, & omnibus fidelibus suis, tam Francis quàm Anglicis in Hereford∣shire salutem, &c. But such the uncertainty of their Succession, it will be very well, if we can continue our Catalogue from the general Aera in other Counties. Edward the Second. 8. RICHARDUS de BASKERVIL.] This name is of Great Antiquity in these parts, whose Ancestours immediately after the Conquest, were benefactours to the Abby of Saint Peters in Glocester, as by the ensuing will appear.Monast. An∣glicanum pag. 113. 1. Bernardus de Baskervile cum semetipso, quando habitum Monachi suscepit dedit Ecclesiae sancti Petri Glouc. unam Hidam tarrae in Cumba VVal∣terus et Robertus de Baskervile confirmant tempore Homelini Abbatis. 2. Anno Domini 1109 Robertus de Baskervilla. De IerusalemIdem. p. 115. reversus dedit Ecclesiae sancti Petri Gloc. Unam Hidam extramuros quidem Civitatis, ubi est nunc Hortus Monachorum, Rege Henrico Confirmante, tempore Petri Abbatis As these came out of Normandy from a Town so named, so are they extant at this Day in this County, and have formerly been famous, and fortunate for their Mi∣litary Atchievments. Name Place Armes RICH. 2.     Anno   * Aza Cross Checky Or & Gules. 1 Rob. Whitney, ar.* Whitney Ar. on a Cross S. a Leopards head, Or▪ 2 Sim. de Brugge     3 Joh. VValwayne   G. a Bend within a bordure, Erm. 4 Hugo. Carew   Or, three Lions pass. Gardant. S. 5 Sim. de Brugge ut prius   6 oh. VValwayne ut prius   7 Rog. Pauncefort   Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Argent. 8 Tho. de la Barre Kinnersley Azure, a Bend argent Cotized, Or, twixt 6 Martlets of the same. 9 Nic. Maurdin     10 Tho. Oldcastle   Argent, a Towre triple towred, Sable. 11 Rinardus, sive Ki∣nardus, de la Bere     12 Tho. de la Barre ut prius   13 Tho. VValwayn ut prius Ar. a Chv. betwixt 3 Unicorns Sable. 14 Hu. deMonington     15 Tho. Oldcastle ut prius   16 Mascre. de la Ma.     17 Tho. VValwayne ut prius   18 Joh. VValwayne ut prius   19 Tho. de la Barre ut prius   20 Idem ut prius   21 Tho. Clanowe     22 Idem     HEN. 4     Anno     1 Joh. ap. Harry     2 Wil-Lucy, mil. &  Haklut miles Yetton. G.  Or 3. Pikes hauriant, Ar. G. 3 Battle-axes, Or, 3 Joh. Bodenham     4 Idem. ut prius Azure, a Fess betwixt 3 Chesse∣Rooks. Or 5 Idem. ut prius   6 Joh. Merbury     7 Jo. Oldcastle, mil. ut prius   9 Jo. Skudamore, m. Holm. La∣cy.   10 Joh. Smert   Gules. 3 Stirrops leathered and Buckled, Or 11 Joh. Bodenham ut prius   12 VVill, VValwein ut prius   HEN. 5.     Anno     1 Robert VVhitney ut prius   2 Johan. Merbury     3 Johan. Bodenham ut prius   4 Johan. Brugge ut prius   5 Johan. Russel   Arg. a Cheveron betwixt three Crosses Croslets fitchee Sable. 6 Thom. Holgot     7 Johan. Merbury     Rich. de la Bere     9 Idem     HEN. 6.     Anno     1 Rich. de la Mare     2 Row Lenthal   Sable, a Bend Lozengee Arg. 3 Guid. Whittington Hampton. G. a Fess Checky Or. and Az. 4 Johan. Merbury     5 T. de la Hay Jun.     6 Ro. Whitney, mil.     7 Rie. de la Mare ut prius   8 Joh. Merbury     9 Jo. Skudemore, m.     10 ut prius   11. R. Whitney, mil.     12. T. de lay Hay ut prius   13 Tho. Merbury     14 Tho. Mille     15 Rob. VVhitney ut prius   16 J. Pauncefoote ut prius   17 VValtery Skull   * Arg. a .... betwixt  Li∣ons Heads  of the Field 18 Ric. VValwin ut prius   19 VVil. Lucy ut prius   20 Idem ut prius   21 Hen. Charleton ut prius   22 Tho. Parker     23 Rad. VValwain ut prius   24 Tho. Mille.     25 Hum. Stafford   Or, a Chev. G. a Quarter Erm. 26 Walt. Devereux VVebley Arg. a Fess. Gules in Chief, three Torteauxes. 27 Walt. Skull, mil. ut prius   28 Joh. Skudemore ut prius   29 Joh. Berry, mil.     30 Tho. Parker, ar.     31 Tho. Cornwayl   Er. a Lion Ramp. Gules crowned Or, within a Border engrailed, S. . 32 VVil. Lucy, ar. ut prius   33 Jo. Barry, mil.     34 VValt. Skul, mil ut prius  
35 Io. Skudamore, m. ut prius   36 Ioh. Seymor, mil.   G. 2 Angels Wings Pale-ways Inverted Or. 37 VV. Catesby, m.   Ar. 2 Lyons Pass. . Corone, Or. 38 Iam. Baskervill Erdstey Ar. a Cheveron Gules betwixt 3 Heurts Proper. EDVV. 4.     Anno,     1 Ioh. VVelford     2 Tho. Monington ut prius.   3 Idem prius   4 Sim. Melburn, ar.     5 Ioh. Baskervill, m. ut prius   6 Ioh. Lingein, ar.   Barry of 6. Or and Az. on a Bend G. 3 Cinque soils Ar. 7 Tho. Cornwall, ar. ut prius * A. 3. Grey-hounds in Pale ∣rant Sable, collared Gules. 8 *VVal. VVigmore     9 VV. Baskervil, m. ut prius * Quarterly, per Fess indented, Az. & Ar. in the first quarter a Lion Passant Or. 10 *Ric▪ Crot, sen. a. Croft-cast   11 Ric. Croft. sen. m. ut prius   12 Ioh▪ Lingein, m. ut prius   13 Tho. Monington. ut prius   14 Iam. Baskervil, m. ut prius   15 Rob VVhitney t prius   16 Rich. Crofts, mil. ut prius   17 Rdulph. Haclu it ut prius   18 I. Mortimer, mil.   Barry of 6. Or, & Az. on a hief of the first, 3 Pallet in∣ter 2. Esquires bast, Dexter, and Siniter of the second, an In-Escoucheon Argent. 19 R. de la Bere, m.     20 Simon Melborne     21 Ia. Baskervil, m. ut prius   22 Iohan. Mortimer. ut prius   RICH. 3.     Anno.     1 Rich. de la Bere m.     2 Tho. Cornwal, m. ut prius   3 Rich. Crofts, mil. ut prius   HEN. 7.     Anno,     1 Johan. Mortimer ut prius   2 Johann. Lingeyn ut prius   3 Roger. Bodenham ut prius   4 Henric. Skudamore ut prius   5 Joh. Devereux, m. ut prius   6 Tho▪ Monington ut prius   7 Rich. Greenway     8 Ric. de la Bere, m.     9 Jo. Mortimer, mil. ut prius   10 Edw. Blunt, ar.   Barry Nebule of 6. Or, and S. 11 Joh. Lingein, mil. nt prius   12 Hen. Harper, ar.   A. a Lion ramp. withinu a Bor∣der ingrailed S. 13 oh. Lingein, Ar. ut prius   14 Rich. Greenway ut prius   15 Hen. Mile Arm.     16 Rich. Miners, ar.     17 Joh. Mortimer, m. ut prius   18 T. Cornwaile, m. ut prius   19 Idem. ut prius   20 Edw. Croft, ar. ut prius   21 J. Lingin jun. m. ut prius   22 R. Cornwaile, Ar. ut prius   23 Rad. Hackluit Hackluit. ut prius   24 Hen. Mile, Ar.     HEN. 8     Anno,     1 Edward. Croft, Ar. ut prius   2 Rich. de la Bere, a. ut prius   3 Th. Moningron, ar. ut prius   4 Hen. Mile, Arm.     5 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius   6 Th. Cornwaile, m. ut prius   7 Will. Herbert Mil.   Party per pale Az. & G. 3 Lions Ramp. Ar. 8 Joh. Lingein, mil. ut prius   9 Edw. Croft, miles ut prius   10 Rad. Hackluit ut prius   11 Rich. Cornwail ut prius   12 Joh. Lingein, m. ut prius   13 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius   14 Row. Morton   Quart. G. & Erm. in the 1. & fourth a Goats . erased, Ar. 15 Jaco. Baskervile ut prius   16 Jo. Skudemore, a. ut prius   17 Hen. Vain, Arm. KENT Az. 3 -hand Gauntlets, Or. 18 Rich. Cornwail ut prius   19 Tho. Baskervil, a. ut prius   20 Tho. Lingein, m. ut prius   21 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius   22 Ri. Vaughan, m.     23 Ric. Walwein, ar. ut prius   24 T. Monington, a. ut prius   25 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius   26 Mic. Lister, Arm.     27 Wil. Clinton, ar.     & Tho. Clinton, ar.     28 Joh. Skudamor, a. ut prius   29 Joh. Blount, ar. ut prius   30 J. Packington, ar.   Per Cheveton, S. & Arg. in cheif 3 Mullets Or, In base  many Garbes ules. 31 Mich. Lister, ar.     32 Tho Monington ut prius   33 Rich. Vaughan     34 . Baskervil, m. ut prius   35 Ioh. Skudamore ut prius   36 Joh. Leingein, ar. ut prius   37 Step. ap Harry, .     38 Rog. Bodenham. ut prius   EDVV. 6.     Anno,     1 Joh. Cornwail, m. ut prius   2 Th. Baskervile, ar. ut prius   3 John Harley, Ar. Brampton Or, a Bend cotised Sable. 4 Jac. Baskervile ut prius   5 Jam. Baskervil ut prius   6 Joh. Skudamore, a. ut prius   PHIL. R. & MA. Reginae.     Anno,     1 Johan. Price, miles     2 Tho. Howard, Ar.   G. a Bend between 6 Cross Croslets Fitchie Arg. 3 Johan. Baskervil ut prius   4 Tho. VVinston, ar. ut prius   5 Rich. Monington     6 Rog. Bodenham, a. ut prius   ELIZ. Reginae.     Anno,     1 Geor. Cornwal. m. ut prius   2 Tho. Blount, Ar. ut prius   3 Joh. Harley, Arm. ut prius   4 Joh. Huband, Ar.     5 Geo. ap Harry, Ar.     6 Jam. Baskervil ut prius   7 Jo. Skudamore, ar. KelnChurch   8 Georgius Price, ar.     9 VVill. Shelley, ar. SUSSEX. S. a Fess ingrailed between 3 Periwincle Shells, Or. 10 Tho. Clinton, ar.     11 Th. Baskervlle, a.   12 Baskervle, a. Baskervil, a. ut prius   13 Joh. Huband, m.     14 Hngo ap Harry     15 Joh. Abrahal, Ar.   Azure 3 Porcupines, Or. 16 Jac. VVhitney. m. ut prius   17 George Price, ar.     28 Juc. VVarcomb     29 Tho. Morgan, ar.     20 Wa. Baskervil, a. ut prius   21 VVill. Cecil, ar. Altrinnis Barry of 10. Ar. & Azure on 6 Eschucheons 32 & 1 S. as many Lons Ramp. of the first. 22 Fran. Blount, ar. ut prius   23 Ja. Skudamore, a. ut prius   24 Tho. Conisby, a. ut prius   25 Ric. Walweyn, a. angford G. a Bend with a Border Erm. in chief an Hound Passant, Or. 26 Hu. Baskevile, a. ut prius   37 Ro. Bodenham, a. ut prius   28 Ja. Whitney, m. ut prius   29 Jac. Boyle,. Arm.   Partee per Bend, Embattelled, Argent and Gules. 30 Joh. Berington, a. Courar   31 Th. Baskervile, a. ut prius   32 Cha. Brudges, ar. ut prius   33 Will. Rudham. a. Rudham  
34 Rich. Tomkins, a. Moniton Az. a Chever. betwixt 3 Phea∣sant Cocks Or. 35 Ro. Bodenham, a. ut prius   36 Tho. Harley, ar. ut prius   37 Georg. Price, ar.     38 Eustac. Whitney. ut prius   39 Nich. Garnons, a. Garnons G. 2 Lyos passant Or, within a Border Azure. 40 Thomas Conisby ut prius   41 Wil. Dauntsey, a. Brinsop Barry Wavy of 6. peeces Arg. and Gules. 42 Hen. Vaughan, a.     43 Ja. Skudamore, m. ut prius   44 Rich. Hyatt, Ar. Sauntield   45 Tho. Harley ut prius   JACOB Reg.     Anno,     1 Tho. Harley, Ar. ut prius   2 Joh. Blount, Arm. ut prius   3 Joh. Berington, ar. ut prius   4 Jacob. Tomkins, a. ut prius   5 Will. Rudhal, ar.     6 Joh. Kirle, arm. MuchMarcle Vert a Cheveron betwixt 3 Flower de Lyces Or. 7 Rich. Hopton, mil. Hopton Gules Seme de Crosse  a Lyon Rampant Or. 8 Hu. Baskervil, mil. ut prius   9 Hum. Cornwall, a. ut prius   10 Rob. Kirle, arm. ut prius   11 Joh. Colles, Arm.     12 Fran. Smalman, a. Kinnesley   13 Rich. Cox, Arm.     14 Row. Skudmor, . ut prius   25 Ambro. Elton, ar. Lidbury Paly of 6 Or & G. on a Bend S. 3 Mullets of the first. 16 Herb. Westfaling   A. a Cros tw. 4 Cheval-traps O. 17 VVill. Unet, Ar. Cas. Frome Sable, a Chever on between 3. Lions heads couped, Arg. 18 Edw. Leingein▪ a. ut prius   19 Joh. Bridges, ar.     20 Sam. Aubrie, m.   Gules a Fess ingrailed A. 21 Iac. Rodd, Arm.     23 Fran. Pember, ar.   Ar. 3 More-cocks proper com∣bed and jealoped G. a cheif Azure. CHAR. Reg.     Anno,     1 Egidius Bridges, r. Wilton Argent on a cross. S. a Leopards head, Or. 2 Fitz Will. Conisby ut prius   3 VVill. Read, Arm.     4 Iohan. Kirle, Bar. ut prius   5 Iac. Kirle, armig. ut prius   6 Walop. Brabazon Eaton G. on a  Arg. 3 Martelets of the first. 7 Roger. Dansey, ar. ut prius   8 Ph. Holman, arm.     9 Ioh. Abrahal, arm. ut prius   10 Wil. Sku damore ut prius   11 Tho. Wigmore, a.   S. 3 rey-hounds currant Arg. 12 Rog. Vaughan, a.     13 Hen. Lingei, r. ut prius   14 Rob. Whitney, m. ut prius   15     16     17 Isacus Seward     18     19 Haec fecit     20 inania     21 Mavors.     22 Amb. Elton, ju. a. ut prius   K. HENRY the Sixth. 26. WALTER . I have vehement and (to use the Lord Coke his Epithet) necessary presumptions, to per∣swade me, that he was the same person, who married Anne, Daughter and sole heir unto VVilliam Lord Ferrers of Chartley, and in her right was afterwards by this King created Lord Ferrers. He was Father to, 1. John Lord Ferrers of Chartley, who married Cecily Sister to Henry Bourchi∣er, Earl of Essex, and was father to, 2 VValter Devereux Lord Ferrers, created Viscount Hereford, by King Edward the Sixth, and was Father to, 3 Sir Richard Devereux Knight, dying before his Father, and Father to, 4 VValter Devereux, first Earl of Essex of that Family, Of whom largely hereafter, God willing, in Carmarthen▪shire the place of his Nati∣vity. EDVVARD the Fourth. 14 IAMES BASKERVILE Miles. 18 IOHN MORTIMER Miles. 19 RICHARD de la BER Miles. This Leash of Knights were persons of approved Valour and Loyalty to K. Hen. the Seventh, by whom (being Knights Bachelours before) they were made Knights Bannerets in the beginning of his Reign, I confesse some difference in the date and place,Stows Chro pag. 471. one assigning the Tower of London, when Iasper was created Duke of Bedford;Selden in his Titles of Hon. pag. 700. ex Manuscripto. another with ar more probability naming Newark, just after the fighting of the battle of Stoke hard by. Nor doth it sound a little to the honour of Hereford-shire, that amongst the thirteen, then banneretted in the Kings Army, three fall out to be her Natives. HENRY the Eighth. II RICHARDUS CORNVAIL] He was a Knight howsoever it cometh to passe he is here unadditioned. I read, how Anno Domini 1523. in the 15. of K. Henry the Eighth, he was a prime person among those many Knights which attended the Duke of Suffolk into France, at what time they
summoned and took the Town of Roy, andLord Herbert in the Life of King Henry the Eighth, pag. 151. Sir Richard was sent with four hundred men, to take possession thereof, the only service of remarke, performed in that expedition. Queen EIZABETH. Reader, let me confess my self to thee. I expected to have found in this Catalogue of Sheriffs Sr. JAMES CROFTS (knowing he was this Countryman, whose family flourishedCamdens E∣liz. in appa∣ratu. at Crofts Castle) but am defeated, seeing his constant attendance on Court and Camp pri∣viledged him from serving in this Office. This worthyIdem anno 1560. Knight was accused for complying with Wiat, and notwithstanding his most solemn Oath in his own defence, he was imprisoned by Queen Mary, convicted of high Treason, restored by Queen Elizabeth, and made Governour of the Town and Castle of Barwick. At the siege of Leith he behaved him most vallantly in repelling the Foe, and yet when in a second assault the English were worsted, the blame ell on him, (as if he favoured the French and maligned the L Gray then General) so that he was outed of his Government of Barwick. Yet he fell not so into the Queens final Disfavour, but that she continued him Privy Councellor, and made him Comptroller of her Houshold. He was an able man to manage War, and yet an earnest desirer and advancer of Peace, being one of the Commissioners in 88. to treat with the Spaniard in Flanders: I conceive he survived not long after. His ancient Inheritance in this County is lately devolved to Herbert Crofts D.D. and Dean of Hereford. 40. THOMAS CONISBY Mil.] I have heard from some of this County a pretious Report of his Memory, how he lived in a right worshipful Equipage, and Founded a place in Hereford for poor people, but to what proportion of Revenue, they could not inform me. 43. JAMES SKUDAMORE Knight] He was Father unto Sr. Iohn Skudamore created by King Charles Viscount Slego in Ireland. This Lord was for some years imployed Leiger Embassadour in France, and during the Tyranny of the Protectorian times, kept his secret Loyalty to his Sovereign, Hospitality to his Family, and Charity to the Distressed Clergy, whom he bounti∣fully relieved. The Farewell. I am credibly informed, that the Office of the Under-Sheriffe of this County is more beneficial, than in any other County of the same proportion; his Fees it seems increa∣sing from the Decrease of the States of the Gentry therein. May the Obventions of his office hereafter be reduced to a lesser summe. And seeing God hath blessed (as we have formerly observed) this County with so many W's' we wish the Inhabitants thereof the Continuance and Increase of one more, WISDOME, expressing it self both in the improving of their spiritual Concernment, and warily managing their secular Estates.
HUNTINGTON-SHIRE is surrounded with North-hampton, Bed∣ford and Cambridge-shires, and being small in Extent hardly stretcheth 20 miles outright, though measured to the most advantage. The gene∣ral goodness of the ground may certainly be collected from the plen∣ty of Convents erected therein at Saint Neots, Hinching-Brook, Hunting∣ton, Sautrie, Saint Ives, Ramsie, &c. So that the fourth foot at least in this shire was Abbey land belonging to Monks and Friers, and such weeds we know would ot grow but in rich Ground. If any say that Monks might not chuse their own Habitations being confined therein to the pleasures of their Founders; know there were few Founders that did not first consult some religious Person in the erection of Convents, and such would be sure to chuse the best for men of their own Profession. Sure I am it would set all England hard to show in so short a distance, so pleasant a Park as Waybridge, so air a Meadow as Portsholme, and so fruitful a Town for Tillage as Godmanchester, all three within so many miles in this County. No peculiar Commodity or Manufacture (save with others equally intercommoning) appearing in this County, let us proceed. The Buildings. KIMBOLTON Castle, This being part of the jointure of Queen Katharine Dow∣ager, was chosen by her to retire thereunto as neither too neer to London to see what she would not, nor so far off but that she might hear what she desired. Here she wept out the Remnant of her widdowhood (while her husband was yet alive) in her devoti∣ons. This Castle came afterwards by gift to the Wingfields, from them by sale to the Montagues; Henry late Earle of Manchester sparing no cost which might add to the beauty thereof. HINCHING-BROOKE, once a Nunnery and which I am confident will ever be a Religious house whilst it relateth to the truly Noble Edward Montague (Earl of Sand∣wich) the owner thereof. It sheweth one of the Magnificent roomes which is to be be∣held in our Nation. VVe must not forget the House and Chappel in litle Godding (the inheritance of Master Ferrer) which lately made a great Noise In the be∣ginning of the long Par∣liament. all over England. Here three Numerous female families (all from one Grand-Mother) lived together in a strict discipline of devotion. They rise at midnight to Prayers, and other people most com∣plained thereof, whose heads I dare say never ak't for want of sleep. Sure I am, strang∣ers by them were entertained, poore people were relieved, their Children instructed to read, whilest their own Needles were emploied in learned and pious work to binde Bibles: Whereof one most exactly done was presented to King Charles. But their soci∣ety was beheld by some as an Embrio Nunnery uspecting that there was a Pope Ioane therein, which causeless Cavill afterwards confuted it selfe, when all the younger of those Virgins, practised the Precept of St. Paul, to marry, bear Children, and guide their1 Tim. 5. 14. houses. Medicinal Waters. There is an Obscure Village in this County neare St. Neots called Haile-weston whose very name Soundeth something of sanativeness therein, so much may the Adding of what is no Letter, alter the meaning of a Word, for. 1. Aile Signifieth a Sore or Hurt, with complaining the effect thereof. 2 Haile, (having an affinity with Gamden's Brit. in Dorset∣shire. Heile the Saxon Idol for Esculapius) Im∣porteth a cure, or Medicine to a Maladie. Now in the afore-said Village there be two Fountaine-lets which are not farre a∣sunder. 1. One sweet, conceived good to help the dimness of the eyes. 2 The other in a manner salt, esteemed sovereign against the Scabs and Le∣prosie. What saith St. James 3. 11. James; Doth a Fountain send forth at the same Place sweet Water and bitter? meaning in an Ordinary way, without Miracle. Now although these diffe∣rent Waters flow from several Fountains; Yet seeing they are so near together, it may justly be advanced to the Reputation of a Wonder.
Proverbs. This is the way to BEGGARS BUSH.] It is spoken of such who use dissolute and improvident courses which tend to poverty, Beggars Bush being a tree notoriously known, on the left hand of London road from Hun∣tington to Caxton. I have heard, how King James, being in progress in these parts, with Sir Francis Bacon the Lord Chancellour, and having heard that morning, how Sir Francis had prodigiously rewarded a mean man for a small present, Sir Francis (said He) you will quickly come to beggars bush, and I may even goe along with you, if both be so bountifull. RAMSEY the I. Speed, (or Sir Robert Cotton rather) in the descri∣ption of Hun∣tingtonshire. Rich-] This was the Cresus or Croessus of all our English Abbies. For having (but sixty Monks to maintaine therein, the Revenues thereof according to the standard of those times amounted unto Camdens Brit. in Hunting ton∣shire. Seven Thousand pounds a year, which in proportion was a hundred pound for every Monk, and a thousand for their Abbot. Yet at the dissolution of Monasteries, the Income of this Abby was reckoned but at Speeds Ca∣talogue of Re∣ligous Houses▪ folio 809. One thousand nine hundred eighty three pounds by the year, whereby it plainly appears how much the Revenues were under ra∣ted in those valuations. But how soon is Crassus made Codrus, and Ramsey the Rich, become Ramsey the Poor. The wealth of the Town, relative with the Abby, was dissolved therewith, and moe the Mendicants since in Ramsey than the Monks were before. However now there is great hope that Ramsey after the two extremes of Wealth and Want, will at last be fixed in a comfortable mediocrity, the wish of Proverbs 30. 8. Agur being granted unto him, give me neither poverty nor riches, especially since it is lately erected (or rather restored) to the Dignity of a Market-Town. And surely the convenient scituation thereof since the draining of the Fens, doth advantage it to be a Staple-place for the sale of fat and lean Cattle. Saints. ELFLED, daughter of Ethelwold Earl of East-Angles (Founder of the Monastery of Ramsey in this County) was preferr'd Abbess of Ramsey, & confirm'd by K. Edgar therein. She is reported to excel in austerity and holiness of life. When her Steward complained unto her, that she had exhausted her coffers with the profuseness of her Charity, she with her prayers presently recruited them to their former fulness. VVhen her candle, as she read the Lesson, casually went out, there came such a brightness from the R. Buckland in Vitis San∣ctarum Mulier. Anglic. page 242. Fin∣gers of her right hand, that it inlightned the whole Quire; which is as true as the New Lights to which our modern Sectaries do pretend, the one having Miracles, the other Revelations at their fingers-ends. She died Anno Dom. 992. being buried in the Lady∣Church at Ramsey with high veneration. Prelates. VVILLIAM de VVHITLESEY, no printed Author mentioning the Place of his birth and breeding. He was placed by us in this County, finding Whitlesey a Town therein (so memorable for the Mere) and presuming that this William did follow suitM. S. Sc. Cant. in the Masters f Peter H. with the best of his Cote in that age, sirnamed from the places of their Nativity▪ Mr. Parker (I tell you my story and my stories-man) an industrious Antiquary, collecteth out of the Records of the Church of Ely, that (after the resignation of Ralph de Holbeach) William de Whitlesey Arch-deacon of Huntington, 1340. was admitted third Master of Peter-House in Cambridge. Yet hath he left more signal Testimony of his affection to Oxford, which he freed Antiquit. Brit. pag. 254. from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lincolne, allowing the Scholars leave to choose their own Chancellour. He was Kinsman to Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury, who made him Vicar Ge∣neral, Dean of the Arches, and successively he was preferred Bishop of Rochester, Worcester, London, Archbishop of Canterbury. An excellent Scholar, an eloquent Preacher, and his last Sermon most remarkable to the Convocation on this Text, Veritas John 8. 2. liberabit vos, The truth shall make you free. It seems by the story, that in his Sermon he had a
reflection on the priviledges of the Clergy, as exempted by preaching the truth from payment of Taxes, save with their own free consent. But all would not serve their turn, for in the contemporary Parliament the Clergy unwillingly-willing granted a yearly Tenth to supply the pressing occasions of King Edward the Third. This Wil∣liam died Anno Dom. 1375. Since the Reformation. FRANCIS WHITE was born at St. Neots in this County, (and not in Lan∣cashire as I and others have been By Master Holmes his Secretary, being him∣self deceived without in∣tent to de∣ceive. mis-informed) witness the Admission book of Caius∣Colledge and the Testimonie of his brothers Mr. White, Druggist in Lumbard∣street. son still alive. The Father to this Francis was a Minister and had 5 sons who were Divines and two of them most eminent in their generation. Of these, this Francis was bred in Caius-Colledge, on the same Token, That when he was Bishop of Ely (and came to consecrate the Chappel of Peter-House) he recei∣ved an Entertainement at that Colledge, where with a short speech he incouraged the young students to ply their books by his own Example, who from a poor Scholar in that house by Gods blessing on his Industry, was brought to that preferment. By the Lord Grey of Grobie he was presented to Broughton Ashby in Leicestershire, and thence (why should a Candle be put under a bushel?) he was brought to be Lecturer of St. Pauls in London, and Parson of St. Peters in Cornhil; whence he was successively preferred, first Deane, then Bishop of Carlile, after Bishop of Norwich, and at last of Ely. He had several solemn Disputations with Popish Priests and Jesuites (Father Fisher and others) and came off with such good successe, that he reduced many seduced Romanists to our Church. He often chose Daniel Featly D. D. his assistant in such disputes; so that I may call this Prelate and his Doctor, Ionathan and his Armour-bearer (being confident that the Doctor, if alive, would not be displeased with the comparison as any disparage∣ment unto him) joyntly victorious over the Romish Philistines. He died Anno. 163▪ leaving some of his learned workes to Posterity. Writers. The Candid Reader is here requested to forgive and amend what in them is of ca∣sual transposition. HENRY SALTRY was born in this J. Bale and J. Pitz. De script. Brit. County, and became a Cistertian Monk in the Monastery of Saltry, then newly founded by Simon Saint Liz, Earl of Hunting∣ton. He was also instructed by one Florentian an Irish Bishop. He wrote a profitable book for his own Religion in the maintenance of Purgatory, which made him esteemed in that superstitious age. He flourished Anno Dom. 1140. GREGORY of HUNTINGTON, so called from the place of his Nativity, was bred a Benedictine Monke in Ramsey, Where he became Pitz. De script. Brit. Cent. 4 Num. 22. Prior or Vice-Abbot, a place which he deserved, being one of the most Learned men of that age for his great skill in Languages. For he was through-paced in three Tongues, Latine, Greek (as appears by his many Comments on those Grammarians) and Hebrew, which last he learned by his constant conversing with the Jewes in England. But now the fatal time did approach, wherein the Iewes (full loth I assure you) must leave the Land, and many precious books behind them. Our Gregory partly by love, partly by the Kings power (both together will go far in driving a bargain) purchased many of those rarities to dispose them in his Convent of Ramsey; which as it exceeded other English Monasteries for a Library, so for Vide infra Jo. Yong in the Writers since the Re∣formation. Hebrew books that Monastery exceeded it self. After this Gregory had been Prior of Ramsey no fewer then 38 Pitz. de Ang. scrip. in Anno 1255. years, flourishing under King Henry the Third. He died in the Reign of K. Edward the First about 1280. HUGH of Saint NOTS was born in that well known Market-Town, bred a Carmelite in Hitching in Hartfordshire. Hence he went to study in Cambridge, where for his worth, the Degree of Doctorship was by the University Bale de script. Brit. Cent 5. Num. 28. gratis, (quare whither without paying of Fees, or keeping of Acts) conferred upon him. To him Bale, (though that be the best Bale which hath the least of Bale, and most of Leland therein) giveth this Testimony, that living in the Egyptian Darkness, he sought after the light of Truth, ad∣ding that he was Piscis in Palude nihil trahens de Sapore Palustri, a Fish in the enns, drawing nothing of the mud thereof, which is a rarity indeed. Many his Sermons; and he wrotea Comment on Saint Luke. He died 1340. and was buried at Hitching.
WILLIAM RAMSEY was born in this County famous for the richest Benedictines Abbey in England, yet here he would not stay but went to Crowland, where he prospered so well that he became Abbot thereof. He was a Bale Cent. 3. Numb. 9. Natural Poet, and therefore no wonder, if faults be found in the feet of his verses. For it is given to thorough-paced∣Naggs, that amble naturally, to trip much whilest artificial pacers goe surest on foot. He wrote the life of St. Guthlake, St. Neots. St. Edmond. the King, &c. all in verse. But that which may seem a wonder indeed is this, that being a Poet, he paid the vast debts of others, even fourty thousand Pittz. de script. Britt. Anno 1180. Mark for the ingagement of his Co∣vent, and all within the compasse of eighteen Moneths, wherein he was Abbot of Crowland. But it rendreth it the more credible, because it was done by the assistance of King Henry the Second, who to expiate the blood of Becket was contented to be melted into Coine, and was prodigiously bountiful to some Churches. Our William died 1180. HENRY of HUNTINGTON I. Bale de scrip. Britt. Cent. 2. Num. 92. & Pitz. in Anno, 1148 Son to one Nicholas, where born, unknown, was first a Canon of the Church of Lincolne, where he became acquainted with one Albine of Angiers born in France, but Fellow-Canon with him of the same Church. This Albine he afterwards in his writings modestly owned for his Master, having gained much learn∣ing from him. He was afterwards Chaplain to Alexander that Great Bishop of Lincoln, (Magnificent unto Madnesse) who made him Arch-Deacon of Huntington, whence he took his Dnomi∣nation. A Town which hath received more Honour from him than ever it can return to him, seeing Huntington had never been mentioned in the mouths, nor passed under the Pens of so many foreigners, but for the worthy History of the Saxon Kings, written by this Henry. Let me add, that considering the sottishness of Superstition in the age, he lived in, he is less smoohted therewith, than any of his contemporaries, and being a secular Priest doth now and then abate the pride of Monastical pretended perfection. He flou∣rished under King Stephen in the year of our Lord, 1248. and is probably conjectured to die about the year 1260. ROGER of St. IVES was born at that noted Town of this County, being omitted by Bale but remembred by Anno 1420. Pits (though seldome sounding when the other is silent) for his activity against the Lollards, and Sir John Old-Castle, against whom he wrote a book, flourishing in the year 1420. Since the Reformation. IOHN YONG was a Monk in Ramsey Abbey at the dissolution thereof. Now by theAMP. same proportion that a penny saved is a penny gained, the preserver of books is a Mate for the Compiler of them. Learned Leland looks on this ong, as a Benefactor to poste∣rity in that he saved many Hebrew books of the Noble Library of Ramsey. Say not such preserving was purloyning, because those books belonged to the King seeing no conscience need to scruple such a nicety: Books (though so precious that no∣thing was worth them) being in that juncture of time counted worth nothing. Never such a Massacre of good Authours, some few only escaping to bring tidings of the Destructi∣on of the rest. Seeing this Yong is inserted by De script. Britt, Cent. 9. Num. 9. Bale, and omitted by Pits, I collect him to savour of the Reformation. As for such who confound him with Iohn Yong, many years after Master of Pembrook-Hall, they are confuted by the different dates assigned unto them, this being his Senior 30 years, as flourishing, Anno Dom. 1520. JOHN WHITE, brother to Francis White Bishop of Ely, was born at Saint Neots in this County, bred in Caius Colledge in Cambridge, wherein he commenced Ma∣ster of Arts. He did not continue long in the University, but the University continued long in him; so that he may be said to have carried Cambridge with him into Lancashire, (so hard and constant in his study) when he was presented Vicar of Eccles therein. Afterwards Sir Iohn Crofts a Suffolk Knight, being informed of his abilities and pittying his remote living on no plentiful Benefice, called him into the South, and was the oc∣casion that King Iames took cognizance of his worth, making him his Chaplain in Ordinary. It was now but the third moneth of his attendance at Court, when he sick∣ned at London in Lumbard-street, dyed and was buried in the Church of S. Mary So I am in∣formed by his son Mr. White a Druggist, li∣ving in ∣bard-street. Woolnoth 1615. without any other Monuments, save what his learned works have left to posterity, which all whohave either learning, piety, or Ingenuity, do, yea must most highly cōmend.
Sir ROBERT COTTON Knight and Baronet son to Iohn Cotton Esquire was born at Cunnington in this County discended by the Bruces from the bloud Royall of Scotland. He was bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge where when a youth; He discovered his inclination to the studie of Antiquity (they must Spring early who would sprout high in that knowledge) and afterwards attained to such eminency, that sure I am he had no Superiour if any his equal in the skill thereof. But that which rendred him deservedly to the praise of present and future times, yea the wonder of our own and forreign Nations, was his collection of his Library in West∣minster, equally famous for 1. Rarity, having so many Manuscript Originals, or else copies so exactly Transcribed, tht, Reader, I must confesse he must have more skill then I have to distinguish them. 2. Variety, He that beholdeth their number, would admire they should be rare, and he that considereth their rarity will more admire at their number. 3. Method, Some Libraries are labyrinths, not for the multitude, but confusion of Volumes, where a stranger seeking for a book may quickly loose him∣self, whereas these are so exactly methodized (under the heads of the twelve Roman Emperours) that it is harder for one to misse then to hit any Author he desireth. But what addeth a luster to all the rest is the favourable accesse thereunto, for such as bring any competency of skill with them, and leave thankfulness behind them. Some Antiquaries are so jealous of their books, as if every hand which toucheth wold ravish them, whereas here no such suspition of ingenious persons. And here give me leave to re∣gister my self amongst the meanest of those who through the favour of Sir Thomas Cotton (inheriting as well the courtesie as estate of his Father Sir Robert) have had admit∣tance into that worthy treasury. Yea, most true it is what one saith, That the grandest Antiquaries have here fetcht their materials. —Weavers fu∣neral Monu∣ments in the Preface. Omnis ab illo Et Camdene tua, & Seldeni gloria crevit, Camden to him, to him doth Selden owe, Their Glory, what they got from him did grow. I have heard that there was a design driven on in the Popes Conclave after the death of Sir Robert, to compasse this Library to be added to that in Rome, which if so, what a Vatican had there been within the Vatican, by the accession thereof. But blessed be God the Project did miscarry to the honour of our Nation, and advantage of the Protestant Religion. For therein are contained many privaties of Princes, and transactions of State, inso∣much that I have been informed, that the Fountains have been fain to fetch water from the stream; and the Secretaries of State, and Clerks of the Council, glad from hence to borrow back again many Originals, which being lost by casualty or negligence of Officers, have here been recovered and preserved He was a man of a publick spirit, it being his principal endevour in all Parliaments (wherein he served so often) That the prerogative and priviledge might run in their due channel, and in truth he did cleave the pin betwixt the Soveraign and the Subject. He was wont to say, That he himself had the least share in himself, whilest his Country and Friends had the greatest interest in him. He died at his house in Westminster, May the 6. Anno Domini, 1631. in the 61. year of his Age, though one may truely say, his age was adequate to the conti∣nuance of the reation, such was his exact skill in all antiquity. By Elizabeth daughter and co-heire of William Brocas Esquire, he had onely one son, Sir Thomas now living, who by Margaret daughter to the Lord William Howard (Grandchild to Thomas Duke of Norfolke hath one son Iohn Cotton Esquire, and two daughters Lucie and Francis. The Opera posthuma of this worthy Knight, are lately set forth in one Volume to the great profit of posterity. STEPHEN MARSHALL was born at God-Manchester in this County, and bred a Batchellour of Arts in Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge. Thence he went very ear∣ly a Reaper in Gods Harvest, yet not before he had well sharpned his Sickle for that service.
He became Minister at Finchfield in Essex, and after many years discontinuance, came up to Cambridge to take the degree of Batchelour of Divinity, where he performed his exercise with general applause. In the late long lasting Parliament, no man was more gracious with the principal Members thereof. He was their Trumpet, by whom they sounded their solemn Fasts, preaching more publick Sermons on that occasion, then any foure of his Function. In their Sickness he was their Confessor in their Assembly their Councellour, in their Treaties their Chaplain, in their Disputations their Champion. He was of so supple a soul that he brake not a joynt, yea, sprained not a Sinew in all the alteration of times; and his friends put all on the account, not of his unconstancy, but prudence, who in his own practice (as they conceive) Reconciled the various Lections of Saint Pauls Rom. 12. 11 precept, serving the Lord, and the Times. And although some severely censure him for deserting his Principles, yet he is said on his death-bed to have given full tisfaction to such who formerly suspe∣cted his sincerity to the Presbyterian Discipline, dying Anno Dom. 1655. He was solemn∣ly buried in the bbey at Westminster. Exi-Romish-Writers. RICHARD BROUGHTON was born at Great In the pre∣face of his Church Hi∣story. Steuckley in this County, bred at Rhemes in France, where he received the Order of Priesthood, and was sent over into England for the propagation of his partie. Here he gave so signal testimony and fidelity to the cause, that he was (before many others) preferred. Pits de Script. Aug. pag. 815. Assistant to the English Arch-Priest. He wrote many books, and is most esteemed by those of his own Religion, for his English Ecclesiastical History from the first planting of the Gospel, to the coming in of the Saxons. But in plain truth, there is little milk, no creame and almost all whey therein, being farced with Legendary stuff, taken from Authors, some of condemned, most of suspected credit. If by the Levitical Deut. 23. 2. Law, a bastard should not enter into the congregation of the Lord (understand it, to bear Office therein) to the tenth generation: it is pity, that adulterated Authours being an illegitimate off-spring should be admitted to bear rule in Church-History. This Broughton was living in the latter end of the Reign of King Iames. Benefactors to the Publicke. AMBROSE Son to Iohn Nicholas was born at Needenworth in this County, whence he went to London and was bound apprentice to a Salter, thriving so well in his Trade that Anno 1576. he became Lord Mayor of London. He founded Twelve Almes houses in Mungwel-street in that City, indowing them with Competent maintenance. Sir WOLSTAN (Son to Thomas Dixie) was born at Catworth in this County,* Reckoned by Mr. Stow in his Survey of London. bred a Skinner in London whereof he became Lord Mayor Anno 1585. He was a man made up of deeds of Charitie the particulars whereof are too long to recite. He gave 600. pound to Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge to the founding of a Fellowship; Erected a Free-school at Bosworth in Leicestershire and Endowed it; where his family flourish at this day in a worshipfull Estate. RICHARD FISHOURN was born in the Town of Huntington; cut out of no mean Quarry, being a Gentleman by his Extraction. Leaving a Court life (as more pleasant then profitable) He became servant to Sir Raptist Hicks, afterwards Viscount Camden, and by Gods blessing on his industry attained a great Estate; whereof he gave two thousand pounds for the buying out of Impropriations in the Northern parts, and setling a preaching Ministery where most want ▪thereof, he bequeathed as much to the Company of Mercers, whereof he was free, and the same summe to Huntington the place of his Nativity, with One thousand marks to Christ-Church Hospital. The whole summe of his benefactions amounted to ten thousand seven hundred pounds and upwards, briefly summed up in his Funeral Sermon (commonly called Corona Charitatis) preached by Master Nathaniel Shute, wherein (to use his Expression) He supped up many things with a very short breath, contracting his Deeds of Charity to avoid tediousness.
Nor must it be forgotten how this Gentleman lying on his death-bed, when (men are presumed to speak with unmasked consciences) did professe that to his knowledge he had got no part of his goods unjustly. No man of his Quality won more Love in health, Prayers in sicknesse, and Lamentation at his Funeral; dying a single man, and buried in Mercers Chappel, May the 10. 1625. Memorable Persons. Sir OLIVER CROMWELL Knight, son of Sir Henry Cromwell, Knight of Hinching-brooke in this County, is Remarkable to Posterity on a four-fold account. First, For his hospitality and prodigious entertainment of King James and his Court. Secondly, for his upright dealing in bargain and sale with all chapmen, so that no man, who soever purchased Land of him, was put to charge of three pence to make good his Title; Yet he sold excellent penniworths, insomuch that Sir Iohn Leamon (once Lord Mayor of London) who bought the fair Manour of Warboise in this County of him, affir∣med; That it was the cheapest Land that ever he bought, and yet the dearest that ever Sir Oliver Cromwell sold. Thirdly, for his Loyalty, alwayes beholding the Usurpation and Tyranny of his Nephew, God-Son, and NAME-SAKE with Hatred and Contempt. Lastly, for his Vivacity, who survived to be the oldest Gentleman in England, who was a Knight; Though not the oldest Knight who was a Gentleman; seeing Sir George Dalston, younger in years (yet still alive,) was Knighted some dayes before him. Sir Oliver died, Anno Dom. 1654. The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners, in the Twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth. William Bishop of Lincoln, Commissioners. John de Tiptofte, Chivaler,   Roger Hunt, Knights for the Shire.   William Waton. Knights for the Shire.   Abbatis de Ramsey Abbatis de Sautrey Prioris de Huntington Prioris de S. Neoto Prioris de Stonle Archidiaconi Eliensis Rectoris de Somerham Preben∣daŕii, Ecclesiae Lincolniens. Domini de Leighton, Rectoris Ecclesiae de Bluntesham Vicarii Ecclesiae de Gurmecest. Vicarii Ecclesiae de S. Neoto Rect. Ecclesiae de Ript. Abbatis Nicholai Stivecle Militis Roberti Stonham armigeri Everardi Digby armigeri Radulphi Stivecle armigeri Thomae Devyll armigeri Thomae Nesenham armigeri Henrici Hethe. Johannis Bayons armigeri Rogeri Lowthe Edwardi Parker Walteri Taillard Iohannis Eyr Iohannis Bekeswell Willielmi Castell Willielmi Waldesheefe Thomae Freman Ioannis Donold Walteri Mayll Roberti Boteler de Alyngton Roberti Boteler de Hilton Iohannis Kirkeby Iohannis Sankyn Roberti Langton Reginaldi Rokesden Iohannis Pulter Roberti Wene Iohannis Sampson de Somersh Thomae Clerevax Radulphi Pakynton VVillielmi Est Richardi Est Roberti Creweker VVillielmi Maister Iohannis Morys VVillielmi Druell de VVeresle Radulphi Ioce Iohannis Devyll de Chescerton Iohannis Cokerham Richardi Bsingham I. Cokeyn Parker de Kimbolton Richardi Burgham Richardi Parker de Bukden Thomae Alcumbury VVillielmi Boteler de VVeresle VVill. Iudde d Sancto Ivone VVillielmi VVassingle VVillielmi VVardale VVillielmi Colles Laurentii Merton Thomae Judde Willielmi Boteler de Ramsey Thomae Barboure de Eadem Thomae Rede Thomae Irlle Willielmi Holland Williel. Smith de Alcumbury Williel. Hayward de Buckworth Richardi Boton Iohannis Cross senioris Edmundi Fairstede Willielmi Erythe Willi. Skinner de Brampton Willielmi West Thomae Daniel Willielmi Daniel Iohannis Barbour Thomae Parker de S. Neoto Edm. Faillour de Kymbolton Thomae Bowelas Willielmi eete Willielmi Talers Thomae Aungevin Walteri Godegamen Iohannis Cage
Johannis Manypeny Johannis Copgray clerici Willielmi Arneburgh Henrici Attehill Johannis Charwalton Edmundi Ulfe Willielmi Hare Johannis Dare Willielmi Sturdivale Richarde Brigge Mich. Carleton Ballivi ejusdē Ville Huntington Georgei Giddyng Iohannis Chikson Iohannis Pecke Thome Charwalton Iohannis Abbotesle I meet with this uncomfortable passage in Mr. Speeds (or rather in Sir Robert Cottons) description of this Shire. Thus as this City, so the old families have been here with time out worne, few onely (of the many former) now remaining, whose Sirnames before the Reign of the last Henry were in this Shire of any eminency. Let others render a reason, why the ancient families in this County (more in pro∣portion then else where) are so decayed. This seemeth a probable cause why many new ones are seated herein, because Huntington-shire being generally Abby-land, (as is aforesaid) after the Dissolution many new purchasers planted themselves therein. Sheriffes of this Shire alone. Names Place Armes K. CHARLES     12 Tho. Cotton Bar. Cūnington Azure an Eagle displaid Arg. 13 Ioh. Hewet. Bar. Waresly S. a Cheveron Counter-Battellee between 3 Owles, Argent. 14 Tho. Lake* Knight Stoughton * S. a Bend betwixt 6 Cross Crosets fitchie Arg. 15 Will. Armyn ar. Orton Erm. a Salt. engrailed G. on a chief of the 2. a Lion Passant, Or. 16 VVill. Leman VVarbois Az. a Fess betwixt 3 Dolphins. Ar. 17 Rich. Stone mil. Stuckly Arg. 3. Cinque foils S. a Chief Az. Cambridge-shire and this County may pass for the Embleme of Man and Wife who have long lived lovingly together, till at last upon some small disgust they part Bed and Board and live asunder: Even from the time of King Henry the Second, these two * Camdens Brit. in Cam∣bridge-shire, shires were united under one Sheriff, (as Originally they had one Earle of the Royal blood of Scotland) Till in the Twelfth of King Charles, (on what Mutual distast I know not, they were divided. But the best part of the Embleme is still behind: As such separated persons doe on second thoughts some times return together again, as most for their Comfort, Conveni∣ence, Credit and Conscience; so these two Counties (after six years Division) have been re-uni∣ted under the same Sheriff, and so continue to this day. The Farewell. Much of this Counties profit depends on the Northern roade crossing the body thereof from God Mondchester to Wainsforde-Bridge. A Road which in the winter is the ready way, leading not only to trouble but Danger; Insomuch that here it coms to pass, (what war caused in the dayes of Judges 5. 6. Shamgar) The high wayes are un imployed and Travellers walk through by-wayes, to the present prejudice and future undoing of all ancient Stages. And indeed though STIF-CLAY (commonly called Stukley) be the name but of one or two Villages in the midst, yet their Nature is extensive all over the County, con∣sisting of a deep Clay, giving much annoyance to Passengers May a mean mans motion be heard? Let the repayring of bad places in that High way, (which is now the Parish,) be made the County Charge, whereby the burden will become the lesse (born by more backs) and the benefit the more, when the wayes thereby shall effectually be mended and maintained.
KENT, In the Saxon Heptarchie was an entire Kingdome by it self, an ho∣nour which no other sole County attained unto. It hath the Thames on the North, the Sea on the East and South, Sussex and Surrey on the West. From East to West it expatiateth it self into fifty three miles: But from North to South expandeth not above twenty six miles. It differeth not more from other Shires then from it self, such the variety there∣of. In some parts of it; Health and Wealth are at many miles distance, which in other parts are reconciled to live under the same Roof; I mean abide in one place together. Nor is the wonder great, if places differ so much which lie in this Shire far asunder, when I have Hartlibs Leg. pag. 170. read, that there is a farm within a mile of Graves-End, where the cattle alwayes drinking at one common Pond in the Yard; if they graze on one side of the House, the butter is yellow, sweet and good; but if on the other, white, sowrish, and naught. Yet needeth there no Oedipus to unriddle the same, seeing one side lieth on the chalke, and hath much Tre-foile; the other on the Gravel abounding onely with Couch-grass. A considerable part of this County is called the VVealde, that is, a VVood-land ground, the Inhabitants whereof are called the VVealdish-man. And here, Reader, I humbly submita small Criticisme of mine to thy censure. I read in M. In his Chron. pag. 845. parag. 30. Speed in VVyats Rebellion how Sir Henry Isley and the two Knevets conducted five hundred VVelch men into Rochester. I much admired how so many Cambro-Britans should straggle into Kent, the rather because that Rising was peculiar to that County alone; since I conceive these VVelch men should be Wealdisk-men, viz. such who had their habitation in the woodie side of this shire. However, the goodness of the soyl generally may be guessed from the greatness of the Kentish breed, where both the Cattle and the Poultry are allowed the largest of the land, A Giant-Ox fed in Rumney-Marsh was some 6 years since to be seen in London, so high, that one of ordinary stature could hardly reach to the top of his back. Here let me observe a slip of the penn in Industrious Master Speed. The Aire, saith he, of Kent is both wholesome and temperate (which is confessed most true, but mark what followeth) as seated nearest to the Equinoctial, and farthest from the Nor∣thern Pole. But let his own general Map be appealed to as judge, being therein both true and unpartial, and it will appear that some part of Devonshire lieth South of Kent well nigh a whole Degree, or threescore miles. Thus we see other mens, other men see our mistakes; so necessary is mutual Candor and Charity, because he who forgivet h to day may have need to be forgiven to morrow. And yet I deny not but that Kent of all English Counties is nearest to France, not because Southern-most, but because the Sea in∣terposed is there the Narrowest. Natural Commodities. Cherries. These were fetched out of Flanders, and first planted in this County by King Henry the Eighth, in whose time they spred into thirty two pārishes; and were sold at great rates. I have Hartlibs Le∣gacy pag. 15. read that one of the Orchards of this primitive plantation consisting but of thirtie acres produced fruit of one year sold for one thousand pounds; plentie it seems of Cherries in that garden, meeting with a scarcitie of them in all other places. No English fruit is Dearer then those at first, Cheaper at last, pleasanter at all times; nor is it lesse wholsome then delicious. And it is much that of so many feeding so freely on them, so few are found to surfeit. Their several sorts doe ripen so successively that they continue in season well nigh a quarter of a year. It is incredible how many Cherries one Tree in this County did beare in a plentiful year. I mean not how many pound (being the fruit of other trees) have been weighed thereon (the Common fallacy of the word bear amongst the Country folke) but simply how many did naturally grow thereupon. We leave the wholsomness of this fruit both for Food and Physick to be praysed by others, having hitherto not met with any discommending it. As for the outlandish Proverb, He that eateth Cherries with Noble-men, shall have his eyes spurted out with the stones, It fixeth no fault in the Fruit, the Expression being merely Meta∣phorical, wherein the folly of such is taxed, who associate themselves equal in expence with others in higher dignity and estate till they be loosers at last, and well laughed at for their pains.
Saint-Foine. SAINT-FOINE or Holy-hay; Superstition may seem in the name, but I assure you there is nothing but good husbandry in the sowing thereof, as being found to be a great Fertilizer of Barren-ground; It is otherwise called Polygala, which I may English much Milk, as causing the Cattle to give abundance thereof. Some call it the small clover Grass, and it prospereth best in the worst ground. It was first fetcht out of France from about Paris, and since is sown in divers places in England, but especially in Cobham-Park in this County, where it thriveth extraordi∣nary well on dry chalky banks where nothing else will grow. If it prospereth not equal∣ly in other dry places, it is justly to be imputed to some errour in the managing thereof, as that the ground was not well prepared or made fine enough, that the seed was too sparing, or else old and decayed, that cattle cropt it the first year, &c. It will last but seven years, by which time the native grasse of England will prevail over this Foreign∣er, if it be not sown again. Trouts. We have treated of this Fish before, In Bark-shire. and confesse this repetition had been a breach of the Fundamental Laws, premised to this Book, were it not also an addition; Kent affording Trouts at a Town called Forditch nigh Canterbury, differing from all others in many considerables. 1. Greatness, many of them being in bignesse near to a Salmon. 2. Colour, cutting white (as others do red) when best in season. 3. Cunning, onely one of By Sir George Hastings, Mr. Waltham in his compleat An∣gler pag. 94. them being ever caught with an Angle; whereas other Trouts are easily tickled into taking and flatered into their de∣struction. 4. Abode, remaining nine moneths in the Sea, and three in the fresh water. They observe their coming up thereinto almost to a day and the men of Forditch ob∣serve them as exactly, whom they catch with nets, and other devices. Weld or Wold. Know, Reader, that I borrow my Orthographie hereof (if it be so) from the Dyers themselves. This is a little seed sown in this County some fourty years since (when first it was brought into England) with Barley, the growth whereof it doth not hinder in any degree. For, when the barley is mowed down in Harvest, then this Weld or Wold first peeps out of the Earth, where it groweth, till the May following when it is gather∣ed; And thus Husband-men with one sowing reap two Crops: yet so as it taketh up their ground for two years. The use hereof is for the dying of the best Yellow. It hath some times been so low as at four pounds a Load, (which containeth fifteen hundred weight) and somtimes so dear that it was worth fifteen pounds, betwixt which prices it hath its constant motion; and now is in the Aequator betwixt both, worth seven pounds ten shillings. It was first sown in this County and since in Northfolk and in other places. Madder. This is very useful for Dyers, for making of Redds and Violets. It is a Weed whose root onely is useful for dying, (whilest the leaves only of Woade are serviceable for that purpose) and there are three kinds thereof. 1. Crop-Madder worth betwixt 4. and 5. l. the hundred. 1. Umber-Owe   betwixt 3. and 4. l.   3. Pipe or Fat-Madder   about 1. l. 10. s.   Some two years since this was sown by Sir Nicholas Crispe at Debtford, & I hope will
have good success; first because it groweth in Zeland in the same (if not a more Nor∣thern) Latitude. Secondly, because wild-Madder growes here in abundance; and why may not Tame Madder if Cicurated by Art. Lastly because as good as any grew some thirty years since at Barn-Elms in Surrey, though it quit not Cost through some Error in the first Planter thereof, which now we hope will be rectified. Flaxe. I am informed by such who should know, that no County in England sends better or more to London. Yet doth not our whole Land afford the tenth part of what is spent therein: so that we are fain to fetch it from Flanders, France, yea as far as Aegypt it selfe. It may seem strange, that our Soile, kindlie for that seed, the use whereof and profit thereby so great, yet so little care is taken for the planting thereof, which well husbanded would find linen for the rich, and living for the poor. Many would never be indicted Spinsters, were they Spinsters indeed, nor come to so publick and shameful punishments, if painfully imployed in that Vocation. When a Spider is found upon our clothes, we use to say, some money is coming towards us. The Moral is this, such who imitate the industry of that contemptible creature (which taketh hold with her hands, and is in Kings Prov. 30. 28. Palaces) may by Gods blessing weave themselves into wealth and procure a plentiful estate. Manufactures. Though clothing (whereof we have spoken before) be diffused through many Shires of England, yet is it as vigorously applyed here as in any other place, and Ken∣tish cloth at the present keepeth up the credit thereof as high as ever before. Thread. I place this the last, because the least of Manufactures, Thread being counted a thing so inconsiderable: Abraham said to the King Gen. 14. 23. of Sodom, that he would take nothing from a Thread to a Shoe latchet; That is, nothing at all. It seems this Hebrew Proverb surround∣ed the Universe, beginning at a Thread, a contemptible thing, and after the incircling of all things more precious, ended where it begun at a Shoe-latchet as mean as Thread in valuation. But though one Thread be little worth, many together prove useful and profitable, and some thousand of pounds are sent yearly over out of England to buy that Commo∣dity: My Hartlib in his Legacy, page 32. Author telleth me, that Thread is onely made (I understand him out of London) at Maidstone in this County, where well nigh a hundred hands are imployed about it. I believe a thousand might be occupied in the same work, and many idle wo∣men who now onely spin Street-thread (going tatling about with tales,) might procure, if set at work a comfortable lively-hood thereby. The Buildings. The Cathedral of Rotchester is low and little proportional to the Revenews there∣of. Yet hath it, (though no Magnificence) a venerable aspect of Antiquity therein The King hath (besides other) three fair Palaces in this Shire, Greenwich with a pleasant medlay prospect of City, Country, Water and Land, Eltham not altogether so wholsome, and Otford, which Arch-Bishop VVarham did so enlarge and adorne with Building, that Cranmer his Successor was in some sort forced to Camden Brit. in Kent. exchange it with King Henry the Eighth on no gainful conditions. To lesson the Clergy to content themselves with Decency without sumptuousness, lest it awaken Envy, and in fine they prove loosers thereby. COBHAM, the House of the late Duke of Richmond, and..... the fair Mansion of Sir Edward Hales Baronet (adequate to his large Estate) when finished, will carry away the credit from all the buildings in this County.
The Wonders. A marvellous accident happened August 4. 1585. in the Hamlet of Villare Can∣tianum, page 136. Mottingham (pertaining to Eltham in this County) in a Field, which belongeth to Sir Percival Hart. Betimes in the morning the ground began to sink, so much that three great Elm-trees were suddenly swallowed into the Pit; the tops falling downward into the hole: and before ten of the Clock they were so overwhelmed, that no part of them might be discerned, the Concave being suddenly filled with water. The compasse of the hole was about 80. yards, and so profound, that a sounding-line of fifty Fathoms could hardly find or feel any bottom. Ten yards distance from that place, there was ano∣ther piece of ground sunk in like manner, near the High-way, and so nigh a dwelling∣house, that the Inhabitants were greatly terrified therewith. The Navy Royal. It may be justly accounted a WONDER of Art; and know the Ships are properly here handled, because the most, best and biggest of them have their Birth (built at Woolwich) and Winter aboad nigh Chattam in the River of Medway in this County. Indeed before the Reign of Q. Elizabeth the ships Royal were so few, they deserved not the name of a Fleet, when our Kings hired Vessels from Hamborough, Lubeck, yea, Genoa it self. But such who in stead of their own servants use chair folke in their houses, shall find their work worse done, and yet pay dearer for it. Queen ELIZABETH, sensible of this mischief, erected a Navy-Royal (con∣tinued and increased by her successors) of the best ships Europe ever beheld. Indeed much is in the matter, the excellency of our English-Oake; more in the making, the cun∣ning of our shipwrights; most in the manning, the courage of our Seamen, and yet all to Gods blessing who so often hath crowned them with success. If that man who hath versatile ingenium be thereby much advantaged for the working of his own fortune; Our ships, so active to turn and winde at pleasure, must needs be more useful than the Spanish▪ Gallions, whose unwieldiness fixeth them almost in one posture, and maketh them the stedier markes for their enemies. As for Flemish bottoms, though they are finer built, yet as the slender Barbe is not so fit to charge with, they are found not so useful in fight. The great SOVERAIGN built at Dulwich, a Leiger∣ship for State is the greatest Ship our Island ever saw. But great Medals are made for some grand solemnity, whilest lesser Coyn are more current and passable in pay∣ment. I am credibly informed, that that Mystery of Ship-Wrights for some descents hath been preserved successively in Families, of whom the Petts about Chattam are of singular regard; Good success have they with their skill, and carefully keep so precious a pearl, lest otherwise amongst many Friends some Foes attain unto it. It is no Monopoly which concealeth that from common enemies, the concealing whereof, is for the common good. May this Mystery of ship-making in England never be lost till this floting world be arrived at its own Haven, the End and Dissolution thereof. I know what will be objected by Forreigners, to take off the lustre of our Na∣vy-Royal, viz. That (though the Model of our great Ships primitively were our own yet, we fetched the first Mold and Pattern of our Frigots from the Dunkerks, when in the dayes of the Duke of Bukcingham (then Admiral) we took some Frigots from them, two of which still survive in his Majesties Navy by the name of the Providence, and Expedition. All this is confessed, and honest men, may lawfully learn something from thieves for their own better defence. But it is added, we have Improved our Patterns, and the Trans∣script doth at this day exceed the Original: witnesse some of the swiftest Dunkirks and Ostenders, whose wings in a fair flight have failed them, overtaken by our Frigots, and they still remain the Monuments thereof in our Navy. Not to disgrace our Neigbouring Nations, but vindicate our selves, in these nine following particulars, The Navy-Royal exceeds all Kingdoms and States in Europe.
1. Swift sayling. Which will appear by a comparative Induction of all other Nations. First for the Portugal his Carvils and Caracts whereof few now remain (the charges of maintaining them far exceeding the profit they bring in) they were the veriest Dr ones on the Sea, the rather because formerly their Seeling was dam'd up with a certain kind of morter to dead the shot, a fashion now by them disused. The Frenchh (ow dexterous soever in Land-battles) are Left-handed in Sea-fights, whose best ships are of Dutch Building. The Dutch build their ships so sloaty and boyant they have little hold in the Water in comparison of ours, which keep the better Winde and so out sail them. The Spanish-Pride hath infected their ships with Loftiness which makes them but the fairer marks to our shot. Besides the winde hath so much power of them, in bad weather, so that it drives them two Leagues for one of ours to the Lee-ward, which is very dangerous upon a Lee∣shore. Indeed the Turkish Frigots especially some 36 of Algier formed and built much near the English mode, and manned by Renegadoes, many of them English, being already too nimble heeld for the Dutch, may hereafter prove mischievous to us, if not seasonably prevented. 2. Strength. I confine this only to the Timber whereof they are made, our English Oak being the best in the World. True it is (to our shame and sorrow be it written and read) the Dutch of late have built them some ships of English Oak, which (through the Negligence or Covetousness of some Great ones) was bought here and transported hence. But the best is, that as Bishop Latimer once said to one who had preached his Sermon, that he had gotten his fidle-stick but not his rosin so the Hollanders with our Timber did not buy also our Art of ship-Building. Now the ships of other Countries are generally made of Fir and other such slight wood whereby it cometh to passe, that, as in the Battle in the Forest of Ephraim (where∣in Absolon was slain,) the Wood devoured more People that Day then the Sword, the splin∣ters2 Sam. 18. 8. of so brittle Timber, kill more than the shot in a Sea fight. 3. Comelyness. Our Friggots are built so neat and snug made long and low: so that (as the Make of some Womens Bodies hansomely concealeth their pregnancy or Great Belly) their Contri∣vance hideth their bigness without suspicion, the Enemy not expecting thirty, when (to his cost) he hath found sixty Peeces of Ordnance in them. Our Masts stand gene∣rally very upright whereas those of the Spaniards hang over their Poop as if they were ready to drop by the Board, their Deckes are unequal, having many Risings and fall∣ings, whereas ours are even. Their ports some higher in a Tire then others, ours drawn upon an Equal Line. Their Cables bad, (besides subject to rot in these Countries) because bought at the second hand, whereas we make our best markets, fetching our Cordage from the Fountain thereof. 4. Force. Besides the strength inherent in the structure (where of before) this is accessary con∣sisting in the Weight and number of their Guns, Those of the Sixth 10. 12. 14. 16. 18. 20. Fifth 22. 26. 28. 30. Fourth Rates carrying 38. 40. 44. 48. 50. Ordinance mounted. Third 50. 54. 56. 60. Second 60. 64. 70. The Royal-Soveraign being one of the first rates when she is fitted for the Seas, carrieth one hundred and four Peeces of Ordnance mounted.
5. Sea-men. Couragious and skilful. For the first we remember the Proverb of Solomon; Let an other praise thee, not thy own mouth, a stranger, not thy own lips. The Spaniards with sad shrug and Dutch with a sorrowful shaking of their heads give a tacite assent hereunto. Skillful. Indeed Navigation is much improved especially since Saint Pauls time, inso∣much, that, when a man goes bunglingly about any work in a ship, I have heard our English-men say; such a man is one of Saint Pauls Mariners. For though no doubt they were as ingenious as any in that Age to decline a Tempest, yet modern experience affords fairer fences against foul Weather. 6. Advantagious VVeapons. Besides Guns of all sorts and sizes from the Pistol to whole Cannon, they have Round-double-head-Bur-spike-Crow-Bar-Case-Chain shot. I joyn them together because (though different Instruments of death) they all concur in doing Execution. If they be VVind-ward of a ship, they have Arrows made to shoot out of a bow with fire-workes at the end, which if striking unto the Enemies Sails will stick there I fire them, and the ship if they lye board and board they throw hand-Granadoes with stinck-pots into the ship which make so noisom a smell that the Enemie is forced to thrust their heads out of the Ports for air. 7. Provision. 1. Wholsome, our English Beef and Pork keeping sweet and sound longer then any Flesh of other Countries, even twenty six moneths to the East and West-Indies. 2. More plentiful, than any Prince or State in all Europe alloweth. The Sea-men having two Beef, two Pork, and three Fish-dayes; besides every Sea-man is alwayes well stored with Hooks to catch Fish, with which our Seas do abound. Insomuch that many times six will diet on four mens allowance, and so save the rest therewith to buy fresh meat, when landing, where it may be procured. I speak not this that hereafter their al∣lowance from the King should be the lesse, but that their Loyalty to him, and thank∣fulnesse to God may be the more. 8. Accommodation. Every one of his Majesties Ships and Friggot-Officers have a distinct Cabin for them∣selves, for which the Dutch, French and Portugals do envy them, who for the most part∣lye sub dio under ship-decks. 9. Government. Few offences comparatively to other Fleets are therein committed, and fewer escape punishment. The Offender, if the fault be small, is tried by a Court-Mar∣shal, consisting of the Officers of the Ship, if great, by a Council of Warre, wherein only Commanders and the Judge Advocate. If any sleep in their watches it is pain of death. After 8 a clock none save the Captain, Lievtenant, and Master, may presume to burn a candle. No smoaking of Tobacco (save for the priviledged aforesaid) at any time, but in one particular place of the ship, & that over a Tub of water. Preaching they have lately had twice aweek, Praying twice aday: but my Intelligencer could never hear, that the Lords Supper for soe yeares was administred aboard of any ship, an Omission which I hope hereafter will be amended. But never did this Navy appear more triumphant, then when in May last it brought over our Gracious Soveraign being almost becalmed (such the fear of the winds to offend with over-roughness,) the prognostick of his Majesties peaceable Reign. The Farwel. Being to tak our leave of these our wooden walls, first I wish that they may conquer with their Mast and Sailes without their Gunnes, that their very appearnace may fright their foes into Submission. But if in point of Honour or safety they be necessitated to ingage, may they alwayes keep the Wind of the Enemy, that their shot may flye with the greater force, and that the smoake of their Pouder pursuing the Fe may drive him to fire at hazard. May their
Gunner be in all places of the ship, to see where he can make a shot with the best advantage, their Carpenter and his Crew be allwayes in the Hold presently to drive in a wooden plug (whereas a shot comes betwixt wind and water) and to clap a board with Tar and Camels Hair upon it till the dispute be over. Their Chirurgion and his assistants be in the same place (out of danger of shot) to dress the wounded. Their Captain to be in the uppermost, the Lieuetenant in every part of the Ship to incourage the Sea-men. The Chaplain at his Devotions, to importune Heaven for success and encouraging all his by his good Council, if Time will permit. Medicinal Waters. TUNBRIDGE - WATER.] It is usual for Providence when intending a Benefit to Mankind to send some signal chance on the Errand to bring the first Tidings thereof; most visible in the Newes of Medicinal-Waters. The first Discovery of this Water (though variously reported) is believed from a Foot∣man to a Dutch Lord, who passed this way, and drinking thereof found it in taste very like to that at the Spaw in Germany. Indeed, there is a great Symbolizing betwixt them in many concurrences, and I be∣lieve it is as Soveraign as the other, save that it is true of Things as of Persons, Major è longinquo Reverentia. Surely it runneth thorough some Iron-Mine, because so good for Splenitick distempers. But I leave the full Relation to such, who having experimentally found the Vertue of it can set their Seal of Probatum est unto the commendation thereof. Proverbs. A KENTISH Yeoman] It passeth for a plain Man of a plentiful estate, Yeomen in this County, bearing away the Bell for wealth from all of their ranck in England. Yeomen contracted for Yemen-mein are so called, saith a greatVerstegan in his restoring of decayed Intelligence. Antiquary from Gemein, (G in the beginning is usually turned into Y as Gate into Yate) which signifieth Common in old Dutch, so that Yeoman is a Commoner, one undignified with any title of Gentility. A condition of People almost peculiar to England, seeing in France, Italy and Spain, (like a lame Dye which hath no points betwixt Duce and Cinque) no medium between Gentlemen and Pesants. Whereas amongst us the Yeomen, Ingenui, or Legales Homines, are in effect the Basis of all the Nation, formerly most mounting the subsidy∣Book in Peace with their purses, and the Muster Roll in war with their Persons. Kent as we have said affordeth the richest in this kind whence the Rime. A Knight of CALES, and a Gentle-man of WALES, and a Laird of the North Countree. A Yeoman of KENT with his yearly Rent will buy them out all Three. CALES Knights were made in that voyage by Robert Earle of Essex anno Dom. 1596 to the number os sixty, whereof (though many of great birth and estate) some were of low fortunes, and therefore Queen Elizabeth was halfe offended with the Earle for making Knighthood so common. Of the numerousness of Welsh Gentlemen we shall have cause to speak hereafter. Northern Lairds are such who in Scotland hold Lands in chief of the King, whereof some have no great Revenue, so that a Kentish Yeoman (by the help of an Hyperbole) may countervail, &c. Yet such Yeomen refuse to have the Title of Master put upon them, contenting themselves without any addition of Gentility, and this mindeth me of a Passage in my memory. One immoderately boasted, that there was not one of his name in all England, but that he was a Gentleman, to whom one in the company retnrned, I am sorry, Sir, you have never a good man of your name. Sure I am in Kent there is many a hospital Yeoman of great ability, who though no Gentleman by Descent and Title, is one by his Means and state, let me also adde by his courteous carriage, though constantly called but Goodman, to which Name he desireth to answer in all respects.
A Man of KENT.] This may relate either to the Liberty, or to the courage of this County-men. Liberty, the tenure of Villanage (so frequent elsewhere) being here utterly unknown, and the bo∣dies of all Kentish persons being of free condition. In so much that it is holdenFitz. Herbert 15. in Title of Villanage. suffi∣cient for one to avoid the Objection of bondage, to say that his Father was born in Kent. Now seeing servi non sunt viri quia non sui sur is, A bond-man is no man, because not his own man; the Kentish for their Freedome have atchieved to themselves the name of Men. Others refer it to their courage, which from the time of King Canutus hath pur∣chased unto them the precedency of marching in our English Armies to lead the Van. JOANNES Sarisbur. De egregiaeThus cited, for hitherto I have not read the Ori∣ginal by Mr. Selden in his Notes on Poliolbion, page 303. Curial. 6▪ cap. 16. Ob egregiae virtutis meritum, quod potenter & patenter exercuit, Cantia nostra primae Cohortis honorem, & primos congressus Hostium, usque in omnibus diem in omnibus praeliis obtinet. For the deert of their worthy valour, which they so powerfully and publick∣ly expressed. Our Kent obtaineth even unto this day the honor of the first Re∣giment, and first assaulting the Enemy in all Battails. Our Authour lived in the Reign of Henry the Second, and whether Kentish-men retain this Priviledge unto this day (wherein many things are turned upside-down, and then no wonder it also forward and backward) is to me unknown. Neither in KENT nor Christendome.] This seems a very insolent expression, and as unequal a division. Surely the first An∣thour thereof had small skill in even distribution to measure an Inch against an Ell; yea to weigh a grain against a pound. But know Reader, that this home-Proverb is calculated onely for the elevation of our own Country, and ought to be restrained to English-Christendome, whereof Kent was first converted to the Faith. So then Kent and Christendome, (parallel to Rome and Italy) is as much as the First cut, and all the Loafe besides. I know there passes a report, that Henry the fourth King of France, mu∣stering his Souldiers at the siege of a City, found more Kentish-men therein, than For∣raigners of all Christendome beside, which (being but seventy years since) is by some made the Original of this Proverb, which was more ancient in use; and therefore I ad∣here to the former Interpretation, alwayes provided, —Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; Si non; his utere mecum. If thou know'st better, it to me impart; If not, use these of mine with all my heart. For mine own part I write nothing but animo revocandi, ready to retract it when better evidence shall be brought unto me. Nor will I oppose such who understand it for Periphrasis of NO-WHERE; Kent being the best place of England, Christendome of the World. KENTISH Long-TAILES.] Let me premise, that those are much mistaken, who first found this Proverb on a Mi∣racle of Austin the Monk, which is thus reported. It happened in an English Village where Saint Austin was preaching, that the Pagans therein did beat and abuse both him and his associats, opprobriously tying Fish-tails to their back-side. In revenge where∣of an impudent Author relateth, Reader, you and I must blush for him, who hath not the modesty to blush for himselfe) how such Appendants grew to the hind-parts of all that Hierome Porter in the Flowers of the lives of the Saints, p. 515. Generation. I say they are much mistaken, for the Scaene of this Lying Wonder was not laied in any Part of Kent, but pretended many miles off, nigh Cerne in Dorset∣shire. To come closer to the sence of this Proverb, I conceive it first of outlandish extraction, and cast by forraigners as a note of disgrace on all the English, though it chanceth to stick only on the Kentish at this Day. For when there happened in Palestine a difference betwixt Robert brother of Saint Lewis King of France and our William Longspee Earle of Salisbury, heare how the French-man insulted over our nation.
MATTHEW PARIS. Anno Dom. 1250. pag. 790. O timidorum caudatorū formidolositas! quàm beatus, quàm mundus praesens foret exer∣citus, si à caudis purgaretur & cau∣datis. O the cowardliness of these fearful Long∣tails! How happie, how cleane would this our arm ie be, were it but purged from tails and Long-tailes. That the English were nicked by this speech appears by the reply of the Earle of Salisbury following still the metaphor; The son of my father shall presse thither to day, whither you shall not dare to approach his horse taile. Some will have the English so called from wearing a pouch or poake,) a bag to carry their baggage in) behind their backs, whilest probably the proud Monsieurs had their Lacquies for that purpose. In proof whereof they produce ancient pictures of the English Drapery and Armory, wherein such conveyances doe appear. If so, it was nei∣ther sin nor shame for the common sort of people to carry their own necessaries, and it matters not much whether the pocket be made on either side, or wholly be∣hinde. If any demand how this nick-name (cut off from the rest of England) continues still en∣taild on Kent? The best conjecture is, because that county lieth nearest to France, and the French are beheld as the firstfounders of this aspersion. But if any will have the Ken∣tish so called from drawing and dragging boughs of trees behind them, which afterwards they advanced above their heads and so partly cozened partly threatned King William the Conqueror to continue their ancient customes, I say, if any will impute it to this original, I will not oppose. KENTISH Gavel▪ Kind] It is a custome in this County, whereby the lands are divided equally among all the sons, and in default of them, amongst the daughters; that is, Give all kind, kind sig∣nifying a Child in the low Dutch. This practice, as it appeares in Tacitus, was derived to our Saxons from the ancient Germans Teutonibus priscis patrios succedit in agros Mascula stirps omnis, ne foret ulla potens. 'Mongst the old Teuch lest one o'retop his breed, To his Sire's land doth every son succeed. It appeareth that in the eighteenth year of King Henry the sixth, there were not above fourty persons in Kent, but all their land was held in this tenure. But on the petition of divers Gentlemen this custome was altered by Act of Parliament in the 31. of King Henry the eighth, and Kentish-lands for the most part reduced to an uniformitie with the rest in England. DOVER-COURT, All speakers and no hearers] There is a Village in Essex not far from Harwich called Dover-Court formerly famous for a Rood burnt in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. But I take it here to be taken for some Tumultuous Court kept at Dover, the Consluence of many Blustering Sea-men, who are not easily ordered into awful attention. The Proverb is applyed to such irregu∣lar conferences, wherein the People are all Tongue and no Eares, parallel to the Latine Proverb, Cyclopum Respublica, being thus charactered that therein . The Father to the Bough] The Son to the Plough.] That is, though the Father be executed for his Offence the Son shall neverthelesse succeed to his Inheritance. In this County if a W. Lambert his perambu∣lation of Kent. page 550. and 551. Tenant in Fee-simple of Lands in Gavel-kind commit Felony, and suffer the judgement of Death therefore, the Prince shall have all his Chattels for a forfeiture. But as touching the Land, he shall neither have the Escheat of it, though it be immediately holden of himself, nor the Day, year and Wast, if it be holden of any other; for in that case the Heir, notwithstanding the offence of his Ancestor, shall en∣ter immediately and enjoy the lands after the same Customes and services by which they were holden before, In assurance whereof the former Proverb is become Currant in this County. But this Rule holdeth in case of Felony and of Murther onely, and not in case of Treason, nor (peradventure) in Piracy, and other Felonies made by Statutes
of later times, because the custome cannot take hold of that which then was not in being. It holdeth moreover, in case where the offender is justiced by Order of Law, and not where he withdraws himself after the fault cōmitted, and will not abide his lawful trial. TENTERDENS Steeple is the Cause of the Breac in Goodwyn Sands.] It is used Commonly in derision of such, who being demanded to render a reason of some inportant Accident assign Non causam pro causa, or a Ridiculous and improbable cause thereof, and hereon a story depends. When the Vicinage in Kent met to consult about the Inundation of Goodwyn sands and what might be the Cause thereof, an Old man imputed it to the building of Tenter∣den Steeple in this County; for those sands (said he) were firme Lands before that steeple was built which ever since were overflown with Sea-water. Hereupon all heartily laughed at his unlogical Reason, making that the effect in Nature which was only the consequent in time; not flowing from but following after the building of that steeple. But One story is good till another is heard. Though this be all whereon this Proverb is G. Sandys on on his notes of the 13. of Ovids Meta∣morph. p. 282. generally grounded I met since with a * supplement thereunto. It is this. Time out of mind mony was constantly collected out of this County to fence the East bancks thereof against the eruption of the Seas. And such Sums were deposited in the hands of the Bishop of Rochester. But because the Sea had been very quiet for many years, without any encroachings; The Bishop commuted that money to the building of a Steeple and endowing of a Church in Tenterden. By this diversion of the Collection for the maintenance of the Banks, the Sea afterwards brake in upon Goodwyn Sands. And now the old man had told a rational tale, had he found but the due favour to finish it. And thus sometimes, that is causelesly accounted ignorance in the speaker which is no∣thing but impatience in the Auditors unwilling to attend the end of the discourse. A Jack of Dover] I find the first mention of this Proverb in our English Ennius, Chaucer, in his Proeme to the Cook. And many a Jack of Dover he had sold Which had been two times hot and two times cold. This is no Fallacy but good Policy in an houshould, to lengthen out the Provision thereof, and though lesse toothsome may be wholsome enough: But what is no false Logick in a Family is false Ethicks in an Inn, or Cooks-shop, to make the abused Guest to pay after the rate of New and Fresh for meat at the second and third hand. Parallel to this is the Latine Proverb crambe bis cocta, crambe being a kind of Cole∣wort, which (with vinegar) being raw is good, boiled better, twice boiled noysome to the Palat and nauceous to the stomach. Both Proverbs are appliable to such who grate the ears of their Auditors with ungrate∣full Tautologies, of what is worthlesse in it selse, tolerable as once uttered in the notion of Novelty; but abominable if repeated for the tediousnesse thereof. Princes. JOHN of ELTHAM Second Son to King Edward the Second by Isabell his Queen was born at Eltham in this County. He was afterwards created Earle of Cornwal. A spritely Gentleman, and who would have given greater evidence of abilities, if not prevented by death in the prime of his age. He dyed in Scotland in the tenth yeare of the reign of King Edward the Third. Be it observed that hitherto the younger Sons to our English Kings, were never advanced Higher than Earls. Thus Richard Second son to King Iohn never had higher English Honour then the Earle of Cornwel, though at the same time he were King of the Romans: But this Iohn of Eltham was the last Son of an English King, who dyed a plain Earl, the Title of Duke coming aerwards into fashion. Hence it was that all the younger Sons of Kings, were from this time forwards Created Dukes, except expiring in their infancy. BRIDGET of ELTHAM fourth Daughter of K Edward the fourth and Elizabeth his Q. was born at Eltham in this County. Observing her three eldest Sisters not over happy in their husbands, she resolved to wed a Monastical life and (no whit ambitious) of the place of an Abbess, became an ordinary votary in the Nunnery at Dartford in this County, founded by K. Edward the 3. The time of her death is uncertain, but this is certain, that her dissolution hapned some competent time before the dissolution of that Nunnerie.
EDMUND youngest Son to King Henry the 7. and Elizabeth his Queen. (bearing* Vincent in his Discovery of Brook his errors, p. 481. the name of his Grand-father Edmund of Haddam) was born at Greenwich in this Coun∣ty 1495. He was by his Father created Duke of Somerset, and he dyed before he was full five years of age at Bishops Hatfield in Hartford▪ shire, which then was the Nursery for the Kings Children: Little notice generally is taken of this Prince, and no wonder, for. Who onely act short parts in Infant age, Are soon forgot, they e're came on the Stage. He died Anno Dom. 1500. in the 15. year of his Fathers Reign, and lieth buried (without any Monument) in Westminster. HENRY the Eighth, second son of King Henry the Seventh, was born at Greenwich. A Prince who some praise to the Skies, others depresse to the Pit, whilest the third (and truer) sort embrace a middle way betwixt both. Extream. Mean. Extream. Some carry him up as the Paragon of Princes. The great advancer of Gods Glo∣ry and true Religion, and the most Magnificent that ever sate on the Throne. Master Fox in his Acts and Monu∣ments, is sometimes very su∣perlative in his Commenda∣tion; And so are most Pro∣testant Authours who wrote under his Reign. Polidor Virgil hath an Expression of him to this Effect, Princeps in quo aequali quasi tem∣peramento magnae in∣erantVirtutes ac non mi∣nora vitia. A Prince in whom great Virtues and no less Vices, were in a manner equally contem∣perated. Sir Walter Rawleigh in his Preface to his great History, whose words may better be read there than Tran∣scribed thence, makes him the truest Map of Tyranny. Inso∣much, that King James (who could not abide that any un∣der a King, should speak a∣gainst a King) was much offended thereat. And those words worst became the wri∣ter so much advanced by the daughter of the said K. Henry. For mine own part, I humbly conceive, God effected more by his work, as the In∣strument, than he was directed by Gods Word as the Principal. Indeed he was a Man of an Uncomptrolable spirit, carrying a MANDAMUs in his mouth, sufficiently sealed when he put his hand to his Hilt. He awed all into Obedience, which some impute to his skilfulnesse to Rule, others ascribe to his Subjects ignorance to resist. Let one pleasant passage (for Recreation) have its Pass amongst much serious Matter. A company of little boyes were by their School-Master not many years since appointed to act the Play of King Henry the Eighth, and one who had no presence but (an absence rather) as of a whyning voice, puiling spirit, Consumptionish body was appointed to personate K. Henry himself, only because he had the richest Cloaths and his parents the best people of the parish: but when he had spoke his speech rather like a Mouse then a Man, one of his fellow Actors told him; If you speak not HOH with a better spirit your Parliament will not grant you a penny of Money. But it is vain to Glean in the stubble seeing the Lord Herbert hath so largely wrote the life of this King that nothing of moment can be added thereunto. He dyed January 28, 1546. MARY eldest Daughter to King Henry the Eighth and Q. Katharine of Spain was born at Greenwich the 18. of February 1518. She did partake of both her parents in her person and properties, having from her Father a broad face, big voyce, and undaunted spirit; from her Mother a swarthy complexion, and a mind wholy devoted to the Romish Religion. She attained the crown by complying with the Gentry of Norfolk and Suffolk, promising them to continue Religion as established by K. Edward the 6. after the breach of which promise she never prospered. For first she lost the hearts of her subjects, then her hopes of a Child, then the company (not to say affection) of her husband, then the City of Calais, then her mirth, then her health, then her life, which ended on the. 17. of November, 1558. Queen ELIZABETH Second Daughter to King Henry the Eighth was born at Greenwich: Septemb. 7. 1533. She was Heire only to the eminences of her Father, his Learning, Bounty, Courage and Success; Besides Grace and true goodness, wherein she was Daughter to her Mother.
Her Learning appears in her two Latine speeches to the University, and a third little better then Ex tempore to the Poland Ambassador. Her bounty was better then her Fathers, less flowing from Humour, and more founded on Merit, and ordered with Modera∣tion; seeing that▪s the best Liberality that so enricheth the Receiver that it doth not impo∣verish the Giver. Her Courage was undaunted, never making her self so cheap to her Favorites, but that she still valued her own Authority, whereof this an eminent instance; A prime Officer with a White staffe (whose name I purposely forbear) com∣ing into her presence, the Queen willed him to confer such a place now voyd on one of her servants whom she commended unto him. Pleaseth your Highness, Madam, saith the Lord, The disposal thereof pertaineth to me by vertue of this white staffe conferred upon me. True, said the Queen; yet I never gave you your office so absolutely, but I still reserved my self of the Quorum: But of the Quarum, Madam, returned the Lord, presuming on the favour of her Highnesse. Hereat the Queen in some passion snatching the staff out of his hand; you shall ac∣knowledge me, said She, of the Quorum Quarum Quorum before you have it again. The Lord waited Stafflesse almost a day (which seemed o long unto him as if the Sun stood still) before the same was reconferred upon him. Her success was admirable, keeping the King of Spain at Armes. End all her Reign. She was well skilled in the Queen-craft; and by her policy and prosperity she was much beloved by her people insomuch that since it hath been said, That Queen Elizabeth might lawfully doe that, which King James might not. For although the Laws were equally the rule to them both, yet her popularity sugared many bitter things, her sub∣jects thanking her for taking those Taxes which they refused to pay to her Successor. She died at Richmond March 24. Anno Domini 1602. MARY; Daughter to King James and Anne of Denmark his Queen, was born atStow his Chronicle, pag. 862. Greenwich April 8. about eleven a clock at night, and soon after baptized with great∣er state, than the memory of any then alive in England could recover. King James was wont pleasantly to say, that he would not pray to the Virgin Mary, but he would pray for the Virgin Mary; meaning his own Daughter. But it seems his prayers prevailed not (Divine Providence having otherwise determined it) for her long life, who expired in her infancy, and lies buried at Westminster. SOPHIA, youngest daughter to King James and Queen Anne, was born atStow in his Survey of London, (con∣tinued by How) p. 512. Green∣wich the 22. day of June 1606. and departed this life three dayes after. This Royal Babe lieth buried nigh Queen Elizabeth, in the North part of the Chappel of King Hen∣ry the Seventh, represented sleeping in her Cradle, wherewith vulgar eyes, especially of the Weaker sex, are more affected (as level to their Cognizance, more capable of what is prety, than what is pompous)▪ than with all the magnificent Monuments in Westminster. CHARLES eldest Son of King Charles and Q. Mary, was born at Greenwich Anno 1629. A fright of his Mother is generally reported to have accelerated, or rather ante∣dated his nativity. The Popish Priests belonging to the Queen stood ready, watching to snatch the Royal Babe to their superstitious baptisme; but the tender care of King Charles did out▪ vigil their watchfullness, commanding Doctor Web (His next Chaplain in attendance) to Christen it according to the Church of England. This done, within few houres he expired, and lyes buried at Westminster. Saints. EALPHAGE born of good parentage, had his education during his youth in Glocester∣shire, then he became a Monk at Glastenbury. But, that place not sufficiently suiting the se∣verity of his solitary soul, removing thence he built himself a Hut at Bath, which smal Cel in process of time (the longest line proceedeth from a little point at first) proved the beautiful Priory in that place. Hence by Dunstan he was preferred Bishop of Winchester continuing therein twenty two years; And at last became Bishop of Canterbury. It happeneth that the cruel Danes seizing on that City put it under Decimation. Start not, loyal reader, at the word, if in the late Tyranny of the times thou thy self hast been* Godwin in his Catalogue of Archbishops of Caterbury. against all right and reason Decimated in thy Purse, as now the poor Citizens of Canterbury were in their Persons. For the Danes, under pretence of Tribute detained, Saved the tenth part of the Citizens alive amounting unto eight hundred and four Destroyed the other nine parts, no fewer than seven thousand two hundred & thirty six.
As for Arch-Bishop Alphage, they demanded of him a greater summe, than he could pay or procure, whose wealth consisted chiey in his Piety, no currant Coin with the Pagan Danes; So that after seven moneths imprisonment they barbarously mur∣thered him near Greenwich about the year 1013. His Corps was first buried in Saint Pauls, and then removed by the command of King Canutus to Canterbury. Impudent Monks have almost as much wronged his me∣mory, as the Danes did his Person, farcing his life with such abominable lies, that there∣by the very truth therein is rendred suspected. AGELNOTH Son to Count Agelmar, was a Weaver Fun. Sermon. p. 301. Calendred Saint in this County being Elected Archbishop of Canterbury from being Dean over the Canons in that Convent. This is the first time I find the Dignity of Decanus or Dean in England so called from , Ten, having (it seemeth at the first) Inspection just over that Number, though since* Cowel's In∣terp. in the word Dean. an Heteroclite in England, as, either over fewer, but Six in Norwich, Bristol, &c. or many more in other Cathedrals. He was so pious in his Life, that he was commonly called the GOOD. And here one may justly wonder, God having two Grand Epithets OPTIMUS and MAXIMUS most give the former the go-by, and strive onely for the latter, to be the Greatest, though Greatnesse without Goodnesse is both Destructive to him that hath it, and Dan∣gerous to all others about him. Going to Rome to get his Pall from the Pope, by him he was courteously entertained, and deserved his welcome, who gave him (saith my VVeaver ut prius. Author) for the Arm of Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo) one hundred Talents of Silver, and one Talent of Gold, citing Bishop Godwin for his author; But indeed that Bishop though reporting the hundred Ta∣lents of Silver, mentioneth not at all that of Gold. Perchance Mr. Weaver had lately read (still obversing his fancy) how 2 Chr. 36. 3. Pharaoh K. of Egypt having taken away King Jehoahash, condemned the land in An Hundred Talents of Silver, and A Talent of Gold; and to me it is a double wonder; First, that this Arch∣bishop would give; Secondly, that he could give, living in a harraged Land, (wherein so much Misery and little Money) so vast a sum. However this mindeth me of a passage in Saint Augustine speaking of the Reliques of the deceased, Si tamen Martyrum, if so they be of Martyrs; and let me chuse the words of this Father on this Father, Si tamen Augustini, If this were the arm of Saint Augustine and not of some other Ordinary (not to say Infamous) person. Well, were one as good a Mathematician, as He, who collected the Stature of Her∣cules from the length of his Foot, it were easie to proportion the Price of Saint Augu∣stines whole body, from this valuation of his arme. And now having so dearly bought it, let him dispose thereof as he pleaseth, and let no man grudge if he gave it to Coven∣try rather than Canterbury. He expended much in repairing (or rather renewing) of his Cathedral of Canterbury lately destroyed by the Danes, assisted therein by the bounty of King Canutus, who at the instance and by the advice of this Prelate, did many worthy works. Our Agelnoth, after he had set 17. years in his See, died October 29. in the year 1038. Martyrs. WILLIAM WHITE was born in this Bale de script. Brit. pag. 564. County, and entering into Orders, became a great maintainer of the Opinions of Wicliffe. He was the first married Priest in England, since the Popes solemn prohibition thereof. I find Johan his wife, commen∣ded for her modesty and patience, and that she was Idem Ibi∣dem. conjux talidigna marito. Indeed she shared very deep in her husbands sufferings, hardly coming off with her life at the last. For he, though leaving his living (as unsafe to hold) still kept his calling, and preached about all the Eastern parts of the Land. The same mouth which commanded the Dis∣ciples in time of Peace, Luk. 10. 7. Goe not from house to house, so to avoid the censure of Levity, advised them also, when Matt. 10. 23. ye are persecuted in one City fly to another, so to provide for their own security. Such the constant practice of this W. VVhite, who was as a Partridge dayly on the wing, removing from place to place. At last he was seised on at Norwich, by VVilliam Alnwick the cruel Bishop thereof, and charged with 30 Articles, for which he
was condemned and burnt at Norwich in September Fox Acts and Monuments. 1428. He was the Protomartyr of all born in this County, and had not five before him in all England, who suffered merely for Religion, without any mixture of matter of State charged upon them. As for MARIAN Martyrs, we meet with many in this County though not to be charged on Cardinal Pool Arch-bishop of Canterbury further then his bare permission thereof. It is observed of Bears, that they love to kill their own Prey, and (except forced by Famine) will not feed on what was dead before. Such a Bear was bloody Bonner, who was all for the quick and not for the dead, whilest clean contrary Cardinal Pool let the living alone, and vented his spleen onely on the dead (whom he could wrong, but not hurt) burning the bones of Martin Bucer and Paulus Phagius at Cambridge. Such Mar∣tyrs therefore, as suffered in this Shire, were either by the cruelty of Griffin Bishop of Rochester, or of Thornton Suffragan of Dover. Confessors. SIMON FISH Esquire, was born in thisJ. Bale in his Book titled Scriptores no∣stri temporis, pag. 102. County, bred a Lawyer in Graies-Inn Lon∣don. Here he acted that part in a Tragedy, wherein the pride of Cardinal Wolsey was per∣sonated, and wherewith that Prelate was so offended, that Fish was fain to fly, and live two years beyond the Seas. There he made, and thence sent over into England, a small but sharp Treatise, called The Supplication of Beggars, termed byActs and Mo∣numents. p. 1014. Master Fox a Li∣bel, understand him a little Book; Otherwise prizing and praising it for a Master-piece of Wit-learning and Religion, discovering the Superstition of that age. This by Queen Anna Bollen was presented to King Henry the Eighth, who therewith was so highly affe∣cted, that he sent for the Author home, and favoured him in great proportion. However, many nets were laid by the Popish party against him, especially by Sir Thomas More his implacable Enemy, yet Fish had the happinesse to escape the hands of Men, and to fall into the hand of God more immediately, Dying of the Plague, 1531. and lieth buried at St. Dunstan in London. Sir JAM. HALES was born, did live & was richly landed in this county, one of the Justices of the Common-Pleas, a man of most signal Integrity. When the rest of the Judges (fright∣ed at the frowns of the Duke of Northumberland) subscribed the disinheriting of the La∣dy Mary, and Lady Elizabeth, he onely refused, as against both Law and Conscience. Yet afterwards in the first of Queen Mary he fell into the displeasure of Bishop Gar∣diner, (which like Juniper coals once kindled hardly quenched) for urging the obser∣vation of some Lawes of King Edward the Sixth. For this he was imprisoned, hardly used, and so threatned by his Keeper, that he endeavoured to have killed himself, which being after let at liberty he afterwards effected, drowning himself in a small wa∣ter near his house, fear and melancholly so much prevailing upon him; Mr. Fox con∣cludeth the sad Poem of his final estate with this Distich. Cū nihil ipse vides, propria quin labe laboret, Tu tua fac cures, caetera mitte Deo. Seing nought thou eest but faling in the best, Mind thy own matters & leave God the rest. We must look on his foul Deed with anger, and yet with pity on the doer thereof, Frown on the one, and weep for the other. For seeing he had led a right godly life, and had suffered so much on the account of his Conscience, I hope that his station in this place, will not be cavilled at by any charitable persons. He died Anno Dom. 1555. Cardinals. JOHN KEMP son to Thomas, Grand-child to Sir John Kemp Nephew to Sir Roger Kemp both Knights, was born at Wie in this County, (where he built a fair Col∣ledge for Seculars) bred also in Merton Colledge in Oxford, successively Bishop of Roche∣ster, Chichester and London; afterwards Arch-Bishop of York and Canterbury, Cardinal first by the Title of Saint Balbine, then of Saint Rufine in Rome; all his preferments are comprehended in the old followingMade by Thomas Kemp his Kins-man Bishop of London. verse. Bis Primas, ter Praesul erat, is Cardine functus.
He had another honour to make up the Distich, being twice Lord Chancellour of England, so that I may add; Et dixit Legem bis Cancellari us Anglis. Such are mistaken, who report him the first raiser of his Family to a Knightly degree, which he found in that Equipage, as is aforesaid, though he left it much improved in Estate by his bounty, and some of his name and bloud flourish in Kent at this day. He died a very old man, March the 22. Anno 1453. RICHARD CLIFFORD. His Nativity may bear some debate Herefordshire pretending unto him. But because Robert Clifford was his Villare Gant. p. 24. brother (in the first of King Henry the Fourth High Sheriff of this County, and richly landed therein) I adjudge him a Cantian and assign Bobbing as the most probable place of his birth. His worth pre∣ferred him Bishop of London 1407. and he was sent by King Henry the Fourth as his Embassadour to the Council of Constance. I could hold my hand from ranking him un∣der the Topick of Cardinals, confident that no ingenious person would take exception thereat. For first he was one in Merit and Desert. Secondly, in general Desire and Designation. Thirdly, (though no actual Cardinal) he acted as a All colle∣cted out of Godwin his Bishops of London. Cardinal when joyned to their Conclave to see fair play amongst them at the choosing of a new Pope. Yea some mentioned him for the place, who (counting it more credit to make, than be a Pope) first nominated Cardinal Columna, and he clearly carried it by the name of Martin. During his abode at Constance he preached a Latine Sermon before the Emperour and Pope. He answered his name de clivo forti, or of the strong Rock indeed, viz. Lord be thou my strong Rock. Ps. 31. 3. Davids; being a most pious person, returning home he lived in good esteem, with Prince and People, until his death, which happened 1421. being buried nigh the pre∣sent Monument of Sr. Christopher Hatton. Prelates. RALPH of MAYDENSTAN. I presume this the ancient Orthography of Mayd∣ston (a noted Town in this County) the rather, because I met with no other place in England, offering in sound or syllables thereunto. An Tho. Wike in his chron. of Osney. Author giveth him this short but thick commendation; Vir magnae literaturae & in Theologia Nominatissimus. Insomuch that in the Reign of King Henry the Third 1234. He was preferred Bi∣shop of Hereford. This Prelate bought of one Mount-hault a Noble-man, a fair house in, and the Pa∣tronage of St. Mary Mount-hault (commonly, but corruptly called Mount-haw) in London, leaving both to his successours in the See of Hereford. Know Reader, that all English Bi∣shops in that age had Palaces in London for their conveniency, wherein they resided and kept great Hospitality during their attendance in Parliament. Now, although the School-men generally hold, that Episcopacy is Apex consummatae Religionis, then which Nihil amplius, Nothing higher or holyer in this life; and though many Friers have been preferred Bishops as a progressive motion both in Dignity and Sanctity: Yet our Ralph was of a different judgement herein. This made him in the year 1239. turn his Godwin in the Bishops of Hereford. Miter into a Coule, and become a Franciscan, first at Oxford, then at Glo∣cester, where he died about the year 1244. HENRY de WINGHAM (a well known Town in this County) was by K. Henry the Third, preferred Chancellour both of England and Gascony, Dean both of Godwin in the Bishop of London. Totten-Hall (quaere where this place is) and Saint Martins, and twice Embassadour into France. It happened that one Ethelmar, wom-brother to King Henry the Third was then Bi∣shop of Winchester. A person who properly comes not under my pen; First, for his Foreign nativity. Secondly, (so much as he was English) he was an UNWORTHY, wanting Godwin in the bishops of VVinchester. Age, Ability, and Orders to qualifie him in that place. Hereupon the Monks of Winchester indeavouring to eject him chose Wingham a man of Merit (and Might in the Court) to be their Bishop, which honour he wisely refused, fearing to incur the Kings displeasure. It was not long before his Modesty and Discretion
were rewarded with a peaceable (in sted of that litigious) Bishoprick, when chosen to London 1259. But he enjoyed his See not full two years dying July 13. 1261. And was buried in his own Cathedral. HENRY of SANDWICH, Archdeacon of Oxford, was consecrated Bishop of Lon∣don 1263. He took part with the seditious Barons against King Henry the Third, for which he was deservedlySo was also his Countrey∣man Benedict of Gravesend Bishop of Lin∣coln, otherwise not to be re∣membred. excommunicated by Othobon the Popes Legate. Going to Rome it cost him well nigh an Apprenticeship of Patience, dancing attendance almost seven years be∣fore he could gain his Absolution. Godwin in his Catalogue of the bishops of London. Which obtained, he returned home, and dying Sep∣tember 16. 1273. was buried in his own Church of St. Pauls. RICHARD of GRAVES-END Arch Deacon of Northampton was (after Fulk Lovel had freely refused it) Consecrated [at Coventry] Bishop of London, Anno 1282. He was the first Founder of a Covent of Carmelites at Maldon in Essex, and dying at Fulham 1303. was buried in his own Cathedral. SIMON MEPHAM was born at Mepham in this County. W. Lambert in his peram∣bulation of Kent. He was bred in Merton-Golledge in Oxford; he was a good Scholar, as those dayes went, chosen by the Monk of Cant. approved by King Edward the Third, and consecrated by the com∣mand of the Pope, Archbishop of Cant. He is only Famous for two things, his expen∣sive suit with the Moncks of Canterbury, wherein at last he got the better, though it cost seven hundred pounds in the Court of Rome. Secondly, his magnificent Visitation in person of the Dioceses South of Thames, till he was resisted by Grandison Bishop of Exeter. This affont did half break Mephams heart; and the Pope siding with the Bishop against him, brake the other half thereof, hastning his death, which happened Anno Dom∣mini, 1333. HAYMO of HITHE was born therein, a small Town on the Sea-side, Hithe in old English signifying a Landing place, as Queen-Hithe, Garlick-Hithe, &c. in London. He was made Bishop of Rochester in the Twelfth of King Edward the Secondto whom he was Confessour. I believe him Owner of good temporal means; First, because he made so much building on a mean Bishoprick, erecting the great Hall and fair Frontispice at his Palace in Halling, and repairing all the rooms thereof, not forgeting the Town of his Nativity, where he erected and endowed the Godwin in his Bishops of Rochester. Hospital of Saint Bartholomew for ten poor people. Secondly, because in his old age he lived on his own Estate, resign∣ing his Bishoprick, which the charitable conceive done not out of Discontent but De∣fire of retirement to compose himself the better for his Dissolution, which happened about the year 1355. JOHN of SHEPEY, Prior of Rochester, succeeded Haymo aforesaid in the same See, and for some time was Treasurer of England. His death happened Anno Do∣mini 1360. WILLIAM READ. I place him in this County with confidence, having clearly conquered all suspicions to the contrary: First, because of his Name then flourishing at Read in Villare Can∣tianum p. 321 Marden in this County: Secondly, because the Provost-place of Wingham∣Colledge therein was his first publick preferment. To which I may adde that he was bred Fellow of Merton-Colledge (abounding with Cantians, since a Bishop in Kent, was Founder thereof) and he merited much of that Foundation, not onely building a fair Library therein, but furnishing it with books, and Astronomical Tables of his own making, which (they say) are still to be Godwin in the Bishops of Chichester. seen therein with his lively picture inserted. In his reduced age he applied himself to Divinity, and by King Edward the Third was preferred Bishop of Chichester. Retaining his Mathematical Impressions he commen∣dably expressed them in Architecture, erecting a Castle Egregii operis, saith my Baleus. Au∣thor, at Amberley in Sussex. His death happened, Anno Dom. 1385. THOMAS KEMP, brothers son to John Kemp Archbishop of Canterbury, was born of a Knightly Family in this County, bred in Oxford, whereof he became Proctor Anno 1437. By Papal provision he was made Bishop of London, Consecrated by his Uncle at York-House (now White-Hall) and sate in his See Godwin in his Bishops of London. fourty years from the Twenty eighth of Henry the Sixth, till the Fifth of Henry the Seventh, so that he saw the wars between Lancaster and York begun, continued, concluded; and the two Roses tied together in one Royl Posie. I know not whether his benefactions were adequate to his long possessing of so wealthy a place, finding him to have curiously arched and leaded the Divinitie Schools in Oxford, and built the Crosse nigh the Church of St. Pauls
as it stood in our memories, but lately demolished, though guilty of no other Super∣stition, save accommodating the Preacher and some about him with convenient places. Me thinks, though Idle Crosses standing onely for shew were published for offenders, this usefull one, which did such service, might have been spared: but all is Fish, which comes to the Net of Sacriledge. This Bishop died, Anno Dom. 1489. JAMES GOLDWELL was born at Great Chart in this County, bred in All∣Souls-Colledge in Oxford, promoted first to be Dean of Salisbury and Secretary to King Edward the Fourth, and at last made Bishop of Norwich. He not onely repaired the Church at Great Chart where he was born, but also founded aWeavers Fun. Mo. p. 296. Chappel on the South∣side thereof, where his picture is in the East-window, with his Rebus, [viz. a Golden∣Well] in every Quarry of the same. He died, Anno Dom. 1498. THOMAS GOLDWELL was born at Goldwell in the Parish of Great Chart in this County, where his Family had long flourished, tillVillare Can∣tianum, p. 145. lately alienated. He was by Queen Mary preferred Bishop of Saint Davids, and as a Volunteer quitted the Land in the First of Queen Elizabeth. Going to Rome he made a deal of do to do just nothing; pre∣vailing by much importunity with the Pope to procure large Indulgencies for such who superstitiously were in Pilgrimage to, and offered at the Well of Saint Winifrid in his Di∣ocesse. The obscurity of his death denieth us the exact date thereof. Reader, I am sensible how imperfect my list is of the Bishops in this County: The rather because I have heard from my worthy friend and excellent Historian Mr. Fisher, Fellow of Merton-Col. that this his native shire of Kent had twelve Bishops at one time, whilst I can hardly make up twelve Bishops at all times before the Reformation. But my defects will be perfectly supplyed by such who shall Topographically treat of this subject in relation to this County alone. Since the Reformation. JOHN POYNET was born in thisBishop God win in his Bi∣shops of VVinchester.  J. Bale de Script. Brit. cent. 8. Numb. 62. County; bred (say some) in Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. Sure I am he was none of the Foundation therein, because not ap∣pearing in Master Hatcher his exact Manuscript Catalogue. a Bale is rather to be be∣lieved herein, making him to be brought up in Queens Colledge in the same University. But where ever he had his Education, he arrived at admirable Learning, being an ex∣act Grecian and most expert Mathematician. He presented King Henry the 8. with a Horologium (which I might English Dial, Clock or watch, save that it is epithetedBishop God∣win, ut prius. Sciotericum) observing the shadow of the Sun, and therein shewing not only the hours, but dayes of the Month, change of the Moon, ebbing and flowing of the Sea, &c. I confesse the modern mystery of Watch-making is much completed (men never being more curious to divide, more carelesse to imploy their time) but surely this was accounted a master-peece in that age. His Sermons so indeared him to King Edward 6. that he preferred him (whilst as yet scarce thirty six yeares of age) to the Bishoprick of Rochester, then of Winchester. But alas! these honors soon got were as soon lost, being forced to fly into high Germany in the first of Queen Mary. Where before he was fully fourty, and before he had finish∣ed his Book begun against Thomas Martin in defence of Ministers marriage, he died at Strasburg the 2. August 1556. And was buried there with great Lamentation. RICHARD FLETCHER was born in thisSo his near relation in∣formed me. County, Brother to Doctor Giles Fletcher the Civilian and Embassadour in Russia, and bred in Bennet Colledge in Cam∣bridge. He was afterwards Dean of Peterborough at what time Mary Queen of Scots was beheaded at Fotheringhay, to whom he made saith my AuthourGamdens Eliz. Anno 1589. Verbosam Orationem a Wordy speech of her past, present and future condition, wherein he took more pains that he received thanks from her who therein was most concerned. Hence he was preferred Bishop of Peterborough, and at last of London; myIdem im Anno 1596. Authour saith he was Presul Splendidus, and indeed he was of a comly presence and Queen Eli∣zabeth knew full well. Gratior est pulcro veniens è corpore virtus The Iewel vertue is more Grac'd When in a proper person Cas'd. Which made her alwayes on an equality of Desert to reflect favourably on such who were of Graceful countenance, and stature.
In one respect this Bishop may well be resembled to John Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom I find this Character, Bishop God∣wyn in his Ca∣talogue of the Arch-. of Cant. and the life of J. Pek∣ham. Quanquam gestu & incessu, saepeetiami n Sermone gloriosus videretur & elatus; a∣nimo tamen fuit benignissimo & perquam comi. Although he seemed a boaster, and puffed up both in gesture and gae, and some∣times in his speech also: yet was he of a loving disposition & exceeding courte∣ous. Such a one was Bishop Fletcher, whose pride was rather on him, than in him, as on∣ly gate and gesture-deep, not sinking to his heart, though causelesly condemned for a proud man, as who was a good Hypocrite and far more humble than he appeared. He married a Lady of this County,Sir Richard Baker in his Chon. who one commendeth for very vertuous, which i so, the more happy she in her self, though unhappy that the world did not believe it. Sure I am, that Queen Elizabeth (who hardly held the second matches of Bishops excusable) accounted his marriage a trespasse on his gravity, whereupon he fell into her deep displeasure. Hereof this Bishop was sadly sensible, and seeking to lose his sorrow in a mist of smoak, died of theCambdens Eliz. in Anno 1596. immoderate taking thereof, June the fif∣teenth, 1596. BRIAN DUPPA, D. D. the worthy Bishop of Winchester was born at Lewsham in in this County: staying for farther instructions, I am forced to deferre his life to our Additions. States-Men. Sir EDWARD POYNINGS, Knight, was in martial performances inferiour to none of his age, and a Native of this County, as from the Catalogue of the Sheriffs there∣in may be collected. We will insist only on his Irish Action, being employed by King▪ Henry the seventh to conjure down the last walking Spirit of the House of York, which haunted that King, I mean Perkin Warbeck. Having ferreted him out of Ireland, he seriously set him self to reclaim that barbarous Nation to civility, and in order thereunto passed an Act in Parliament, whereby all the Statutes made in England bfore that time, were enacted, established, and made of force in Ireland. He caused also another Law to be made, that no Act should be propounded in any Parliament in Ireland, till first it had been transmitted into England, approved there by the King, and returned thence under his broad Seal. Now though this Act seemeth prima facie, prejudicial to the liberty of the Irish Sub∣jects, yet was it made at the request of the Commons upon just & important cause, being so sensible of the oppression, and Laws imposed by private Lords, for their particular ends, that they rather referred themselves to the Kings Justice, than to the merciless mercy of so many Masters. Also to conform Ireland to England, he procured the passing of an Act; that the Irish Barons should appear in Parliament in their Robes, which put a face of Grandeur and State on their Convention. And indeed formalities are more than Formalities in mat∣ters of this nature, essentiall to beget a veneration in barbarous people, who carry much of their Brain in their Eyes. He thriftily improved the Kings Revenues, and obtained a Subsidy of twenty six shil∣lings eight pence, payable yearly for five years, out of every six score Acres manured. The worst was, the burden fell on their backs, whose Islands were most industrious, whereby the Soveraign became not more wealthy, but the Subjects more lazy, the mis∣chief being as apparent as the remedy impossible. Many more large Laws of his making found but narrow performance, viz. only within the Pale. Nor was Henry the seventh (though in title) in trth Lord of all Ireland, but by the favour of a Figure, and large Sy∣nechdeche, of a part for the whole. These things thus ordered, Sir Edward was recalled in to England, created a Baron, and dying in the beginning of King Henry the eight, left a numerous natural, but no legitimate issue. Sir ANTHONY St. LEGER, is rationally reputed a Kentish man (though he had
also a Devonshire Relation) as will appear to such who peruse the Sheriffs of this Coun∣ty. He was properly the first Vice-Roy of Ireland, seeing shadows cannot be before their substance, and in his Deputy-ship Henry the eight (in the 33. year of his reign) assumed the Title of King and Supream Head of the Church of Ireland. To him all the Irish Nobility made their solemn submission, falling down at his feet upon their knees, laying aside their Girdles, Skeines and Caps. This was the fourth so∣lemn submission of the Irish to the Kings of England, and most true it is, such seeming submissions have been the bane of their serious subjection. For out of the Pale our Kings had not power either to Punish or Protect, where those Irish Lords (notwithstanding their Complemental Loyalty) made their list the law to such whom they could over∣power. He caused also certain Ordinances of State to be made, not altogether agree∣able with the Rules of the Law of England, a satisfactory reason hereof, being given in theIn the Coun∣cel Book of Ireland, in the 33 of King Hen. 8. Preamble to them. Quia nondum sic sapiunt leges & Jura, ut secundum ea jam immediate, vivere & regi possint. Because the [Irish] as yet do not so savour the Laws [of England] as immediately to live after, and be ruled by them. Thus the greatest Statesmen must sometimes say, by your leave to such as are under them, not acting alway according to their own ability, but others capacity. He seized all the Abby Lands in Ireland for the Kings use, a flower of the Crown which alone had made a Posey, if continued thereunto. But alas the Revenues of Abby Lands are as  as their buildings, nothing more than the rubbish thereof remaining in the Kings Exchequer. He made a Law, that no Children should be admitted to Church li∣vings, which importeth the frequency of that abuse in former times. He perswaded O Neile, O Brian, &c. to go over into England to surrender their lands into the Kings hands, promising they should receive them again from him by Letters Patents, with the Addition of Earls, which was done accordingly. At his desire the King conferred on them Houses nigh Dublin, that residing there, they might suck in Civility with the Court air. These things thus setled he returned into England, and died (as I take it) in the raign of King Edward the sixth. Sir HENRY SIDNRY, was son to Sir William Sidney of Pensherst in this County, who by his own worth, was advanced into the favour of Queen Elizabeth (never a whit the lesse for marrying Mary Dudley, sister to Robert Earl of Leicester;) he was by her made Knight of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and for eleven years (off and on) Deputy of Ireland. Now, though generally the Irish are querelous of their Deputies (what Patient for the present will praise his Chirurgion, who soundly searcheth his sore?) yet Sir Henry left a good memory, and the monuments of a good Governor behind him. 1. HeSir John Davis in his discovery of Ireland. pag. 251. made Annaly a Territory in Loynsteresse by the Sept of Offerralles, one entire Shire by it self, called the County of Longford; he likewise divided the Province of onaght into six Counties. 2. In a Parliament held the eleventh of Elizabeth, he abolished the pretended and usurped Captain-ships, and all extortions incident thereunto. 3. He caused an Act to pass, whereby the Lord Deputy was authorized to accept the surrenders of the Irish Segniories, and to re-grant estates unto them, to hold of the Crown by English Tenures and Services. 4. Because the inferiour sort of the Irish were poor, and not Amesable by Law, he provided, that five of the best persons of every Sept, should bring in all the persons of their surname, to be justified by the Law. 5. A Law was made, that for the civil education of the youth, there should be one Free Schoole at least, in every Diocesse. 6. To acquaint the people of Mounster and Conaght with the English Government again (disused amongst them for two hundred years) he instituted two Presidency Courts in those two Provinces. 7. To augment the Revenues of the Crown, he resumed and vested therein (by
the power of the same Parliament) more than half the Province of Ulster, up∣on the attainder of Shane O Neale. 8. He raised Customs upon the principal Commodities of the Kingdom, and reformed the abuses of the Exchequer by many good instructions from Eng∣land. 9. He established the Composition of the Pale, in lieu of Purveyance and Sesse of Souldiers. It must not be forgotten, that he caused the Statutes of Ireland unto his own time, to be printed, and so (saith myJ. Wareus de script. Hibern. pag. 136. Author) ex umbra in solem eduxit, he brought them out of the shadow into the sun-shine. Whereas formerly they were only in Manuscript; a sad case, that men should be obliged to the observation of those Laws, scarce ever seen by one in an hundred subjected thereunto. Being to leave Ireland, Anno 1578. and now ready to go up into his Ship, he took hisCamb. Eliz Anno 1578. leave thereof with the words of the Psalmist,Psal. 114. 1. When Israel came out of Egypt, and Jacob from a strange people; rejoycing in heart, that, he came with a clear conscience from that dangerous employment. He died at Worcester, May the fifth, 1586. and his Corps being brought to Pensherst, were there solemnly interred amongst his Ancestors. I will close his Life with this Encomium which I find in a WorthyDoctor Pow∣el in his Hist. of . E∣pist. to the Reader. Author: His dispo∣sition was rather to seek after the Antiquities, and the Weal-Publick of those Countries which he governed, than to obtain lands and revenues within the same; for I know not one foot of Land that he had, either in Wales or Ireland. Sir PHILIP SIDNEY. Reader, I am resolved not to part him from his Father, such the Sympathy betwixt them, living and dying both within the compass of the same year. Otherwise, this Knight in relation to my Book, may be termed an Ubiquitary, and appear amongst Statesmen, Souldiers, Lawyers, Writers, yea Princes themselves, being (though not elected) in election to be King of Poland,Fragment. regal. in his Charact. which place he declined, preferring rather to be a Subject to Queen Elizabeth, than a Soveraign beyond the Seas. He was born at Pensherst in this County, son to Sir Henry Sidney (of whom before) and Sisters Son to Robert Earl of Leicester, bred in Christs Church in Oxford. Such his appetite to Learning, that he could never be fed fast enough therewith; and so quick and strong his digestion, that he soon turned it into wholsome nourishment, and thri∣ved healthfully thereon. His homebred abilities travel perfected with forraign accomplishments, and a sweet Nature set a glosse upon both. He was so essential to the English Court, that it seem∣ed maimed without his company, being a compleat Master of Matter and Language, as his Arcadia doth evidence. I confesse I have heard some of modern pretended Wits cavil thereat, meerly be∣cause they made it not themselves: such who say, that his Book, is the occasion that many pretious hours are otherwise spent no better, must acknowledge it also the cause, that many idle hours are otherwise spent no worse, than in reading thereof. At last, leaving the Court, he followed the Camp, being made Governor of Flushing, under his Uncle Earl of Leicester. But the Walls of that City (though high and strong) could not confine the activity of his mind, which must into the Field, and before Zut∣phen was unfortunately slain with a shot, in a small skirmish, which we may sadly tearm a great battel, considering our heavy losse therein. His Corps being brought over into England, was buried in the Quire of St. Pauls with general lamentation. Sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, Knight, was born in this County, wherein his Family long flourished at Chiselhurst, though ICamb. Brit. in Norfolk. read, that originally they fetch their name from Walsingham in Norfolk. He was bred in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, and gave the King of pain his Bible to the Library thereof. As a traveller many years beyond the  he learnt experience, as an Agent he practised it there, and after his return, a Secretary of State: he taught it to many Emisaries imployed under him. None alive did better ken the Secretary Craft, to get Counsels out of others, and keep them in himself. Mrvellous his agacity in examining suspected persons, either to make them confesse the truth, or confound themselves by denying it to their detection. Cun∣ning
his hands, who could unpick the Cabinets in the Popes Conclave; quick his ears, who could hear at London, what was whispered at Rome; And numerous the spies and eyes of this Argus dispersed in all places. The Jesuites being out-shot in their own Bow, complain'd, that he out-equivocated their equivocation, having a mental reservation deeper and farther than theirs. They tax him for making Heaven ow too much to Earth, oft-times borrowing a point of conscience, with full intent never to pay it again, whom others excused by Reasons of State, and dangers of the times. Indeed his Simulation (which all allow lawful) was as like to Dissimulation (condemned by all good men) as two things could be, which were not the same. He thought that Gold might, but Intelligence could not be bought too dear; The cause that so great a States man left so small an estate, and so publick a person was so pri∣vately buried in Saint Pauls, Anno Dom. 1590. His only Daughter Frances was suc∣cessively matched to three matchlesse men, Sir Phili Sidney, Robert Earl of Essex, and Richard Earl of Clanricard. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir JOHN FINEUX, was by all probability born at Swinkfield in this County (as I am informed from my good friend Mr. Thomas Fineux, a descendant from him) a place (In his Re∣mains, pag. 118. saith Mr. Cambden,) bestowed on his Ancestor by T. Criol, a great Lord in Kent, about the raign of King Edward the second. I learned from the same Gentle∣man, that he was eight and twenty years of age, before he betook him to the study of the Law, that he followed that profession twenty eight years before he was made a Judg, and that he continued a Judge for twenty eight years, whereby it appears, that he lived four∣score and four years. This last exactly agrees withIn his Glos∣sary Vebo Ju∣sticiarius. Sir Henry Spelman, making him con∣tinue Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, from the eleventh of King Henry the se∣venth, until the seventeenth of King Henry the eight. He was a great Benefactor unto Saint Augustines in Canterbury, whose Prior William Mallaham thus highly commendeth him in aWill. Somner in his Antiq. of Cant. Manuscript Instrument, Vir prudentissimus, genere insignis, Justitia praeclarus, pietate refertus, Humanitate splendidus & charitate foecundus, &c. Now though some will say, his Convent may well afford him good words, who gave them good deeds; yet I believe this Character of him, can in no part be disproved. He died about the year 1526. and lies buried in Christ Church in Canterbury; who had a fair habitation in this City, and another in Herne in this County, where his Motto still remains in each window, Misericordias Domini cantabo in Aeternum. Sir ROGER MANWOOD, born atLambert in his perambu∣lation of Kent, pag. 131. Sandwich in this County, applyed himselfe from his youth, to the study of the Common Law; wherein he attained to such emi∣nency, that by Queen Elizabeth he was preferred second Justice of the Common Pleas, in which place he gave such proof of his ability and integrity, that not long after in Sir Hen. Spel∣man in Gloss. Verbo Justici∣arius. Hillary Term, in the 21. of Queen Elizabeth, he was made chief Baron of the Exche∣quer, discharging that office to his  Commendation, full fourteen years, till the day of his death. He was much employed in matters of State, and was one of the Com∣missioners who sate on the Trial of the Queen of Scots. His Book on the Forest Laws is a piece highly prized by men of his Profession. In Vacation time his most constant ha∣bitation was at Saint Stephens in Canterbury, where, saith myCamb. Brit. in Kent. Author, the poor inha∣bitants were much beholding to his bounteous liberality. He erected and endowed a fair Free Schoole at Sandwich, the place of his Nativity, and died in the 35. of Queen Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1593. Sir HENRY FINCH, Knight, was born in this County of Right Worshipful Ex∣traction, (their ancient sirname being Herbert) a Family which had and hath an heredi∣tary happinesse of Eminency in the study of the Laws. He was Sergeant at Law to King James, and wrote a Book of the Law, in great esteem with men of his own profession▪ yet were not his studies confined thereunto, witnesse his Book of The calling of the Jews; and all ingenious persons which dissent from his judgement will allow him lear∣nedly
to have maintained an error, though he was brought into some trouble by King James, conceiving that on his principles he advanced and extended the Jewish Com∣monwealth, to the depressing and contracting of Christian Princes free Monarchies. He was father unto Sir John Finch, Lord Chief Justice, and for a time Lord Keeper, and Baron of Foreditch, who is still alive. Souldiers. Kent hath so carried away the credit, in all ages, for Man-hood, that the leading of the Front, or Van-guard (so called from Avant-guard, or Goe on guard, because first in marching) in former times hath simply and absolutely belonged unto them; I say abso∣lutely, for I find two other Shires contending for that place. The best is, it is but a Book-Combate, betwixt learned Writers, otherwise if real, such a division were enough to rout an Army, without other Enemy. But let us see how all may be peaceably composed. It is probable, that theMichael Cor∣nubiensis, see Cornwall, title Souldiers. Cornish-men led the Van in the days of King Arthur, who being a Native of Cornwall, had most cause to trust his own Country-men. But I be∣hold this as a temporary honour, which outlasted not his life who bestowed it. The men of Archenfeld in Hereford-shire, claimed by custom to lead theCamb. Brit. in Hereford∣shire. Van-guard, but surely this priviledge was Topical, and confined to the Welsh Wars, with which the aforesaid men, as Borderers were best acquainted. As for Kent, Cantia nostra primae cohortis honorem, & primos congressus hostium usque in Hodiernum diem in omnibus praeliis obtinet, saith myJoan. Sarisb. de nugis curial. 6. cap. 18. Author. Reader, It may rationally be concluded that the ensuing Topick had been as large in this as in any County in England, seeing it is bounded by the Sea on the East and South sides thereof, had not the Author departed this life before the finishing of the same. Seamen. WILLIAM ADAMS, was (as his ownPurchase his Pilgrims. Pen reporteth) born at Gillingham in this County, and take the brief account of his Life, being the first Englishman, who ef∣fectully discovered Japan. Twelve years he lived at home with his Parents. Twelve years he was Apprentice and Servant to Nich. Diggins, a brave Sea∣man, for some time he was Master of one of the Queens Ships. Ten years he served the English Company of Barbary Merchants. Fourteen years (as I collect it) he was employed by the Dutch in India. For he began his Voyage 1598. Pilot to their Fleet of five Sail, to conduct them to Japan; and in order to the settlement of Trade endured many miseries. He who reads them will concur with Cato, and repent that ever he went thither by Sea, whi∣ther one might go by Land. But Japan being an Island, and unaccessible, save by Sea, our Adams his discretion was not to be blamed, but industry to be commended in his adventures. He died at Firando in Japan about 1612. Civilians. NICHOLAS WOTTON, Son to Sir Robert, was born at Bockton-Malherb in this County, a place so named (as it seems) from some noxious and malignant herbs, grow∣ing therein. What the natural plants there may be, I know not, sure the moral ones, are excellent, which hath produced so many of the Honourable Family of the Wottons; Of whom this Nicholas, Doctor of Civil Laws bred in Oxford, may be termed a Center of Remarkables, so many met in his person. 1. He was Dean of the two Metropolitan Churches of Canterbury and York. 2. He was the first Dean of those Cathedrals. 3. He was Privy Councellor to four successive Soveraigns, King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth.
4. He was employed, Thirteen several times in Embassies to forraign Princes. Now because there are some of so diffident Natures, that they will believe no total summe, except they peruse the particulars, let them satisfie themselves with what fol∣loweth. Five times to Charls the fifth Emperor. Once to Philip his Son, King of Spain. Once to Francis the first, King of France. Once to Mary Queen of Hungary, Gover∣ness of the Netherlands. Twice to William Duke of Clive. Once to renew the peace between England, France, and Scotland, Anno Dom. 1540. Again to the same purpose at Cambra, 1549. Once sent Commissioner with others to Edinbourgh in Scotland, 1560. We must not forget how in the first of Queen Elizabeth, the Archbishoprick of Canterbury was Hollinsheads Chron. pag. 1403. proffered unto, and refused by him. He died January the twenty sixth, Anno Dom. 1566. being about seventy years of age, and was buried in Can∣terbury. GILES FLETCHER, (brother of Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London) was born in this County, as I am credibly From the mouh of Mr. Rmsey, Mini∣ster of Rough∣am in Norfolk, who mrried the Widow of Mr. Giles Flet∣cher Son to this Doctor. informed. He was bred first in Eaton, then in Kings Col∣ledge in Cambridge; where he became Doctor of Law. A most excellent Poet, (a quality hereditary to his two Sons, Giles and Phineas) Commissioner into Scotland, Germany, and the Low-Countries for Queen Elizabeth, and her Embassador into Russia, Secre∣tary to the City of London, and Master of the Court of Requests. His Russian Embassie to settle the English Merchandise was his master-piece, to Theodor Juanowich Duke of Muscovia. He came thither in a dangerous juncture of time, viz. in the end of the year 1588. First, some forraigners (I will not say they were the Hollanders) envying th free Trade of the English, had done them bad offices. Se∣condly, a false report was generally believed that the Spanish Armado had worsted the English Fleet; and the Duke of Muscovy (who measured his favour to the English, by the possibility he apprehended of their returning it) grew very sparing of his smiles, not to say free of his frowns on our Merchants residing there. However our Doctor demeaned himself in his Embassie with such cautiousness, that he not only escaped the Dukes fury, but also procured many priviledges for our En∣glish Merchants, exemplified in Mr. Hackluit. Returning home, and being safely ar∣rived* In his Vo∣lumne of En∣gl sh Naviga∣tion, pag. 473. at London, he sent for his intimate friend Mr. Wayland, Prebendary of S. Pauls, and Senior Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge (Tutor to my Father, from whose mouth I received this report) with whom he heartily exprest his thankfulnesse to God for his safe return from so-great a danger; for the Poets cannot fansie Ulrsses more glad to be come out of the Den of Polyphemus, than he was to be rid out of the power of such a barbarous Prince, who counting himself by a proud and voluntary mistake, Emperour of all Nations, cared not for the Law of all Nations; and who was so habited in blood, that had he cut off this Embassadors head, he and his friends might have sought their own amends; but the question is, where he would have found it? He afterwards set forth a Book, called, The Russian Commonwealth, expressing the Government or Tyranny rather thereof; wherein, saith my Camb. in his Eliz. Anno 1583. when he was Agent in Muscovy, as afterward Embassador. Author, are many things most observable. But Queen Elizabeth indulging the reputation of the Duke of Mus∣covy as a confederate Prince, permitted not the publick printing of that, which such who have private Copies, know to set the valuation thereon. I cannot attain the certain date of his death. Physicians. ROBERT FLOID, who by himself is latined Robertus de Fluctibus, was born in this County, and that of a Knightly Family, as I am informed, bred (as I take it) in Ox∣ford, and beyond the Seas. A deep Philosopher, and great Physician, who at last fixed his habitation in Fan-Church-Street, London. He was of the Order of the Rosa-Crucians, and I must confesse my self ignorant of the first Founder and Sanctions thereof, per∣chance none know it, but those that are of it. Sure I am, that a Rose is the sweetest of Flowers, and a Cross accounted the sacredest of forms or figures, so that much of emi∣nency must be imported in their composition.
His Books written in Latine are great, many and mystical. The last some impute to his Charity, clouding his high matter with dark language, left otherwise the lustre thereof should dazle the understanding of the Reader. The same phrases he used to his Patients, and seeing conceit is very contributive to the well working of Physick, their fancy or faith-natural was much advanced by his elevated expressions. His works are for the English to sleight or admire, for French and Forraigners to un∣derstand and use: not that I account them more judicious than our own Countrymen, but more inquiring into such difficulties. The truth is, here at home his Books are be∣held not so good as Chrystal, which (some say) are prized as precious pearls beyond the Seas. But I conclude all with the Character, which my worthy (though concea∣led) Friend thus wrote upon him. Lucubrationibus quas solebat edere profusissimas sem∣per visus est plus sumere laboris, quam Populares nostri volebant fructum, quia hunc fere negligebant, prae tedio legendi, & prejudicio quodam oleam perdendi operamque, ob CA∣BALAM, quam scripta ejus dicebantur olere magis quam PERIPATUM, & ob fer∣ventius hominis ingenium, in quo plerique requirebant Judicium. He died on the eighth of September, Anno Dom. 1637. WILLIAM HARVEY, Son of Thomas Harvey, was born at Folkston in this County. His Father had a Week of Sons; whereof this William bred to learning, was the eldest; his other brethren being bound Apprentices in London, and all at last ended in effect in Merchants. They got great Estates, and made their Father the Treasurer thereof, who being as skilful to purchase Land, as they to gain Money▪ kept, employed, and improved their gainings to their great advantage; so that he sur∣vived to see the meanést of them, of far greater estate than himself. Our William was bred in Caius Colledge in Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of Physick. Five years also he studied at Padua, making a good Composition of For∣raign and Domestick learning: So that afterwards he was (for many years) Physician to King Charles the First. And not only Doctor Medecinae, but Doctor Medicorum. For this was he that first found out the Circulation of the Blood; an opinion which entred into the World with great disadvantages. For first, none will be acquainted with strangers at the first sight, as persons generally suspected; as if to be unknown, were part of being guilty. Secondly, the Grandees of this Profession were of the oppo∣site judgement, heavy enough without any Argument to overlay (and so to stifle) any Infant opinion by their Authority. But, Truth, though it may be questioned for a Vagrant, carrieth a Passport along with it for its own vindication. Such have since shaken friendly hands with Doctor Har∣vey, which at first tilted Pens against him. And amongst the rest Riolanus that learned Physician, if not Ambabus ulnis, with one Arm at the least doth embrace his opinion, and partly consent thereunto. This Doctor, though living a Batchelor, may be said to have left three hopeful Sons to posterity; his Books, 1. De circulatione sanguinis, which I may call his Son and Heir; the Doctor living to see it at full age, and generally received. 2. De generatione, as yet in its minority; but, I assure you growing up apace into publick credit. 3. De Ovo, as yet in the nonage thereof, but infants may be men in due time. It must not be forgotten, that this Doctor had made a good progresse, to lay down a Practice of Physick, conformable to his Thesis, of the Circulation of Blood; but was plundered of his Papers in our Civil War: Unhappy dissentions, which not onely murdered many then alive; but may be said by this, (call it mischief or mischante) to have destroyed more not yet born, whose Diseases might have been either prevented or removed, if his worthy pains had come forth into the Publick: And I charitably presume, that grateful posterity will acknowledge the improvements of this opinion, as Superstructures on his Foundation; and thankfully pay the fruit to his memory, who watered, planted, (not to say made) the root of this discovery. He hath since been a second Linaore and great Benefactor to the Colledge of Physi∣cians in London, where his Statue stands with this Inscription.
GULIELMO HARVEO VIRO Monumentis suis immortali Hoc insuper Coll. Med. London. posuit. Qui enim Sanguin. motum (Ut & Animal. ortum) dedit Meruit esse Stator perpetuus. He died in the eightieth year of his Age, June 3. Anno Dom. 1657. Writers. JOHN of KENT, so called, because born in this J. Pits in Ang. Scrip. 1248. County; after he had studied at home with good proficiency, went over into France, where he became Canon in the Church of Saint Maries in Angiers. But afterwards being weary of worldly wealth, he quitted that place, and turned a Franciscan Fryer, and by Pope Innocent the fourth, he was sent a joynt▪ Legate into England. He flourished in the year of our Lord, 1248. HAIMO of FEVERSHAM, both had his first breath at, and fetched his name from Feversham in this County. When a man, he left the land, and repairing to Paris, ap∣plied his studies so effectually, that Leland saith he was inter Aristotelicos, Aristotelis∣simus. He became a Franciscan in the Church of Saint Dennis it▪ self, and returning into England, was elected Provincial of his Order. Afterwards he was called to reside in Rome for his advice, where quitting his Provincialship to his Successor, he was chosen General of the Franciscans. Surely he had much real, or reputed merit, being so highly prized by the Italians, who generally do as much undervalue us English, as they over∣admire themselves. Speculum honestatis, the Glasse of honesty, aith Pitz. in Ang. script Anno 1260. one, was the title given unto him, though dark and false this Glasse, if Bale may be believed, who tax∣eth him for being an Inquisitor after, and Bale de scrip. Cent. 4 Num. 27. Persecutor of good people, especially when im∣ployed by the Pope into Grecia. Lying on his Death-bed, at Anagnia in Italy, the Pope in person came to visit him, which was no small honour unto him, but all would not prolong his life, which he ended Anno 1260. Having first, at the command of Pope Alexander the fourth, corrected and amended the Roman Breviary. SIMON STOCK was born in this Bale de srip. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 7. & . in Anno 1265. County, and when but twelve years of Age, went into the Woods (whereof this Shire then afforded plenty) and became a Hermite. This Christian Diogenes had for his Tub, the Stock of a hollow Tree, whence he fetched his name, and (abating his Sex) was like the Nymphs called Hama-druides, which were the properties of Oak Trees. Here he had (saith Leland) Water for his Nectar, and wild Fruits for his Ambrosia. One may admire how this man here met with Learning, ex∣cept by Inspiration, and except Books (as at the Original) were written on Barks of Trees, where with he conversed: yet the University of Oxford would force a Batchelor of Divinity-ship upon him: and many are the superstitious writings he lèft to po∣sterity. Reader, behold here how the Roaring Lyon hath translated himself into a Mimical Ape, endeavouring a mock Parallel betwixt this Simon and Simeon in the Go∣spell.
Old Simeon had a Luk. 2. 26. Revelation that he should not die till he had seen our Saviour come in the Flesh. This Simon aged 80. years, had a Bale Ib. Reve∣lation, that before his death, he should behold a holy Order of Carmelites come out of Syria, which fell out accordingly. At their arrival in England, our Simon quitted his Oak, and advanced forward to meet them, as of whom, though he had no sight, he had a vision before, which is pro∣bably as true, as that he was fed seven years with Manna in Mount Carmel. He was cho∣sen the General Governour of their Order all over Europe: and died in the hundred year of his age, Anno Dom. 1265. and was buried at Burdeaux in France. THOMAS HASHLWOOD. I find the name very ancient in a worshipful Family in AMP. Northampton-shire, and professe not only my inclination but propensity, to gain him for the credit of my Native Country. But that needs not to be (and I ought not to make it) rich with the wrong of others. Indeed I find a Haselwood (Transposition makes no Mu∣tation) in Suffolk, and another in Northumberland: but their vast distance from the Mo∣nastery of Leeds in this County, wherein our Haselwood was bred an Augustinian Fryer, (with some other insinuations, too long to report) prevail with me to fix him in this place. He was an excellent Scholar himself, and a fortunate School-master to teach o∣thers, and became a faithful and painful Historian. Bale De script. Brit. Cent. 5 Num. 20. (out of William Botiner, an industrious Collector of Antiquities) assigneth him to flourish under King Edward the second, 1321. but Funeral Mo∣nvments, pag. 206. Mr. Weaver light on a Manuscript of his making in Sir Robert Cot∣tons Library, wherein he particularly speaks of the Atchievements of Edward the black Prince, which I here thought fit to exemplifie. Edwardus filius Edw. 3. primogenitus, Princeps Walliae fortunatissimus, & miles in bello audacissimus, inter validissima bella gesta militaria, magnifice ab eodem peracta, Johannem Regem Franciae apud Poyteizes debellavit, & pluribus, tam nobilibus quam aliis, de dicto regno captis, & interfectis, eundem Regem captivavit, & ipsum po∣tenter in Angliam ductum Patri suo praesentavit. Henricum etiam intrusorem Hispa∣niae, potentissime in bello devicit, & Petrum Hispaniae Regem, dudum à regno suo ex∣pulsum, potenti virtute in regnum-suum restituit. Unde propter ingentem sibi probi∣tatem, & actus ipsius triumphales, memoratum Principem, inter regales Regum me∣morias, dignum duximus commendandum. Thus have I (not kill'd two Birds with one bolt, but) revived two mens memories with one Record, presenting the Reader (according to my In our De∣scription of Oxsordshire, in in this Princes life. promise) with the Character of this Prin, and Style of this Writer, speaking him (in my conjecture) to have lived a∣bout the raign of King Richard the second. Since the Reformation. Sir THOMAS WIAT, Knight, commonly called the Elder, to distingish him from Sir Thomas Wiat (raiser of the Rebellion (so all call it) for it did not succeed) in the raign of Queen Mary, was born at Allyngton Castle in this County, which afterwards he repaired with most beautiful buildings. He was servant to King Henry the eight, and fell (as I have heard) into his disfavour, about the business of Queen Anna Bollen, till by his innocence, industry, and discretion, he extricated himself. He was one of admirable ingenuity, and truly answered his Anagram, Wiat, A Wit. In Brit. in Kent. Cambden saith he was, Eques auratus splendide doctus. It is evidence enough of his Protestant Inclination, because he translated Davids Psalms into English meter; and though he be lost both to Bale and Pits in the Cata∣logue of Writers, yet he is plentifully found by In suis Noe-uiis. Leland, giving him this large Com∣mendation. Bella suum merito jactet Florenti Dantem Regia Petrarchae carmina Roma probat, His non inferior Patrio Sermone Viattus Eloquii secum qui decus omne tulit. Let Florence fair her Dantes justly boast, And Royal Rome her Petrarchs numbred feet, In English Wiat both of them doth coast: In whom all graceful eloquence doth meet.
This Knight being sent Embassador by King Henry the eight, to Charles the fifth Em∣perour, then residing in Spain; before he took shipping, died of the Pestilence in the Wevers Fun. Mon. pag. 853. West Country, Anno 1541. LEONARD DIGGS, Esquire, was born in this County, one of excellent Lear∣ning, and deep judgement. His mind most inclined him to Mathematicks, and he was the best Architect in that age for all manner of buildings, for conveniency, pleasure, state, strength, being excellent at fortifications. Lest his learning should die with him, for the publick profit he Printed his Tectonicon, Prognostick general, Stratiotick, about the ordering of an Army, and other works. He flourished Anno Dom. 1556. and died, I believe, about the beginning of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Nothing else have I to observe of his name, save that hereditay learning may seem to run in the veins of his family, witnesse, Sir Dudley Diggs of Chilham Castle in this County, made Master of the Rolls, 1636. whose abilities will not be forgotten whilest our age hath any remembrance. This Knight had a younger son, Fellow of All Souls in Oxford, who in the beginning of our Civil Wars, wrote so subtile and solid a Trea∣tise, of the difference betwixt King and Parliament, that such Royalists, who have since handled that Controversie, have written plura non plus; yea, aliter rather than alia of that subject. THOMAS CHARNOCK, was born in the Isle of Thanet in this County, as by his own In his Bre∣viary, pag. 298 words doth appear. He discovereth in himself a modest Pride; modest stiling himself (and truly enough) the uNLETTERED SCHOLAR; Pride, thus immode∣rately boasting of his Book discovering the mysteries of the Philosophers Stone, For satisfying the minds of the Students in this Art, Then thou art worthy as many Books as will lie in a Cart. However herein he is to be commended, that he ingeniously confesseth the Persons, (viz. William Byrd Prior of Bath, and Sir James a Priest of Sarisbury) who imparted their skill unto him. This Charnock in the pursuance of the said Stone (which so many do touch; few catch, and none keep) met with two very sad disasters: One on New-years day (the omen worse than the accident) Anno 1555. when his work unhappily fell on fire. The other three years after, when a Gentleman, long owing him a grudge, paid him to purpose, and pressed him a Souldier for the relieving of Calice. Whence we observe two things, first, that this Charnock was no man of estate, seeing seldom, if ever a Subsidy man, is pressed for a Souldier. Secondly, that though he practised Theatrum Chymicum, Brit. pag, 476. Surgery, yet he was not free of that Society, who by the Statute 32 Hen. 8. are exempted from bearing armour. But the spight of the spight was, that this was done within In his Bre∣viary of Phi∣losophy, cap. 4. a Month (according to his own computation, which none con confute) of the time wherein certainly he had been made master of so great a treasure. Such miscarriages, frequent in this kind, the friends of this Art, impute to the envy of evil spirits maligning mankind so much happinesse, the foes thereof conceive that Chymists pretend (yea, sometimes cause) such casualties to save their credits thereby. He was fifty years old Anno 1574. and the time of his death is unknown. FRANCIS THINNE was born in this Coun∣ty, and from his in∣fancy had an inge∣nuous inclination to the Study of Anti∣quity, and especial∣ly of Pedignees. Herein hee made such proficiency, that he was prefer ROBERT GLO∣VER, Son to Tho∣mas Glover, & Mil∣dred his Wife, was born at Out of his Epitaph on his Monument. Ashford in this County. He addicted himself to the Study of He∣raldry, and in the reward of his pains was first made a Pursuivant Porcul THO. MILLES Sisters Son to Ro∣bert Glover afore∣said, was born at Ashford in this Coun∣ty, and following his Uncles directi∣on, applyed himself to be eminent in the Genealogies of our English Nobi∣lity. JOHN PHIL∣POT, was born at Faulkston in this County, and from his child-hood had a genius enclining him to the love of Antiquity. He first was made a Pursui∣vant Extraordinary, by the Title of Blanch-Lion, then
red towards the end of the raign of Q. Elizabeth, to be an Herald, by the Ti∣tle of Lancaster. A Gentleman painful, and well deserving, not only of his own Office, but all the English Nation. Whosoever shall peruse the Volumi∣nous Works of Ra∣phael Hollinshed, will find how much he was assisted therein by the help of Mr. Thinne, seeing the Shoulders of Atlas himselfe may bee weary, if sometime not beholding to Hercules to relieve him. He died 15. lis, and then Somer∣set Herald. When the Earle of Derby was sent into France to car∣ry the Garter to K. Henry the third, Weavers Fun. Mon. Mr. Glover atten∣ded the Embassage, and was, as he de∣served, well rewar∣ded for his pains. He by himselfe in Latine began a Book, called the Catalogue of Honour of our English Nobi∣lity, with their Arms and Matches. Be∣ing the first Work in that kind; He therein traced un∣trodden paths, and therefore no won∣der if such Ralph Brook, York; Augu∣stine Vincent, Windsor He∣rald. who since succeeded him in that subject, have found a nearer way, and exceed him in Acurateness there∣in. Being old rather in experience than years, he died not 46. years old, Anno 1583. and lieth bu∣ried under a come∣ly Monument in Saint Giles without Creplegate, London, on the South Wall of the Quire. Let Brit. in his description of . Mr. Cambdens commendation pass for his Epitaph, Artis Heraldicae stu∣diosissimus, peritis∣simusque, qui in foe∣cialium Collegio So∣merseti titulum ges∣sit, Robertus Glove∣rus. If the expression were as properly predicated of a Ne∣phew, as of the next Brother, one might say, he raised up seed unto his Uncle Glo∣ver, in setting forth his Catalogue of Ho∣nour, in English, as more useful there∣in, because chiefly of our Nationall concernment. He was employ∣ed on a message of Importance from Q. Elizabeth un∣to Henry the fourth King of France, be ing then in Nor∣mandy, which trust he discharged with great fidelity, and incredible sceleri∣ty, being returned home with a satis∣factory answer to her Highness be∣fore she could be∣lieve him arrived there. In memory of which service, he had given him for the Crest of his Arms, a Chappeau with Wings, to de∣note the Mercuri∣ousnesse of this Mes∣senger. He died An∣no 16. in Ordinary, by name of Rough∣Dragon, and after∣wards Somerset He∣rald. He made very pertinent Additions to the second Edi∣tion of Mr. Camb∣dens Remains, and deserved highly wel of the City of Lon∣don, proving in a learned and ingeni∣ous Book, that Gentry doth not a∣bate with Appren∣tiship, but only slee∣peth during the time of their Inden∣tures, and awaketh again when they are expired. Nor did he contribute a little to the setting forth of his Uncles Cata∣logue of Honour. He died Anno 1645. and was buried in Bennet Pauls-wharf. THOMAS PLAYFERD was born in this County, as some of his nearest Relations have informed me. He was bred Fellow of Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, and chosen 1597. to succeed Peter Barrow in the place of Margaret Professor. His fluency in
the Latine tongue seemed a wonder to many, though since such who have seen the Sun admire no more at the Moon, Doctor Collins not succeeding him so much in age, as exceeding him in eloquence. The counsel of the Apostle is good, . His Foe-Friends commen∣ding of him, and his own conceiting of himself made too deep an impression on his In∣tellectuals. It added to his Distemper, that when his reelection to his place (after his last two years end) was put into the Regent-House, a great Doctor said DETUR DIGNIORI. However he held his Professor-ship until the day of his death, 1609. and lieth buried with an Hyperbolical Epitaph in S. Botolphs in Cambridge. JOHN BOIS, D. D. was descended of a right ancient and numerous Family in this County, deriving themselves from J. de Bosco, entring England with William the Con∣queror, and since dispersed into Villare Canti∣anum, pag. 25. eight Branches extant at this day in their several seats. Our John was bred Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, and afterwards prefer∣red Dean of Canterbury, famous to posterity for his Postils in defence of our Liturgy. So pious his life, that his adversaries were offended that they could not be offended therewith. A great Prelate in the Church did bear him no great good will for mutual animosities betwixt them, whilest Gremials in the University; the reason perchance, that he got no higher preferment, and died (as I conjecture) about the year 1625. Benefactors to the Publick. Sir JOHN PHILPOT was born in this County, where his Family hath long resided at Upton-Court, in the Parish of Sibbertswood. He was bred a Citizen and Grocer in Lon∣don, whereof he became Mayor, 1378. In the second of King Richard the second our English Seas wanted scouring, over∣run with the rust of Piracies, but chiefly with a Canker fretting into them, one John Mercer a Scot, with his fifteen Spanish Ships. To represse whose insolence, our Phil∣pot on his own cost set forth a Fleet, a project more proportionable to the Treasury of a Prince, than the purse of a private subject. His successe was as happy as his underta∣king honourable, and Mercer brought his Wares to a bad Market, being taken Stows Chro. pag. 281. with all his Ships and rich plunder therein. Two years after he conveyed an English Army into Britaine, in ships of his own hiring, and with his own money released more than 1000. Arms there, which the Soul∣diers formerly engaged for their victuals. But this industry of Philpot interpretatively taxed the lazinesse of others, the Nobility accusing him (Drones account all Bees prag∣matical) to the King, for acting without a Commission. Yea, in that ungrateful age, under a Child-King, Pro tantorum sumptuum praemio, veniam vix obtinuit. However, he, who whilest living, was the scourge of the Scots, the fright of the French, the delight of the Commons, the darling of the Merchants, and the hatred of some envi∣ous Lords, was at his death lamented, and afterwards beloved of all, when his memo∣ry was restored to its due esteem. WILLIAM SEVENOCK was born at Sevenock in this County. In allusion where∣unto he gave Stows Survey of London. Seven Acorns for his Arms, which if they grow as fast in the field of He∣raldry, as in the Common field, may be presumed to be Oaks at this day. For it is more than 200. years since this William (bred a Grocer at London) became Anno 1419. Lord Mayor thereof. He founded at Sevenock a fair Free Schoole for poor peoples Children, and an Alms House for Idem pag. 88. twenty men and women, which at this day is well maintained. Since the Reformation. Sir ANDREW JUD, Son of John Jud was born at Tunbridge in this County, bred a Skinner in London, whereof he became Lord Mayor Anno 1551. He built Alms Hou∣ses nigh Saint Ellens in London, and a stately Free Schoole at Tunbridge in , sub∣mitting it to the care of the Company of Skinners. This fair Schoole hath been twice founded in effect, seeing the defence and maintenance whereof hath cost the Compa∣ny of Skinners in suits of Law, and otherwise, Dr. willet in his Catalogue of good wors since the Re∣formation. four thousand pounds, So careful have
they been (though to their own great charge) to see the Will of the Dead per∣formed. WILLIAM LAMB, Esquire, sometime a Gentleman of the Chappel to King Hen∣ry the eighth, and in great favour with him, was born at  Survey of London, pag. 93. Sutton-Valens in this Coun∣ty, where he erected an Alms-House, and a well endowed Schoole. He was a person wholly composed of goodnesse and bounty, and was as general and discreet a Benefa∣ctor as any that age produced. Anno 1557. he began, and within five months finished the fair Conduit at Holborn-Bridge, and carried the water in pipes of Lead more than two thousand yards at his own cost, amounting to Fifteen hundred pound. The to∣tal summe of his several gifts moderately estimated exceeded six thousand pounds. He lies buried with his good works in Saint Faiths Church under Saint Pauls; where this Inscription, set up (it seems by himself in his life time) is fixed on a Brasse plate to a Pillar. O Lamb of God which sin didst take away And (as a Lamb) wast offered up for sin. Where I (poor Lamb) went from thy flock astray, Yet thou (good Lord) vouchsafe thy Lamb to win Home to thy Fold, and hold thy Lamb therein, That at the day, when Goats and Lambs shall sever, Of thy choice Lambs, Lamb may be one for ever. The exact time of his death, I cannot meet with, but by proportion I conjecture it to be about 1580. FRANCES SIDNEY, Daughter of Sir William, Sister to Sir Henry (Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of Wales) Aunt to the renowned Sir Philip Sidney, was born (and probably at Pensherst the ancient seat of the Sidneys) in this County. A Lady en∣dowed with many Virtues, signally charitable, expending much in large Benefactions to the Publick. She bestowed on the Abby Church of Westminster a salary of twenty pounds per annum for a Divinity Lecture; and founded Sidney Sussex Colledge in Cam∣bridge, of which largely in my Church-History. She was Relict of Thomas Ratcliff, the third Earl of Sussex. This worthy Lady died Childless (unlesse such Learned Per∣sons who received their Breeding in her Foundation may be termed her Issue) on the ninth day of May, Anno 1588. as appeareth by herOn her Mo∣nument in Westminster Abb. Epitaph. Sir FRANCIS NETHERSOLE, Knight, born at Nethersole in this County, was bred Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, and afterwards became Orator of the University. Hence he was preferred to be Embassador to the Princes of the Union, and Secretary to the Lady Elizabeth, Queen of ; it is hard to say whether he was more remarkable for his doings or sufferings in her behalf. He married Lucy eldest Daughter of Sir Henry Goodyear of Polesworth in Warwick-, by whose encourage∣ment (being free of himself to any good design) he hath founded and endowed a very fair School at Polesworth aforesaid, and is still living. Memorable Persons. SIMON, Son of William Lynch, Gent. was born at Groves in the Parish of Staple in this County, Decemb. 9. 1562. But see more of his Character under this Title in Essex, where his Life and death were better known. MARY WATERS was born at Lenham in this County, and how abundantly intitu∣led to Memorability, the ensuing Epitaph in Markeshall Church in Essex will sufficient∣ly discover. Here lieth the Body of Mary Waters, the Daughter and Co-heir of Robert Waters of Lenham in Kent, Esquire, wife of Robert Honywood of Charing in Kent, Esquire, her only Husband, who had at her decease lawfully descended from her, Three hundred sixty seven Children; sixteen of her own body, one hundred and four∣teen Grand-children, two hundred twenty eight in the third Generation, and nine in the fourth. She lived a most pious life, and in a Christian manner died here at
Markeshall, in the ninety third year of her age, and in the forty fourth year of her Widowhood, the eleventh of May, 1620. Thus she had a Child for every day in the (though Leap) year, and one over. Here we may observe, that (generally) the highest in Honour, do not spread the broadest in posterity. For time was, when all the Earls in England (and those then seventeen in number) had not, put together, so many Sons and Daughters, as one of them had, viz. Cambden in his Eliz. Anno 89. Edward Somerset, Earle of Worcester. And yet of both Sexes he never had but * thirteen. But to return to Mistresse Waters, she since hath been much out-stript inMills in his Catalogue of Honour, pag. 10 6. point of See Memo∣able Persons n Buckingham∣shire. fruitfulnesse, by one still surviving; and therefore this worthy Matrone (in my mind) is more memorable on another account, viz. for patient weathering out the tempest of a troubled conscience, whereon a remarkable story dependeth: Being much afflicted in mind, many Ministers repaired to her, and amongst the rest, Reverend Mr. John Fox, than whom no more happy an instrument to set the joynts of a broken spirit. All his counsels proved ineffectual, insomuch that in the agony of her soul, ha∣ving a Venice-glass in her hand, she brake forth into this expression, I am as surely damn'd as this glasse is broken, which she immediately threw with violence to the ground. Here happened a wonder, the glasse rebounded again, and was taken up whole and entire. I confesse it is possible (though difficult) so casually to throw as brittle a sub∣stance, that lighting on the edges it may be preserved; but happening. immediately in that juncture of time, it seemed little lesse than miraculous. However the Gentlewoman took no comfort thereat (as some have reported, and more have believed) but continued a great time after (short is long to people in pain) in her former disconsolate condition without any amendment. Until at last, God, the great Clock-keeper of Time, who findeth out the fittest minutes for his own mercies, suddenly shot comfort like lightning into her soul; which once entred, ever remained therein; (God doth no palliate cures, what he heals it holds) so that she led the re∣mainder of her life in spiritual gladnesse. This she her self told to the Reverend fa∣ther Thomas Morton Bishop of Duresme, from whose mouth I have received this re∣lation. In the days of Queen Mary she used to visit the Prisons, and to comfort and relieve the Confessors therein. She was present at the burning of Mr. Bradford in Smithfield, and resolved to see the end of his suffering, though so great the presse of people, that her shooes were trodden off, and she forced thereby to go barefoot from Smithfield to Saint Martins, before she could furnish her self with a new pair for her money. Her dis∣solution happened as is aforesaid, Anno 1620. NICHOLAS WOOD was born at Halingborne in this County, being a Landed man, and a true Labourer. He was afflicted with a Disease called Boulimia, or Caninus Apetitus; insomuch that he would devour at one meal, what was provided for Sands in his Nores on the eighth Book of Ovids Meta∣morph. pag. 162. twen∣ty men, eat a whole Hog at a sitting, and at another time thirty dozen of Pigeons; whilest others make mirth at his malady. Let us raise our gratitude to the goodness of God, especially when he giveth us appetite enough for our meat, and yet meat too much for our appetite; whereas this painful man spent all his estate to provide Provant for his belly, and died very poor about the year 1630. We will conclude this Topick of Memorable Persons with a blanck mention of him, whose name hitherto I cannot exactly attain, being an Ingenuous Hartib. his Legacy, pag. 6. Yeoman in this County, who hath two Ploughs fastened together so finely, that he plougheth two furrows at once, one under another, and so stirreth up the Land twelve or fourteen Inches deep, which in so deep ground is very good. Scholars know that Hen-dia-duo is a very thrifty Figure in Rhetorick, and how advantagious the improvement of this device of a Twinne-Plough may be to posterity, I leave to the skilful in Husbandry to consider.
Lord Mayors. Name. Father. Place. Company. Time 1. Will. Sevenock. William Rumshed. Sevenock. Grocer. 1418 2. Thomas Hill. William Hill. Hillstone. Grocer. 1484 3. Rich. Chawry. William Chawry. Westram. Salter. 1494 4. Andrew Jud. John Jud. Tonbridge. Skinner. 1550 4. John Rivers. Richard Rivers. Pensherst. Grocer. 1573 6. Edw. Osburne. Richard Osburne. Ashford. Clothworker. 1583 7. Tho. Polloccil. William Polloccil. Footseary. Draper. 1584 8. William Rowe. Thomas Row. Pensherst. Iron Monger. 1592 9. Cuthbert Aket. Thomas Aket. Dertford. Draper. 1626 The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. Henry Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. Commissioners to take the Oaths. Robert de Poynyngs, Knight. Richard Widvile. Kights for the Shire. John Perye. Kights for the Shire. Will. Prioris Ecclesiae Christi Canter. Prioris de Rouchester Abbatis Sancte Rad∣gundis. Abbatis de Langedon Abbatis de Boxle. Abbatis de Lesnes. Prioris Sancti Geor∣gii Cartur. Prioris de Ledes. Prioris de Tunbregge Prioris de Bilsington. Prioris de Horton. Rogeri Heron magi∣stri ▪ de Mayd∣ston. Thome Ward Recto∣ris Ecclesiae de Wro∣ham. Thome Mome Recto ris Ecclesiae de Dele Henrici Benwortham Rectoris Ecclesiae de Bourne. Ashton Pre∣positi Coll▪ de Win∣gham. Will. Palmer Recto∣ris Eccl. de Smerden. Rich. Corden. Ar∣chidiaconi Roffensis Johannis Gladwyn magistri Collegii de Cobham. Will. Lyef Rectoris Ecclesie de Heriet∣tesham. Johan. Corwel ma∣gistri de Stode. Rob. Rectoris Eccle∣siae de Redelegh. Fratris Andree Birch∣ford Mil. de Swyn∣feld magistri Hosp. de Osprenge. Simonis Chepynden Rectoris Ecclesiae de Wornesel. Johannis Petthe mil. Rogeri Chamberleyn, mil. Galfridi Louther. Johannis Darsel. Willihelmi . Willielmi Cheyney. Willielmi Clifford. Edwardi Gilfford. Rogeri . Thome Browne. Reignaldi Peckham. Johannis Seyntleger. Johannis Bamburgh. Lodewici Clifford. Willielmi Garnel. Johannis Cheyney. Thome Walsingham. Willielmi VVarner. Johannis Dennis de VVelle. Valentini Baret. Willielmi Manston. Berton. Johannis Isaac. Thome Ballard. Willielmi Sepuans. Willielmi Pikhill. Thome Sepuans. Johannis Greneford. Edmundi Hardes. Johannis Digges. Edwardi Lymsey. Johannis Shyngleton Richardi Bamme. Richardi Chiche. Roberti Shandeford. Willielmi Frogenale. Richardi Combe. Thome Betenham. Johannis Kelsham. Edmundi Pashele. Henrici Horne de Apledre. Thome Achier. Johannis  de Hoo. Roberti Watten. Stephani Cossington. Willielmi Channz. Rogeri Honyngton. Johannis Horne de Lenham. Walteri Colepepar. Nicholai Colepepar. Willielmi Burys. Willelmi Gullby. Johannis Norton. Johannis Feerby de Paulstrey. Iohannis Erhithe. Stephani Norton. Willielmi Kereby. Rogeri Appulton. Roberti Mollyngton. Willielmi Isle de Son∣. Willielmi Hodestle. Thome Hardes. Iohannis Oxenden. Thome Brokhill de Saltwode. Nichola Brokhill de Saltwode. Adomari Digge. Willielmi Bertyn. Edwardi Seint Iohn. Richardi Malman. Roberti Cappes.
Iohannis Vinche. Richardi Horn de Westwell. Will. Lane de Cant∣naria. Will. Chilton de ea∣dem. Will. Benet de eadem Will. Bellington de eadem. Ioh. Rose de eadem. VVill. Osborn de ea∣dem. Roberti Stopingdon de eadem. Gilberti Germayn. Thome Normayne de Cant. Iohannes Foochunt de eadem. VVill. Bryan de ea∣dem. Richardi Curteler de eadem. Richardi Prat de ea∣dem. Edmundi VVykes de eadem. VVill. Baker de ea∣dem. Rogeri Manston. Iohannis Hetesle. Thome Salisbury. Iohannis Carleton. Iohannis Gotysle. Iohannis Dandylion. Will. Isaak. Thome Apuldrefeld. Will. Steveday. Iohannis Moyne. Iohannis Gerwinton. Iohannis Feneaux. Will. Sutton de North∣burne. Stephani Monyn. Iohannis Broke de Snaxton. Iohannis Petit de Charham. VVill. Valence. Tho. Hollys de God∣marsham. Iohannis Rolling. Nicholai Hame. Roberti Yerde. Richardi Bruyn. VVill. Brokman. Guidonis Elys. Thome Simond de Hertley. Iohannis May. Thome Horden. Thome Burgeys. Iohannis Golde. Iohannes Hoigges. Thome Springet. Rogeri Twisden. Iohannis Hore. Iohannis Derby. Will. Collings de Thameto. Walteri Gore. Thome Champion. Iohan. Chamberlain. Hen. Hicks de Rou∣chestre. VVill. Sidenore. Radulfi Towke. Iohannis Wareve de VVy. VVill. Goldwell de Godyinton. VVill. Goldwell de Chart. Richardi Sprot. Thome Chiterynden. VVill. Enfynge. VVill. Spert. Roberti Tropham de Wingham. Roberti Goodebarne. Thome Bevesle. Will. Iuenet. Iohannis Iuenet. Iohannes Brenchesle sn. Iohannis Brenchesle jun. Laur. Betleston de Bydynden. Iohan. Pitlesden de Tynderdi. Thome Hames de eadem. Thome Berkynden. Thome Gosebourne. Will. Gosebourne. Iohannis Edyngham. Richardi Edyngham. Hugonis Godwyn. Peteri Colepeper. Walt. Baker de Maid∣ston. Steph. Colney de ea∣dem. Laur. Stonstreet de eadem. Will. Enton. Thome Mellere de Lenham. Caur. Mellere de ea∣dem. Hen. Boycote. Will. Hadde. Robert Purse. ehannis Laurence. Robert Norton. Rich. Dawdemere. Will. Roger. Thome Grymston. Iohannis Tuttesham. Galfrid Yong. Simonis Goldsmith. Ioh. Croweche de Wa∣teringbery. Ioh. Reve. Ioh. Westbery. Thome Stydolf. Tho. Hilles de Bren∣chesle. Laur. Hilles. Ioh. Slyhand. VVill. Woadlond de VVest-gate. Ioh. Philpot de ea∣dem. Thome Tenham de Thaneto. Thome Pawlyn de Thaneto. Ioh. Roger de VVhit∣staple. Iohannis Salmon de VVhitstaple. VVill. Hall de Ea∣strey. Thome Hunt de Crud deswode. VVill. Licheffeld de Norbourn. Henrici Bynton. Adde Chanceler. Thome Newman de Chistlet. Richardi Bomoure de eadem. Thome Causant de eadem. VVill. Philip de Hierne. Thome Loucher. Roberti Lovelass. Thome Cadbery. Thome Rokesle. Roberte Virle. Ioh. Rose de Shor∣ham. VVill. Holden de Hunten. Ioh. Rolff de VVro∣tham. Iohannis Swan de Southfleet. Iohannis Mellere de VVimelingwelde. Iohannis Eythorst de Tenbam. VVill. Blosme de Tenderden. Iacobi Budde de VVhitresham. Richardi Combre. VVillielmi VVotton de Denton. Iohannis Biunham. Roberti Hothe de Ry∣vere. Thome Willok de Wy. VVill. VVillok de Wy. Iohannis Atte Cam∣bre de Bokton A∣luph. Iohannis Sandre de Bokton Aluph. Iohannis Colman de Eastwell. Io. Walter de Eastewl. Tho. Richard de Wy. Thome Cartere de Crundale. Will. Lucas de Esshe∣ford. Rich. Atte Sole Ke∣nington. Iohannis Roberd de eadem. Iohannis Sandre de Conybrohe. Thome Chapman. Iohannis Ely. Will. Ixning. Nicholai Roger de Mersham.
Nichol ai Kenet. Johannis Weston. Henrici Tepynden. Barthol. Atte Boure. Will. Bregges de Ore. Reginalai Dylonde. Nicholai Dane. Richardi Langedon. Stephani Hoigge. Harry. illielmi Iden. Johannis Hwet de Chertham. Willielmi Egerden. Johannis Bertlot de Cantuaria. Johannis Lynde de eadem. Rob. Becket de eadem Johan. Edle de ead. Ioh. Edmond de ead. Johan. Osburn de ea. Johan. Pikerel de ea. Lau. Winter de ead. Will. Atte Wode de ea. Thome Cherch de ea. Iohan. Bronns de ea. Rob. Pycot de eadem. Rich. Galding de ead. Thome Pollard de ea. Johan. Pende de ead. Thome Mott de ead. Thome Lamsyn de ea. Joh. Malling de ead. Joh. Cosyn de ead. Joh. Bertholt de ead. David Marryes de eadem. Ade Body de eadem. Henrici Piers de ead. Johannis Robart de Cranebroke. Willielmi Hert de . Richardi Fawconer. Johannis Bakke. Johannis Bereham. Johannis Bettenham Iohannis Watte de Hankherst. Will. Bernes de ead. Richardi Hodingfold Nicholai Piers. Willielmi Piers de Molash. Richardi Monyn. Willielmi Cobham. Johannis Baily de Hoo. Roberti Reynold. Henrici Rowe. Richardi Groucherst de Horsmonden. Johannis Jud. Walteri Fletcher de Tunbridge. Johannis Picot de ea. illielmi Randolf de eadem. Rich. Johnson de ea. Simonis Fitzaufe. Thome Barbour de Wrotham. Willielmi Menyware. Iohannis Rowe. Richardi Ruxton. Stephani Atte Bourn de Gontherst. Will. Robert de ead. Ioh. Thorp de Gil∣lingham. Io. Spencer de Melton Ioh. Spencer de ea∣dem, jun. Io. Petyge de Graves∣end. Ioh. Pete de eadem. Will. Doget de ead. Roberti Baker de ead. Iohan. Igelynden de Bydinden. Richardi Smith de Shorne. Michaelis atte Dean. Richardi Lewte. Iohannis Bottiler de Clyne. Thome Gardon de ea. Thome Peverel de Cukston. Ioh. Chambre de ead. Will. Holton de Heo. Simonis Walsh de Creye. Iohannis Mayor de Rokesle. Thome Shelley de Farnburgh. Ioh. Mellere de Or∣pington. Ioh. Shelley de Bixle. Willielmi Bery. Iohannis Bery. Thome Crssel. Iohan. Manning de Codeham. Roberti Merfyn. Roberti Chesman de Greenwich. Philippi Dene de Wolwich. Radulphi Langle de Beconham. Will Wolty de eadem. Ioh. Smith de Seve∣nock. Ioh. Cartere de Ne∣mesing. Tho. Palmer de Ot∣ford. Nicholai Atte Bore de Bradest. Rog. Wodeward deea. Willielmi Rothel. Roberti Allyn. Iohannis Knolls. Richardi Rokesle. Iohannis Steynour. Radulfi Stanhall de Westerham. Rich. Yong de eadem. Rich. Paris de eadem Thome Martin de donbregge. Thome Peny. Iohannis Dennet de Edonbregge. Willielmi Kirketon de Fankham. Iohannis Crepehegge Iohannis Hellis de Dernthe. Iohan. Chympeham. Rob. Coats de Stone. Roberti Stonestrete de Ivechesch. Iohan. Hogelyn de ea. Iohannis Lowys. Petri Thurban. Thome Beausrere. Steph. Ive de Hope, sen. Willielmi Newland de Brokland. Hen. Aleyne de ead. Willielmi Wolbale. Iohannis Creking. Stephani VVyndy. Henrici Dobil. Simonis Odierne. Roberti Hollynden. de Stelling. Will. Bray de eadem. Petri Neal de El∣mestede. Steph. Gibbe de Ston∣ting. Rich. Shotwater de eadem. Rogeri Hincle de Elham. Andree VVodehil de eadem. Nicolai Campion. VVill. Atte Berne de Lymyne. Iohannis Cartere de Abyndon. Rich. Knight, de Stelling. Will. Kenet de Bo∣nington. Iacobi Skappe. Iacobi Godefray. Ioh. Baker de Cald∣ham. Roberti Dolyte▪ Roberti Woughelite. Ioh. Chilton de New∣ington. Tho. Chylton de ead. Thome Turnour de Rouchester. Ioh. ust de eadem Ioh. Houchon de ead. Stephani Riviel. Warini Wade. Thome Groveherst. Will. Berford de Newington. Iohannis Grendon de Upcherche. Iohannis Hethe de Bakchild. Rich. Groveherst de Syndingbourn. Ioh. Sonkyn de ead. P. Haidon de Borden. Thome Waryn de Lenham. Rich. Dene de Hede∣crone. Walteri Terold. Hugonis Brent.
Sheriffs. HEN. II. Anno 1 Rualons. Anno 2 Radul. Picot, for six years. Anno 8 Hugo de Dovera, for seven years. Anno 15 Gerv. de Cornhilla, for six years. Anno 21 Gervat. & Rob. fil. Bernardi. Anno 22 Rob. filius Bernardi, for eight years. Anno 30 Will. filius Nigelli. Anno 31 Alanus de Valoigns. for four years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Regnal. de Cornhill, for six yars. Anno 7 Will. de sancta Mardalia. Walt. filius Dermand. Anno 8 Reginald. de Cornhill. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Rex JOHAN. Anno 1 Reginald. de Cornhill, for eleven years. Anno 12 Johan Fitz Vinon & Regi∣nald. de Cornhil, for six years. HEN. III. Anno 1 Hubert. de Burgo. Hugo de Windlesore, for seven years. Anno 8 Hub. & Roger de Grimston, for three years. Anno 11 Huber. de Burozo & Will. de Brito, for six years. Anno 17 Bartholomeus de Criol, for six years. Anno 24 Hum. de Boh. Comes Essex Anno 25 dem. Anno 26 Petrus de Sabaudia & Ber∣tram de Criol. Anno 27 de Criol & Johan. de Cobham. Anno 28 John de Cobham, for five years. Anno 33 Reginald. de Cobham, for eight years. Walterus de Bersted. Anno 41 Reginaldus de Cobham. Anno 42 Fritho. Poysorer. Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Johannis de Cobham. Anno 45 dem. Anno 46 dem. Anno 47. Rob. Walerand. Tho. de la Wey. Anno 48 Rogerus de Layburne. Anno 49 Idem. Anno 50 Rog. & Hen. de Burne, for three years. Anno 53 Steph. de Penecester, & Henricus de Ledes, for three years. Anno 56 Henricus Malemeins. EDW. I. Anno 1 Hen. Malemenis Mort. Anno 2 Will. de Hents. Anno 3 Will. de Valoigns, for four years. Anno 7 Robertus de Schochon. Anno 8 Robertus de Schochon. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Petrus de Huntinfend. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Hamo. de Gatton. Anno 15 Will. de Chelesend. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Will. de Brimshete. Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Johan. de Northwod. Anno 21 Johannes & Johannes & Burne. Anno 22 Johan. de Burne. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Will. Trussel. Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27. Hen. de Apuldrefeld. Anno 28 Johan. de Northwod. Anno 29 Hen. de Cobham. Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Warresius de Valoynes. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Johan. de Northwod. Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Will. de Cosington. Anno 36 Galfridus Colepepar, for four years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Henricus de Cobham. Anno 2 Johan. de Blound, for five years. Anno 7 Will. de Basings & Johannes de Hulo, jun. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Hen. de Cobham. Anno 10 Johannes de Malemeyns de Hoo. Anno 11 Idem. Johannes de Fremingham. Anno 12 Johan. & Hen. de Sardenne. Anno 13 Hen. & Wil. Septuans. Anno 14 Nul. Tit. Com. in hoc Ro∣tulo. Anno 15 Will. Stevens & Radus Savage. Anno 16 Nul. Tit. Com. in Rotulo. Anno 17 Johannes de Shelvinge. Anno 18 Johannes de Fremingham. Anno 19 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Radulph de Sancto Laur. Anno 2 Will. de Orlaston. Anno 3 Johannes de Shelvingges & Will. de Orlaston. Anno 4 Johannes de Bourne, Johan∣nes de Shelvingges. Anno 5 Johannes de Bourne. Anno 6 Tho. de Brockhull, Laur. de Sancto Laur. Anno 7 Tho. de Brockhull. Anno 8 Steph. de Cobham. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem.
Anno 11 Tho. de Brockhull. Anno 12 Wll. Morants. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Henrici de Valoyns. Anno 15 Johannes de Mereworth. Anno 16 Johannes de Widleston, Jo▪ hannes de Mereworth. Anno 17 Johannes de Widleston, for four years. Anno 21 Williel. de Lngele. Anno 22 Johannes de Fremingham, Anno 23 VVilliel. de Langele, Ar∣naldus Snvage. Anno 24 Nl. Tit. Com. in hoc Ro∣tulo. Anno 25 Will. de Langele. Anno 26 Jacob. Lapin. Anno 27 Will. de Apelderfeld. Anno 28 Jcobi. Lapin. Anno 29 Reginal. de Duk, sive Dyk. Anno 30 Gilb. de Helles. Anno 31 Will. de Apelderfeld. Anno 32 Radus Freminghm. Anno 33 Williel. Wakenade. Anno 34 Will. de Apelderfeld. Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Willielmi Pimpe. Anno 38 Will. de . Anno 39 Jhannes Colepepar. Anno 40 dem. Anno 41 Ricus Atte Les. Anno 42 Johannes de Brockhull. Anno 43 Johannes Colepepar. Anno 44 Will de Apelderfeld. Anno 45 Williel. Pimp. Anno 46 Johannes Anno 47 . Colepepar Anno 48 Rob. Notingham Anno 49 Williel. Pimpe Anno 50 Nic. Arte Crouch Anno 51 Henrici Apuldereld. Henry III. I HUBERT de BURGO, & HUGO de WINDLESORE.] This is that Hubert so famous in our Chronicles, late Lord Chamberlain unto King John and Lord Chiefe Justice of England. In this year of his , he not on∣ly valiantly defended the Castle of Dover, against Lewis the French Kings Son, but also in a naval conflct overthrew a new supply of Souldiers sent to him for his assi∣stance. I behold this Hugo joyned with him (as the shadow to the substance) as his Under-Sheriff, acting the affairs of the County in his absence. II HUBERT de BUROZO, & WILL. de BRITO.] This year Anno 1227. Hugo de Burgo (of whom immediately before) was in the month of Februay, by the King made Earle of Kent, and for a farther reward, had granted unto him the third penny of all the Kings profits arising in the said County, and Hubert de Burozo succeeded him in his Office. But I humbly conceive him the same Burozo is but our English Burrouh, bar∣barously lati∣nized, and the same with Bur∣go. person, who was both Comes and Vice-Comes of Kent at the same time, a conjuction often precedented in other Counties. The rather, because this Hubert lived many years after, till at last he got the Kings ill will, for doing him so many good Offices, not dying till the twenty seventh year of his Raign, Anno 1243. Edw. I. 20 JOHAN. de NORTHWOD.] This was a right Ancient Family in this County, for I find in the Church of Minster in Shepy this Inscription, Hic jacent Rogerus Norwod & Boan uxor ejus, sepulti ante Conquestum. Possibly they might be buried here before the Conquest, but the late Character of the Letter doth prove it a more modern Inscription. The chief Rsidence of the Nor∣wods, was a house of their own name in the Parish of Milton-Chuch, where they have many fair Monuments, but with defaced Epitaphs. One of their Heirs was married in∣to the Family of the Nortons, of whom In the fifth of King Henry te eight. hereafter.
Sheriffs. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Tho. de Cobham. Roundall G. on a Chev. Or, 3 Cress. Sa. 2 Jo. de Fremingham Freming   3  c de Peckham Yldham Sab. a chev. Or, between 3. cross Croslets Fitchee Arg. 4 Will. Septuans Milton   5 Arnald. Svage Bobbing Arg. 6. Lioncls 3, 2, & 1. Sab. 6 Tho. Brockhul Cale-Hill Gul. a Cross ingraild between 12. cross-croslets Fitche Ar 7     8 Rob. Corby Boughton   9 Arnold. Savage ut prius   11 Radus Seintleger . Fretee Arg. a Chief Gul. 11 . de Guldeord Hempsted O, a Saltyr betwixt 4 Mart∣lets Sable. 12 Jacobus Peckham ut prius   13 Will. Burcestre antshire   14 Rich. de Berham Berham Arg. 3. Bars Sable, 2. & 1.  Or. 15 ho. Chich † Dungeon   16 Wil. Barry Sevngton † Az. 3 Lions rampant, within a border, Arg. 17 Joh. Fremingham     18 Tho. Colepeper Pepenbnry Arg. a Bend engrailed Gules. 9 Will. Haut Waddenhal Or, a Cross engrailed Gules. 20 Tho. Seintleger ut prius   21 Nich. Potyne Queen-Co.   12 Joh Botiller. Gravency Ag. on a Chief Sab. 3. Cups covered Or. HEN. IV.     Anno     1 R b Cifford Bobbing Checkee Or, and Azure, a Fess within a border, Gul. 2 Tho. Lodelow Joh Diggs Digs Cou. , on a Cross, Arg. 5. Eaglets displayed, Sable. 3 Tho. Hyach     4 Rich Cliderow G ldstan∣ton. Arg. on a Cheveron, Gules, btwixt  Spread-Eagles, Sable, 5 Annulets, Or. 5     6 Valent Baret Lenham   7 .     8 Edw. Haut. ut prius   9 Will. Snayth   † Ar. 4.  G. on a chief, S. a bar  of the first. 10 Reginald. Pimpe † Pimps Co.   11 Joh Darel Cale-Hil. Az. a Lion rampant Or, crow∣ned Argent. 12 Will. Notebeame     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Will. Clifford ut prius   2 Rob. Clifford. ut prius   3 Will. Langley     4 Will Darel t prius   5 Joh Darel ut prius   6 Rich. Cliderow ut prius   7 Joh Burgh     8 Will. Haut Hautsburn. ut 9     10 Joh. Darel. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1  Darel. ut prius   2 Wil . Azure, 6. Lions rampant, Ar∣gent, a Canton Erm. 3 Joh Rykeld Eastlinghā.   4 Will. Clifford ut pius   5 Will. Culpeper Preston ut prius. 6 Tho. Ellis Burton , on a Cross S. 5. Cressants A. 7 Will. Scot Braborne AMP. 8 Joh. Peach Lullingston   9 Joh. Seintleger ut prius   10 Edward Gulfort Haden ut prius. 11 Will. Burys Bomeley   12 Rich Woveile. Northāp. Arg. a Fess and Canton, Gul. 13 Will. Clifford ut prius   14 Will. Manston Manston   15 Jacobus Fienis Kmsing Az 3. Lions rampant, Or. 16 Rich Wller Grome-Br. Sab. 3. V Vallnut-leaves, Or, between 2. Benlets, Argent. 17 Edw Guleford ut prius   18 Gervasius Clifton Brabourn. Sable, Semi de cinque Foyles, a Lion rampant, Argent. 19 Joh. Yeard Denton   20 Joh Waner Votecrey   21 Will. Mareys † Sable, 3 Lions pass. in Bend, double cotised, Argent. 22 Tho. Brown † Surrey   23 Will. Crowmer Tunstal Arg. a Cheveron  three Ravens, Sable. 24 Joh. Feversham   25 Will. Sundridge Emin, a Fesse Gules. 26 Will. Kene Well. Hal   27 Steph. . ut prius   28 Hen. Crowmer ut prius   29 Garvasius Clifton. ut prius   30 Rob. Horn Horns place   31 Tho Ballard Hoton   32 Joh . Repton   33 Joh , mil. ut prius   34 . Belknp, arm. The Moat   35 Alex Eden, arm. Westwell   36 Joh Gldeford, ar. ut prius   37 . Clifton, mil. ut prius   38 To. Brown mil & ut prius   Joh. Scot, ar. Vicis. vic. Scots-Hal ut prius. EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Isaac, ar. Howlets   2 Will. Peach, mil.     3 Idem.     4 Joh. Diggs, ar▪ ut prius   5 Alex. Clifford, ar. ut prius   6 VVill. Haut, mil. ut prius   7 oh. Colepeper, mil. ut prius   8 . Sentleger, ar. ut prius   9 Hen. Frrers, ar. Warw shire   10 Joh. Bromston, ar. Preston   11 Rich Colepeper, ar. Oxenhoath ut prius. 12 Ja Peckham, ar. ut prius   13 Joh. Fogge, mil.     14 Joh. Isley, ar. ut prius   15 Will Haut, mil. ut prius   16 . Green, ar. Scadbury Gules, across  Ermin, within a border Gobony Arg. and Sable. 17 Will. Cheyney, ar. ut prius   18 Rich. Haut, ar. ut prius   19 Rich. Lee, ar. Delce   20 Ioh. Fogge, mil.     21 Geo. Brown, mil. ut prius   22 Rich. Haut, ar. ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Will. Haut, mil. ut prius   2 Ioh. Banne. Grench   3 Rich Brakenbury, mil The Moat   & Will. Cheyney. ut prius   HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Will. Cheyney. ut prius   2 Ioh. Pymp, ar. ut prius   3 Hen. Frrers, mil. ut prius.   4 Walt. Roberts. Glastenb.   5 Will, Boleyn, mil. Norfolk Argene, a Cheveron , inter three Buls heads  Sable, armed Or. 6 Will. Scot, mil. ut prius   7 Ioh. Darel, ar. ut prius   8 Tho. Kemp, ar. Ollantie   9 Rich. , mil. Halden ut prius 10 Ioh. Peach, ar.     11 Ioh. Diggs, ar. ut prius   12 . Walsingham, ar. Scadbury Pally of 6. Arg. and Sab.  Fesse Gules. 13  w Clifford, ar. ut prius   14 Rob Wotton, ar. Bocton Arg. a Saltire engrailed, Sab. 15 Alex. Colepeper, ar. ut prius   16 Tho. Eden, ar.     17 Will. , mil. ut prins   18 Rad. Seintleger. ut prius   19 Will. Crowmer, ar. ut prius   20 Ioh. Langley, ar. Knowlton   21 Tho Kmp. mil.     22 Alex Colepeper, ar. ut prius   23 Henry Vaine. Tonbridg , 3 Gantlets , Or. 24 Reginald. Peckham. ut prius.   HEN. VIII.     1 Will. Growmer, mil. ut prius  
2 Iacobus Diggs, a. ut prius   3 Tho. Boleyn, mil. ut prius   4 Tho. Kemp, mil.     5 Io. Norton, mil. Northwood   6 Alex. Colepeper, ar. ut prius   7 Tho. Cheyney, ar. ut prius   8 Will. Scot, mil. ut prus   9 Tho. Boleyn, mil. ut prius   10 Ioh. Crisps, ar. Quekes   11 Ioh. Wiltshire, mil. Stone   12 Ioh. Roper, ar. Eltham. Party per Fesse, Az. and Or, a pale counterchanged, three Row. Bucks-heads erased of the second. 13 Rob. Sonds, ar. * Town place   14 Ioh. Fgge, mil.     15 Geo. Guldeford, mil. ut prius   16 Will. Haut, mil. ut prius * Ar. 3 Black Mores heads cou∣ped prop. bet. 2  S. 17 Hen, Vne, ar. ut prius   18 W ll Whetnal, ar. Hexal Vert, a Bend Ermin. Scot, mil. ut prius   20 Will Kemp, ar.     21 Edw , mil. ut prius   2 VVill. VValler, mil. ut prius   23 Rch. Clement, mil. Ightham   24 VVil. Finch, mil. East-well Arg. a Cheveron between 3. Griffins passant Sable. 25 Tho. Roberth, ar. Glastenb.   26 Tho. Ponings, mil. Otenhang. Barry of 6. Or and Vrt, a Bend, Gules. 27 Edw. VVoton. mil. ut prius   28 Tho . mil.   29 VVill. Hau, mil. ut prius   30 VVill Sidney, mil Penshert Or, a Pheon Azure. 31 Anth. Seintleger, m. ut prius   3 Anth. Sonds, ar. ut prius   33 Reginald Sco. mil. ut prius   34 Henry Iseley, mil. ut prius   35 Humph. Style, mil. Langley-pa Sable, a Fesse engrailed Frettee between 3. Flowers de Lis, Or. 36 Ioh. Fogge, mil.     37 Percival Hart, mil. Lullingst.   38 Hen. , at.     EDW. VI.     Anno   Az. a Fesse  . 3 goats heads erased Arg.  Or. 1  Sidley, ar. Scadbury   2 Go. Harper, mil. Sutton Sab. a Lion rampant within a border engrailed, Gules. 3 Tho. Culpeper, ar. ut prius   4 Tho. Wat, mil.     5 Hen sley, mil. ut prius   6 Ioh. Guldeford, mil. ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     M.  Rob. Southwel, m. Merworth   M. 1. & . Wil. Roper, ar. ut prius   2 & 3 Tho. Kemp. mil.     3 & 4     4 & 5 Geo. Vane, ar. ut prius   5 & 6  Wotton, ar. ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Nich. Crisps, ar.     2 Warh. Seintleger, ar. ut prius   3 Ioh. Tufton, ar. Hothfield S. an Eagle displayed Erm. a border Arg. 4 Rih. Baker, ar. * Sisingherst   5 Tho. Walsingham, ar ut prius * Az. a Fesse Or, between three Swans beads erased, beaked, Gules, 6 Tho. Kemp, mil.     7 Ioh. Mayney, ar. Will. Isley, ar. ut prius   8 Ioh. Sidley, ar. Southfleet   9 Will. Cowmer, ar. ut prius   10 Ioh. Brown, ar. Browns pla. Az. a Chev. betw. 3 escalops Or, within a border engrailed, G. 11 Edw. Isaac, ar. Patricks-b.   12 Ioh. Leonard, ar. Chevinin. Or, on a Fesse Gules, 3 flower de Lis of the first. 13 Walter Mayne, sen. ar Spilsil   14 Tho Vane, sen. mil. Badsel ut prius 15 Tho. Willoughby, ar Bore place O, Frette Azure. 16  Hales, mil. Woodch. Gules, 3 Arrows, Or, headed and feathered, Argent. 17 Ioh. Tufron, ar. ut prius   18 Tho. Scot, mil. ut prius   19 Edw. Boys, ar. Fredville Or, a Griffin Sergreant, Sable, within two Borders, Gules. 20 Tho. VVotton, ar. ut prius   21 Tho. Copinger, ar. Tho. Vane, ar. ut prius Bendy of six, Or, and Gul. on a Fsse, Azure, three plates. 22 Tho. Sonds, ar. ut prius   23 Geo. Hart, mil. ut prius   24 Rich. Baker, mil. ut prius   25 Iust. Champneys, ar. Hall-plac Per pale, Arg. and Sab. a Li∣on rampant within a border engrailed counterchanged. 26 Nich. Sonds, ar. ut prius   27 VVill. Cromer, ar. ut prius   28 Iacobus Hales, mil. ut prius   29. Ioh. Fineux, ar. Haw-Co. Vert, a Cheveron between 3. Eglets displayed, Or. 30 Rich Hardres, ar.     31 VVill. Sidley, ar. ut prius   32 Tho. VVilloughby, ar. ut prius   33 Sampson Leonard, ar ut prius   34 Rob. Bing, ar. W oham Quarterly S. & Ar. a Lion ra. in the first quarter of the sec. 35 Mich. Sond, ar. * Throughley   36 Edw VVotton, mil. ut prins * ut prius 37 Tho Palmer, ar.     38 Moilo Finch, mil. Eastwell Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Crif∣fins passant, Sable. 39 Tho. Kemp, ar.     40 Martin Banham, ar.   S. a Cross eng. bet. 4 Cress. . 41 Rog. Twisden, ar. East Peckh. Gyrony  four, Arg. & Gul. a Saltire between as many croslets all counterchanged. 42 Ioh. Smith, ar. Ostenhang.   43 Tho. Scot, ar. ut prius   44 Petr. Manwood, ar. St. Steph   45 Ia. Crome, mil. ut prius   JACOBUS.     Anno     1 Jacob. Cromer, mil. ut prius   2 Tho. Bker, mil. ut prius   3 Moilus Finch, mil. ut prius   4 Nort. Knatchbul, mil Mersham Azure 3 Croslets Fitchee be∣tween 2 Bendlets, Or. 5 Rob. Edolph, mil. Hinx-hill   6 Edw. Hales, mil. ut prius   7 VVill. VVithens, m South end   8 N ch. Gilborn, mil. Charing   9 Max Dallison, mil. Halling Gules, 3 crssents, Or, a Canton Ermin. 10 VVill. Steed, mil Steed hill   11 Anh. Awcher, mil. Hautsbourn † Sab. 3 Bars, and as many cinquesoils in Chief, Or. 12 Edw Filmer, mil. † E. Sutton   13 Edwin Sandis, mil. Northborn Or, a Fess Dancy, bet. 3 cros. G. 14 VVill. Beswick, ar. Spelmōden Gul. 6 Bsants, a  Or. 15 Gabr. Livesey, ar. Hollingbor. Ar. a Lion ramp Gul. between 3 trefoils, Vet. 16 Tho. Norton, mil. Bobbing   17 Edw Scot, ar. ut prius   18 John Sidley Bar. ut prius   19 Tho. Roberts, mil. & b. Glastenb.   20 George Fane, mil. ut prius   21 Ioh Hayward, mil. Hollingbor.   22 Tho. Hamond, mil. Brasted Arg. n a Cheveron engrailed betwixt 3 martlets Sable, as many cinque foils, Or. CAROL. I.     Anno     1 Isa. Sidley, m. & bar. G. Chart. ut prius. 2 Basilius Dixwel, ar. Folkston Ar. a Che. G bet. 3 flow. de lys S 3  dw. Engham, mil. Goodnestō. Arg. a Chev. Sab. betw. 3 Ogres∣ses, a Chief, Gules. 4 VVill. Campion, m Combwel   5 Rich. Brown, ar. Singleton ut prius. 6 Rob. Lewkner, mil. Acris Azure, three Cheverons, Arg. 7 Nich. Miller, ar. Crouch   8 Tho. Style, bar. Watringb ut prius. 9 Ioh. Baker, bar. ut prius   10 Edw. Chute, ar. Surrendē   11 VVil. Culpeper, bar. ut prius   12 Geo. Sands, mil. ut prius   13 Tho. Hendley, mil Courshorn   14 Edw. Maisters, mil. E. Langdō   15 David Polhill, ar. Otford   16 Iacob. Hugeson, ar. Lingsted   17 VVil Brokman, m. Joh. Honywood, m. Bithborow Evington   18     19     20 Ioh. Rayney, bar.     21 Edw Monins, bar. Waldershāe Court. Azure, a Lion passant betwixt 3 Escalops, Or. 22 Ioh. Hendon▪ mil.    
Richard the Second. 5. ARNOLD SAVAGE.] He was a Knight, and the third Constable of Queenborough-Castle. He lieth buried in Bobbing Church, with this Inscription, Orate specialiter pro animabus Arnoldi Savage, qui obiit in vigil. Sancti Andreae Apost. Anno 1410. & Domine Joanne uxoris ejus quae fuit fil. &c. The rest is defaced. 16. GULIELMUS BARRY.] In the Parish Church of Senington in this County, I meet with these two sepulchral Inscriptions, Orate pro anima Isabelle quondam uxoris Willielmi Barry, Militis. Hic jacet Joanna Brry quondam uxor Willielmi Brry, Militis. There is in the same Church a Monument, whereupon a man armed is pourtrayed, the Inscription thereon being altogether perished, which in all probability, by the re∣port of the Parishioners, was made to the memory of Sir William Barry aforesaid. Henry the Fourth. 6 VALENTINE BARRET.] He lieth buried in the Parish Church of Lenham in this County, under a Grave-stone, thus inscribed, Hic jacet Valentine Barret, Arm. qui obiit Novemb. 10. 1440. & Cecilia uxor ejus, quae obiit, Martii 2. 1440. quorum animabus— Henry the Sixth. 7. WILLIAM SCOT.] He lieth buried in Brabone Chuch, with this Epitaph, Hic jacet Willielmus Scot de Braborne Arm. qui obiit 5. Febr. 1433. cujus anim— Sis testis Christe quod non jacet hic lapis iste, Corpus ut ornetur sed spiritus ut memoretur. Quisquis eris qui transieris sic perlege, plora, Sum quod eris fueramqu quod es, pro me precor ora. His Family afterwards fixed at Scots Hall in this County, where they flourish at this day in great reputation. 9. JOHN SEINTLEGER.] I find him entombed in Ulcombe Church, where this is written on his Grave, Here lieth John Seintleger, Esq and Margery his Wife, sole Daughter and Heir of James Donnet, 1442. Wonder not that there is no mention in this Catalogue of Sir Thomas Seint∣leger, a Native and potent person in this County, who married Anne the Relict of Hen∣ry Holland D. of Exeter, the Sister of Kng Edward the Fourth, by whom he had Anne, Mother to Thomas Manners, first Earle of Rutland. For the said Sir Thomas Seintleger was not to be confided in under King Henry the Sixth; and afterwards, when Brother-in-law to King Edward the Fourth, was above the Office of the Sherivalty. 16. RICHARDUS WALLER.] This is that renowned * Souldier, who in the time of Henry the Fifth, took CharlesVillare ∣anum, pag. 320 Duke of Orleans, General of the French Army, Prisoner at the Battel of Agin-Court, brought him over into England, & held him in honorable restraint or custody at Grome∣Bridge, which a Manuscript in the Heralds Office notes to be twenty four years: In the time of which his recess, he newly erected the house at Grome-Bridge upon the old Foundation, and was a Benefactor to the repair of Spelherst Church, where his Armes emain in stone-work over the Church porch: but lest such a signal piece of service might be entombed in the Sepulchre of unthankful forgetfulnesse, the Prince assign∣ed to this Rihard Waller and his Heirs for ever, an additional Crest, viz. the Arms or Escoucheon of France, hanging by a Label on an Oak, with this Motto affixed, Haec Fru∣ctus Virtutis. From this Richard, Sir William VValler is lineally descended.
23. WILLIELMUS CROWMER.] This year happened the barbarous Rebellion of Iack Cade in Kent. This Sheriff, unable with the posse Comitatus, to resist their numerousness, was taken by them, and by those wild Justicers committed to the Fleet in London; because, as they said (and it must be so if they said it) he was guilty of extortion in his Office. Not long after, these Refor∣mers sent for him out of the Fleet, made him to be brought to Mile-end, where, with∣out any legal proceedings, they caused his head to be Stows Chro. page 391. smitten off, and set upon a long pole on London bridge, next to the Lord Say aforesaid, whose Daughter he had married. 38 JOHN SCOT, Arm. Et vicissem Vic.] I understand it thus, that his Under-Sheriff supplied his place, whilest he was busied in higher affairs. He was knighted, much trusted and employed by King Edward the Fourth. I read in a Inter Bun∣del. Indnt. de Guerra a ud Pelles W. st. Record, Johannes Scot, Miles, cum C. C. Soldariis ex mandato Domini Regis apud Sand∣wicum pro salva custodia ejusdem. The aforesaid King, in the twelfth year of his raign, sent this Sir Iohn (being one of his Privy Councel, and Knight Marshall o Calis) with others, on an Embassie, to the Dukes of Burgundy and Britain, to bring back the Earls of Pembroke and Richmona, whose escape much perplexed this Kings suspicious thoughts. But see his honourable Epitaph in the Church of Braborne. Hic jacet magnificus ac insignis Miles Johanes Scot quondam Regis domus, invi∣ctissimi Principis Edwardi quarti, Controll. & nobilissima integerrimaque Agnes uxor ejus. Qui quidem Johannes obiit Anno 1485. die mens. Octob. 17. Richard the Third. 3. RICHARDUS BRAKENBURY, Mil. & WILLIELMUS CHENEY.] The former was of an ancient extraction in the North. I behold him as nearly allied (if not Brother) to Sir Robert Brakenbury, Constable of the Tower, who dipped his fin∣gers so deep in the blood of King Edward the Fifth and his Brother. It concerned King ichard, in those suspitious times, to appoint his Confident: Sheriff of this impor∣tant County; but he was soon un-Sheriffed by the Kings death, and another of more true Integrity substituted in his room. Henry the Seventh. 5. WILL. BOLEYN, Mil.] He was Son to Sir Ieffery Boleyne, Lord Mayor of London, by his Wife, who was Daughter and co-heir to Thomas Lord Hoo and Hastings. This Sir VVilliam was made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King Richard the Third. He married one of the Daughters and Co-heirs of Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond, by whom (besides four Daughters married into the Worshipful and Wealthy Families of Shelton, Calthrop, Clere, and Sackvil) he had Sir Tho. Boleyn, Earle of VViltshire, of whom hereafter. 10. JOH: PEACH, Arm. This year Perkin VVarbeck landed at Sandwich in this County, with a power of all Na∣tions, contemptible not in their number or courage, but nature and fortune, to be feared, as well of Friends as Enemies, as fitter to spoil a coast, than recover a country. Sheriff Peach (knighted this year for his good service) with the Kentish Gentry, acquitted them∣selves so valiant and vigilant, that Perkin shunk his horns back again into the shell of his ships. About 150. of his men being taken, and brought up by this Stows An∣n tis, pag 480. Sheriff to Lon∣don, some were executed there, the rest on the Sea Coasts of Kent, and the neighbou∣ring Counties, for Sea-marks to teach Perkin's people to avoid such dangerous shoars. Henry the Eighth. 5 JOH. NORTON, Mil.] He was one of the Captains, who in the beginning of the Raign of King Henry the eight went over with the 1500. Archers, under the conduct of Sir Edward Poynings, to assist
Margaret, Dutchesse of Savoy (Daughter to Maximillian the Emperour, and Gover∣nesse of the Low-Countries) against the incursions of the Duke of Guelders; where this Sir John was knighted by Charles, young Prince of Castile, and afterwards Emperor. He lieth buried in Milton Church, having this written on his Monument; Pray for the souls of Sir John Norton, Knight, and Dame Joane his Wife, one of the Daughters and Heirs of John Norwood, Esq who died Febr. 8. 1534. 7. THOMAS CHEYNEY, Arm.] He was afterward knighted by King Henry the Eighth, and was a spriteful Gentleman, living and dying in great honour and estimation; a Favourite and Privy Counsellor to four successive Kings and Queens, in the greatest urn of times England ever beheld; as by this his Epitaph in Minster Church, in the Isle of Shepey will appear. Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Cheyney, inclitissimi ordinis Garterii Miles, Guardua∣nus quinque Portuum, ac Thesaurarius Hospitii Henrici octavi, ac Edwardi sexti, Regum; Reginaeque Mariae ac Elizabethae, ac eorum in secretis Consiliarius, qui obiit—mensis Decembris, Anno Dom. M.D.L.IX. ac Reg. Reginae Eliz. primo. 11. JOHN WILTSHIRE, Mil.] He was Controller of the Town and Marches of Calis, Anno 21. of King Henry the Se∣venth. He founded a fair Chappel in the Parish of Stone, wherein he lieth entombed with this Inscription, Here lieth the bodies of Sir John Wiltshire, Knight, and of Dame Margaret his Wife; which Sir John died 28. Decemb. 1526. And Margaret died—of— Bridget his sole Daughter and Heir was married to Sir Richard VVingfield, Knight of the Garter, of whom formerly in Cambridge-shire. 12. JOHN ROPER, Arm.] All the memorial I find of him, is this Inscription in the Church of Eltham, Pray for the soul of Dame Margery Roper, late VVife of John Roper, Esquire, Daughter and one of the Heirs of John Tattersall, Esquire, who died Febr. 2. 1518. Probably she got the addition of Dame (being Wife but to an Esquire) by some immediate Court∣attendance on Katharine first Wife to King Henry the Eighth. King James. 3. MOILE FINCH, Mil.] This worthy Knight married Elizabeth, sole Daughter and Heir to Sir Thomas Heneage, Vice Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, and Chancellor of the Dutchy of Lancaster. She in her Widowhood, by the special favour of King James was honoured Vicouness Maidston, (unprecedented, save by Mary Beau∣mont, or Villers, extraordina∣rily created Countess of Buckingham. One, for this hundred years) and afterwards by the great Grace of King Charles the First, created Countesse of VVinchelsey, both Honors being entailed on the Issue-male of her Body; to which her Grand-Child, the Right Honourable Heneage (lately gone Embassador to Constantinople) doth succeed. The Farewell. Having already insisted on the Courage of the Kentish-men, and shown how in former Ages, the leading of the Van-guard was intrusted unto their magnanimity, we shall conclude our Description of this Shire, praying that they may have an accession of Loyalty unto their Courage, (not that the Natives of Kent have acquitted themselves less Loyal, than those of other Shires) but seeing the one will not suffer them to be idle, the other may guide them to expend their Ability for Gods glory, the defence of his Majesty, and maintenance of true Religion.
CANTERBURY. CANTERBURY is a right ancient City, and whilest the Saxon Hptar chy flourished, was the chief seat of the Kings of Kent. Here Thomas Becket had his death, Edward surnamed the Black Prince and King Henry the Fourth their Interment. The Metropolitan Dignity first conferred by Gregory the Great on London, was for the Honour of Au∣gustine afterwards bestowed on thisCamb. Brit. de Cant. City. It is much commended by William of Malmesbury for its pleasant scituation, being surrounded with a fertile soil, well wooded, and commodiously watered by the River Stoure, from whence it is By Mr. Som∣ner in his De∣scription of Canterbury, pag. 37. said to have had its name Durwhern, in British, a swift River. It is happy in the vici∣nity of the Sea, which affordeth plenty of good Fish. Buildings. CHRIST CHURCH, First dedicated, and (after 300. years intermission to Saint Thomas Becket) restored to the honour of our Saviour, is a stately structure, being the performance of several successive Arch-Bishops. It is much adorned with glasse Win∣dows. Here they will tell you of a foraign Embassador, who proffered a vast price to transport the East Window of the Quire beyond the Seas. Yet Artists who commend the Colours, condemn the Figures therein, as wherein proportion is not exactly ob∣served. According to the Maxime, Pictures are the Books, painted windows were in the time of Popery the Library of Lay men; and after the Conquest grew in general use in Eng∣land. It is much suspected Aneyling of Glass (which answereth to Dying in grain in Drapery) especially of Yellow, is lost in our age, as to the perfection thereof. Anciently Colours were so incorporated in Windows, that both of them lasted and faded toge∣ther: Whereas our modern Painting (being rather on than in the Glass) is fixed so faintly, that it often changeth, and sometimes falleth away. Now, though some be∣ing only for the innocent White, are equal enemies to the painting of Windows as Fa∣ces, conceiving the one as great a Pander to superstition, as the other to wantonnesse; Yet others of as much zeal and more knowledge, allow the Historical uses of them in Churches. Proverbs. Canterbury-Tales.] So Chaucer calleth his Book, being a collection of several Tales, pretended to be told by Pilgrims in their passage to the Shrine of Saint Thomas in Canterbury. But since that time Canterbury-Tales are parallel to Fabulae Milestae, which are Charactered, Nec ve∣rae, nec verisimiles, meerly made to marre precious time, and please fanciful people. Such are the many miracles of Thomas Becket; some helpful (though but narrow, as only for private conveniency) as when perceiving his old Palace at Otford to want water, he struck his staff into the dry ground (still called Saint Thomas his well) whence water runneth plentifully to serve that house (lately re-built) unto this day. Others spightful: as when (because a Smith dwelling in that Town had clogged his Horse) he ordered, that Lambert in his Perambu∣lation of Kent; pag. 37. no Smith afterwards should thrive within that Parish. But he, who shall go about seriously to confute these Tales, is as very a Fool, as he was somewhat else, who first impudently invented and vented them. Prelates. STEPHEN LANGTON. Here we are at a perfect losse for the place of his birth,S. N. his surname affording us so much direction, in effect it is none at all. Inopes nos copia fecit, finding no fewer than twelve Langtons (though none very near to this place) which makes us fly to our marginal refuge herein. Stephen, born in England, was bred in Paris, where he became one of the greatest Scholars of the Christian world, in his age. He was afterwards consecrated Cardinal of Saint Chrysogone, and then by Pa∣pal
power intruded Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in defiance of all opposition which King John could make against him. Many are his learned Works, writing Comments on all the Old, and on some of the New Testament. He was the Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. Num. 87. & Math. Panker in the Life of Langton. first that divided the whole Bible into Chapters, as Robert Stephens a French-man, that curious Critick and painful Printer, so ne six score years since, first subdivided into Verses. A worthy Work, making Scripture more managable in mens memories, and the passages therein the sooner to be turned to, as any person who is ooner found out in the most populous City, if methodized into Streets and Houses with signs, to which the Figures affixed do fitly allude. Say not this was a presumption, incurring the curse denounced to such, who adde to Scripture, it being no Addition but an Illustration thereof. Besides, God set the first pattern to mens industry herein, seeing the distinction of some Verses may be said to be Jure Divino, as those in the Lamentations and elsewhere, which are Alphabetically modelled. As causless their complaint, who cavil at the inequality of Chapters, the eighth of the first of Kings, being sixty six, the last of Malachy but six verses, seeing the entire∣ness of the sense is the standard of their length, or shortness. It is confessed some few Chapters end, and others begin obruptly: and yet, it is questionable, whether the a∣teration thereof would prove advantageous, seeing the reforming of a small fault, with a great change, doth often hurt more than amend: and such alterations would discom∣pose Millions of Quotations, in excellent Authors conformed to the aforesaid received divisions. Here it must not be concealed, that notwithstanding this general tradition of Lang∣tons chaptering the Bible, some learned men make that design of far ancienter date, and particularly that able Antiquary In Glossario vrbo Hepta∣teuchus. Sir Henry Spelman. This I am confident of, that Stephen Langton did something much material in order thereunto, and the Improver is usually called the Inventor, by a complemental mistake. However, though I believe Langton well employed in dividing the Bible, he was ill bused in rending asunder the Church and Kingdom of England, reducing King Iohn to sad extremities. He died, and was buried at Canterbury Anno Dom. 1228. Souldiers. WILLIAM PRUDE, Esquire, (vulgarly called Proud) was born in this City, where his stock have continued for some hundreds of years, bred a Souldier in the Low Coun∣treys, where he attained to be Lieutenant Colonel. He was slain Iuly 12. 1632. at the siege of Mastrich. His body (which I assure you was no usual honour) was brought over into England, and buried in the Cathedral of Canterbury, in Saint Michaels Chap∣pel on the South side of the Quire, with this Inscription on his Monument; Stand Souldiers; ere you march (by way of charge) Take an example here, that may enlarge Your minds to noble Action▪ Here in peace Rests one whose Life was War, whose rich encrease Of Fame and Honour from his Valour grew, Unbegg'd, unbought, for what he won he drew By just desert: having in service been A Souldier, till near sixty from sixteen Years of his active Life, continually Fearless of Death; yet still prepar'd to die In his Religious Thoughts: for ▪midd'st all harmes He bare as much of Piety as Armes. Now Souldiers on, and fear not to intrude The Gates of Death by th' example of this Prude.
He married Mary Daughter of Sir Adam Sprackling, Knight, and had Issue by her four Sons and three Daughters; to whose memory his surviving Son Searles Prude hath erected this Monument. Writers. OSBERN of CANTERBURY, so called, because there he had his first birth, or best Being, as Chanter of the Cathedral Church therein. An admirable Musitian, which quality endeared him (though an Englishman) to Lankfrank, the Lordly Lombard, and Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. He was the English Gen. 4. 22. Jubal, as to the curiosity thereof in our Churches. An Art, which never any spake against who understood it; otherwise Apollo is in a sad case, if Midas his ears must be his Judges. However in Divine Service all Musick ought to be tuned to edification (that all who hear may understand it) other∣wise it may tend to delight not devotion, and true zeal cannot be raised where knowledge is depressed. This Osbern wrote the life of Saint Dunstan in pure Latine, according to that age, flourishing under William the Conquerer, Anno 1070. SIMON LANGTON, was by his Brother Stephen Langton the Arch-Bishop, prefer∣redS. N. Arch-Deacon of Canterbury; who, Carne & sanguine revelante (saith the Somner in his Catalogue of the Arch-Dea∣cons of Cant. Record) made the place much better, both to him and his successors, in revenue and jurisdicti∣on. A troublesome man he was, and, on his Brothers score, a great adversary to King Iohn, even after that King had altered his Copy, and became, of a fierce Foe, a Son-Servant to the Pope, by resigning his Crown unto him. But our Simon could not knock off when he should, having contracted such an habit of hatred against K. Iohn, that he could not depose it, though commanded under the pain of excommunication. This caused him to trudge to the Court of Rome, where he found little favour. For, such who will be the Popes white Boyes, must watchfully observe his signals, and not only charge when he chargeth, but retreat when he retreateth. This Simon (beside others) wrote a Book of the penitence of Magdalene, in relation (it seems) to himself, though she found more favour in the Court of Heaven, than he at Rome. He died Anno Dom. 12— Benefactors to the Publick. JOHN EASDAY, was Alderman and Mayor of this City, Anno 1585. He found the Walls thereof much ruined, and being a man but of an Somner in his Survey of Cant. pag. 15. indifferent estate, began the reparation thereof at Ridingate, and therein proceeded so far as his name is inscribed on the Wall; whose exemplary endeavours have since met with some to commend, none to imitate them. THOMAS NEVILE, born in this City of most honourable extraction, as his name is enough to notifie and avouch. He was bred in Cambridge, and Master first of Mag dalen, then of Trinity Colledge, and Dean of Canterbury. He was the first Clergy man (sent by Arch-Bishop Whitgift) who carried to King James tidings of the English Crown; and it is questionable whether he brought thither or thence more welcome news (especially to the Clergy) acquainting them with the Kings full Sir George Paul in the Life of Arch∣Bishop Whit∣gift. intentions to maintain Church-Discipline, as he found it established. But the main matter commending his memory is his magnificency to Trinity College, whose Court he reduced to a spacious and beautiful Quadrangle. Indeed he plucked down as good building as any erected, but such as was irregular intercepting the sight, disturbing the intended uniformity of the Court, whereby the beauty at this day is much advanced. For as the Intuitive knowledge is more perfect, than that which insinu∣ates it self into the Soul Gradually by discourse, so more beautiful the prospect of that Building, which is all visible at one view, than what discovers it self to the sight by parcels and degrees. Nor was this Doctor like those Poets, good only at Translation, and bad at Invention, all for altering, nothing for adding of his own, who contributed to this Colledge (I will not say a Widows Mite, but) a Batchelours Bounty: a stately new Court of his own expence, which cost him three thousand pounds and upwards. Much enfeebled with the Palsie, he died an aged man Anno Dom. 161—
The Farewell. I am heartily sorry that the many laudable endeavours for the scouring and enlarge∣ment of the River Stoure (advantagious for this City) have been so often defeated, and the Contributions given by well-disposed Benefactors (amongst whom Mr. Rose, once an Alderman of Canterbury gave three hundred pounds) have missed their ends, pray∣ing that their future enterprises in this kind may be crowned with success. For the rest I refer the Reader to the pains of my worthy Friend Mr. William Som∣ner, who hath written justum volumen of the Antiquities of this City. I am sorry to see him Subject-bound (betrayed thereto by his own modesty) seeing otherwise, not the City, but Diocesse of Canterbury had been more adaequate to his abilities. I hope others, by his example will undertake their respective Counties; It being now with our age, the third and last time of asking the Banes, whether or no we may be wedded to skill in this kind, seeing now use, or for ever hold your Pens, all Church Monuments leading to knowledge in that nature, being daily irrecoverably imbezeled.
LANCASHIRE. LANCASHIRE: Hath the Irish Sea on the West, York-shire on the East, Cheshire (parted with the River Mersey) on the South, Cumberland and Westmerland on the North. It rangeth in length from Mersey to Wenander-Mere, full fifty five miles, though the Broadest part thereof exceedeth not One and thirty. The Ayre thereof is Subtil and Piercing, (being free from Foggs saving in the Mosses) the Effects whereof are found in the fair Comple∣ctions and firme Constitutions of the Natives therein, whose bodies are as able as their minds willing for any laborious Employment. Their Soyle is tolerably fruitful of all things necessary for humane Sustenance: Ad, as that Youth cannot be counted a Dnce, though he be Ignorant, if he be Docible, because his lack of Learning is to be scored on the want of a Teacher; So Sterilitie can∣not properly be imputed to some places in this County, where little Graine doth grow, because capable thereof (as daily experience doth avouch) if it were hus∣banded accordingly. This Shire, though sufficiently thick of people, is exceedingly thin of Parishes, as by perusing this parallel will plainly appear, Rutland hath in it, Parishes Forty Cambd. Brit. in Rutland. eight. Lancashire hath in it, Parishes Thirty Idem in Lan∣cashire. six. See here how Rutland being scarce a Fifth part of Lancashire in greatness, hathSpeed (I think mistaken) says but 28. a fourth part of Parishes more therein. But, as it was a fine Sight to behold Sir Tho. More, when Stapleton in his Life. Lord Chancellour of En∣gland, every morning in term time, humbly ask blessing in VVestminster-hall of Sir John More his Father, then a pusnie Judge: so may one see in this Shire some Chapels, ex∣ceeding their Mother-Churches in fairness of Structure and numerousnesse of people, yet owning their filial relation and still continuing their dutiful dependance on their Parents. But for Numerosity of Chapels, surely the Church of Manchester, exceedeth all the rest, which (though anciently called, but Villa de Manchester) is for Wealth and Greatnesse corrival with some Cities in England, having no lesse then Nine Chapels, which before these our civil Wars, were reputed to have five hundred communicants a peice. Insomuch that some Clergy men, who have confulted Gods Honour with their own credit and profit, could not better desire for themselves, than to have a Lincoln-shire Church, as best built, a Lancashire Parish, as largest bounded, and a London Audience, as consisting of most intelligent people. The people, generally devout, are, (as I am informed) Northward and by the West Popishly ; which in the other parts (intended by Antiperistasis) are zealous* 2 Sam. 3. 1. Protestants. Hence is it, that many Subtile Papists, and Jesuits have been born and bred in this County, which have met with their Matches (to say no more) in the Natives of the same County; So that thereby it hath come to passe, that the house of Saul hath waxed weaker and weaker, and the house of David stronger and stronger. Natural Commodities. Oates. If any ask why this Graine growing commonly all over England, is here entered as an Eminent Commodity of Lancashire? Let him know, that here is the most and best of that kind; yea Wheat and Barlie may seem but the adopted, whilst Oates are the Natural Issue of this County; so inclined is its genius to the production thereof. Say not Oates are Horse-graine, and fitter for a Stable then a Table. For, besides that the Meal thereof is the distinguishing form of Gruel or Broth from Water, most hearty and wholsome Bread is made thereof, Yea anciently North of Humber, no other was eat∣en by People of the Primest Quality. For we read, how William the Conquerour be∣stowed the Mannour of Castle Bitham in Lincoln-shire, upon Stephen Earl of Albemarle and Holderness, chiefly for this consideration, that thence he might have Cambd. Brit. in Lancashire. wheaten bread to feed his Infant Son, Oaten bread being then the Diet of Holderness and the Counties lying beyond it.
Allume. I am informed that Allume is found at Houghton in this County, within the Inheri∣tance of Sir Richard Houghton, and that enough for the use of this and the neighbou∣ring Shires, though not for Transportarion. But because far greater plenty is affor∣ded in York-shire, the larger mention of this Mineral is referred to that place. Oxen. The fairest in England are bred (or if you will, made) in this County, with goodly heads, the Tips of whose horns are sometimes distanced five foot afunder. Horns, are a commodity not to be slighted, seeing I cannot call to mind any other substance, so hard, that it will not break, so solid, that it will hold liquor within it, and yet so clear, that light will pass through it. No Mechanick Trade, but hath some Utensils made thereof, and even now I recruit my pen with Ink from a Vessel of the same. Yea it is useful cap-a-pe, from Combs to shooing-horns. What shall I speak of the many gardens made of horns, to garnish houses? I mean artifi∣cial flowers of all colours. And besides what is spent in England, many thousand weight are shaven down into leaves for Lanthorns and sent over daily into France. In a word the very Shavings of Horn are profitable, sold by the Sack, and sent many miles from London for the manuring of ground. No wonder then that the Horners are an ancient corporation, though why they and the Stows Sur∣vey of London, pag. 638. Bottle-makers were formerly united into one company, passeth my skill to conjecture. The best horns in all Eng∣land: and freest to work without Flaws, are what are brought out of this County to London, the shop-general of English Industry. The Manufactures. Fustians. These anciently were creditable wearing in England, for persons of the primest quality, finding the Knight in Chaucer in his Prologue. Chaucer thus habited. Of Fustian he weared a Gippon All besmottred with his Haubergion. But it seems they were all Forreign Commodities, as may appear by their modern names. 1. Jen Fustians, which I conceive so called from Jen a City in Saxony. 2. Ausburgh Fustians made in that famous City in Swevia. 3. Millaine Fustians, brought over hither out of Lumbardy. These retain their old names at this day, though these several sorts are made in this County, whose Inhabitants buying the Cotton, Wool, or Yarne, coming from beyond the Sea, make it here into Fustians, to the good employment of the Poor and great improvement of the Rich therein, serving mean people for their out-, and their betters for the Lineings of their garments. Bolton is the staple-place for this commodity, being brought thither from all parts of the County. As for Manchester, the Cottons thereof carry away the credit in our Nation, and so they did an hundred and fifty years agoe. For when learned In his Ilinera∣ry. Leland on the cost of King Henry the Eighth, with his Guide travailed Lancashire, he called Manchester, the fairest and quickest Town in this County, and sure I am, it hath lost neither spruceness nor spirits since that time. Other Commodities made in Manchester are so small in themselves and various in their kinds, they will fill the shop of an Haberdasher of small wares, being therefore too many for me to reckon up, or remember, it will be the safest way to wrap them all together in some Manchester-Tickin, and to fasten them with the Pinns (to prevent
their falling out and scattering) or tye them with the Tape, and also, (because sure bind sure find) to bind them about with points and  all made in the same place. The Buildings. MANCHESTER, a Collegiate as well as a Parochial Church, is a great orna∣ment to this County, The Quire thereof, though but small is exceeding beautiful, and for Woodwork an excellent peice of Artifice. The Wonders. About Camdens Br. in Lancshire. VViggin and elsewhere in this County, men go a Fishing with spades, and Mathooks, more likely one would think to catch Moles then Fishes with such Instru∣ments. First, they pierce the Turffie ground, and under it meet with a black and deadish water, and in it small Fishes do swim. Surely these Pisces Fossiles or subterra∣nean Fishes must needs be unwholesome, the rather because an unctuous matter is found about them. Let them be thankful to God in the first place, who need not such meat to feed upon. And next them let those be thankful, which have such meat to seed upon, when they need it. Proverbs. [Lancashire fair Women.] I believe that the God of nature, having given fair complections to the Women in this County, Art may save her pains, (not to say her sinnes,) in endeavouring to better them. But let the Females of this County know, that though in the Old Testament express notice be taken of the beauty of many Women, Gen. 12. 11. Sarah, Gen. 24. 16. Rebekah, Gen. 29. 17. Rachel, 1 Sam. 25. 3. , 2 Sam. 13. 1. Thamar, 1 King. 1. 4. Abishag, Ester 2. 7. Esther; yet in the New Testament no mention is made at all of the fairness of any Woman; not because they wanted, but because Grace is chief Gospel-beauty, Elizabeths Luke 1. 6. unblameableness, the Virgin Maries Luke 2. 19. ponering Gods word; the Canaanitish Womans Mat. 15. 28. faith; Mary Magdalens John 12. 3. charity; Lydia her Acts 16. 4. attention to Pauls Preaching; these soul-piercing Perfections, are far etter than skin-deep Fairness. It is Cam. Brit. in Lancashire. written upon a Wall in Rome. RIBCHESTER was as rich as any Town in Christendome. And why on a Wall? Indeed the Italians have a Proverb, A wall is the fools paper, whereon they scribble their Fancies.  not to be overcurious in examining hereof, we suppose some Monumental Wall in Rome, as a Register, whereon the names of principal Places were inscribed, then subjected to the Roman Empire: and probably, this Ribchester anciently was some eminent Colony (as by pieces of Coins and Colus there dayly digged out doth appear.) However at this day it is not so much as a Mercate Town, but whether decaied by age, or destroyed by accident, is uncertain. Here Reader give me leave, the Historian must not devour the Divine in me, so as to debar me from spiritual Reflections, What saith S.* Paul? We have here no continuing City: and no wonder, seing Mortal Men are the Efficient, Moldring Buildings the Material, and Mutable Laws the formal cause thereof. And yet S. Paul was as well stocked with Cities as any man alive: having three, which in some sort he might call his own; Acts 22. 3. Tarsus, where he was born, * Jerusalem where he was bred at the feet of Gamaliel, and Acts 22. 27. Rome, whereby he received the Priviledg of Freedome: all which he waved as nothing worth, because of no abiding and continuance. Martyrs. JOHN ROGERS was born in this J. Bale, descrip. Brit. cent. 8. n. 83. & Fox, Act. & Monum. County, and bred in the University of Cambridge, a very able Linguist and General Scholar. He was first a Zealous Papist, till his eyes being opened, he detested all Superstition, and went beyond *Seas, to VVitenberg, where (some years after Tyndal) he translated the Bible, from Genesis
till the Revelation, comparing it with the Original: coming to England he presented it in a fair Volumne to King Henry the  prefixing a Dedicatory Epistle, and subscribing himself (those dangerous dayes required a Disguise) under the name of J. Bale. ut pri. Thomas Matthew. And now Reader that is unriddled unto me which hath pusled me for some Years; for I finde, that K. James, in the See my Church History, 10th Book, 17th Cen. page 47. Instructions which he gave to the Translators of the Bible enjoyned them to  the former Translations of, 1. Tindal, 2. Matthews, 3. Coverdale, 4. , 5. Geneva. Now at last I understand who this Matthews was (though unsatisfied still in VVhitchurch) believing his Book never publickly printed, but remaining a Manuscript in the Kings Library. Yet this present could not procure Mr. Rogers his security, who it seems for fear of the 6 Articles was fain to fly again beyond Seas, and returning in the Raign of King Edward the six became a Preacher of London. He and Mr. Hooper were the two greatest Sticklers against Ceremonies, though otherwise allowing of Episcopal Government. He was the first Martyr, who suffered in Smithfield, in Queen Maries dayes, and led all the rest, of whom we may truly say, that if they had not ben flesh and blood▪ they could not have been burnt: and if they had been no more then flesh and blood they would not have been burnt. The Non-Conformists account it no small Credit unto them, that one of their Opinion, (as who would not flinch from the faith) was chosen by Divine Providence, the first to encounter the fire. Such may remember, that no Army is all FRONT, and that as constant did come behinde as went before. Had those of an opposite judgment been called first, they had come first to the stake; and in due time the defenders of Ceremonies were as substantial in their Sufferings. This John Rogers was martyred, Febr. 4. 1555. Fox, Acts and Mon. JOHN BRADFORD was born at * Manchester, in this County, and bred first a Lawyer in the Inns of Court, and for a time did solicite Suits for Sr. John Harrington▪ afterwards (saith my * Authour, ex Rixoso Causidico mitissimus Christi Apostolus: goingJ. Bale, Descr. Brit. cent. 8. numb. 87. to Cambridg a man in maturity, and ability, the University by special Grace bestowed on him the Degree of Master of Art: and so may he be said to Commence, not only per saltum, but per volatum, The Jesuit doth causlesly urge this his short standing for an Argument of his little understanding; whereas he had alwayes been a hard Student from his youth: and his Writings and his Disputings give a sufficient Testimony of his Learning. It is a demonstration to me, that he was of a sweet temper, Because In his Exam. of J. Fox his Mareyrs. Parsons who will hardly afford a good VVord to a Protestant, saith, that he seemed to be of a more soft and milde nature than many of his fellowe  Indeed he was a most holy and mortified man, who secretly in his closet would so weep for his sinnes, one would have thought he would never have smiled again: and then appearing in publick, he would be so harmlesly pleasant, one would think he had never wept before: But Mr. Fox his pains have given the pens of all Posterity a VVrit of ease, to meddle no more with this Martyr, who suffered Anno Dom. 1555. GEORGE MARSH was born at Fox, Acts and Monum. page 1561. Dean in this County, bred a good Scholar in a Grammer-School, and then lived in the honest condition of a Farmer: after the death of his wife he went to Idem, ibid. Cambridge, where he followed his Studies very close, and afterwards solemnly entring into Orders, became a profitable Preacher and Curate to Mr. Lawrence Sanders, the worthy Martyr, Causlesly therefore doth In his Exam. of oxes Mart. Parsons asperse him, that he of a Farmer turned a Preacher, as if he had done it immediately (with many of our Age leaping from the plough to the pulpit) concealing his Academical breeding, such is the Charity of his jesuitical reservation. As little is his Charity for condemning him for answering  and fearfully at first, to such who examined him about the Sacrament of the Altar, seeing the said Marsh condemned himself for doing it, as therein too much consulting carnal Respects to save his life, as appears in Mr. Fox, whence the Jesuite fetcheth all his Information. But Marsh made amends for all these failings with his final constancy, being both burnt and scalded to death (having a barrel of pitch placed over his head, an accent of cruelty peculiar to him alone) when he was martyred at VVestchester, Apr. 24. 1555.
Cardinals. WILLIAM ALAN was born in this County (saith my Pitz. p. 792. Authour) nobilibus parentibus, of  Parentage. He was bred in Oriel Colledg, in the University of Oxford, and became Head of S. Maries Hall therein, Then going beyond the Seas he became Kings  at , Cannon of Cambray, and Rhemes, and at last by Pope Sixtus Quint us made Cardinal priest of Martins in Rome, 1587. and deserved his Red Hat by his good Service the year after against his Native Country. But hear what Different Characters two Authours of several perswasions bestow upon him. PITZEU▪  ANO. Script. page. 792. GODWIN in his Catalogue of Cardinals, page 479. He was somewhat▪ above an ordinary man in Stature, comely of Countenance, composed in his Gae, affable in all Meetings; and for the Gifts of his Mind, Pious, Learned, Prudent, Grave, and though of Great Authority, Humble, modest, meek, patient, peaceable, in a word, beautified and adorned with all kinds of Virtues. He was the last of our English Cardinals, in time, and first in wickedness, deserving not to be counted among English men, who, as another Herostratus, to atchieve himself a name amongst the Grandees of Earth, endeavoured to fire the Church of England, the Noblest (without envy be it spoken) in the Christian World, so that his memory deserveth to be buried in oblivion. He collected the English Exils into a Body, and united them in a COLLEDG, first at Doway, then at Rhemes, so great an Advancer, that we may behold him as Founder of that Seminary. He yed at Rome, Anno 1594. and preferred rather to be buried in the English School, than in the Church of St. Martins, which gave him the Title of Cardinal. Prelates. HUGH OLDHAM, born in this County, at Oldham, a Village some fix miles from Manchester, bred in Queens Colledge in Cambridge, was no ill Scholar, and a good Man, most pious according to and above the Devotion of the Age he lived in; he was afterwards Bishop of Exeter, a Foe to a Monkish Superstition, and a Friend to University Learning. Brazen-Nose Colledge in Oxford, and Corpus-Christi Colledge therein will for ever bear witnesse of his bounty, to advance Religion, and Learning. Besides the Town of Manchester have good cause to remember him, who founded and endowed a School therein, with large Revenue, appointing the Warden of the Colledge therein, Caput Scholae. This Bishop, having a tough contest with the Abbot of Tavestock, was excommunicated for refusing to stand to the decision of the Court of Rome. He had formerly built a Chapel, in the South side of his Cathedrall, and dying excommunicate (on the aforesaid account) was Buried, not in the very Church, but brink thereof, and body of the Wall. He dyed Anno Dom. 1520. JAMES STANLEY, D. D. brother of Thomas, Earl of Darby, was born in this County, and was by K. Henry the seaventh (his kinsman by marriage (preferred Bishop of Ely, 1506. a man more memorable than commendable, who never resided at his own Cathedral. I can partly excuse his living all the Summer with the Earl his Brother, in this County, but must condemn his living all the Winter at his Godwin, in his Bishops of Ely, and Cambdens Br. in the Description of Huntington. Mannour at Somersham, in Huntingtonshire, with one who was not his sister, and wanted nothing to make her his Wife save mariage. However if Jehu allowed a Burial to his most profest Enemy, on this account, that she was 2 King. 9. 34. a Kings Daughter, none I hope will grudge his memory a room in this Book, were it only because he was an Earles Brother. He dyed Anno 1515. HERY STANDISH was, as I have just cause to conclude, extracted from the Standishes of Standish in this County, bred a Franoiscan, and Dr. of Divinity in Cambridge,
and afterwards made Bishop of S. Asaph. I neither believe him so Good as Pitz doth character him, pietate & doctrina clarum, nor so bad as Bale doth decry him, making him a doteing Fool. Sure I am, there was Impar congressus, betwixt him and Erasmus, as unequal a Contest, as betwixt a Childe and Man, not to say, Dwarf and . This Stand is said to have fallen down on his knees before King Henry▪ the Eighth, petitioning him to continue Religion, established by his Ancesters, and  into Maers of Divinity, he cited the Bale, de script. Brit. cent. 9. num. 3. Cols for the Corinthians, which being but a Memory-mistake in an Aged Person, needed not to have exposed him so much, as it did, to the laughter of the Standers by. After he had sate 16 years, Bishop of St. , he died very aged, 1535. JOHN CHRISTOPHERSON was born in this Bale, Pitz. and Bish. Godwin, in the Bishops of Chichester. County, bred first in Pembrook Hall, then Fellow of St. Johns; and afterwards Master of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge: an excellent Scholar, and Linguist especially. I have seen a Greek Tragedy, made and written by his own hand, (so curiously that it seemed printed) and presented to K. Henry the eight: He no lesse eleganly (if faithfullly) translated Philo and  into Latine: Besides his own benefaction to the Masters Lodgings and , he was highly instrumental in moving Queen Mary to her magnificent bounty to Trinity Colledge. In the visitation of Cambridge, he was very active in burning the bones of , being then Elect Bishop of Chichester, scarcely continuing a year in that Place. All expected, that at his first coming into his Diocesse, he should demean himself very favourably. For why should not the Poets Observation of Princes be true also of Prelates. —Mitissima sors est Regnorum sub Rege novo— Subjects commonly do finde New made Soveraigns most kinde. But he had not so much mercy as Nero, to begin courteously, having no sooner put on his Episcopal Ring, but presently he washed his hands in the blood of poor Martyrs, whereof in due * Place. In the First of Qu. Elizabeth he was deprived, andSee Martyrs in Suffex. kept in some restraint, wherein he dyed, about the Year 1560. Since the Reformation. JAMES PILKINTON, D.D. was the third Son of James Pilkinton of Parkers Scel. Cant. M. S. in the Masters of S. Johns. Rivington, in this County, Esq. a Right ancient Family, being informed by my good Friend Master William Ryley, Norrey, and this Countryman, that the Pilkintons were Gentlemen of repute in this Shire, before the Others make this of far later Date. conquest, when the chief of them, then sought for, was fain to disguise himself, a Thresher in a barn. Hereupon partly alluding to the  of the flail (falling sometime on the one, sometime on the other side) partly to himself embracing the safest condition for the present, he gave for the Motto of his Armes, Now thus, Now thus. This James, bred fellow of St. Johns in Cambridge, was in the First of Qu. Mary forced to fly into Germany, where he wrote a Comment Bale, de script. Brit. pagina penult. on Ecclesiastes, and both the Epistles of St. Peter: after his return, in the First of Qu. Elizabeth, he was chosen Master of St. Johns, and March the 2d 1560. was consecrated Bishop of Durham. Nine Years after the Northern Rebels came to Durham, and first tore the Bible, then the Cam. Eliz. in Anno 1569. English Liturgy in pieces. Unhappy (though most innocent) Book, equally odious to opposite parties; such who account the Papists Heretiques esteeming it popish, whilest the Papists themselves account it heretical. The Bishop had fared no better than the book, could he have been come by. But when the Rebellion was suppress'd▪ the Bishop commenced a Suit against Qu. Elizabeth for the Lands and Goods of the Rebels attainted in the Bishoprick, as forfeited to him by his Charter, and had Cam. Brit. in Bi. of Durham. prevailed, if the Parliament had not itnerposed, and on special consideration pro hoc tempore adjudged them to the Queen. He dyed Anno Dom. 1576. EDWIN SANDYS was born at Conisby in this County; whose good actings, great sufferings, pious life, and peaceable death, 1588. are plentifully related in our Church. History. RICHARD BARNES was borne at Ou of a Manuscript of the Great Antiquary, Mr. Dodesworth. Bolde near Warrington in this County, bred in Brasen-Nose Colledg, in Oxford, and afterwards advanced Suffragan Bishop of Nottingham,
thence he was preferred to Carlile, 1570. and seven years after to Durham. He was himself One of a good nature, (as by the sequele will appear) but abused by his Cre∣dulity and affection to his Brother John Barnes, Chancellour of his Diocesse. Bishop Carle∣ton in the Life of Mr. Gilp. A Man, of whom it is hard to say, whether he was more Lustfull, or more Covetous: who, where as he should have been the man who ought to have reformed many Enormities in the Diocess, was indeed the Authour of them, permitting base and dishonest Persons to escape scot-free for a piece of mony, so that the Bishop had a very ill report every where. By the suggestion of this ill instrument, the Patriarchall man Mr. Gilpin, fell into this Bishops Displeasure, and by him was suspended from his Benefice. But the good Bishop afterwards restored him; and visiting him at his house, took him aside into the Parlour, and thus accosted him; Father Gilpin, Item Ibidem. I acknowledge you are fitter to be Bishop of Durham, then my self to be Parson of this Church of yours: I ask forgiveness for Errors passed; forgive me Father; I know you have hatched up some Chickens that now seek to pick out your Eyes, but so long as I shall live Bishop of Durham, be secure, no man shall injure you. This Bishop sate about Eleven years in his See, and dyed a very aged man, a little before the Spanish Invasion, Anno Dom. 1588. JOHN WOOLTON was born at Wiggin in this County, of honest Parents, and worshipful by his mothers side. He was bred a short time in Oxford, and in the reign* Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Exeter. of Queen Mary, attended his Unkle Alexander Nowell in his flight beyond the Seas. Returning into England, he was made first Cannon Residentiary, and after, Anno 1579. Bishop of Exeter, being an earnest assertor of Conformity against opposers thereof. He met (whilst living) with many hard speeches, but after his death (when mens me∣mories are beheld generally in their true colours) he was restored to his deserved esteem, even by those who formerly had been his adversaries. He indited Letters full of Wisdome and Piety, becoming the strength of one in health, not two hours before his death, which happened March the 13. Anno 1593. It is a part, though not of his Praise, of his happiness, that his Daughter was married to Francis Godwin Bishop of Hereford, whose Learned pen hath deserved so well of the Church of En∣gland. MATTHEVV HUTTON. I have given a large account of him formerly, in my Ecclesiastical History. However having since received an exact Anarie (as I may so say) from his nearest relation, of his life, I will here insert an Abridgement thereof. 1. Being Son to Matthew Hutton of Priest▪ Hutton in this County, he was born Anno Dom. 1529. 2. He came to Cambridge in the 17. year of his age, Anno 1546. the 38. of K. Henry the Eighth. 3. cōmen∣ced. Bach. of Arts, 1551 Mr. 1555 4. Chosen Margaret Profes∣sor of Divinity, December 15. Anno 1561. in the 4. of Queen Elizabeth. 5. In the same year com∣menced Bachelour of Di∣vinity. 6. Elected Master of Pem∣broke-hall May the 12. and the same year September the fifth, admitted Re∣gius Professor, Anno 1562. 7. Answered a publick Act before Q. Eliz. and Her court at Cambridg. A. 1564 8. Married in the same year Katharine Fulmetby (Neice to Thomas Goodrick late Bishop of Ely) who died soon after. 9. Made Dean of York, Anno 1567. 10. Married for his second Wife Beatrix Fincham, Daughter to Sir Thomas Fincham of the Isle of Ely 11. Resigned his Master∣ship of Pembroke-hall, and his Professours place to Dr. Whitgift April 12. A. 1567. 12. Married Frances, Wid. of Martin Bowes, son of Sir Martin Bowes, Alder∣man of London, Nov. 20. 1583. 13. Chosen Bishop of Dur∣ham, June 9. Anno Dom. 1589. 14. Confirm'd by the Dean and Chapter July 26. 15. Consecrated by John Arch-bishop of York, Ju∣ly 27. 16. Translated to York, and consecrated at Lambeth, anno 1594. the Thirty seventh of Queen Eliza∣beth, by John Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and others March 24. 17. He dyed in January, anno 1605. in the se∣ventie sixth year of his age.
He gave an hundred marks to Trinity colledge in Cambridge, and founded an Hos∣pital at Wareton in this County. In a word, he was a learned Prelate, liv'd a pious man, and left a precious memory. MARTIN HETON was born in this County (as by his Epitaph on his Mo∣nument lately set up by his Daughters in the Church of Ely may appear) and bred first a Student then a Canon of Christs-church, on whom Queen Elizabeth bestowed the Bishoprick of Ely, after 20. years vacancie thereof. Now although his memory groweth under the suspicion of Simoniacal compliance, yet this due the Inhabitants of Ely do unto him, that they acknowledge him the best House▪ keeper in that See▪ within mans Remembrance. He dyed July 14. 1609. leaving two Daughters marri∣ed in those Knightly Families of Fish and Filmer. RICHARD BANCROFT was born at......... in this So I find in the Manuscript of Mr. Dods∣worth and so Mr. Richard Line (this Arch-bishops servant lately deceased) did inform me. County, bred in Jesus Colledge in Cambridge, and was afterwards by Queen Elizabeth made Bishop of London, by King James Arch bishop of Canterbury. Indeed he was in effect Arch-bishop whilest Bishop, to whom Doctor Whitgift in his decrepite age remitted the managing of matters, so that he was the Soul of the high Commission. A great Statesman he was, and Grand Champion of Church Discipline, having well hardned the hands of his Soul, which was no more then needed for him, who was to meddle with Nettles and Bryers, and met with much opposition. No wonder if those who were silenced by him in the Church, were loud against him in other places. David speaketh of Psal. 140. 3. poison under mens lips. This Bishop tasted plentifully thereof from the mouths of his Enemies, till at last, (as Mithridates) he was so habited to poisons, they became food unto him. Once a Gentleman coming to visit him, pre∣sented him a Lyebell, which he found pasted on his Dore, who nothing moved thereat; Cast it (said he) to an hundred more which lye here on a heap in my Chamber. Many a Lyebell, [Lye] (because false) [Bell] because loud) was made upon him. The aspersion of coveteousnesse, though cast, doth not stick on his memory; being confuted by the estate which he left, small in proportion to his great prefer∣ment. He cancelled his first Will, wherein he had bequeathed much to the Church, which gave the occasion for scurrilous pens to passe on him; He who never repented of doing Ill, Repented that once he made a good Will. Whereas indeed, suspecting an Impression of popular violence on Cathedralls, and fearing an alienation of what was bequeathed unto them, he thought fit to cancel his own, to prevent others cancelling his Testament. This partly appears by his second Will, wherein he gave the Library at  (the Result of his own, and three Predecessors Collections) to the University of Cam∣bridge (which now they possesse) in case the Archi episcopal See should be extinct. How came such a jealousie into his mind? What fear of a Storm when the Sun shined, the Skye clear, no appearance of Clouds? Surely his skill was more then ordinary in the Complexion of the Common-wealth, who did foresee, what afterward (for a time) came to pass. This clause providentially inserted, secured this Library in Cambridge, during the vacancy of the Archi-episcopal See; and so prevented the embeselling, at the least the dismembring thereof, in our late civil distempers. He dyed Anno Dom. 1610. and lyeth buryed at the Church in Lambeth.* Sir James VVare de pr∣sulibus Lageniae. pag. 40. THOMAS JONES was born in this County, bred Master of Arts in Cam∣bridge, but commenced Doctor of Divinity in the University in Dublin. He was first Chancellour then Dean of St. Patricks in that City, and thence was made Bishop of Meath, Anno 1584. and the next Month appointed by Queen Elizabeth one of her Privy Councel in Ireland. Hence he was translated to be Archbishop of Dublin, An. 1605. and at the same time was by King Iames made Chancellour of Ireland, which office he discharged Thirteen years, dying April 10. 1619. As he was a good Officer for the King, he was no bad one for himself, laying the Foundation of so fair an estate, that Sir Roger Iones his Son, was by King Charles created Viscount Renelaugh. Thus whilst the Sons of the Clergy men in England ne∣ver* The other Viscount Ely son to Arch∣bishop Loius. mounted above the degree of Knighthood, Two of the Clergy men in Ireland at∣tained to the dignity of Peerage: I say no more, but good success have they with their honour in their persons and posterity.
RICHARD PARR was born in this Mr. James Chaloner in his  of the Isle of Man. pag. 7. County, bred Fellow of Brazen-nose Colledg in Oxford: whilest he continued in the University, he was very painfull in reading the Arts to young Scholars, and afterwards having cure of Souls, no lesse industrious in the Ministery. He was afterwards preferr'd to be Bishop of Man, by the Earl of Derby, Lord thereof: for the Lords of that Island have been so absolute Patrons of that Bishoprick, that no lease made by the Bishop, is valid in Law, without their confirmation. This Prelate excellently discharged his Place, and died anno Domini, 16— Souldiers. Sr. WILLIAM MOLINEUX, Kt. of Sefton in this County: He was at the Battel of Navarret, in Spain, made Knight Banneret by Edward the Black Prince, Anno 1367. under whose command he served in those Warrs, as also for a long time, in the Warrs of France. From whence returning homewards, he dyed at Weavers Funeral Monuments, Page 234. Canterbury, Anno 1372. on whom was written this Epitaph. Miles Honorificus MOLINEUX subjacet intus; Trtius Edwardus dilexit hunc ut amicus: Fortia qui gessit, Gallos, Navaros que repressit, Sic cum recessit, morte feriente decessit, Anno Milleno trecento septuageno, Atque his junge duo: sic perit omnis homō. His Monument is not extant at this day, and it is pity that so good a Sword did not light on a better Pen; and that Pallas (so much honoured by him in her Military relation) did not more assist in his Epitaph in her Poetical capacity. Sr. WILLIAM MOLINEUX, junior, Knight, descendant from the former, flourished under K. Henry the eighth, being a man of great command in this County, bringing the considerable strength thereof to the seasonable succour of the Duke of Norfolk, with whom he performed signal service in Flodden-Field. It is confesed on all sides, that the Scots lost the Day, by not keeping their Ranks, but not agreed on the cause thereof. Bucanan (who commonly makes the too much* Paulus Jovius Courage of his Countrymen the cause of their being conquered) imputes it to their indiscreet pursuing of the English, routed at the first. Others say, they did not break their Ranks, but they were broken, unable to endure the Lancashire Archers, and so forced to sunder themselves. In this Battail the Scotch King, and chiefest Gentry were slain; the English loosing scarce any, of the Scts scarce any but of prime note. The King afterwards wrote his gratulatory Letter, to Sr. Soows Chro. page 495. William Molinux, in forme following: Trusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well, and understand as well by the Report of Our Right Trusy Cousin and Counsellor, the Duke of Norfolk, as otherwise, what acceptable servie You amongst others lately did unto us, by your valiant towardnesse in the assisting of Our said Cousin, against our great Enemy, the late King of Scots; and how couragiously you as a very hearty loving Servant, acquitted your self for the overthrow of the said late King, and distressing of his malice and power, to our great Honour, and the advancing of your no little Fame and praise: For which We have good cause to favour and thank you, and so we full heartily do; and assured may you be, that VVe shall in such effectual wise remember your said service in any your Reasonable Pursuits, as you shall have cause to think the same Rightwell imployed to your comfort and weal hereafter. Given under our Signet, at our Castle at Windsore, the 27 of November. It appears by our Authour, that th like Letters, mutatis mutandis, were sent unto Sr. Edward Stanley, and some other men of principal note, in Lancashire and Cheshire. I have nothing more to observe, save that these two worthy Sr. VVilliams were Ancestors unto the truly Honourable the Lord Molineux, Viscount Marybourgh in Ireland, lately deceased.
Writers. HUGH of MANCHESTER was, saith my Authour, when Adolescens [a youth]* Pitz, de scrip. in anno 1294. a Dominican, but when Juvenis [a young man] he changed his Copy, and turned a Franciscan. Say not he degraded himself, choosing a later order then he left▪ for it seems that amongst them the last is counted the best, as of a more refined perfection. He was a great scholar, and highly esteemed in that age, for his severity and discre∣tion. An Imposter happened at this time, pretending himself first blind, then Bale, de scri. Brit. Cen. 4. Num. 62. cured at the Tomb of King Henry the Third, so to get coine to himself, and credit to the dead King. But our Hugh discovered the cheat▪ and Writing a Book De  Diliriis, Dedicated it to King Edward the First, who kindly accepted thereof, preferring that his Fathers memory should appear to posterity, with his true face,  painted with such false miracles. This Hugh with another Franciscan, was imployed by the same King to Philip, King of France, to demand such Lands as he detained from him in Aquitain. Such who object, that sitter men than Friers might have been found for that service, consider not how in that Age such mortified men were presumed the most proper Persons, peaceably to compremise differences between the greatest Princes. This Embassie was undertaken Anno Dom. 1294. RICHARD ULVERSTON was born in this Bale, de scrip. Brit. 1430. County, at Ulverston, a well-known Market in Loynsay-Hundred: A great Leland. Antiquary (ambitious of all Learned Mens acquaintance) complained, that he knew him not so well as he desired, He was bred in Oxford, and wrote a Book intituled the Articles of Faith, or the Creed of the Church, this lay latent a good while, till John Stanberry Bishop of Hereford rescued it from the Moaths, some Thirty Years after the Authours death, and bestowed a double Light upon it; one in producing it into the Publick, the other illustrating it with a Commentary he wrote thereon. Say not, this was false Herldry, but true. Humility, to see a Bishop commenting (which is not usual) on the Book of a Priest, Bale concludeth all thus▪ ▪ longum Non doctrina potest obscuro carcere claudi. ——no will Worth Long be confin'd, but make its own way forth. The Time and Place of his Death are equally uncertain; but by probability about 1434. under the Reign of King Henry the sixt. THOMAS Bale, de scrip. Brit. cent. 8. Numb. 47. PENKETH, so was his true name (though wrested by some Latinists into Penhettus, and miswritten Penthy, and Penker, by some English) taken from a Village in this County. He was bred an Augustinian in Warrington, and a Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, a deep Scotist, and of so great a memory, that Ambrosius  and Jocobus Bergomensis. Foreiners (amongst whom he lived) report of him, that had all the Books of Scotus been lost, he could easily have restored every word of them. He was called to be Professor at Padua, and returning into England, became Provincial of his Order. But his last act stained his former life, who promoted the bastardizing of the Issue of K. Edward the 4th. and as Dr. Shaw ushered, his Flattery held up the train of the Usurper's Praises, in a Sermon at St. Pauls, in preaching whereof, he who had formerly forfeited his Honesty, lost his* Voice, a proper punishment for a Parasite. His Disgrace hadSpeeds Chron. pag. 717. some influence on his Order, which then verticall and numerous, ayly  in England, to their Dissolution. This Thomas dyed, and was buryed in London, 1487. JOHN STANDISH. Short mention shall serve him, who might have been left out wthout losse. He was Nephew to Henry Standish, Bishop of St. Asaph, of no mean Family in this County. One would suspect him ot the same Man, called by Pale a scurrillous Fool, and admired by pit for piety and learning, jealous lest another man should be more wise to Salvation than himself: he wrote a Book against the Translation of Scripture into English▪ and presented it to the Parliament. His death happened seasonably for his own safety, 1556. a little before the Death of Queen Mary.
Since the Reformation. THOMAS LEAVER was born in this Bale. de scri. Brit. Cent. 9. num. 86. County, where his Family and Name still remains, at two Villages, called Leaver at this day. He was bred Fellow and Batchelour of Divinity o St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, whereof he was chosen Master, 1552. He was also preferred Master of Sherburn-House, or Hospital in the Bishoprick, a Place it seems of good profit and credit, as founded by Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham, and Earle of Northumberland. In the beginning of Queen Mary he was forced to fly beyond the Seas, and became the principal Pastour (for they had three other) of the English Exiles at Arrow in Switzerland, which Congregation I behold, as the least, so the freest from Factions of any in that age of our Nation. He was, saith my Idem, ut prius. Author, Virtutum in omni mansuetudine seminator, and besides some Sermons, and a Comment on the Lords Prayer, he wrote a Book intituled, The Right Path way to Christ. After the death of Queen Elizabeth coming over into England, he took a Journey to Durham, to visite his old Hospital of Sherburne, and falling sick by the way, dyed Parker, in his Skellet. . M.S. in the Masters of S. John. at Ware, anno 1558. in that very juncture of time, when what Church-Preferment he pleased courted his Acceptance thereof. I finde two more of his Name, Ralph Leaver, and John Leaver (probably his Kinsmen) Exiles for their Conscience in Germany, in the Reign of Queen Mary. WILLIAM WHITACRE was borne at Holme in this County, whose Life hath been formerly twice In my Holy-State, and Church History written by me. He dyed anno 1596. ALEXANDER NOWELL was born 1510. of a Knightly Family at Read See the Latine Life of his Nephew Dr. Whitaker, near the beginning. in this County, and at In his Epitaph, on his Mon. in Pauls. thirteen Years of age being admitted into Brasen-nose Colledge in Oxford, studied thirteen Years therein. Then he became School-Master of Westminster. It happened in the first of Queen Mary he was fishing upon the Thames, an Exercise wherein he so much delighted, insomuch that his Picture kept in Brazen-nose Colledg, is drawn with his lines, hooks, and other ackling, lying in a round on one hand, and his Angles of several sorts, on the other. But whilest Nowel was catching of Fishes, Bonner was catching of Nowel, and understanding who he was, designed him to the Shambles, whither he had certainly been sent, had not Mr. Francis Bowyer then Merchant, afterwards Sheriffe of London, safely conveyed him beyond the Seas. Without offence it may be remembred, that leaving a Bottle of Ale (when fishing) in the Grasse; he found it some dayes after, no Bottle, but a Gun, such the sound at the opening thereof: And this is believed (Casualty is Mother of more Inventions than Industry) the Original of bottled-Ale in England. Returning the first of Queen Elizabeth he was made Dean of St. Pauls, and for his meek Spirit, deep Learning, Prudence, and Piety, the then Parliament and Convocation both, chose, injoyned and trusted him to be the man to make a  for publick use, such a one as should stand as a Rule, for Faith and Manners to their Posterity. (by the way) is an ancient Church▪ Ordinance, as appears by Luke 1. 4▪ . Theophilus and Acts 18. 25▪ . Apollos, both exercised . It remained in state during th rimitive Church, and did not decline till Popery began to encrease▪ For,  Catechising continued, it had made the Laity more wise in Religion, than would well have stood with the interest of the Church of Rome. It was therefore outed by School-Divinity, and then a fruitfull Olive was cut down, to have a bamble set in the room thereof. In the first Reformation Protestants revived this Ordinance, and by the use thereof Religion ot the speed, and great ground of Superstition; till the Jesuits sensible thereof have since outshot us in our own bow, most carefull to catechise their Novices, whilest English Protestants (for I will not condemn Foreig Churches) grew negligent therein. What is the Reason that so much loth so soon changeth colour▪ even because it was never well : and why do men so often change their Opinions? even because they were never well catechised. He was Confessour to Queen Elizabeth, constantly preaching the First and Last Lent-Sermons before Her. He gave two Hundred Pounds per annum to maintain thirteen Schollars in brasen. Nose Colledge. He died being Ninety Years of age, not decayed in sight, Febru. 13. 1601.
JOHN DEE, where born I cannot recover, was a man of much motion, and isS. N. mentioned in this place, where he had his (though last) best fixation. He was bred (as I believe) in Oxford, and there Doctorated, but in what faculty I cannot determine. He was a most excellent Mathematiti an and Astrologer, well skilled in Magick, as the Antients did, the Lord In his Ad∣vancement of Learning. Bacon doth, and all may accept the sence thereof, viz. in the lawfull knowledg of Naturall Philosophie. This exposed him, anno 1583. amongst his Ignorant Neighbours, where he then lived, at Mortclack in Surrey, to the suspicion of a Conjurer: the cause I conceive, that his Library was then seized on, wherein were Theatrum Chemicum pag. 480. four thousand Books, and seven hundred of them Manuscripts. This Indignity joyned with the former Scandal, moved him to leave the Land, and go over with Sr. Edward Kelly, into Bohemia, as hereafter shall be more See Sir Edw. Kellys life in Worcester-shire. fully related. Returning to Mortclack, 1592. the same Scandal of being a Conjurer, haunted him again: Two Years after Viz. 1594. he was under a kinde of Restraint, which caused him to write to the Lady Scydemore, to move Queen Elizabeth, either, that he might declare his case to the Counsel, or have liberty under the broad Seal to depart the Land. Next year he wrote an apologetical Letter to Arch-bishop Whitgift, which it seems found good reception: yea, at last he gave such satisfaction of the lawfulness and usefulness of his Studies▪ that the Queen (besides many considerable New-Years Gifts sent unto him) presented him Warden of Manchester in this Countie, 1596. where he had many contests and suits with the Fellows of that Colledge. The last mention I find of him, is in Mr. Camden, to whom he presented an ancient Roman Inscription, found about Manchester, and Mr. In his Brit. in Lancashire, Camden in his requital, presen∣ted him with this Commendation. Hanc mihi descripsit, qui vidit, Cl. Mathematicus, J. Dee, collegij Manchestrensis custos. And indeed all the books he hath left behind him, speak him a learned, as those, de Usu Globi Terrestris. De Nubium, Solis, Lunae, ac Planetarum distantiis, &c. an aged man, being dedicated to King Edward the Sixth, and he dying about the begin∣ning of King James. ROGER FENTON, D. D. Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, was born in this County, as appeareth by his Epitaph, in St. Stephens Wallbrook, London, being the painfull, pious, learned and beloved Minister thereof. Little is left of him in print, save a sollid Treatise against Usury. Great was his intimacy with Dr. Nicholas , being Contemporaries, Collegiates, and City-Ministers together, with some  in their Sirnames, but more sympathy in their Natures. Once my own Father gave Dr. Fenton a visite, who excused himself from entertain∣ing him any longer; Mr▪ Fuller (said he) hear how the passing-bell towls  this very Instant, for my Dear Friend, Dr. Felton, now a dying; I must to my Study, it  mutually agreed upon betwixt us in our healths, that the Surviver of us should  the others Funerall-Sermon. But see a strange change, God, to whom belongs the Psal. 68. 20.  from death, was pleased (with the Patriarch Gen. 48. 14. Jacob blessing his ) wittingly to guide his hands , reaching out death to the living, and life to the dying, So that Dr. Felton recovered, and not only performed that last office to his Friend Dr. Fenton, but also survived him more than ten years, and dyed Bishop of ▪ Roger Fenton dyed in the fiftieth Year of his age, anno Dom. 1615. buryed in his own Church, under a Monument made at the expence of the Parish. ROBERT BOITON was born at Blackborne in this County, on Whit sunday ▪  Year, as infamous for the Massacre of many Protestants in France, so for the  of some eminent in England. His Parents having a narrow Estate, struggled with their necessities, to give him liberal Education; and he was bred first in ▪ then in Brazen-nose Colledge in Oxford. He had Isocrates his six Marks, or Properties of a good Scholar, , See the Particulars justified in his life at large, written by my worthy Friend Edw. Bagshaw. Esq. . His want of means, proved an advancement unto him: For,  having whence to buy Books, he borrowed the best Authours of his Tutor, read over, abridged into Note-books, and returned them. He was as able to express himself, in Latine, or Greek,
as English; and that Stylo Imperatorio. He was chosen one of the Disputants before King James, at his first coming to the University, and performed it with great applause. Thus far I have followed my Authour mentioned in the Margine, but now must depart from him a little in one particular. Though Mr. Boltons parents were not overflowing with wealth, they had a competent Estate (as I am informed by credible intelligence) wherin their Family had comfortably continued long time in good repute. Sr. Angustine Nicholls presented him to the Rectory of Broughton in Northampton∣shire, sending him his Presentation unexspectedly, from his Chamber in Sergeants nn, where D. King Bishop of London, being accidentally present, thanked the Judge for his good choice, but told him withall, that he had deprived the University of a singular Ornament. Besides his constant Preaching he hath left behinde him many usefull Books, the Witnesses of his Piety and Learning, and dyed in the 59th Year of his age, December 17. 1631. JOHN WEEVER was born at ▪ in this County, bred in Queens Colledge in Cambridge, under Dr. John Person his worthy Tutor. He was very industrious in the Studie of Antiquity, and composed a usefull Book of Funeral Monuments, in the Diocesse of Canterbury, Rochester, London, and Norwich: He dyed in London in the fifty sixth Year of his age, and was Buried in St. James Clerken-well, where he appointed this Epitaph for himself, Lancashire gave me Breath, And Cambridge Education. Middlesex gave we Death, And this Church my Humation. And Christ to me hath given A place with him in Heaven. The certain date of his Death I cannot attain, but by Proportion I collect it to be about the Year of our Lord, 1634. RALPH CUDVVORTH, D. D. the second Son of Ralph Cudworth, of Wernith-hall near Manchester Esquire; Chief Lord of Ouldham, was bred Fellow of Emanuel-colledge in Cambridge. A most excellent preacher, who continued and finished some imper∣fect works of Mr. Perkins, and after his Decease supplyed his place in St. Andrews in Cambridge. He was at last presented by the Colledge to the parish of Auler in Somersetshire, Anno 163.. LAWRENCE CHADERTON was born at Chaderton in this County, of ancient, and wealthy Parentage, but much nuzled up in Popish Superstition. He was intended for a Lawyer, and in order thereunto, brought up some time in the Inns of Court, till he changed his profession, and admitted himself in Christs Col∣ledge in Cambridge. His Father hearing that he had altered his place, studies, and Religion, sent him a Poke with a groat therein, for him to go a begging therewith, disinheriting him of hat fair estate, which otherwise had descended upon him. But God who taketh men up when their Fathers and Mothers forsake them, provided him a comfortable subsistance, when chosen Fellow of the Colledge. He was for many years Lecturer at St. Clements in , with great profit to his Auditors, after∣wards made by the Founder first Master of Emanuel. He was chosen by the Non-Conformists to be one of their four Representatives in Hampton-court conference, and was afterwards employed one of the Translators of the Bible. He had a plain but effectual way of Preaching. It happened that he visiting  friends, preached in this his Native Countrey, where the Word of God (as in the dayes of Samuell) was very pretious. And concluded his Sermon which was of two hours continuance at least, with words to this effect. That he would no longer trespasse upon their Patience. Whereupon all the Auditory cryed out, (wonder not if hungry people craved more meat) for God  Sir Go on go on. Herea Mr. Chaderton was surprised into a longer Dis∣course, beyond his expectation, in Satisfaction of their importunity, and (though on a sudden) performed it to their contentment and his commendation. Thus, constant Preachers, like good house keepers, can never be taken so unprovided, but that, (though they make not a plentiful Feast) they can give wholsome food at a short war∣ning.
He commenced Dr. in Divinity, when Frederick Prince Palatine (who married the Lady Elizabeth) came to Cambridge. What is said of Mount Caucasus, that it was never seen without Snowe on the Top, was true of this Reverend Father, whom none of our Fathers generation knew in the Universitie, before he was gray headed, yet he never used Spectacles till the day of his death, being Ninety four years of age. He was not disheartned with that common saying, he that resigneth his place before his death, buryeth himself alive, but put off his Clothes long before he went to bed, divested himself of the Master-ship of Emanuel Colledge, that so he might see a worthy successor in his life time. The blessing which befell Job. 42. 15. Job, was in some sort appliable unto him, he saw his Successors to the fourth generation. I mean Doctor Presson, and after his Death Doctor Sancroft, and after his death Doctor Holesworth, who preached his Funeral Sermon Anno 1640. about the Ninety fourth year of his age. GEORGE WALKER was born at Hauxhead in Fournifells, of Religious Parents. Being visited when a child, with the Small-poxe, and the standers by ex∣pecting his dissolution, he started up out of a Trance, with this ejaculation, Lord take me not away till I have shewed forth thy praises, which made his Parents devote him to the Ministery after his recovery. He was bred B. D. in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, where he attained to be well skilled in the Oriental Tongues, an excellent Logician and Divine, Mr. Foster (formerly his Tutor) resigned unto him his living of St. John the Evangelist, London, wherein Mr. Walker continued the painful Preacher well nigh fourty years, refusing higher preferment often profered him. Dr. Felton (the same morning he was elected Bishop of Ely) made him his Chaplain, and Dr. Featly chose him his second in one of his Disputations against Father Fisher, yea Mr. Walker alone had many encounters with the subtillest of the Jesuitical party. He was a man of an holy life, humble heart, and bountiful hand, who deserved well of Sion Colledge Library, and by his example and perswasion, advanced about a thou∣sand pounds towards the maintenance of preaching-Ministers in this his Native Coun∣ty. He ever wrote all his Sermons, though making no other use of his Notes in the Pulpit, than keeping them in his pocket, being wont to say, that he thought he should be out if he had them not about him. His Sermons since printed, against the pro∣phanation of the Sabboth, and other practises and opinions, procured him much trouble, and two years Imprisonment, till he was released by the Parliament. He dyed in the seventy year of his Age, Anno Dom. 1651. Romish Exile Writers. EDWARD RISHTON was born in this * County, and bred some short timePitz. de Ang. Scrip. pag. 787. in Oxford, till he fled over to Doway, where he was made Master of Arts. Hence he removed to Rome, and having studyed Divinity four years in the English Colledge there, was ordained Preist 1580. Then was he sent over into England to gain Proselites, in prosecution whereof, he was taken and kept Prisoner three years. Yet was the Seve∣rity of the State so mercifull unto him, as to spare his Life, and only condemn him to Banishment. He was carried over into France, whence he went to the University of Pontmuss in Loraine, to plye his Studies. During his abode there, the place was infected with the Plague. Here Rishton forate the Physicians Rule, Cit, Procul, Longe, Tarde, flye away soon, live away far, say away long, come again slowly. For he remained so long in the Town, till he carried away the infection with him, and going thence, dyed at St. Manhow, 1585. I presume no Ingenuous Papist will be censorious on our Pain∣ful Munster, Learned Junius, Godly Greenham, all dying of the Pestilence, seeing the most conscientious of their own Perswasion subject to the same, and indeed neither Love nor Hatred can be collected from such Casualties. THOMAS WORTHINGTON was born in this * County, of a Gentile Fa∣mily,Pitz. de Ang. scrip. Etate 17. pag. 808. was bred in the English Colledge at Doway, where he proceeded Bachelour in Di∣vinity, and a little before the Eighty Eight was sent over into England as an Harvin∣ger for the Spanish Invasion, to prepare his Party thereunto. Here he was caught and
cast into the Tower of London: yet found such favour, that he escaped with his life, being banished beyond the Seas. At Triers he commenced Doctor in Divinity, and in process of time, was made President of the English Colledge at Rhemes. When after long expectation the Old Testament came out in English at Rhemes (permitted with some cautions for our Lay-Catholicks to read) this Worthington wrote his notes thereupon, which few Protestants have seen, and fewer have regarded. He was alive in 1611. but how long after is to me unknown. If not the same, (which for his vivaciousness is improbable) there was a Father* See his one foot out of the Snare. Worthington, certainly his Kinsman and Countryman, very busie to promote the Catho∣lick cause in England, about the beginning of King Charles. He Dining some thirty years since, with a Person of Honour in this Land, (at whose Table I have often eaten) was very obstreperous in arguing the case for Transubstantiation, and the Ubiquitariness of Christs body; Suppose (said he) Christ were here. To whom, the Noble Master of the House (who till then was silent) returned, If you were away, I beleive he would be here. Worthington perceiving his Room more wellcome then his Company, embraced the next opportunity of Departure. ANDERTON whose christian name I cannot recover, was born in* In the life of Mr. Bolton. this County, and brought up at Blackborne School therein, and (as I have been informed) he was bred in Christs Colledge in Cambridge, where for his Eloquence he was commonly called Golden Mouth Anderton; afterwards he went beyond the Seas, and became a Popish preist, and one of the learnedst amongst them. This is he, who improving himself on the poverty of Mr. Robert Bolton, sometimes his School-Fellow, (but then not fixed in his Religion, and Fellow of Brazenose colledge) perswaded him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and go over with him to the English Seminary, promising him gold enough, a good argument to allure an unsta∣ble mind to popery, and they both appointed  meeting. But it pleased the God of Heaven, who holdeth both an Hour-glass and reed in his hand; to measure both time and place, so to order the matter, that though Mr. Bolton came, Mr. Anderton came not accor∣dingly. So that Rome lost, and England gain'd an able Instrument. But now I have lost J. Pitz to guide me, and therefore it is time to knock off, having no direction for the date of his Death. Benefactors to the publick. WILLIAM SMITH was born at * Farmeworth in this County, bred Fellow inBish. Godwin in the Bishops of Lincoln. Pembroke hall in Cambridge, and at last by King Henry the Eighth, preferred Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. That Politick Prince to ease and honour his Native Country of Wales, erected a Court of Presidency, conformable to the Parliaments of France, in the Marshes thereof, and made this Bishop first President, those Parts lying partly in his Diocesse. He discharged the place with singular Integrity, and general contentment, retaining that Office till the day of his Death, when he was removed to be Bishop of Lincoln. A good name is an Ointment poured out, saith Solomon, and this man wheresoever he went, may be followed by the perfume of charity he left behind him. 1. At Lichfield he founded an Hospital for a Master, two preists, and ten poor peo∣ple. 2. In the same place he founded a School, procuring from King Henry the seventh, that the Hospital of Downholl in Cheshire, with the Lands there unto belonging, should be bestowed upon it. Say not this was Robbing the Spittle, or at the best Robbing Pe∣ter to pay Paul, seeing we may presume so charitable a Prelate, would do nothing un∣just, though at this distance of time we cannot clear the particulars of his proceed∣ings. At Farmeworth where he was born, he founded a school, allowing ten pounds annu∣ally (in that age no mean salary) for the Master thereof. The University of Oxford discreetly chose him (Oxford being in his Diocesse of Lin∣coln) their Chancellour, and lost nothing thereby, for he proved a more loving Ne∣phew than Son, so bountiful to his Aunt Oxford, that therein he founded Brazen Nose∣colledge but dyed 1513, before his Foundation was finished.
Both these Notes were taken out of a Manuscript of Mr. Roger Dworth. Molineux a famous preacher about Henry the Eigths time, descended of the house of Sefton in the County of Lancaster, builded the Church at Sefton anew, and houses for Schools about the Church-yard; and made the great Wall about Magdalen Colledge in Oxford. EDVVARD HALSALL in the County of Lancaster Esquire, sometimes Chamberlain of the Exchequer at Chester, founded a Free-school in Halstall, and en∣dowed it with competent Revenue, for the maintenance of a Schoolmaster there for ever. When this party lived, I cannot as yet recover. THOMAS WEST was younger Brother to the Lord De la Ware, and Parson of Manchester; On whom the Barony was devolved, his Brother dying Issuelesse; The Pope allowed him to marry for the Continuance of so honourable a Family, upon condition that he would build a Colledge for such a number of preists (fellows under a Warden) as the Bishops of Durham and Lichfield should think fit, which he did ac∣cordingly in Manchester. The Endowment of this collegiate and parochiall church, were the Gleabe and Tithes of the parsonage of that parish, and besides them, scarce any other considerable Revenue. I say the Gleab, esteemed about 800. Acres of that County (half as much more as the statute) Measure; Besides a considerable part of the Town commonly called the Deans Gate, corruptly for St Dionise Gate, (to whom with the Virgin Mary, and St. George, Manchester Church was dedicated) built upon the Gleab-Land belonging to the Church. As for the Tythes of the Parish, they lye in two and thirty Hamblets, wherewith the Collegiats were to be maintained, which were, one Warden and four Fellows; The integrated and incorporate Rector unto whom the parsonage was ap∣propriated. There were also two Chaplains, Singing-men, Queristers, and Organists. This Colledge hath passed many Dissolutions and refoundations. But was lately dissolved, and the Lands thereof sold by the late Act for Sale of Dean and Chap∣ters Lands: Some skilful in the Gospel much bemoaning it, and some learned in the Law, conceiving, That being but the Gleab of that Rectory, it came not within the compasse of that Act: but blessed be God it since hath reverted to its former Condition. Since the Reformation. JOHN SMITH was born at. . . . . . . . . in this County, bred in Magdalen Cll. in Cambridge. Whereof he became Fellow and Proctor of the University, when past Sixty years of age, when the Prevaricators gave him this Homonyous Salute Ave Pater. This man could not fidle, could not Tune himself to be pleasant and plausible to all Companies: but He could, and did make that little Coll. great; wherein he had his Education. The Poets fain how Bachus, by reason of his Mother Semyles her untimely death, was taken out of his Mothers Womb, and sewed into the thigh of Jupiter his Father, where he was bred untill the full time of his Nativity. A Fiction which finds a Morall in this Magdalen Coll. Whose Mother may be said to decease before the Infant was fit to be borne, and that Mr. Smith performed the rest of the Parents part there∣unto. Indeed Ed. Stafford Duke of Buckingham, the first founder thereof, gave it little more than a Name. The Lord Audley bestowed on it a new name, with little buildings and lesse Indowment, Magnificent Dr. Nevil for a Time was Mr. thereof, but (ac∣cording to the fashion of the World the rich shall still have more) his affections were all for Trinity Coll. to which he was after removed. Onely Mr. Smith by his long life and thrifty living, by what he gave to, and what he saved for the Colledge, so Improved the Condition thereof, that though he left it Lateritium as he found it, yet what he found poor and empty he left rich and full of Scholars. Nor must we forget his painfulnesse, when with Dr. Gouge he sollicited the Suit called Magdalen Colledge Case, Nor yet his Patience, when he lay so long in the Fleet, for refusing to submit to an Order of Chancery (fearing their cause would be prejudi∣ced thereby) so that he may be called the Confessor of the Colledge, from inconside∣rable
Income. He raised by his carefulnesse considerable profit to the Fellows of that house, and by observing the Statutes, brought the Colledge into such Reputation for Learning, That yearly it afforded one or more Eminent scholars. In a word, he was a true servant to the Colledge all his life and at his Death, to which he bequeathed all he had, six hundred pounds at least, and dyed Anno. Dom. 163. . . GEORGE CLARKE Haberdasher, a plain honest man, just, temperate and ugal: And according to his understanding, (which in the Worlds esteem was not great) devout, a daily frequenter of the Prayers in the Colledge Church, and the Hearer of Sermons there. Not long before the breaking forth of our civil dissentions; dying without issue, he made the Poor his Heir; and did give them one hundred pounds per annum, in good lands lying in a place called Crompsall, within a Mile from Man∣chester; I have not yet attained the certain Date of his Death. HUMPHREY CHETHAM, third Son of Henry Chetham of Crompsall Gentleman, is thought (on just ground) to descend from Sir Jeffrey Chetham of Chet∣ham, (a man of much Remark in former dayes) and some old Writings in the hands of Worshipful persons, not far remote from the place, do evidence as much, but the said Sir Geffrey falling in troublesome times into the Kings Displeasure; his Fami∣ly (in effect) was long since ruinated. But it seems his Posterity was unwilling to fly far from their old (though destroy∣ed) Nest, and got themselves a handsome habitation at Crompsall hard by, where James, elder Brother of this Humphrey Chetham, did reside. The younger Brethren George, Humphrey, and Ralph, betook themselves to the Trading of this County, dealing in Manchester commodities, sent up to London; And Humphrey signally im∣proved himself in piety and outward prosperity. He was a diligent Reader of the Scriptures and of the Works of sound Divines, a Respecter of such Ministers, which he accounted truely godly, upright, sober, discreet and sincere. He was High∣Sheriffe of this County, 1635. discharging the place with great Honour. Insomuch that very good Gentlemen of Birth and Estate did wear his Cloth at the Assize, to testifie their unfeigned affection to him, and two John Huntley & H. Wrigley Esquires. of them of the same profession with himelf, have since been Sheriffs of the County. Grudge not Reader, to go through so long a Porch, for I assure thee it leads unto a fair Pallace; to as great a Masterpiece of Bounty, as our age hath afforded. This Mr. Chetham by his Will bearing Date the 16. of January 1651. gave 7000. l. to buy a Fee-simple estate of 420. l. for ever, for the Education of forty poor Children in Manchester at School, from about 6. till 14. years of age, when they are to be bound out Apprentizes. They must be the Children of poor but honest Parents, no bastards, nor diseased at the time wherein they are chosen, not lame or blind, in regard the Town of Manchester hath ample means already (if so employed) for the maintenance of such Impotents. Indeed, he intended it for a Seminary of Religion and Ingenuity, where the aforesaid Boyes were to have Diet, Lodging, Apparel and Instruction. He gave a 1000. l. for Books to a Library, and a 100. l. to prepare a place for them. He bequeathed 200. l. to buy Books, (such as he himself delighted in) for the Churches of Manchester, Bolton, and other Chapels thereabouts; He gave the Remainder of his Estate (Debts and Legacies first paid) to the Encrease of the books in the Library. Now as the Loaves in the Gospel, multiplyed in the breaking, So Mr. Chethams Estate did not shrink but swell in the calling of it in; Insomuch, That the aforesaid Surplusage, is known to be the better part of Two thousand pounds. Dying a Ba∣chelour, he appointed George Chetham Esquire, Citizen and Grocer of London (where∣of he was chosen Alderman 1656. and fined for the same) and Edward Chetham Gent. Executors of his Will and Testament: God send us more such men, That we may dazle the Eyes of the Papists, with the light of Protestant good works. And know Reader I am beholding for my exact Information herein, to my worthy friend Mr. Johnson, late Preacher of the Temple, and one of the Feoffees appointed by Mr Chetham for the uses aforesaid.
Memorable Persons. Sir EDMUND de TRAFFORD Knights, Sir THOMAS de ASHTON Knights, were persons of high esteem, as anciently descended, and richly reveneued in this County, how great their skill was in Chemistry, will appear by the following Patent (faithfully transcribed with mine own hand, out of the Original in the Tower) granted unto them by King Henry the sixth, in the four and twentieth year of his Reign. REX omnibus ad quos, &c. Salutem.Pat. 24. of Heb. 6. Me mb. 14. Sciatis, quod cum dilecti & fideles nostri, Edmundus de Trafford Miles, & Thomas Ashton Miles, Nobis per quandam supplicationem monstrave∣rint, quod quamvis ipsi super certis metallis, per Artem sive Scientiam Philosophiae operari vellent, metalla imperfecta de suo proprio genere trans∣ferre, & tunc ea per dictam Artem sive Scientiam, in Aurum sive Ar∣gentum perfectum transubstantiare, ad omnimodas probationes & examinati∣ones, sicut aliquod aurum sive argen∣tum in aliqua Minera crescens, expe∣ctandum & indurandum, ut dicunt; Nihilominus certae personae illis male∣volentes, et malignantes, supponant ipsos per Artem illicitam operari, & sic ipsos in probatione dictae Artis sive Scientiae impedire et perturbare pssunt. Nos praemissa considerantes, ac conclu∣sionem dictae operationis, sive Scientiae scire volentes, de gratia nostra speci∣ali concessimus & licentiam dedimus iisdem Edmundo & Thomae, & ipso∣rum servientibus, quod ipsi Artem sive Scientiam praedictam, operari & pro∣bare possint licite & impune, abs{que} im∣petione nostra vel Officiariorum no∣strorum quorumcunque; aliquo Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione, sive Provisione in contrarium facto ordinat. sive pro∣vis. non obstante. In cujus, &c. T. R. apud Westmond. septimo die Aprilis. The King to all unto whom, &c. Greeting. Know ye, that whereas our beloved & loyal Edmund de Trafford Knight, and Thomas  Knight, have by a certain Petition shown unto Us, that although they were willing by the Art or Science of Philosophie, to work upon certain metalls, to translate imperfect metalls from their own kind, and then to tran∣substantiate them by the said Art or Science, as they say; into perfect Gold or Silver, unto all manner of proofs and trialls, to be expected and indured, as an Gold or Sil∣ver growing in any Mine, Notwith∣standing certain persons ill willing, and maligning them, conceive them to work by unlawful Art, and so may hinder and disturb them in the triall of the said Art and Science. We considering the premisses, and willing to know the conclusion of the said Working or Science, of Our special grace have granted and given leave to the same Edmund and Thomas, and to their Servants, that they may work and trie the aforesaid Art and Science, lawfully and free∣ly, without any hinderance of Ours, or of Our Officers whatsoever, Any Statute, Act, Ordinance, or Pro∣vision, made, ordained, or pro∣vided to the contrary notwithstan∣ding. In witness whereof, the King at Westminster, the 7. day of April. Mr. ...... KIDSON. Reader, I presume not now to direct thee, who my self am at a losse, and Grope for a Guide▪ Leland in his Itinerary, speaking of Warton a Village in this County, observeth, that Mr. Kidson was born there, a passage which never had fallen from his Pen, had he not been one of signal Remark. Who this Mr. Kidson was, where he lived, what he did, where he dyed, I shall be thank∣ful to such as give me Satisfaction. RICHARD ROTHVVELL was born at or near Mr. Clark in his Lives of modern di∣vines p. 450. Bolton in the Mores, in this County. Taking the Ministry (after his education in Cambridge) upon him, he dis∣posed his temporal estate to his freind to live of the Gospell. I remit the Reader to his Life extant at large in Print, wherein this most remarkable, viz. his dispossessing of John Fox near Nottingham of a Divel, there passing betwixt them a large Discourse,
by way of Question and Answer. I know that such Confabulations are common in the Church of Rome, to whose Exorcists, Satans Language is as Familiar as Erasmus his Dialogues are well known to men, or those of Corderius to School-Boys. But such accidents amongst Protestants are very rare, and therefore the more to be observed. There are I confess, more Thomases then my self, much given to mistrust (whose faith will be at a stand herein) However finding it atteste by an honest and * ableMr. Stanly Gower Minist. of Dorchester, who penned his Life full of many observa∣bles. person, I dare not deny the truth thereof. All I will say, is this, That is the best be∣leif, which is neither over forward, nor over-froward, which, as it will not run it self out of breath with too much speed, will not be like a  horse, which no force can make to go farther. He dyed at Mansfield in Nottingham-shire, 1627. in the 64▪ year of his age. No could I write lesse of him, whom Idem Ibidem. one termeth Orbis Terra▪ rum Anglicarum Oculum, The Eye of our English World, and my Book would seem  and blind, if passing him over in Silence. Lord Mayors.   Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1 Nicholas Mossey Edward Mossey Hough Clothworker 1599. 2 James Pemberton. James Pemberton Eccleston Goldsmith 1611. Reader, Lancashire is one of the 12. pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose Gentry, were not returned into the Tower, in the Twelfth year of K. Henry the Sixth. Sheriffes. Name. Place. Armes. Reginae Elizab.     Anno,     1 Johan. Talbot, ar.   Arg. 3 Lions Rampant, Purpre▪ 2 Rob. , .     3 Joh. , m. Atherton 3 Falcons, Or. 4 Joh. Southworth     5 Tho. Hesketh, m.   Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Garbs, Or. 6 Tho. Houghton, a. Houghton 3. Bars Argent. 7 Edw. Trafford, ar. Trfford Argent a Griffin Ramp. Gules. 8 Ric. Mollineux, m Sheffon a Cross Moline, Or. 9 Tho. Laugnton, m.   Arg. 3  Gules. 10 Edw. Holland, ar.   Az. a L. R. sem. de Fluer de L. Ar. 11 Joh. Preston, arm.   Arg. 2 bars, ou a Cant. Gules, a 12 Tho. utler, arm.   Cinque foil, Or. 13 Edw. Trafford, a. ut prius   14 Fran▪ Holt, arm.   Arg. on a Bend Engrailed S. 3 Flower de Luce of the first. 15 Rich. Holland, a. ut prius   16 Will. Boothe, ar.   Arg. 3  heads Erased and Erected S. 17 Fran▪ Holt, arm. ut prius   18 Rich. Bold, arm.   Argent a  Rampant S. Io-zeenge▪ of the Field & Sables. 19 Ro. Dalton, ar.     20 Johan▪ Party per Pale , Az. and Or 6 Martlets counter chang'd Arg. a Mullet Sable. 21 Rad▪ Ashton▪ ar.*     22 Edw. Trafford, m. ut prius   23 Joh. Byron miles   Argent 3. Bendlets Gules. 24 . Holland, ut prius   25 Joh. Atherton, ar. ut prius   26 Edwar. Trafford, ut prius   27 Tho. Preston, ar. ut prius   28 Richard. Asheton ut prius   29 Johan. Fleetwood ut prius   30 Tho. Talbot, ar. ut prius   31 Rich. Mollineux ut prius   32 Rich. Bold, ar. ut prius   33 Jac. Asheton, ar. ut prius   34 Edw. Fitton, ar.   Az. on a Bend Arg. 3. Garbs O. 35 Richard. Asheton ut prius   36 Radulp. Asheton ut prius   37 Tho. Talbot, arm. ut prius   38 . Holland ut prius   39 Rich. Molleneux ut prius   40 Richard. Asheton ut prius   41 Rich. Houghton ut prius   42 Robert. Hesketh ut prius   43 Cut. Halsall, m.   Arg. 3. Griffins Heads Erazed. A 44 Edward. Trafford ut prius   K. James.     Anno,     1 Nic. Moseley, mil.   S. a Chev. betw. 3 Pick▪ axes, arg 2 Thom. Baker, mil.     3 Edw. Fleetwood, a. ut prius   4 Rich. Ashton, mil. ut prius   5 Rob, , ar. ut prius   6 Edw. Trafford, m. ut prius   7 Roger. Nowell, a.   Arg. 3. Cups covered S. 8 Johan. Fleming, a.     9 Cut. Halsall, m. ut prius   10 Rob. Bindlose, a. Borwick Quarterly per Fess indented G. & on a Bend, Or. 11 Rich. Shiborn, a.     12 Edw. Stanley, ar.   Arg. on a end Az. 3. Stags heads caboshed, Or. 13 Rolan▪ Moseley, a ut prius   14 Edw. Trafford, m. ut prius   15 Ric.   S. 3 Weavers Shuttles, Argent. 16 Leonar. Ashawe, a     17 Edw. Moore, ar.   Vert. ten Trefoiles 4. 3. 2. and 1. Argent. 18     19     20     21     22     23     24 K. CHARLES.   Courteous Reader, do not behold these Vacuities, as the Effect of my Lazinesse. Nor will I excuse my self, by accusing of others. The rather because, In gratuitisnulla est Jnjusticia, it was no wrong in any to deny, what was boun∣ty in them to bestow, on me. But know all my Industry and Impor∣tunity could not procure the sea∣sonable sight of the Records of this County (not kep a the rest in the Exchequer but in a proper place by themselves) thereby to supply the Begining and Finishing of this our Catalogue. 1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8     9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19     20     21     22    
The Batails. At Preston in Andernesse, August 17. 1648. Duke Hambleton resolving to play an Aftergame of Loyalty, entred England with an Army more numerous then well Discip∣lined. Most beheld him as one rather cunning than wise, yet rather wise, than valiant. However he had Officers who did Ken the War-craft, as well as any of our Age. He would accept of no English Assistance, so to engrosse all the work and wages to him∣self. Some suspect his Officers trust was undermined, (or over-moneyed rather) whilst others are confident, they were betrayed by none save their own security. Indeed the common Souldiers were perswaded that the conquest would be easy, rather to be possessed then purchased, their Van and Rear were many miles asunder, and they met the resistance of Major General Lambert, before they expected it. H at Preston gave the Scotch Army such a Blow, as setled or stund it, though it reeled on some miles more Southward into Staffordshire, where at Ulceter, the Duke was taken prisonerBy ollonel Waite., and utterly defeated. As for the Defeat of James Earl of Derby in this County, at the end of August, anno 1651. it amounted not to a Battle; which properly is the Engagement of two formed Armies. Whereas the forces of the Earl, were sattered before fully  red, to a firm consistency. Yet this had been a Battle, if not prevented by the Vigilancy of Coll. Lilburn and others, whose seasonable Service to the Parliament, was not so great in it self, as in the most considerable consequences thereof. The Farewell. I am informed that Pillyn-Mos is the Fountain of Fewell [Turfe] in this County, and is conceived inexhaustible by the Vicinage. May it prove so. But if it should chance to fail, may Gods Grace (which the vulgar in their profane Proverb unequally yoak therewith) I say may Gods Grace never be drained to those that stand in need there∣of. And because this County may be called the Cock-pit of Conseience, wherein constant Combates betwixt Religion and Superstition, may the Contest betwixt them prove like the Morning Twilight, wherein (after some equal Conflict betwixt them) the Light gaineth the final Conquest of the Darkness. One word more to this Shire and I have done. Let me be the Remembrancer, that Hugh of Manchester in this CountyVide supra pag. 14. Titulo Writers. wrote a Book in the Reign of K. Edward the first. Intituled, De Fanaticorum Deliriis. Of the Doteages of Fanaticks. At which time an Impostor had almost made Elianor the Queen mother mad; by re∣porting* Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 4. N. 62. & Pitz. De Ang. Script. Anno 1294. the Posthume-miracles done by her Husband King Henry the Third, till this our Hugh setled her judgement aright. I could wish some worthy Divine (with such Lan∣cashire doth abound) would resume this Subject, and shew how Antient and Modern Fanaticks, though differing much in their wild Fancies and Opinions, meet together in a mutual madness and distraction.
LEIGESTERSHIRE. LEICESTER-SHIRE. This County is (though not exqui∣sitely) circular in the form, whilst Leicester the Shire-Town is al∣most the exact Center thereof, and the River Soare, Diameter∣like, divides it into two equal halfes. Having Lincolne, and Rutland-shire on the East, Darby and Nottingham-Shire on the North, Warwick-Shire on the West, and Northampton-Shire on the South. It extendeth from North to South thirty and three miles (measured from the utmost Angle) but exceedeth not twenty seven in the Breadth thereof.Burton in his Description of Leicester-shire. pag. 2. Here  avoid all offence we  collect the Quality of this Soyle from a * Native thereof. Who may be presumed exact in this Quadri-Partition. South-West. North▪ West. North▪ East. South-East Rich ground plenti∣ful in Corn and Pa∣sture, but wanting Wood, forceing the Inhabitants to make use of Straw, Cowe∣▪ &c. For the most part, Hard and Barren, yielding Fruit not without labour and expence, but well stored with Wood & Pit-cole. Good Soyle, apt to bear Corn and Grass and sufficiently pro∣vided with Fuell. Much▪ like the last for fruitfulnesse, & of the two, bet∣ter furnished with Fuel. However these four Quarters being put together into the Body of one Shire, com∣petently supply their mutual defects. Natural Commodities. Beans. Plenty of these in this County, especially about Barton in the Beans, in the Hundred of Sparkhen-Hoe, where they appear like a Forrest toward the time of Harvest. Wherefore the Scouts of Charles Duke of Burgundie, who mistook a Field full of highPhil. Comincus lib. 1. cap. 11.. thistles, near unto Paris, for the Army of the King of France, with their lances held upright, might here commit the like mistake with more probability. Though Beans be gene∣rally beheld, but as horse and hog-graine, yet were they mans * meat, even in the2 Sam. 17. 28 & Ezek. 49. plentiful Country of Canaan, called  Pholl in the Hebrew, whence some deduce the word Pulse, though none dare affirm that Daniel his Pulse was made thereof. But more of thisIn the Pro∣verb, of Bean∣belly Leicester∣shire. Grain hereafter. Cole. These are digg'd up plentifully at Cole-Orton, in the Hundred of West Goscot. I say Cole-Orton, for there is another Village called Cold-Orton in this Shire. An addition, which no lesse truly than sadly would be prefixed to most Towns in this County, if not warmed in VVinter with this under-ground-fewell, that above-ground is so much decayed. I confess , a Treasure of Coles, passeth both in the Greek and Latine Proverb, for a frustrated Expectation, and his hopes fall very low, who, looking for Gold, either in Specie or in Oar, lighteth only on a heap of Coles, which anciently used to be buryed in the Earth, for boundaries orAustin de civi∣tate lib. 21. c. 4. limits of lands. However such Mines of Coles as these, without any help of Alcumy, are quickly turned into Gold and Silver, sold at good rates to the Countryes round about. Manufactures in this County are not to be expected, for where the Husbandmans Acre-Staffe, and the Shepheards-hook are as in this County in Staie, there they engross all to themselves, and command Manufactures to observe their distance from them. The Buildings. This County afordeth no Cathedralls, and as for the Parish-Churches therein, they may take the Eye, not ravish the admiration of the beholder. Bottsford, is one of the primest, very fair and large, with a high Spire Steeple. At the Suppression of Abbeys, many ancient Monument, of the Albanies and Rosses, were removed
hither out of the Priory of Beaver, by the command of Thomas Earl of Rutland, and pity it was, that his commendable care was not imitated in other places. As for ciil Structures, there is a seeming parity betwixt many fair Houses in this Shire, only something Monarchical (above the ordinary Aristocracy of Fabricks) apppears in the heigth, strength and workmanship of the Stone Tower, built by William Lord Hastings at Ashby de la-Zouch. Also the fair, large, and beautiful pallace, built at Broadgate, by Thomas Grey Marquess of Dorset, challengeth the preheminence above the rest. The Wonders. There is a Village in this County named Charleton, sirnamed Curley, and all that are born therein, have an harsh and wratling kind of Speech, uttering their words with much difficulty and wharling in the Throat, and cannot well pronounce the Let∣ter R. Surely this proceedeth not from any natural imperfection in the Parents (whence probably the Tribual Judg. 12. 6. Lisping of the Ephramites did arise) because their children born in other places, are not haunted with that Infirmity. Rather it is to be imputed to some occult quality in the Elements of that Place. Thus a learned Author Jo. Bodin Method. Hist. cap. 5. informeth us, that some Families at Labloin in Guyen in France, do naturally stut and stammer, which he taketh to proceed from the nature of the Waters. As for the inability distinctly to pronounce R. it is a catching disease in other Counties. I knew an Mr. Ios. Mede. Essex man, as great a Scholar as any in our age, who could not for his life utter, Carolus Rex Britanniae without stammering. The best was, the King had from him in his hearty prayers, what he wanted in his plain pronunciation. My Father hath told me, that in his time, a Fellow of Trinity Colledge, probably a Native of Charleton in this County, sensible of his own imperfection herein, made a Speech of competent length with select words both to his Mouth and for his Matter, without any R. therein, to shew that Men may speak without being beholding to the Dogs Letter. Proverbs. Bean-belly Leicester-shire.] So called from the great plenty of that grain growing therein. Yea, those in the neighbouring Counties, use to say merrily, Shake a Leicester-shire Yeoman by the Col∣lar, and you shall hear the Beans rattle in his belly; But those Yeomen smile at what is said to rattle in their bellies, whilst they know good silver ringeth in their Pockets. Indeed I read a Latine Proverb, A Fabis abstineto, Forbear beans; whereof some make a civil interpretation, meddle not with matters of State, because anciently men cast in a Bean, when they gave their Suffrages in publick elections; others expound it physically, because Beans are windy and discompose the tranquillity of mens minds, by their slatuous evaporation; the reason assigned for the general report that Pytha∣goras prohibited the eating of them to his Scholars. Yet an excellent  apud A. Gellium lib. 4. cap. 11. Authour informs me, that Pythagoras had his repast on Beans more than on any kind of pulse. However nothing will put Leicester-shire men out of conceit of their beloved Beans, the rather because their plenty argueth the goodnesse of their ground. For, where∣as lean land will serve for puling pease and faint fetches, it must be a strong and fruit∣ful soyle indeed, where the masculine Beans are produced. If Bever have Burtons De∣scription of Leicester-. pa. 2. a capp,] You Churles of the Vale look to that.] That is, when the Clouds (as he expoundeth it) hang over the Towers of the Castle, it is a prognostick of much rain and moisture, to the much indamaging of that fruitful Vale, lying in the three Counties of Leicester, Lincoln, and Not∣tingham. But alas, though the cap may be there still, the head (or the crown thereof) I am sure is not there, [I mean Beaver Castle it self] being lately demolished in our Civil Wars, though I hear some part thereof is in rebuilding. I wish the Workmen good success, though I suspect the second Edition (to use a Scholars Metaphor) of this Castle, will not be o full and fair as the former.
Princes. IANE GREY, Her life is writen at large in my Holy State. eldest Daughter of HENRY GREY, Duke of Suffolk, by Francis , Eldest Daughter to Mary, second Sister to King Henry the eighth, was born at Broadgates, near unto Leicester. No Lady which led so many pious, lived so few pleasant Dayes, whose soul was never out of the Non-age of Afflictions, till Death made her of full years to inherit Happiness; so severe her Education. VVhilest a childe, her Father's, was to her an House of Correction, nor did she write Woman, sooner than she did subscribe Wife, and in Obedience to her Parents, was unfortunately matched to the L. Guilford Dudley; yet he was a goodly, and (for ought I ind to the contrary) a Godly Gentleman, whose worst fault was, that he was Son to an ambitious Father. She was proclaimed but never crowned Queen, living in the Tower, which Place, though it hath a double capacity, of a Palace, and a Prison, yet appeared to her chiefly in the later Relation. For She was longer a Captive than a Queen therein, taking no contentment all the time, save what she found in God, and a clear Conscience. Her Family, by snatching at a Crown which was not, lost a Coronet, which was their own, much degraded in Degree, and more in Estate. I would give in an Inventory of the vast Wealth they then possessed, but am loth to grieve her surviving Relations with a List of the Lands lost by her Fathers attainture. She suffered on Tower-Hill,  on the twelfth of February. KATHARINE GREY was second Daughter to Henry Duke of Suffolk. Tis pity to part the Sisters, that their Memories may mutually condole and comfort one another. She was born in the same place, and (when her Father was in height) married to Henry Lord Herbert, Son and Heir to the Earl of Pembroke; bu the poli∣tick old Earl, perceiving the case altered, and what was the high way to Honour, tur∣ned into the ready road to Ruin, got pardon from Queen Mary, and brake the mar∣riage quite off. This Heraclita, or Lady of Lamentation thus repudiated, was seldome seen with dry eyes for some years together, sighing out her sorrowful condition; so that though the Roses in her Cheeks looked very wan and pale, it was not for want of watering. Afterward Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford married her privately without the Queens Licence, and concealed till her pregnancy discovered it. Indeed our English Proverb, It is good to be near a kin to Land, holdeth in private patrimonies, not Titles to Crowns, where such Aliances hath created to many much mo∣lestation. Queen Elizabeth beheld her with a jealous Eye, unwilling she should match either Forreign Prince or English Peer, but follow the pattern she set her of constant Virginity. For their Presumption, this Earl was fined fifteen thousand pounds, imprisoned with his Lady in the Tower, and severely forbidden her company. But Love and Money will find or force a passage. By bribing the Keeper he bought (what was his own) his Wifes Embraces, and had by her a surviving Son Edward, Ancestor to the Right Honoura∣ble the Duke of Somerset, She dyed January 26. a Prisoner in the Tower 1567. after nine years durance therein. MARY GREY the youngest Daughter, frighted with the Infelicity of her two Elder Sisters, Jane and this Katharine, forgot her Honour to remember her Safety, and married one whom she could love, and none need fear, Martin Kayes of Kent Esq. who was a Judge at Court (but only of Doubtful casts at Dice, being Sejeant-Porter) and died without Issue, the 20. of April 1578. Martyrs. HUGH LATIMER was born at Thurcaston in this County, what his Father was, and how qualified for his State, take from his own mouth, in his first Sermon beforeFox acts and Monuments. King Edward, being confident the Reader will not repent his pains in perusing it.* Pag. 32.
My Father was a Yeoman, and had no Lands of his own; onely he had a Farme of three or four Pounds a Year at the uttermost, and hereupon he tilled so much as kept halfe a dozen men, he had walk for an Hundred Sheep, and my Mother milked thiry Kine, he was able, and did finde the King an HARNESS with himself, and his Horse, whilest he came unto the Place, that he should receive the Kings Wages. I can remember I buckled his Harness when he went to Black Heath Field. He kept me to School, or else I had not been able to have Preached before the Kings Majestie now. He married my Sisters with Five Pounds, or twenty Nobles a piece: so that he brought them up in Godliness and Fear of God: He kept Hospitallity for his Poor Neighbours, and some Almes: He gave to the Poor, and all this did he of the same Farme, where he that now hath it, payeth sixteen pounds by the Year and more, and is not able to do any thing for his Prince, for himself, nor for his Children, or give a Cup of Drink to the Poor. He was bred in Christ's Colledg, in Cambridg, and converted under God by Mr. Bilney, from a Violent Papist to a Zealous Protestant. He was afterwards made Bishop of Worcester, and four Years after outed, for refusing to subscribe the six Articles: How he was martyred at Oxford 1555. is notoriously known. Let me add this Appendix to his Memory, when the Contest was in the House of Lords, in the Raign of K. Henry the Eighth, about the giving all Abby Lands to the King▪ There was a Division betwixt the Bishops of the Old and New Learning; for by those Names they were distinguished. Those of the Old Learning unwillingly willing▪ were contented, that the King should make a Resumption of all those Abbies which his Ancestors had founded, leaving the rest to continue according to the Intention of their Founders. The Bishops of the new Learning were more pliable to the Kings Desires, Only Latimer was dissenting, earnestly urging, that two Abbies at the least, in every Diocess of considerable Revenues, might be preserved for the Maintenance of Learned men therein. Thus swimming a good while against the stream, he was at last carried away with the Current. Eminent Prelates before the Reformation. GILBERT SEGRAVE Born at Segrave in this County, was bred in Oxford, where he attained to great Learning, as the Books written by him do declare. The first Pre∣ferment I find conferred on him was, The Provosts place of St. Sepulchers in York, and the occasion how he obtained it is remakable. The Pope had formerly bestowed it on his near Kinsman, which argueth the good value thereof, seeing neither Eagles, nor Eagles Birds do feed on Flyes. This Kins∣man of the Popes lying on his death bed, was troubled in Bishop Godw. in vita T. Cor∣bridge. Conscience (which speak∣eth loudest when men begin to be speechlesse, and all Sores pain most when nere night) that he had undertaken such a Cure of Souls upon him, who never was in England, nor understood English, and therefore requested the Pope his Kinsman, that after his Death the Place might be bestowed on some Learned English-man, that so his own ab∣sence and negligence might in some sort be repaired by the Residence and diligence of his Successor, And this Segrave to his great Credit, was found the fittest Person for that Performance. He was afterwards preferred Bishop of London sitting in that See not full four years, dying Anno Dom. 1317. WALTER DE LANGTON was born at VVest-langton in this County. He was highly in favour with King Edward the first, under whom he was Bishop of Co∣ventry and Liechfield, and Treasurer of England. He granted him also Liberty of free  De∣scription of this County. pag. 257. Warren in VVest and Thorpe Langton in this County the Patrimoniall inheritance of this Prelate. VVith his own innocence and friends assistance, at long sailing he weathered out the Tempest of the Popes displeasure. Longer did he groan under the undeserved Anger of King Edward the second, chiefly, because this Bishop sharply reproved him when as yet but Prince for his Godwin in the Bishops of  and Wells De∣bauchery. See here the great difference betwixt youth, some hopefully, some desperately
riotous. Of the former was Henry the fifth, who when King, is said to have rewarded and advanced such, who had reproved and punished him when Prince. Of the latter was King Edward, not only wild but mad in his vitiousnesse. But our Langton at length, was brought saith my T. Walsingham Author in Regis Semigratiam into the Kings half favour, let me add & in populi sesquegratiam, and into the peoples favour and half, who highly loved and honoured him. His tragicomical life, had a peaceable end in Plenty and Prosperity, He found his Cathedral of Lihfield mean, and left it magnificent, and it will appear by the in∣stance of our Langton, Josseline of Wells and others, that Bishops continuing unre∣moved in their See, have atcheived greater matters then those who have been often translated, though to richer Bishopricks. Indeed prodigious was his bounty in building and endowing his Cathedral, wherein he continued almost 25. years, and dying 1321. was buryed in the Chappel of St. Mary of his own erection. ROGERDE Bishop God∣win writeth hm Mortivall. MARTIVAL Son and Heir of Sir Aukitell de Martivall Kt. (who gave for his Arms Argent a Cinque foyle Sable) was born at Nowsley in this County. He was first Arch-Deacon of Leicester, then Dean of Lincoln, and at last consecrated Bishop of Salisbury, in the Reign of King Edward the Second 1315. Now seeing Bishop Godwin, hath nothing more of him save his Name and Date, it is charity further to inform Posterity that he was the last heir male of his house, and founded a Colledg at  in the Description of this County. Pag. 211. Nowsley, temp. Edw. 1. for a Warden and certain Brethren, which in the 24. of Hen. 6. was valued to dispend yearly (besides all charges) 6. l. 13. 5. 4. d. His estate descended to Joyce de Martivall his Sister, married unto Sir Ralph Hastings lineal Ancestor to the now Earl of Huntington. As for the Mannor of Nowsley as it came by the mother, so it went away with her Daughter, into the Family of the He∣rons; and by her Daughter into the Family of the Hazleriggs, who at this day are the Possessors thereof. This Bishop dyed in the midst of Lent, 1329. ROBERT WIVIL was born of worthy and wealthy parentage at Brton in his Description of Leicesler shire. pag. 269. ▪ Stanton Wivil in this County, at the Instance of Philippa Queen to King Edward the Third, the Pope, Anno 1329. preferred him Bishop of Salisbury. It is hard to say whether he were more Dunce or Dwarfe, more unlearned or unhansome, insomuch that T. Wal∣singham tells us, that had the Pope ever seen him (as no doubt he felt him in his large Fees) he would never have conferred the Place upon him. He sate Bishop more then 45. years, and impleaded William Mountague Earl of Sa∣lisbury in a Writ of Right for the Castle of Salisbury. The Earl chose the Trial by Battell, which the Bishop accepted of, and both produced their Champions into the Place. The Combatant for the Bishop coming forth all clad in white, with the bishops own Gowin in the Bishops of Salisbury.  ut pri∣us. Arms (viz.) (Gules Fretty Varee, * a Chief Or) empailed no doubt with them of his See on his Surcote. Some highly commended the Zeal of the Bishop asserting the Rights of his Church, whilest others condemned this in him, as a unprelatical act, God allowing Duells no competent Deciders of such Differences. And moderate men to find out an expedi∣ent, said, he did this not as a Bishop but Baron; the best was, the matter was taken up by the Kings interposing, and the Bishop with 2500. Marks, bought of the Earl the quiet possession of the Castle, and dyed Anno Dm. 1375. being buryed under a Mar∣ble Stone about the middle of the Quire. Since the Reformation. JOSEPH HAL was born at Ashby De La Zouch, in this County, where his Father under the Earl of Huntington, was Governour or Bayly of the Town. So soon almost as Emanuel Colledge was admitted into Cambridge, he was admitted into that Colledge, within few years after the first foundation thereof. He passed all his degrees with great applause▪ First noted in the University, for his ingenuous main∣taining, (be it Truth, or Paradox) that Mundus senescit, The World groweth old. Yet, in some sort, his position confuteth his position, the wit and quickness whereof did argue an increase, rather than a decay of parts in this latter age. He was first beneficed by Sir R. Drury at Hallsted in Suffolk, and thence removed by Edward Lord Denny, (afterward Earl of Norwich) to Waltham Abbey in Essex. Here I must pay the Tribute of my Gratitude to his memory, as building upon his founda∣tion,
beholding my self, as his great Grandchild in that place, three degrees from him in succession: But oh, how many from him in ability! His little Catechisme hath done great good in that populous parish, and I could wish that Ordinance more gene∣rally used all over England. Being Doctor of Divinity, he was sent over by K. James to the Synod of Dort, whence only indisposition of body forced him to return before the rest of his Collegues. He was preferred first Dean of Worcester, then Bishop of Exeter, then Bishop of Exeter, then Bishop of no place; surviving to see his sacred function buryed before his eyes. He may be said to have dyed with his pen in his hand, whose Writing and Living expired together. He was commonly called our English Sir H. Wotton in his Letter to Dr. Collins. Seneca, for the purenesse, plainesse, and fulnesse of his style. Not unhappy at Controversies, more happy at Comments, very good in his Characters, better in his Sermons, best of all in his Meditations. Nor will it be amiss to transcribe the following passage out of his Will. In the name of God, Amen. I Joseph Hall, D.D. not worthy to be called Bishop of Nor∣wich, &c. First, I bequeath my soul, &c. my body I leave to be interred without any funeral*  R. Richard. pomp, at the Discretion of my Executors, with this only monition, that I do not hold Gods House a meet Repository for the dead bodies of the greatest Saints. He dyed September the 8. Anno Dom. 1656. and was buryed at Hyhem near Norwich. Statesmen. GEORGE VILLIERS was born at Brooksby in this County,  son to his father Sir George Villiers and second son to his Mother Mary Beaumont. Being debarred (by his late Nativity) from his fathers lands, he was happy in his Mothers love, main∣taining him in France, till he returned one of the compleatest Courtiers in Christendom, his body and behaviour mutually gracing one another. Sir Tho. Lake may be said to have ushered him to the English Court, whilest the Lady Lucy Countess of Bedford led him by the one hand, and William Earl of Pembroke by the other, supplying him with a support far above his patrimonial income. The truth is, Som∣mersets growing daily more wearisome, made Villiers hourly more welcome to K. James. Soon after he was knighted, created successively Baron Viscount Villiers, Earl, Marquess, Duke of Buckingham, and to bind all his honours the better together, the noble Garter was bestowed upon him. And now Offices at Court, (not being already void) were voided for him. The Earl of Worcester was perswaded to part with his place of Master of the horse, as the Earl of Nottingham with his Office of Admiral, and both conferred on the Duke. He had a numerous and beautiful female kindred, so that there was hardly a noble Stock in England into which one of these his Cients was not grafted. Most of his Neices were matched with little more portion then their Uncles smiles, the forerunner of some good Office or Honour to follow on their Husbands. Thus with the same act did he both gratifie his kindred, and fortifie himself with noble alliance. It is seldome seen that two Kings, (father and Son) tread successively in the same Tract as to a Favourite; but here King Charles, had as high a kindness for the Duke as K. James. Thenceforward he became the Plenipotentiary in the English Court, some of the Scottish Nobility making room for him, by their seasonable departure out of this Life. The Earl of Bristoll was justled out, the Bishop of Lincoln cast flat on the Floor, the Earls of Pem∣broke and Carlisle content to shine beneath him, Holland behind him, none even with, much lesse before him. But it is generally given to him, who is the little God at the Court, to be the great Devil in the Countrey. The Commonalty hated him with a perfect hatred, and all miscarriages in Church and , at Home, Abroad, at Sea and Land were  on his want of Wisdom, Valour or Loyalty. John elton a melancholy malecontented Gentleman, and a sullen Souldier, appre∣hending himself injured, could find no other way to revenge his conceived wrongs, then by writing them with a point of a Knife in the heart of the Duke, whom he stabbed at Portsmouth. Anno Dom. 1620. It is hard to say how many of this Nation were guilty of this murther, either by publick praising or private approving thereof.
His person from head to foot could not be charged with any blemish, save that some Hypercriticks conceived his Brows somewhat over pendulous, a cloud which in the judgement of others was by the beams of his Eyes sufficiently dispelled. The Reader is remitted for the rest of his Character, to the exquisite Epitaph on his magnificent Monument, in the Chappel of Henry the Seventh. Capital Judges. Sir ROBERT BELKNAP. Being bred in the Study of the Laws, he becameA M P. Chief Justice of the Common Pleas October the 8. in the 48. of King Edward the third, and so continued till the general Rout of the Judges, in the wonder-working Parliament the eleventh of Richard the second, when he was displaced on this occasion. The King had a mind to make away certain Lords, viz. His Unkle the Duke of Glocester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham, &c. Who in the former Parliament had been appointed Governors of the Kingdome. For this purpose he called all the Judges before him to Nottingham, where the Kings many Questions in fine were resolved into this, Whether he might by His Regal power revoke what was acted in Parliament. To this all the Judges, Sir VVilliam Skipwith alone excepted, answered affirmatively and subscribed it. This Belknap underwrote unwillingly, as foreseeing the danger, and putting to his seal said these words, There wants nothing but an hurdle an horse and an halter, to carry me where I may suffer the Death I deserve; for if I had not done this, I should have dyed for it, and be∣cause I have done it, I deserve death for betraying the Lords. Yet, it had been more for his credit and conscience, to have adventured a Martyr∣dome in the defence of the Laws, then to hazzard the death of a Malefactour in the breach therof. But Judges are but men, and most desire to decline that danger, which they apprehend nearest unto them. In the next Parliament, all the Judges were arrested in VVestminster-hall of high trea∣son; when there was a Vacation in Term time, till their places were resupplied. Sir R. Tre∣silian, Cheif Justice of the Kings Bench, was executed. The rest thus named and reckoned up in the printed Anno 11. R. 2. cap. 4. Statutes, Robert Belknap, John Holt, John Cray, William Burgh, Roger Fulthorp, all Judges and Knights, with J. Locktan Serjeant at Law, had their lands (save what were intailed) with their goods and chattels, forfeited to the King, their persons being banished, and they by the importunate intercession of the Queen, hardly escaping with their lives. Belknap is placed in this County, only because I find a worshipful family of his name fixed therein, whereof one was High Sheriff in the 17. of K. Henry the 7. Provided this be no prejudice to Sussex, the same Cambd. Brit. in Sussex. Name being very ancient therein. Sir ROBERT CATELIN, descended from the ancient Family of the Catelins of Raunds in Northampton shire, (as doth appear by the Heralds visitation) was born at So I have learned by his relations. Biby in this County. He was bred in the Study of the Municipal Laws, profiting so well therein, that in the first of Q. Elizabeth, he was made Lord Cheif Justice of the Kings Bench. His Name hath some allusion to the Roman L. Catel na. Senator, who was the Incendiary of that State, though in Nature far different, as who by his Wisdom and Gravity was a great support to his Nation. One point of Law I have learned from him, at the Tryall of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, who pleaded out of Bracton, that the Testimonies of Forreigners (the most pungent that were brought against him) were of no Validity. Here Sir Robert delivered it for Law, that in case of Treason they might be given in for evidence, and that it rested in the Brest of the Camd. Eliz. Anno 1572. Peers, whether or no to afford credit unto them. He had one (as what man hath not many) Fancy, that he had a prejudice against all those, who write their Names with an alias, and took exceptions at one in this respect, saying, that no honest man had a double name, or came in with an alias. The party asked him* Idem in his Remains pag. 147. what exceptions his Lordship could take, at Jesus Christ, alias Jesus of Nazareth. He dyed in the Sixteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, and his Coat of Arms, viz. [Party per Cheveron Azure and Or, 3 Lions passant Guardant counterchanged; a Cheif Pearl] is quar∣tered by the Right Honourable the Lord Spencer, Earl of Sunderland, this Judges Daugh∣ter and Sole Heir being married to his Ancestor.
Some forty years since a Gentleman of his name and kindred, had a Cause in the Upper-Bench, to whom the Cheif Justice therin said, Your Kinsman was my Predeces∣sour in the Court and a great Lawyer, My Lord (replied the Gentleman) he was a very honest man, for he left a small estate: But indeed, though his estate was not considera∣ble, compared to his Successors then present, it was in it self of a good valuation. Writers. WILLIAM DE LEICESTER otherwise called William de Montibus (which I would willingly English William of the Woulds) was born in Leicester in this County, bred in Oxford, where he was Doctor and Professor of Divinity, so eminent for his Learning that he was known to and much beloved by the Pitz. de Aug. Script. p. 285. Nobility of the land. He was also known by the name of Idem ibidem. Mr. William an evidence I assure you sufficient to avouch his Majesterialty in all Learning. He was removed to Lincolne, and became first Canon, then Chancelour of the Church. Boston of Bury reckoneth up many and Learned Books of his making. He flourished under King John 1210. and lyeth buryed at Lincolne. RICHARD BELGRAVE was born saith J. De Script. Brit. in A. 1320 Pitz at Chichester in Sussex, but at Belgrave in Leicester-shire saith Mr. William Burton, whom I rather beleive, because*In hisdescrip∣tion of Leicest. pag. 40. he wrote a particular Description of this County. Now surely the more is the exactness of the Authour, the less the extent of his Subject, especially making it his Set-work (what was Pits his by-work) to observe the Natives of this Shire: But both agree him to be a Car∣melite, bred in Cambridge, an excellent Divine and good Schoolman, more Learned then eloquent. He wrote one Book of Theological Determinations, and another of Ordinary Questions, flourishing in the year 1220- under King Edward the Second. ROBERT DE LEICESTER was born therein, but bred in Oxford a Francis∣can Fryer. He was one of those who brought preaching into Fashion in that age, and was much esteemed for his faculty therein, by most of the Nobility. But Robert Mas∣call Bishop of Hereford, (as pious and learned as any in that age) had an extraordi∣nary* Understand it after the death of . of Leicester. affection for him. Our Leicestrian Robert appeareth also a good Chronologer, ha∣ving written judiciously of the Hebrew and Roman Computation. In his reduced age, he retired to Leichfield, where he dyed and was buryed in the Monastery of the Fran∣ciscans* Pitz. de Ang. Script. hoc An. 1348. THOMAS RATCLIF born at Ratcliffe in this County, was bred an Augusti∣nian in Leicester, where he was Ordinis sui  Cent. 6. num. 14. Episcopus, strain the Word no higher then to overseer of his order. He had Ingenium fecundum & amplum, and pity it was, that he had, Vitae institutum sterile & angustum. However to enlarge his Soul, he wrote divers Books and flourished anno 1360. BARTHOLOMEVV CULIE was born at Radoliffe-Culie in this County, as the exact Describer Burton in his Description of -shire. pag. 229. thereof avoucheth. And therefore Pitz committeth a double mistake about this One Writer, first calling him Conway, then making him a Welshman by his Nativity. How hard is it to commit one, and but one Error? This Bartholomew* In Appendice. was an excellent Philosopher, and wrote a Book of Generation and Corruption, and al∣though J. Pitz. confesseth himself ignorant of the time he lived in, my Authour as∣sureth me that he flourished under King Edward the third. WILLIAM DE LUBBENHAM was born at Lubbenham in this County, brought up in Oxford, a good Leland de Script. 265. Philosopher and a Divine, was after a White Fryer, or Carmelite in Coventry, and after became Provincial of the Order, which place he kept till he dyed. He wrote upon Aristotles Posteriors, and one Book of ordinary Questions. He dyed in the White Fryers in Coventry 1361. in the 36. year of K. Edward the Third. JEFFERY DE HARBY was born at Harby in this County and bred in Oxford, where he became Provincial of the Augustines, and Confessor to K. Edward the Third. Wonder not when meeting with so many Confessors to that King, presuming he had but one at one time, Conscience not standing on State and variety in that kind. For know King Edward reigned 50. years, and Confessors being aged, before admitted to their place, his Vivaciousnesse did wear out many of them. Besides, living much be∣yond the Seas, it is probable that he had his Forraign and his Home Confessors. Our
Jeffery was also of his Privy Counsel, being as prudent to advise in matters politick, as pious in spiritual concernments. Such as admired he was not preferred to some wealthy Bishoprick, must consider that he was ambitious and covetous to be poor, and wrote a violent Book in the praise and perfection thereof against Armachanus. Dying in Lon∣don, he was buryed in the Church of the Augustines, about the Year 1361. WILLIAM DE FOLVIL was born at Ashbye-Folvil in this County, and there∣fore when De Scrip. Brit. cent. 6 num. 72. Bale calleth him Lincolniensem, understand him not by County, but by Dio∣cesse. He was bred a Franciscan in the University of Cambridge, and engaged himself a great Master of defence in that doughty quarrel pro pueris induendis, that children under the age of 18. might be admitted into Monastical orders. For whereas this was then complained of as a great and general grievance; that by such preproperous Couling of Boyes, and vailing of Girles, Parents were cozened out of their children, and children cozened out of themselves, doing in their Minority they knew not what, and repen∣ting in their maturity, not knowing what to do, our Folvil with more passion then reason, maintained the legality thereof. He dyed and was buryed in Bale de Scrip. Brit. pag. 491. Stamford, anno 1384. HENRY DE KNIGHTON was born at Knighton in this County, sometime Abbot of Leicester, who wrote his History from William the Conquerour, to the time of King Richard the Second, in whose Reign he dyed. It seemeth Lelandus non vidit omnia, nor his shadow Bale, nor his shadow Pits, all three confessing that the History of this Knighton never came to their hands. Whereas of late, it hath been fairly printed with other Historians, on the commendable cost of Cornelius Bee. Thus it is some comfort and contentment to such, whom Nature hath de∣nyed to be Mothers, that they may be drye Nurses, and dandle Babes in their Laps, whom they cannot bear in their Wombs. And thus this Industrious Stationer (though no Father) hath been Foster Father to many worthy Books, to the great profit of po∣sterity. WILLIAM WOODFORD. I cannot fixe his Nativity with any certainty, be∣cause so many Woods and Fords, (and would the former did continue as well as the lat∣ter) and consequently so many Towns called Woodfords in England. He is placed here, because his Surname in this age., flourished in great Eminency in this Burton in his Description of Leicestershire. pag. 23. County. He was bred a Franciscan, and though Bilious Bale giveth him the Character of De scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. num. 33. Indoctè Doctus, we learn from Leland, that he was one of profound Learning, and Thomas Waldensis owneth and calleth him Magistrum suum, His Master.* Libro de Sa∣crament. c. 50. Indeed Woodford set him the first Copy of Railing against Wickliffe, being deputed by T. Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury to confute, publickly in Writing, his Opinions. He dyed and was buryed at Colchester 1397. THOMAS LANGTON was born at West-Langton in this County, bred a Car∣melite in London, but first brought up in Oxford. He wrote a Book of their own ordi∣nary Acts; another called The Tryal of Henry Crump Doctor in Divinity; another Book against the Errors of the said Doctor Crump. Reader, We are beholden to my Burton in his Description of this Shire. pag. 157. Au∣thor, for retriving this Writers memory, which otherwise appears not in Leland, Bale, or Pits. He flourished under K. Henry the fourth, anno Dom. 1400. ROBERT DE HARBY was born at Harby in this County, bred a Carmelite in their Covent at Lincolne. He seems to be a Doctor in Pitz. de Ang. Script. A. 1450. Divinity, and surely was a great Adorer of the Virgin Mary, writing many Sermons of her Festivities. He flourished 1450. RICHARD TURPIN was born at Knaptoft in this County, very lately (if not still) in the possession of that antient Family, and was one of the Gentlemen of the English Garrison of Calis in France, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Such Soldiers* Burton in his Description of Leicestershire. . 153. generally in time of VVar had too much, in time of Peace to little work, to employ themselves therein. Commendable therefore the Industry of this Richard, who spent his spare hours in writing of a Chronicle of his time. He dyed Anno Domini 1541. in the*Weavers Fun. Men. pag. 682.  fifth year of the aforesaid Kings reign. This I observe the rather, that the Reader may not run with me on the rock of the same mistake, who in my apprehension confounded him with Richard Turpin the Herauld, first Blew-mantle, and then created Winsor in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth.
Writers Since the Reformation. HENRY SMITH. Commonly called Silver-tongued Smith, Preacher at St. Cle∣mens Danes. But I refer the Reader to his Life writ by me at large, and preposed to his Printed Sermons. JOHN DUPORT D. D. Son to Tho. Duport Esquire, was born at Shepshed in this County, bred fellow, then Master of Jesus Colledge in Cambridge, once Proctour, and thrice Vice-chancelour of that University. He was one of the Translators of the Bible, and a Reverend man in his Generation, who bestowed the perpetual Advowsance of the Rectory of Harston on the Colledge. Men generally in Scripture are notified by their Fa∣thers, seldome by their Sons, as Simon Mark 15. 21. of Cyrene father of Alexander and Rufus, Per∣sons [no doubt] of signal worth in that Age. Thus this Doctor is remarkable for his Son (by Rachel Daughter to Richard Cox Bishop of Ely) James Duport D.D. Fellow of Trinity Colledge, and lately Greek Professor, happy in the Education of many hope∣full Pupils of Worship and Honour, as they more happy in so able a Tutor. His Father D. John Duport deceased 1617. WILLIAM BURTON Esquire, son of Ralph Burton of Lindley in this County, (who had a more ancient Inheritance belonging to his name at Falde in Staffordshire) a place remarkable, because no Description o Leicester-sh. pag. 174. Adder, Snake, or Lizard, (common in the Confines) were ever seen therein▪ as if it were a Land-Island and an Ireland in England▪ This VVilliam was born at Lindley, August 24. 1575. bred in Brazen-nose Colledge, and wrote an Alphabetical Description of the Towns and Villages in this County, with the ArmsIdem p. 68. and Pedegrees of the most ancient Gentry therein. The sparks of his Ingenuity herein, have since set fire on Mr. Dugdale, my worthy Friend, to do the like to Warwickshire (lately under one Sheriff with Leicester-shire) and I hope in process of time they may inflame ma∣ny others into imitation, that so (give me leave to match an English and Greek word to∣gether) the County Graphy of our Land may be compleated. ROBERT BURTON, his younger Brother, born Febr. 8. 1575. afterwards Stu∣dent of Christs-Church Oxon, and Batchellor of Divinity. He wrote an excellent Book (commonly called, Democritus Junior) of the Anatomy of Melancholy (none to the Native, to describe a Countrey) wherein he hath piled up variety of much excellent Learning. On whose Tomb is this Epitaph. Paucis notus, paucioribus `ignotus; Hic jacet Democritus junior, Cui vitam-pariter & mortem Dedit Melancholia. Scarce any Book of Philology in our Land hath in so short a time passed so many Im∣pressions. He died Rector of Segrave (presented by his Patron George Lord Berkeley) in this County, about 1636. RICHARD VINES was born at Blazon in this County, and bred in Magdalen Colledge in Cambridge, where he commenced Master of Arts. Now although many healthfull souls in their age, break out in their youth, he was never given to any extrava∣gancy. Hence he was chosen School-master of Hinckley in this County, a Profession wherein many a good Minister hath been (and it is pity that any but a good man should be) imployed. Entring the Ministry, after other intermediate places (such as are his Censurers would be his Compurgators, if privie to the weighty causes of his just removal) he was fixed at last at S. Lawrence Jury in Lonon. An excellent Preacher, skilfull to cut out Doctrines in their true shape, naturally raised, to sew them up with strong stitches; substantially proved, and set them on with advantage on such backs, who should wear them effectually applied. He was one (yea, I may say one of sevenscore in the Assembly.) The Champion of their Party, therefore called their Luther, much imployed in their Treaties at Uxbridge and Isle of Wight. His Majesty, though of a different Judgement, valued him for his Ingenuity, seldome speaking unto him without touching (if not moving) his Hat. Which by Master Vines was returned (though otherwise blunt and unobservant) with most respectfull Language and Gestures; which I will not say was done by all his fel∣low Divines there present.
He was most charitably moderate to such as dissented from him, though most con∣stant to his own Principles; witness his forsaking of his Mastership of Pembroke-Hall for refusing of the Engagement. Such who charged him with covetuousness, are con∣futed with the small Estate he left to his Wife and Children. It seemeth that the sand in his hour-glass (though sticking high on each side) was but hollow in the middle, for it sunk down on sudden. Visible decays appeared in him a year before his death, though rather in his Limbs than Parts, Spirits than Spirit. But alas, the best Mind cannot make good Musick where the Instrument of the Body is out of tune; his speech grew very low. Not a week before his death, preaching in S. Gre∣gories, a rude fellow cried out unto him, Lift up your voice, for I cannot hear you; to whom Mr. Vines returned, Lift you up your ears, for I can speak no lowder. Indeed his strength was much spent by his former pains, so that some suppose had he wrought less he had lived longer. He was buried Febr. the 7. 1655. in his own Parish Church, where Mr Jacome modestly and learnedly performed his Funeral Sermon. Much lamented, as by many others, so by his own Parish, where he piously indeavou∣red to make them all of one piece who were of different colours, and to unite their Judgements who dissented in Affections. JOHN CLEVELAND was born in this County at Hinckley (where his Father was Vicr) and bred therein under Mr. Ricard Vines his School-master; he was after∣wards Scholar of Christs, then Fellow of S. Johns in Cambridge, and during the late Ci∣vil Wars was much conversant in the Garison of Newark, where (as I am informed) he had the place of Advocate General. A General Artist, Pure Latinist, Exquisite Orator, and (which was his Master-piece) Eminent Poet. His Epithetes were pregnant with Metaphors, carrying in them a difficult plainness, difficult at the hearing, plain at the considering thereof. His lofty Fancy may seem to stride from the top of one Mountain to the top of another, so making to it self a constant Level and Champian of continued Elevations. Such who have Clevelandized, indeavouring to imitate his Masculine Stile, could never go beyond the Hermophrodite, still betraying the weaker Sex in their deficient conceits. Some distinguish between the Veine and Strain of Poetry, making the for∣mer to flow with facility, the latter press'd with pains, and forced with industry. Master Cleveland's Poems do partake of both, and are not to be the less valued by the Reader, because most studied by the Writer thereof. As for his Anagram John Cleveland Heliconean Dew. The difficult trifle I confess, is rather well endevoured then exactly performed. He dyed on Thursday morning the 29 of April 1658. at his Chamber in Greys Inne, from whence his Body was brought to Hunsdon House, and on Saturday being May day, was buryed at Colledge Hill Church, Mr. John Pearson his good friend preaching his Funeral Sermon. He rendred this reason why he cautiously declined all commending of the party deceased, because such praising of him would not be adequate to any expecta∣tion in that Auditory, seeing such who knew him not, would suspect it far above, whilest such who were acquainted with him, did know it much beneath his due desert. The self same consideration, shall put a period to my pen, in his present Character, only this I will adde, that never so eminent a Poet, was Interred with fewer (if any remark∣able) Elegies upon him. I read in an excellent Thuanus de Obit. virorum Illustrium anno 1602. Authour, how one Joannes Passerativus, professor of the La∣tine Tongue in the University of Paris, being no bad Poet, (but Morose and conceited of himself) forbad by his dying words, under an Imprecation, That his Herse should be burthened with bad funeral Verses, Whereupon out of fear to offend his Ghost, very few Verses were made upon him, too much the modesty and charity of Mr. Cleveland, by any such Injunction to obstruct his friends, expressing their affection to his memory. Be it rather imputed to the Royal party, at that juncture of time generally in restraint, so that their fancies may seem in some sort to sympathize with the confining of their persons, and both in due season may be inlarged. Of such Verses as came to my hand these were not the worst, made by my good Mr. Edward Martin of Lon∣don. Friend since deceased.
Ye Muses do not me deny I ever was your Votary, And tell me seeing you do daigne, T'inspire and feed the hungry brain, With what choice cates? with what choice fair? Ye Cleevelands fancy still repair. Fond man, say they, why dost thou question thus? Ask rather with what Nectar he feeds us. But I am informed, that there is a Book intended by the Poets of our age, in the Ho∣nour of his Memory, who was so eminent a Member of their Society. Beńefactors to the Publick. Sir JOHN POULTNEY Knight, was born in this County at  De∣scription of Leicester-shire, pag. 191. Poultney, in the Parish of Misterton, bred in the City of London, and became four times Lord Mayor thereof. He built a Stow Survey of London, pag. 81. Colledge to the Honour of Jesus & Corpus Christi, for a Master and seven Chaplains in St. Laurence Church in Candleweek-Street in London, in the 20. of Edward the Third, which Church was after denominated of him St. Laurence Poultney. He built the Parish Church of Alhallows the lesse in Thames Street, and the Monastery of White Fryers in Coventry, and a fair Chappel on the North Side of St. Pauls in London, where he lyeth buryed, who dyed 1349. the 24. year of Edward the third, he was a great Benefactour to the Hospital of St. Giles by Holborn, and gave many great Legacies to the relief of Prisoners and the Poor. Since the Reformation. READER, If any demand of me the Names of the Natives of this County, Benefactors to the Publick Since the Reformation, all my Answer is, Non sum Informa∣tus, and let the Court judge whether this be the fault of the Councel or of the Client, and I doubt not but the next age will supply the defects hereof. Only postliminio, I have by the help of my good Mr. Rawlins one of the L. Maiors Court. friend, at last recovered one who may keep possession of the place, till others be added unto him. ROBERT SMITH Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of London, was born at Mercate Harborough in this County, and became Comptroller of the Chamber of Lon∣don, and one of the four Attorneys in the Majors Court. A painful person in his place, witness the many remaining Monuments of his Industry whilst he acted in his Office, betwixt the years 1609. and 1617. Nor was his Piety any whit beneath his painfulness, who delivered to the Chamberlain of London, seven hundred and fifty pounds to pur∣chase Lands for the Maintenance of a Lecturer in the Town of his Nativity, as also for several other pious uses, as in the Settlement of those Lands are particularly ex∣pressed. He dyed as I collect, about 1618. Memorable Persons. Know Reader, that by an unavoidable mischance, the two first following persons, who should have been entred under the Topick of Souldiers are (with no disgrace I conceive) remembered in this place. EDMOND APPLEBIE Knight, was son to Iohn Applebie Esquire, and born at Great Applebie, whence their Family fetched their name, and where at this day They had An. 1607. (I hope) they have their habitation. He was a mighty man of Arms, who served at the Battel of Cressy, the 20. of K. Edward the Third, where he took Mounsieur Robert d'n*  Lei∣cester-shire. . 14. Mailarte a Nobleman of France Prisoner. Now know though the pens of our home∣bred Historians may be suspected of partiality, yet English atcheivements acknowledged by French Authours, such as Froizard is, who taketh signal notice thereof; comman∣deth belief. Afterwards in the Eight year of Richard the Second he went into France, with Iohn of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, to treat of a peace betwixt both Kingdomes.
Lastly in the Ninth of Richard the second, he accompanied the said Duke, and the Lady Constance his Wife, Daughter aud Coheir of Peter King of Castile, in his Voy∣age into Castile, who then went over with a great power to invest himself in the said Kingdome, which by Descent belonged to his Wife, and was then usurped by Henry base Brother unto King Peter. JOHN HERDVVICKE Esq born at Lindley in this County, was a very Lowe Man (stature is no standard of stoutnesse) but of great Valour, Courage, and Strength, This is he, though the Tradition goeth by an unknown name, by whose good con∣duct,* Burton in Leicester-shire. pag. 174. Henry Earl of Richmond, afterwards King Henry the seventh, in the Battel of Bosworth, got the advantage of Ground, Wind, and Sun, each singly considerable but little lesse then an Army in themselves, when all put together. Besides he assisted him with the service of many men and great horses. He dyed One Thousand Five Hundred and Eleven, leaving six Daughters and Coheirs, and was buryed at Non∣eaton in Warwick-shire. IOHN Burton in Loicester-shire. pag. 254. POULTNEY born in Little Shepey was herein remarkable, that in his sleep he did usually rise out of his bed, dresse him, open the Dores, walk round about the Fields, and return to his Bed not wakened; sometimes he would rise in his sleep, take a taff, Fork, or any other kind of VVeapon that was next his hand, and therewith lay about him, now striking, now defending himself, as if he were then encountred or charged with an adversary, not knowing (being awaked) what had passed. He afterwards went to Sea with that famous but unfortunate Sir Hugh Willough∣by Knight, and was (together with all the Fleet) frozen to death in the North East passage, about NOVA ZEMBLA. HENRY NOEL Esq I will incur the Readers deserved displeasure, if he appear not most memorable in his Generation. He was younger Son to Sir Andrew Noel of Dalby in this County, who for Person, Parentage, Grace, Gesture, Valour, and many other excellent parts, (amongst which, Skill in Musick) was of the first rank in the Court. And though his Lands and Livclyhood were small, having nothing known certain, but his Annuity and Pension, as Gentleman to Queen Elizabeth, yet in state, pomp, magnificence and expences, did ever equalize the Barons of great worth. If any demand whence this proceeded, the Spanish Proverb answers him, That which cometh from above, let no man question. Being challenged by an Italian Gentleman to play at Baloun, he so heat his blood, that falling into a Feaver he dyed thereof, and by Her Majesties appointment, was buryed in the Abbey of Westminster, and Chapel of St. Andrew, anno 1596. Lord Maiors.   Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1 Geffrey Fielding He was Privy Councelour to K. H. 6. & K. E. William Fielding Lutterworth Mercer 1452 2 William Heriot Iohn Heriot Segrave Draper 1481 3 Robert Billesdon Alex Bilsesdon Queeningsborough Haberdasher 1483 4 Christoph. Draper Iohn Draper Melton-Mowbray Ironmonger 1566 5 George Bolles Thomas Bolles Newbold Grocer 1117 Sheriffs of Leicester and Warwick-Shire. HEN. II. Anno, 1 Geffrey Clinton Anno, 2 Robert Fitz Hugh. Anno, 3 Robert Fitz Hugh. Anno, 4 William de Bello Campo & Robert Fitz Hardulph. Anno, 5 ertram de Bulmer, & Raph Basset. Anno, 6 Raph Basset. Anno, 7 W. Basset for Raph his Br. Anno, 8 Robert Fitz Geffrey. & William Basset. Anno, 9 Willam Basset. Anno, 10 Rap. Glanvil & W. Basset. Anno, 11 William Basset for 5 years Anno, 16 Bert. de Verdun for 10. Anno, 26 Raph de Glanvil, & Bertram de Berder. Anno, 27 Raph de Glanvil, & Bert. de Perdun, Arn. de Burton Arn. de Barton, & Adam de Aldedelega. Anno, 28 Raph de Glanvil, Adam de Aldedelega, Bertram de Verdun, A. de Barton. Anno, 29 Idem Anno, 30 Raph de Glanvil, & Bertram de Verdun. Anno, 31 Raph de Glanvil, & Michael Belet. Anno, 32 Idem Anno, 33 Idem
RICH. I. Anno 1 Michael Belet. Anno 2 Hugh Bishop of Co∣ventry. Anno 3 Hugh ardolph, & Hugh Clarke. Anno 4 Hugh Bp. Coventry, Gil∣bert de Segrave, & Regi∣nald Basset. Anno 5 Reginald Basset. Anno 6 Regin. Basset, & Gilbert. Segrave. Anno 7 Regin. Basset, Williel. Au∣bein, & Gilb. Segrave. Anno 8 Regin. Basset. Anno 9 Regin. Basset, Williel. Au∣bein, & Gilbert egrave. Anno 10 Rob. Harecourt. King JOHN. Anno 1 Regin. Basset. Anno 2 Robert. Harecourt. Anno 3 Rob. Harecourt, & Godfry de Lege. Anno 4 William de Cantelupe, Robert. de Poyer. Anno 5 Robert. Poyer. Anno 6 Hugh Chaucomber, for 4 years. Anno 10 Robert. Roppest. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 William de Cantelupe, Rob. Poyer. Anno 13 Rob. Poyer for 5 years. HEN. III. Anno 2 Will. de Cantelupe, & Phil. Kniton. Anno 3 Philip de Kniton. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Will. de Cantelupe, & Will. de Luditon. Anno 6 Will. de Luditon. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 John Russell, & John Winterborne. Anno 9 Rob. Lupus. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. Stutewill, & Will. Ascellis. Anno 13 Will. Ascellis. Anno 14 Stephen de Segrave, & Will. Edmonds. Anno 15 Will. Edmonds. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Steph. de Segrave, Joh. de Riparas. Anno 18 Raph Bray. Anno 19 Raph. Fitz Nichol. Raph. Brewedon. Anno 20 Raph. & Will. Erleg. Anno 21 Will. de Lucy. Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Hugh Pollier, & Philip Ascett. Anno 24 Hugh Pollier for 8 years. Anno 32 Baldwin Paunton. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Philip Murmuny. Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Will. Maunsel, for 4 y. Anno 41 Alan Swinford. Anno 42 Anketill Martivaus. Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Will. Bagot, for 12 years. Anno 56 Will. Morteyn, & Will. Bagot. EDVV. I. Anno 1 William Mortimer. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 William Hanelin. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Tho. de Hasele, & Robert Verdon. Anno 8 Robert Verdon, & Osb. Bereford, for 5 years. Anno 13 Rob. Verdon, Osbert Be∣reford & Tho. Farendon. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Tho. Farendon, & Foulk Lucy. Anno 16 Foulk Lucy. Anno 17 William Bonvill. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Stephen Baber. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Steph. Baber, & Will. de Castello. Anno 22 Will. de Castello, for 5 years. Anno 27 John Broughton. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Philip Gayton. Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 John Deane, & Richard Herehus. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Richard Whitnere. Anno 35 Idem. EDVV. II. Anno 1 John Deane, & Geffrey Segrave. Anno 2 Richard Herthull. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 John Deane. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 John Olney. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 William Trussell. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Walter Beauchamp. Anno 11 Walt. Beauchamp, & Will. Nevill. Anno 12 Ralph Beler. Anno 13 William Nevill. Anno 14 Thomas le Rous. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno 17 Hen. Nottingham, Rob. Morin, & Oliver Walleis. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem. EDVV. III. Anno 1 Roger Aylesbury. Anno 2 Thomas Blancfront. Anno 3 Robert Burdet. Anno 4 Rob. Burdet, & Roger la Zouch. Anno 5 Roger Aylesbury. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Hen. Hockley, & Roger la Zouch. Anno 8 Roger la Zouch, for 7 years. Anno 15 William Peito. Anno 16 Robert Bereford. Anno 17 John Wallis. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Tho. Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, for 25 years. Anno 44 John Peach. Anno 45 William Catesby. Anno 46 Richard Harthull. Anno 47 Roger Hillary. Anno 4 John Boyvill. Anno 49 John Burdet. Anno 50 VVilliam Breton. Anno 51 Richard Harthull.
Sheriffs of Leicester and Warwick. Name. Place. Arms. RICHARDVS II.     Anno,     1 Roger Perwich     2 . de Bermingham   Per Pale indented Arg. and Sab. 3 Williel. Flamuil Aston L. Argent a Manch Azure. 4 Thomas. Ralegh Arg. Seme of Croslets G. a Cross Moline Sable. 5 T. de Bermingham ut prius   6 Willielm. Baggot     7 Idem.     8 Joh. Bermingham ut prius   9 Jo. Calveleigh, m.   Ar. a Fess G. betw. 3. Calves S. 10 Johannes Parker Olney. .   11 Richardus Ashby   Az. a Cheveron Ermin betwixt three Leopards heads, Or. 12 Williel. Flamuil ut prius   13 Ado. de Lichfeld     14 Rob. de .   Sable a Fret Argent. 15 Johann. Mallory Swinford. Or 3 Lyns Passant Gardant S. 16 Th. de Woodford Sproxt. L. Sable, 3 Leopards heads Feasant Gules, 3 Fleur de Luces Arg. 17 Thomas Ondeby     18 Robertus Veer   Quarterly G. & O. a Mullet, Ar. AMP. 19 Henricus Nevill     20 Robert. Goushul     21 . Eynefford     22 Ado. de Lichfeld     HEN. IV.     Anno,     1 Johan. Berkely, m. G. a Cheveron 'twixt 10 Cinque∣foils Arg. 2 Hen. Nvill, mil. ut prius   3 Alex. Trussel, mil.   Ar. fretty G. on every point a Bez. 4 Johannes Blaket Nowesly. Azure a Bnd cotized, between  Crosse Croslets Fitchee Or. 5 Idem. ut prius   6 on. Berkley, mil. ut prius   7 Thomas Lucy Charlcot. W G. seme de Croslets 3 Lucies Ho∣rient Arg. 8 Johannes Parr   Arg. 2 bars Az. a border ingrail∣ed Sable. 9 Hen. Nevill, mil. ut prius   10 Will. Brokesby   Undee Arg. and S. a Canton G. 11 Roberts Castell Withibroke Gules, 2 bars and a Castle in a Canton Argeut. 12 Barth. Brokesby. ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno,     1 Tho. Crewe, arm.     2 Rich. Hastings, m.   Argent a Manch Sable. 3 Tho. Burdet, mil. Newton-B. Az. on. 2 bars O. 6. Martlets G. 4 Johannes Malbory ut prius   5 Will. Bishopston   or. 3 bends S. a Canon Ermin. 6 Johann. Salveyn     7 Brth. Brookesby ut prius   8 Tho. Ardington & Tho. Maureward. C. Orton. L. Az. a Fess Arg. betw. 3 Cinque∣foils Or. HEN. VI.     Anno,     1 Rich. Hastings, m. ut pris   2 Humph. Stafford Huncote. l Or a Cheveron G. and a quarter Emin. 3 Johann. Mallory ut prius   4 Richar. Cloddale     5 Rich. Hastings. m. ut prius   6 Thomas Stanley   Arg. on a Bend Az. 3 Bucks-h.O. 7 Willielmus Payto Chesterto. Barry of 6 Peices Ar. and G. per 8 Nichol. Ruggeley   pale Indented & counterchanged 9 Humphr. Stafford ut prius   10 W. Mountford, m   Bendee of 10 Peices, Or and Az. 11 Rich. Hastings, m. ut prius   12 Thom. Foulhurst     13 Thom. Ardinon     14 Willielmus. Lucy ut prius   15 Wil. Payto, mil. ut prius   16 Robtus Ardern   Ermin a Fess Checky Or and Az. 17 Hum. Stafford, m. Grafton   18 Laurent. Berkley ut prius   19 Thomas Ashby Lowedby. ut prius. 20 VVil. Mountford ut prius   21 W. Bermingham & Lawr. Sherrard ut prius Staplefrd.   22 Idem. ut prius Arg. a Cheveron G. betwixt 3. Torteauxes. 23 Rob. Harecourt Bosworth. L Or 2 bars Gules. 24 Tho. Erdington Bow. L. Argent 2 Lyons passant Or. 25 Th. Everingham   Gules a Lyon Rampant Vary, co∣rone Or. 26 Tho. Porter, a. & Will. Purefoy, ar. Drayton. L. S. 3 Pair of Gantlets clipping 27 VVill. Purefey ut prius (or joyned together) Argent. 28 VVillielm. Lucy ut prius   29 W. Mountford, m ut prius   30 Rob. Motun, m. Pekleton L. Argent a Cinquesoile Azure. 31 W. Bemingham ut prius   32 Leonar. Hastings Kerby. L. Arms ut prius 33 Thomas Berkley ut prius   34 Williel. Hastings ut prius   35 Tho. Walsh, ar. Wanlip. L G.2 bars gemews, a bend Arg. 36 Tho. Maston, ar.     37 H. Filongley, ar. Filonley. W   38 Edm. Mountford. ut prius   EDW. IV     Anno,     1 Tho. Ferrers, ar.   AMP. 2 Joh. Grevil, arm.   Sab. a bordure & cross engrai∣led Or, thereon 5 Pellets. 3 Idem. ut prius   4 Will. Harecourt ut prius   5 Joh. Huggford, a.     6 Th. Throgmorton Cought. W.   7 Rad. Woodford, a Knipton. L. Gules, on a Cheveron Argent 3. bars gemellee Sable. 8 Edw. Rawleigh, m ut prius   9 Tho. Ferrers, mil. ut prius   10 Joh. Grevil, mil. ut prius   11 Sim. Mountford ut prius   12 VVill. Motum, a ut prius   13 Joh. Higgford, a. ut prius   14 Joh. Grevil, mil. ut prius   15 VVill. Lucy, ar. ut prius   16 VV. Trussell, m. Elmshorp.   17 Johan. Branfitz     18 Joh. Grevill, mil. ut prius   19 Thom. Poultney Misterton. . Arg. a Fess Indented G. in cheif. 3 Leopards heads Sable. 20 Rich. Boughton Lford. W. Sable 3 Cressants Or. 21 Thomas Cokesey     22 Edward Felding . w Ar. on a Fess Az. 3 Lozenges O RICH. III.     Anno,     1 Thom. Entwysel   Arg. on a be Sable 3 Martlets of the field. 2 Humph. Beaufort Guieslif. w Ermin on a bend Az 3 Cinque∣foils Or. 3 R. Broughton, a. & R. Throgmorton ut prius     ut prius   HENRICUS VII.     Anno,     1 Johnnes Digby   Azure a Flower de Luce Arg 2 Henricus Lisle   Or. a Fess  2 Chev. Sab. 3 R. Throgmorton ut prius   4 VVil. Lucy, miles ut prius   5 Tho. Brereton, ar.   Argent 2 bars Sable. 6 Johan. Villars, ar. Brokesby. L Arg. on a Cross G. 5 Escalops, O. 7 R. Throgmorton ut prius   8 Thom. Pulney, m. ut prius   9 Rad. Sherley, m. L. Paly of 6. Or. and Azure a Can∣ton Ermin. 10 Johan. Villars, a. ut prius   11 Ed. Rawleigh, m. ut prius   12 VV. Brokesbury     13 Tho. Nevill, ar. ut prius   14 Rich. Pudsey, m.     15 Joh. Villars, ar. ut prius   16 Tho. Hasilrig, a. Nouselee. L Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Hasel leavesvert. 17 Edw. Belknap, a.     18 Nich. Mallory, a. ut prius   19 Henricus Lysle, a ut prius   20 Nich. Brome, ar.    
21 H. Willoughby   Or, on 2 bars Gules, 3 Water-bou∣guets Argent. 22 Edw. Raleigh, m. ut prius   23 Tho. Trussel, ar. ut prius   24 Will. Skevington Skevington Arg. 3 Bulls heads erased Sable. HEN. VIII.     Anno,     1 Simon Digby, ar. ut prius   2 Johan. Aston, m.     3 Mau. Berkley, ar. ut prius   4 Will. Turpin, ar. Knaptost L. G. on a Bend Arg. 3 Lions heads Erased Sable. 5 Edw. Ferers, mil. AMP.   6 Johan. Digby, m. ut prius   7 Will. Skevington ut prius   8 M. Berkley, m. ut prius   9 Simon Digby, ar. ut prius   10 Edw. Ferrers, m. ut prius   11 Hen. Willougby ut prius   12 Edw. Digby, ar. ut prius   13 Will. Skevington ut prius   14 Will. Browne, ar.     15 Edw. Conway, ar. Ragley. W. S on a Bend betw. 2 Gotises, Ar. a Rose G. betw. 2 Annulets of the First. 16 Tho. Lucy, miles. ut prius   17 H. Willoughby, m ut prius   18 G. Throgmort. ut prius   19 Tho. Putney, m. ut prius   20 Rog. Ratclisse, m.   Argent a bend engrailed Sable. 21 Rich. Verney. ar. W. Az. on a Cross Arg. 5 Mullets G. 22 Christ. Villars, a. ut prius   23 Johan. Villars, m. ut prius   24 Joh. Harrington ut prius   25 Johan. Audley, a.     26 Regin. Digby, ar. ut prius   27 W. Broughton, a.     28 VVal. Smith, ar.     29 Johan. Villars, m. ut prius   30 Tho. Nevill, ar.   Gules a Saltyre Ermine. 31 Johan. Digby, ar. ut prius   32 Rich. Catesby, a.   Ar. 2 Lyons passant S. Corone, O 33 Rog. VVigston, a. Wolston. W   34 Fulco. Grevil, m. Beachamp. w Sab. a boder and cross engrailed Or thereon 5. Pellets. 35 G. Throgmorton utp rius   36 Regin. Digby, a. ut prius   37 Rich. Catesby, m. ut prius   38 Fran. Poultney, & VVill. Leigh, ar. ut prius G. a Cross ingrailed Ar. in the first Quarter a Lozenge, Or.   ut prius   EDVV. VI.     Anno,     1 Fulco. Grevill, m. ut prius   2 Ambro. Cave, m.   Azure Frettee Argent. 3 Rich. Munnar, m.     4 Edw. Hastings, m. ut prius   5 VV. VVigeston, a. ut prius   6 Tho. Nevill, miles ut prius   PHIL. Rex. & M. R.     Anno,     1 R. Throgmorton ut prius   2 Tho. Hastings, m. ut prius   3 Edw. Grevill, m. ut prius   4 Fran. Shirley, ar. ut prius   5 VV. Wigeston, m. ut prius   6 Bran. Cave, arm. ut prius   ELIZAB. Reginae.     Anno,     1 Tho. Lucy, arm. ut prius   2 Will. Skeffington ut prius   3 Tho. Nevill, mil. ut prius   4 Rich. Verney, m. ut prius   5 Johan Fisher, ar. Paington. Per Bend G. O. a Griffin Ramp. counterch. within a bord. Vary. 6 Williel. Devereux   Ar. a F. G. in cheif 3 Tortees. 7 Geor. Turpin, m. ut prius   8 Fran. Smith, ar. Ashby. L. Arg. a Cross G. betw. 4. Pea∣cocks proper. The Reader, may perceive some (not considerable) difference, betwixt this our Catalogue, and the Printed one, set forth by Mr. Burton in his Description of this Shire. I will neither condemn his no commend my own, but leave both to the exa∣mination of others. King RICHARD the Second. 16. THOMAS DE WOODFORD.] He was the eldest Son of Sir Robert de Woodford a wealthy Knight, who dying before his Father, left five sons, viz. John, Walter, Humphrey, Ralph and John. Sir Robert their Grandfather, out of design to perpetuate his posterity, (adventured in five bottoms) made all his Grandchildren in effect elder brothers, dividing his vast estate amongst them; an equal unequal partition to be injurious to the Heir (without his demerit) that he might be bountiful to his other brethren: but it thrived according∣ly. For that great Family (which had long continued in great accompt and estate) by reason of this * Division, in short space utterly decayed, not any part ofBurton in de∣scrip. of this County Pag. 264. their lands (thus disposed) now in the tenure of the Name, and some of the Male Heirs descended from the five brethren, now living in a low condition; and no won∣der, they soon made a Hand of all, where the Thumb was weakned, to strengthen the Four fingers. HENRY the Fifth. 3. THOMAS BURDET Miles.] The Samenesse of Name and Nearnesse of Kindred, giveth me here a just occasion to insist on a memorable Passage, concerning Thomas Burdet Esq Grandchild and Heir to Sir Thomas here named. When as King Edward the Fourth (in his absence) had killed a fat White Buck in his Park at Arrow in Warwick-shire, which he greatly esteemed; upon the first hearing of it, wished the Bucks head and horns in his belly, that moved the King to kill it. Upon the misconstruing of which words, he was accused of Treason, attainted, and beheaded, 18. E. 4. 1477. and was buried in the Grey Fryers in London.
Thus far our English Chronicles with joint consent agree in the same Tune, but I meet with one Burton in the Description of Leicester-sh. Pag. 201. Author, reaching one Note higher then all the rest, adding as followeth, These words spoken and so wrested, were the colour of his death, but the true cause was the hard conceit and opinion, which the King had of him, for that he had ever been a faithful friend, and true Councellour, to George Duke of Clarence his brother, between whom there had been bitter Enmity. Whatsoever was the cause of such severity against him, Burdet patiently and chear∣fully took his Death, affirming he had a Bird in his brest (his own Innocency) that sung comfort unto him. HENRY the Sixth. 2. HUMPHREY STAFFORD.] Being afterwards Knighted, he was by King Henry the Sixth, made Governour of Callice, and coming over into England, was slain by Jack Cade: but God hath a blessing for those whom Rebells curse. Sir Humphrey Stafford his Grandchild fixed himself at Blatherwick in Northampton-shire, where his posterity doth flourish to this day. 34. WILLIAM HASTINGS.] The Reader needeth not my dimme Candle to direct him to this illustrious person. He was son to Sir Leonard Hastings (Sheriffe two years before) and was he whom King Edward the third, or rather Edward Plantagenet (because more in his humane then Royal capacity) so delighted in, that he made him his Lord Chamberlain, Baron Hastings of Ashby de la Zouch, &c. As he loved the King very well, so after this Kings death, he is charged to have loved Jane Shore too well, and Richard Duke of Glocester, per∣ceiving him to obstruct the way to his ambitious designs, ordered his removal, cau∣sing him to be beheaded 1. Edw. 5. As when living he was dear, so being dead his corps are near to Edw. 4. Buried under a very fair Monument in Windsor Chappel. He was Grandfather to George Hastings first Earl of Huntington. EDVVARD the Sixth. 4. EDVVARD HASTINGS Miles.] Queen Mary, much delighting in his Devotion, created him Baron of Loughborough. He founded and endowed a handsome hospital at Stoke Pogeis in Buckingham-shire, whi∣ther (after the Queens death) weary of the World he retired himself, and therein dyed without issue. The foresaid (and that a very Fair) Town of Loughborough, hath since again af∣forded the Title of a Baron to a younger branch of the same honourable Family, Henry Hastings second-Son to Henry (second of that Christian Name) Earl of Huntington, who by his Virtues doth add to the dignity of his Extraction. Queen ELIZABETH. 5. JOHN FISHER Armiger.] His Father Thomas Fisher alias Hawkins, being a Collonel under the Duke of So∣merset in Mr. Dugdale in the descrip∣tion of Warw. pag. 365. Musleborough Field, behaved himself right valiantly, and took a Scotch man Prisoner, who gave a Griffin for his Arms: Whereupon the said Duke conferred on him the Arms of his Captive, to be born within a Border Varrey, in relation to a prime Coat which the said Duke (the Granter thereof) quartered as descended from the Lord Beauchamps of Hatch. Sheriffs of Leicester-Shire alone. Name. Place. Arms. ELIZAB. Reginae.     Anno,     9 Geo. Sherard, ar. Stapleford Argent a Cheveron Gules betwixt three Torteauxes. 10 Hen. Poole, arm.     11 Brian. Cave, arm.   Azure Frettee Argent. 12 Jac. Harington, m Pleton. Sable a Fret Argent. 13 Geo. Hastings, m.   Argent a Maunch Sable. 14 Fr. Hastings, ar.   The same with due difference. 15 Edw. Leigh, arm.   G. a Cross ingrailed Ar. in the first Quarter a Lozenge, O. 16 Geo. Turpin, m. Knaptoft. G. on a bend Argent 3. Lyons heads Erazed Sable. 17 Rog. Villes, ar.   Ar. on a Cross G. 5 Escalops, O 18 Tho. Skevington Skevingt. Arg. 3. Bulls heads erased S. 19 Nic. Beaumont, a. Coleorton Az. seme de flewer de Liz. A Lyon Rampant Or. 20 Tho. Ashby, arm.   A Chev. Erm. tw. 3. Leop. heads.
21 Tho. Cave, arm. ut prius   22 Fran. Hastings, a. ut prius   23 Geor. Purefey, a. Drayton   24 Brian. Cave, a. Engersby ut prius with due difference. 25 Andr. Noell, a. Dalby Or, fretty Gules a Canton Ermin 26 Hen. Iurvile, a. Aston Gules 3 Gheverons varry. 27 Will. Turpin, ar. ut prius   28 Ah. Faunt, ar. Foston A. Crus ule Fitche, a L. Ramp. G with due difference. 29 Will. Cave, arm. Pikwell   30 Tho. Skeffington ut prius   Belgrave Belgrave G. a Chev. Er. twixt 3 Mascles, A ut prius with due difference. 31 Edw. Turvile, a. Thurlston   32 Geor. , a. ut prius   33 Geor. Villers, ar. Brokesby Arms ut prius 34 Thom. Cave, ar. ut prius   35 Will. Turpin, ar. ut prius   36 Hen. Beaumont ut prius   37 Williel. Cave, ar. ut prius   38 Henri. Cave, ar. ut prius   39 Will. Skipwith, a Cotes. Arg. 3 bars Gules in chief a Greyound cursant Sable. 40 Will. Digby, ar. Welby Azure a Fleur de Liz Argent. 41 T. Skffington, a. ut prius   42 Rog. Smith, arm. Withcock Gules on a Gheveron Or, betw. 3 Bezaunts 3 Croslets formy Fitchee. 43 Georg. Ashby, ar. Quenby   44 Tho. Humfreys. Swepston   JACOB. R.     Anno,     1 Will. Faunt, mil. Faufton Arms ut prius 2 Will. Noell, arm. Wellsbor. Arms ut prius 3 Basil. Brook, miles Lubbenham   4 Tho. Nevill, mil. Holt Gules a Saltyre Ermin 5 Hen. Hastings, m. Leicester Arms ut prius 6 Will. Villers, a. Brokesby   7 Joh. Plummer. ar. Marston Ermin a Bend Varry cotised S. 8 T. Beaumont, mil. Coleorton   9 Brian. Cave, mil. Engersby   10 . Hasilrig, m. Nowsley Argent a Cheveron betwixt 3. Hasel leaves vert. 11 Tho. Stavely, ar.   Barry of 8 Ar. and Gules, over all. a Flower de Luce Sable. 12 Wolstan. Dixy, m Bosworth Az. a Lyon Rampant & cheif Or. 13 VVill. Faunt, m. ut prius   14 VV. Holford, m. Welham   15 Edw. Hartop, ar. Buckminster S. a cheveron twixt 3 Otters Ar. 16 VV. Gerveis, a. & Peatling   VVil. Roberts, m. Sutton Per Pale Ar. & G. a Lyon Ramp. S. 17 Johan. Cave, arm. Pikwell   18 Alex. Cave, mil. Bagrave   19 Richard. Holford Wistowe   20 Geo. , ar.     21 Johan. Bale, mil. Carleton- Curley. Per Pale Vert & G. an Eagle dis∣played Arg beaked & armed, O 22 Hen. Shirley, m. Stanton. Paly of 6. Or, & Az. a canton Erm. K. CHARLES.     Anno,     1 Tho. Hartoppe, m. ut prius   2 Nathan. Lary, ar.     3 Georg. Aisby, ar.     4 Er. de la Fontain, m   G. a Bend Or in the Sinister cheif a cinque foile Ermin. 5 W. VVollaston, a.   Sable 3 Mullets pierced Argent. 6 Joh. Banbrigge, a. Lockinton Arg. a cheveron Embateled betw. 3 Battle-axes Sable. 7 Johann. Brokesby ut prius   8 Joh. St. John, m.   Arg. on a cheif G. 2 Mullets Or. 9 Tho Buton M. B. S. a Chev. betw. 3 owles Argent . Or. 10 Fran. Sanders, a.   Partee p. Ch. Ar. & S. 3 Eeph. beads counterch. 11 Joh. Poultney, ar. Arg. a Fess indented G. 3. Leop. heads in cheif Sable. 12 Hen. Skipwith, m ut prius   13 Rich. Roberts, m.     14 Joh. Whaton, ar.     15 Will. Holford, ar.     16 Johan. Pate, arm.     17 Arch. Palmer, ar.     18     19     20     21 Johan. Stafford, a.     22 Will. Hewit, arm.   Sable a Chever. counterbattellee, betwixt 3 owles Argent Queen ELIZABETH. 14. FRANCIS HASTINGS.] I believe him the same Person with Sir Francis Hastings fourth Son to Francis, second. Earl of Huntington of that Sirname, to whose many children Mr. In his Eliz. anno 1560. Cambden giveth this commendation, that they agreed together in brotherly love though not in religion, some Protestants, others Papists, all zealous in their perswafion. Our Sir Francis wrote a Learned Book in the defence of our Religion (rather carped at then confuted by Parsons in his three Conversions) and was an Eminent Benefactor to Emmanuel Colledge: But if I be mistaken in the Man, and these prove two different persons, the Reader will excuse me for taking occasion by this his Namesake and near Kinsman, of entring here the Memorial of so worthy a Gentleman. 28. ANTHONY FAUNT Esquire.] He was a Gentleman of a Comely person and great Valor (Son unto William Faunt Apprentice of the Law of the Inner Temple, one of great Learning and Wisdome) And had in the low Countreys served under William Prince of Orange, where he gained much martial experience. Returning into his Countrey he underwent some Offices therein with good esteeme, being this year chosen Sheriff of the Shire. In the next year, (which was 1588.) He was chosen Lieutenant General of all the Forces of this Shire to resist the Spanish Invasion. But his Election being crost by Henry Earl of Huntington (Lord Leiutenant of the County,) he fell into so deep a Fit of Melancholy Burton in . p. 105., that he dyed soon after. 39. VVILLIAM SKIPVVITH Esq] He was afterwards deservedly Knighted, being a Person of much Valor, judgment, Learning and VVisdome, dexterous at the making fit and acute Idem p, 77. Epigrams, Poesies, Mot∣toes,
and Devises, but chiefly at Impresses, neither so apparent that every Rustick might understand them, nor so obscure that they needed an Oedipus to interpret them. The Farewell. Being now to take my leave of this County, it is needless to wish it a Friday Mar∣ket (the Leap-day therein, and it is strange there should be none in so spacious a Shire) presuming that defect supplied in the Vicinage; Rather I wish that the Leprosy may ne∣ver return into this County, but if it should return (we carry the seeds of all sins in our Souls, sicknesses in our Bodies) I desire that the Lands may also (without prejudice to any) returne to the Hospital of Burton Lazars in this Shire, if not intire, yet in such a proportion as may comfortably maintain the Lepers therein.
LINCOLNE-SHIRE. This County in Fashion, is like a ben∣ded Bowe, the Sea making the Back, the Rivers Welland and Hum∣ber, the two horns thereof, whiles Trent hangeth down from the lat∣ter like a broken string, as being somewhat of the Shortest. Such per∣secute the Metaphor too much, who compare the River Witham, (whose Current is crooked) unto the Arrow crossing the middle thereof. It extendeth 60. Miles from South to North, not above 40. in the middle and broadest part thereof. Being too Volluminous to be managed entire is di∣vided into three parts, each of them corrival in quantity with some smaller Shires) Holland on the South-East, Kesteven on the South-West, and Lindley on the North to them both. Holland, that is, Hoyland or Hayland, from the plenty of Hay growing therein, may seem the Reflection of the opposite Holland in the Neatherlands, with which it Sympathyzed in the Fruitfulness, lowe and wet Scituation. Here the Brakishnesse of the Water, and the Grossenesse of the Ayre, is recompenced by the Goodnesse of the Earth, abounding with Deries and Pasture. And as God hath (to use the * Apostles phrase)1 Cor. 12. 24. tempered the body together, not making it all Eye or all Ear (Nonsense that the Whole should be but One sense.) but assigning each Member the proper office thereof, so the same Providence, hath so wisely blended the Benefits of this County, that take Col∣lective Lincolne-shire and it is Defective in Nothing. Natural Commodities. Pikes. They are found plentifully in this Shire, being the Fresh-Water-Wolves, and there∣fore an old pond-pike, is a dish of more State than Profit to the Owners, seeing a Pikes belly, is a little Fishpond, where lesser of all sorts have been contained. Sir Francis In his History of Life and Death. Bacon alloweth it (Though Tyrants generally be short-lived) the Surviver of all Fresh-water-Fish, attaining to forty years, and some beyond the Seas have tre∣bled that term. The Flesh thereof must needs be fine and wholsome, if it be true what is affirmed, that in some sort it cheweth the Cud, and yet the less and middle size Pikes, are preferred for Sweetnesse before those that are greater. It breedeth but once Mr. Walton in his Compleat Angler, p. 197. (whilest other Fishes do often) in a year; such the providence of Nature pre∣venting their more multiplying, least the Waters should not afford Subjects enough* Idem p. 199. for their Tyranny. For want of other Fish▪ they will feed one on another; ya what is four footed shall be Fish with them, if it once come to their jawes (biteing sometimes for cruelty and revenge, as well as for hunger) and because we have publickly profes∣sed, that to delight, as well as to inform is our aim in this Book, let the ensuing story (though unwarranted with a cited Authour) find the Readers acceptance. A Cub-Foxe, drinking out of the River Arnus in Italy, had his head seised on by a mighty Pike, so that neither could free themselves, but were ingrapled together. In this contest a young man runs into the water, takes them out both alive, and car∣rieth them to the Duke of Florence; whose palace was hard by. The Porter would not admit him, without promising of sharing his full half in what the Duke should give him. To which he (hopelesse otherwise of entrance) condescended. The Duke highly affected with the Rarity, was in giving him a good reward, which the other refused, desiring his Highnesse would appoint one of his Guard, to give him an hundred Lashes, that so his Porter might have fifty, according to his composition. And here my Intelligence leaveth me how much farther the jest was followed. But to return to our English Pikes, wherein this County is eminent, especially in that River which runneth by Lincolne, whence grew this Proverb. [Witham Pike England hath nene like.] And hence it is that Mr. Polyolbiondon 25 Part. 111. Drayton maketh this River Poetizing in her praises, always concluding them, Thus to her Proper Song, The Burden still she bare: Yet for my dainty Pikes I am without compare.
I have done with these Pikes, when I have observed, (if I mistake not) a great mistake in Mr. Stow, affirming that Pickrels were brought over (as no Natives of our Land) into England, at the same time with Carps, and both about the beginning* In his Chro∣nicle, p. 948. of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Now if Pickrels be the deminatives of Pikes, (as Jacks of Pickrels) which none I conceive will deny, they were here many hun∣dred years since, and probably of the same Seniority with the Rivers of England. For I find in the Bill of Fare, made at the Prodigious Feast at the Installing of George Nevil Arch-bishop of York, Anno 466, that there was spent three hundred Bish. Godwin in his Catal. of the Bishops of York. Lupi Fluviatiles, that is, River Pikes, at that Entertainment. Now seeing all are children before they are men, and Pikes Pickrels at the first, Pickrels were more anciently in England then that Author affirmeth them. Wild-foule. Lincoln-shire may be termed the Aviary of England for the Wild-foule therein, Re∣markable for their, 1. Plenty, So that sometimes in the Month of August, three thousand Mal∣lards with Birds of that kind, have been caught at one Draught, so large and strong their Nets, and the like must be the Readers belief. 2. Variety, No man (no not Gesmar himself) being able to give them their proper names, except one had gotten Adam his Nomenclator of Creatures. 3. Deliciousnesse, Wild-foule being more dainty and digestable then Tame of the same kind, as spending their Grossie humours with their Activity and constant Motion in Flying. Now as the Eagle is called Jovis Ales, so here they have a Bird which is called the Kings Bird, namely Knuts, sent for hither out of Denmark, at the charge, and for the use of Knut or Kanutus King of England. If the plenty of Birds have since been drained with the Fenns in this County, what Lincoln-shire lacks in her former, Foul, is supplyed in Flesh (more Mutton and Beef) and a large First makes amends for a lesse second Cours. But amongst all Birds we must not forget, Dotterells. This is Avis , a Mirthmaking Bird, so ridiculoussy Mimical, that he is ea∣sily caught (or rather catcheth himself) by his over-Active imitation. There is a sort of Apes in India, caught by the Natives thereof after this manner: They dress a lit∣tle Boy in his Sight, undresse him again, leave all the Childs apparel behind them in the place, and then depart a competent distance. The Ape presently attieth himself in the same garments, till the Childs Cloaths become his Chains, putting off his Feet by putting on his Shoos, not able to run to any purpose, and so is soon taken. The same Humour, otherwise persued, betrayeth the Dotterells. As the Fowler stret∣cheth forth his Arms and Legs, going towards the Bird, the Bird extendeth his Legs and Wings approaching the Fowler, till surprised in the Net. But it is observed, that the Foolisher the Fowl or Fish, [Woodcocks, Dotterels, odsheads, &c.] the Finer, the Flesh thereof. Feathers. It is Pity to part Lancashire Ticking (lately spoken of) and Lincoln-shire Feathers making so good Beds together. I cannot find the first beginning of Feather-Beds, the Latine word Pulvinar for a Cusheon, Pillowe, or Bolster, sheweth, that the Entrals of such Utensils amongst the Romans, were made but of Dust, and our English plain Proverb, De Puerperis, they are in the Straw; shows Feather-Beds to be of no ancient use amongst the Common sort of our Nation, and Beds of Down (the Cream of Feathers) are more Modern then they. The Feathers of this County are very good) though not so soft as such as are imported from Bardeaux in France) and although a Feather passeth for the Emblem of Lightnesse it self, they are heavy enough in their Prises to such as buy any Quantity, and daily grow Dearer.
Pippins. With these we will close the Stomach of the Reader, being concluded most cordial by Physicians; some conceive them to be of not above a hundred years seniority in En∣gland: However they thrive best, and prove biggest (not Kentish excepted) in this County, particularly in Holland, and about Kirton therein, whence they have acqui∣red addition of Kirton Pippins, a wholsome and delicious Apple, and I am informed, that Pippins graffed on a Pippin stock, are called Renates, bettered in their generous Nature by such double extraction. Fleet-Hounds. In Latine called PETRONII, or Petrunculi, from Petra a Rock, either because their Feet are sound and so∣lid, (and therefore named , by Xenophon) or from the hard and rocky ground, whereon they were accustomed to hunt. These with much certainty of scent, and quick∣nesse of feet, will run down a Hare in a short time. Janus Ulitius a Dutchman, some 15 years since came into England, & though a man of the Gown) employ∣ed in publick affairs) for Diversion, he went down into this County, to spend one Winter, where conver∣sing with some young Gentlemen, he hunted twice a Week with so great content, that the season (o∣therwise unpleasant) was past be∣fore he perceived how it went. Hear him expressing himself, sed & Pe∣trunculi illi, qui vestigiis eorum non minus celeriter quam sagaciter instant haud facile trihorio minus leporem a∣liquem defatigant, ut in Lincolniensi montium aequijugi tractu aliquoties ipse vidi, and yet I assure you the Hares in this County on Ancaster-Heath, do (though lesser) far ex∣ceed in swiftnesse and subtilty of Doubling those of the Vallyes and Plains. Such a Petronius or Fleet-hound, is two Hounds in Effect. Sed premit Inventas, non inventu∣ra Latentes. Illa feras, quae Petroniis bene Glo∣ria constat. To the Petronian, both the praise is due, Quickly to find, and nimbly to persue. Grey-Hounds. In Latin termed VEL∣TRAGA, or VERTRA∣GUS, or VERTAGUS, derived it seems from the Dutch Word, VELT a Field, and RACH or BRACH a Dog, and of how high esteem the for∣mer, and these, were a∣mongst the Ancients, the Reader may infer from the old Burgundian Law. Siquis Canem Veltraum, aut Segutium vel Petrun∣culum praesumpserit invola∣re, jubemus ut convictus coram omni populo posterio∣ra ipsius osculetur. Martial speaking of these Greyhounds, thus ex∣presseth himself, Non sibi sed Domino vena∣tur Vertragus acer. Illaesum Leporem, qui tibi dente feret. For's Master, not Himself doth Greyhound toyl, Whose Teeth to thee re∣turn the unhurt spoyl. I have no more to ob∣serve of these Greyhounds, save that they are so cal∣led (being otherwise of all Colours) because ori∣ginally imployed in the Hunting of Grays, that is, Brocks and Badgers. Mas-Tiffes. Known to the Ro∣mans by the name of Molossi, from Molossia a County in Epirus, whence the fiercest in that kind were fetched at first, before better were brought out of Brittain. Gratius an Ancient Poet, Contemporary with Virgil, writing his Cynegeticon or Poem of Hunting, giveth great praise to our English Mastiffes, highly com∣mending their Valour, only taxing them, that they are not handsomly made. Haec una est Catulis jac∣tura Britannis. The Brittish Whelps no blemish know, But that they are not shap'd for show. Which thing is no∣thing in my mind, see∣ing beauty is no whit material to a Souldier. This County breedeth choice Mastiffes for the Bull and Bear, and the sport is much affected therein, especially about Stamford, whereof here∣after. What remaineth concerning Mastiffes is referred to the same To∣pick in Somerset-shire. Thus the three kinds of ancient hunting, which distinctly require fleetnesse, scent, and strength, are compleatly performed in this County, by a Breed therein, which are an∣swerably
qualified. This I have inserted, because as to my Native Country in general, so to this here in particular, I would not willingly do lesse right, then what a Stranger hath done thereunto. Reader, pardon this true but (abor∣tive) Notation casually come in before the due Time thereof. Before we come to Catalogue the Worthies of this County, it is observable, that as it equalled other Shires in all ages, so it went beyond it self in one generation, viz. in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when it had Natives thereof. 1. Edward Clinton Lord Admiral. 2. William Cecil Lord Treasurer. 3 Sir Edmund Anderson Lord Chief Justice. 4. John Whitgift Arch-bishop of Canterbury. 5. Peregrine Bartu Lord General in France. 6. Tho. Wilson Dr. of Law, and Secretary of State. All Here I men∣tion not Sir Tho. Heneage at the same time a grand Favorite, and Privy Councel∣lor to Queen Elizabeth. Countrymen and Contemporaries. Thus Sea and Land, Church and Camp, Sword and Mace, Gospel and Law, were stored with prime Officers out of this Coun∣ty. Nor must it be forgotten, though born in the same Shire, they were utterly un∣related in Kindred, and raised themselves independently (as to any mutual assistance) by Gods Blessing, the Queens favour, and their own deserts. The Buildings. Here the complaint of the Prophet taketh no place, taxing men to live in Ceeled Pallaces whilst the Temple of God lay wast, No County affording worse Houses, or better Churches. It addeth to the Wonder, that seeing in this soft County, a Diamond is as soon found as a Flint, their Churches are built of Pollished Stones, no Natives but Naturalized by importation from forreign parts. I hope the Inhabitants of this Shire, will endevour to disprove the old Proverb, [the nearer to the Church, the further from God.] because they have substituted a better in the room thereof, viz. The further from stone, the better the Churches. As for the Cathedral of Lincoln, whose Floor is higher then the Roof of many Churches, it is a magnificent Structure, proportionable to the Amplitude of the Diocesse. This I dare boldly say, that no Diocesse in Christendome, affordeth two such Rivers, viz. [Thames and Trent] for the Southern and Northern Bounds, and two such Universities, Cambridge and Oxford, both in the Content thereof, before Ely, Peterbo∣rough, and Ox∣ford. three smaller Bishopricks were carved out of it. Amongst the Houses of the Nobility, I take signal notice of two. One I may call a Premeditate Building, viz. Tattershall (belonging to the Right Honourable the Earl of Lincolne) advanced by degrees at several times, to the Modern Magnificence thereof. But Grimsthorp I may term an Ex tempore Structure, set up on a suddain by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to entertain King Henry the Eighth, in his Progress into these parts. The Hall therein was fitted to a fair Suit of Hangings, which the Duke had by his Wife Mary the French Queen, and is now in the possession of the Right Honourable Montague Earl of Lindsey. The Wonders. At Fishtoft in this County, no Mice or Rats are found, insomuch, that Barns built party per pale, in this and the next Parish, on one side are annoyed, on the other side (being Fishtoft Moiety) are secured from this Vermin. Surely no Piper (what is no∣toriously known of Hamell in Westphalia) did ever give them this Mice-Delivery by his Musick. It is easier to conjure up many, then allay one difficulty, other places in England af∣fording the like. At one of the Rodings in Essex, no Hogs will root. In another Common no Mole will cast. In Linley in Burton in his Doscription of Leicester-shire. Leicestershire, no Snakes are found. I believe they overshoot the Mark, who make it a Miracle, they undershoot it who make it Ma∣gick, they come the nearest to Truth, who impute it to occult Qualities. If some men will swound at some meat, yea but smelling it unseen by their disaffection thereunto, why may not whole species and kinds of creatures have some antipathetical places, though the reason thereof cannot be rendred? Surely as Sampson at his Marriage propounded
a Riddle to his Companions to try their Wits thereon, so God offereth such Aenigmaes in nature, partly that men may make use of their admiring as well as of their understan∣ding, partly that Philosophers may be tanght their distance betwixt themselves, who are but the Lovers, and God, who is the Giver of Wisdome. Let it also passe (for this once) for a wonder, that some seven score years since, nigh Har∣laxton in this Shire, there was found (turned up by one ploughing the ground) a GoldenCamd, Brit, in this County. Helmet of Antick fashion, I say Cassis non aurata sed aurea, a Helmet not guilt but of Massive Gold, studded with precious stones, probable of some Prime Roman Commander. Whence I observe; First, that though no Edge-Tool to offend may be made of Gold and Silver, Yet defensive Weapons may thereof be compounded. Secondly, that the Poetical Fiction of Glaucus his Golden Arms is founded on History. For (not to speak of Solomon his Golden Sheilds) Great Commanders made use of Arms of that Mettal, if not for strength, for state and Ornament. Lastly, it was presented to Queen Katharine, first Wife to King Henry the Eighth, who though not knowing to use it as a Helmet, knew how to employ it as made of Gold and Rich Jewells. Proverbs. Lincolne-shire Bagpipes.] I behold these as most ancient, because a very simple sort of Musick, being little more then the Oaten Pipe improved with a Bag, wherein the imprisoned wind pleadeth melodiously for the Inlargement thereof. It is incredible with what agility it inspireth the heavy heels of the Country Clowns, overgrown with hair and rudenesse, probably the ground-work of the poetical fiction of dancing Satyrs. This Bagpipe in the judge∣ment of the Rural Midas's, carryeth away the credit from the Harp of Apollo himself, and most persons approve the Blunt Bagpipe above the Edge Tool Instruments of Drums and Trumpets in our Civil dissentions. As loud as Tom of Lincoln.] This Shire carryes away the Bell for round-ringing, from all in England, though other places may surpasse it for Changes, more pleasant for the Variety thereof; seeing it may be demonstrated that twelve Bells will afford more changes than there have been hours since the Creation. Tom of Lincoln, may be called the Stentor (fifty lesser-bells may be made out of him) of all in this County. Expect not of me to enter into the dis∣course of popish baptizing and naming of Bells, many charging it on them for a pro∣phane, and they confessing enough to make it a superstitious action. All the Carts that come to Crowland are shod with Silver.] Venice and Crowland, Sic Canibus Catulos, may count their Carts alike; that being sited in the Sea, this in a Morasse and Fenny ground, so that an horse can hardly come to it. But, whether this place since the draining of the Fenns, hath acquired more firmnesse than formerly, is to me unknown. Mr. John Cleveland. 'Tis height makes Grantham Steeple stand awry.] This Steeple seems crooked unto the beholders (and I believe will ever do so, until our age erect the like by it for height and workmanship) though some conceive the slen∣dernesse at such a distance is all the obliquity thereof. Eminency exposeth the uprightest persons to exception, and such who cannot find faults in them, will find faults at them, envying their advancement. As mad as the Baiting Bull of Stamford.] Take the Original hereof. William Earl Warren Lord of this Town in the time of King John, standing upon the Castle Walls of Stamford, saw two Bulls fighting for a Cow in the Meadow, till all the Butchers Dogs, great and small, persued one of the Bulls (being madded with Noyse and Multitude) clean through the Town. This Sight so pleased the said Earl, that heR. Butcher in his Survey of Stamfora. p. 40. gave all those Meadows (called the Castle Meadows) where first the Bull Duel began, for a Common to the Butchers of the Town (after the first Grasse was eaten) on condition that they find a Mad Bull, the day Six weeks
before Christmas day, for the continuance of that sport every year. Some think that the Men must be mad as well as the Bull, who can take delight in so dangerous a Wast∣Time; whereby that no more Mischeif is done, not mans care; but Gods Providence is to be praised. He looks as the Devil overSee the Pro∣verbs in Ox∣sordshire. Lincoln.] Lincolne Minster is one of the statelyest Structures in Christendome. The South-side of it meets the Travellers thereunto, twenty miles of, so that their Eyes are there many hours before their Feet. The Divel is the Map of Malice, and his Envy (as Gods mercy) is over all his works. It grieves him what ever is given to God, crying out with that Flesh-Divel, Ut quid haec perditio? Matth. 26. 8. What needs this wast? On which account he is supposed to have overlook'd this Church, when first finished with a torve and tetrick countenance, as maligning mens costly devotion, and that they should be so expensive in Gods service: But, it is suspicious, that some who account themselves Saints, behold such fabricks with little better looks. He was born atHeywood in his Epigrams cent. 5. num. 19. Little Wittham.] This Village in this County by Orthography is Witham, near which a River of the same name doth rise. But such nominal Proverbs take the advantage of all manner of Spelling as due unto them. It is applyed to such people as are not overstock'd with acutenesse. The best is, all men are bound to be honest, but not to be witty. Grantham Gruel, Nine Grits, and a Gallon of Water.] Gruel (though homely) is wholsome Spoon-meat, Physick for the Sick, and food for persons in health, Water is the Matter, Grits the Form thereof, giving the being thereunto. Now Gruel thus imperfectly mix'd, is Wash rather, which one will have little heart to eat, and get as little heart thereby. The Proverb is appliable to those who in their Speeches or Actions multiply what is superfluous, or (at best) less ne∣cessary, either wholly omitting or lesse regarding the Essentials thereof. They held together as the Men ofThough this Proverb be frequent in this Shire, Mar∣ham is in Nor∣folk. Marham when they lost their Common.] Some understand it Ironically, that is, they were divided with several Factions, which Proverb, Mutato Nomine, is used in other Counties. Yea long since Eglogue. the first. Virgil said the same in effect of the Men of Mantua, when they lost their Lands to the Soul∣diers of Augustus. —En quo Discordia Cives, Perduxit miseros? En queîs consevimus Agros? See Townsmen what we by our Jars are grown And see for whom we have our Tillage sown. Indeed when a Common Danger calls for a Union against a General Enemy, for any then to prosecute their Personal Quarrels, and Private Grudges, is a Folly always ob∣served, often reproved, sometimes confessed, but seldome Reformed. Others use this Proverb, only as an expression of ill Successe, when men strive to no purpose, though Plotting and Practising together; to the utmost of their power, be∣ing finally foiled in their undertakings. Princes. HENRY eldest [surviving] Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was born at the Castle of Bullingbrook in this County, and bred (according to the Discipline of those days) in Camp and Court, in both which he proved a good proficient. By Nature, he was made more to command then obey, being ambitious, cholerick, and withal couragious, cunning to catch, careful to keep, and industrious to improve all advan∣tages. Being netled with some injuries received from King Richard the second he complot∣ted
with a good party of the Nobility to depose him. Miscarriages in his Government, (many by mimanaging, more by the missucceeding of matters) exposed him to just Exception, besides his own Debauchery, and how easily is a dissolute Government dis∣solved. Having by the Murther of King Richard atcheived the Government to himself, he reigned with much difficulty and opposition. Though his Father was a great Patron, He was a great Persecutor of the Wickliffites, though not so much out of hatred to them, as Love to himself, thereby to be ingratiated with the Clergy, then Potent in the Land. When Duke, he wore on his Head, an Antick Hood, which he cast not off when King, so that his Picture is generally known by the Crown superadded thereon. Lying on his Death-bed, he was rather querulous then penitent, much complaining of his Sufferings in keeping, nothing bewayling his sin in getting the Crown. Fire and Faggot was first kindled in his Reign in England to burn (pardon the Prolepsis) poor Protestants, and happy had it been, had they been quenched at his Death, which happened Anno Dom. 1413. This Henry was the only Prince born in this Connty since the Conquest, though a good Authour by mistake, entituleth this County to another, an ancienter Henry: Yet so that he giveth him with one hand to it in his Book of Maps, and takes him away with the other in his Chronicle. J. Speed in his Description of Lincolne-sh. Parag. 7. J. Speed in his Chronicle in the life of W. . Pag. 436. This Shire triumpheth in the Births of Beau∣cleark K. Henry the first, whom Selby brought forth. Henry, Fourth and Youngest Son of King William was born at Selby in York∣Shire. I believe Mr. Speed the Chronocler, before Mr. Speed the Chorographer, because therein concurring with other Authors. Besides, consult the Alphabetical Index of his Map, and there is no Selby in this Shire, we have therefore placed King Henry the First in York-shire, and thought fit to enter this observation not to reprove others, but least I be reproved my self. Saints. Here I make no mention of St. Botolph, because there is no Constat (though very much Probability) of his English Nativity, who lived at, and gave the name to Botolphs Town (corruptly Boston) in this County. GILBERT DE SEMPRINGHAM, There born in this County, was Bale de scrip. . cent. 3. n. 25. and Camd. Brit. in Lin∣colnshire. of noble extraction, Joceline his Father being a Knight, to whom he was eldest Son, and Heir to a great Estate. In Body he was very deformed, but of subtile wit and great courage. Travelling over into France, there he got good Learning, and obtained leave from the Pope, to be Founder of those Epicoene, and Hermaphrodite Convents, wherein Monks and Nuns lived together, as under one Roof, but with partitions betwixt them. Sure it was to him a comfort and credit, (which is confidently related by credible Authors) to see 13. Convents, 700. Monks, 1100. Nuns (Women out-superstition Men) of his order, being aged, one hundred and six years. He appointed the fair Con∣vent at Sempringham (his own rich Inheritance) to be mother, and prime residence of his new erected order. He dyed anno 1189. HUGH was a Child, Jo. Capg. in SS. Ang. Matth. West. & Paris. ann. 1255. born and living in Lincoln, who by the impious Jews was stoln from his Parents, and in Derision of Christ and Christianity (to keep their cruel hands in ure) by them crucified, being about Nine years old. Thus he lost his Life, but got a Saintship thereby, and some afterwards perswaded themselves that they got their cures at his Shrine in Lincoln. However this made up the measure of the Sins of the Jews in England, for which not long after they were ejected the land, or (which is the truer) unwillingly willing they departed themselves. And whilst they retain their old manners, may they never re∣turn, especially in this Giddy and unsettled age, for fear more Christians fall sick of Judaisme, then Jews recover in Christianity. This Hugh was martyred Anno Dom. 1255. on the 27. of July.
Martyrs. ANNE ASKEVVE, Daughter of Sir William Askewe Knight, was born at Kelsey in this County, of her Piety and Patience, when first wracked in the Tower, then burnt in Smithfield, I have largely treated in my Church History. She went to Heaven in a Chariot of Fire. July 16. 1546. Cardinals. ROBERT SOMMERCOT. There are two Villages North and South Som∣mercotAMP. in this  (and to my notice no where else in England) fromone of which I presume he took his Nativity and Name: Yet because De Scrip. Brit. cent. 4. num. 2. Bale affirmeth Lawrence Som∣mercot his Brother or Kinsman, born in the South of England, we have affixed our Note of Dubitation. But out of doubt it is, he was a right learned man, to whom In an. 1241. pag. 576. Mat∣thew Paris gives this short but thick commendation, viz. Vir fuit discretus, & circumspe∣ctus, omnibus amabilis merito & gratiosus. By Pope Gregory the Ninth, he was made Cardinal of St. Stephens, anno 1231. He was a true Lover of his Countrymen, and could not abide to hear them abused, the cause that his choler was twice raised, when the Pope said in his Presence, that there was not a faithful man in England, though wisely he repressed his Passion. After this Pope Gregories death, he was the formost of the  Elects for the Pa∣pacy,* Idem in an. 1240. p. 524. & 542. and on fair play, the most probable person to carry the place, but he was dou∣ble barr'd: First, because an honest man as any in that age. Secondly, because an English-man, the Italians desiring to Monopolize the choice to themselves. Here∣upon in the Holy Conclave (the better place the better deed) he was made away by poison; to make room for Celestine to succeed him, who sate that skittish place but a short time, dying 17. days after our Somercots death, which happened anno Dom. 1241. Prelates. WILLIAM of GANESBOROUGH, was born in that Fair Market Town, which performeth more to the Eye, then Fame hath reported to the Ear thereof. He was bred a Franciscan in Oxford, and became the Twenty fifth Lecturer of his Order. He was afterwards sent over by King Edward the first, with Hugh of Manchester, to Philip King of France, to demand reparation for some Dammages in Aquitaine. He was a mighty Champion of the Popes Infallibility, avowing that what David in∣dulged to his Son Adonijah, never saying unto him, 1 King. 1. why didst thou so? ought to be rendred by all to his Holynesse, being not to be called to an account, though causing the Damnation of thousands. I remember when I was in Cambridge, some thirty years since, there was a Flying, though false report, that Pope Urban the Eight, was cooped up by his Cardinals, in the Castle of St. Angelo. Hereupon a waggish Scholar said, jam  est, Papa non potest errare, it was then true (according to their received Intelligence) that the Pope could not straggle or wander. But our Ganesborough stoutly defended it in the literal sense against all opposers, for which his good service, Pope Boniface the Eight preferred him Bishop of Worcester, where he sate 6. years, and dyed 1308. WILLIAM AYRMIN, was descended of an ancient Family in this County, still extant in great Eminency of Estate at Osgodby therein. He was for some time, Keeper of the Seal, and Vice-Chancellour to King Edward the Second, at what time anno 1319. the following misfortune befell him, and take the Original thereof out of an Anonymal Croniclering Manuscript.
Episcopus Eborum, Episcopus Eliae, The∣saurarius, Abbas Beatae Mariae Eborum, Abbas de Selbie, Decanus Eborum, Domi∣nus Willielmus Arymanee Vice-Cancellarius Angliae, ac Dominus Johannes Dabeham, cum 8000. ferme hominum, tam equitum, quam peditum, & Civibus properanter Ci∣vitatem egredientes, quoddam flumen Swale nuncupatum sparcis cuneis transeuntes, & in∣dispositis seu potius confusis ordinibus, cum Adversariis congressi sunt. Scoti siquidem in Marte gnari amplitudinem eorum exerci∣tus caute regentes, in nostris agminibus stri∣ctis audacter irruerunt; nostrorum denique in brevi laceratis cuneis at{que} dissipatis, cor∣ruerunt ex nostris, tam in ore gladii quam aquarum scopulis suffocati, plusquam 4000. & capti sunt Domini Johannes de Papeham, & Dominus Willièlmus de Arymanee, ut prae∣fertur, de Cancellaria, &c. The Arch-bishop of York, the bishop of Ely, Lord Treasurer, the Abbot of St. Maries in York, the Abbot of Selby, the Dean of York, Mr. William Arymane Vice-Chancelour, and Mr. John Dabe∣hame, with almost 8000. Men as well Horse as Foot, and Citizens hastily going out of the City, passing over a certain River called Swale, with scattered parties, Fashioned in Form of a Wedge. and with disordered, or rather confused Ranks, encountred the Enemy. The Scotch cunning in War, waryly ruling the great∣nesse of their Army, boldly rushed on our Men with well ordered Troops, and afterwards in short time having broken, and scattered ou Parties, there fell of our Men, with the mouth of the Sword, and chok'd with the Water, more then 4000. and Mr. Iohn de Pabehame, and Mr. William Arymane of the Chancery, as aforesaid, were taken Prisoners. Afterwards recovering his Liberty he was made Chancelour of England, and bishop of Norwich, in the 18. year of King Edward the Second. He gave two hundred pounds to buy Land to maintain priests to say Masse for his Soul. He dyed anno Dom. 1337. at Charing Cross nigh London, when he had been eleven years bishop. I am credibly informed, that he bestowed the Mannor of Silk Willoughby in this County, on his Family, which with other Fair Lands is possessed by them at this day. WILLIAM WAYNFLET, was born at Waynflet in this County, whence he took his Denomination, according to the custome of Clergymen in that age: For otherwise he was eldest Son to Richard Pattin, an ancient Esquire in this County, and I understand, that at this day they remain at Barsloe in Darbyshire, descended from the said Knight. But of this worthy Prelate, Founder of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, abundantly in my Church-History. WILLIAM LYNVVOOD, was born at Harpsfield in his History. Lynwood in this County, and pro∣ceeded Doctor of the Laws (probably rather by Incorporation then constant Education) in Oxford, long living a Commoner in Gunvil Hall in Cambridge. He was Chancellor to the Archbishop of Canterbury, Keeper of the Privy Seal to King Henry the Sixth, and was employed in several Embassies into Spain and Portugall. He wrote a learned Comment on the English provincial Constitutions, from Stephen Langhton to Arch∣bishop Chichley, and his pains at last was rewarded with the Bishoprick of St. Davids, where he dyed 1446. WILLIAM ASCOUGH, was descended of a worshipful and very ancient Family now living at Kelsey in this County, the variation of a Letter importing nothing to the contrary. I have seen at Sarisbury, his Arms, with allusion to the Arms of that House, and some Episcopal addition. Such likeness is with me a better Evidence then the same∣nesse, knowing, that the Clergy in that age delighted to disguise their Coats from their Paternal bearing. He was bred Doctor of the Laws, a very able man in his profession, became Bishop of Sarum, confessor to King Henry the Sixth, and was the first (as T. Gascoigne relateth) of Bishops, who discharged that Office, as then conceived be∣neath the place. Some will say, if King Henry answered the character commonly re∣ceived of his Sanctity, his Confessor had a very easie performance. Not so, for al∣ways the most conscientious are the most scrupulous in the confession of their sins, and the particular enumeration of the circumstances thereof. It happened, that I. Cade with his cursed crew (many of them being the Tennants of this Bishop) fell fowl on this Prelate, at Edington in this shire, Bishop Godwin saith, Illi quam ob causam infensi non habo compertum. He could not tell why they should be so incensed against him. But I conceive, it was because he was learned, pious and rich,
three capital crimes in a Clergyman. They plundered his Carriages, taking ten thou∣sand marks (a Mine of Money in that age) from him, and then to secure their Ri∣ot and Felony, by murder and high treason, dragged him as he was Officiating from the High Altar. And although they regarded difference of place no more, then a Wolf is concerned whether he killeth a Lamb in the Fold or Field, yet they brought him out of the Church to a Hill hard by, and there barbarously murdered Him, and tore his bloody Shirt in peices, and left his stripped body stark naked in the place. Sic concussa cadit Populari MITRA Tumultu, Protegat optamus nunc DIADEMA Deus. By Peoples fury MITRE thus cast down, We pray henceforward God preserve the CROWN. This his Massacre happened June 29. 1450. when he had sate almost twelve years in the See of Sarisbury. RICHARD FOX, was born at Grantham in this County, as the Fellows of his Foundation in Oxford have informed me. Such who make it their only argument to prove his Birth at Grantham, because he therein erected a fair Free School, may on the same Reason conclude him born at Tanton in Sommerset shire, where he also founded a goodly Grammar School. But what shall I say? Ubique nascitur qui Orbi nascitur, he may be said to be born every where, who with Fox was born for the publick and general good. He was very instrumental in bringing King Henry the Seventh to the Crown, who afterwards well rewarded him for the same. That politick Prince, (though he could go alone as well as any King in Europe, yet) for the more state, in matters of Moment he leaned principally on the Shoulders of two prime Prelates, having Archbishop Morton for his Right, and this Fox, for his left Supporter, whom at last he made Bishop of Winchester. He was bred first in Cambridge, where he was President of Pembroke∣hall (and gave Hangings thereunto with a Fox woven therein) and afterwards in Ox∣ford, where he founded the fair Colledge of Corpus Christi (allowing per annum to it, 401. l. 8. s. 11. d.) which since hath been the Nursery of so many eminent Scholars. He expended much Money in Beautifying his Cathedral in Winchester, and methodi∣cally disposed the Bodies of the Saxon Kings and Bishops (dispersedly buryed in this Church) in decent Tombs erected by him on the Walls on each side the Quire, which some Souldiers (to showe their Spleen at once against Crowns and Miters) valiantly fighting against the Dust of the dead, have since barbarously demolished. Twenty seven years he sate Bishop of this See till he was stark blind with age. All thought him to dye to soon, one only excepted, who conceived him to live too long, viz. Thomas Wolsey, who gaped for his Bishoprick, and endevoured to render him to the Displeasure of K. Henry the Eigth, whose Malice this Bishop though blind discovered, and in some measure defeated. He dyed anno Domini 1528. and lyes buryed in his own Cathedral. Since the Reformation. THOMAS GOODRICH was Son of Edward Goodrich, and Jane his Wife of Kirby in this County, as appeareth by the York-shire Visitation of Heralds, in which County the Allies of this Bishop seated themselves, and flourish at this day. He was bred in the University of Cambridge D. D. say some, of Law say others, in my opinion more probable, because frequently imployed in so many Embassies to Forraign Princes, and at last made by King Henry the Eighth Bishop of Ely (wherein he continued above tweney years) and by King Edward the Sixth, Lord Chancellour of England. Nor will it be amisse to insert and translate this Distick made upon him; Et Bonus & Dives, bene junctus & optimus Ordo: Praecedit Bonitas pone sequuntur Opes. Both Good and Rich, well joyn'd, best rank'd indeed: For Grace goes first, and next doth Wealth succeed.
I find Sir John Hey∣wood the Life of King Edw. the Sixth. one Pen pirting Ink upon him (which is usual in his Writings) speaking to this effect, that if he had ability enough, he had not too much to discharge his Office. I be∣hold him as one well inclined to the protestant Religion, and after his Resignation of the Chancellors place, to Stephen Gardiner, his Death was very seasonable for his own Safety.* Peruse Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary, in Verbo Chancel∣lariorum. May 10. 1554, In the first of Queen Mary, whilst as yet, no great Violence was used to Protestants. JOHN WHITGIFT was born at Grimsby in this County, successively bred in Queens, Pembroke-hall, Peter-house and Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, Master of the Later, Bishop of Worcester, and Arch bishop of Canterbury. But I have largely written his life in my Ecclesiastical History, and may truly say with him, who constantly returned to all Inquirers, Nil novi novi, I can make no new addition thereunto; only since I met with this Camdens Re∣mains, p. 184. Anagram, Joannes Whitegifteus. Non vi egit, favet Jhesus. Indeed, he was far from Violence, and his politick patience was blessed in a high proportion, he dyed anno 1603. Feb. 29. JOHN STILL D. D. was born at Grantham in this County, and bred first Fellow of Christs, then Master of St. Iohns, and afterwards of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, where I have read in the Register this commendation of him, that he was , nec Collegio gravis aut onorosus. He was one of a venerable presence, no lesse fa∣mous for a preacher; then a Disputant. Finding his own Strength, he did not stick to warn such as he disputed with in their own arguments, to take heed to their Answers, like a perfect Fencer, that will tell aforehand in what Button he will give his Venew. When towards the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was an [unsucceeding] mo∣tion of a Dyet or meeting which should have been in Germany, for composing of mat∣ters of Religion; Sir John Harrington in his Continua∣tion of Bishop Godwins Ca. of Bishops. Doctor Still was chosen for Cambridge, and Doctor Humfred for Oxford, to oppose all comers for the defence of the English Church. Anno 1592. being then the second time Vice-chancelour of Cambridge, he was conse∣crated Bishop of Bath and Wells, and defeated all causelesse suspition of Symoniacal com∣pliance, coming clearly thereunto, without the least scandal to his person or losse to the place. In his days God opened the bosome of the Earth, Mendip Hills affording great store of Lead, wherewith and with his own providence (which is a constant Mine of Wealth) he raised a great estate, and layed the Foundation of three Families, leaving to each of them a considerable Revenue in a Worshipful condition. He gave five hundred pounds for the building of an Almes-house in the City of Wells, and dying February 26. 1607. lies buryed in his own Cathedrall under a neat Tomb of Ala∣baster. MARTIN FOTHERBY D. D. was born at Great Grimsby in this County, of a good Family, as appeareth by his Epitaph on his Monument, in the Church of All∣hallows Lumbard street London. He was bred Fellow of Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, and became afterwards one and twenty years Prebendary of Canterbury, then he was pre∣ferred by King Iames Bishop of Salisbury; He dyed in his calling, having begun to put in print an excellent book against Atheists most useful for our age, wherein their sin so aboundeth. His Death happened March 11. 1619. not two full years after his Conse∣cration. Statesmen. EDVVARD FINES Lord Clinton, Knight of the Garter, was Lord Admiral of England, for more then thirty years, a Wise, Valiant and Fortunate Gentleman. The Masterpeice of his service was in Mustleborough Field, in the Reign of King Edward the* Sir John Hey∣ward in the Reign of K. Edward the Sixth. pag. 15. Sixth, and the Battail against the Scots. Some will wonder, what a Fish should do on dry Land, what use of an Admiral in a Land fight. But know, the English kept themselves close to the shore, under the shelter of their ships, and whilst their Arrows could do little, their spears lesse, their swords nothing, against the Scots (who* Idem. p. 31. appeared like a hedge of Steel, so well armed and closed together) the great Ordnance from their ships, at first did all, making such destruction in the Scottish army, that though some may call it a Land-fight, it was first a Victory from the sea, and then but an Execution on the Land.
By Queen Elizabeth (who honoured her honours by bestowing them sparingly) he was created Earl of Lincoln May 4. 1574. and indeed he had breadth to his height, a proportionable estate, chiefly in this County, to support his Dignity, being one of those, who besides his paternal Inheritance, had much increased his estate. He dyed January the sixteenth, 1585. and lyeth buryed at Windsor, in a private chappel under a stately Monument, which Elizabeth his third Wife, Daughter to the Earl of Kildare, erected in his Remembrance. THOMAS WILSON, Doctor of Laws, was born in this Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 9. County, bred Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, and afterwards was Tutor in the same Uni∣versity, to Henry and Charles Brandons, successively Dukes of Suffolk. Hard shift he made to conceal himself in the Reign of Queen Mary. Under Queen Elizabeth he was made Master of the Hospital of St. Katharines, nigh the Tower of London, upon the same Token that he took down the Quire, which, my Stows Survey of London, in Tower-street Ward. Author saith (allow him a little Hyperbole, was as great as the Quire at St. Pauls. I am loth to believe it done out of Covetousnesse, to gain by the materials thereof, but would rather conceive it so run to Ruin, that it was past repairing. He at last became Secretary of State to Q. Elizabeth for four years together. It argues his ability for the place, because he was put into it; Seeing in those active times, under so judicious a Queen, weaknesse might despair to be employed in such an office. He dyed anno dom. 15.. THOMAS Lord BURGE or BOROUH, Son to William Lord Burge, Grandson to Thomas Lord Burge, (created Baron by King Henry the Eight) was born in his Fa∣thers Fair Camd. Brit. in this County. house at Gainsborough in this County. His first publick appearing was, when he was sent Embassador into Scotland, anno 1593. to excuse Bothwell his lurking in England, to advise the speedy suppressing of the Spanish Faction, and to advance an effectual association of the Protestants in that Kingdome for their Kings defence, which was done accordingly. Now when Sir William Russel Lord Deputy of Ireland was recalled, this Lord Tho. Burgh, was substituted in his room, anno 1597. Mr. Camden doth thus character him. In his Eliz. anno. 1597. Vir acer, & animi plenus, ed nullis fere castrorum rudimentis. But where there is the stock of Valour with an able brain, Experience will soon be graffed upon it. It was first thought fit, to make a Months Truce with Tyrone, which cessation like a Damm, made their mutual animosities for the present swell higher, and when removed for the future, run the fiercer. The Lord Deputy (the Truce expired) streightly besieged the Fort of Blackwater the only Receptacle of the Rebells in those parts (I mean besides their Woods and Bogs) & the Key of the County of Tyrone. This Fort he took by Force, and presently followed a bloody Battle, wherein the English paid dear for their Victory, loosing many worthy men, and amongst them two that were Foster brothers [Fratres Collactanei] to the Earl of Kildare, who so layed this losse to his heart, (amongst the Irish, Foster brethren are loved above the Sons of their fathers) that he dyed soon after. Tyrons credit now lay a bleeding, when to stanch it, he rebe∣sieged Blackwater, and the Lord Deputy, whilst indevouring to relieve it was struck with untimely death, before he had continued a whole year in his place. All I will add is this, that it brake the heart of Valiant Sir John Norris (who had promised the Deputies place unto himself, as due to his deserts) when this Lord Burgh was superinduced into that Office. His Relict Lady (famous for her Charity, and skill in Chirurgery) lived long in Westminster, and dyed very aged some twenty years since. WILLIAM CECIL. Know Reader, before I go farther, something must be premised concerning his position in this Topick. Georgic. l. 1. Virgil was prophane in his flat∣tery to Augustus Caesar, profering him his free choice after his death, to be anked amongst what heathen Gods he pleased, so that he might take his place either amongst those of the Land, which had the oversight of Men and Cities, or the Sea-Gods, commanding in the Ocean; or the Skye-Gods, and become a new Constellation therein. But without the least adulation, we are bound to profer this worthy Peer his own ele∣ction; whether he will be pleased to repose himself under Benefactors to the Publick, all England in that age being beholden to his bounty (as well as the poor in Stand∣ford, for whom he erected a fair Bead-house) acknowledging under God and the Queen,
their prosperity the fruit of his prudence. Or else he may rest himself under the title of Lawyers, being long bred in the Inns of Court, and more learned in our Municipal∣Law, then many who made it their sole profession. However, for the present, we lodge this English Nestor (for wisdome and vivacitie) under the notion of States-men, being Secretarie and Lord-Treasurer for above thirty years together. Having In my Holy∣State. for∣merly written his life at large, it will be enough here to observe, that he was born at Bourn in this County, being son to Richard Cecil Esq (of the Robes to King Henry the eighth, and a Legatee in his Will) and Jane his Wife, of whom hereafter. He was in his age Moderator Aulae, steering the Court at his pleasure, and whilst the Earl of Lei∣chester would indure no equall, and Sussex no superiour therein, he by siding with nei∣ther, served himself with both. Incredible was the kindness which Queen Elizabeth had for him, or rather for her self in him, being sensible that he was so able a Minister of State. Coming once to visit him being sick of the Goute at Burley house in the Strand, and being much height∣ned with her Head Attire (then in fashion) the Lords Servant who conducted her thorow the door, May your Highness (said he) be pleased to stoop, the Queen return∣ed, For your Masters sake I will stoop, but not for the King of Spains. This worthy Patriot departed this life in the seventy seventh year of his Age, August the 4th. 1598. Capitall Judges. Sr. WILLIAM de SKIPVVITH, was bred in the study of the Laws, pro∣fitingREM. so well therein, that he was made, in Trinity Terme, Lord Chief Baron of the Ex∣chequer, in the thirty fifth, Sr. Hen. Spel∣mans Glos. tit. Justitiari∣us. continuing therein untill the fortieth, of the Reign of King Edward the third. I meet not with any thing memorable of him in our English Histories; except this may pass for a thing remarkable, that, at the importunity of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, this Sr. William condemned William Bishop God∣win in the Bishops of Win∣chester. Wichkam, Bish. of Winchester, of Crimes rather powerfully objected then plainly proved against him; whereupon the Bishops Temporalls were taken from him, and he denied access within twenty miles of the Kings Court. I confess there is a Village in the East riding of Yorkshire, called SKIPWITH, but I have no assurance of this Judge his Nativity therein: though ready to remove him thither, upon clearer information. Sr. WILLIAM SKIPVVITH Junior. He was inferior to the former inAMP. place (whom I behold as a Puisne Judge) but herein remarkable to all posterity; That he would not complie, neither for the importunity of King Richard the second, nor the example of his fellow See Sr. Robert Belknap. Title Lawyers. in Leicestershire. Sr. Hen. Spel. in Glos. verbo Justitiarius. Judges, in the 10th. year of that Kings Reign) to allow, that the King by his own power might rescinde an Act of Parliament. Solus inter impios mansit integer Gulielmus Skipwith * Miles Clarus ideo apud Posteros. And * shined the brighter for living in the midst of a crooked Generation, bowed with fear and favour into Corruption. I know well, that the Collar of S. S. S. (or Esses) worn about the necks of Judges (and other persons of Honor) is wreathed into that form, whence it receiveth its name. Chiefly from Sanctus Simon Simplicius, an uncorrupted Judge in the Primitive Times. May I move that every fourth link thereof, when worn, may mind them of this SKIPVVITH, so upright in his judgment in a matter of the highest importance. Having no certainty of his Nativity, I place him in this County, where his name at Ormesby hath flourished ever since his time, in a very worshipfull equipage. Sr. WILLIAM HUSE Knight was born, as I have cause to believe, in thisAMP. County, where his name and Familie flourish in a right worshipfull equipage. He was bred in the study of our Municipall Law, and attained to such eminencie therein, that by King Edward the fourth, in the one Spelmans Glossarie, pag. 417. and twentieth of his Reign, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. King HENRY the seventh (who in point of policy was onely directed by him∣self) in point of Law, was chiefly ruled by this Lord Veru∣lam in the lise of King Henry the 7th. pag. 242. Judge, especially in this question of importance. It hapned that in his first Parliament, many Members thereof were returned, who (being formerly of this Kings partie) were attainted, and thereby not legal to sit in Parliament, being disabled in the highest degree, it being incongruous
that they should make Laws for others, who themselves were not Inlawed. The King not a little troubled therewith, remitted it as a case in Law to the Judges. The Judges assembled in the Exchequer Chamber, agreed all with Sr. VVilliam Husee, (their Speaker to the King) upon this Grave and safe opinion, mixed with Law and convenience, that the Knights and Burgesses attainted by the course of Law, should forbear to come into the House, till a Law were passed for the reversall of their attainders, which was done accordingly. When at the same time it was incidently moved in their Consultation, what should be done for the King himself, who likewise was attainted? the rest unanimously agreed with Sr. VVilliam Husee, that the Crown takes away all defects, and stops in blood, and that by the Assumption thereof the fountain was cleared from all attainders and Corruptions. He died in Spelmans Glossarie ut prius. Trinity Term, in the tenth year of King Henry the 7th. Sr. EDMUND ANDERSON Knight, was born a younger brother of a Gentile extract at Flixborough in this County and bred in the Inner Temple. I have been informed that his Father left him 1000 l. for his portion, which this our Sr. Edmund multiplyed into many, by his great proficiency in the Common Law, being made in the twenty fourth of Queen Elizabeth Chief Justice of the Common Pleas. When Secretary Davison was sentenced in the Star Chamber for the business of the Cambden Eliz. Anno. 1587. Queen of Scots, Judge Anderson said of him, that therein he had done * justum non juste, and so acquitting him of all malice, censured him, with the rest, for his indiscretion. When H. uff was arraigned about the Rising of the Earl of Essex, and when Sr. Edward Coke the Queens Solicitor opposed him, and the other answered Syllogistically, our Anderson (sitting there as Judge of Law not Logick) checked both Pleader and Pri∣soner ob stolidos Syllogismos for Idem Anno. 1600. their foolish Syllogismes, appointing the former to press the Statute of King Edward the third. His stern countenance well became his place, being a great promoter of the established Church-discipline, and very severe against all Brownists when he met them in his Circuit. He dyed in the third of King James, leaving great Estates to several sons, of whom I behold Sr. Francis Anderson of Euworth in Bed∣fordshire the eldest, whose son Sr. John, by a second Wife Audrey Butler (Neece to the Duke of Buckingham) and afterwards married to the Lord Dunsmore in VVarwickshire) was (according to some conditions in his Patent) to succeed his Father in Law in that honour, if surviving him. This I thought fit to insert, to vindicate his memory from oblvion, who being an hopefull Gentleman (my fellow Colleague in Sidney Colledge) was taken away in the prime of his youth. Souldiers. Sr. FREDERICK TILNEY Knight had his chief Residence at Hacluit in his first Vol∣lum  Sea Voyages. Bostone in this County. He was a man of mighty stature and strength, above the Proportion of ordinary persons. He attended King Richard the first. Anno Dom. 1190. to the Seidge of Acon in the Holy Land, where his Atcheivements were such, that he struk terror in∣to the Infidels. Returning home in safety he lived and died at Terington nigh Tilney in Norfolk, where the measure of his incredible stature was for many  preserved. Sixteen Weaver in his Funeral Mon. in Norfolk. pag. 817. Knights flourished from him successively in the Male line, till at last their Heir generall being married to the Duke of Norfolk, put a period to the Lustre of that ancient family. PEREGRINE BERTY, Lord Willoughby, Son of Richard Berty, and Katharine S. N. Dutchess of Suffolk. Reader, I crave a dispensation, that I may with thy good leave, trespass on the Premised Laws of this Book, his name speaking his foraign Nativity, born nigh Hidleberg in the Palatinate. Indeed I am loath to omit so worthy a Person. Our Histories fully report his valiant Atcheivements in France and the Netherlands, and how at last he was made Governour of Berwick. He could not brook the Obsequious∣ness and Assiduity of the Court, and was wont to say that he was none of the Reptilia, which could creep on the ground, the Camp was his proper Element, being a great Souldier, and having a suitable magnanimity. When one sent him an insulting Challenge, whilst he lay sick of the Gout, he re∣turned this Answer, that, although he was lame of his hands and feet, yet he would met him with a peice of a Rapier in his teeth. Once he took a Gennet, mannaged for the War, which was intended for a
present to the King of Spain, and was desired by a Trumpeter from the General to restore it, offering this Lord 1000 l. down for him, or 100 l. per annum during his life at his own choise. This Lord returned, that if it had been any COMMANDER, he FREELY would have sent him back, but being but an HORSE, he loved him as well as the King of Spain himself, and would keep him. Here I will insert a Letter of Queen Elizabeth, written to him with her own hand, and Reader deale in matters of this nature, as when Venison is set before thee, eat the one and read the other, never asking whence either came, though I profess, I came honestly by a Copy thereof, from the Original. Good Peregrine, we are not a little glad that by your Journey you have received such good fruit of amendment; specially when we consider how great vexation it is to a minde devot∣ed to actions of honour, to be restrained by any indisposition of body, from following those Courses, which to your own Reputation and our great satisfaction you have formerly performed. And, therefore as we must now (out of our desire of your well doing) cheifly enjoyne you to an especial care to encrease and continue your health, which must give life to all your best endea∣vours; so we must next as seriously recommend to you this Consideration. That in these times when there is such appearance, that we shall have the triall of our best and noble Subjects, you seem not to affect the satisfaction of your own private Contentation, beyond the attending on that which nature and duty challengeth from all persons of your quality and Profession. For if necessarily (your health of body being recovered) you should Elloigne your self by resi∣dence there from those imployments, whereof we shall have too good store; You shall not so much amend the state of your body, as happily you shall call in question the reputation of your mind and Judgment, even in the opinion of those that love you, and are best acquainted with your disposition and discretion. Interpret this our plaineness we pray you to our extraordinary estimation of you, for it is not Common with us to deal so freely with many; and believe that you shall ever find us both rea∣dy & willing in all occasions to yeild you the fruits of that interest, which your endeavours have purchased for you in our opinion and estimation. Not doubting, but when you have with mo∣deration made tryal of the success of these your sundrie Peregrinations, you will find as great Comfort to spend your dayes at home as heretofore you have done; of which we do wish you full measure, howsoever you shall have cause of abode or return. Given under our Signet at our Mannor of Nonesuch the seventh of Octob. 1594 in the 37 year of our Reigne. Your most loving Soveraign E. R. It appears by the Premises, that it was written to this Lord when he was at the Spaw in Lukeland, for the Recovery of his health, when a second English Invasion of the Spaniard was (I will not say fear'd, but) expected. Now though this Lord was born beyond the Seas accidentally (his Parents flying persecution in the Reign of Queen Mary) yet must he justly be reputed this Country man, where his Ancestors had flou∣rished so many years, and where he was Baron VVilloughby in right of his Mother. He dyed Anno Dom. 1601. and lyes buryed under a stately Monument at Eresby in this County. Sir EDVVARE HARVVOOD was bornnigh Bourn in this County, a valiant Souldier and a gracious man. Such who object, that he was extremely wilde in his youth, put me in minde of the return which one made to an ill natur'd man in a Com∣pany, who with much bitterness had aggravated the Debauched youth of an aged and right Godly Divine: You have proved (said he) with much pains what all knew before, that Paul was a great Persecutor before he was converted. I have read of a bird, which hath a Face like, and yet will prey upon a man; who coming to the water to drink, and finding there by reflexion, that he had killed one like himself, pineth away by degrees, and never afterwards enjoyeth it self. Such in some sort the condition of Sir Edward. This accident, that he had killed one in a private quarrell, put a period to his carnal mirth, and was a covering to his eyes all the dayes of his life. No possible provocations could afterwards tempt him to a Duell: and no wonder if one's conscience loathed that whereof he had surfeited. He refused all challenges with more honour than others accepted them; it being well known, that he would set his foot as far in the face of his Ene∣mie, as any man alive. He was one of the four standing Colonels in the Low∣Countries, and was shot at the Seige of Mastricht, Anno Dom. 1632. Death was so
civil to him as to allow him leave to rise up on his knees, & to crie Lord have mercy upon me. Thus a long death-prayer after short piety is not so good, as a short prayer after a long pious conversation. Seamen. JOB HARTOP was (as himself In his Tra∣vells inserted in Hackluits Voyages, last part. pag. 487. affirmeth) born at Bourn in this County, and went Anno 1568. (early dayes I assure you for the English in those parts) with Sir John Hawkins, his Generall, to make discoveries in New Spaine. This Job was chief Gunner in her Majesties Ship called the Iesus of Lubeck, being the Queens by no other title, but as hired for her money, who in the beginning of her Reign, before her Na∣vy-Royall was erected, had her Ships from the Hans-Townes. Long and dangerous was his journey, eight of his men at Cape-Verd being killed, and the General himself wounded with poyson'd Arrowes, but was cured by a Negro draw∣ing out the poyson with a Clove of Idem ibid. Garlick, enough to make nice noses dispence with the valiant smell for the sanative vertue thereof. He wrote a treatise of his Voyage, and is the first I met with, who mentioneth that strange tree, which may be termed The Tree of Food, affording a liquor which is both Meat and Drink; The Tree of Raiment, yielding Needles wherewith, and Threed whereof Mantles are made; The Tree of Harbour, Tiles to cover houses being made out of the solid parts thereof, so that it beareth a self sufficiency for mans mainte∣nance. Iob was his name, and patience was with him, so that he may pass amongst the Con∣fessors of this County. For, being with some other by this General, for want of provisi∣ons left on land, after many miseries they came to Mexico, and he continued a Priso∣ner twenty three years, viz: Two years in Mexico, one year in the Contractation-House in Civil, another in the Inquisition-House in Triana, twelve years in the Gallies, four years (with the Cross of St. Andrew on his back) in the Everlasting-Prison, and three years a drudge to Hernando de Soria, to so high a summ did the Inventorie of his sufferings amount. So much of his patience, now see the end which the Lord made with him. Whil'st enslaved to the aforesaid Hervando, he was sent to Sea in a Flemish, which was after∣ward taken by an English ship, called the Galeon-Dudley, and so was he safely landed at Portsmouth, Decemb. the second, 1590. And I believe lived not long after. Sir WILLIAM MOUNSON Knight, was extracted of an Antient Family in this Shire, and was from his youth bred in Sea-Service, wherein he attained to Great Perfection. Queen Elizabeth having cleared Ireland of the Spanish Forces, and desiring carefully to prevent a Relapse, altered the Scaene of the War, from Ireland to Spaine, from Defending to Invading. Sir Richard Leveson was Admiral, our Sir William Vice-Admiral, Anno 1602. These without drawing a Sword Killed Trading quite on the Coasts of Portugal, no Vessels daring to goe in or out of their Harbours. They had Intelligence of a Caract ready to land in Sisimbria, which was of 1600 Tun, richly laden out of the East-Indies, and resolved to assault it, though it seemed placed in an Invincible Posture. Of it self it was a Gyant in Comparison to our Pigmy Ships, and had in her three hundred Spanish Gentlemen; the Marquess de Sancta Cruce lay hard by with thirteen Ships, and all were secured under the Command of a Strong and well fortified Castle. But nothing is Impossible to Mars valour and Gods blessing thereon. After a aire dispute (which lasted for some houres) with Sillogismes of fire and sword, the Caract was Conquered, the wealth taken therein amounting to the value of Ten Hundred     . Thousand Crownes of Portugal Account. But though the Goods gotten therein might be valued, the Good gained thereby was Inestimable, for henceforward they be∣held the English with admiring eyes, and quitted their thoughts of Invasion. This worthy Knight dyed about the mid'st of the Reign of King Iames. Writers. This County hath afforded many, partly, because so large in it self, partly, be∣cause abounding with so many Monasteries (whereof two Mitred ones Crowland and
Bardney) the Seminaries of many Learned men. Not to speak of the Cathedral of Lincoln and Embrio University of Stamford, wherein many had their Education. Wherefore to pass by Faelix Crowlandensis, Kimbertus Lindesius and others, all of them not affording so much true History, as will fill a hollow quill therewith, we take notice of some principal ones and begin with, GILBERT of HOLLAND. He took his name, not as others from a single Town, but a great part of ground, the third part of this Tripartite County, which in my apprehension argues his Diligence in preaching thereabouts. But quitting his Native Land, he was invited by the famous St. Bernard to go to, and live with him at Clarvaulx in Burgundy, where he became his Scholar. Some will prize a Crum of Forreign Praise, before a Loafe of English commenda∣tion, as subject to partiality to their own Countrymen. Let such hear how Abbot Trithemius the German commendeth our Gilbert, Vir erat in Scripturis Divinis Stu∣diosus & egregie doctus, ingenio subtilis & clarus eloquio. The Poets feig, that Hercules for a time supplyed the place of wearied Atlas in supporting the Heavens; so our Gilbert was frequently substitute to St. Bernard, con∣tinuing his Sermons where the other brake ff, from those words in lectulo meo per no∣ctes, &c. unto the end of the book, being forty six Sermons, in style scarce dis∣cernable from St. Bernards. He flourished anno Dom. 1200. and was buryed at Gistre∣aux in France. ROGER of CROULAND, was bred a Benedictine Monk therein, and after∣wards became Abbot of Friskney in this County. He was the seventh man in order, who wrote the Life of Thomas Becket. Some will say his six elder Brethren left his Pen but a pitiful portion, to whom it was impossible to present the Reader with any remark∣able Novelty in so trite a subject. But know, that the pretended miracles of Becket daily multiplying, the last Writer, had the most matter in that kind. He divided his book into seven Volumes, and was full fifteen years in making of it, from the last of King Richard the first, to the fourteenth of King Iohn. But whether this Elephantine Birth answered that proportion of time in the performance thereof, let others de∣cide. He flourished anno Domini 1214. ELIASDE TREKINGHAM, was born in this County, at a Village so called, as by the sequents will appear. Pag. 865. Ingulphus relateth, that in the year of our Lord 870. in the Month of September, Count Algar with others, bid battle to the Danes in Kesteven, a Third part of this County, and worsted them, killing three of their Kings, whom the Danes buryed in a Village therein, formerly called Laundon, but after Trekingham. Nor do I know any place, to which the same name on the like accident can be applied, except it be Alcaser in Africa, where anno 1578. Sebastian the Portugal and two other Morish Kings were killed in one Battle. I confess no such place as Trekingham appeareth at this day in any Catalogue of English Towns. Whence I conclude it either a Parish some years since depoulated, or never but a Churchlesse Village. ThisBale de Scrip. Brit. cent. 4. num. 31. Elias was a Monk of Peterborough, Doctor of Divi∣nity in Oxford, a Learned man and great Lover of History, writing himself a Chroni∣cle from the year of our Lord 626, till 1270. at what time it is probable he de∣ceased.* Pitz. de Scrip. Angl. pag. 35. Anno 1270. HUGO KIRKSTED, was born at that well known Town in this County, being bred a Benedictine-Cistercian-Bernardine. A Cistercian is a Reformed Benedictine, a Ber∣nardine is a Reformed Cistercian, so that our Hugh may charitably be presumed Pure, as twice Refined. He consulted one Serlo an aged man, and one of his own Order, and they both clubbing their pains and brains together made a Chronicle of the Cistercians from their first coming into England, anno 1131. (when Walter de Espeke founded their first Abby at Rivaax in York-shire) Our Hugh did write, Serlo did indict, being almostBale de Scrip. Brit. cent. 3. num. 81. an hundred years old, so that his Memory was a perfect Chronicle of all remarkable Passages, from the Beginning of his Order. Our Hugo flourished anno Domini 1220. WILLIAM LIDLINGTON was born, say some, at that Village in Cam∣bridge-shire, at a Village so named in this County say others, with whom I concur, be∣cause he had his Education at Stamford. He was by profession a Carmelite, and became
the Fifth Provincial of his Order in England. Monasteries being multiplyed in that age, Gerardus a Frenchman, Master General of the Carmelites, in a Synode at Narbone, deputed two English Provincials of that Order, to the great grievance of our Lidling∣ton, refusing to subscribe to the Decisions of that Synode. His stubbornesse cost him an Excommunication from Pope Clement the Fifth, and four years Pennance of banishment from his Native Country. Mean time our Lidlington living at Paris acquired great cre∣dit* Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 4. n. 79. unto himself by his Lectures and Disputations. At last he was preferred Provin∣cial of the Carmelites in Palestine (whence from Mount Carmel he fetched their Origi∣nal) and he himself best knew whether the Depth of his profit answered the Heigth of his Honour therein, which I suspect, the rather, because returning into England he dyed and was buryed at Stanford, anno Dom. 1309. NICHOLAS STANFORD. He was born at that well-known Town (once of∣fering to be an University) and bred a Bernardine therein. The Eulogy given him by Learned Leland ought not to be measured by the Yard but weighed in the ballance. Admi∣rabar hominem ejus aetatis tam argute, tam solido, tamque significanter potuisse scribere, I admired much that a man of his age, could write, so smartly, so solidly, so significantly: Understand him not, that one so infirm with age or decrepit in years, but that one living in so ignorant and superstitious a generation could write so tercely; flourishing (as may be collected) about the year of our Lord 1310. JOHN BLOXHAM was born at that Town in this County, and bred a Car∣melite in Chester. I confess it is a common expression of the Country folk in this County, when they intend to character a dull, heavy, blundering person, to say of him, he was born at Bloxham; but indeed our Iohn (though there first incradled) had acute∣ness enough, and some will say activity too much for a Fryer. He advantagiously fixed himself at Chester, a City in England, nere Ireland, and not far from Scotland, much conducing to his ease, who was supream prefect of his Order, through those threeBale de scrip. Brit. cent. 5. p. 399. Na∣tions, for two years and a half. For afterwards he quitted that place, so great was his employment under King Edward the second and third, in several Embassies into Scot∣land and Ireland, flourishing anno 1334. JOHN HORNBY was born in thisPitz. de Ang. Script. num. 636. County, bred a Carmelite D. D. in Cam∣bridge. In his time happened a tough contest betwixt the Dominicans and Carmelites about Priority. Plaintiffe. Judges. Defendant. Dominican.   Carmelite. Iohn Stock (or Stake rather, so sharp, and poinant his pen) left marks in the Backs of his Adversaries. Iohn Donwick the Chancellor, and the Doctors of the U∣niversity. Iohn Hornby who by his preaching and writing did vindicate the seniority of his Order. But our Hornby with his Carmelites clearly carried away the Conquest of precedency, and got it confirmed under the authentique seal of the University. However, the Dominicans desisted not to justle with them for the upper hand until Henry the Eight made them friends by thrusting both out of the Land. Our Hornby flourished anno Domini 1374, and was buried at his Convent in Boston. BOSTON of BURY, for so he is generally called. I shall endevour to restore* Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. n. 48. & Pits. in Anno 3410. him first to his true name, then to his native countrey. Some presume Boston to be his Christian, of Bury, his Sirname. But seeing Boston is no Font-name, and Godfathers were consciencious in those dayes (I appeal to all English Antiquaries) in imposing if not Scripture or Saints names: yet such as were commonly known (the christianizing of Sirnames to baptized Infants being of more modern devise) we cannot concur with their judgment herein. And now thanks be to Doctor Iohn Caius, who in the Ca∣talogue of his Authors cited in the Defence of the Antiquity of Cambridge, calleth him Iohn Boston of Bury, being born at and taking his Sirname from Boston in this County (which was customary for the Clergymen in those dayes) though he lived a Monk in Bury. Thus in point of Nativities, Suffolk hath not lost, but Lincoln-shire hath recovered a Writer belonging unto it.
He Travelled all over England, and exactly perused the Library in all Monastaries, whereby he was enabled to write a Catalogue of Ecclesiasticall Writers, as well Forraign as English extant in his age. Such his acuratness, as not only to tell the Initiall words in Every of their Books, but also to point at the place in each Library, where they are to be had. John Leland oweth as much to this Iohn Boston, as Iohn Bale doth to him, and Iohn Pits to them both. His Manuscript was never Printed, nor was it my happi∣ness to see it, but I have often heard the late Reverend Arch-Bishop of Armagh rejoyce in this, that he had, if not the first, the best Copie thereof in Europe. Learned Sir James WARE transcribed these Verses out of it, which because they conduce to the clearing of his Nativity, I have here Inserted, Requesting the Reader not to measure his Prose by his Poetry, though he dedicated it to no meaner then Henry the fourth, King of Eng∣land. Qui legis hunc Librum, Scriptorum, Rex Miserere, Dum scripsit vere, non fecit, (ut aestimo) pigrum. Si tibi displiceat, veniat tua Gratia grandis Quam cunctis pandis, haec sibi sufficiat. Scriptoris nomen Botolphi Villa vocatur; Qui condemnatur nisi gratum det Deus Omen. Sure it is, that his Writings are Esteemed the Rarity of Rarities, by the lovers of An∣tiquitys, which I speak in Humble Advice to the Reader, if possessed thereof to keep, and value them, if not, not to despise his Books, if on any Reasonable price they may be procured. This Iohn Boston flourished Anno Dom. 1410. LAURENCE HOLEBECK, was born saith my Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. Author Apud Girvios, that is amongst the Fenlanders. I confess, such people with their Stilts do stride over much ground, the parcells of severall Shires, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridg, Huntington, Northampton, Lincolnshire, But I have fixed him right in this County, where Holebeck is not far from Crowland in Holland. He was bred a Monk in the Abby of Ramsey, and was very well skill'd in the Hebrew Tongue according to the rate of that Age. For the English-men were so great strangers in that Language, that even the Priests amongst them, in the Reign of King Henry the Eight, as In his Dia∣logue. Per Re∣ligi. Er. Erasmus reporteth, Isti quicquid non intelligunt, Haebraicum vocant, counted all things Hebrew, which they did not understand, and so they reputed a Tablet which he wrote up in Walsingham in great Roman Letters, out of the Rode of Common Cognizance. Holebeck made an Hebrew Dictionary, which was counted very exact according to those days. I. Pitz, doth heavyly complaine of Robert Wakefeild, (the first Hebrew Professor in Cambridg) that he purloined this Dictionary to his private use, whereon all I will observe is this. It is resolved in the Law, that the taking of another mans Sheep is Felony, whilst the taking away of a Sheep-Pasture is but a Trespass, the party pretending a right thereunto. Thus I know many men, so Conscientious, that they will not take twenty lines together from any Author (without acknowledging it in the Margin) conceiving it to be the fault of a Plagearie. Yet the same Criticks repute it no great guilt to seize a whole Manuscript, if they can conveniently make themselves the Masters, though not Owners thereof, in which Act none can excuse them, though we have had too many Prece∣dents hereof. This Laurence died Anno Dom. 1410. BERTRAM FITZALIN. Finding him charactered Illustri Bale de Scrip. Briti Cent. 7. Num. 64. stemmate oriun∣dus, I should have suspected him a Sussex man and Allied to the Earls of Arundell, had not Pitz de An. Script. Anno 1424. another Author positively informed me he was patria Lincolniensis, bred B. D. in Oxford, and then lived a Carmelite in the City of Lincolne. Here he built a faire Li∣brary on his and his freinds cost, and furnish'd it with books, some of his own making, but more purchased. He lived well beloved, and dyed much lamented the seventeenth of March, 1424. Writers since the Reformation. EDMUND SHEFFEILD (descended from Robert Sheffeild, Recorder of Lon∣don, Stow's Sur∣vey of London pag. 574. Knighted by King Henry the Seventh. 1496 for his good Service against the
Rebells at Black-Heath) was born at Butterwick in the Isle of Axholm in this Country, and was by King Edward the sixth Created Baron thereof. Great his Skill in Musick who wrote a Book of Sonnets according to the Italian fashion. He may seem Swan like to have sung his own Funeral, being soon after Slaine (or Murthered rather) in a skirmish against the Rebells in Norwich; first unhorsed and cast into a ditch, and then Slaughtered by a Butcher, who denyed him Quarter, 1449. He was direct Anchester, to the hopeful Earl of Moulgrave. PETER MORVVING was born in this Bale de scrip∣tor. sui tem∣poris. County, and bred fellow of Magdalen Colledg in Oxford. Here I cannot but smile at the great Praise which De Angl. Script. pag. 757. I Pitz bestoweth upon him. Vir omni Latini sermonis elegantia bellè instructus, & qui scripta quaedam, tum versu, tum Prosa tersè, nitidèque composuisse perhibetur. It plainly appeareth he mistook him for one of his own perswasion, and would have retracted this Caracter, and beshrewed his own fingers for writing it, had he known him to have been a most P. Morvinus, voluntarium in Germaniâ Ex∣ilium, turpi in  reman∣sioni, praetulit. Dr. Humfred in vitâ Juelli. pag. 73. Cordial Protestant. Nor would he have afforded him the Phrase of Claruit sub Philippo et Mariâ; who under their Reigns, was forced for his Con∣science, to fly into Germany, where he supported himself by Preaching to the English Exiles. I find not what became of him after his return into England in the Reigne of Queen Elizabeth. ANTHONY GILBY was born in this County, I. Bale. and bred in Christs Colledge in Cambridge, where he attained to great skill in the three learned languages. But which gave him the greatest Reputation with Protestants, was, that in the Reign of Queen Mary he had been an Exile at Geneva, for his Conscience. Returning into England, he became a feirce, fiery and furious opposer of the Church Discipline established in England, as in our Ecclesiasticall History may appear. The certaine date of his death is to me unknown. JOHN FOX was born at Boston in this County, and bred Fellow in Magdalen Col∣ledg in Oxford. He fled beyond the Seas in the Reign of Queen Mary, where he set forth the first and least edition of the Book of Martyrs, in Latine, and afterwards return∣ing into England, inlarged and twice revised the same in our own language. The story is sufficiently known of the two Invita Aeso∣pi. Servants, whereof the one told his Master, he would do every thing, the other (which was even Esop himself,) said he could do nothing, rendering this reason, because his former fellow servant would leave him no∣thing to do. But in good earnest, as to the particular subject of our English Martyrs, Mr. Fox hath done every thing, (leaving posterity nothing to work upon) and to those who say, he hath overdone somthing, we have returned our answer In our De∣scription of Bark-shire, un∣der the title of Confessors. before. He was one of Prodigious Charity to the poor, seeing nothing could bound his boun∣ty but want of mony to give away: but I have largely written of his life and death in my Church History. THOMAS SPARKS D. D. was born at South So am I in∣formed by his Grandchild and Heire. Sommercot in this County, bred in Oxford, and afterwards became Minister of Bleachley in Buckingham-shire. An Im∣propriation which the Lord Gray of Wilton (whose dwelling was at Whaddon hard-by) Restored to the Church. He was a solid Divine and Learned man, as by his Works still extant doth appear. At first he was a Non-conformist, and therefore was chosen by that party as one of their Champions in the Conference of Hampton Court. Yet was he wholy silent in that Disputation, not for any want of Ability, but because (as after∣wards it did appear) he was Convinced in his Conscience at that Conference of the lawfullness of Ceremonies, so that some accounted him King James's Convert herein. He afterwards set forth a book of Unity and Uniformity, and died about the year of our Lord, 1610. Doctor TIGHE was born at Deeping in this County, bred (as I take it) in the Uni∣versity of Oxford. He afterwards became Arch Deacon of Middlesex, and Minister of Alhallowes Barking London. He was an excellent Textuary and profound Linguist, the reason why he was imployed by King James in translating of the Bible. He dyed (as I am informed by his Nephew) Living at Tenterbury in Kent. about the year of our Lord, 1620. leaving to John Tighe his Son, of Carby in this County, Esquire, an Estate of one thousand pounds a year, and none I hope have cause to envy or repine thereat. FINES MORISON Brother to Sir Richard Morison, Lord President of Mun∣ster, was born in this County of worshipfull extraction, and bred a fellow in Peter-house
in Cambridge. He began his Travels May the first, 1591 over a great part of Christen∣dome and no small share of Turky, even to Jerusalem, and afterwards Printed his Ob∣servations in a large book, which for the truth thereof is in good Reputation, For of so great a Traveller, he had nothing of a Traveller in him, as to stretch in his reports. At last he was Secretary to Charles Blunt Deputy of Ireland, saw and wrote the Conflicts with, and Conquest of Tyrone, a discourse which deserveth credit, because the Wri∣ters cye guide his pen, and the privacy of his place acquainted him with many secret passages of Importance. He dyed about the year of our Lord, 1614. Benefactors to the Publique. Having formerly presented the Reader with two Eminent ones, Bishop Wainfleit Founder of New Colledge, and Bishop Fox, Founder of Corpus Christi in Oxford, He, (if but of an ordinary appetite) will be plentifully feasted therewith, so that we may pro∣ceed to those, who were, Since the Reformation. WILLIAM RATCLIFF, Esq And four R. Butcher in his survey of Stamford. pag. 82. times Alderman of the Town of Stamford, died Anno Dom. 1530. Gave all his Messuages, Lands and Tenements in the Town, to the Maintenance of a Free-School therein, which Lands for the present yeild thirty pounds per Annum or there-abouts, to a School-Master and Usher. I am informed that an Augmentation was since given to their stipend by William Cecil, Lord Treasurer, but it seems that since some Intervening accident hath hindered it from taking the true effect. JANE CECIL, Wife to Richard Cecil, Esquire, and co-heire to the worship∣full Families of Camdens Eliz. in Anno 15. Ekington and Wallcot, was born in this County, and lived the maine of her life therein. Job speaking of parents deceased, His Sons (saith he) Job. 14. 21. come to honour, and he knoweth it not: but God gave this good woman so long a life (abating but little of an hundred years) that she knew the preferment of her Son William ecil, for many years in her life, Lord Treasurer of England. I say, she knew it and saw it, and joyed at it, and was thankfull to God for it; for well may we conclude her grati∣tude to God from her Charity to man. At her own charges, Anno 1561. She Leded and Richard But∣cher in his Sur∣vey of Stam∣ford, pag. 33. Paved the Friday Market Cross in Stamford: Besides fifty pound given to the Poor, and many other Benefactions. Her last Will was made Anno Dom. 1588. But she survived some time after, and lies buried in the same Vault with her Son, in St. Mar∣tins in Stamford. GEORGE TRIGG Gentleman, was as I collect a Native of this County, heAMP. gave Anno Dom. 1586 four hundred pounds Idem, page 33. & 38. to be lent out for ever, upon good securi∣ty, without Interest, to Poor young Trads-men and Artificers in Stamford. He also bestowed a Tenement upon the Parson and Poor of St. Johns in the same Town. RICHARD SUTTON, Esquire, was born at Knaith in this County, bred a Souldier in his Youth, and was somwhat of Pay-Master by his place, much mony there∣fore passing through, some did lawfully stick on his fingers, which became the bottom of his future Estate. He was afterward a Merchant in London, and gained great Wealth therein. Such who charge him with Purblindness in his soul, looking too close on the earth, do themselves acquit him from Oppression, that though Tenax, he was not Rapax, not Guilty of Covetousness, but Parcimony. Indeed, there was a Merchant his Comrage; whose name I will Conceal (except the great Estate he left doth discover it) with whom he had Company in Common, but their Charges were severall to themselves, when his friend in Travell called for two Faggots, Mr. Sutton called for one, when his friend for half a pint of Wine, Mr. Sutton for a Gill, under-spending him a Moity; at last, Mr. Sutton hearing of his friends death, and that he left but fifty thousand pounds Estate. I thought (said e) he would dye no Rich man, who made such needless expences. Indeed, Mr. Suttons Estate doubled his, and he bestowed it all on Charter∣House, or Suttons Hospitall. This is the Master-peice of Protestant English Charity, designed in his life, Compleated after his death; Begun, Continued and finished with
Buildings and Endowments, Sin Causa Socia, soly at his Charges. Wherein Mr. Sutton appears peerless in all Christendom, on an equall Standart and Valuation of Re∣venue. As for the Canker of Popish Malice endeavouring to fret this fair Flower, we have returned plentifull Answers to their Cavells in our Ecclesiasticall History. Mr. Sutton died Anno Dom. 1611. ROBERT JOHNSON was born at Stamford, whereof Maurice his Father had been chiefe Magistrate. He was bred in Cambridge, and entring into the Ministry, he was beneficed at Luffenham in Rutland, at what time that little County was at a great losse for the education of the Children therein, and Mr. Johnson endeavoured a reme∣dy thereof. He had a rare faculty in requesting of others into his own desire, and with his ar∣guments could surprise a Miser into charity. He effectually moved those of the Vici∣nage, to contribute to the building and endowing of Schools, Money or Money worth Stones, Timber, Carriage, &c. not flighting the smalest guift, especially, if proportio∣nable to the Givers Estate. Hereby finding none, he left as many Free Schools in Rutland, as there were Market Towns therein. One at Oakeham, another at Upping∣ham well faced with buildings and lined with endowments. Hitherto he was only a Nurse to the Charity of others, erecting the Schools afore∣said, as my Camd. Brit. in Rutland E stipe collaticia. Author observeth, who afterwards proved a fruitful parent in his own person, becoming a considerable Benefactor to Emanuel and Sidney Colledges in Cam∣bridge. And though never dignified higher then Archdeacon of Leicester, he left an Estate of one thousand pounds per Annum, which descended to his posterity. He dyed about the year of our Lord 1616. FRANCES WRAY, Daughter to Sir Chichester Wray Lord chief Justice, was born at Glentworth in this County and married first unto Sir George St. Paul of this Coun∣ty, and afterwards to Robert Rich first Earl of Warwick of that Sirname. She was a Pious Lady, much devoted to charitable actions, though I am not perfectly instructed in the particulars of her Benefactions. Only I am sure Magdalen Colledge in Cambridge, hath tasted largely of her Liberality, who dyed in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles. Memorable Persons. JAMES YORKE a Blacksmith of Lincolne, and an excellent Workman in his Profession. Insomuch that if Pegasus himself would wear shoes, this man alone is fit to make them, contriving them so thin and light, as that they would be no burthen to him. But he is a Servant as well of Apollo as Vulcan, turning his Stiddy into a Study, having lately set forth a Book of Heraldry called the Union of Honour, containing the Arms of the English Nobility, and the Gentry of Lincolne-shire. And although there be some mistakes (no hand so steady as alwayes to hit the Nail on the head) yet is it of singular use and industriously performed: being set forth Anno 1640. Lord Maiors.   Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1 John Stockton Richard Stockton Bratoft Mercer 1470. 2 Nicholas Aldwin Richard Aldwin Spalding Mercer 1499. 3 William Rennington Robert Rennington Bostone Fishmonger 1500. 4 William Forman William Forman Gainsborough Haberdasher 1538. 5 Henry Hoberthorn Christ. Hoberthorn Waddingworth Merchant-Tay. 1546. 6 Henry Amcoates William Amcoates Astrap Fishmonger 1548. 7 John Langley Robert Langley Althrope Goldsmith 1576. 8 Iohn Allot Richard Allot Limbergh Fishmonger 1590. 9 Nicholas Raynton Robert Raynton Highington Haberdasher 1632.
The Names of the Gentrie of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. William Bishop of Lincoln. Commissioners. Lion de Welles Chivaler.   Thomas Meres. Knights of the Shire.   Patricius Skipwith. Knights of the Shire.   Johannis Willoughby militis Roberti Ros militis Humfridi Littelbery armig. Phillippi Tilney armigeri Johannis Copuldik armig. Richardi Laund armigeri Willielmi Braunche armig. Richardi Pynchebek Richardi Welby Richardi Benynington Willielmi Goding de Boston Gilberti Haltoft Will. Hughbert de Doning. VVill. Quadring de Tofte Iohan. Pawlyn de Frampton VVill. VValcote de Spaldyng Thom. Overton de Swynshed Hug. Dandison de VVrangle Roberti Hughson de Boston Rich. Whiteb. de Gosberkirk Ioh. Docking de VVhaploade Will. Calowe de Holbetch Will. awode de Whaploade Nich. Gyomer de Sutton de Holand Godf. Hilton Militis Iohannis Busshe militis Nicholai Bowel militis Philippi Dymmok militis Iohannis Gra Militis Iohannis Pygot armigeri Iohannis Boys armigeri Galfridi Painell armigeri Maunceri Marmeon armig. Willielmi Eton armigeri Iohannis Markham Iohannis Trenthall Gent. Thom. Holme Gent. Ioh. Saltby de Gunwardby Thomae Repynghale Iohannis Hesill de Carleton Iohannis Leek de Grantham Will. Mapulbeck de Cranth. Ioh. Chevercourt de Stannf. Nich. Mason de Blankeney Ioh. Chapeleyn de Sleford Thomae Sleford de Kirkeby Ioh. Hardyng de Kime Ioh. Wykes armigeri de Kis∣teven Hugonis Midleton militis Rogeri Wentworth armigeri Roberti Auncell de Grymesby Willielmi Bleseby de Bleseby Thomae Fereby de Burten Iohannis Ufflete de Halton Iohannis Thoresby de Croxby Andreae Godehand de Whalesby Iohannis Tomlinson de Wotton Roberti Morley armigeri Iohannis Abbot de Hatclif Iohannis Smith de Elkington Abbatis de Neusom Iohannis Teleby Canonici ejusdem Abbatis Iohannis Cawode de Oxeomb Iohannis Langton de Somercotes William Marshall de Somercotes Roberti Pigot do parva Gry∣mesby Thomae Spaldyng de Claxby Ioh. Hamond Parsone de Whalesby Iohannis Boucher de Tynton Richardi Alesby de Hatclif clerici Rogeri Glaston parsone de Alesby Roberti Lackwode de VVhalesby Iohannis Nundye de VVhalesby Chapellani. Sheriffs of Lincolne-Shire. HEN. II. Anno, 1 Rainerus de Bada Anno, 2 Jordanus de Blossevilla Anno, 3 Walterus de Amunde∣vel, for seven years Anno, 10 Petrus de Gossa Anno, 11 Idem Anno, 12 Willielmus de Insula Anno, 13 Aluredus de Poiltona Anno, 14 Philippus de Kime Anno, 15 Idem Anno, 16 Walterus de Grimesby Anno, 17 Idem Anno, 18 Walt. & Al. de Poilton Anno, 19 Walt. & Al. de Poilton Anno, 20 Idem Anno, 21 Idem Anno, 22 Drogo Filius Radulphi Anno, 23 Idem Anno, 24 Will. Basset for 7 years Anno, 31 Nigel. Fillius Alexandri Anno, 32 Idem Anno, 33 Idem RICH. I. Anno, 1 Nigellus Filius Alex. Anno, 2 Gerardus de Camvill Roger. de Stikewald Anno, 3 Gerardus de Camvill Anno, 4 Gerard. & Roger Stikel∣ralde. Anno, 5 Idem Anno, 6 Gerardus & Eustacius de Hedenham Anno, 7 Simond Kimmeo & Pe∣trus de Trihanton Anno, 8 Sim. de Kime & Petus de Beckering et Rober∣tus de Trihanton Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Philip. Filius Roberti JOH. REX. Anno, 1 Robertus de Tateshall Anno, 2 Ger. de Cemvill & Hugo Fillius Ricardi for six years Anno, 8 Thomas de Muleton Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Idem Anno, 11 Huber. de Burgo & Alex. Ormesby (ut Custos) Anno, 12 Huber. Alex. (ut Custos) Anno, 13 Hubertus de Burozo & Robertus de Aoziulver Anno, 14 Hub. de Burozo et Rob. Aquilum Anno, 15 Hubertus de Burgo & Rob. Aquilum Alex. de Puncton Anno, 16 Idem Anno, 17 Johannis Marescallus.
HEN. III. Auno, 1 Willi. Comes Saresb. & Willi. Filius Warner. Auno, 2 Willi. Comes Sarisb. & Johan. Bonet for five years Auno, 7 Steph. de Segne & Ra∣dulphus Filius Regin. Auno, 8 Idem Auno, 9 Hugo Lincolne Episcopus & Rad. Filius Regin. Auno, 10 Hugo Episcop. & Rad. Auno, 11 Radulp. Filius Regin. Auno, 12 Idem Auno, 13 Idem Auno, 14 Robertus de Rokefeld Auno, 15 Walt. de Cuerame & Willielmus de Curum Auno, 16 Walt. & Willielmus Auno, 17 Phil. de Ascellus Auno, 18 Philippus Auno, 19 Philippus Auno, 20 Philippus Auno, 21 Robertus Lupus, for four years Auno, 25 Radulphus Basset for 5 years Auno, 30 Willielmus de Derleg Auno, 31 Willi. Filius de Curzim for five years Auno, 36 Gilbertus de Cheile for four years Auno, 40 Roger. Beler & Roger. & Haeres Ejusdem Auno, 41 Williel. de Leverton Auno, 42 Joh. de Cockerington. Auno, 43 Will. de Angleby, & Williel. de Notingham. Auno, 44 Hamo Hauteyn Auno, 45 Idem Auno, 46 Willielmus de Grey Auno, 47 Idem Auno, 48 Idem Auno, 49 Will. & Rich. de Grey, Fil. ejus haeres, et Will. de Notingham Clericus Auno, 50 Will. & Rich. Will. & Ja. Panton Auno, 51 Idem Auno, 52 Jacobus Panton for four years Auno, 56 Tho. de Bolton EDVV. I. Anno, 1 Thomas Anno, 2 Thomas Anno, 3 Richardus de Harington Anno, 4 Nicholaus de Rye Anno, 5 Idem Anno, 6 Idem Anno, 7 Adamus de Sancto Laudo Anno, 8 Idem Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Radulphus de Arnehall Anno, 11 Rad. de Arnehall, & Walt. de Stuchesle Anno, 12 Idem Anno, 13 Idem Anno, 14 Robertus de Cadworth for five years Anno, 19 Johan. Dyne Anno, 20 Idem Anno, 21 Johan. & Radulphus de Trihampton Anno, 22 Robertus le Venur. for four years Anno, 26 Rad. de Paynell et Rich. de Draycot Anno, 27 Idem Anno, 28 Ricardus de Howell Anno, 29 Hugo de Bussey Anno, 30 Idem Anno, 31 Tho. Fil. Eustarchi Anno, 32 Idem & Johan. Nevill Anno, 33 Thom. de Burnham for five years. EDVV. II. Anno, 1 Radulphus Paynell Anno, 2 Idem Anno, 3 Thom. de Burnham Anno, 4 Johan. de Nevill & Rad. de Rye Anno, 5 Idem Anno, 6 Johannes Anno, 7 Johannes Anno, 8 Tho de Tittele, & Joh. de Nevill Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Johan. de Nevill, & Ro∣bertus Stannton. Anno, 11 Robertus de Stannton Anno, 12 Robertus & Simon de Landerthorpe Anno, 13 Johan. de Bella fide for four years Anno, 17 Simon le Chamberlaine Anno, 18 Simon & Riginaldus Donington Anno, 19 Idem EDVV. III. Anno, 1 Tho. de Novo Mercato Anno, 2 Simon Kinardsley Anno, 3 Tho. de Novo Mercato Anno, 4 Tho. de Novo Mercato Anno, 5 Rad. de Santo Laudo & Tho. de novo Mer. Anno, 6 Reginal de Donington, & Rad. de Santo Laudo Anno, 7 Idem Anno, 8 Johan de Trehampton Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Rad. de Santo Laudo & Regin. de Donington Anno, 11 Johan. dé Bolingbroke, & Joh. de Trehampton Anno, 12 Gilbertus de Beaved Anno, 13 Idem Anno, 14 Willielmus Disney, & Gilbertus de Leddred Anno, 15 Idem Anno, 16 Willielmus Franuke Anno, 17 Johannes de Hundon Anno, 18 Saierus de Rochford Anno, 19 Idem Anno, 20 Johan. de Trehampton Anno, 21 Idem Anno, 22 Anno, 23 Saierus de Rochford, for six years Anno, 29 Tho. Fulvetby & Saje∣rus de Rochf, for 4 years Anno, 33 Edw. de Cormil. Anno, 34 Idem Anno, 35 Johan. de Boys Anno, 36 Idem Anno, 37 Will. Haudley for 6 years Anno, 43 Tho. de Fulvetby for four years Anno, 47 Willielmus Bussy Anno, 48 Johannes Hode Anno, 49 Tho. de Kidale Anno, 50 Kogerus Beler Anno, 51 Radulphus Paynell
Sheriffes. Name. Place. Arms. RICHARD. II.     Anno,     1 Thom. de Kydale Ferribie Sable, a Saltyr Raguled Argent. 2 Will. de Spaygne     3 Johann. Ponger     4 Tho. Thimorby Irenham Arg. 3 Pallets, & 4 Mullets in Bend S. 5 Will. de Belesby Belebye Ara Chev. 'twix 3 steel Gads. S 6 Johannes Pongr     7 Johannes Bussy Hather Argent 3 Bars Sable. 8 Williel. Spaygne     9 Johannes Bussy ut prius   10 Philip. de Tilney Boston Ar. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 Griffins hads erased Gules. 11 Will. de Belesby ut prius   12 Anketin. Mllore     13 Walter. Taylboys   Arg. a Cross Salt. & chief G on the last, 3 Escallops of the first. 14 Johannes Bussy ut prius   15 Johann. Rochford   Quarterly O & G. 12 Bezants on a Border Sable. 16 Henr. de Recford     17 Joh. Cupuldicke Haringtō Ar. a Ch. 'twixt 3 Croses. crossed G. 18 Johann. Skipwith Orsbye Ag. 3 bars G. in chief a Grey∣hund cursant Sable. 19 Johann. VValch Grimsbye G. 2 bars Gemelles a bend Arg. 20 Rogerus Wely   S. a Fess 'twixt 3 Flour de L. Ar. 21 Henricus. Bidford & Joh. Litelbury, m.   Ar. 2 Lions Pssant Gardant, G. HEN. 4.     Anno,     1 Jo. Cobeldikes, m. ut prius   2 Joh. Rochford, m. & Tho. Swynford. ut prius   3 Ger. Soihil, mil. Redborne G. an Eagle displayed Argent. 4 T. Wiloughy, m. Eresby Az. a Fret of eight Peices, Or▪ 5     6 Thomas Hanlay     7 Henr. Redford, m.     8 Rad. Rochford, m. ut prius   9 T. Chauworth, m.   Azure, two Chevtrons, Or. 10 Johan. Rochford ut prius   11 Joh. de Waterton Waterton Barry of 6. Ermin and Gules 3. Cressants Sable. 12 Rob. Waterton, ut prius   HEN. 5.     Anno,     1 Thomas Clarell     2 Robertus Hilton   Arg. 2 bars Az. over all a Flour de Luce, Or. 3 T. Cumberworth, m Cumberw.   4 Nicholas Tournay Cainby Arg. a Chev. 'twixt 3 Bulls pas∣sant, Sable, Armed, Or. 5 Joh. Normanvile     6 Thom. Chaworth ut prius   7 Rich. Haunsard S. Kelsey Gules, three Mullets Argent. 8 Robertus Roos Melton G. three Water-bougets Argent. 9 Rob. & Tho. Clarel     HEN. 6.     Anno,     1 Wal. Talboyes, m. ut prius   2 Johann. Haytfeld     3 Robertus Hilliard     4 Johannis Talboys ut prius   5 Will. Cupuldicke ut prius   6 Henricus Retsord     7 Hamo Sutton Willought Argent a Quarter Sable, a Cres∣cent Gules. 8 Will. Rither, mil.     9 T. Cumberworth, m     10 Rob. Roos, miles ut prius   11 Johan. Pigott, ar. Dodintō Sable three Pickaxes Argent. 12 Tho. Darcy, arm. Norton Az. crusuly 3 Cinque soiles Arg. 13 Johan. Cunstable Halsham Quarterly G. & Vaire a bend, O 14 Robert. Roos, m. ut prius   15 Thom. Meres, ar. Kirton Gules a Fesse 'twixt 3 Water∣bougets Ermin. 16 Philippus Tilney, ut prius   17 H. Willoughby, m. ut prius   18 Johannes Nevil   AMP. 19 Nichol. Bower, m.     20 Rog. Pedwardyn Burt. Ped.   21 Johannes Sothil ut prius   22 Thomas Moigne   Sab. a Fess Dancette, betwixt 6. Annulets Or. 23     24 Johan. Harington   Argent a Fret Sable. 25 Thomas Meres ut prius   26 Nicholaus. Bowet     27 Manc. Marmyon, m Scrivelby Varry Az. and Arg. a Bend G. 28 Brian. Stapleton   Arg. a Lyon Rampant Sable. 29 Will. Rither, mil.     30 Nich. Bowet, m.     31 Johannes Nevil ut prius   32 Rich. Waterton ut prius   33 Hen. Retford, m.     34 Joh. Tempest, m.   Arg. a Bend 'twixt 6. Martlets S. 35 Ioh. Harington, a. utprius   36 Ric. Waterton, a. ut prius   37 W. Skipwith, mil. ut prius   38 Joh. Marmyon, a. ut prius   EDW. 4.     Anno,     1 Joh. Burgh, arm. Gainsbor. Az. 3. Flower de Luces Ermin. 2 Tho. Blound, ar.     3     4 VVil. Skipwith, m. ut prius   5 Brian. Stapleton, m ut prius   6 Joh. Wichcote, a. Harpswell Ermin, two Boares Gules. 7 Rob. Cunstable, m ut prius   8 Thomas Meres ut prius   9 Ri. Fitz Williams, m Maple-th. Lozengee Argent and Gules. 10 Rich. Tempest, m. ut prius   11 Richard. Welby ut prius   12 L. Thornburgh, a.     13 Thomas Kyme Freisney G. a Cheveron betwixt 9 Crosses crossed Or. 14 Joh. Villers, arm. Leicest. sh. A. on a Crosse G. 5 Escallops, Or. 15 Th. Wimbech, ar.     16 Rob. Markham, m Sidebroke. Az. in Chief Or, a Lyon Issuant G. and Border Argent. 17 Tho. Bolles, arm. Haugh. Az. 3 Cups Arg. holding as many Boars Heads Erected, Or. 18 Willielm. Brown AMP.   19 Tho. Tempest, ar. ut prius   20 Joh. Bushy, mil. ut prius   21 Rob. Talboys, m. ut prius   22 Will. Tirwhit, ar. Kettleby Gules, 3 Puits, Or. RICH. III.     Anno,     1 Thomas Knight     2 Rob. Dymock, m.   Sable 2 Lyons passant Guardant Argent crowned, Or. 3 Thomas Meres. ut prius   HENRIC. VII.     Anno,     1 Thom. Pinchbeck     2 Brian. Standford     3 Johan. Copuldick ut prius   4 Tho. Tempest, m. ut prius   5 Oliv. St. John, m.   Arg. on a chief G. 2 Mllets, Or, peirced. 6 H. Willoughby, m. ut prius   7 Thomas VVelby ut prius   8 Johan. Skipwith, ut prius   9 Johan. Husee. Sleford Or, a Plain crosse Vert. 10 VV. Shiriolli, m.     11 Georg. Taylboys, ut prius   12 Mance. Marmyon ut prius   13 Tho. Knight, ar.     14 Th. Dalaland, m. Ashbi.   15 VVill. Ascue, ar. Kelsey. S. a Fesse O. betwixt 3 Asses, pass. Argent, Main'd of the second. 16 VVill Tirwhit, m ut prius   17 H. Willoughby, m ut prius   18 Rob. Dimmock, m ut prius   19 Leon. Percy, arm.   Or. a Lyon Rampant Azure. 20 VVill. Ascu, mil. ut prius   21 Milo Bushy, mil. ut prius   22 Rob. Sutton, arm. ut prius  
23     24 VVill. Ascugh, m. ut prus   HEN. VIII.     Anno,     1 Rob. Dymock, m. ut prius   2 Thomas Parr, m. Northam. Argent, 2 Bars Azure a Border engrailed Sable. 3 Edw. Guldeford, a. KENT. Or, a Saltyr entre 4 Martlets Sable. 4 Tho. Cheyne, mil.     5 Mar. Constab. j. m. ut prius   6 G. Fitz williams, a. ut prius   7 Leo. Dymmock, m. ut prius   8 Will. Hansard, m. ut prius   9 Will, rwhi, m. ut prius   10 Th. Burgh, jun. m. ut prius   11 Rob. Tirwhit, m. prius   12 Will. skue, mil. ut prius   13 Franc. rown, ar.     14 Andr. Billesby, m ut prius   15 Rob. Tirwhit, m. ut prius   16 Thom. Burgh, m. ut prius   17 Gilb. Taylboy, m ut prius   18 Will. Skipwith, a. ut prius   19 Th. Portington, a.     20 G. Fitz williams, a ut prius   21 Andr. Besby, m. ut prius   22 Will. Hussey, m. ut prius   23 Will. Disney, ar. Nort. D s. Argent on a Fesse▪ G. 3 Flower de Lucies, Or. 24 Joh. Markham, m. ut prius   25 G Fi zwilliam, m ut prius   26 Joh. Goodrick, ar.   Argent on a Fesse Gules, 'twixt 2 Lyons passant Guardant S. a Flower de Luce 'tween 2 cres∣sants, Or. 27 Edw. Dymock, 2. utprius   28 Will. Titwhit, m. ut prius   29 Jo. Harrington, m ut prius   30 W. Newenham, m     31 Will. Sandon, m.   Or, a Cheif Azure. 32 Rob. Tirwhit, m. ut prius   33 Tho. Dymock, ar. ut prius   34 Rob. Hussey, mil. ut prius   35 Will. Sandon, ar. ut prius   36 Franc. Ascugh, m. ut prius   37 Will. Dallison, ar. Laughon. G. 3 Cressants Or, a Cant. Em. 38 Andr. Nowel, ar.   Or, Fretly Gules, a Canton Erm. EDW. VI.     Anno,     1 Edw. Dymock, m. ut prius   2 Joh. Copledick, m. ut prius   3 Fran. Ayscough, m. ut prius   4 Richard. Bolles, . ut prius   5 Ric. Thimolby m. ut prius   6 Will. Skipwith, m. ut prius   R. Phil. & Mar. Reg.     Anno,     1 Fran. Ascough, m. & W. Mounson, ar. ut prius S. Carlton Or, 2 Cheverons, Gules. 2 & 3 E. Dymock, m. ut prius   3 & 4 Nic. Disney, a. ut prius   4 & 5 T. Lilebery, a. ut prius   5 & 6 W. Thorold, a. Blancney Sab. 3 Goats Salient Argent. ELIZAB. Reg.     Anno,     1 Rob. Tirwhit, mil. ut prius   2 Ric. Thimolby, m. ut prius   3 Rich. Welby, arm. ut prius   4 Adlerdus VVelby, a ut prius   5 VVil. Skipwith, m. ut prius   6 Rich. Berty, arm. Grims∣thorp. Arg. 3 Battering Rams in Pale barry Az. arm'd & garnish'd O. 7 Tho. St. Pole, arm. Snarsord. Arg. a Lyon Rampant bicade Gules, crowned Or. 8 Rich. Disney, arm. ut prius   9 Joh. Copledick, ar. ut prius   10 Johan. Carr, arm. Sleford. G. on a Ch▪ veron Arg. 3 Mullets Sable. 11 Rich. Bolles, arm. ut prius   12 Tho. Quadring, a.   Erm. a Fesse engrailed Gules. 13 Anthon. Tharold, ut prius   14 VVil. Hunston, a.   Sable 4 Fusils, Ermin a Border Engrailed Argent. 15 Rob. Savill, arm.   Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Owls of the 1. 16 Andr. Gedney, a. B. Enderb. Argent. 2 Luces Saltways Az. 17 VVil. Metham, a. Bulling▪ . Quaterly Az. & Arg. on the first a Fowe de ce Or. 18 G. Hennage, ar. Haynton. Or, a Greyhound current S. 'twixt 3 Leopards Heads Az. a bord. G 19 Joh. Mounson, ar. ut prius   20 Franc. Manby, a. Elsham. Arg. a Lyon Ramp. S. in an Ole of Escallops G. 21 Tho. St. Pole, ar. ut prius   22 W. Fitzwilliams, a▪ ut prius   23 Rob. Carr, jun. a. ut prius   24 Daniel Disney, a. ut prius   25 Edw. Tirwhit, ar. ut prius   26 Edw. Dymock, m. ut prius   27 VVil. Hennage, a ut prius   28 Barth. Armyn, ar. Osgodbie. Erm a Saltyre engrailed G. on a cheif of the second, a Lyon pas. O. 29 Edw. Ascough, a. ut prius   30 Go. St. Pole, ar. ut prius   31 Joh. Markham, a. ut prius   32 Johan. Savile, ar. Dodngtō. Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Owls of the 1. 33 Carolus Huss▪ y, a. ut prius   34 Nic. Sanderson, a. Fillingā. Pally of 6. Arg. and Az. on a Bend Sable 3 Anulets Or. 35 Valent. Brown, ar Croft.   36 VVill. VVry, ar. Glentwor. Azure on a cheif Or. 3 Martlets Gules. 37 Phiip. Tirwhit, a. ut prius   38 Johan. Meres, ar. ut prius   39 Tho. Mounson, m. ut prius   40 VV. Hennage, m. ut prius   41 Rob. rwhit, ar ut prius   42 Th. Grantham, a. Goltho. Ermin a Crisfin sergreant his Tail nowed G. 43 Rog. Dallison, ar. ut prius   44 VVill. Pelham, a. & VVill. Armyn, m. Broklesbie ut prius Az. 3 Pellicans Argent. JACOB. Rex.     Anno,     1 VVill. Armyn, m. ut prius   2 Edw. Marbury, m. Girsby. Arg. on a Fesse engrailed Az. 3 Garbs, O. 3 Rich. Amcots, mil.   Arg. a Castle twixt 3 Cups cover∣ed Azure. 4 VVill. VVelby, m. ut prius   5 Gerv. Helwish, m. Wortetly. Or a Fesse Azure & Bend Gules. 6 Rich. Ogle, miles Pinchbeck Arg. a Fesse 'twixt two Cressants Jess. & as many Flower de L. G. 7 Johan. Reade, m. VVrangle G. on a Bend Arg. 3 shovelers S. Beaked, Or. 8 Joh. Hatcher, m. Carebye.   9 Rob. Tiwhit, arm. Camerin. ut prius. 10 Joh. Langton, m. Langton. Quarterly Sab. and O. a Bend Ar. 11 Nic. Sanderson, m ut prius   12 Ed. Carr, m▪ & b. ut prius   13 Joha. Thorold, m. ut prius   14 Franc. South, mil. Kelstern. Arg. 2 Bars G. in cheis a Mull. S. 15 Anth. Thorold, a. ut prius   16 Edwar. Huss▪ y▪ m. ut prius   17 Joh. Buck, miles Hanby Barry Bendy O. & Az. a Cant. Er. 18 Tho. Taylor, ar. Dodingtō.   19 Ric. Hickson, ar. Ropsley.   20 Geo. Southco, m. Bliburgh.   21 Tho. Midlecot, m. Boston   22 VVill. Lister, ar. Coleby. Erm. on a Fesse S. 3 Mullets Arg. CAROLUS I.     Anno,     1 Jo. VVray, m. & b. ut prius   2 Johan. Bolles, ar. Scampton ut prius with a Flower de Luce for difference. 3 Jac. Brampton, ar. Touse.   4 Geor. Hennage, m. ut prius   5 VVil. Armyn, bar. ut prius   6 Dan▪ Deligne, m. Harlaxon. Or, a Bnd Gules a chief Checky Argent and Azure. 7 Edw. Ascough, m. ut prius   8 VV. Thorold, m. ut prius   9 Jervas. Scroop, m. Cokering- Aure a Bend Or. 10 VV. Norō, m. & b ton.   11 VVil. Pelham, m. ut prius   12 Edw. Hussey, mil. ut prius   13 Anthonius Irby, m Boston. Arg. a Fret of 8. peices S. on a Canton G. a Chaplet O. 14 Tho. Grantham, a. ut prius   15 Joh. Brownlew, a. Belton. O. an Escocheon, & Orle of Mart∣lets Sable. 16 Tho. Trollop, a.   Vert 3 Bucks pas. Arg. mained and unguled O. a border Argent. 20 Thoma Lister, ar. ut prius   22 Joh. Hobson, ar.   Sab. a Cinquefoi Arg. a cheif checquy O. & Az.
RICHARD the Second. 19. JOHN WALCH.] Proportion of time and place, evidence him the same person, of whom I read, in the Eighth year of the Reign of this King, anno 1385▪ Stows chron. On St. An∣drews day, there was a combat fought in the Lists at Westminster, betwixt an English Esq named John Walch of Grimesby, and one of Navar, called Mortileto de Vilenos, who had accused him of Treason to the King and Realm. In which combat the Navarois was overcome, and afterwards hang'd for his false accusation. HENRY the Fourth. 2. JOHN ROCHFORD Miles.] The same no doubt with him who was Sheriff in the 15. of K. Richard the Second. I confesse there was a Knightly Family of thisCamd. Brit. in Essex. Name at Rochford in Essex, who gave for their Arms Argent, a Lyon Rampant Sable, langued, armed and crowned Gules; quartered at this day by the Lord Rochford Earl of Dover, by the Butlers and Bollons descended from them. But I behold this Lincolnshire Knight, of another Family, and different Arms, quartered by the Earl of Moulgrave, whence I collect his heir matched into that Family. Consent of time and other circumstances, argue him the same with Sir John Roch∣ford, whomDe scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. n. 41. Bale maketh to flourish under King Henry the Fourth, commending him for his noble birth, great learning, large travail through France and Italy, and wor∣thy pains in translating Iosephus his Antiquities, Polychronicon, and other good Au∣thors into English. RICHARD the Third. 2. ROERT DIMOCK Miles.] This Sir Robert Dimock at the Coronation of King Henry the Seventh, came on horse back into VVestminster Hall, where the King dined, and casting his Gauntlet on the Ground, challenged any who durst Question the Kings right to the Crown. King Henry being pleased to dissemble himself a stranger to that Ceremony, demanded of a stander by, what that Knight said? to whom the party returned, He challengeth any man to fight with him, who dares deny your Highnesse to be the lawful K. of England. If he will not fight with such a one (said the King) I will. And so sate down to dinner. HENRY the Seventh. 9. JOHN HUSEE.] This was undoubtedly the same person, whom King Henry the Eigth afterwards created, the first and last Baron Husee of Sleford, who ingaging himself against the King, with the rebellious Commons, anno 1537, was justly beheaded, and saw that honour begun and ended in his own person. HENRY the Eighth. 16. THOMAS BURGE Miles.] He was honourably descended from the Heir General of the Lord Cobham of Ster∣bury inCamd. Brit. in Surry. Surry, and was few years after created Baron Burge, or Burough by King Henry the Eigth. His Grandchild Thomas Lord Burge Deputy of Ireland, and Knight of the Garter, (of whomIn this Shire Title States∣men. before) left no Issue Male nor plentiful Estate, only four Daughters, Elizabeth married to Sir George Brook, Frances to the ancient Family of Copinger in Suffolk, Anna, Wife to Sir Drue Drury, and Katharine married to..... Knivet of Norfolk, Mother to Sir John Knivet Knight of the Bath, at the last Installment, so that the honour which could not conveniently be divided, was here determined. King CHARLES. 9. JERVASIUS SCROOP Miles.] He ingaged with his Majesty in Edge-hill-fight, where he received twenty six wounds, and was left on the ground amongst the dead. Next day his Son Adrian obtained
leave from the King to find and fetch off his Fathers Corps, and his hopes pretended no higher then to a decent Interment thereof. Hearty seeking makes happy finding. Indeed, some more commendedthe affe∣ction, than the judgement of the Young Gentleman, conceiving such a search in vain, amongst many naked bodies, with wounds disguised from themselves, and where pale Death had confounded all complexions together. However he having some general hint of the place where his Father fell, did light upon his body, which had some heat left therein. This heat was with rubbing, within few Minutes, improved into motion; that motion, within some hours into sense; that sense, within a day into speech; that speech within certain Weeks, into a per∣fect recovery, living more then ten years after, a Monument of Gods mercy and his Sons affection. He always after carried his Arme in a Scarfe, and loss of blood made him look very pale, as a Messenger come from the Grave, to advise the Living to prepare for Death. The effect of his Story, I received from his own mouth, in Lincolne-colledge. The Farewel. It is vain to wish the same Successe to every Husband man in this Shire, as he had, who some seven score years since at Harlaxton in this County, found an Helmet of Gold as he was Plowing in the Field. Besides, in Treasure Trove, the least share falleth to him who first finds it. But this I not only heartily wish, but certainly promise to all such who industriously attend Til∣lage in this County (or else where) that thereby they shall find (though not gold in specie, yet) what is gold worth, and may quickly be commuted into it, great plenty of good grain, the same whichProv. 28. 19. Solomon foretold, He that tilleth his Land shall have Plenty of Bread.
IT is in effect but the Suburbs at large of London, replenished with the retyring houses of the Gentry and Citizens thereof, besides many Pallaces of Noble-men, and three [lately] Royal Mansions. Wherefore much measure cannot be expected of so fine ware; The cause why this County is so small, scarce extending East and West to 18 miles in length, and not exceeding North and South 12 in the bredth thereof. It hath Hertford-shire on the North, Buckingham-shire on the West, Essex parted with Ley on the East, Kent and Surrey (severed by the Thames) on the South. The ayr ge∣nerally is most healtful, especially about High-Gate, where the expert Inhabitants report, that divers that have been long visited with sickness, not John Norden Speculum Brit. pag. 22. curable by Physick, have in short time recovered, by that sweet salutary ayr. Natural Commodities. Wheate. The best in England groweth in the Vale lying South of Harrow-the-Hill nigh Hessen, (where providence for the present hath fixed my habitation) so that the Camdens Brit. in Mid∣dlesex. Kings bread was formerly made of the fine flower thereof. Hence it was, that Queen Elizabeth received no Composition money from the Villages thereabouts, but took her Wheat in kinde for her own Pastry and Bake-house. There is an obscure Village hereabouts called Perivale, which my Norden in his spec. Brit. pag. 11. Author will have more truly termed Purevale (an Honour I assure you unknown to the Inhabitants thereof) because of the cleerness of the Corn growing therein, though the Purity there∣of is much subject to be humbled with the Mildew, whereof In the Far∣well to this County. hereafter. Tamarisk. It hath not more affinity in sound with Tamarind, then sympathy in extraction (both originally Arabick) general similitude, in leaves and operation, onely Tamarind in England is an annual, (dying at the approach of Winter) whil'st Tamarisk lasteth many years. It was first brought over by Bishop Grindal out of Switzerland (where he was exile under Queen Mary) and planted in his Garden at Fulham in this County, where the soile being moist and Fenny, well complied with the nature of this Plant, which since is removed, and thriveth well in many other places. Yet it groweth not up to be Timber, as in Arabia, though often to that substance that Cups of great size are made thereof; Dioscorides, saith, it is good for the Tooth-ach, (as what is not, and yet indeed what is good for it?) but it is especially used for mollifying the hardness, and opening the stopping of the Belly. Manufactures. Leather. This, though common to all Counties, is entred under the Manufactures of Middlesex, because London therein, is the Staple-place of Slaughter; and the Hides of beasts there bought, are generally tanned about Enfield in this County. A word of the antiquity and usefulness of this commodity. Adams first suit was of leaves, his second of Leather. Hereof Girdles, Shoes, and many utensils (not to speak of whole houses of Leather, I mean Coaches) are made. Yea, I have read how Frederick the second Emperour of Germany, distressed to pay his Army, made Monetam Coriace∣am, Coin of Leather, making it currant by his Proclamation, and afterwards when his Souldiers repayed it into his Exchequer, they received so much silver in lieu thereof. Many good-laws are made (and still one wanting to enforce the keeping of them) for the making of this Merchantable commodity, and yet still much unsaleable leather is sold in our Markets.
The Lord Treasurer Barleigh (who always consulted Artificers in their own Art) was indoctrinated by a Cobler in the true Tanning of Leather: This Cobler taking a slice of Bread, tosted it by degrees at some distance from the fire, turning many times till it became brown and hard on both sides. This my Lord (saith he) we good Fellowes call a Tanned Tost, done so well that it will last many mornings draughts, and Leather thus leisurely tanned and turned many times in the Fat, will prove serviceable, which otherwise will quickly fleet and rag out. And although that great Statesman caused Statutes to be made according to his instructions, complaints in this kind daily conti∣nue and encrease. Surely were all of that Occupation as honest as Simon the Tanner (the entertainer of Simon Peter in Joppa) they would be more conscientious in their calling. Let me add, what experience avoweth true, though it be hard to assign the true cause thereof, that when Wheat is dear, Leather alwayes is cheap, and when Leather is dear then Wheat is cheap. The Buildings. HAMPTON COURT was built by that pompous Prelate. Cardinal Woolsey, one so magnificent in his expences, that whosoever considereth either of these three, would admire that he had any thing for the other two left unto him, viz. His House-building. House-keeping. House-furnishing. He bestowed it on King Henry the eight, who for the greater grace thereof, erected it (Princes can conferr dignities on Houses as well as persons) to be an honour, increasing it with buildings till it became more like a small City, than a House. Now whereas other royal Pallaces (Holdenby, Oatlands, Richmond, Theobalds) have lately found their fatal period, Hampton Court hath a happiness to continue in its former estate. Non equidem invideo, miror magis, undique totis Usque adeo spoliatur agris. I envy not, its happy lot, but rather thereat wonder; There's such a rout, our Land throughout, of Pallaces by Plunder. Let me add, that Henry the Eight enforrested the grounds hereabouts (the last of that kinde in England) though they never attained the full reputation of a Forrest, in common discourse. OSTERLY HOUSE (now Sir William Wallers) must not be forgotten, built in a Park by Sir Thomas Gresham, who here magnificently entertained and lodged Queen Elizabeth. Her Majesty found fault with the Court of this House as too great, affirming, That it would appear more handsome, if divided with a Wall in the middle. What doth Sir Thomas, but in the night-time sends for workmen to London (money commands all things) who so speedily and silently apply their business, That the next morning discovered that Court double, which the night had left single before. It is questionable whether the Queen next day was more contented with the conformity to her fancy, or more pleased with the surprize and sudden performance thereof. Whilest her Courtiers disported themselves with their several expressions, some avow∣ing it was no wonder he could so soon change a Building, who could Build a Change; others (reflecting on some known differences in this Knights Family) affirmed, That any house is easier divided than united. Proverbs. A Middlesex Clown.] Some English words, innocent and in-offensive in their primitive Nation, are bowed by Custome to a disgraceful sense, as Villain originally nothing but a Dweller in a Village and Tiller of the Ground thereabouts. Churle in Saxon Coorel a strong See, Sir Hen∣ry Spelmans Glossary. stout Husbandman. Clown from Colonus, one that plougheth the ground, (without which neither King nor Kingdome can be maintained) of which Middlesex hath many of great Estates.
But some endeavour to fix the Jgnominious sense upon them, as if more arrant Rusticks then those of their condition elsewhere; partly, because Nobility and Gentry are re∣spectively observed (according to their degree) by People far distant from London, less regarded by these Middlesexians (frequency breeds familiarity) because abounding thereabouts, partly, because the multitude of Gentry here (contraries are mutuall Com∣mentaries) discover the Clownishness of others, and render it more Conspicuous. How∣ever to my own knowledge, there are some of the Yeomantry in this County, as com∣pleatly Civill as any in England. He that is a low Ebbe at Newgate, may soon be a Flote at Tieburne.]* John Hi∣wood in his 26th Epigram upon Pro∣verbs. I allow not this Satyricall Proverb as it makes mirth on men in Misery, whom a meer man may pity for suffering, and a good man ought to pity them for deserving it. Tieburne, some will have it so called from Tie and Burne, because the poor Lollords for whom this (instrument of Cruelty to them, though of Justice to Malefactors) was first set up, had their necks tied to the Beame, and their lower parts burnt in the fire; Others will ave it called from Twa and Burne that is two Rivolets which it seems meet near to the place. But whencesoever it be called, may all endeavour to keep them∣selves from it, though one may justly be Confident, that more souls have gone to Heaven from that place, then from all the Churches and Church-yards in England. When Tottenham-Wood is all on fire, Then Tottenham-Street is naught but mire.] I find this Proverbe in the DescriptionCap. 3. of Tottenham, written by Mr. William Bed∣well, one of the most learned Translators of the Bible. And seeing so grave a Divine stoop'd to solow a subject, I hope I may be admitted to follow him therein. He thus expoundeth the Proverb. When Tottenham-Wood, of many hundred-Acres, on the top of an high hill in the West-end of the Parish, hath a foggie mist hanging and hover∣ing over it in manner of a smoak, then generally foul weather followeth, so that it ser∣veth the Inhabitants instead of a Prognostication. I am confident as much mire now, as formerly in Tottenham-Street, but question, whether so much wood now as anciently on Tottenham-hill? Tottenham is turn'd French.] I find this in the same place of the same Author, but quoting it out of Mr. Heiwood. It seems about the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the eigth, French Mechanicks swarmed in England, to the great prejudice of English Artisans, which caused the in∣surrection in London on ill May-day, Anno Dom. 1517. Nor was the City onely, but Country Villages for four miles about filled with French fashions, and infections. The Proverb is applied to such, who contemning the custome of their own Country, make themselves more ridiculous, by affecting forraign humours and habits. Princes. EDVVARD sole surviving Son of King Henry the eight, and Jane his Wife, was born at Hampton▪ Court in this County, Anno Dom. 1537. He succeeded his Father in the Kingdome, and was most eminent in his Generation, seeing the Kings of England fall under a five-fold division. 1. Visibly Vicious, given over to dissolutenesse and debauchery, as King Ed∣ward the second. 2. Potius extra vitia, quàm cum virtutibus, Rather free from Vice then fraught with Virtue, as King Henry the third. 3. In quibus aequali temperamento, magnae virtutes inerant nec minora vitia, In whom Vices and Virtues were so equally matched, it was hard to decide which got the Mastery, as in King Henry the eight. 4 Whose good qualities beat their bad ones quite out of distance of Compe∣tition, as in King Edward the first. 5 Whose Virtues were so resplendent, no faults (humane frailties excepted) appeared in them, as in this King Edward. He died July 5. 1553. and pity it is, that he who deserved the best, should have
no monument erected to his memory, indeed a brass Altar of excellent workmanship, under which he was buried (I will not say sacrificed with an untimely death by the trea∣chery of others) did formerly supply the place of his Tombe, which since is abolished under the notion of superstition. Guesse the goodness of his head and heart▪ by the following letters written to Barnaby Fitz-Patrick (Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and brought up with him, copyed out from the Originalls, by the Reverend Arch-Bishop of Armagh, and bestowed upon me. Say not they are but of narrow and personal concernment, seeing they are sprinkled with some passages of the Publique. Neither object them written by a Child, seeing he had more man in him than any of his Age. Besides, Epistles are the calmest com∣municating truth to Posterity, presenting History unto us in her night cloths, with a true face of things, though not in so fine a dress as in other kindes of writings. EDVVARD, We have received your Letters of the eighth of this present moneth, whereby we understand how you are well entertained, for which we are right glad▪ and also how you have been once to goe on Pilgrimage: For which cause we have thought good to Advertise you, that hereafter if any such chance happen, you shall desire leave to goe to Mr. Pickering or to Paris for your bu∣siness, And if that will not serve to declare to some man of Estimation, with whom you are best acquainted, that as you are loth to offend the French King, because you have been so favourably used, so with safe concience you cannot do any such thing being brought up with me, and bound to obey my Laws. Also that you had Commandment from me to the Contra∣ry, yet if you be vehemently procured, you may go as waiting on the King, not as intending to the abuse, nor willingly seeing the Ceremonies, and so you look on the Masse. But in the mean season regard the Scripture or some good Book, and give no reverence to the Masse at all. Furthermore remember when you may conveniently be absent from the Court to tarry with Sir William Pickering to be instructed by him how to use your self▪ For Women, as far forth as you may avoid their Company: Yet if the French King command you, you may some time Dance, so measure be your meane, else apply your self to Riding, Shooting, Tennis, or such honest games, not forgetting some times (when you have leisure) your learning, cheifly reading of the Scriptures. This I write, not doubting but you would have done, though I had not written but to spur you on; your exchange of 1200 Crowns you shall receive either month∣ly or quarterly by Bartholomew Campaignes Factor in Paris. He hath warrant to receive it by, here, and hath written to his Factors to deliver it you there; we have signed your Bill for wages of the Chamber which Fitzwilliams hath, likewise we have sent a Letter into Ireland to our Deputy, that he shall take Surrender of your Fathers Lands, and to make again other Letters Patent, that those Lands shall be to him, you, and your Heirs lawfully begotten for ever, adjoyning thereunto two religious Houses you spake for, Thus fare you well, from West∣minster the 20 of December, 1551. Mr. BARNABY, I have of late sent you a Letter from Bartholmew Campaigne for your payment by the French Embassadors Pacquet. I doubt not but your good nature shall profitably and Wisely receive the Kings Majesties Letter to you, Fatherly of a Child, Comfor∣tably of your Soveraign Lord, and most wisely of so young a Prince: And so I beseech you that you will think wheresoever you go, you carry with you a Demonstration of the Kings Majesty, coming a Latere Suo, and bred up in Learning and Manners with him, with your conservati∣on and modesty, let me therefore believe the good reports of the King to be true, and let them perceive what the King is when one brought up with him, Habeat Virtutis tam Clarum Specimen. This I write boldly as one, that in you willeth our Masters honour and credit; and I pray you use me as one that loveth you in plain termes. Scribled in hast, from West∣minster the 22 of December. 1551. Yours to use and have W. Cecill. To the KINGS MAIESTY, According to my bounden Duty, I most humbly thank your Highness for your gratious Letters of the 20 of December, lamenting nothing but that I am not able by any meanes, nor cannot deserve any thing of the goodness your Highness hath shewed towards me. And as for the avoiding of the company of the Ladies, I will assure
your Highness, I will not come into their Company, unless I do wait upon the French King. As for the Letter your Majesty hath granted my Father for the assurance of his Lands, I thank your Highness, most humbly confessing my self as much bound to you as a Subject to his Soveraign for the same. As for such simple news as is here, I thought good to certifie your Majesty. It did happen that a certain Saint standing in a blind corner of the Street, where my Lord Admirall lay, was broken in the night-time, when my Lord was here, which the French men did think to have been done by the English-men, and the English-men did think it to have been done by some French-men, of spite because the English-men lay in that street, and now since that time they have prepared another Saint, which they call our Ladie of Silver, because the French King that dead is, made her once of clean Silver, and afterwards was stoln, like as she hath been divers times, both stolen and broken in the same place, which Ladie was at this present Sunday being the 27 of this month, set up with a solemn procession, in the which procession came first in the morn∣ing, divers Priests of divers Churches, with Crosses and Banners, and passed by the place where she should stand, then afterwards about a 11 of the Clock came the Legat of Rome, in whose company came first afore him sixty black Canons of our Ladies Church, then came after them one that carried the Legates Hat in such sort as they carry the great Seal in England; then came the Master of Paris next to the Cardinall which carried the Image that should be set up; then came the Legate himself all in red, and with a white Surpless, still blessing, accompanied with the Bishop of Caers; & after him came the four Presidents of the Town, with all the Councel of the Town; also there went before, and came behind, divers Officers of the Town with Tip-Staves, and so they have set her up with great solemnity, and defended her with a double grate, to the intent she should be no more stolen nor broken; and the poor people lie still in the foul streets worshi ping her. Further, as I am crediblie informed, the Legate that lieth here, doth give Pardons and Bulls daily, and one of the Kings Trea∣sures standeth by, and receiveth the money to the Kings use; other news I have none, Decemb. the 28. The meanest and most obliged of your Subjects Bernaby Fitz-Patrick. EDVVARD, We have received your Letters of the 28 of Decemb. whereby we perceive your Constancy, both in avoiding all kind of Vices, and also in following all things of Activity or otherwise, that be honest and meet for a Gentleman, of the which we are not a little glad, nothing doubt∣ing your Continuance therein. We understand also by certain Letters you sent to the Earl of Pembroke and Mr. Vice-Chamberlaine, that you have some lack of Muletts, and that you desire to have sent to you some of ours, whereupon we have considered, that our Muletts being old and lame, will do you but little service, and at least less, then good ones bought there. For which cause we have willed Bartholomew Champagne, to deliver you 300 Crownes by Ex∣change for the buying of your two Muletts over and besides your former allowance. Here we have little news at this present, but only that the challenge you heard of before your going was very well accomplished. At Tlt there came eighteen Defendants, at Tournay twenty, at Barriers they fought eight to eight, a Twelfth night: This last Christmas hath been well and mer∣rily past. Afterwards there was run a Match at Tilt six to six which was very well runne; also because of the Lord Riches Sickness, the Bishop of Ely was made Chancellour of England during the Parliament. Of late there hath been such a Tide here as hath overflown all Medowes and Marshes. All the Isle of Dogges, all Plumsted Marsh, all Shippey, Foulness in Essex, and all the Sea Coast was quite drowned. We hear that it hath done no lesse harme in Flanders, Holland and Zealand, but much more, for Townes and Cities have been there drowned. We are advertised out of Almaine, that Duke Morice is turned from the Emperour, and he with the Protestants levieth men to deliver the old Duke of Sax, and the Land grave out of Prison. The cause of our slowness in writing this Letter, hath been lack of Messengers, else we had written before time. Now shortly we wil prove how ye have profited in the French tongue, for within a while we will write to you in French. Thus we make an end, wishing you as much good as our selves. At Westminster the 25 of Jannuary, 1551.
EDVVARD, We have received your Letters, dated at Paris the twelfth of this instant, and also Mr. Pickerings Letter written to our trusty well beloved Couzen the Duke of Northumberland on your behalf. Whereby we perceive both the great preparation for the Warrs, which the French King our Brother maketh. And also how that you are ill furnished of all things, meet to go such a Journey, so that he thinketh that your Costs will not be born under 300. l. whereupon we have given order to Bartholomew Campagine for to deliver you in Paris 800 French Crowns over and besides all moneys sent you heretofore; and besides your diet. Also, whereas you seem to find a lack for the moylettis, there was appointed to you 300 French Crowns for the buying of the same, because they could not well be transported. Also order is given for your Horses to be carried over to you with dilligence, which we trust shall like you well. We have no more to you, but to will you not to live too sumptiously as an Ambassa∣dour, but so as your proportion of living may serve you, we mean because we know many will resort to you▪ and desire to serve you. I told you how many I thought convenient you should keep. After you have ordered your things at Paris go to the Court, and learn to have more Intelli∣gence if you can, and after to the VVarrs to learn somwhat to serve us. News from hence I shall write you when you send us some, in the mean season none but that (thanks be to God) all is well for the present. Fare you well from Westminster the 25 of February, 1551. EDVVARD, VVe have received your Letters of the second and fifteenth of Aprill. VVhereby we per∣ceive then you were at Nancy, ready to go together with Mr. Pickering to the French Camp, and to the intent you might be better instructed  to use your self in these Warrs, we have thought good to advertise you of our pleasure therein. First we would wish you, as much as you may conveniently, to be in the French Kings presence, or at least in some part of his Army, where you shall perceive most business to be, and that for two Causes: One is because you may have more experience in the Warrs, and see things that might stand you in stead another day. The other is, because you might be more profitable in the Language. For our Embassador who may not weare harness cannot well come to those places of danger, nor seem so to serve the French King as you may, whom we sent thither for that purpose. It shall be best for you there∣fore hereafter, as much as you may to be with the French King, and so you shall be more ac∣ceptable to him, and do your self much good. VVe doubt not also but of such things as you see there done, you will not fail to advertise us as you have well begun in your last letters, for thereby shall we Iudge of your diligence in learning, and seeing things that be there done; we shall be nothing wearied with often advertising, nor with reciting of particularity of things, and to the intent we would see how you profit in the French, we would be glad to receive some letters from you in the French tongue, and we would write to you again therein. VVe have a little been troubled with the smale Pox, which hath ltted us to write hitherto; ut now we have shaken that quite away. Thus fare you well, at Greenwich the third of May Anno 1552. EDVVARD, VVe have received your Letters, dated at Rhemes the fourth of this instant, by which we understand, how the French King doth mean now to set forth a new Army to resist the Empe∣rour, and that for that cause you think you cannot yet ask leave to return without suspition till this bray do cease. In which thing we like your opinion very well, and the rather because you may peradventure see more things in this short journey (if so be it, that the Emperor doth march towards you) then you have seen all the while you have been there. Neverthelesse as soon as his businesse is once over past, you with Mr. Pickerings advice may take some occasion to ask leave for this VVinter to come home▪ because you think there shall few things more be done, then have been already, in such manner and form as we have written in our former Letters. VVe pray you also to advertise for how long time you have received your Diets. Bartholomew Campaigne hath been paid six VVeeks agon, till the last of September, and we would be very glad to know whether you have received so much at his Factors hands. More we have not to advertise you, and therefore we commit you to God. From Hampton Court the 7. of October anno Dom. 1552.
Martyrs. Smithfield neer London, being Bonners Shambles, and the Bone-fire Generall of Eng∣land, no wonder if some sparks thereof were driven thence into the Vicenage, at Barnet, Izlington, and Stratford Bow, where more then twenty persons were Martyred, as in Mr. Fox doth appear. Nor must we forget Mr. John Denley burnt at Uxbridge, who began to sing a Psalm at the Stake, and Dr. Story (there present) caused a prickley Fox Acts, & Mon. p. 1685. fagot to be huled in his face, which so hurt him, that he bled therewith. Now the singing Plin. Nat. Hist. Nightingale needed no Thorn but only the sleeping one, to awake it. We may beleive that this Martyrs Prick-song indeed, made good melody in the Ears of the God of Heaven. Prelats. RICHARD NORTHALL, was saith my Bale de scrip. Brit. c. 7. n. 6. Author born in this County, ad∣ding moreover Praetoris Londinensis, ejusdem cognominis ut fertur filius, But take Pretor, either for Major or Sheriffe, and no such man appeareth in Stow, his exact survay of London, so that one may thence safely conclude the Negative, no such person in those places, though probably he might hold some other eminent office in that City. By the way, the applying the names of Roman As Pretor, Quaestor, Cen. sor, Tribunus, &c. Magistrates to our English Officers, wherein every one followeth their own fancy in assigning the correspondency, hath caued much uncertainty in matters of this nature. But we willingly believe this Robert of wealthy extraction, though he became a Carmelite, and afterward Chaplain to King Richard the second, who for his good Preaching preferred him Bishop of Ossory, for a time J. VVaraeus descrip. Hibern. pag. 127. Chancelour of Ireland, and at last Arch-Bishop of Dublin. He wrote a Set of Sermons for the whole year, lived much beloved for his learning and virtues, and died no less lamented, Anno Dom. 1397 on the 20 day of July. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM WICKHAM, born at Dr. Hatchers Manuscript of the Fellows of Kings Coledge in Cambridge. Enfield in this County, bred in Kings-Colledge, was Bishop first of Lincolne, then of Winchester, where he may be termed William Wickham junior in distinction of his name-sake and predecessor; one equal to any of his Order in piety and painfullnesse (though little of him extant in print) supe∣riour to all in patience, dying Anno 1596 of the Strangury, when he had not made wa∣ter for Gdwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of VVinchester. fourteen days together. This mindeth me of an usuall prayer amongst the modern Jews (had they no worse customes their company would be wellcome unto us) praising God as well for their vents of ejection, as mouths for the admission of nourishment. Souldiers. FALCATIUs, or FULKE de BRENT, was a Middlesex-man by his Nativity, whose family so flourished threin in former ages (remaining in a meaner condition to this day) that an Norden in his Descript. of Middlesex. Antiquarie will have the rivolet Brent, which denomi∣nateth Brentford, so named from them, which is preposterous in my opinion, believing them rather named from the rivolet. This FULK was a Minion to King John, whose dangers indeared Martial-men unto him, who the more to oblige his fidelity, gave him in marriage Margaret the Daugh∣ter of Warrin Fitz- Gerald his Chamberlaine, late Wife to Baldwin de Rivers, many muttering thereat, and the Ladie her self (it seems) not well satisfied therewith, as beneath her deserts. Hereupon our Mat. VVestm. Author, Lex connectit eos, amor & concordia lecti, Sed lex qualis? amor qualis? cōcordia qualis? Lex exlex, amor exosus, concordia discors. Now both of them be'ng brought into a Bed, By law, and love, and concord joyned are: What law? what love? what cōcord did them wed? Law lawless, loath'd love, concord which did jarr. This Fulke was highly in favour with King Henry the third; who by the valour of this his Generall, obtained the great Victory at Lincolne. But afterwards, when the Land was setled in peace, Fulke found himself less re∣spected, set by, and not set by, hung up like the Axe, when it hath hew'n all the hard timber, on the wall unregarded. He endeavoured therefore to embroile the Nation in a new War, and, like a dishonest Chirurgion, willfully to blister the sound flesh into a sore, to gaine by the cureing thereof. This not succeeding (all being
weary of civil warr) he presuming on the Kings Lenitie, and his own merit (accounting himself too high to come under the roofe of any Law) committed many outrages of felonies and murders. He was esteemed too bad to live, such his present desperate∣ness, yet too good to be put to death, such his former deserts; and therefore (as an expedient between both) he was condemn'd to perpetuall banishment. He went to Rome (none had more need to confess his faults) where he lived Mat. Paris in Anno 1226. obscurely, died mife∣rably, and was buried ignobly, Anno 1226. Sir RALPH SADLIER, Son of Sadlier, Esquire, was born at Hackney in this County, where he was heir to a fair Inheritance. He first was Servant to the Lord Cromwell, and by him advanced into the service of King Henry the eighth. A Prince judicious in men and meat, (and seldome deceived in either) who made him cheife Secretary of State. He was much knowing, (and therefore most imploy∣ed) in the Scotch affairs, much complicated with State Intricacies, which he knew well to unfold. It is seldome seen that the Pen and Sword, Goun and Corselet, meet emi∣nently as here, in the same person. For in the Battle of Muscleborow, he orered and brought up our scattered Troops, (next degree to a rout)  them to fight by his own example, and so for his valour was made a Knight Bannaret. Of these two kinds, one by way of encouragement made before, the other by way of Rward,  a Feild , more safe, and no less honourable in my Opinion. Sir Ralph was of the second sort and the last which survived in England of that Order. Yet was he little in stature, tall not in person but performance. Queen Eliz. made him Chanceour of the Dutchy. During his last Embassie in Scotland, his house at Standon in Herforashire, was built by his Stew∣ard in his absence far greater then himself desired, so that he never joyed therein, and died soon after, Anno 1587. in the 80 year of his age. Howver it hath been often filled with good Company, and they feasted with great chear by the Hereditary Hospi∣tality therein. I must not forget, how when this Knight attended his Master the Lord Cromwel at Rome, (before the English renounced the Papal power) a ardon ws granted (not by his own, but a Servants procuring,) for the Sins of that Famiy, for three immediate Generations, (expiring in R. Sadlier Esquire, lately dead) which was extant, (but lately lost o displaced) amongst their Records, and though no use was made thereof, much mirth was made therewith. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. Sir THOMAS FROVVICK Knight, was born at Elinge in this County, son to Tho∣mas Frowick Esquire; By his Wife, who was Daughter and Heire to Sir John Sturgeon, Knight, (giving for his Armes, Azure three Sturgeons, Or, under a fret Gules) bred in the study of our Municipal Law, wherein he attained to such eminency, that he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, on the 39 of September, in the 18 year of the Reign of King Henry the seventh. Four years he sate in his place, accounted the Oracle of Law in his Age, though one of the youngest men that ever enjoyed that Office. He is reported to have dyed floridâ juventute, before full forty years old, and lyeth buryed with Joane his Wife, in the Church of Finchley in this County, the Circumscription about his Monument being defaced; onely we understand that his death hapned on the seventeenth of October, 1506. He left a large Estate to his two Daughters, whereof Elah the Eldest was mar∣ried to Sir John Spelman (one of the Justices of the Kings Bench) Grand-Father to Sir Henry that Renowned Knight. Sir WILLIAM STAMFORD, Knight, was of Staffordian extraction, Robert his Grand-Father living at Rowley in that County. But William his Father was a Merchant in London, and purchased Lands at Hadley in Middlesex, where Sir William was born August 22. 1509. He was bred to the study of our Municipal Lawes, attaining so much eminence therein, that he was preferred one of the Judges of the Common Pleas; His most learned Book of the Pleas of the Crown, hath made him for ever famous amongst men of his own profession. There is a Spirit of Retraction of one to his native Country, which made him purchase Lands, and his son settle himself again in Staffordshire; this
worthy Judge died August 28, and was buried at Hadley in this Shire, in the last year of the Reign of Queen Mary, 1558. Writers. JOHN ACTON. I find no fewer then seventeen Actons in England, so called as I conceive Originally from Ake, in Saxon an Oake, wherewith antiently no doubt those Townes were well stored. But I behold the place nigh London, as the Paramount* Bale descrip. Brit. c. 4. n. 66. Acton amongst them. Our Iohn was bred Doctor of the Laws in Oxford, and afterwards became Canon of Lincolne, being very able in his own faculty. He wrote Bale de scrip. Brit. c. 5. n. 13. a learned Comment on the Ecclesiasticall Constitutions of Otho and Ottob one (both Cardinalls and Legats to the Pope in England) and flourished under King Edward the First, Anno 1290. RALPH ACTON was bred in the University of Oxford, where he attained (saith my Author Idem Ibidem.) Magisterium Theologicum, and as I understand Magister in Theologiâ is a Doctor in Divinity, so Doctor in Artibus is a Master of Arts. This is reported to his eternall Commendation Evangelium regni Dei fervore non modico praedicabat in medijs Romanarum Superstitionum Tenebris. And though somtimes his tongue lisped with the Siboleth of the superstition of that age, yet generally he uttered much pretious truth in those dangerous days, and flou∣rished under King Edward the second, Anno 1320. ROGER TVVIFORD. I find eleven Towns so named in England, (probablyAMP. from the confluence of two fords thereabouts) and two in this County. He was bred an Augustinian Friar, studied in both Universities, and became a Doctor in Divinity. In his declining age he applyed himself to the reading of the Scripture and the Fathers, and became a painfull and profitable Preacher. I find him not fixed in any one place, who is charactered, Bale de scrip. Brit. c. 7. n. 17. Concionum propalator per Dioecesin Norvicensem, an Itinerant (no Errant) Preacher through the Diocess of Norwich. He was commonly called GOOD∣LUK (and Good-Luck have he with his honour) because he brought good success to others (and consequently his own welcome) with him whithersoever he went, which made all Places and Persons Ambitious and Covetous of his presence. He flourished about the year of our Lord, 1390. ROBERT HOVVNSLOVV was born in this County at Hownslow, a Village well known for the Road through, and the Heath besides it. He was a Fryar of the* Bale de Scrip. Brit. & Pitzeus Order of the Holy Trinity, which chiefly imployed themselves for the redemption of Captives. Indeed Locusts generally were the devourers of all food, yet one kind of Locusts were themselves wholesome, though course food, whereon Iohn Baptist had his common repast; Thus Fryers (I confess) generally were the Pests of the places they lived in, but to give this order their due, much good did redound from their endea∣vours. For this Robert being their Provinciall for England, Scotland and Ireland, rich people by him were affectionately exhorted, their Almes industriously collected, such collections carefully preserved, till they could be securely transmitted, and thereby the liberty of many Christian Captives effectually procured. He wrote also many Synodall sermons, and Epistles of confequence to severall persons of quality, to stir up their liberality. He flourished (sayes Pitseus) Anno Dom. 1430. a most remarkable year by our foresaid Author, assigned either for the flourishing, or for the Funeralls of eleven famous writers, (yet so, as our Robert is dux gregis, and leads all the rest) all Contemporaries, whereas otherwise, for two or three eminent persons to light on the same year, is a faire proportion through all his book, De illustribus Angliae scriptoribus. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM GOUGE Born at Stratford-Bow in this County, bred in Kings Colledge in Cambridge, where he was not once absent from publique service morning These Me∣moires are ex∣tracted out of the Sermon preached at his Funeral. and evening the space of nine years together. He read fifteen Chapters in the Bible every∣day, and was afterwards Minister of Blackfryers in London. He never took a journey meerly for pleasure in all his Life; he preached so long, till it was a greater difficulty
for him to go up into the Pulpit, then either to make or preach a Sermon, and dyed aged seventy nine years, leaving the examples of his humility, faith, patience, &c. to the imitation of posterity, being buryed in his own Church, December 16. 1653. Benefactors to the Publick. A namelesse HERMITE (dwelling in the Hermitage where now the School is)* Norden in his sec. Brit. p. 22. on his own cost, caused Gravel to be digg'd in the Top of Hygate-hill (where now is a fair Pond of VVater) and therewith made a Causway from Hygate to Islington; a two handed Charity, providing water on the Hill, where it was wanting, and cleanesse in the Vale, which before (especially in Winter) was passed with much molestation. Since the Reformation. ALICE Daughter of Thomas VVilkes, was a poor Maid born in Islington, where her Cap was casually shot through with an Stows Sur∣vey of London. arrow without any hurt to her head. She afterwards was thrice married to Wealthy Husbands (whereof Iustice Owen the last) and built at Islington near to the place of her Deliverance, a proper Alms-house by her well endowed. This Lady expended to charitable uses here and elsewhere, what amounted to the full sum of two thousand three hundred pounds and upwards, and lyeth buryed as I take it in Islington. Sir JULIUS CAESAR Knight, was born in this County, his Father having a house J. Norden in Description of Middlesex. nigh unto Tottenham. His Father was a Doctor of Physick to Queen Elizabeth, and descended of the ancient Family of the Dalmarii in Italy. This his Son was bred in Oxford, and after other intermediate preferments, was advanced Chancelour of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and sworn a privie Counsellor on Sunday the 6. of July 1607.* Stow his An∣nals. and afterwards was preferred Master of the Rouls. A person of prodigious bounty to all of worth or want, so that he might seem to be Almoner General of the Nation. The Story is well known of a Gentleman, who once borrowing his Coach, (which was as well known to poor people as any Hospital in England) was so Rendevouzed about with Beggers in London that it cost him all the money in his purse to satisfie their importunity, so that he might have hired Twenty Coaches on the same Terms. Sir Francis Bacon Lord Verulam was Judicious in his Ele∣ction, when perceiving his Dissolution to approach, he made his last bed in effect in the house of Sr. Julius. He continued more then 20 years Master of the Rolles, and though heaved at by some Expectants, sate still in his place well poyzed therein, with his Gravity and In∣tegrity. Vir tantarum Elemosynarum non movebitur, a man of so great alms and Pray∣ers (made by him and for him) shall not be removed. Nor was it without a prospe∣rous Omen, that his chief House in Hartford shire was called Benington, that is, Villa Benigna the bountiful Village, as one Norden in Hertfordshire. Author will have it, or as Camd. Brit. in Hertfordshire. another Villa bene∣ficii the Town of Good Turns, from the River so named running by it. What shall I speak of his Arms, viz. Gules 3 Roses Argent on a Chief of the first, so many Roses of the Second, embleming the fragancy of the Memory he hath left behind him.* So blazoned by Peacham in his practice of Blazonry pag. 186. His Monument in great St. Hellens London, being out of the road of ordinary fan∣cies, was thus designed by himself. The ensuing Description is contrived in Form of a Deed, and imita∣teth Ruffled Parchment, in Allusion to his Office, as Master of the Rolles. Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit. Sciatis, me Iulium Dalmare alias Caesarem Militem: Utriusque Doctorem; Elizabethae Reginae Supremae Curiae Admiralitatis judicem; & unum è Magistris libellorum, Iacobo Regi à Privalis Concilliis, Cancellarium Scaccarii Scriniorum Magistrum haec praesenti Charta mea confirmasse me Annuente Divino Numine naturae debitum libenter sol∣viturum,
quam primum Deo placuerit. In cujus rei memoriam, Manum meam, & Sigillum apposui. Datum 27. Februarii 1635. Julius Caesar Here his Seal or Coat of Arms is affixed; and beneath them is written Irrotulatur Coelo. He dyed the Twenty Eigth Day of April, Anno Domini 1636, in the Seventy Ninth of his Age. Memorable Persons. PETER FABEL. I shall probably offend the Gravity of some to insert, and certainly curiosity of others to omit him. Some make him a Fryer, others a Lay Gen∣tleman, all a conceited person, who with his merry Devises, deceived the Devil, who by grace may be resisted, not deceived by Wit. If a Grave Bishop in his At the Fu∣neral of King James.Sermon speaking of BRUTE his coming into this Land, said it was but a Bruit, I hope I may say without offence, that this Fabel was but a fable, supposed to live in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. ........ TRESTRAM was a Gardener by his Occupation, living at Branford in this County. This man anno Dom. 1609. fell into a most violent Inflammation of the Lungs, accompanied with a Terrible Feaver, Shortnesse of Breath, Stitch of both Sides, Dry Cough, and an unquenchable Thirst. Dr. Theod. From his own Letter Printed in Dt. Hakewill his Apology, pag. 242.Deodate being his Neighbour (then Physician to Prince Henry and the Lady Elizabeth) beholding him of a Ruddy and Sanguine Complexion, adventured to let him blood, though he was of Threescore and sixteen years of age. Once he let him Blood about Twenty Ounces, by which Evacuation (his Blood being extremely putrified) he felt ease for three hours, but afterwards all his accidents re∣turned as violent as before. Next Morning he repeated the Bleeding in the same quantity, whereby the Patient only found a Momentary Ease, his pain returning as violent as before.
The third day Remembring the Rule of Hypocrates, that blood must be let to the changing of the Colour, he adventured again on as copious a Phlebotemy as before whereby the Sickman found an extraordinary ease, who in three days had lost more then Sixty Ounces of Blood. This Trestram survived eight years after, and dyed anno 1619. a most eminent In∣stance against those who endevour to prove the decay of the World, because men cannot spare so much by Bloodletting as in former ages. Lord Maiors.   Name. Father. Place. Company Time. 1 Henry Frowicke Henry Frowicke Totenham Mercer 1435. 2 William Marrow Stephen Marrow Stebunheath Mercer 1455. 3 William Hallin Nicholas Hallin Fullham Fishmonger 1459. 4 Humphrey Heyford Roger Heyford Stratford Bowe Goldsmith 1470. 5 Christopher Askew. John Askew Edmonton Draper 1533. 6 John Lyon Thomas Lyon Peryfare Grocer 1554. 7 Thomas Curteis John Curteis Enfield Fishmonger 1557. 8 John Jolles Thomas Jolles Strafford Bowe Draper 1615. The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commis∣sioners in the Twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth 1433. Richard Bishop of London. Commissioners to take the Oaths. The Prior of the Hospital of St. Johns of Jerusalem.   John Ash Knights for the Shire.   Richard Maideston Knights for the Shire.   Johannis Harpeden Militis Thomae a Chaleton Militis Johannis Boys Militis Henrici Somer Iohannis Frampton Thomae Hasele Thomae b Frowyk Simonis Campe Alexandri Anne Willielmi c Wrothe Iohannis Chichele Roberti Warner d Iohannis Shordyche Edmundi Bibbesworth Walteri Grene Thomae Holgyll Thomae Malton Iohannis Drayton Willielmi Swanlond Willielmi Norton Iohannis Barnvile Richardi Richmond Roberti Oliver Willielmi Bray Roberti Foster Henrici Filingsley Iohannis Bronn Roberti Charyngworth Richardi Skarburgh Richardi Bronn Iohannis e Elryngton VVillielmi Brokherst Iohannis Danyell. What is generally true of the Gentry in all Counties, that being in continuo fluxu, Labitur, & labetur, in omne volubilis aevum, is most true in this County, where the Stream thereof runneth most rapid, to make more speedy room for Succession; so that the Gentry in Middlesex, seem Sojourners, rather then Inhabitants therein. Is it not strange, that of the thirty three forenamed Families, not three of them were extant in the Shire, one hundred and sixty years af∣ter, viz. anno Dom. 1593. as appeareth by the alphabetical Collection, set forth by Mr. In his  Brit. pag. 42. Norden in that year. I impute the brevity (as I may term it) of such Gentry in this County, to the Vicinity of London to them, or rather of them to it, and hope, that Worshipful Families now fixed in Middlesex, will hereafter have longer conti∣nuance. THOMAE a CHALETON Militis.] I can hardly believe him of the same Family (R. being slipped out in the Writing thereof) with Thomas Carleton, who dyed anno Domini 1447. being buryed under a much defaced Monument in Edmonton∣Church, and whom the Inhabitants deliver by Tradition, to have been a man of great command in this County.
THOMAE b FROVVYK] He was Owner of Gunners-Bury in the Parish of Great Eling, wherein he lyes buryed, and was Father of famous Judge Frowyk of whom before. WILLIELMI c WROTH] Ancestor to Sir Henry VVrot, still living at Durance, whose great Grandfather Sir Thomas VVroth, fled over for his Religion into Germany, in the Reign of Queen Mary; and it is observable, that he, who then went away for his Conscience, hath alone of all this Catalogne, his name remaining in this County. As for VVilliam VVroth mentioned in this Catalogue, he was Son to VVill. VVroth Esquire, who dyed the 20. of Ex bundello Inquisitionum Anno 2. Regis Hen. 5. num. 4. in Turre Lond. March, the Ninth of Henry the Fourth, who was the Son of Iohn VVroth, who married Maud sole Daughter unto Thomas Durand, by whom the house of Durands was devolved unto him. JOHN SHORDYCHE.] So called from Shorditch on the North of Bishops Gate, in London, whereof he was Owner, as also of the Mannor of Hackney. I say Shor∣ditch so named here (in the twelfth of King Henry the Sixth) and some hundred years before, quasi Shorditch, or the Ditch that was the Sewer or publick Drain to the North∣East part of the City. Hereby appeareth the Vanity of their Conceits who will have it so called from Iane Shore (the Minion of Edward the Fourth) reported to dye here pitifully (as much pitied though not relieved) in the Reign of King Richard the Third. Reader, Be pleased to take notice, that though Mr. Norden in his Survey of this County, passeth over this Sirname in Silence, yet the Progeny of this Iohn Shorditch hath still a confiderable estate at Icknam therein. JOHANNIS e ELRYNGTON] These had an house sometimes at Idem pag. 37. Neusdon in this County, but are since extinct, and the last that I find of the name was Iohn Elryngton, Filycer of the City of London, and Keeper of the Records of the Com∣mon Pleas, who dying 1504. is buryed with an Inscription in Hackney Church. The Sheriffs. Some perchance may expect, that in conformity to other Counties, I should here insert the Sheriffs of Middlesex, reserving those of London to the Descrption of that City. These proceed on an old vulgar error, that the Sheriffs aforesaid have their several Jurisdictions divided accordingly. Whereas indeed both are jointly and equally Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, having not only concurrent but united power in all places. Nor know I any difference betwixt them, save that he, who is first cho∣sen taketh place, and he who liveth the neerest to the Tower, hath the Poultrie, the other VVood street-Counter, assigned to his Service. But more of them in London. All I will add is this, the Gentry in Middlesex have herein a priviledge above any County in England, that they are not Eligible (except also they be Freemen of Lon∣don) to be Sheriffes of this Shire, which doth cut off from them the occasion of much expences. The Battells. Brandford Fight 1642. November the 12. It began on the South west side of the Town near Zion house: some execution being done by Great Guns, and a Boat on the Thames with many therein sunk, and Capt. Quarles (an active Citizen on the Parliament side) drowned before he could recover the Shore. Soon was the Scene of this Tragedy removed to the North of the Town, near Acton, and the Kings Forces fell fiercely on the Regiment of Collonel Denzil Hollis then present in Parliament, and put them to the Worst. Here the Welsh under Sir....... Salisbury their Leader, made true the Greek Pro∣verb, , he that Flyeth will fight again.  These who shewed swift heels at Edgehill attle, use as stout Arms [as any] in this Fight. For formerly they were little better then Naked, whereas since they had recovered armour to fence their bodies, and Resolutions to arme their Minds.
Next day being Sunday, marched out the Militia of London, but both Armies may be said to have kept the Sabboth, faceing each other without any considerable action. It is incredible how many Cart Loads of Victuals were carried out from London, enough to have feasted their Souldiers for some days, and fed them for some Weeks. In the Evening the Kings Forces drew off towards Kings Town. The Number of the slain on both sides amounted not to a thousand, and the Repu∣tation of the Victory on the Kings Side, was more then the effect thereof, for then the Royalists did Nose and Beard the Populous City of London, and did Triumphare (though not In) sub Hostico. Indeed the accession of Citizens to the King answered not Rati∣onal expectation, Wealth though Loyal being always Fearful, and Loath to hazzard a certain Estate. This is most sure, that many Scores of Prisoners taken by the King, were by him freely dismissed without other Ransome, then a strict Oath to serve no more against him. Now what Oath office is kept in London; I know not, nor what Pope therein had power to dispence with so sacred an Obligation. But these met with such Confessors, who seemingly satisfied them in the Violation of this Oath, so that some Weeks after they appeared on the same side as fierce as before. The Farewell. This County is much infested with the Mildew. That it is, I know to my Cost, but could not purchase the knowledge what it is, much lesse how it might be prevented at the same Price, though having diligently enquired into the Name and Nature thereof. Some will have it called Mildew, quasi Maldew, or Illdew, others Meldew or Hony∣dew, as being very sweet (oh how lushious and noxious is Flattery!) with the Astrin∣gency thereof, causing an Atrophy a Consumption in the Grain. His Etymology was pe∣culiar to himself who would have it termed Mildew, because it grindeth the Grain afore∣hand, making it to dwindle away almost to nothing. It falleth (be it Mist or Dew) when Corn is almost ripe for the Sicle, and antidateth the Harvest (not before it is welcome but) before it is wished by the Husbandman, Grain being rather withered then ripened thereby. If after the fall a good Rain or strong wind cometh, it washeth and wipeth it off, so that no mischeif is done: Otherwise the hot Sun arising, sealeth (to use the Husbandmans Phrase) the Mildew upon the Straw, and so intercepteth the Nourishment betwixt the Root and the Ear, especially if it falleth not on the Hoase (which is but another case, and hath another Tunicle under it) but on the stripped Straw near to the top of the Stalk. Grain growing under Hedges (where the wind hath least power) is most subject there∣unto, though VVheat of all Grain is most, Bearded VVheat of VVheat is least liable unto it: Not that the Hawnes thereof are Spears to fright the Mildew from it, but advanta∣gious Gutters to slide it away the sooner, which sticketh on notted or pollard VVheat. Inland Counties, Northampton-shire, Bedford-shire, &c. complain the least, Mari∣time the most of Mildew which insinuateth the Vapors of the Sea to be causall thereof. Some hold, that seeing it falls from the Skies, Earth hath no guard for Heavens blowe, save praier, which in this very case is prescribed by 1 Kings 8. 37. Solomon. But others conceive, that humane may be subordinate to Spiritual means, to prevent not the falling but the hurting of this Dew in such a degree, and hopefully expect the Remedy from the In∣genuity of the next Generation. I am the rather confirmed in my Hopes, because a help hath been found out against the smooting of VVheat, at leastwise in some good proportion, I say the smooting of VVheat which makes it a Negro, as Mildew makes it a Dwarfe, viz. by mingling the seed with Lyme as your Husbandmen will inform you. And for my Vale to this County, I heartily desire, that either God would of his Good∣nesse spare the Fruits of the Earth, from so hurtful a Casualty, or put it into the Minds of Men (if it may stand with his VVill) to find out some defensitive in some part, to abate the Malignity thereof.
LONDON. It is the second City in Christendome for greatnesse, and the first for good Government; There is no civilized part of the World but it hath heard thereof, though many with this mistake, that they conceive London to be the Country, and England but the City therein. Some have suspected the declining of the Lustre thereof, because of late it vergeth so much VVestward, increasing in Build∣ings in Convent Garden, &c. But by their Favour (to disprove their Fear) it will be found to Burnish round about, to every point of the compasse, with new Structures daily added thereunto. It oweth its greatnesse under Gods Divine providence, to the well conditioned River of Thames, which doth not (as some Tyrant Rivers in Europe) abuse its strength in a destructive way, but imployeth its greatnesse in goodnesse, to be beneficial for com∣merce, by the Reciprocation of the Tide therein. Hence it was that when K. James offended with the City, threatned to remove his Court to another place, the Lord Maior [boldly enough] returned that he might remove his Court at his pleasure, but could not remove the River of Thames. In his Adage Rhdii Sacrifi∣cium. Erasmus will have London so called, from Lindus a City of Rhodes, averring a great resemblance betwixt the Language and Customes of the Britains and Grecians. But Mr. Camden (who no doubt knew of it) honoureth not this his Etymology with the least mention thereof. As improbable in my apprehension, is the deduction from Ludstown, Town being a Saxon, no Brittish Termination) and that it was so termed from Lan Dian a Temple of Diana (standing where now St. Pauls doth) is most likely in my opinion. Manufactures. Natural Commodities are not to be expected to growe in this place, which is only the Field of Art, and Shop General of England, Cheapsiae being called the best Garden only by Metaphore, seeing otherwise nothing but Stones are found therein. As for London Manufactures they are so many, I shall certainly loose my self in this Labyrinth if offer∣ing to enter: in leaving therefore all intermediate Inventions to others; I will only insist on the Needle and the Engine, as the least and greatest Instruments imployed therein. Needles. The Use hereof is right ancient, though sewing was before Needles. For weGen. 3. 7. read that our first parents made themselves Aprons by sewing Fig leaves together, either fast∣ning them with some Glutinous Matter, or with some sharp thing joyning them toge∣ther. A Pin is a Blind Needle, a Needle a Pin with an Eye. What Nails do in solid, Needles do in supple Bodies, putting them together; only they remain not there formally but ver∣tually, in the Thread which they leave behind them. It is the womans Pencil and Em∣broidery [Vestis acu picta] is the masterpeice thereof. I say Embroydery much used in former, neglected in our age, wherein modern Gallants (affecting Variety of suits) de∣sire, that their Cloaths should be known by them, and not as Our Ancestors, They by their cloaths, one suit of state serving them for several solemnities. This Industrious Instrument, Needle, quasi Ne idle, (as some will have it) main∣taineth many millions. Yea, he who desireth a Blessing on the Plough and the Needle, (including that in the card and compass) comprehendeth most Employments at home, and abrode, by land and by sea. All I will add is this, that the first fine spanish Needles in England, were made in the Reign of Queen Mary, in Cheapside by a Negro, but such his Envy, that he would teach his Art to none, so that it dyed with him. More charitable was Elias Crowse a German, who coming over into England, about the Eigth of Queen Elizabeth, first taught us the Making of spanish Needles, and since we have taught our selves the using of them.
The Engine. This general Word▪  to all Machins or Instruments, use in this City hath confined to signifie that which is used to quench Scare-fires therein. One Mr. Jones a Merchant (living in Austin Fryers) fetched the first Form thereof from Norenberge, and obtained a Patent of King James that none should be made without his Appro∣bation. Two were begun but not finished in his Life time, who dyed in the great Plague Primo Caroli primi; since which Time, William Burroughs City-Founder, now living in ∣bury, hath so compleated this Instrument, that his additions, amount to a new Inven∣tion, having made it more secure from breaking, and easie to be cleansed, so that with the striking out of a Wedge, it will cleanse it self, and be fit to work again in Four Minutes. Since, the aforesaid  hath made about threescore of these Engines for City and Country. The Cooper, Carpenter, Smith, Founder, Brasier and Turner contribute their skills to the  o it▪ Yet may the price thereof be compassed for thirty five pounds. It hath gained, because it hath saved many pounds, and (which is unvaluable) many Lives of men in this City. The best (though not the Biggest) was lately in the Church of t. James Clarken-well, as hath many Times been experimented. A good Musician makes a good Instrument, and it was a poor Blew Cap (better known by his Work then Name) who played so wll thereon, that (though not with the left handed Gibeonites to hit the Mark within a Hairs Breadth) he could hit within the scantling of a Shilling: since a Newer at St Bridgets Church is a better, and no wonder if the Younger out active those who are more ancient; All wish'd this Engine may be brought forth once a Quar∣ter to be scoured, oyled, and trimmed, but not to be used. But if there be an occa∣sion thereof, may it effectually perform that, for which it was intended. The Buildings. St. Pauls. This is the only Cathedral in Christendome Dedicated solely to that Saint: Great the Pillars (little Legs would bowe under so big a body) and small the Windows thereof, Darknesse in those dayes being conceived to raise Devotion, besides it made artificial Lights to appear with the more Solemnity. It may be called the Mother Church indeed, having one Babe in her Body St. Faiths, and another in her Arms St. Gregories. Surely such, who repair to Divine Service in St. Faiths, may there be well minded of their Mortality, being living People, surrounded with the Antiperistasis of the Dead both above and beneath them. For the present I behold St. Pauls Church, as one struck with the Dead Palsie on one side, the East part and Quire thereof being quick and alive, well maintained and repaired, whilst the West part is ruinous and ready to fall down. Little hopes it will be repaired in its old Decayes, which is decayed in its new Reparations, and being formerly an Ornament, is now an Eyesore to the City; not to say unto the Citizens in general, some being offended that it is in so bad, and others that it is in no worse Condition. The Repairing of this Church was a worthy Monument of the Piety and Charity of Arch-Bishop Laud, not only procuring the Bounty of others, but expending his own Estate thereon. We dispair not but that his Majesties Zeal in commending this work to their care, will in due time meet with the Forward Bounty of the Citi∣zens. It is no sin to wish, that those who have plundered the Cloak and Cover of St. Pauls (not left behind by, but) violently taken from him, might be com∣pelled to make him a new one of their own Cost, at leastwise to contribute more then ordinary proportions thereunto.
As for the Parochial Churches in London they have all either cast their skins with the Snake, or renewed their Bills with the Eagle, having at the least their Fronts beautified, if not their bodies rebuilt. Amongst which St Clements Eastcheap, is not to be forgot∣ten, the Monument of the Bounty of Baldwin Hamey Doctor in Physick. So that what is written in a modest challenge to the Papist on the Entry into the New built Church of St. Giles in the Fields, may be inscribed on the Rest.  Viator! Anne Bonis operi∣bus effoetum est HOC seculum? The Bridge. The Middle thereof is properly in none, the two ends in two Counties Middlesex and Surrey. Such who only see it beneath where it is a Bridge, cannot suspect it should be a Street, and such who behold it above where it is a Street, cannot beleive it is a Bridge, It was made with great cost, and is maintained with daily charge against the Batery and Assault of the Tide: The sad Riddle is generally known to all, which hap∣pened here some twenty years since, when a lamentable fire could not be quenched, because there was such store of Water, hindering all accesse thereunto. The Exchange. This was built by Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, anno Domini 1571. in Imitation of that at Antwerp, but so that the Copy exceedeth the Original, Queen Elizabeth na∣med it the Royal burse, but it is commonly called the Exchang or Change, because by Bargains  ven there, Wares are changed for Wares, and Wares for mony, and mony for money. Yet because much of Mutability is imported in the word Change, it may be a fit Remembrancer to Merchants meeting here, not to build their hopes of perpetuity on what is so subject to Vicissitude and Alteration. Well may this place be termed the Change, where poor men so soon become rich by Good Successe, and Richmen Poor by Losses and Casualties unexpected. The Tower. This to wave the Fable of Julius Caesar, was first founded by King VVilliam the Conquerour, finished by William Rufus▪ encompassed with a Ditch by William Long∣camp Bishop of Ely, enlarged by King Henry the Third, fortified by King Edward the Fourth, beautified by King Richard the Third, repaired by King Henry the Eighth, since whose time no considerable addition thereunto. The Morter thereof (to make it belke the more tenacious) was, saith my Fit-Stevens in his Descrip∣tion of London. Author, tempered with the blood of Beasts, and this Tower was built to secure London in both senses, to  or defend it, as occasion should require. It is a Palace, a Prison, a Liberty, a Town, a Castle, and what not? most remarkable for the Armory, Mint, Ward-robe and [formerly] the Unicorns-Horn therein. Armory. I place this before the Mint, because of Solon his Speech to Croesus that he that hath the best Steel will command all his Gold and Silver. Here many justly admire at the pro∣digeous greatnesse of some ancient Corslets. If Tully, seeing a little man wearing a long Sword, said pleasantly, that he was alligatus gladio, tyed to his Sword, surely at the Sight hereof he would conclude Wearers imprisoned in their arms. This hath put men on many Conjectures, some collecting hence the Strength and Stature of the Former ages, far above ours. Others parrallel them with the Shields left by Alexander to lye in India, purposely to possesse posterity with an untruth, about the proportion of the persons of his Soldiers. If I may interpose my conjecture (and if he may speak of John of Gaunt, who never fought in his armour) I conceive those Arms so signally great, not made to march in (as too ponderous for any under a Gyant) but to stand therein in a breach where they might be serviceable. Nor can a general diminution of Mens strength be justly inferred from the Dispropor∣tion of Arms in our and former ages. I say General Diminution, seeing all ages even in
the same Country have produced some of greater some of  Dimensions. For if we compare the common Armour used Three hundred years since (and yet extant in the Tower) with ours of Modern use, no such sensible difference will be found betwixt them, as should argue an Universal decay. It is confessed that their Arrows exceeded ours both in bigness and length. But a Dr. Hac will in his Apology pag. . learned Author  this rather to their continual practice in shooting from their Infancy, then to their strength and Stature: so that it is rather Difuse, then disability in our age, that we cannot shoot the like, and since the Invention of Guns, the Light use we make of Arrows, have made them the lighter in the making. Mint. Many of these anciently in most Cities and some Towns. These afterwards (as so many Spangles in one peice of Gold) were united in the Tower. Of late it was much imployed to coin the Plate of our Nation, to make State-mony, whence one said, Caesaris Effigies nulla est, sed imaginis Expers, Crux duplex super est dira, gemensque Lyra. And Another, May their Successe, like to their Coin appear, Send double Crosses for their Single Chear. Sure I am, their Coin, goeth under a general suspicion of being as bad as their Cause. But I hope hereafter, when the Question is asked of our Coiners, Whose Image and Superscription is this? it will be returned the Caesars of England. Ward-robe. This was not that for the Kings wearing apparel, or livees of Servants kept else∣where in an House so called, in the Parish of St. Andrews Ward robe, but for Vests or Robes of State, with rich Carpets, Canopies and Hangings to be used on great Solem∣nities. Here lately was a rich peice It now hangeth in the Painted Chamber. of Arras, presenting the Sea-fight in eighty eighth, and having the living portractures of the chiefest Commanders, wrought in the borders thereof. On the same token, that a Lord Verulam in his . Captain, who highly prized his own service, mis∣sing his picture therein, complained of the injury to his friend, professing of himself that he merited a place there, as well as some therein remembred, seeing he was ingaged in the middle of the Fight. Be content (quoth his friend) thou hast been an old Pirate, and art reserved for another hanging. There were also kept in this place, the ancient Cloaths of our English Kings, which they wore on great Festivals; so that this Ward robe was in effect a Library for Anti∣quaries, therein to read the Mode and Fashion of Garments in all ages. These King James, in the beginning of his Reign, gave to the Earl of Dunbar, by whom they were sold, resold, and re-re-resold at as many hands almost as Briarius had, some gaining vast Estates thereby. The Unicorns-Horn. Amongst the many precious rarities in the Tower, this (as another in Windsor-Castle) was in my memory, shown to people. It belongs not to me to enquire, what is become of them, but rather to discuss, 1. Whether there be such a crea∣ture as an Unicorn. 2. What kind of Animal it is? 3. What the fashion and colour of his Horn. 4. What the use & effect. of his Horn. For the first, they produce a weak proof, who alledge them to be the Supporters of the Scottish-arms, and of the arms of some English Gentlemen, particularly of the Fa∣mily of Paris in Cambridge-shire; seeing most Heralds wear the addition of Painters, and
the Fancy of Painters pretends to the priviledge of a lawlesse Liberty. But, besides that it is uncivil to give the lye to a common Tradition, the former existence of such a creature (and surely no Species is wholly lost) is cleared from several places of Scrip∣ture, Num. 23. 22. God hath as it were the strength of an Unicorn. Job. 39. 9. Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? Psal. 22. 10. My Horn shalt thou exalt like the Horn of an Unicorn, &c. True it is, the Word in the   Reem. Original importeth nothing of any Horn therein (as doth the Latin Unicornis, and the Greek Monoceros) Yet I am confident it is right rendred, because it is so rendred. Such was the Learning and Piety of the persons imployed in that Translation. Proceed we now to the second Quaere about the kind thereof. Surely it is distinct from the Rhinoceros (carrying a Horn not on his Forehead but on his Nose) because the Exaltation of his Horn is not considerable, as not bunching forth much above a Foot in the prominency thereof. He is commonly pictured, bodyed like a Buck, with a Horn advanced out of his Forehead, some two Yards in proportion, and this his Picture confuteth his Picture, seeing generally he is held to be no Beast of Prey, but which feedeth on the grass, and if so, his Mouth cannot meet with the Ground; the Interposition of his Horn so fancifully fixed, making so great distance betwixt them. The plain Truth is, I, who first questioned whether there were any Unicorns, am since convined that there are so many sorts of them, The Indian Oxe, the Indian Asse, the Oyx, &c. famous for carrying one Horn, but which is the prize in this Lot∣tery I cannot decide, seeing none alive in our Land have seen a four footed Beast of that kind, and Julius Scaliger saith truly, Ex libris colligere quae prodider unt Authores longe est periculo∣sissimum; Rerum ipsarum cognitio vera è rebus ipsis est. OLAUS WORME, One no lesse a curious Inquirer into the Mysteries, then careful preserver of the Rarities of Nature, Physician at this day to the King of Denmark, in a Learned Work which he lately set forth endevoureth to prove all under a general mistake, who fancy a Unicorn a four footed Beast, proving the same to be a Fish in the Northern Seas, of 22. Foot in Length, a long horn in his Fore∣head (no more cumbersome in the portage, then Ears are to other Beasts) with which Horn he tilteth at his prey, and having pierced it through, doth afterward feed upon it. If it be objected to the contrary, that in . 34. 7. Scripture he is ranked amongst the Qua∣; And the Unicorns shall come down with them, and the Bullocks with the Bulls, and their Land shall be soaked with blood, and their Dust made Fat with Fatnesse; It will be answered, that Unicorns there are not real, but metaphorical (rendred appellatively Robusti in some Translations) importing that strong Enemies both by Water and Land, shall invade Idumaea to the utter destruction thereof. Come we now to the fashion and colour of the Horn, conceiving it no considerable controversie concerning the length and bignesse thereof, quantity not varying the kind in such cases. Some are plain, as that in St. Marks in Venice; others wreathed about, as that at St. Dyonis neer Paris, with anfractuous spires, and cocleary turn∣ings about it, which probably is the effect of age, those Wreaths being but the wrinkles of most vivacious Unicorns. The same may be said of the colour, white, when newly taken from his Head; Yellow, like that lately in the Tower of some hundred years seniority, but whether or no it will ever turn black, as that of Aelians and Plinies Description, let others decide. The last Quaere remains of the virtue of this Horn, which some exalt so high, that it is not only antidotal to several Venomes, and substances destructive by their qualities, which we can command our selves to believe; but also that it resisteth poysons which kill by second qualities, that is, by corrosion of parts; wherein I concur with my learned Tho. Browne Dr. of Physick in his Enqui∣ries into vul∣gar Errors B. 3. cap. 23. Author, and doubt such exceed the properties of its nature, and the promises of experiment will not secure the adventure; and I believe few Mountebanks will be so da∣ring as to poyson themselves on the Security of such an Alexipharmacon.
I have done Reader with this Subject, when I have told thee that two of my wor∣thy friends (yea, the Friends to Mankind by their general generosity) Dr. Baldwin Hamey and Sir Francis Prugean, the one had the Horn it self (which to my dim eyes at some distance seemed like a Taper of wreathed Waxe) the other hath the Socket (as I may term it) of the Fish, into which this Horn was fixed. I have heard, that upon Experiment, a great cure against poyson hath been done with some Grains theerof; and it is impro∣bable that the Vigour of the vigour of Nature, should extrude that so specious to Sight, which is not also Soveraign to Service. Since I am informed that the same Dr. Hamey, hath parted with the Propriety thereof to the Colledge of Physicians, and they have solemnly presented this Unicorns Horn to his Majesty, to supply the place of that in the Tower, which our Civil wars have embeseled. Proverbs. A London Jury, hang half and save half.] Some affirm this of an Essex, others of a Middlesex Jury, and my Charity believes it equally true, that is, equally untrue of all three: What gave first occasion to this Libelling Proverb I know not; this I know, reports of this Nature, like round bo∣dies, down Precepices, once mved move themselves, and a Mouse may stir what a man cannot stay in this kind. The best is, though none can hinder a Slanderer from speaking, they may hinder them from speaking Truth. This Proverb would fain suggest to credulous people, as if Londoners frequently impannelled on Juries, and loaded with multiplicity of matters, aim more at dispatch then Justice, and to make quick Riddance (though no hast to hang true men) acquit half and condemn half. Thus hey divide themselves in aequilibrio, betwixt Justice and mercy, though it were meet the latter should have the more advantage, and the Beam break on the pitiful side. Others extend this Proverb also to their arbitrations betwixt party and party; as if not minding the merits of the cause, they cleave the thing controverted into equal moities betwixt Plainuff and Defendant. The falsnesse of these Suggestions will appear to such, who by perusing History do discover the London Jurors most consciencious in proceeding secundum allegata & pro∣bata, always inclining to the merciful side in saving life, when they can find any cause or colour for the same, and amongst many thousands take two most memorable In∣stances. The first, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who on the 17 of April 1554. was (in the Reign of Queen Mary) arraigned for High Treason in Guildhall, before Sir Thomas White Lord Maior, the Earls of Shrewsbury and Derby, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord Cheif Justice, &c. Mr. Edward Griffin the Attorney General, pressed the Prisoner very sorely for his Correspondency with the Carews in the West, and his being privy to the Rising of Sir Thomas Wyat. Sir Nicholas pleaded many hours for himself, no lesse stoutly then wisely, yet with due submission to the Conrt, till at last his Jury passed upon him, whose names ad perpetuam rei memoriam are here inserted. Hollingshead chron. p. 1105. 1. Wheston. 2. Lucar. 3. Yoong. 4. Martin. 5. Beswike. 6. Barscarfeld. 7. Kightleie. 8. Low. 9. Painter. 10. Banks. 11. Calthrop. 12. Cater. These acquitted the Prisoner, and though much menaced by the Court, stood stoutly to their Verdict, for which they were all imprisoned, five Idem p. 1126. of them fined, and paid 260. l. a peice, the rest lower Sums, and after their discharge from durance, commanded to attend the Council Table at an Stows chron. pag. 624. who saith, they were fined 500. l. a peice hours warning. The other is of a person who was lately arraigned in Guildhall, and whom I list not to name, partly because he is easily guessed, partly because he was of so turbulent a Spirit, that his Name would set all my Book at dissention. He being charged with what concerned his Life, was by an uncorrupted Jury, though heavily pressed to the contrary, clearly acquitted, and one passage (omitted in his printed Tryal) I must here insert.
Speaking his Farewell to the Jury now ready to depart the Bar, he requested them to remember a Statute in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, as making much in his behalf. Sirrah, said one Judge on the Bench to this Prisoner, I know that Statute bet∣ter then you do; to whom he calmly replyed, I believe you Sir, but I desire that these Gentlemen of the Jury should understand it but as well as I do; and so it seems they did, for his life was saved thereby. A Fool will not part with his Bawble for the Tower of London.] This Tower anciently was (and in part still is) the Magazine of Englands Wealth. There the Silver, the Mint of Money, and there the Brasse and Iron to defend it, the Armory and Store-house of Ordnance; yet Fools so doat on their darling Fancies, that they prize them above all this Treasure. But alass! Quod scribimus, & Legimus, & ridemus, hoc facimus; We do our selves what we deride in others. Every one is addicted to some vanity or other, which he will not part with on any conditions, so weak and wilful we are by nature. He that will not freely and sadly confess that he is much a Fool, is all a Fool. London Lick Penny.] The Countryman coming up hither by his own experience will easily expound the meaning thereof. The best is, it is also London Get Penny, to those who live here, and carefully follow their Vocations. London Cockneys.] Let us observe first the antiquity of this Proverb, then the meaning; Lastly, the Application thereof to Londoners. It is more then four hundred years old; for when Hugh Bigot, added artificial fortifications to the natural strength of his Castle at Bun∣gey in Suffolk, he gave out this Rhime, therein vaunting it for impregnable; Were I in my Castle of Bungey, Upon the River of Waveney, I would ne care for the King of Camd. Brit. in Suffolk. Cockeney. Meaning thereby King Henry the Second, then peaceably possessed of London whi∣lest some other places did resist him, though afterwards he so humbled this Hugh, that he was fain with large sums of money, and pledges for his Loyalty, to redeem this his Castle from being razed to the Ground. I meet with a double sense of this word Cockeney, some taking it for, 1. One coaks'd or cockered, made a wanton or Nestle-cock of, delicately bred and brought up, so that when grown Men or Women, they can en∣dure no hardship, nor comport with pains taking. 2. One utterly ignorant of Husbandry, and Huswifery, such as is practiced in the Country, so that they may be perswaded any thing about Rural Commodities, and the Original there∣of, and the Tale of the Citizens Son, who knew not the Language of Cock, but call'd it Neighing is commonly known. Here I take no Notice of his Minshews Diction. in the word Cockney. Fancy who will have it called Cockney by Transpo∣sition, quasi Incoct, raw and rude, as forc'd and far fetch'd. The Name is generally fix'd on such who are born within the Sound of Bow-Bell, and are tender enough, and sufficiently ignorant in Country businesses. One merrily perswaded a She Citizen, that seeing Malt did not grow, the good Huswifes in the Countrey did spin it; I knew as much said the Cockney, for one may see the Threds hang out at the ends thereof. However, be it known unto all people, that as there are deli∣cate and silly Folk in the Countrey; so are there as hardy men and skilful Huswives in the City, no disparagement to any of what place soever. Ane ill word meets another, and it were at the Bridge of London.] This is a Scottish Proverb by David Ferau∣son Ministr at . Proverb, and indeed a Scottish Text needs a Scottish Comment
thereon. However, I thus guesse at the meaning thereof; London-Bridge is notori∣ously known for a narrow passe, and numerous passengers, so that people meeting there∣on, a Quarrel will quickly be engendred, if one of them hath not the wit or patience, to step into a Shop, if on foot; if on Horseback to stay in the void places. Thus Words quickly enflame a difference, except one of the parties have the Discretion of silence, yeilding or departure. Billings-gate Language.] Billings was formerly a Gate, though now rather portus then porta, being the prime Landing place, and Market for some Sea Commodities. Now, although as fashio∣nable people live there, as elsewhere in the City, yet much rude folk repair thither, so that one may term this the Esculine Gate of London, from the drosse and dregs of the baser people flocking thither. Here one may hear Linguas jurgatrices; yea shrewd words are sometimes improved into smart blows betwixt them. I doubt not, but that Rome, Venice, Paris, and all populous Cities have their Billings-gate Language, in those places where rude people make their Rendezvouz. Kirbies Castle, and Megses Glory. Spinolas Pleasure, and Fishers Folly.] These were four houses about the City, built by Citizens, large and sumptuous above their Estates, whose Memories are likely longer to continue by this Rhime, then by their own pompous buildings. The fist of these is so uncastelled, the Glory of the second so obscured, that very few know (and it were needlesse to tell them) where these houses were fixed. As for Spinola (a Genoan made Free-Denizon) the Master and Fellows of a Colledge in Cambridge, know too well what he was, by their expensive Suit known to poste∣rity, by Magdalen Colledge Case. If his own Countrey (I mean the Italian) curse did overtake him, and if the Plague of Building did light upon him, few I believe did pity him. As for the last, it was built by Jasper Fisher, Free of the Goldsmiths, one of the six Clerks in Chancery, and a Justice of Peace, who, being a Man of no great Wealth (as indebted to many) built here a Beautiful house, with Gardens of pleasure, and* Stows Sur∣vey p. 175. Bouling Alleys about it, called Devonshire House at this Day. However, it seems this was an ancient Vanity, even in the Days of King David,* Psal. 49. 11. Their inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all Generations: They call their Lands after their own names. He will follow him like a St. Anthonies pig.] St. Anthonie is notoriously know for the Patron of Hogs, having a pig for his page in all picturs, though for what reason unknown, except, because being an Hermit, and having a Cell or hole, digged in the earth, and having his generall repast on roots, he and hogs did in some sort entercommon both in their diet and lodging. There was a fair Hospital built to the honour of St. Anthony, in Bennets Fink in this City. The Protectors and Proctors whereof claimed a priviledge to themselves, to garble the Live Pigs in the Markets of the City, and such as they found starved, or otherwise unwholsom for mans sustenance, they would slit in the ear, tie a Stows Survey of London, pag. 190. Bell about their Necks, and let them loose about the City. None durst hurt or take them up (having this Livery of St. Anthony upon them) but many would give them bread, and feed them in their passage, whom they used to follow whining after them. But, if such Pigs proved fat, and well liking (as often they did) the Officers of St. Anthonies Hospital would seize on them for their own use. The Proverb is appliable to such, who have servile saleable souls, who for a small reward, will lack-wey many Miles, pressing their Patrons with their unwelcome importunity. He was born within the Sound of Bow-Bell.] This is the Periphrasis of a Londoner at large, born within the Suburbs thereof; the Sound of this Bell exceeding the extent of the Lord Maiors Mace. It is called Bow-bell,
because hanging in the Steeple of Bow-Church, and Bow-Church because built on Bows or Arches. Stows Survey of London. pag. 269. John Dun Mercer, gave 1472, two Tenements to maintain the ringing of this Bell nightly at Nine a clock, which sounded to Servants a Retreat from their Work, and a March to their Supper and Bed; and therefore conceived by some Masters to ring too soon, by most Apprentices too late. William Copland the Kings Merchant about the Year 1520. gave a bigger Bell for the same purpose, and had the hansel thereof him∣self, being first rang as a Knell at his Burial. —St. Peters in the Poor. Where no Tavern Alehouse or Sign at the Dore.] Under Correction I conceive it called in the Poor, because the Augustinian Friers professing wilful poverty, for some hundred of years, possessed more than a Moiety thereof. But as one gave for his Motto Malim dives esse quam haberi; this Parish may say Malim pauper vocari quam esse, which ever was (not to say is) one of the richest in London, which their Signlesse houses doe avouch, being a Sign of the emi∣nency of their Inhabitants, ubi quisque sui ipsius index, sufficiently notified and distin∣guished by themselves. How ancient the use of Signs in this City on private houses is to me unknown, sure I am, it was generally used in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, Witnesse that dear jest of a well meaning Citizen, who lost his life in those dangerous times for saying he would leave the Crown to his Son. I suspect this Proverb is lately a little discomposed, and that some publick houses for entertainment have stept or crept into this Parish. To dine with Duke Humphrey.] This Proverb hath altered the original meaning thereof. For first it signified alie∣na vivere quadra, to eat by the bounty, or feed by the favour of another man. For Humphrey Duke of Gloucester (commonly called the good Duke) was so hospital, that every man of Fashion, otherwise unprovided, was welcome to Dine with him. It not being so proper for Strangers to sup in those dayes, with the greatest House kee∣pers. The said Duke was so bountiful, that his Stows Survey of London. pag. 75. Alms-dish of Silver, was very massie when empty (what then when full;) which Alms-dish came afterwards into the posses∣sion of the Duke of Somerset, who sent it to the Lord Rivers, to sell the same to furnish himself for a Sea-voyage. But after the Death of good Duke Humphrey, (when many of his former Alms-men were at a losse for a meals meat) this Proverb did alter its Copy, to Dine with Duke Humphrey, importing, to be Dinnerlesse. A general mistake fixed this sense, namely, that Duke Humphrey was buryed in the Body of St. Pauls Church, where many men chaw their meat with feet, and walk away the want of a Dinner; whereas indeed that noble person interred in St. Pauls, was Sir Idem p. 368. John Beauchamp Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight of the Garter, Son to Guy Earl of Warwick, and Brother to Thomas Earl of Warwick, whilst Duke Humphrey was honourably buried in St. Albans. I will use you as bad as a Jew.] I am sure I have carried the Child home, and layed it at the Fathers House, having traced this Proverb by the Tract from England in General to London, thence to the Old Jury, whence it had its first Original; that poor Nation (especially on Shrove∣Tuesday) being intollerably abused by the English, whilst they lived in the Land. I could wish, that wheresoever the Jews live, they may not find so much courtesie as to confirm them in their false, yet not so much Cruelty as to discourage them from the true Religion; till which time I can bemone their Misery, condemn the Christians Cruelty, and admire Gods justice in both. See we it here now fulfilled, which God long since Deut. 28. 37. 1 Kings 9. 7. Jer. 24. 9. frequently foretold, and threat∣ned, namely that he would make the Jews become a Proverb, if continuing Rebellious against him. I passe not for the Flouts of prophane Pagans, scoffing at the Jews Re∣ligion, Juven. Sat. Credat Judaeus Apella, but to behold them thus Proverbiascere, for their Re∣bellions against God, minds me of the performance of Gods Threatning unto them.
Good manners to except my Lord Maior of London.] This is a corrective for such, whose expressions are of the largest size, and too ge∣neral in their extent, parallel to the Logick Maxime; Primum in unoquoque genere est excipiendum, as too high to come under the Roof of comparison. In some cases it is not civil to fill up all the room in our speeches of our selves, but to leave an upper place voyd, as a blank reserved for our betters. I have dined as well as my Lord Maior of London.] That this Proverb may not crosse the former, know, that as well is not taken for as dubiously or daintily, on Variety of Costly Dishes, in which kinds, the Lord Maior is Paramount for Magnificence. For (not to speak of his solemn Invitations, as when Henry Pickard, Lord Maior 1357. did in one day entertain a Stows Survey of London, pag. 87. Messe of Kings, Edward King of England, John King of France, David King of Scots, and the King of Cy∣prus, besides Edward Prince of Wales, and many prime Noble-men of the Land) his daily Dinners, are Feasts both for Plenty, Guests and Attendants. But the Proverb hath its modest meaning, I haue dined as well, that is, as comfortable, as contentedly, according to the Rule; Satis est quod sufficit, enough is as good as a Feast, and better then a Surfeit, and indeed Nature is contented with a little, and Grace with lesse. As old as Pauls Steeple.] Different are the Dates of the Age thereof, because it had two births or beginnings. For if we count it from the time wherein it was originally co-founded by K. Ethelbert, with the Body of the Church, Anno six hundred and ten, then it is above a thousand and forty years of Age. But if we reckon it from the year 1087. when burnt with Light∣ning from Heaven, and afterwards rebuilt by the Bishops of London; it is not above five hundred years old. And though this Proverb falls far short of the Latine ones, An∣tiquius Arcadibus, Antiquius Saturno: yet serveth it sufficiently to be returned to such, who pretend those things to be Novell, which are known to be stale, old, and almost antiquated. He is only fit for Ruffians-Hall.] A Ruffian is the same with a Swaggerer, so called, because endevouring to make that Side to swag or weigh down, whereon he ingageth. The same also with Swash-Buck∣ler, from swashing, or making a noise on Bucklers. West-Smith-field (now the Horse∣Market) was formerly called Continuer of Stows Annals pag. 1024. Ruffians-Hall, where such men met casually and other∣wise, to try Masteries with Sword and Buckler. Moe were frighted then hurt, hurt then killed therewith, it being accounted unmanly to strike beneath the Knee, be∣cause in effect it was as one armed against a naked man. But since that desperate Trai∣tor Rowland Yorke Camd. Eliz. in Anno. 1587. first used thrusting with Rapiers, Swords and Bucklers are disused, and the Proverb only appliable to quarrelsome people (not tame, but wild Barret∣ters) who delight in brawls and blows. A Loyal heart may be landed under Traitors Bridge.] This is a Bridge under which is an Entrance into the Tower (over against Pink Gate) formerly fatal to those who landed there, there being a muttering that such never came forth alive, as dying (to say no worse) therein, without any Legal Try∣al. The Proverb importeth, that passive Innocence overpower'd with Adversaries, may be accused without cause, and disposed at the pleasure of others; it being true of all Prisoners, what our Saviour said to and of St. Joh. 21. 18. Peter, Another shall carry thee whi∣ther thou wouldst not. Queen Elizabeth may be a proofe hereof, who in the Reign of Queen Mary her Sister, first stayed and denyed to Land at those Stairs, where all Traytors and Offen∣ders customably used to Land, till a Lord (which my Fox Acts and Monuments, pag. 2092. Author would not, and I can∣not name) told her she should not choose, and so she was forced accordingly. To cast water into the Thames.] That is, to give to them wo had plenty before; which notwithstanding is the dole general of the World. Yet let not Thames be proud of his full and fair stream,
seeing Water may be wanting therein, as it was Anno 1158. the Fourth of William Rufus, when men might walk over Stows Chron. in An. notato. dryshod; and again Idem in Anno notato. Anno 1582. a strong Wind lying West and by South, which forced out the Fresh and kept back the Salt-water. He must take him a House in J. Heywood in his Epigrams num. 69. Turn-again Lane.] This in old Records is called Stows Survey of London, pag. 427. Wind-again Lane, and lyeth in the Parish of St. Se∣pulchres, going down to Fleet-Dike, which men must turn again the same way they came, for there it is stopped. The Proverb is applied to those, who sensible that they embrace destructive courses, must seasonably alter their manners, which they may do without any shame to themselves; it is better to come back through Turn-again (though a narrow and obscure) Lane, then to go (on an ill account) straight forwards in a fair street hard by, whence, Vestigia nulla retrorsum, as leading Westward to Exe∣cution. He may whet his Knife on the Threshold of the Fleet.] The Fleet is a place notoriousl known for a Prison, to which many are commit∣ted for their contempts, more for their debts. So called it is from a Brook running by, as that (of Tygris in Armenia) from its former Fleetnesse, though now it creepeth flow enough, not so much for age; as the injection of City excrements wherewith it is so obstructed. The Proverb is appliable to those who never owed ought, or else having run into debt have crept out of it, so that now they may defie danger and arrests, yea may triumphare in Hostico, laugh in the Face of the Serjeants. Surely the Threshold of the Fleet so used, setteth a good edge on the Knife, and a better on the Wearer thereof, acting him with a Spirit free from all engagements. All goeth down Gutter-lane. There is a small Lane (inhabited anciently by Gold-beaters) leading out of Cheap∣side, East of Foster-lane, which Orthography presents to the Reader by the name of Stows Survey of London. Pag. 338. Guthurun-Lane, from him the once Owner thereof. But common people (we must speak with the volge and think with the wise) call it Guttur Lane, pleading for their mispronouncing it, that the narrow form thereof is like the Throat or Gullet, and such a one would have pleased Apitius the Epicure, who wished to himself Tricubitale Gut∣tur. The Proverb is appliable to those who spend all in Drunkennesse and Gluttony, meer Belly-Gods, whom the Arist. moral. l. 3. Philosopher called : I confesse the word both in sound and sense, hath some affinity with that of St. Pauls of the Tit. 1. 12. Gretians, , Idle-bellyes, save that our Gastrimargi are far worse, so named from the meer madnesse and distraction of their appetite. As Lame as St. Giles Criple-gate.] St. Giles was by irth an Athenian, of noble Extraction and great Estate, but quitted all for a solitary Life. He was visited with a Lamenesse (whether natural or casual I know not) but the Tradition goes, that he desired not to be healed thereof for his greater mortification: if so, his Judgement differed from all the good Lame∣men in the Gospel, importunate for ease from their infirmity. He is accompted the Patron of Criples; and whereas Churches dedicated to other Saints of better Footman∣ship, get the speed of him and come into the City, generally Lame St. Giles laggeth behind in the Suburbs, as in London, Cambridge, Salisbury, &c. Criplegate was so called before the Stows Survey of London. pag. 32. Conquest, from Criples begging of Passengers therein. And indeed they may prescribe for their Custome, ever since the Lame∣man begged an Alms of eter and Iohn at the beautiful Gate of the Temple.* Acts 3. 2. This Proverb may seem guilty of false Herauldry, Lamenesse on Lamenesse, and in common Discourse, is spoken rather merrily then mournfully of such, who for some light hurt, lagg behind, and sometimes is applied to those, who out of Lazinesse (none so lame as they that will not go) counterfeit Infirmity. You are all for the Hoistings, or Hustings.] It is spoken of those who by Pride or Passion are mounted or elated to a pitch a∣bove
the due proportion of their Birth, Quality, or Estate; such as are all in Altitudi∣nibus, so that Common persons know not how to behave themselves unto them. It cometh from Hustings, the Principal and highest Court in London, (as also in Win∣chester, Lincolne, York, &c.) so called from the French word Haulser, to raise or lift up. The mention of the Hustings, a Court so called, mindeth me of another Court, called the Court of Hall-mote, and I am resolved to run the hazard of the Reader's anger with this my Digression, to rectifie a mistake in some, and prevent it in others. Sir Edward Coke, Institut. 4. part. cap. 9. This is derived of Hall and Mote, as much as to say, the Hall Court, id est, Conventus Civium in Aulam Publicam; Every Company in London having a Hall wherein they kept their Courts, and this Court antiently called Hall-Mote, or Folk-Mote. With whom verbatim concurreth (who would not willingly dissent from him in point of Common-Law) the Learned Doctor Cowel in his Interpreter. But let all take heed that they confound not this Court, with another more Anti∣ent, (and more proper for the cognizance of the Pen of a Divine) viz. Haly-Mote Court, being a Court derived from Haly, which is Holy, and Mote a Meeting, being an Assembly kept before the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, for the Regulation of the Company of the Bakers in London, (wherein the Staffe of Bread, and therein the Life of the poor is so much concerned) formerly kept on the Lords Day, (whence it took its Name) before the Feast of St. Thomas. But a Court of Common-Councell . the 15th. 1609. altered that Court, until the Thursday before St. Thomas's Day, as since by a la∣ter act of the same Councel, it is Removed unto the Monday before the said Festival. The Antient Title of this Court ranne as followeth; Curia Sancti-Motus tenta in Guilhaldea Civitatis London. coram Majore, & Vi∣cecomitibus Civitatis London. Die Dominico proximo ante Festum St. Thomae Apostoli, ad horam sextam, ante Meridiem ejusdem Diei, secundum Consuetudinem Civitatis London. Such who are Learned in the Lawes, and are pleased to reflect on the Name of my Author Mr. Richard Smith still li∣ving, quon∣dam Sene∣schallus Cu∣riae Sancti-Mo∣tus antedi. and Worthy Friend on the Margin, will not in the least Degree suspect the Truth hereof. Before I come to enroll the List of the Worthies of this City, I premise the words Londinas and Londinensis, as some have curiously stated their Senses, according to whose fancy, 1. Londinas signifieth one born in London wheresoever he doth live. 2. Londinensis   one living in   wheresoever he was born. Could this be made a truth, this distinction would be very serviceable to me in this work; but it will not hold water, finding on due enquiry, that by the best Criticks, both are used promiscuously for an, either born, or living in that City, save, that Londinas (answering to the Question Cujas) signifieth Persons alone, whilst Londi∣nensis importeth either Persons or Things relating to that City, as Turris Londinensis, Pons Londinensis, &c. Princes. KATHERINE third Daughter of K. Henry the third, and Q. Eleanor, was born at Speeds Chro∣nicle, pag. 551. London, Anno Dom. 1252. November the 25th. being St. Katherins day, whose name was therefore given unto her at the Font, by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbu∣ry, her Uncle and Godfather. She dyed in her very Infancy, on whom we will pre∣sume to bestow this Epitaph. Wak't from the wombe, she on this world did peep, Dislik tit, clos'd her eyes, fell fast asleep. She lyeth interr'd at Westminster, in the space betwixt the Chappels of King Edward and St. Bennet. JOAN Eldest Daughter, and third child of K. Edward the second, and Q. Isabel, was born in the Speeds Chro. pag. 576. Tower of London, about the year 1316. She was afterward married
to David the second, K. of Scotland, continuing his wife twenty eight yeares. This was she (Others ap∣ply it to Joan Daughter to K. John, wife to Alexander the 2. King of Scotland. as I conceive) who was commonly called Joan Make-Peace; (and we know Blessed are the peace makers) improving her power (though sometimes with small suc∣cesse) to do good offices betwixt the two Kingdomes. Coming into England to visit her Brother K. Edward the third, she deceased here without issue, Anno 1357. and lyeth buried in Gray-Friers London. It will not be amiss in Reference to her Name, here to observe, that Joan (which is Feminine to John) was a frequent name in the Royal Family of England, as also amongst Foreign Princes; and no wonder, seeing we find a worthy woman of that name, Luke the 8. 3. Benefactresse to our Saviour himself. However, seeing in later times it hath been counted but a Course and homely name, and some Proverbs of Contempt have been cast thereon: it hath since been m ollified into Jane, (sounding finer it seemes to an English eare) though this modern name will hardly be found in any English wri∣ter three hundred yeares ago. KATHERINE, youngest Daughter to K. Henry the 7. and Elizabeth his Queen, was born in the Tower of London, on the 2 day of February, Anno Dom. 1503. decea∣sing few dayes after. It is a sad (and probably too true an) account, of an Antient man, which is given in his Epitaph, Camdens Remains. Here lies the man was born, and cry'd, Liv'd sixty yeares, fell sick, and dy'd. What was a bad Character of his aged unprofitablenesse, is a good one of this infant Ladies innocence, of whom we know nothing, save that she sucked, fell sick and decea∣sed. Only let me adde, she was the last Princesse born in the Tower; our English Kings hereafter removing their residence to Bridewel and White-hall, and using the Tower not so much as a Palace for the State, as Prison for the strength thereof. ANNA BOLLEN, Daughter of the Lord Thomas Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, was (asA M P. some of her Honourable relations still surviving do conjecture) born in London, and became second Wife to K. Henry 8th. Indeed he passionately affected her, when but a Lords Daughter, but did not marry her till she was a Princesse; Created by him Mar∣chionesse of Pembroke, partly to make her the more proportionable Match, and partly to try how she would become a oronet, before she wore a Crown. The Papists much disparage her memory (malice will lye, or must be dumb) ma∣king all her Wit to consist in Boldnesse, her Beauty in a French garb and her Modesty in a Cunning oynesse; whereas indeed she was a Lady accomplished in Body, (was it likely K. Henry would love what was not lovely?) and Vertuous in Mind, and, whilst a Favourite of the Kings, a Favourer of all good men, and great Promoter of the Gospel. The Inconstancy of her husbands affections, is conceived by most moderate men, (what else soever was pretended) her chiefest crime, and cause of her death, which happened Anno 1536. KATHERINE HOWARD, Daughter to the Lord Edmond Howard, son to ThomasA M P. Duke of Norfolk, was (though her father had large lands and houses in many places) probably born in London, and at last became fifth wife to K. Henry the eighth. Such as desire to know the names, number and successe of all six, may conceive K. Henry thus speaking on his death bed, Three Kates, two Nans, and one dear Jane I wedded, One Spanish, one Dutch, and four English Wives, From two I was divorc'd, two I beheaded, One died in childbed, and one me survives. Of this Katherine Howard little is reported, and yet too much, if all be true, of her incontinency, which cost her her life. The greatest good the Land got by this match, was a general leave to marry Cousin-Germans, formerly prohibited by the Canon, and hereafter permitted by the Common-law; A door of lawful liberty left open by God in Scripture, shut by the Pope for his private profit, opened again by the King, first, for his own admittance, (this Katherine being Cousin-German to Anna Bollen, his former Wife) and then for the service of such Subjects, as would follow him upon the like occasion. This Lady was beheaded Anno Domini 1540.
Saints. Not to speak of St. Sedd born in this City, Hierom Por∣ter, Lives of the Saints, pag. 25.and afterwards Bishop thereof, of whom we find nothing reported, save that he was very instrumental to the converting of the Mercians; we begin with WULSINE who was born in this Hierom ∣ter, in his flowers of the lives of Engl. Saints. Janu∣ry 8. City, of worthy Parents, breeding him up in the Devotion of that age; and became a Benedictine Monk, till at last by his fast friend St. Dunstan, he was preferred, first Abbot of Westminster, whence he was afterwards remo∣ved to be Bishop of Sherburne in Dorsetshire. A mighty Champion he was for a Mona∣stical life, and therefore could not be quiet till he had driven all the secular priests out of Sherburne, and substituted Monks in their room. I read not of any Miracle done by him either whilst living, or when dead, save, that in the juncture of both, he is said with St. Stephen to have seen Heavens opened, &c. He had contracted great intimacy with one Egeline, a virtuous Knight, who died on the same day with him, and he in∣joyned his Monks that they should both be buried in one Grave; their joynt death hap∣pened January the 8th. Anno 985. THOMAS BECKET, son to Gilbert Becket Merchant, and Maud his wife, was born in this City, in the place where now Mercers-Chappel is erected. I have, Reader, been so prodigal in the large description of his life, in my Ecclesiastical History, that I have no new observable left to present you with. Onely when I consider of the multitude of vows, made by superstitious Pilgrims to his Sbrine (where the stones were hallow∣ed with their bended knees) I much admire at their Will-worship, no vowes appearing in Scripture but what were made to God alone. And therefore most impudent is the attempt of those Papists, tampering to corrupt Holy Writ, in favour of such vowes, reading in the Vulgar Latine, Prov. 20. 25. Ruina est homini devotare Sanctos, & post vota retractare. Instead of Ruina est homini devorare Sancta, & post vota retractare. It is a snare to a man who often maketh vowes to Saints, and after vowes retracteth them. It is a snare to a man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vowes to make enqui∣ry. This Becket was slain (as is notoriously known) on Innocents-day, in his own Church of Canterbury, 1170. Martyrs. WILLIAM SAUTRE, aliàs Chatris, Parish-Priest of the Church of St. Osiths Lon∣don, was the first Englishman that was put to death by fire, for maintaining the opinions of Wicliffe. In the Primitive times (pardon Reader, no impertinent digression) such the lenity and tendernesse of the Fathers of the Church, towards Hereticks, that, contenting themselves with condemning their blasphemous opinions, they proceeded to no penal∣ty on their persons. Yea, in after ages, when the Christian Augustine Epist. 68. Emperour would have punisht the furious Donatists with a pecunlary mulct, the Holy men of those times so earnestly interceded, as to procure the remission. And St. Augustine himself, who was most zealous in his writing against those Donatists, Epist. 127. & Retract. lib. 2. cap. 5. professeth he had rather be himself slain by them, than by detecting them, be any cause they should undergoe the punishment of death. Whereas henceforward in England, many were brought to the fire by the Bishops, and others of the Clergy, whose opinions were neither so blasphe∣mous, nor deportment so inhumane as ancient Hereticks. I confesse not onely simple heresie was charged on this Sautre, but also a relapse thereinto after abjuration, in which case such is the charity of the Canon-Law, that such a person is, De . cap. 9. & tit. cod. cap. 4. in Sexto. seculari judicio sine ulla penitus audientia relinquendus, not affording any audience to one relapsed, though he should revoke his opinions. Quite contrary to the charitable Judgement of St. Chrysostome who sticked not to say, Socrates de Chrysostomo, lib. 6. cap. . lat. 19. ; If thou fall a thousand times, and repent thee of thy folly, come boldly into the Church.
There is some difference amongst Authors, about the legal proceedings against this Sautre, by what power he was condemned to dye: Hypodigma Neustriae Anno 1401. pa. 158. Walsingham will have him die during the sitting of the Parliament secundo Hen∣rici quarti, by vertue of the Law then made against Hereticks. Others will have him put to death, not by any Statute-Law then made, but as convicted in a Provincial Councel of the Archbishop of Canterbury. The latter seemeth most true, because the Writ De Haeretico comburendo, (sent down by the advice of the Lords Temporal, to the Mayor of London, to cause his executi∣on) bare date the 26 of February; whereas it was ordered in that Rot. Parl 2 H. 4. num. 116. Parliament, that the penal Statutes made therein, should not take effect till after VVhit∣sontide. But, by what power soever it was done, poor Sautre was burnt in Smithfield, about the 28 of February, 1400. One criticisme of cruelty and hypocrisie is most remarka∣ble. The close of the Archbishops sentence of degradation, when Sautre was commit∣ted over to the Secular Fox Acts and Monuments, pag. 517. Court, endeth with this expression, Beseeching the Court aforesaid, that they will receive favourably the said William unto them thus recommitted. We are much beholding to Baronius, for the better understanding this passage, Tom. 4. Anno 386. num. 23. in∣forming us that it was ever fashionable with their Clergy to this day, that when they consigne an Heretick over to the Secular for execution, they effectually intercede that he may not be punished with death. For, it appeareth in Prosper, that 4 Bishops were excommu∣nicated An. 392. for being accusers of Priscilian (the first Heretick who was confuted with steel) that age conceiving all tendency to cruelty, utterly inconsistent with Cleri∣cal profession. And hence it was, thinks the aforesaid Baronius, that this custome was taken up, of the Clergie's mock-mercy, in their dissembled mediation for condemned Hereticks. I say dissembled: for, if the Lay, having them in his power, shall defer the doing of it more than ordinary, it is the constant tenet of the Canonists, (relying on a Bull of Alexander the 4th. 1260.) he is to be compell'd unto it by spiritual cen∣sures. We have been the larger upon this Sautre's death, because he was the English Protestant (pardon the Prolepsis) Proto-martyr. But every son must not look to be an heir, we will be shorter on the rest in this City, contenting our selves with their bare names, except some extraordinary matter present it self to our obser∣vation. JOHN BADBY was an Artificer in Black Friars in London, condemned, and burned in Smithfield, about 1401. Henry Prince of VVales (afterwards King Henry the 5th.) happened to be present at his execution, who not onely promised him par∣don on his recantation, but also a stipend out of the Kings Treasury, sufficient for his support; all which Badby refused. He was put into an empty Tun, (a ceremony of cruelty peculiar to him alone) and the fire put therein. At the first feeling thereof, he cryed Fox Acts and Monuments, pag. 22. Mercy, Mercy, begging it of the God of hea∣ven, which Noble Prince Henry mistook for a kind of Revocation of his Opinions, and presently caused the fire round about him to be quenched, renewing his promises unto him with advantage, which Badby refused the second time, and was Martyred. But Reader, I will engage no deeper in this copious subject, lest I lose my self in the Labyrinth thereof. * Joseph left off to Number the Corn in Egypt, for it was with∣outGen. 41. 49. number; the cause alone of my desisting in this subject. Yea, Bloudy Bonner had murdered many more, had not that Hydropical Humor which quenched the life of Queen Mary, extinguished also the Fires in Smithfield. Prelates. Here in this City we are at a greater losse, as to this Topick, than in any Shire in England: for in vain it is for any man to name himself Thomas of London, John of Lon∣don, &c. such Sirnames not reaching their end, nor attaining their intention, viz.  diversifie the Person, the laxity of so populous a place leaving them as unspecified as it
found them. We therefore have cause to believe, that many Clergy-men both Bishops and Writers born in this City, did not follow suit with others of their Coat, to be named from the Place of their Nativity, but from their Fathers, the Reason why we can give so slender an account of them as followeth. SIMON OF GAUNT, was born in this City, 1. Bale, 1. Pitz. and Bish. God∣win in the Bishops of Sa∣lisbnry. (his Mother being an En∣glish Woman, his Father a Flemming) and being bred in good literature, became so fa∣mous, that by King Edward the first he was preferred Bishop of Salisbury, 1298. He gave the first leave to the Citizens thereof, to fortifie that place with a deed Ditch, partly remaining, and a strong wall wholly demolished at this day. Now seeing good Laws are the best walls of any foundation, no lesse was his care for the Church, than City of Salisbury, making good Statutes, whereby it was ordered even unto our age. He dyed about the year 1315. JOHN KITE, was born in Godwin in the Bishops of Carlisle. London, bred in Oxford, sent Embassadour in∣to Spain, made a Grecian titulary Arch bishop, (receiving thence as much profit, as men shear wool from hogs) and at last the real Bishop of Carlisle: yet is his Epitaph in the Church of Stepney neither good English, Latine, Spanish or Greek, but a barbarous con∣fusion, as followeth, Under this Stone closyd & marmorate Lveth John , Londoner naciste. Encreasing invirtues rose to hyghestate In the fourth Edwards chappel by his yong life Sith which the Seuinth Henries service primatife Proceeding still in virtuous efficase To be in favour with this our Kings grase. With Witt endewyed chosen to be Le∣gate, Sent into Spain, where he right joyfully Combined both Princes in pease most amate. In Grece Archbishop elected worthely And last of Carlyel ruling postorally: Kepyng nobyl houshold with great hos∣pitality. On thousand fyve hundred thirty and seuyn Inuyterate with carys consumed with Age, The nineteeth of Jun reckonyd full euyn Passed to Heauyn from worldly Pyl∣gramage, Of whose Soul good peopul of Cherite Prey, as ye wold be preyd for, for thus must you lye; Ieu mercy, Lady help. These, if made 300 years ago, had been excusable, but such midnight verses are abominable, made, as it appears, in the dawning of good learning and pure language. Yet because some love Poetry, either very good or very bad, that if they cannot learn from it, they may laugh at it, they are here inserted. WILLLIAM KNIGHT, was born in this Register of that Colledge in anno 1493. City, bred Fellow of New-col∣ledge in Oxford, on the same token, that there have been ten of his Sirname, Fellowes of that Foundation. He proceeded Doctor of Law, and a noble Lord Herbert in the Life of Hen. 8. p. 216. Pen makes him Secretary to King Henry the Eighth. Sure it is, he was the first Person imployed to the Pope, to motion to him the matter of his Divorce; advertizing the King, by his weekly dispatches, how slowly his Cause, (though spurred with English Gold) crept on in the Court of Rome. After his return, the King rewarded his Industry, Fidelity and Ability, with bestowing the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells upon him. In Wells) with the assistance of Dean Woolman) he built a stately covered Crosse in the Market-place, for the glor of God, and conveniency of poor people, to se∣cure them from the weather, adding this Inscription; Laus Deo, Pax Vivis, Requies De∣functis. He dyed September 29. Anno 1547. NICOLAS HEATH, was born, and had his childhood in the City of Lon∣don, being noted for one of St. Stows Sur∣vey of London. Anthonies Pigs therein, (so were the Scholars of that School commonly called, as those of St. Pauls, Pauls pigeons) and bred first in* Idem Ibidem. Rich. Hall in the Life of Bishop Fisher. Christs-Colledge, then Fellow of Clare-hall in Cambridge▪ By K. Henry the eighth (to whom he was Almoner) he was preferred Bishop first of Rochester, then of Worcester: deprived by K. Edward the Sixth, restored by Q. Mary, who advanced him Arch-bi∣shop of York, and Lord Chancelour of England. A moderate man, who would not let
the least spark of persecution be kindled in his Diocess, if any in his Pro∣vince. In the Conference at Westminster betwixt Papists and Protestants, primo Elizabethae he was a kind of Moderatour, but interposed little. Infected b his Fellow-Prisoner∣Popish-Prelates, he could not be perswaded to take the Oath of Supremacie, for which he was deprived. He led a pious and private life on his own lands; at Cobham in Sur∣rey, whither Q. Elizabeth came often to visit him, and dyed about the year of our Lord 1566. Since the Reformation. JOHN YOUNGE D. D. was borne in So am I in∣formed by Sir John Young his Grandchild Cheapside, and bred in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, whereof he became Master; hence he was preferred Rector of St. Giles Cripple▪ gate, and at last Bishop of Rochester. A constant preacher, and to whose Judge∣ment Q. Elizabeth ascribed much in Church matters. Better Bishopricks were often offered to, and as often refused by him; particularly, when Norwich was proferred him, by one who affirmed it to be a higher Seat: Bishop Young pleasantly returned; Yea, but it is a harder, and not so easie for an old man, since the Cushion was taken away from it; Meaning, since Dr. Scambler had scambled away the Revenues thereof. He dyed Anno Dom. 1605. and lyeth buried at Bromly Church in Kent, where his son most solemnly and sumptuously interred him, though he en∣joyned all possible privacy, and on his death-bed forbad all funeral expences. But in such cases it may become the Charity and Affection of the survivers, to do what be∣seemes not so well the modesty and discretion of the dying to desire. WILLIAM COTTON D. D. was bon in this City, (though his infancy was much conversant about Finchley in Middlesex) as his Edward Cot∣ton D. D. his son. nearest relation hath informed me. He was bred in Queens Colledge in Cambridge, preferred by Queen Elizabeth, Arch-Deacon of Lewis, and Canon Residentiary of St. Pauls. Hence he was advan∣ced and consecrated Bishop of Exter, November the 12. 1598. During his sitting there, Mr. Snape a second Cartwright (not for abilities but acti∣vity) came out of Gersey, and plentifully sowed the Seeds of non-conformity in his Diocesse, which the vigilancy of this stout and prudent Prelate, plucked up by the roots, before they could come▪ to perfection. In his old age he was Apoplectical, which malady deprived him of his Speech some dayes before his death; so that he could only say Amen, Amen, often reiterated. Here∣upon some scandalous Tongues broached this jeer, that he lived like a Bishop, and dyed like a Clark, and yet let such men know, that no dying person can use any one word more expressive; Whether it be an invocation of his help in whom all the promises are Amen; or whether it be a submission to the Divine providence in all, by way of appro∣bation of former, or option of future things. I will only add and translate his Epitaph transcribed from his Monument. A Paulo ad Petrum Pia te Regina vocavit: Whom th' Queen from Paul to Peter did re∣move: Cum Petro & Paulo Coeli Rex arce locavit. Him God with Paul, and Peter plac'd a∣bove. He lyeth buried in the North-side of the Quire of Exeter, but his Monument is di∣stanced from the place of his Interment, in a North-East Chappel. His Death hap∣pened Anno Domini 1621. LANCELOT ANDREVVS D. D. was born in this City in Tower street, his Father being a Seaman of good repute belonging to Trinity House. He was bred Scho∣lar, Fellow and Master of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge. He was an unimitable Preacher in his way, and such Plagiaries who have stolen his Sermons could never steal his Preaching, and could make nothing of that whereof he made all things as he desired. Pious and pleasant Bishop Felton (his Contemporary and Colleague) indevoured in vain in his Sermon to assimulate his style, and therefore said merrily of himself; I had almost marr'd my own natural Trot by endevouring to imitate his
artificial Amble. But I have spoken largely of this peerlesse Prelate in my Church∣History. He dyed Anno Dom. 1626. THOMAS DOVE D. D. was born in this City, as a Mr. Thursby. Credible person of his nearest Relation hath informed me, bred a Tanquam, (which is a Fellowes Fellow) in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge. He afterwards became an eminent Preacher, and his Ser∣mons substantial in themselves, were advantaged by his comely person and graceful elo∣cution. Q. Elizabeth highly See more of hm in my Church. History. affected, and Anno 1589. preferred him Dean of Nor∣wich, advancing him eleven yeares after to the Bishoprick of Peterborough. He depart∣ed this life 1630. in the thirtieth year of his Bishoprick, on the thirtieth of August, who kept a good house whilst he lived, and yet raised a Family to Knightly de∣gree. JOHN HOWSON D. D. was born in St. So am I in∣formed by his own Daughter the Widow of famous Master Farnaby, since remarried to Mr. Cole in Suf∣olk. Frides Parish in this City, bred a Scholar in St. Pauls School, whence going to Oxford, he became a Student and Canon of Christ-Church, and afterwards was consecrated Bishop of Oxford, May 9. 1619. be∣ing his H. Holland in his Printed Additions to Bishop Godw. Birth-day in his Climacterical, then entring upon the 63 year of his age. His Learned book, in what case a Divorce is lawfull, with his Sermons against Sa∣criledge, and stating of the Popes supremacy, in 4 Sermons, injoyned on him by King James, (to clear his causelesse aspersion of favouring Popery) and never since reply∣ed unto by the Romish party, have made him famous to all posterity. He was after∣wards removed to the Bishoprick of Durham, but continued not long therein; for he dyed in the 75 year of his Age, 6th of February, Anno Domini 1631. and was buried in St. Pauls in London. JOHN DAVENANT D. D. born in Watling-street, was son to John Dave∣nant a Wealthy Citizen, whose father was of Davenants lands in Essex. When an In∣fant newly able to go, he fell down a high pair of staires, and rising up at the bottome smiled, without having any harme; God and his good Angels keeping him for further service in the Church. When a child, he would rather own his own frowardnesse, than anothers flattery, and when soothed up by the servants, that not John but some other of his brothers did cry; He would rather appear in his own face, than wear their disguise; returning, that it was none of his brothers, but John only cryed. He was bred first Fellow-Commoner, then Fellow, then Margaret Profeslor, then Master of Queens▪ lledge in Cambridge. At a publick Election, he gave his negative voice against a near Kinsman, and a most excellent M. John ore (aftrwards knghted) of Gilesden in Hertfordshire. Scholar; Cosen (said he) I will satisfie your father, that you have worth, but not want enough to be one of our Society. Returning from the Synod of Dort, he was elected Bishop of Sarum, 1621. After his Consecration being to perform some personal Service to King James at Newmarket,, he refused to ride on the Lords Day, and came (though a Day later to the Court) no lesse welcome to the King, not only accepting his excuse, but also commending his seasonable forbearance. Taking his leave of the Colledge, and of one John Rolfe, an ancient servant thereof, he desired him to pray for him. And when the other modestly returned, that he rather needed his Lordships Prayers: Yea John (said he) and I need thine too, being now to enter into a Calling wherein I shall meet with many and great Temptations. Pŕaefuit qui profuit, was the Motto written in most of his Books, the sense whereof he practi∣sed in his Conversation. He was humble in himself, and (the Consequence thereof) charitable to others. Indeed once invited by Bishop Field, and not well pleased with some Roisting Com∣pany there, he embraced the next opportunity of departure after Dinner. And when Bishop Field, proferred to light him with a Candle down Stairs, My Lord, my Lord (said he) let us lighten others by our unblameable Conversation, for which Speech some since have severely censured him, how justly I interpose not. But let others unrela∣ted unto him write his Character, whose Pen cannot be suspected of Flattery, which he when living did hate, and dead did not need. We read of the Patriarch Israel that the time drew nigh, that he Gen. 47. 29. must dye; Must, a necessity of it. Such a decree attended this Bisop happy to dye, before his Order (for a time) dyed, April 1641. and with a solemn Funeral he was Buried in his own ∣dral, Dr. Nicholas (now Dean of St. Pauls) preaching an excellent Sermon t his In▪ terment.
MATHEVV WREN D. D. was born in this City (not far from Cheap-side) but descended (as appears by his Arms) from the worshipful Family of the Wrens in Northumberland. He was bred Fellow of Pembroke-hall in Cambridge where he kept the extraordinary Philosophy Act before King James. I say kept it with no lesse praise to himself, then pleasure to the King, where if men should forget, even Dogs would re∣member his seasonable distinction, what the Kings hounds could perform above others, by vertue of their prerogative. He afterward became an excellent Preacher, and two of his Sermons in the Univer∣sity were most remarkable; one preached before the Judges on this Text; Amos 5. 24. And let Judgement run down like waters, and righteousnesse as a mighty stream; at what time the draining of the Fens was designed, suspected detrimental to the Univerity: The other when newly returned from attending Prince Charles into Spain, on the words of the Psalmist,Psal. 42. 7. abyssus abyssum invocat, one depth calleth another. He was afterwards preferred Master of Peterhouse, Dean of Windsor, Bishop of Norwich and Ely: Some in the Long Parliament fell so heavily on him, that he was imprisoned in the Tower almost fifteen years, and his cause never heard. Surely had the imposers been the sufferers hereof, they would have cryed it up for a high piece of inju∣stice. But as St. Acts 16. 39. Paul had the credit to be brought with intreaties out of Prison, by those who sent him thither: so this Prelate hath had the honour, that the same Parli∣amentary power (though not constituted of the same persons) which committed him, caused his Inlargement, still living 1661. Statesmen. The Summe hereof is ta∣ken out of his Printed Life (rare to be had) written by a Nephew of his, more fairly and un∣partially then any would ex∣pect from so near a relation. Sir THOMAS MORE was, Anno Domini 1480 born in Milkstreet London, (the  that ever shined in that Via lactea) sole Son to Sir John More Knight, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench. Some have reported him of mean parentage, meerly from a mistake of a modest word, in an Epitaph of his own making on his Monument in Chelsey Church. Where Nobilis is taken not in the civil but Common Law sense, which alloweth none Noble under the degree of Barons. Thus men cannot be too wary what they in∣scribe on Tombs, which may prove a Record (though not in Law, in History) to po∣sterity. He was bred first in the Family of Arch-bishop Morton, then in Canterbury Colledge (now taken into Christ Church) in Oxford, where he profited more in two, then many in ten years continuance. Thence he removed to an Inn of Chancery called New Inn, and from thence to Lincolns Inn, where he became a double Reader. Then did his worth prefer him to be Judge in the Sheriffe of Londons Court, whilst a Pleader in others. And although he only chose such causes which appeared just to his Conscience, and never took Fee of Widow, Orphane or poor person; he gained in those days four hundred pounds per annum. Being made a Member of the House of Commons, he opposed King Henry the Se∣venth, about money for the Marriage of his Daughter Margaret: Whereat the King was much discontented, when a Courtier told him, that a beardlesse Boy (beard was ne∣ver the true Standard of brains) had obstructed his desires. Which King being as cer∣tain, but more secret then his son in his revenge, made More the mark of his Displea∣sure, who to decline his anger had travelled beyond the Seas, had not the Kings going into another World stopped his journey. King Henry the Eighth coming to the Crown, and desirous to ingratiate himself by preferring popular and deserving persons, Knighted Sir Thomas, and made him Chancelour of the Dutchy of Lancaster, the Kings personal patrimony. Finding him faithfull in lesser matters (according to the method of the Gospel) he made him in effect Ruler of all, when Lord Chancelour of England; a place wherein he demeaned himself with great integrity, and with no less expedition. In testimo∣ny of the later, it is recorded, that calling for the next cause, it was returned unto him, there are no more to be heard, all Suits in that Court depending, and ready for hearing, being finally determined. Whereon a Rhythmer.
When More some years had Chancelor been, o more suits did remain, The same shall never more be seen, Till More be there again. Falling into the Kings displeasure for not complying with him about the Queens di∣vorce, he seasonably resigned his Chancellours Place, and retired to his House in Chelsey, chiefly imploying himself in writing against those who were reputed Hereticks. And yet it is observed to his Credit (by his great friend Erasmus) that whilest he was Lord Chancellor no Protestant was put to death, and it appears by some passages in his Utopia, that it was against his mind that any should lose their Lives for their Consci∣ences. He rather soyled his Fingers then dirtied his hands in the matter of the holy Maid of Kent, and well wiped it off again. But his refusing (or rather not accepting) the Oath of Supremacy, stuck by him, for which he was 16. Months imprisoned in the Tower, bearing his afflictions with remarkable patience He was wont to say that his natural temper was so tender▪, that he could not indure a philip; But a supernatural Princi∣ple (we see) can countermand, yea help natural imperfections. In his time (as till our Memory) Tower Prisoners were not dyetd on their own, but on the Kings charges; The Lieutenant of the Tower providing their Fare for them. And when the Lieutenant said that he was sorry that Commons were no better, I like (said Sir Thomas) Your Dyet very well, and if I dislike it, I pray turn me out of Dores. Not long after he was beheaded on Tower hill, 153.. He left not above one hun∣dred pounds a year Estate, perfectly hating Covetousnesse as may appear by his refu∣sing of four or fiveMr. More in the Lif of his Grandfather. thousand pounds offered him by the Clergy. Among his Latin Books his Utopia beareth the Bell, containing the Idea of a compleat Common-wealth in an Imaginary Island (but pretended to be lately discovered in America) and that so live∣ly* Pag. 405. counterfeited, that many at the reading thereof mistook it for a real truth. Inso∣much, that many great Learned men, as Budeus, and Johannes Paludanus, upon a fervent zeal, wished that some excellent Idem p. 359. Divines might be sent thither to preach Christs Gospel; yea, there were here amongst us at home sundry good men and Learned Divines, very desirous to undertake the Voyage to bring the People to the Faith of Christ, whose manners they did so well like. By his only Son Mr. John More, he had five Grandchildren, Thomas and Augustin born in his Life time, who proved zealous Romanists; Edward, Thomas and Bartholo∣mew (born after his Death) were firm Protestants, and Thomas a married Minister of the Church of England. MARGARET MORE. Excuse me Reader, for placing a Lady among Men and Learned Statesmen. The Reason is, because of her  affection to her Father, from whom she would not willingly be parted (and for me shall not be) either living or dead. She was born in Bucklers-bury in London at her Fathers house therein, and attained to that Skill in all Learning and Languages, that she became the miracle of her age. For∣reigners took such notice hereof, that Erasmus hath dedicated some Epistles unto her. No Woman that could speak so well, did speak so little: Whose Secresie was such, that her Father entrusted her with his most important Affairs. Such was her skill in the Fathers, that she corrected a depraved place in St. Cyprian, for whereas it was corruptly writen she amended it Nisi vos sinceritatis. This is ac∣knowledged by J. Costerus, and Pamelion on that place. Nervos sinceritatis. Yea she translated Eusebius out of Greek, but it was never printed, because I. Christo∣pherson had done it so exactly before. She was married to William Roper of Eltham in Kent Esquire, one of a bountiful heart and plentiful Estate. When her Fathers head was set up on London Bridge, it being suspected it would be cast into the Thames, to make room for divers others (then suffering for denying the Kings Supremacy) she bought the head, and kept it for a Re∣lique
(which some called affection, others religion, others Superstition in her) for which she was questioned before the Council, and for some short time imprisoned, un∣til she had buryed it; and how long she her self survived afterwards, is to me un∣known. THOMAS WRIOTHESLEY Knight of the Garter, was born in The house of his Nativity is called Garter∣court. Barbican, Son to William Wriothesley York Herauld, and Grandchild to John VVriothesley (descended from an heir general of the ancient Family of the Dunsterviles) King of Arms. He was bred in the University of Cambridge; and if any make a doubt thereof, it is cleared by the pas∣sage of Mr. Ascams Letter unto him, writing in the behalf of the University when he was Lord Chancellour, Pag. 200. Quamobrem Academia cum omni literarum ratione, ad te unum conversa (Cui uni quam universis aliis se chariorem intelligit) partim tibi ut alum∣no suo, cum authoritate imperat: partim, ut patrono summo, demisse & humiliter supplicat, &c. He afterwards effectually applyed his Studies in our municipal Law, wherein he attain∣ed to great eminency. He was by King Henry the Eighth, created Baron of Titchborne at Hampton Court, January the first, 1543. and in the next year about the beginning of May by the said King made Chancelor of England. But in the first of King Edward the Sixth, he was removed from that place (because a conscienciously Rigorous Roma∣nist) though in some reparation he was advanced to be Earl of Southampton. He dyed at his House called Lincolns place in Holborn, 1550. the 30. of Iuly, and lyes buryed at St. Andrews in Holborn. WILLIAM PAGET Knight, was born Out of the Heraulds Visitation of Stafford-sh. in this City of honest Parents, who gave him pious and learned education, whereby he was enabled to work out his own advancement; Privy-Councellour to 4 successive princes, which, though of diffe∣rent perswasions, agreed all in this, to make much of an able and trusty Minister of State. 1. King Henry the Eighth made him his Secretary, and imployed him Embassador to Ch. the Emperor and Francis King of France. 2. King Edward the Sixth made him Chancellor of the Dutchy, Comptroller of his Houshold, and created him Baron of Beaudesert. 3. Queen Mary made him eeper of her privy Seal. 4. Queen Elizabeth dispenced with his attendance at Court, in favour to his great Age, and highly respected him. Indeed Duke Dudley in the dayes of King Edward ignominiously took from him the Garter of the Order; quarrelling, that by his extraction he was not qualified for the same. Bur if all be true which is reported of this Dukes See Edmund Dudley in our Discription of Stafford-sh. Parentage, he of all men was most unfit to be active in such an imployment. But no wonder if his Pride wrong∣fully snatched a Garter from a Subject, whose Ambition endevoured to deprive two Princes of a Crown. This was restored unto him by Queen Mary, and that with Ce∣remony and all solemn accents of honour, as to a md. Eliz. anno 1563. person, who by his prudence had me∣rited much of the Nation. He dyed very old, anno 1563, and his Corps (as I remem∣ber) are buryed in Lichfield, and not in the Vault under the Church of Drayton in Middlesex where the rest of that Family, I cannot say lye (as whose Coffins are ere∣cted) but are very compleatly reposed in a peculiar posture, which I meet not with elsewhere; the horrour of a Vault, being much abated with the Lightnesse and Sweet∣nesse thereof. THOMAS WENTVVORTH, was born (his Mother coming casually to London) in Chancery Lane in the Parish of St. Register of St. Dunstans. Dunstans in the West. Yet no reason Yorkshire should be deprived of the honour of him, whose Ancestors long flourished in great esteem at VVent-worth-VVoodhouse in that County. He was bred in St. Iohns Colledge in Cambridge, and afterwards became a Champion Patriot on all occasions. He might seem to have a casting voice in the House of Com∣mons; for where he was pleased to dispose his Yea or Nay, there went the affirmative or negative. It was not long before the Court gained him from the Country, and then Honours and Offices were heaped on him; created Baron and Viscount Wentworth, Earl of Strafford and Lord Deputy of Ireland.
When he went over into Ireland, all will confesse, he laid down to himself this noble foundation; vigorously to endevour the Reduction of the Irish to perfect obedience to the King, and profit to the Exchequer. But many do deny the Superstructure (which he built thereon) was done by legal line and Plummet. A Parliament was called in England, and many Crimes were by prime persons of England, Scotland and Ireland, charged upon him. He fenced skilfully for his Life, and his Grand-guard was this, that (though confessing some Misdemeanors) all proved against him amounted not to Treason. And indeed Number cannot create a new kind, so that many Trespasses cannot make a Riot, many Riots one Treason, no more then many Frogs can make one Toad. But here the Dstinction of Acumulative and Constructive▪ Treason was coyned, and caused his Destruction. Yet his Adversaries politickly brake off the Edge of the Axe, which cut off his head, by providing his Condemnation should not passe into Precedent to Posterity, so that his Death was remarkable but not exemplary. Happy had it been, if (as it made no Precedent on Earth so) no Remembrance thereof had been kept in Heaven. Some hours before his Suffering he fell fast asleep, alledged by his friends, as an Evidence of the Clearnesse of his Conscience, and hardly to be parallel'd, save in St. Acts 12. 6. Peter, in a dead sleep, the Night before he was to dye, condemned by Herod. His death happened, 1641. He hath an eternal Monument in the matchlesse Meditations of King Charles the First, and an everlasting Epitaph in that weighty Character * there given him, Med. 2. pag. 6. I looked upon my Lord of Strafford as a Gentleman, whose abilites might make a Prince rather afraid than ashamed, in the greatest Affairs of State, &c. God alone can revive the dead, all that Princes can perform, is to honour their Memory and Posterity, as our Gracious Soveraign King Charles hath made his worthy Son Knight of the Garter. LYONEL CRANFIELD Son to Randal Cranfield Citizen, and Martha his Wife, Daughter to the Lady Dennis of Gloucester-shire, (who by her will, which I have perused, bequeathed a fair estate unto her) was born in Bassing-hall street, and* Register of the Parish of St. Michael Bassinghall. bred a Merchant, much conversant in the Custome-House. He may be said to have been his own Tutor, and his own University: King Iames being highly affected with the clear, brief, strong, yea and profitable sense he spake, prefer∣red him Lord Treasurer 1621. Baron of Cranfield, and Earl of Middlesex. Under him it began to be young flood, in the Exchequer (wherein there was a very low Ebb when he entred on that Office (and he possessed his Treasurers place some four years, till he fell into the Duke of Bucks (the best of Friends, and worst of Foes) displeasure. Some say this Lord, who rose cheifly by the Duke (whose near Kinswoman he mar∣ried) endevoured to stand without, yea in some cases (for the Kings profit) against him, which Independency and opposition that Duke would not endure. Flaws may soon be found, and easily be made Breaches, in great Officers, who being active in many cannot be exact in all matters. However this Lord by losing his Office, saved himself, departing from his Trea∣surers place, which in that age was hard to keep: Insomuch, that one asking, what was good to preserve Life? was answered, Get to be Lord Treasurer of England, for they ne∣ver do dye in their place, which indeed was true for four Successions. Retiring to his magnificent House at Copt-hall, he there enjoyed himself conten∣tedly, entertained his friends bountifully, neighbours hospitably, poor charitably. He was a proper person, of comely presence, chearful, yet grave countenance, and surely a solid and wise man. And though their Soul be the fattest, who only suck the sweet Milk, they are the healthfullest, who (to use the Latine Phrase) have tasted of both the Breasts of fortune. He dyed as I collect anno 1644, and lyeth interred in a stately Monument in the Abby at Westminster.
Writers on the Law. FLETA or FLEET. We have spoken formerly of the Fleet as a Prison, but here it importeth a person disguised under that name, who, it seems being committed to the Fleet, therein wrote a Book of the Common Laws of England, and other Antiquities. There is some difference concerning the Time, when this Learned Book of Fleta was set forth, but it may be demonstrated done before the fourteenth of the Reign of King Edward the Third: for he saithLib▪ 1. cap. 30 that it is no Murder except it be proved that the Party slain was English and no Stranger, whereas this was altered in the fourteenth year of the saidSratutes 14. Edw. 3. cap. 4. King, when the killing of any (though a Forreigner living under the Kings protection) out of prepensed Malice, was made Murder. Cowels Interp. de verbo Fleta. He seemeth to have lived about the End of King Edward the Second, and be∣ginning of King Edward the Third. Seeing in that Juncture of Time, two Kings in effect were in being, the Father in right, the Son in might, a small contempt might cause a confinement to that place, and as Loyal ubjects be within it as without it. Sure it is, that (notwithstanding the confinement of the Author) his Book hath had a good passage, and is reputed Law to posterity. CHRISTOPHER St. GERMAN. Reader wipe thine eyes, and let mine smart, if thou readest not what richly deserves thine observation; seeing he was a person remarkable for his Gentility, Piety, Chastity, Charity, Ability, Industry and Vivacity. 1. Gentility; descended from a right ancient Family, born (as I have cause to be∣lieve) in London, and bred in the Inner Temple in the Study of our Laws. 2. Piety; he carried Saint in his nature (as well as in his Surname) constantly reading and expounding every night to his Family, a Chapter in the Bible. 3. Chastity; living and dying unmarried without the least spot on his Reputation. 4. Charity; giving consilia and auxilia to all hisBale de scrip. Brit. c. 8. n. 75. People gratis. Indeed I read of a Company of hysicians in Athens, called , because they would take no Money of their Patients, and our St. German, was of their Judgement as to his Clients. 5. Ability; being excellently skill'd in Civil, Caxon and Common Law; so that it was hard to say wherein he excelled. Add to these his skill in scripture, witnesse his Book called The Doctor and Student: where the former vics Divinity with the Lw of the later. 6. Industry; he wrote several works wherein he plainly appeareth not only a Favou∣rer of, but Champion for the Reformation. 7 Vivacity; Lving to be above eighty years old, and dying anno Dom. 1593. was buryed at St. Alphage London, near Criplegate. WILLIAM RASTAL, was born in this City (Sisters Son to Sir Thomas More) and was bred in the Study of our Common Law, and whoever readeth this pas∣sage in Pitz., will thence conclude him one of the two Chief Justices of England, Pitz. de Ang. Script. Aetat. 16. anno 1565. Factus est Civilium & Criminalium causarum alter ex duobus per Angliam supremis Judicibus; whereas in deed he was but one of the Justices of the Kings Bench: yet his Ability and Integrity, did capacitate him for higher preferment, being also a person of Indu∣stry. He wrote the Life and set forth the Works of his Uncle More, made a Collecti∣on of, and Comment on the statutes of England. Great was his Zeal to the Roish Religion▪ flying into Flanders, with the changing of his Countrey (under King Edward the Sixth) he changed the nature of his Studies, but then wrote worse Books on a better subject, I mean Divinity. He undertook Bi∣shop Juel, as much his over match in Divinity, as Rastal was his, in the common Law. The Papists are much pleased with him, for helping their cause (as they conceive) and we are not angry with him, who hath not hurt ours in any degree.
He dyed at Lovain 1565. and lyeth buryed with his Wife in the same Tomb, and this Epitaph may be bestowed on him. Rastallus tumulo cum conjuge dormit in uno, Unius carnis Pulvis & unus erit. Know that Winifrid Clement his Wife, was one of the greatest Female Scholars, an exact Grecian, and (the Crown of all) most pious according to her perswasion. Souldiers. No City in Europe hath bred more (if not too many of late) and indeed we had had better Tadesmen if worse Souldiets. I dare not adventure into so large a Subject, and will instance but in one (to keep possession for the rest) submitting my self to the Readers censure, whether the Parties merit, or my private Relation puts me on his Memorial. Sir THOMAS ROPER Son of Thomas Roper Servant to Queen Elizabeth, was born in Friday Street in London, whose Grandfather was a younger Son of the House of Heanour in Derby shire. Indeed Furneaux was the ancient name of that Fa∣mily, until Richard Furneaux marryed Isald the Daughter of..... Roper of Beighton in the County of Derby Esquire, and on that Consideration was bound to assume the name of Dugdale in his  of Warwick∣shire illust a∣ted, p. 212. Roper by Indenture, Dated the Sventh of Henry the Sixth. This Sir Thomas Going over into the Lowe Countries became Page to Sir John Norrice, and was Cap∣tain of a Foot Company at sixteen years of age: what afterwards his Martial perfor∣mances were, to avoid all suspicion of Flattery (to which my Relation may incline me) I have transcribed the rest out of the Original of his Patent. Cum Thomas Roper Eques auratus, è Secretioribus Concilliariis nostris in regno nostro Hyberniae, jampridem nobis Bellicae virtutis Splendore clarus innotuerit; Utpote qui quam plurimis rebus per eum in nuper∣rimo bello hujus Regni fortiter gestis, prae∣clarum Nomen & Strenui Militis, & pru∣dentis Ducis reportavit: Cujus virtus prae∣cipuè in recessu in Provinciâ nostrâ Conaciae prope Le Boyle emicuit, ubi paucissimis admodum equestribus ingentes equitum turmas per Regni Meditullia hostiliter grassantes fortiter aggressus: Ita prudentiâ suâ singulari receptui cecinit, ut non modo, & se, & suos, sed etiam totum exercitum ab ingenti periculo Liberavit, hostesque quam plurimos ruinae tradidit. Qui etiam, cum Provincia nostra Ultoniae bello deflagaverat, ob exploratam animi fortitudinm ab honoratissimo Comite Essexiae exercitus tunc imperatore, unius ex omnibus designatus fuit ad Duellum eum Makal, uno ex fortissimis Tyronen∣tium agminum ducibus suscipiendum, nisi praedictus Makal duello praedicto se expo∣nere remisset. Cumque etiam praedictus Thomas Ro∣per, in nuperrimo Bello apud Brest in Regno Gallie se maximis periculis objici∣endo & sanguinem suum effundendo Forti∣tudinem suam invictam demonstravit: Qui etiam in expeditione Portugalenci se for∣titer
ac honorifice  ac etiam apud Bergen in Belgio cum per Hispanos obsi∣deretur invictissimae fortitudinis juve∣nem in defensione ejusdem se praebuit. Qui etiam in expugnationis Kinsalen∣sis die primus  juxta  pro∣pissime constitutus fuerat, Hispanesque ex eo oppido sepius eodem die , fortissime felicissimeque, & ad maximam totius exercitus   & profligavit. Sciatis igitur quod nos intuitu praemis∣sorum Dominum Thomam Roper milli∣tem, &c. Whereas Thomas Roper Knight, one of our Privy Councellors of our King∣dome of Ireland, long since hath been known unto us famous, with the Splen∣dor of his Warlike vertue; As who by the many Atchievements valiantly per∣formed by him in the late War of this Kingdome, hath gained the eminent Repute both of a stout Souldier, and a disceet Commander; whose Valour chiefly appeared in his Retreat near Le Boyle in ur Province of Conaught, where with very few horse he undanted∣ly charged great Troops of the Horse of the Enemy, who in a Hostile manner forraged the very Bowels of the King∣dome, and by his Wisdome made such a singular retreat, that he not only saved himself and his men, but also delivered the whole Army from great danger, and slew very many of his Enemies. Who also when our Province of Ulster was all on Fire with war, being one out of many, was for the tryed resolution of his mind, chosen by the Right Honora∣ble the E. of Essex, then General of the Army, to undertake a Duel with Makal, one or the stoutest Captains in the Ar∣my of Tyrone, had not the said Makal declined to expose himself to the ap∣pointed Duel. And also when the aforesaid Thomas Raper, in the late war in the Kingdome of France at Brest, by exposing himself to the greatest perils, and sheding of his own bloud, demonstrated his cour∣age to be unconquerable. Who also i the voyage to Portugal, behaved him∣self valiantly and honorably; as also at Bergen in the Nether-lands, when it was besiedged by the Spaniards, approved himself a young man of  va∣lour in the defence thereof. Who also in the day wherin Kinsale was assaulted, was placed in the first ranck, nearest of all unto the Town, and with no less success then valour, to the great safety of the whole army beat back and put to flight the Spaniards, who in the same day made several sallies out of the Tow. Know therefore, that We in  of the premises have appointed the aforesaid Thomas Roper Knight, &c. Then followeth his Patent, wherein King Charles in the third of his raign created him Baron of Bauntree, and Viscount  in Ireland. I will only adde from exact intelligence, that he was a principal means to break the hearts of Irish Rebels; for whereas formerly the English were loaded with their own cloths, so that their slipping into Bogs did make them, and the slopping of their breeches did keep them prisoners therein; he first being then a Commander put himself into Irish Trouzes, and was imitated first by all his Officers, then Souldiers, so that thus habited they made the more effectual execution on their enemies. He died at  Rest, Anno Dom. 164.. and was buried with Anne his wife (daughter to Sir Henry ,) in Saint Johns Church in Dublin. Seamen. I behold these Sea men as the Sea it elf, and suspect, if I launch far therein, I sall see land no more: Besides, I know there be many laws made against Forestalers, and would be loth to fall under that penalty; for preventing the pains of some able per∣son a  of the Trinity-, who may write a just tract thereof. Civilians. Sir HENRY MARTIN Knight, was born in this City, where his Father left him forty pounds a year, and he used merrily to say, that if his Father had left him , he would never have been a Scholar, but lived on his Lands; whereas this being (though a large encouragement, but) a scant maintenance, he plyed his book for a better lively∣hood. He was bred a Fellow in New colledge in Oxford, and by the advice of Bishop Andrews addressed himself to the Study of the Civil Law. By the advice of the said Bishop, Master Martin had weekly transmitted unto him from some Proctors at Lambeth, the Brief heads of the most Important causes which were to be tried in the high Commission, Then with some of his familiar friends in that faculty they privately pleaded those Causes amongst themselves, acting in their Chamber what was done in the Court. But Mr. Martin, making it his work, exceeded the rest in amplifying and agravating any fault moving of anger and indignation against the guilt thereof, or else in extenuating and excusing it, procure pitty, obtain pardon, or at least prevail for a lighter punishment. Some years he spent in this personated pleading, to enable himself against he was really called to that Profession. Hence it was that afterwards he became so eminent an Advocate in the high Commis∣sion, that no cause could come amiss to him. For he was not to make new armour, but only to put it on and buckle it, not to invent but apply arguments to his Cliant. He was at last Knighted and made Judge of the Prerogative for Probate of Wills, and also of the Admiraltry in causes concerning forraign traffick; so that as King James said plea∣santly;
He was a mighty Monarch in his Jurisdiction over Land and Sea, the Living and dead. He died very aged and wealthy, Anno Dom. 1642. Physicians. RICHARDUS ANGLICUS was certainly a man of Merit, being eminent∣lyREM. so denominated by Foraigners, (amongst whom he conversed) from his Country, and he who had our Nation for his Name, cannot have less then London for his Lodg∣ing in this our Catalogue of Worthies. He is said to have studied first in Oxford, then in Paris, where he so profited in the faculty of Physick, that he is counted by Sim∣phorianusIn tractatu q uinto de ejus Artis Scriptori∣bus. Champerius (a stranger to our Nation, and therefore free from Flattery,) one of the most eminent Writers in that Profession. Now, because he was the first English man, whom I find famous in that Calling, may the Reader be pleased with a Receipt of the several names of the Books, left by him to posterity. 1. Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. Num. 92. & Pits. in Anno 1230. A Tractate of . 2. Of the Rues of Urins. 3. Of the Signs of Diseases. 4. Of Prognostick Signs. 5. Of Letting Bloud. 6. Of Anatomy according to alen. 7. Of Feavors. 8. A Correction of Alchymy. 9. A Mirour of Alchymy. 10. Of Physick. 11. Repressive. 12. Of the Signs of Feavors. Leland reporteth, that besides these, he writ other works, which the Envy of time hath denied unto us. He flourished about the year of our Lord 1230. JOHN  was born in this City,  de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 38. bred Fellow of Baliol-colledge in Ox∣ford, where he contracted familiarity with his Colleague and Mecaenas, I. Tiptoft Earl of Worcester. He afterwards travelled into Italy, and at Ferrara was a constant audi∣tor of Gwarinus an old man, and famous Philosopher. Hitherto our Phreas made use only of his ears, hereafter of his tongue, when of Hearer he turned a Teacher; and see the stairs whereby he ascended. 1. He read Physick at Ferrara, concerning Medicinal herbs. 2. Then at Florence, well esteemed by the Duke thereof. 3. Then at Padua, (beneath Florence in beauty, above it in learning,) an Univer∣sity where he proceeded Doctor of Physick. 4. Then at Rome, where he was gratious with Pope Paul the second, dedicating unto him many books translated out of Greek. The Pope rewarded him with the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells, dying before his consecration, Idem ibidem. poisoned (as is vehemently suspected) by some, who maligned his merit; Heu mihi quod nullis livor medicabilis herbis! Solomon himself, who wrot of all Simples, from the 1 King. 4. 33. Cedar in Lebanus, to the Hysop on the Wall, could find no defensative against it; which made him cry out Prov. 22. 4. But who can stand before envy? No wonder therefore, if our Phreas (though a skilful Botanist) found mens malice mortal unto him. He died at Rome Anno Domini 1465. and Le∣lands commendation of him may serve for his Epitaph, if but, Hic jacet Johannes Phreas be prefixed before it; qui primus Anglorum erat, qui propulsâ barbarie, pa∣triam honesto labore bonis literis restituit. ANDREW BORDE Doctor of Physick, was (I conceive) bred in Oxford, because I find his book called the Breviary of Health examined by that University. He was Physician to King Henry the eighth, and was esteemed a great Scholar in that age. I am confident his book was the first written of that faculty in English, and dedicated to the Colledge of Physicians in London. Take a tast out of the beginning of his Dedi∣catory Epistle, Egregious Doctors and Masters of the Eximious and Arcane Science of Physick, of your Urbanity exasperate not your selves against me for making this little volume of Physick, &c.
Indeed his book contains plain matter under hard words, and was accounted such a Jewel in that age, (things whilst the first are esteemed the best in all kinds,) that it was Printed, Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum, for William Midleton, Anno 1548. He died as I collect in the raign of Queen Mary. Writers. Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 8. NOTELMUS of LONDON. Having casually let slip his forelock, I mean his Episcopal Capacity, (being successively Bishop of London, and Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury,) under which he ought to be entred, we are fain to lay hold on his hind-part, (that his memory may not escape us) taking notice of him as a Writer. In his Age shined a Constellation of three learned men, Bede, Alcuinus, and our Nothelme, whom the two former by their letters invited to writ (a performance proper for his Pen) the gests of Gregory the Great, and the Disciples sent by him with Austin the Monk, for the Conversion of Britain. Nothelme the more effectually to enable himself for this work, went to Rome, obtained leave from Pope Gregory the second, to peruse his Records; then sent his compleated collections to Bede, to be inserted in his Church history. Bede in gratitude, (according to the courteous custome of the learned exchange,) dedicated to him his thirty questions on the Books of Kings. His death happened Anno Domini 739. WILLIAM FITZ-STEPHENS was descended saith Leland of Norman Nobility, but born in this City, and bred a Monk in Canterbury. He wrote many learned works, and one in Latine of the description of London, since commendably (because rare to come by) translated and added to the Survey of London. Say not that London then, was but the Suburbs to the London now, for the bigness and populousness thereof; seeing in Fitz Stephens time, it accounted thirteen Conventual and an hundred and six and thirty Parochial Churches, not producing so many at this day▪ so that it seems though there be more Bodies of Men, there be fewer Houses of God therein. As for the populousness thereof in his time, it was able to set forth sixty thousand Foot, which I believe it may treble in our time. It could also then raise twenty thou∣sand Horsemen, which would pose it at this day to perform. But as railing Rabshekah made Jerusalem weaker, [not able to set two thousand Riders on horses] so possibly Fitz-Stephens might make London stronger then it was. I hope one may safely wish this City may be better in holiness, as bigger in houses, then it was when Fitz-Stephens flourished 1190. ALBRICIUS of LONDON. Leland maketh him a Native of this City, and signally learned, though little is extant of his writings, save a work of the Original of Heathen Gods. Herein he sheweth how mankind having by error and ignorance, left and lost the true God, multiplyed Deities, that a Mock-infinite (viz. what was but Indefinite in number) should supply his place, who was Infinite in Nature. Albricius flourished Anno Domini 1217. WILLIAM SENGHAM born of mean, but honest Parents, being one of aREM. meek nature, and quick wit, was brought up in learning, wherein he attained to great perfection. He wrote many books and one de fide & Legibus, wherein De script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 17. Bale highly praiseth this passage, There is no other law for the Salvation of men, besides the Gospel of Christ our Lord. Now although this be but a plain expression of the common truth, yet was it be∣held as an Oracle in that ignorant age. Thus a beam of noon-day might it be seen at mid-night, would shine as the Sun it self; besides, these words were uttered in that age, when impudent Friers began to obtrud on the world a fift forged Gospel, (consisting of superstitious ceremonies and) called Aeternum Evangelium, which did much mis∣chief in the Church amongst credulous men. This William is supposed by some an Augustinian Frier, who flourished Anno Dom. 1260. LAURENTIUS ANGLICUS was certainly an English-man, and probablyREM. a Londoner, but brought up and living most of his time in Paris, where he was Master
of the Colledge, which had an Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 30. English-man for the sign thereof. Hence I collect it for building little better then our ordinary Inns for entertainment, where probably our Country men had their lodgings for nothing. This Laurence, being a learned and pious person, stoutly opposed that mock Gospel commonly called See more hereof in the life of John Driton in Sus∣sex. Evangelium Aeternum, with the Mendicant Friars the Champions thereof. He wrote a smart book contra Pseudo-Praedicatores; but afterwards being frightned with the Popes thunder∣boults, and the Friars threatnings, he cowardly recanted. But what saith Pro. 24. 16. Solomon A just man falleth seven times, [the Vulgar Latine addeth in die, in one day,] and riseth again, as we hope this Laurence did, who flourished Anno Dom. 1260. Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 12. NICHOLAS LYRA was (as Barnabas a Jew-Cypriot, and Saul a Jew-Gili∣cian a Jew-English man, the first by Nation, the second by Nativity. He had the Rbbins at his Fingers ends, but conversed so long with, that at last he was converted by some Franciscans to be a Christian; and I behold Nicholas [Conquerour of his People] as his Font-name then given him, as predictory of those Victories he afterwards got, by his disputings and writings, over his own Country-men. Nor doth the Church of God more complain of Nicholas, that Proselite of Antioch, (the last of the seven Deacons, and first founder of the Nicholaitans whom God hated,) then it doth com∣mend our Nicholas, who vigorously confuted the Jews; who expect the rising of the Sun in the afternoon, waiting for Messias still to come. I read, how some fifty years before, Henry the third, founded a house called Domus Conversorum, (where now the Office of the Rolls is kept in Chancery-lane,) where Converted Jews were accommodated with Lodging, and a small Salary. But I believe Lyra made no use thereof, contenting himself to live first in Oxford, then in Paris a Franciscan Fryar, and wrote Comments on all the Old and New-Testament, whereof so different the Editions, that I am certainly informed, one is so bad, one can hardly give too little; and one so good, one can hardly give too much for it. Though sometimes he may be wide of the Mark, and this Harp be out of Tune, yet uncharitable their censure of Lyra Delirat, whilst In his Com∣ment on the 2. and again on the 9. chap. of Gen. Luther highly praiseth him▪ because his wanton wit did not gad after empty Allegories, but with the good house-keeper stays at home, keeping himself close to the Text in his literal interpretations. Now though there were many Jewish Synagogues in England, (at York, Cambridge, Northampton, &c.) yet the Old Jury in London, equalling all the rest in numerousness, Lyra his birth is here assigned with best assurance, though dying in Paris about the year 1340. BANKINUS of LONDON, not Bancks of London, (who taught his Horse rea∣son to perform feats above belief,) but one of hgher Parts, and worse employed. Being an Augustinian Friar he set himself wholly to suppress the poor Wicklevicks, and being ready to dispute against them in a publique Council, was taken off in his full speed with the following accident, worthy of the Readers observation; Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 6. Num. 97. Sed terrae▪motus justissima summi Dei vindicta, subito exortus, diruptis Passim domorum edificitis, immanes eorum impe∣tus fregit, ac vires infirmavit. But an Earthquake by the just revenge of the most high God, suddenly arising, by breaking asunder the buildings of the houses, brake their cruel assaults, and weakned their forces. This if literally true, deserved a down-right (and not only so slenting a) mention. But hitherto meeting it in no other Author; I begin to suspect it ment Metaphorically of some consternation of mind, wherewith God's restraining grace charmed the ad∣versaries of the truth. Bankinus flourished under King Richard the second, Anno 1382. ROBERT IVORY was, saith Leland, none of the meanest Natives of this City, a Carmelite and President General of his Order, D. D. in Cambridge. He wrote several Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 6. Num. 96. books, and Prece & Precio, procured many more, wherewith he adorned the Library of White-Fryars in Fleet-street. He dyed November the fifth, 1392. JULIANA BARNES was born ex antiquâ & illustri domo. Understand it notREM. in the sense wherein the same was said of a certain Pope, born in a ruinous Cottage, where the Sun did shine through the Rotten Walls and Roof thereof. But indeed she
was descended of a respective Family, though I, not able to find the place, am fain to use my Marginal Mark of greatest uncertainty. She was the Diana of her Age for Hunting and Hawking, skilful also in Fishing, and wrote threeBale Cent. 8. Num 33. books of these Exercises, commending the practise thereof to the Gentry of England. The City of Leyden is scited in the very bottom of the Low-Countries, so that the water setled their, would be soon subject to putrefaction, were it not by Engins forced up that it might fall, and so by constant motion kept from corruption. Idleness will be∣tray Noble mens minds to the same mischief, if some ingenious industry be not used for their imployment. Our Julian also wrot a book of Heraldry. Say not the needle is the most proper pen for the woman, and that she ought to meddle with making no Coats, save such as Dorcas made for the widows, seeing their Sex may be not only pardoned, but praised for such lawful diversions. No Gentleman will severely censure the faults in her , but rather imitateDe arte  liber Hype∣Criticus, capite sexto. Julius Scaliger who passing his verdict on all Poets, and coming to do the like on Sulpitia a Roman Poetress (living under Domitian) thus courteously concludeth, Ut tam  Heroinae ratio habeatur, non ausim objicere ei judicii severi∣tatem. She flourished Anno Domini 1460. under King Henry the sixth. ROBERT FABIAN was born and bred in thisBale Cent. 8. Num. 62. & J. . Anno 1512. City, whereof he became Sheriff 1493. Treating his Guests with good chear and wellcome, he doubled his dishes with pleasant discourse, being an excellent Historian, witness two Chronicles of his own writing. 1. From Brutus to the death of King Henry the second. 2. From the first of K. Richard, to the death of K. Henry the seventh. He was also an excellent Poet, both in Latine, French and English. A ModernSir John Suckling. Master wit, in the contest betwixt the Poets of our age, for the Laurel maketh Apollo to adjudge it to an Alderman of London, because to have most wealth was a sign of most wit. But had the Scene of this competition been laid seven score years since, and the same remitted to the umpirage of Apollo, in sober sadness he would have given the Laurel to this our Alderman. As for his Histories, if the whole strain of them doth , it must be indulged to him that followed the genius of his own education. He died at London 1512. and was buried in the Church of All-hallows, where he hath aExemplified in Stow's Surv. pag. 214. tedious and barbarous Epi∣taph, as commonly (Reader, I should be glad to have my observation confuted,) who hath worse Poetry then Poets on their Monuments? After his death, Cardinal Wolsey caused* Bale ut prius. so many Copies of his Book as he could come by to be burnt, because therein he had opened the Coffers of the Church too wide, and made too clear discovery of the Reve∣nues of the Clergy. THOMAS LUPSET was born in thisBal & Pits. City, and was related to most English and some forraign learned eminencies of his age. 1. Bred a child in the house of Dean olet. 2. Under W. Lilly in St. Pauls School. 3. Sent to Oxford, where he became Greek Professor. 4 Resigns his place to his friend Ludo∣vicus Vives. 5. Travailed into Italy, and at Padua was familiar with C. Pole. 6. Was known unto Erasmus, who giveth him this Chara∣cter; Hujus ingenio nihil gra∣tius, nihil amantius. 7. Intended Divinity, diverted by Cardinal Woolsy. 8. At Paris was Tutor to Th. Winter, a ward to the Car∣dinal. 9. Returning into England, was known to King Henry the eight. 10. Began to grow into his favour, when cut off with a Consumption 1532. in the prime of his life. He died in London, and lieth buried in the Church of Saint Alphage nigh Cripple∣gate, without a monument.
Since the Reformation. JOHN RASTALL was aBale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 74. Citizen and Printer of London, by marriage a kin to Sir Thomas More, and when the said Sir Thomas and Bishop Fisher wrote in defence of Purgatory, to prove it by Scripture, Rastall undertook to maintain it by reason. Surely, he that buy's the two former books, deserveth to have this last given him to make him a saver. Some will say, the former two indeavoured to prove the fire, and Rastall the smoak of Purgatory. But to pass by his works in Divinity, he  a good Mathematician, and made a Comedy of Europe, Asia and Africa, which, myBase ut prius. Author saith, was very witty, and very large; and I can believe the later, seeing he had three parts of the world for his subject; and how long would it have been had America been added. He wrote a book against John Frith, but afterwerds (convinced with his adversaries arguements) recanted it of his own accord; the cause why we have placed him since the Reformation. He wrote a book of the terms of Law, and made an Index to Justice Fitz Herbert; yea, I behold this John as father to Rastall the famous Lawyer, of whomIn this City, Tile, Writers on the Law. before. He died and was buried at London 1536. EDWARD HALL. We may trace him from his cradle to his coffin, as follow∣eth. 1. He was a Citizen of Londn by hisStow his Sur∣vay pag. 92. birth. 2. He was bred a Scholar at Eaton. 3. Thence he removed and was one of theHachers M. S. of K. Col. Foundation of Kings-colledge. 4. Thence he went to Grays-Inn, and studied the Municipal-law. 5. He became common Serjeant of London, for the well discharging whereof he, 6 Was advanced to be one of the Judges in the Sheriffs Court. 7. Wrote an elegant history of the wars of York and Lancaster, from K. Henry the fourth, till the end of King Henry theBale de script. Brit. Cent. 9. eight. 8. Died a very aged man 1547. He was as by some passages in his book may appear, in that age well affected to the Reformation. He lieth buried in the Church of Saint Sithes (contracted I think for* Stows Sur∣vay p. 276. Saint Osiths) where I cannot recover any Epitaph upon him. WILLIAM FULKE D. D. was born in thisParker in his Scheliton Cant. City, bred first Fellow of Saint John's, then Master of Pembroke hall in Cambridge. His studies were suitable to his years, when young, a good Philosopher, witness his book of Meteors; after∣wards his endeavours ascended from the middle region of the aire, to the highest hea∣vens, when he bcame a pious and solid Divine. Now the Romanists, seeing they could no longer blind-fold their Laitie from the Scriptures, resolved to fit them with false spectacles, and set forth the Rhemish Trans∣lation; which by Doctor Fulke was learnedly confuted, though he never attained any great preferent in the Church. Here it is worth our pains to peruse the immediate succession of Masters in Pem∣broke-hall, because unparallel'd in any English Foundation. Edm. Grindall, Archp. of Cant. Mat. Hutton, Archp. of York. Jo. Whitgift, Archp. of Cant. Jo. Young, . of Rochester. William Fulke, D. D. Lanc. Andrews, Bp. of Winchester. Sam. Harsnet, Archp. of York. Nic. Felton, Bp. of Eely. Here, though all the rest were Episcopated, Doctor Fulke was but Doctor Fulke still, though a man of great merit. This proceeded not from any disaffection in him to the Hierarchie (as some would fain suggest) but principally from his love of privacy, and place of Margaret-Professour, wherein he died Anno Dom. 1589. EDMOND SPENCER born in thisCamb. Eliz. in Anno 1598. City, was brought up in Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, where he became an excellent Scholar, but especially most haypy in English Poetry, as his works do declare. In which the many Chaucerisms used (for I will not say affected by him) are thought by the ignorant to be blemishes, known by the learned to be beauties to his book; which notwithstanding had been more salable, if more conformed to our modern language.
There passeth a story commonly told and believed, that Spencer presenting his Poems to Queen Elizabeth: She highly affected therewith, commanded the Lord Cecil Her Treasurer, to give him an hundred pound; and when the Treasurer (a good Steward of the Queens money) alledged that sum was too much, then give him (quoth the Queen) what is reason; to which the Lord consented, but was so busied, belke, about matters of higher concernment, that Spencer received no reward; Where∣upon he presented this petition in a small piece of paper to the Queen in her Progress, I was promis'd on a time, To have reason for my rhyme; From that time unto this season, I receiv'd nor rhyme nor reason. Hereupon the Queen gave strict order (not without some check to her Treasurer) for the present payment of the hundred pounds, she first intended unto him. He afterwards went over into Ireland, Secretary to the Lord Gray, Lord Deputy thereof; and though that his office under his Lord was lucrative, yet got he no estate, but saith myCamd. Elz. in Anno 1598. Author, Pculiari Poetis fato semper cum paupertate conflictatus est. So that it fared little better with him, then with William Xilander the German, (a most ex∣cellent Linguist, Antiquary, Philosopher and Mathematician,) who was so poor, that (as Obi Virourm doct. An. 1576. Thuanus saith) he was thought, fami non famae scribere. Returning into England, he was robb'd by the Rebels of that little he had, and dying for grief in great want, Anno 1598. was honorably buried nigh Chaucer in West∣minster, where this Distick concludeth his Epitaph on hs monument, Anglica te vivo vixit plausitque poesis, Nunc moritura timet te moriente mori. Whilst hiu didst live, liv'd English poetry, Which fears, now thou art dead, that she shall die. Nor must we forget, that the expence of his funeral and monument, was defrayed at the sole charge of Robert, first of that name, Earl of Essex. JOHN STOW son of Thomas Stow, who died Anno 1559. grand-child to Thomas Stow, who died 1526. (both Citizens of London, and buried in Saint Michaels in Corn∣hill) was born in this City, bred at learning no higher then a good Gramar-scholar, yet he became a painful, faithful, and (the result of both) useful Historian. Here, to prevent mistake by the homonymie of names, I request the Reader to take special notice of three brace of English writers, 1. Sir Thomas (common∣ly with the addition of De la) More, who lived under, and wrote the life of King Edward the second. 1. John Leland, bred in Oxford, the most exqui∣site Grammarian of his age, who flourished Anno 1428. 1. John Stow, a Benedi∣ctine Monke of Norwich, Anno 1440. who wrote various Collections, much cited by Caius in his hi∣story of Cambridge. 2. Sir Thomas More, the witty and learned Chan∣cellour of England. 2. John Leland, bred in Cambridge, the most, e∣minent Antiquary under K. Henry the eight. 2. John Stow, this Londi∣ner, and Historian. I confess, I have heard him often accused, that (as learned Guicciardine is charged for telling magnarum rerum minutias) he reporteth res in se minutas, toys and trifles, being such a Smell-feast, that he cannot pass by Guild-hall, but his pen must tast of the good chear therein. However this must be indulged to his education; so hard it is for a Citizen to write an History, but that the fur of his gown will be felt therein. Sure I am, our most elegant Historians who have wrote since his time (Sir Francis Ba∣con, Master Camden, &c.) though throwing away the basket, have taken the fruit, though not mentioning his name, making use of his endeavors. Let me adde of John Stow, that (however he kept tune) he kept time very well, no Author being more ac∣curate in the notation thereof. Besides his Chronicle of England, he hath a large Survey of London, and I believe
no City in Christendome, Rome alone excepted, hath so great a volume extant there∣of. Plato was used to say, that many good laws were made, but still one was want∣ing, viz. a law to put all those good laws in execution. Thus the Citizens of London have erected many fair monuments to perpetuate their memories, but still there wanted a monument to continue the memory of their monuments (subject by time, and otherwise to be defaced) which at last by John Stow was industriously per∣formed. He died in the eightieth year of his age April 5. 1605. and is buried at the upper end of the North-Isle of the Quire In his own Survey of Lon∣don (continued after his death) pag. 152. of Saint Andrews-Undershaft. His Chronicle since continued by another, whose additions are the lively embleme of the times he writeth of, as far short of Master Stow in goodness, as our age is of the integrity and charity of those which went before it. GILES FLETCHER was born in this So was I in∣formed by Mr. Jo. Rainsey who married his Relict. City, son to Giles Fletcher Dr. in law, and Embassadour into Russia, of whom formerly in Kent. From Westminster-school he was chosen first Scholar, then Fellow of Trinity colledge in Cambridge. One equally be∣loved of the Muses and the Graces, having a sanctified wit, witness his worthy Poem intituled Christs Victory, made by him being but Bachelour of Arts, discovering the Piety of a Saint, and Divinity of a Doctor. He afterward applied himself to School∣Divinity, (cross to the grain of his Genius, as some conceive) and attained to good skill therein. When he preached at Saint Maries, his prayer before his Sermon usu∣ally consisted of one entire Allegory, not driven, but led on, most proper in all par∣ticulars. He was at last (by exchange of his living) setled in Suffolk, which hath the best and worst aire in England, best about Bury, and worst on the Sea-side, where Master Fleticher was beneficed. His clownish and low parted Parishoners, (having no∣thing but their shoos high about them,) valued not their Pastour according to his worth, which disposed him to melancholy, and hastened his dissolution. I behold the life of this learned Poet, like those half-verses in Virgils Aeneids, broken off in the middle, seeing he might have doubled his days according to the ordinary course of nature; whose death happened about the year 162. He had another brother Phineas Fletcher Fellow of Kings-colledge in Cambridge, and beneficed also in Norfolk, a most excellent Poet, witness his Purple Island, and several other pieces of great inge∣nuity. JOHN DONNE was born in this City of wealthy parentage, extracted out of Wales, one of an excellent wit, large travail, and choice experience. After many vicissitudes in his youth, his reduced age was honoured with the Doctorship of Divini∣ty, and Denary of Saint Pauls. Should I endeavour to deliver his exact character, (who willingly would not doe any wrong) should do a fourfold injury. 1. To his worthy memory, whose merit my pen is unable to express. 2. To my self, in undertaking what I am not sufficient to perform. 3. To the Reader, first in raising, then in frustrating his expectation. 4. To my deservedly honored friend Master Isaac Walton, by whom his life is so learnedly written. It is enough for me to observe he died March 31. Anno Dom. 1631. and lieth buried in Saint Pauls under an ingenious and choice monument, neither so costly as to occasion envy, nor so common as to cause contempt. Romish Exile Writers. JOHN HEIWOOD was born in Piz de Ang. Script. Anno 1556. London, and was most familiar with Sir Thomas More, whom he much resembled in quickness of parts, both undervaluing their friend to their jest, and having Ingenium non edentulum, sed mordax. I may safe∣ly write of him, what he pleasantly In his 5 hun. of Epig. num. 100. writes of himself, that he applied mirth more then thrift, many mad plays, and did few good works. He hath printed many English pro∣verbial Epigrams, and his Monumenta Literaria are said to be non tam labore condita, quàm lepore condita. He was highly in favour with Queen Mary, and after her
death, fled for Religion beyond the seas. It is much, that one so Fancyful should be so conscientious. He lived, and (for ought I find) died at Mechlin about the year 1566. Gasper Heiwood his son, was a great Jesuit, and executed here in Q. Elizabeths raign. MAURICE CHAMNEE most probably born in this City, was bred a Friar in Charter-house, now called Suttons Hospital. He was imprisoned for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, with 18. of his Order, all which lost their lives for their obsti∣nacy, whilst our Maurice (like Jobs messenger) only escaped alone to tell of his fellows misfortune, and write the history of the execution. Some of Chamnee's party, report to his praise, that Pitz. in Anno 1581. Martyrdome was only wanting to him, and not he to Martyrdome. Others more truly tax him, for warping to the Will of King Henry the eighth, not so much to decline his own death, as to preserve his Covent from destruction, who sped in the first, and failed in the latter. However fearing some afterclaps, he fled beyond the Seas, passing the rest of his life in the Low-Countries, dying Anno Dom. 1581. EDMUND CAMPIAN was born in this Pitz. de script. Ang. in Anno 1581. City, and bred Fellow in Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford, where he became Proctor Anno 1568. when Queen Eli∣zabeth visited that University, being made Deacon by the Protestant Church; he afterwards renounced that Order, and fled beyond the Seas. A man of excellent parts, though he who rod post to tell him so, might come too late to bring him tidings thereof, being such a valuer of himself, that he swelled every drop of his ability into a bubble by his vain ostentation. And indeed few who were reputed Scholars, had more of Latine, or less of Greek, then he had. He was sent over with Father Parsons into England, to reduce it to the Church of Rome; to this purpose he set forth his Ten Reasons so purely for Latine, so plainly and pithily penned, that they were very taking, and fetch'd over many (Neuters before) to his perswasion. It was not long before he was caught by the Setters of the Secretary Walsingham, and brought to the Tower, where one of his own Religion saith that he was Idem ibidem. exqui∣sitissimis cruciatibus tortus, rack'd with most exquisite torments. Yet the In the Princes report of the first days con∣ference fol. 1. Lieutenant of the Tower truly told him, that he had rather seen then felt the rack, being so favourably used therein, that being taken off, he did presently go to his lodging without help, and used his hands in writing. Besides, (as Campian con∣fess'd) he was not examined upon any point of Religion, but only upon matters of State. Some days after he was ingaged in four solemn disputations, to make good that bold challenge he had made against all Protestants. Place. Auditors. Time. Opposers. Questions. Campians answer. The Chappel in the Tower. The Lieute∣nant of the Tower, Mr. Bele, Clerk of the Coun∣sel withmany Protestants and Papists. 1581 August 31 Alexander Nowell Dean of Pauls. 1. Whether the Protestants had cut off many goodly and principal parts of Scripture from the body thereof? Affirmative     Septem. 18 William Day Dean of Windsor. 2. Whether the Catholick Church be not properly invisible? Negative     23 William Fulk D. D. 3. Whether Christ be in the Sacrament Substantially, very God and Man in his Natural Body? Affirmative     27 Roger Goad D. D. 4. Whether after the Consecration the Bred & Wine are Transubstantiated? Negative       William Fulk D. D. 5. Whether the Scriptures contain suf∣ficient Doctrine for our Salvation?         Roger Goad D. D. 6. Whether Faith only justifyeth?         John Walker           William Clarke    
An Camb. in his Eliz. An. 1580. Authentick Author giveth this unpartial account of Campian in his Disputati∣on, ad disputandum productus expectationem concitatam aegre sustinuit, and in plain truth, no man did ever boast more when he put on his Armour, or had cause to boast less when he put it off. Within few days, the Queen was necessitated for her own security to make him the subject of severity, by whose laws he was executed in the following December. Benefactors to the Publike. THOMAS POPE Knight, was born in this City, as my worthy friend Doctor Seth Ward the Head, and others of the Society of Trinity colledge in Oxford have inform∣ed me. I behold him as fortunae suae fabrum, the Smith (who by Gods blessing) hammered out his own fortune without any Patrimonial advantage. Indeed he lived in an Age which one may call the harvest of wealth, wherein any that would work might get good wages at the dissolution of Abbyes. Herein he was much employed, being under the Lord Cromwell, an instrument of the second magnitude, and lost nothing by his activity therein; however by all the Printed books of that age he appeareth one of a candid carriage, and in this respect stands sole and single by himself. That of the Abby Lands which he received, he refounded a considerable proportion for the building and endowing of Trinity∣colledge in Oxford. He died as I collect about the beginning of the raign of Queen Elizabeth. There are in Oxford shire many descendants from him continuing in a worshipful Estate, on the same token, that King James came in Progress to the house of Sir  Pope Knight, when his Lady was lately delivered of a daughter, which Babe was presented to King James with this Paper of Verses in her hand, which because they pleased the King I hope they will not displease the Reader; See this little Mistress here, Did never sit in Peters chair; Or a triple Crown did wear, And yet she is a Pope. No Benefice she ever sold, Nor did dispence with sins for Gold, She hardly is a Sevenight Old, And yet she is a Pope. No King her feet did ever kiss, Or had from her worse look then this; Nor did she ever hope, To saint one with a Rope. And yet she is a Pope. A female Pope you'l say, A second Joan, No sure she is Pope Innocent or none. I behold the Earl of Down in Ireland (but living in Oxford shire) the chief of the Family. THOMAS CURSON born in Alhallows Lumbard street, Armorour, dwelt without Bishop-gate. It happened that a Stage-player borrowed a rusty Musket, which had lien long Leger in his Shop: now though his part was Comical he therewith acted an unexpected Tragedy, killing one of the standers by, the Gun casually going off on the Stage, which he suspected not to be Charged. O the difference of divers mens in the tenderness of there Consciences! some are scarse touch'd with a wound, whilst others are wounded with a touch therein. This poor Armourer was highly afflicted therewith, though done against his will, yea without his knowledge, in his absence, by another, out of meer chance. Hereupon he resol∣ved to give all his Estate to pious uses, no sooner had he gotten a round sum, but presently he posted with it in his Apron to the Court of Aldermen, and was in pain till by their direction he had setled it for the relief of poor in his own and otherJohn Cheston George Carter Parishes, and disposed of some hundreds of pounds accordingly, as I am credibly in∣formed by the then Church-wardens of the said Parish. Thus as he conceived himself casually (though at great distance) to have occasioned the death of one, he was the immediate and direct cause of giving a comfortable living to many, he dyed Anno Domini 16. EDWARD ALLIN was born in the aforesaid Parish near Devonshire-house, where now is the sign of the Pie. He was bred a Stage-player, a Calling which many have condemned, more have questioned, some few have excused, and far fewer conscienci∣ous
people have commended. He was the Roscius of our age, so acting to the life, that he made any part (especially a Majestck one) to become him. He got a very great Estate, and in his old age following Christs Councel, (on what forcible motive belongs not to me to enquire) He made friends of his unrighteous Mammon. Building therewith a fair Colledge at Dulwich in Kent, for the relief of poor people. Some I confess count it built on a foundred foundation, seeing in a spiritual sense none is good and lawfull money save what is honestly and industrously gotten; but perchance such who condemn Master Allin herein, have as bad Shillings in the bot∣tome of their own bags if search were made therein; sure I am, no Hospital is tyed with better or stricter laws, that it may not Sagg from the intention of the Foun∣der. The poor of his native Parish Saint Buttolph ishopgate have a priviledge to be pro∣vided for therein before others. Thus he who out-acted others in his life, out did him∣felf before his death, which happened Anno Domini 16. WILLIAM PLAT was born in this City (as his Heir hath informed me) son to Sir Hugh Plat, grand-son to Richard Plat Alderman of London. He was a Fellow∣Commoer bed in Saint Johns colledge in Cambridge, and by his Will bequeathed thereunto Lands to maintain Fellows and Scholars, (Fellows at thirty, Schollars at ten pounds per annum) so many as the Estate would extend unto. But this general and doubtful settlement was liable to long and great suits betwixt the Colledge and the Heirs of the said William, until Anno 1656. the same were hap∣pily compoled betwixt the Colledge and John Plat Clerk, (Heir to the foresaid Wil∣liam) when a settlement was made by mutual consent of four Scholars at ten, and two Fellows at fifty pounds per annum. Here I mention not thirty pounds yearly given by him to the poor of Hornsey and High-gate, with a Lecture founded therein. This Wil∣liam Plat died Anno 1637. ALEXANDER STRANGE son to a Doctor in Law, was born in So was I in∣formd by his carful Ex∣cutors. London, bred in Peter-house in Cambridge, where he commenced Bachelour of Divinity, and afterwards for So read I in his Epitaph in the Chappel. forty six years was Vicar of Layston, and Prebend of Saint Pauls, where his Prebenda submersa the Corps whereof were drowned in, the Sea afforded him but a noble year. Now, because Layston Church stood alone in the fields, and inconveniently for such who were to repair thereunto, he built at Buntingford (a thorow-road market, mostly in his Parish, a neat and strong Chappel è stipe collatitiâ, from the bounty others gave, and he gathered.) Wherefore having laid the foundation, before well furnished for the finishing thereof, he gave for his Motto, Beg hard or beggard. None could tax him (with the Scribes and Pharisees) for binding heavy burthens and* Mat. 23. 4. grievous to be born, and laying them on other mens shoulders, whilst he himself would not move them with one of his fingers. First, because the burthens were not heavy, being light in the particulars, though weighty in the total summe. Secondly, he bound them on none, but profest himself bound unto them, if pleased to take them up for a publick good. Thirdly, he put his, and that a bountiful hand unto them, purchasing land out of his own purse to pay for the daily reparation thereof. He also promoted the building of a Free-school in the said place, to which some sisters worshpfully born in the same Town, wealthily and honourably married, were the Foundresses, yet so as it will still be thankful to contributors thereunto for better accommodation. This Master Strange being no less prosperous then painful in compounding all diffe∣rences among his neighbours, being a man of peace went to eternal peace December 8. in the eightieth year of his age 1650. To the Readér. Pauperis est numerare, They have but few who have but a number. It passeth my power to compute the Benefactors Natives of this City, whose names are entred in fair Tables (the Counterpart of the Original no doubt kept in heaven,) in their respe∣ctive Parishes; so that in this City it is as easy to find a Steeple without a Bell hanging
in it, as a Vestry without such a Memorial fixed to it: Thither I refer the Reader for his better satisfaction, and proceed to the Lord Mayors.   Name Father Place Company Time 1 Iohn Rainwell Robert Rainwell London ish-monger 1426 2 Nicholas Wotton Thomas Wotton London Draper 1430 3 Robert Large Thomas Large London Mercer 1439 4 Stephen Foster Robert Foster London Fish-monger 1454 5 Ralph Varney Ralph Varney London Mercer 1465 6 Iohn Tate Iohn Tate London Mercer 1473 7 Bartholom Iames Edward Iames London Draper 1479 8 Iohn Percivall Roger Percivall London Merchant-Taylor 1498 9 Richard Haddon William Haddon London Mercer 1506 10 William Brown Iohn Brown London Mercer 1507 11 Henry Kebble George Kebble London Grocer 1510 12 William Brown Iohn Brown London Mercer 1513 13 George Monox Nt named Lonon Draper 1514 14 Thomas Seymer Iohe Seymor London Mercer 1526 15 William Holleis William Holleis London Baker 1539 16 George arn George Barn London Haberdasher 1552 17 William Garret Iohn Garret London Grocer 1555 18 William Chester Iohn Chester London Draper 1560 19 Thomas Rowe Robert Rowe London Merchant-Taylor 1568 20 William llen William Allen London Mercer 1571 21 Iames Hawes Thomas Hawes London Cloath-worker 1574 22 Nichol Woodrofe David Woodrofe London Haberdasher 1579 23 Iohn Branche ohn Branche London Draper 1580 24 Thomas Blanke Thomas Blank London Haderdasher 1582 25 George Barne George Barne London Haberdasher 1586 26 Martin Calthrop Martin Calthrop London Draper 1588 27 Iohn Garret William Garret London Haberdasher 1601 28 Thomas Low Simon Low London Haberdasher 160 29 Henry Rowe Thomas Rowe London Mercer 1607 30 Iohn Swinnerton Thomas Swinnerton London Merchant-Taylor 1612 31 Sebastan Harvey Iames Harvey London Iron-Monger 1618 32 William Cockain William Cockain London Skinner 1619 33 Martin Lumley Iames Lumley London Draper 1623 34 Iohn Goare Gerrard Goare London Merchant-Taylor 1624 35 Robert Ducy Henry Ducy London Merchant-Taylor 1630 36 Robert Titchborn ........ Titchborn London Skinner 1656 Sheriffs of London and Middlesex. HEN. II. Anno 1 Quatuor Vic. Anno 2 Gervasius, & Johan. Anno 3 Gervasius, & Johan. filius Radulphi. Anno 4 Anno 5 Remiencus fili. Berigarii, & socii ejus. Anno 6 Anno 7 Johan. filius Radulphi. Anno 8 Eri saldus Sutarius, & vital, Clicus. Anno 9 Remiencus filius Borin∣garii, & Will. fil. Isabell, for 7 years. Anno 16 Johan. Bievinitte, & Bald. Clicus Anno 17 Rad. Orificus, & Rad. Vinter. Andre. Buckerol, Adlord. Crispus, David de Cornhill, & Rog. Blundus, for 4 years. Anno 21 Bricknerus de Haverhil, & Pet. fil. Walter. Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Will. fil. Isab Anno 24 Waleran. Johan. filius Nigelli. Anno 25 Will. fil. Isab. & Ar∣nulphus Buxell.
Anno 26 Will. & Regin. le Viell. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Will. & fil. Isab. for 6 years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Henri. de Cornhill & Rich. fil. Renner. Anno 2 Rich filius Renner ut su∣pra. Anno 3 Will & Hen. fil. Ren∣ner. Anno 4 Nichol. Duke, & Pet. Neveley. Anno 5 Rog. Duke, & Rich. fil. Alwin. Anno 6 Will. fil. Isabel, & Will. fil. Arnold. Anno 7 Rob. Besont, & Joh. de Josue. Anno 8 Gerard. de Anteloch, & Rob. Durant. Anno 9 Rog. Blunt, & Nicol. Ducket. Anno 10 Constant. fil. Arnold. & Rob. le Beau. K. JOHN. Anno 1 Arnold. fil. Arnold. & Rich. fil. Barthol. Anno 2 Rog. Dorset, & Jacob. Bartholomew. Anno 3 Walter. filius Alic. & Simon. de Alderman∣bury. Anno 4 Norman. Blundell, & Johan. de Eely. Anno 5 Walt. Broune, & Will. Chamberlain. Anno 6 Tho Haverel, & Hamon. Brond. Anno 7 Johan Walgrave, & Rich. de Winchester. Anno 8 Johan. Holihand, & Edm. fil. Gerard. Anno 9 Rog. Winchester, & Edm. Hard I. e. Anno 10 Petrus Duke, & Tho. Neal. Anno 11 Petr. le Josue, & Will. Blound. Anno 12 Adam. Whiteley, & Step. le Grasse. Anno 13 Johan. fil. Pet. & Joh. Garland. Anno 14 Randolp. Eyland, & Constan. Josue. Anno 15 Martin. fil. Alic. & Petr. Bate. Anno 16 Solom. Basinge, & Hug. Basinge. Anno 17 Joh. Travers, & Audre. Newland. HEN. III. Anno 1 Benedict. Seinturer, & Will. Bluntivers. Anno 2 Tho. Bockerel, & Rad. Holyland. Anno 3 Johan. Veile, & Johan. le Spicer. Anno 4 Rich. Wimbledon, & Johan. Veile. Anno 5 Rich. Renger. & Johan. Veile. Anno 6 Rich. Renger, & Tho. Lambart. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. Travars, & Aud. Bockerell. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rog. Duke, & Martin. fil. Will. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Steph. Bokerel, & Hen. Cocham. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Will. Winchester, & Rob. fil. Johan. Anno 15 Rich Walter. & Johan. de Woborne. Anno 16 Micha. de S. Helen, & Walter. de Enfeild. Anno 17 Hen. de Edmonton, & Gerard. Bat. Anno 18 Sim. fil. Mar. & Rog. Blunt. Anno 19 Rad. Ashwy, & Johan. Norman. Anno 20 Gerard. Bat. & Rich. vel Rob. Hardle. Anno 21 Hen. Cobham, & Jor∣dan. de Coventry. Anno 22 Johan. Toloson, & Ger∣vasius. Anno 23 Johan. Codras, & Joh. Wilhall. Anno 24 Reymond. Bongey, & Rad. Ashwy. Anno 25 Johan. Gisors, & Mich. Tony. Anno 26 Tho. Duresme Johan. Voil. Anno 27 Johan. fil. Joh. & Rad. Ashwy. Anno 28 Hugo. Blunt. & Adam. Basing. Anno 29 Rad. Foster, & Nich. Bat. Anno 30 Rob. de Cornhill, & Adam. de Bewley. Anno 31 Simon. fil. Mar. & Laurent. Frowick. Anno 32 Johan. Voile, & Nic. Bat. Anno 33 Nich. fil. Josue, & Galf. Winchester. Anno 34 Rich. Hardell, & Joh. Toloson. Anno 35 Humf. Bat. Will. fil. Richardi. Anno 36 Laur. Frowick, & Nic. Bat. Anno 37 Will. Duresme, & Tho. Wimborne. Anno 38 Johan. Northamton, & Rich. Picard. Anno 39 Rad. Ashwy, & Rob. Limon. Anno 40 Steph. Doe, & Hen. Walmond. Anno 41 Mich. Bocherel, & Joh. Minor. Anno 42 Rich. Otwell, & Will. Ashwy. Anno 43 Rob. Cornhill, & Joh. Adrian. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Adam. Brouning, & Hen. Coventry. Anno 46 Iohan. Northampton, & Rich. Picard. Anno 47 Iohan. Taylor, & Rich. Walbrook. Anno 48 Rob. de Mount. Piter. Osbert. de Suffolk. Anno 49 Greg. Rokesley, & Tho. de Detford. Anno 50 Edward. Blunt, & Petr. Anger. Anno 51 Iohan. Hind, & Iohan. Walraven. Anno 52 Iohan. Adrian, & Lucas. de Baten-Court. Anno 53 Walter. Harvy, et Will. Duresme Anno 54 Tho. Baseing, et Rob.
Cornhill Anno 55 Walt. Potter, & Phil. Taylor Anno 56 Greg. Rokesley, & Hen. Walleys Anno 57 Rich. Paris, & Johan. de Wodeley EDW. I. Anno 1 Johan. Horne, & Walt. Potter Anno 2 Nico. Winchester, & Hen. Coventry Anno 3 Lucas de Batencourt, & Hen. Frowick Anno 4 Johan. Horne, & Rad. Blunt Anno 5 Rob. de Arer, & Rad. le Fewre. Anno 6 Johan. Adrian, & Walt. Langley Anno 7 Rob. Baseing, & Will. le Meyre Anno 8 Tho. Fox, & Rad. De∣lamore Anno 9 Will. Farenden, & Nich. Winchester Anno 10 Will. le Meyre, & Rich. Chigwell Anno 11 Rad. Blunt, & Ankerin de Betavill Anno 12 Johan. Goodcheap, & Martin. Box Anno 13 Steph. Cornhill, & Rob. Rokesley Anno 14 Walt. Blunt, & Johan. Wade Anno 15 Tho. Cross, & Gualt. Hawteyne Anno 16 W. Hereford, & Tho. Stanes Anno 17 W. Betane Johan. de Canter. Anno 18 Fulke of St. Edmond, & Salom. Langford Anno 19 Tho. Romaine, & W. de Leyre Anno 20 Rad. Blunt, & Hamond. Box Anno 21 Hen. Boll vel Bolle, & Elias Russel Anno 22 Rob. Rokesley jun. & Mort. Aubery Anno 23 Hen. Box, & Rich. Glocester Anno 24 Johan. Dunstable, & Adam. de Halingbury. Anno 25 Tho. de Suffolk, & Adam. de Fulham Anno 26 Rich. Reham, & Tho. Sely Anno 27 Johan. Armenter, & Hen. Fingrith Anno 28 Lucas de Havering, & Rich. Champnes Anno 29 Rob. Callor, & Pet. de Bescant Anno 30 Hugo Pourte, & Sim. Paris Anno 31 W. Combmartin, & Johan. de Burford Anno 32 Rog. Paris, & Johan. de Lincolne Anno 33 Will. Cawson, & Regin. Thunderley Anno 34 Galf & Sim. Billet EDW. II. Anno 1 Nico. Pigot, & Nigeb∣rury Anno 2 W. Baseing, & Jam. Butteler Anno 3 Rog. le Palmer, & Jacobus de Saint Ed∣mons Anno 4 Sim. Cooper, & Petr. Blackney Anno 5 Sim. Metwood, & Rich. Wilford Anno 6 Johan. Lambin, & Will. Lutkin Anno 7 Rob. Gurden, & Hugo. Garton Anno 8 Steph. Abingdon, & Hamond Chigwell Anno 9 Hamond Goodcheap, & Willielm. Bode∣leigh Anno 10 Will. Caston, & Rad. Balancer Anno 11 Johan. Prior, & Will. Furneux Anno 12 Johan. Pointell, & Joh. Dalling Anno 13 Sim. de Abington, & Johan▪ Preston Anno 14 Rena. & Will. Prodham Anno 15 Rich. Constantine, & Rich. de Hackney Anno 16 Johan. Grantham, & Rich. de Ely Anno 17 Adam. de Sarisbury, & Johannis de Ox∣ford Anno 18 Benet. de Fulham, & Johan. Cawson Anno 19 Gilb. Mordon, & Joh. Causton Anno 20 Rich. Rothing, & Rog. Chauntclere EDW. III. Anno 1 Hen. Darcy, & Johan. Haughton Anno 2 Sim. Frances, & Hen. Combmartim Anno 3 Rich. Lazar, & Will. Gisors Anno 4 Rob. of Eley, & Tho. Wharwood Anno 5 Johan. Mocking, & And. Auberey Anno 6 Nico. Pike, & Johan. Husband Anno 7 Johan. Hamond, & Will. Hansard Anno 8 Johan. Kingstone, & Walt. Turke Anno 9 Walt. Mordon, & Rich. Upton Anno 10 Johan. Clarke, Will. Curtes Anno 11 Walt. Neale, & Nic. Crane Anno 12 Will. de Pomfrett, & Hugo Marbler Anno 13 Will. Thorney, & Rog. Frosham Anno 14 Adam Lucas, & Barth. Morris Anno 15 Rich. de Barkeinge, & Johan. de Rokesley Anno 16 Johan. Loufkin, & Rich. Killingbery Anno 17 Johan. Steward, & Joh. Aylesham Anno 18 Geffred. Witchingham, & Tho. Leg Anno 19 Edmund Hemenhall, & Johan. de Glouce∣ster Anno 20 Joh. Croyden, & Will. Clopton Anno 21 Adam Brapson, et Rich. Fas, vel Bas Anno 22 Hen. Picard, et Sim. Dolseby
Anno 23 Adam. de Bury, & Rad. de Lynn. Anno 24 Johan. Notte, & Will. de Worcester. Anno 25 Johan. Wroth, & Gilb. de Stenineshorpe. Anno 26 Johan. Peache, & Joh. Stotley. Anno 27 Will. Wold vel Wild, & Johan. Little. Anno 28 Will. Nottingham, & Rich. Smelt. Anno 29 Walt. vel Tho. Forster, & Tho. Brandon. Anno 30 Rich. Nottingham, & Tho. Dolsell. Anno 31 Stephan. Candish, & Barth. Frostlinge. Anno 32 Iohan. Barnes, & Iohan. Buris. Anno 33 Sim. de Bennington, & Iohan. de Chichester. Anno 34 Iohan. Dennis, et Walt. Berny. Anno 35 Will. Holbech, et Iacob. Tame. Anno 36 Iohan. de S. Alban. et Iacob. Andrew. Anno 37 Rich. de Croyen, et Iohan. Hiltoft. Anno 38 Iohan. de Metford, et Simon. de Mordon. Anno 39 Iohan. Bukylsworth, et Iohan. vel Tho. Ireland. Anno 40 Iohan. Ward, et Tho. de Lee. Anno 41 Iohan. Turnegold, et Will. Dickman. Anno 42 Rob. Girdeler, et Adam. Wimondham. Anno 43 Iohan. Piell, et Hugo. Holdich. Anno 44 Will. Walworth, et Rob. Gayton. Anno 45 Adam. Staple, et Rob. Hatfeild. Anno 46 Iohan. Philpot, et Nich. Brembar. Anno 47 Iohan. Aubery, et Iohan. Fished. Anno 48 Rich. Lyons, et Will. Woodhouse. Anno 49 Iohan. Hadley, et Will. Newport. Anno 50 Iohan. Northampton, et Rob. Land. King JOHN. 5 WALTER BROWN.] This is he who with Rosia his Wife founded the Hospital of Saint Mary without Bi∣shopsgate, commonly called Saint Mary Spittle. HENRY the Third. 31 SIMON. FITZ-MARY.] He founded the Hospital of Mary, called Bethlehem (corruptly Bedlam) without Bi∣shops-gate. Sheriffs of London and Middlesex. Name. Armes. RICH. II.   Anno   1 Andr. Pikeman   1 Nich. de Twiford Arg. two bars, and on a Canton Sab. a Buckle of the first. 2 Johan. Bosham   2 Tho. Cornwallis   3 Johan. Helesdon   3 Will. Barret   4 Walt. Doget   4 Will. Knightcott   5 Johan. Hende Arg. on a Cheveron Az. 3 Escalop shells of the field, on a Chief of the second, a Lion passant of the first. 5 Johan. Rote   6 Adam. Bam Erm. on a Chief indented S. an Annulet between 2 trefoils Arg. 6 Johan. Sely   7 Johan. More Argent, a Fess Dauncetle Gul. & Sab. between 3 Mullets of 6 points pierced of the third. 7 Simon. Winchcombe   8 Nich. Exon Gules, a Cross between 12 Croslets fitched Or. 8 Johan. Fresh Vert, a Fess ingraled Or in Chief an annulet Sable. 9 Johan. Churchman   9 Johan. Organ   10 Will. Moore   10 Will. Stanndon Sable, on a Cheveron between 3 Lions∣heads erased Arg. 7 Cloves proper. 11 Hugo. Tastolfe   11 Will. Venour Gules, on a Fess Or, 5 Escallops 3 & 2, Sable. 12 Tho. Austen   12 Adam. Carleille   13 Johan Lovey   13 Johan. Walcott Arg. on a Fess Sab. 3 Escalops Or. 14 Tho. Vynant   14 Johan. Francis Ermine, on a Canton Sab. a harp Arg. 15 Johan. Chadworth Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Trefoils of the first. 15 Hen. Vauner   16 Gilb. Muchfeld   16 Tho. Newton   17 Urogo. Barentme S. 3 Eagles Arg. in the midst an annulet Or. 17 Rich. Whittington Gul. a Fess compony Or and Az. in the dexter Canton an annulet. 18 Will. Brampton   18 Tho. Knoll Azure, semy of Croslets and a Cross re∣cercilte Or. 19 Will. Shiringham   19 Roger. Ellis   20 Tho. Wilford   20 Will. Panker   21 Johan. Woodcoke Or, on a Bend Gules, 3 Crosses bottony fitched at foot of the first. 21 Will. Askham Gules, a Fess Or, between 3 Dolphins Najant Argent. 22 Johan. Warmer   22 Johan. Wade   HEN. IV.   Anno   1 Will. Walderne Arg. a Bend between 3 Griffons-heads erazed Sable. 1 Will. Hide   2 Will. Gnote   2 Johan. Wakeley   3 Rob. Chichley Or, a Cheveron ingrailed between 3 Cinquefoiles Gul. 3 Rich. Merlaw Quarterly Gules, and Sable, an Orle of Martlets of the second. 4 Tho. Polle   4 Tho. Fawkoner Pally of 6 Arg. and Sab. on a bend Vert 3 trefoils of the first. 5 Tho. Polle   5 Tho. Fawkoner Ut prius.
6 Hen. Barton Ermin. a Saltire Sab. voided of the field. 6 Will. Crowmer Argent, a Cheveron ingrailed between 3 Choughs proper. 7 Nich. Wotton Arg. a Saltire ingrailed Sable. 7 Galf. Brooke   8 Hen. Haltoh   8 Hen. Pounfrayt   9 Will. Norton   9 Tho. Dukes   10 Johan. Law   10 Will. Chichley Armes before. 11 Johan. Penn   11 Tho. Pike   12 Johan. Raynwell Per pale indented Argent and Sable, a Cheveron Gules. 12 Walt. Cotton   HEN. V.   Anno   1 Johan. Sutton   1 Johan. Michell   2 Johan. Michell Sab. a Cheveron between 3 Escalops Or. 2 Tho. Aleyn   3 Will. Cambrigg Azu. a Cross patonce between 4 Swans Arg. 3 Adam. Everard   4 Johan. Coventre Arg. on a Cheveron S. between 3 colum∣bines proper a Bezant. 4 Rob. Widington   5 Hen. Rede   5 Johan. Gedney Arg. on a Fess Azu. 3 Eaglets displayed Or, between as many Leopards-heads 6 Johan. Parvies Or a fess vert, over all a Saltire Gules. 6 Rad. Brton   7 Johan. Botiller   7 Rob. Whitingham   8 Johan. Welles Lozengy Or and Ermin. a Lion rampant Gules. 8 Johan. Botiller   9 Will. Weston   9 Rich. Gosselin   HEN. VI.   Anno   1 Will. Eastfield Sab. a Cheveron between 3 Boyes heads Arg. Crined Or. 1 Rob. Tatersall   2 Tho. Wadeford   2 Nich. James   3 Johan. Bithwater   3 Sim. Seman   4 Will. Milreth   4 Johan. Brockle Checkee Or and vert. a Chief Argent 5 Rob. Arnold   5 Johan. Higham   6 Rob. Otteley Argent, 3 Lions-heads Erazed within a border ingrailed Sable. 6 Hen. Frowcke   7 Johan. Abbot   7 Tho. Duffhous   8 Will. Rus   8 Rad. Holland   9 Rob. Large Arg. a Bend Azure, between 3 Mullets ules. 9 Walt. Chichley Or a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cinquefoils Gu. 10 Steph. Brown Arg. 2 Cheverons S. on a Canton Ermin. an Annulet of the second. 10 Johan. Hatherley   11 Johan. Padesley Arg. 3 flower deliz. Az. charged on the middle with Annulets Or. 11 Johan. Olyney G. Besanty 2 flanches S. on each a Lion ramp. Gardant Argent. 12 Tho. Chalton Azu. a Lion rampant regardant Arg. Crowned Or. 12 Johan. Linge   13 Tho. Brunewell   13 Simon. Eyre G. a porcupine saliant Arg. quitted and chained about the neck Or. 14 Rob. Clopton Gul. a fess Ermin. between 6 Mascles Or. 14 Tho. Chatworth Ermin. 3 pyles Sab. on a Canton Or, a flower deliz Azu. 15 Will. Gregory Per pale Or and Azu. 2 Lions rampant Indorsed & regardant counterchanged. 15 Tho. Marsted   16 Will. Chapman   16 Will. Halys   17 Hugo. Dike   17 Nich. Yoo, sive Goo▪   18 Rob. Markhall   18 Phil. Malpas   19 Johan. Sutton   19 Will. Wettenhall   20 Will. Combes   20 Rich. Rich   21 Tho. Beaumond   21 Rich. Norden   22 Johan. Norman Or, 3 Bars Gul. on a Chief Arg. as many flower deliz Sable. 22 Nich. Wyfor   23 Steph. Foster Sa. a Cheveron ingrailed Ermin, between 3 Pheons Arg. 23 Hugo. VVich Ar. on a Cheveron Gu. 5 plates between 3 caterfoils sliped Vert. 24 Johan. Darby   24 Galf. Felding Arg. on a Fess Az. 3 Lozenges Or. 25 Rob. Horne   25 Galf. Bullen Arg. a Cheveron Gul. between 3 Bulls∣heads couped Sab. armed Or. 26 VVill. Abram   26 Tho. Scot Arg. a Cheveron between 3 Gridirons Sable. 27 VVill. Catlowe   27 VVill. Marrowe Az. a fess ingrailed Or, between 3 maiden∣heads, Arg. crined of the second. 28 Tho. Caning   28 VVill. Hulyn Arg. a Cheveron Az. within a border in∣grailed Sable. 29 VVill. Dere   29 Johan. Middleton   30 Math. Philip Sable, semy of flower de liz Or a Lion rampant Ermin, crowned Gold. 30 Chri. Marter   31 Rich. Lee Azure, on a fess between 2 cotises Or 3 Leopards-heads Gul. 31 Rich. Allyn Az. a pale ingrailed Ermin. 32 Johan. VValden   32 Tho. Cooke Or, a Cheveron compony G. and Az. betw. 3 cinquefoils of the third. 33 VVill. Tayllour   33 Johan. Felde   34 Johan. Young Lozengie Or and Arg. on a bend Azu. 2 Ebeckes-heads Erased of the first. 34 Tho. Oldgrave Az. a Cheveron ingrailed Ermin, between 3 Owls Or. 35 Johan. Styward   35 Rad. Varny Az. on a cross Arg. 5 Mullets Or. 36 Tho. Reyner   36 VVill. Edward Arg. a fess between 6 Martlets Sable. 37 Rad. Jocelin Az. a wreath Arg. and Sab. adorned wit 4 Horse-bells Or. 37 Rich. Nedeham   38 Johan. Stocker   38 Johan. Plommer   EDW. IV.   Anno   1 Johan. Lambard   1 Rich. Fleming   2 Geor. Ireland   2 Johan. Lock   3 Will. Hampton Gul. a fess Checky Or and Az. within a border Arg. 3 Barh. James Az. on a Cheveron between 3 Lions pass. Gardant Or, as many Escalops Sable. 4 Rob. Basset   4 Tho. Muschamp   5 Johan. Tate Per fess Or and Gules, a pale counter∣changed between 3 Cornish choughs. 5 Johan. Stone   6 Hen. Wever, mil.   6 Will. Constantin   7 Johan. Brown Az. a Cheveron between 3 Escalops Or, within a border ingrailed. 7 Johan. Stockton G. a Cheveron vary Arg. and S. between 3 Mullets Silver. 8 Hum. Hayford Arg. a Cheveron S. between 3 Roe-bucks tripping Gules. 8 Tho. Stalbroock   8 Will. Heriot Per pale Ermin. and Erminess 3 Cressants counterchanged. 8 Simon. Smith   10 Rob. Drope Arg. gutte de poix on a Cheif G. a Lion passant Gardant Or. 10 Rich. Gardiner Per fess Arg. and Sab. a pale counter∣changed between 3 Griffons-heads Erased of the field. 11 Johan. Crosbey   11 Johan. VVard   12 Johan. Shelley   12 Johan. Aley   13 Tho. Bledlowe   13 Johan. Brown   14 VVill. Stocker   14 Rob. Billesdon Az. a bend cotised Or, in the sinister Chief an Eagles-head Erased of the second.
15 Tho. Hill S. a Chev. Erm. betw. 3 Lions passantGua. 15 Edw. Shaw Arg. a Chev. between 3 losinges Ermines within a Border Gules. 16 Rob. Colwich   16 Hugo. Brice Argent, fretty Gul. a plain Cross of the first, within a Border Azure, verdoy of Cinquefoils Or. 17 Rich. Rawson   17 Will. Horne   18 Hen. Collet S. on a Cheveron between 3 Hinds triping Arg. as mny Annulets of the first. 18 Johan. Stocker   19 Rob. Harding   19 Rob. Byfeld   20 Tho. Ilam   20 Johan. Ward   21 Will. Bacon   21 Tho. Daniell Armes before. 22 Rob. Tate   22 Rich. Chawry Arg. on a Cheveron S. between 3 Birds Az. as many Annulets of the first. RICH III.   Anno   1 Johan. Mathew Gyrouny of 6 S. and Gul. a Lion ramp. Or, within a border Az. charged with Crosses pattee Gold. 1 Will. Whte S. on a Chev ro between 3 Ewers Arg. as many Martlets Gul. 2 Tho. Northland   2 Mill. Marten Or, 2 Bars Gul. on the first, an Echion Ermin. 3 Rad. Astry arry wavy Arg. and Az. on a Chief Gul. 3 Bezants. 3 Tho. Breteyn   HEN. VII.   Anno   1 Johan. Tate Armes before. 1 Johan. Swan   2 Johan. Percivall Per Cheveron G. and Az. 3 Grey-hounds heads rased Argent. 2 Hugo. Clopton Paly of 4 Or and Azure, a Lion rampant Counterchanged. 3 Tho. Frukell   3 Will. Remington Gyrouny of 8 Ermin. & Az. a Dolphin naiant Or. 4 Rad. Tilney Ar. a Cheveron between 3 Gri-heads Erased Gul. 4 Will. Isacke   5 Will. Capell Gu. a Lion ramp. 'twixt 3 Crosses Botony Fitchy Or. 5 Johan. Brooke   6 Hen. Coote   6 Hugo. Pemberton   7 Tho. Wood   7 Will. Borne Per pale indented Or. and Ar. a Cheveron been 3 Escalopshells Gul. 8 Will. Welbeck   8 Will. Purches Ag. a Lion rampant Azu. wherion a fess S. charged with 3 Besants. 9 Rob. Fabian   9 Johan. Winger Arg. on a Cheveron between 3 Mascles S. as many Besants. 10 Nich. Alwyn Arg. a Fess nubilee Az. between 2 Lions passant Sable. 10 Johan. Warner   11 Tho. Knesworth Ermin. a Cheveron wavy Gul. between 3 Grey-hounds passant. 11 He. Somer   12 Johan. Shawe Armes before. 12 Rich. Haddon Or, a mans Leg Couped at the Thigh Az. 13 Barth. Rede Per pale G. and S. a Croslet Botony fitched at Base between 4 flower de liz Or. 13 Tho. VVindew   14 Tho. Burdbery Sa. a Cheveron Ermin. between 3 round Buckles Arg. the tongs pendant. 14 Steph. Jenings Arg. a Cheveron G. betwixt 3 Plomets S. 15 ac. VVilford   15 Rich. Brond   16 Johan. Hawes   16 VVill. Stede   17 Laur. Aylemer, mil.   17 Hen. Hedde   18 Hen. Kebill Argent, a Cheveron ingrailed Gul. on a Chief Azu. 3 Mullets Or. 18 Nich. Nynis   19 Chri. Hawes   19 Tho. Grannger   20 Rog. Acheley Gules, on a fess ingrailed between 3 Griffons-heads erased Or, as many Crosses patty sitched Sable. 20 VVill. Brown Armes before. 21 Rich. Shore   21 Rog. rove   22 VVill. Coppinger Bendy of 6 Arg. and G. on a fess vert 3 Plats within a border of the second. 22 VVill. Fitz-VVill.   23 Will. Botiler Arg. on a fess compone G. & Az. betwixt 6 Croslets of the third 3 Annulets Or. 23 Johan. Kirkby   24 Tho. Exmewe Arg. a Cheveron checke G. & Sil. between 3 Escalopshells S. within a berder of the second ennurny of Leopards-heads, and entoir of annulets Or. 24 Rich Smith   HEN. VIII.   Anno   1 Georg. Monox Arg. on a Cheveron S. between 3 Holly∣leaves proper as many besants, on a Chief G. a Bird between 2 Anchors Or, 1 Johan. Doget   2 Johan. Wilborne   2 Johan. Rest   3 Nich. Shelton   3 Tho. Mirfin   4 Rob. Fenrother   4 Rob. Aldernes   5 Johan. Brugges Arg. on a Cross Sa. a Leopards-head Or. 5 Rog. Basford Sab. 3 dancing Bears Or. 6 Jac. Yarford   6 Johan. Mundy   7 Hen. Warly   7 Rob. Baily   8 Tho. Seymor Sable, a fess imbatiled with 3 Ogresses 'twixt as many wings Arg. 8 Johan. Thirston   9 Tho. Baldry   9 Rad. Simonds   10 Johan. Aleyn   10 Jacob. Spens   11 Johan. Wikenson   11 Nich. Pertrich Argent and Sab. on a bend, G. 3  O. 12 Johan. Kime Gul. a Cheveron etwixt 9 Cross Cros Or. 12 Johan. Skevington Arg. 3 Bulls-heads erased Sable. 13 Johan. Bretton   13 Tho. Pargiton   14 Johan. Rudston   14 Johan. Champnes Per pale Ar. and S. a Lion ramp.  a border ingrailed Counterchanged▪ 15 Mich. English * * S. 3 Lions passant Arg. 15 Johan. Junis   16 Rad. Dodmer   16 Will. Roche   17 Johan. Counton   17 Chri. Askew   18 Steph. Peacocke   18 Nich. Lambard   19 Johan. Hardy   19 Will. Howles   20 Rad. Warren   20 Johan. Long   21 Mich. Dormer Azu. 10 Billets 4, 3, 2, and 1. Or, in a Chief of the second, a Lion issuant Sa. arm. and Langued Gul. 21 Walt. Champion   22 VVill. Dauntsey   22 Rich. Cophin   23 Rich. Gresham   23 Edw. Altam   24 Rich. Reynolds   24 Johan. Prise   25 VVill. Forman   25 Tho. Kitson, mil.   26 Nich. Lawson   26 VVill. Denham   27 Hum. Munmoth   27 Johan. Cotes   28 Rob. Paget   28 VVill Bowyer   29 Johan. Gresham   29 Tho. Lewyn   30 VVill. VVilkinson   30 Nich. Gibson Azu. 3 storks rising proper. 31 Johan. Fairy   31 Tho. Huntlowe   32 Mart. Bowes   32 VVill. Louton   33 Roland. Hill, mil.   33 Hen. Suckley   34 Hen. Hoberthorne   34 Hen. Amcos Arg. a Castle betwixt 3 cups covered Az.
35 Rich. Tolus   35 Johan. Dobes   36 Johan. Wilford   36 And. Judde   37 Georg. Barnes   37 Rad. Aleyn   38 Rich. Jerveys   38 Tho. Curtys   EDW. VI.   Anno   1 Rob. Chertesey   1 Tho. White   2 Will. Lock   2 Johan. Ayliffe   3 Johan. York   3 Rich. Turke   4 Agust. Hinde   4 Johan. Lyon   5 Johan. Lambert   5 Johan. Cooper   6 Johan. Maynard Arg. a Chron Azu. betwixt 3 Hands Gules. 6 Will. Gerrard   REX. PHIL. & MAR. REGI.   Anno   1 Tho. Offley Arg. on a Cross Az. Formee rt. a Lion passant Or. betwixt 4 Cornish Choughes proper. 1 Will Hewet   2 David. Woodroffe   2 Will. Chester   3 Tho. Leigh   3 Johan. Macham   4 Will. Harpur   4 Johan. White   5 Rich. Mallary   5 Jaco. Altham   6 Johan. Hales   6 Rich. Champion   REG. ELIZAB.   Anno   1 Tho. Lodge   1 Rog. Martin   2 Chri. Diaper   2 Tho. Roo   3 Alex. Avenon Argent, a Cheveron Gul. `twixt 3 Heurs proper. 3 Hum. Baskervill   4 Will. Allen   4 Rich. Chamberlain   5 Edw. Bauckes   5 Rowland. Haward   6 Edw. Jackman   6 Lion. Ducket Azure, 2 Bars Dancette Or, in Chief 3 Bezants. 7 Johan. Rivers   7 Jacob. Hwys   8 Amb. Nicolas   8 Johan. Langley Sab. a Cheveron Emine, `twixt 3 Rams∣heads Erazed Argent. 9 Thomas Ramsey   9 Will. Bond   10 Johan. C ffe   10 Jacob. Bacon   11 Hen. Becher   11 Will. Dane   12 Fran. Barnham   12 Will. Boxe   13 Johan. Milles   13 Johan. Braunch   14 Rich. Pipe Azu. Crusuly, 2 Pypes Or. 14 Nich. Woodroffe   15 Jacob. Harvy   15 Tho. Pullyson   16 Tho. Blancke   16 Anth. Gamage   17 Edw. Osborn   17 Walstans. Dixe   18 Will. Kimpton   18 Georg. Barne   19 Nich. Backhouse   19 Fran. Bowyer Or, a Bend Vary betwixt 2 cotises Gul. 20 Georg. Bonde   20 Tho. Starkey   21 Mart. Caltherpe Checke Or and Azure, a Fess Ermin. 21 Johan. Hart   22 Rod. Woodcoke   22 Johan. Allott   23 Rich. Mrtin   23 Will. Webbe   24 Will. Rowe Argent, on a Cheveron Azure, between 3 tresoils parted per pale Gul. and Vert, as many Bezants. 24 Cutb. Buckell   25 Will. Masham   25 Johan. Spencer   26 Steph. Slany   26 Hen. Willingsley   27 Anth. Ratli   27 Hen. Prannell   28 Rob. House   28 Will. Elkin   29 Johan. Catcher   29 Tho. Skynner Arg. on a Cross Az. Formy fleury a Lion Passant Or between 4 Cornish Coughes Proper. 30 Hugo. Offeley   30 Rich. Saltenstall   31 Rich. Gourney Gul. a Cheveron, betwixt 3 Mallets Or. 31 Steph. Soame Sable, a Cheveron `twixt 2 Mallets Ar. 32 Nich. Mouseley   32 Rich. Brooke   33 Will. Rider Azure, 3 rescents Or. 33 Benedic. Barnham   34 Johan. Gerrard   34 Rob. Taylor   35 Pavel. Banning   35 Pet. Haughton   36 Rob. Lee   36 Tho. Benett   37 Tho. Lowe   37 Leon. Holliday   38 Johan. Watts   38 Ricard. Goddard   39 Hen. Rowe   39 Johan. Moore   40 Edw. Holmenden   40 Rob. Hampson   41 Rog. Clarke   41 Hum. Welde   42 The. Cambell   42 Will. Craven Argent, a Fess betwixt 6 Cress Cros fitchy Gules. 43 Hen. Anderson Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cross Croslets Sable. 43 Will. Glover   JACOB. REX.   Anno   1 Jam. Pemberton Arg. a Cheveron betw. 3 Buckets Sable. 1 Johan. Swynnerton Argent, a Cross Formee Flurt Sable. 2 Will. Rumney   2 Tho. Middleton   3 Tho. Hayes, mil. Ermin. 3 Leopards-heads Erased Gules 3 Oliver. Stile, arm.   4 Clem. Scudamore Gules, 3 Stirrups leathered and buckled, Or. 4 Johan. Jolles, mil.   5 Will. Lman   5 Johan. Leman Azure, a Fss betwixt 3 Dolphins Arg. 6 Galf. Elwis   6 Nich. Stile   7 Georg. Booles Az. 3 Cups Arg. holding as many Bores∣heads erected Or. 7 Rich. Farington   8 Rich. Pyott   8 Fran. Jones   9 Edw. Barkham Argent, 3 Pallets Gules, over all a Cheveron. 9 Georg. Smithes   10 Edw. Rotheram   10 Alex. Prescot   11 Tho. Bennett   11 Hen. Jay   12 Pet. Proby   12 Mart. Lumley   13 Will. Gore G. a Fess betw. 3 Crosets Fitcee Or. 13 Johan. Gore G. a Fess betw. 3 Crosets Fitcee Or. 14 Allanus Cotton   14 Cu. Harbert  
15 Will. Holeday   15 Rob. Johnson   16 Rich. Herve   16 Hugo. Hamersley   17 Rich. Deane   17 Jacob. Cambell   18 Edrus. Allen   18 Rob. Ducy Or, 2 Lions Passant Gules. 19 Geor. Whitmore Vert, Fretty Or. 19 Nich. Ranton   20 Johan. Hodges   20 Hum. Handford, m.   21 Tho. Moulson   21 Rad. Freeman Azure, 3 Lozinges, Argent. 22 Roland. Heylinge   22 Rob. Parkhurst   CAR. REX.   Anno   1 Johan. Poole   1 Chri. Cithenowe   2 Edrus. Bromfeild   2 Rich. Fenn   3 Maur. Abbot, mil.   3 Hen. Garway▪ Arg. a Pile surmounted by a Fess, be∣tween 4 Leopards-heads Gules. 4 Rowland Backhouse   4 Will. Acton, m. & bar.   5 Edmund. Wright   5 Humphi. Smith   6 Arthur Abdey Or, 2 Chevorons betwixt 3 Cinque-folis Sable. 6 Rob. Cambell * Ar. on a Cheveron S. between 3 Pellets, each charged with a Martlet of the field, as many Mascles O. 7 Sam. Cranmer   7 Hen. Prat *   8 Hugo. Perry   8 Hen. Andrews   9 Gilb. Harrison   9 Rich. Gurney Paly Counter-paly of 6 Peeces per Fess Or. & A. 10 Joh. Highlord Sab. a Bend Flory, Argent. 10 Joh. Cordell   11 Tho. Soame   11 Joh. Gaire   12 Will. Abell   12 Jac. Gerrard   13 Tho. Atkin   13 Edw. Rudge   14 Isaac. Pennington   14 Joh. Woolaston Sab. 3 Mullets pierced Argent. 15 Tho. Adams Ermme, 3 Catts Azure. 15 Johan. Warner Or, a Cheveron betwixt 3 boars-heads Eras. Sable. 16 Johan. Towse   16 Abram. Reynardson Arg. 2 Cheverons Engrailed and a Can∣ton G. whereon a Mascle of the field. 17 Georg. Garret, mil.   17 Georg. Clarke Arg. on a Bend Gules, between 3 Ogresses as many Swans proper. 18 Johan. Langham Argent 3 Bears-heads erazed Sa. musled Or. 18 Tho. Andrews Arg. on a Cheveron ngrailed betwixt 3 Tersoils Vert, as many Mullets Or. 19 Johan. Fouke Vert. a Flower de luce Argent. 19 Jacob. Bunce   20 Will. Gibbs   20 Rich. Chambers   21 Johan. Kendrick   21 Tho. Foot Arg. a Cheveron, and in the Dexter∣point a Trefoyle Sable. 22 Tho. Cullum   22 Simon. Edmunds   The Reader (whom I presume no less charitable then judicious) will not be offended with the many naked blanks or arme-less spaces, annexed to these Sheriffs. He that thinks the Sheriffs of London as cognoscible Persons (especially so long since) as these of other Counties, may with equal truth maintain the springs of rivers as easily dis∣cernable as their Channels. For the Sheriffs of Counties were men of known and grown Estates, equally eminent for the roots whence they sprang, as for the branches springing from them; whereas many Sheriffs of London (like those plants which the Gardiners tearm Annual, lasting but a year) appear only eminent during their Sherifalty, ad afterwards no motion or mention of them, especially of such as died before their Mayoralty, the true reason why we could attain but so few Armes with any assurance. HENRY the Sixth. 18. PHILLIPUS MALPAS.] He Stow's Survey of London pag. 88. gave by his Testament 125l. to relief of poor Prisoners, and every year for five years 400. Shirts and Smocks, 40. pair of Sheets, 150. gowns of Freeze to the Poor. To 500. poor people in London, every one 6. Shillings 8. Pence; to poor Maids Marriages, 100. Marks; to High-ways, 100. Marks; 20. Marks the year to a Graduate to Preach; 20. Pounds unto Preachers at the Spittle on the three Easter holy-days, &c. 20. RICHARD RICH.] He was a Mercer, and founded Almes-houses at Idem p. 89. Hodsden in Hartford-shire, which no doubt were by him competently endowed, though now the Almes-houses are as poor as the Almes-folk, the one needing repairing, as much as the other relieving. EDWARD the Fourth. 17. RICARD RAWSON.] He Idem ibidem. gave by Testament large Legacies to the Prisoners, Hospitals, and Lazer∣houses. To other poor, to High-ways, to the Water-conduits, besides to poor Maids Marriages 340. pounds, and his Executors to build a large house in the
Church-yard of Saint Maries Spittle, wherein the Mayor and his Brethren doe use to sit, and hear the Sermons in Easter holy-days. 20. THOMAS ILAM.] He newly builded the great Stow's Surv. of London p. 89. Conduit in the Cheap, of his own charges, to the great convenience of the City. HENRY the Seventh. 18. HENRY KEBL.] He gave to High-ways Idem ibidem. 200. pounds, to poor Maids Marriages 100. Marks, &c. to 7. Almes-men in London 6. pence the Week for ever. He was when living a great Benefactor to the building of Alder-Mary-Church, and by his Testament gave 1000. pounds towards the finishing thereof, how barbarously he was afterwards re∣quited, and his body cast out of the grave, we have First book in the chap. of Churches. formerly largely bemoaned and with just indignation. HENRY the Eighth. 1. GEORGE MONOX.] He re-edified the decayed Stow's Surv. of London p. 90. Parish-Church of Waltamstow or Walthamstow in Essex, he founded there a Free-school, and Almes-houses for thirteen Almes-people, he made also a Cawsey of Timber over the Marshes from Walthamstow to Lock-bridge. The Farewell. And now, being to take my Farewell of this great City, I cannot forget the verse, which I find amongst others, in Master Camden's commendation thereof. Urbs pietate potens, numeroso cive superba. Potent in piety, in her people proud. But see the Romish charity, who confine all piety to Popery. The Index Expurgato∣ius, Printed at Madrid by Lewes Sanchez 1612. commandeth the forepart of the verse, concerning their piety to be expunged, letting the latter moity of their pride to remain. May I in this particular be the humble Remembrancer of the City, (without the least intrenching on his place, who worthily dischargeth that office,) to cross and con∣sute that peevish and partial Index. Let it be their endeavours, to delete out of their hearts, all high conceits of their populousness, and effectually to express grace and goodness in their conversations. Nor let the City of London ever forget quantillum interfuit inter maximam Civi∣tatem et nullam; How little distance there lately was betwixt the greatest City and none at all, if Gates and Barrs (as it is generally received) be the essential difference of a City. But God who can produce light out of darkness can make the plucking dwn of the Gates, to be the setting up of the City. Wherefore though the Eleventh day of March, be generally beheld as the first day of Spring, London may date her Spring from the Eleventh day of February 1659. when she effectually felt the vernal heat after a long Winter of woe and misery. I heartily wish this honourable City what ever may conduce to the continuance and increase of the happiness thereof. Especially that the river of Thames, the lif of London (as which Easeth, Adorneth, Inricheth, Feedeth and Fortifieth it,) may have its Channel constantly continued: The Millers Riddle, If I have Water, I will drink Wine; But if I have no Water, I must drink Water. is appliable to this City; so long as Thames-water continues, Londoners may Wine it; but should it fail, they must drink water indeed, and some perchance brackish too, as made of their tears.
I will not pry too nearly and narrowly into the fancy of our Bella in his ruins of Rome translated by Spencer. Poet, speaking of the ruins of old Rome, Ne ought save Tiber hasting to his fall, O Worlds inconstancy! Remains of all: That, which is firm doth flit and fall away, And that is flitting doth abide and stay. And yet by his leave, greater rivers then Tiber have in process of time had their streams by casualties or neglect, partly drained, wholy dryed, or otherwise diverted. My humble request therefore to the Officers of the City is, effectually to own their concern∣ment in the river of Thames, in clearing and cleansing it from Sholes, Sands, and other obstructing incroachments, that they may leave it as well to posterity, as they found it from their fathers.
WESTMINSTER. WESTMINSTER is the greatest City in England next London, not onely in Position, but by the Dimensions thereof. For let it be taken (as truly it ought) extensively with the Liberty of Lancaster from Temple-bar, and it filleth as much ground (not to say containeth more reasonable souls) then any City in the Land. But as a proper man seemeth a Dwarfe, when placed next to a Giant; such the infelicity of Westminster, whose due greatness, devoured by the vicinity of London, is insensible in the eyes of the Beholders. It was anciently called Thorney, and afterwards Westminster, for distinction from Saint Pauls, called in ancient times Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. p. 173. in vita Gilberti West∣monasteriensis. Eastminster. The Buildings. The Abbey Church is beheld as a rare structure, with so small and slender Pillars (greatest legs argue not the strongest Man) to support so weighty a fabrick, built by King Henry the third, and afterwards much enlarged and beautified by the Abbots thereof. Adjoyning to it, is the Chappel of King Henry the seventh, which Leland calls the Miracle of the World. Indeed let the Italians deride our English, and condemn them for Gothish Buildings, This they must admire, and may here take notes of Architecture (if their pride would permit them) to perfect theirs accordingly. In this Chappel the founder thereof, with his Queen lieth interr'd, under a Monu∣ment of solid Or Copper rather. Brass, most richly gilded, and Artificialy carved. Some, slight it for the cheapness, because it cost but a thousand Godwin in his. Annals of K. Henry 8. Anno 1. pounds in the making thereof. Such do not consider it, as the work of so thrifty a Prince, who would make a little money go far; besides, that it was just at the turning of the Tide (as one may term it) of money, which flowed after the finding out of the West-Indies, though ebbing be∣fore. Amongst the civil structures, Westminster-Hall is eminent, erected by King W. Rufus, for the Hall to his own Court, built with copwebless beams, conceived of Irish∣wood. Sure I am, we then had no command in that Island, as first subdued by King Henry the second. It is one of the greatest rooms in Christendome, and indeed it needeth to be of good capacity, to receive so many Plantiffes and Defendants, being at such mutual distance of affection. Next is White-hall, the Palace of ou English Kings, which one term'd a good Hy∣pocrite, promising less then it performeth, and more convenient within then comely with∣out, to which the Nursery of Saint James's was an appendant. As for the houses of Noble-men all along the Strand, I desire to be excused from commending some, lest it should by caviling Spirits be implicitely interpreted a dis∣praise of the rest. Besides, I am ignorant under what name to commend them to posterity; so many houses daily new-dipt, assume to themselves new names, accord∣ing to the alteration of their Owners. I conclude them therefore all best, and best of all, whilst they continue in the hands of their present possessors. Proverbs. As sure as Exchequer pay.] All know, that the Exchequer was formerly the Treasury of the Kings of England, kept in this City, the pleading part on the one side, and the paying part on the other side of Westminster-hall. This Proverb was in the prime thereof, in the raign of Queen Elizabeth, who maintained her Exchequer to the heigth, that her Exhequer might matain her. The pay thereof was sure inwards, nothing being remitted which was due there to the Queen; and sure outwards, nothing being detained which was due thence from the Queen, full and speedy payment being made thereof. This Proverb began to be crost about the end of the raign of King James, when the credit of the
Exchequer began to decay, and no wonder if the streams issuing thence were shallow, when the fountain to feed them was so low, the revenues of the Crown being much abated. There is no redemption from Hell.] There is a place partly under, partly by the Exchequer Court commonly called Hell; I could wish it had another name, seeing it is ill jesting with edge tools, especially with such as are sharpened by Scripture. I am informed that formerly this place was appointed a prison for the Kings debtors, who never were freed thence, untill they had paid their uttermost due demanded of them: If so, it was no Hell but might be termed Purgatory according to the Popish erronious perswasion. But since this Pro∣verb is applyed to moneys paid into the Exchequer, which thence are irrecoverable, upon what plea or pretence whatsoever. As long as Megg of Westminster.] This is applyed to persons very tall, especially if they have Hop-pole-heighth wanting breadth proportionable thereunto. That such a gyant woman ever was in Westminster, cannot be proved by any good witness, (I pass not for a late lying Pamphlet) though some in proof thereof produce her Grave-stone on the South-side of the Cloistures, which (I confess) is as long an large and entire Marble, as ever I beheld. But be it known, that no woman in that age was interred in the Cloistures, appropriated to the Sepultures of the Abbot and his Monkes. Besides, I have read in the Records of that Abby of an infectious year, wherein many Monkes dyed of the Plague, and were all buried in one Grave, probably in this place under this Marble Monument. If there be any truth in the Proverb, it rather relateth to a great Gun, lying in the Tower, commonly call'd long Megg, and in troublesome times, (perchance upon ill May day in the raign of King Henry the eighth,) brought to Westminster, where for a good time it continued. But this Nut (perchance) deerves not the Cracking. Princes. EDWARD the first was born in Westminster, being a Prince placed by the posture of his nativity, betwixt a weak Father, and a wilful Son. Yet he needed no such advantage for foils to set forth his  worth. He was surnamed Longshanks, his step being another mans stride, and was very high in stature. And though oftimes such who are built four stories high are observed to have little in their cock-loft, yet was he a most judicious man in all his undertakings, equally wise to plot, as valiant to per∣form, and (which under Divine Providence was the result of both,) happy in success at Sea, at Land, at Home, Abroad, in VVar, in Peace. He was so fortunate with his Sword at the beginning of his raign, that he awed all his enemies with his Scabbard, before the end thereof. In a word he was a Prince of so much merit that nothing under a Chronicle can make his compleat Character. EDWARD sole on to King Henry the sixth, and Margaret his Queen, was Seeds Chro∣nicle p. 684. born at Westminster on the 13 day of Octo. 1453. Now when his Father's party was totally and finally routed in the battail at Teuks-bury, this Prince being taken prisoner, pre∣sented to King Edward the fourth, and demanded by him, on what design he came over into England, returned this answer, That he came to recover the Crown, which his Ancestos for three desents had no less rightfully then peaceably possessed. An answer for the truth, befitting the Son of so holy a Father as King Henry the sixth, and for the boldness thereof, becoming the Son of so haughty a Mother as Queen Margaret. But presently King Edward dashed him on the mouth with his , and his Brother Richard Crook-back stab'd him to the heart with his dagger. A barba∣rous murder, without countenance of justice in a legal, or valour in a military way. And his blood then shed was punished not long after. Here I am not ashamed to make this observation. That England had successively three Edwards, all Princes of Wales, sole or eldest sons to actual Kings; Two dying vio∣lent, all untimely deaths, in their minority, before they were possessed of the Crown, viz. 1 Edward Son to Henry 6. stab'd In the Seventeenth years of his age. 2 Edward Edward 4. stifled Tenth 3 Edward Richard 3. pined away Eleventh
The murder of the second may justly be conceived the punishment of the murder of the first, and the untimely death of the last, (of whom more in In title of Princes. Yorkshire,) a judge∣ment for the murder of the two former. EDWARD eldest son of Edward the fourth and Elizabeth his Queen, was born in the Sanctuary of Westminster, November 4. 1471. His tender years are too soft, for a solid character to be fixed on him. No hurt we find done by him, but too much on him, being murthered in the Tower by the procurement of his Unckle Protector. Thus was he born in a spiritual, and kill'd in a temporal Prison. He is commonly called King Edward the fifth, though his head was ask'd, but never married to the English Crown; and therefore in all the Pictures made of him, a distance interposed, forbiddeth the banes betwixt them. ELIZABETH eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth and Elizabeth his Queen was born in Speeds Cron. p. 703. Westminster on the eleventh of February 1466. She was after∣wards married to King Henry the seventh, and so the two Houses of York and Lancaster, united first hopefully in their Bed, and aterwards more happily in their Issue. Bsides her dutifulness to her husband, and fruitfulness in her children, little can be extracted of her personal character. She dyed (though not in Child bearing) in Child-bed, being safely delivered on Candlemas day, Anno 1503▪ of the Lady Katharine, and afterwards falling sick, languished until the eleventh of February, and then died in the thirty seventh year of her age, on the day of her Idem. nativity. She lieth buried with her husband in the Chappel of his erection, and hath an equal share with him in the use and honour of that his most magnificent monument. CECILY second daughter to King Edward the fourth, by Elizabeth his Queen,A M P. bearing the name of Cecily Dutchess of York, her grand▪ mother and god mother, was born at Westminster. In her Child-hood mention was made of a marriage betwixt her and James (son to James the third) Prince of Scotland. But that Motion died with her father, Heaven (wherein marriages are made) reserving that place for Margaret her eldest sisters eldest daughter. She long led a single life, but little respected of King Henry the seventh her bro∣ther in law. That politick King knowing, that if he had none, or no surviving Issue by his Queen, then the right of the Crown rested in this Cecily, sought to suppress her from popularity, or any publick appearance. He neither preferred her to any  Prince, nor disposed of her to any prime Peer of England, till at last this Lady wedded her self to a Linconshire Lord, John Baron Wells, whom King Henry advan∣ced Viscount and no higher. After his death, my (Speeds Chro. in the end of the reign of K. Edward the fourth.) Author saith, she was re-married, not mentioning her (Some say his name was Kyme.) husbands name, whence I conclude him an obscure person, and this Lady rather married then match'd, such the distance betwixt their degrees. Proba∣bly this Cecily, consulting her comfort, more then her credit did it of design, so to be beneath the jealousie of King Henry the seventh. She left no children, and the date of her death is uncertain. CHARLES the second (son to King Charles the first of Blessed Memory) (and Mary, youngest daughter to Henry the fourth King of France,) was born at Saint James's May 29. 1630. Great was the general rejoycing thereat. The University of Oxford congratulated his birth with printed Poems, and it was taken ill, though causelesly, by some, that Cambridge did not do the like: for then the Wits of the University were sadly distracted into several Counties, by reason of the plague therein. And I remember, Cambridge modestly excused herself in their Poem made the year after, at the birth of the Lady Mary, and it will not be amiss to insert and translate one Tetrastick, made by my worthy Master Booth of C. C. C▪ friend, Quod fuit ad nixus Academia muta priores, Carolus, aegra fuit. Spe veniente novâ si tunc tacuisset amores, Non tantùm morbo digna, sed illa mori. Prince Charles forgive me, that my silent quill, Joy'd not thy birth, alas sore sick was I. New hopes now come, had I been silent still, I should deserve both to be sick and die. His birth was accompanied with two notable accidents in the heavens. The star Venus was visible all day long, as sometime it falls out neer her greatest Elongation. And two day after there was an Ecclipse of the Sun, about eleven digits, observed by the greatest Bambridge & Gassendus. Mathematicians.
And now Reader, give me leave to be silent my self, and present thee with the ex∣pressions of a most ingeniousHamond L'estrange in the raign of King Charles the first p. 112. Gentleman; To behold this babe, heaven it self seemed to open one Eye more then ordinary.—Such Asterisks and Celelestial Signatures affixt to times so remarkable as this, usually are , prophetically hinting and pointing out somewhat future of eminent contingency. Yea such have since been the occurrences in the life of this pious Prince, that right∣ly considered they will appear (not onely eminent above the common standard of actions, but) full of miracle and amazement. He was on the 1. of January 1650. at Scoon Crowned King of Scotland; Being be∣fore invaded by an Army under the conduct of O. C. Soon after quitting that Kingdome he marched for England, and on the 3. of September 1651. nighSee Battles in Worcester∣shire. Worcester was fought, and lost the day, though he (to use myDoctor Hey∣lin in his life of K. Charles p. 155. Authors expression) acted beyond the expectation of his friends, and to the great applause of his very enemies. Narrow search was made after his person, yea a thousand pounds (a bait his politique enemies made sure would have been bit at,) promised to such who should betray him. Yet God (whose Angels  were his Life-guard) miraculously preserving him out of the hands of his enemies, he safely passed over into France to the Queen his mother. During his continuance beyond the Seas, great were the proffers tendered unto him if forsaking the Protestant Religion; but alas! as soon might the impotent waves re∣move the most sturdy rocks, as they once unfix him; such his constancy, whom nei∣ther the frowns of his afflictions, nor smiles of secular advantages, could make to warp from his first principles. At length his piety and Patience were rewarded by God, with a happy restitution to his undoubted Dominions, and he after a long and tedious exile, landed at Dover, May 25. 1660. to the great joy of his three Kingdomes. A Prince whose vertues I should injure, if endeavouring their contraction within so narrow a scantling. And yet, I cannot pass over that, wherein he so much resembleth the King of Heaven, (whose Vicegerent he is) I mean his merciful disposition, doing good unto those who spightfully used and persecuted him. And now it is my hearty prayer, that God who appeared so wonderful in his Restau∣ration, would continue still Gracious to us in his Preservation, confounding the plots of his adversaries, that upon him and his posterity the Crown may flourish forever. MARY eldest daughter of King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born at Saint James's November 4. 1631. When her royal father out of his paternal love, began to cast about for a fitting confort, this Peerless Princess (though tender in years, rich in piety and wisdome,) made it her humble request, she might be match'd as well in her religion as affection; which happened answerable to her desires. For not long after, a marriage, treated betwixt her and Count William of Nassau, eldest son to Henry Prince of Orange, was concluded, and this royal pair wedded accordingly May 2. 1641. The February following, having at Dover taken her leave of the King her Father (the last time she ever saw him on earth,) she embarked for, and within few days landed in Holland. His Majesties affairs in England daily growing worse and worse, at length the sad news of his horrid murder arrived at her eares: this was seconded with the loss of her husband the Prince of Orange, who deceased October 8. 1650. Yet such her signal patience that she underwent the weight of so many heavy afflictions (sufficient to break the back of a mean Christian) with a courage far surpassing the weakness of her sex. But amidst these her calamities God was pleased to remember mercy, bles∣sing her the November ensuing with a hopeful son. The complexion of the times being altered in England, she came over to congratulate the happiness of her Brother his miraculous restitution. When behold sickness arrests this royal Princess no bail being found by physick to defer the execution of her death, which happened 1660. On the 31. of December following, she was honourably [though privately] interred at Westminster in the Chappel of King Henry the seventh, and no eye so dry but willingly afforded a tear to bemoan the loss of so worthy a Princess.
JAMES third son of King Charles and Queen Mary, October was 13. 1633. born at Saint James's. He was commonly stiled Duke of York, though not solemnly created until January 27. 1643. At the rendition of Oxford he was taken Prisoner, and some two years after, through the assistance of one Colonel Bamfield, made his escape, landing safe in Holland. Hence he went for France, where he so prudently deported himself, that he soon gained the favour and honour of the whole Court. Yea, such was this Princes valour and prowess, that before arrived at the age of one and twenty years, he was made Leiutenant General of the Forces of the King of France, a thing which sounds highly to the esteem of this Duke, being a sufficient argument as well of his Policy as Magnanimity; seeing a wise head is equally required warily to consult, as a stout heart resolutely to act, for the due performance of that office. This trust he discharged to the admiration of all, atchieving so many Noble and He∣roick exploits, which rendred him renow'd throughout the Christian world. Yet such the bafeness and ingratitude of the French, that concluding a Peace with O. C. the Usurper of England, they wholy forgot his former services, and consented to the expulsion of this Prince and his royal brothers out of that Kingdome. valour cannot long lye neglected, soon was he courted by Don John de Austria into Flanders, where in the action at Dunkirk, he far surpassed his former deeds, often forgetting that he was a Prince to shew himself a true souldier, such his hazarding his person, (really worth ten thousand of them) to the great molestation of his true friends. Since God out of his infinite love to the English, hath safely returned this Duke to his native Country, where that he may long live, to be the joy and delight of the whole Nation, I shall constantly beg of God in my daily devotions. ELIZABETH second daughter of King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born at Saint James's Anno 1635. on the 28. day of December. She proved a Lady of parts above her age, the quickness of her mind making recompence for the weakness of her body. For the remainder of her life I will my hold peace, and listen to my good friend MasterNow Clek of Stationers∣hall, then an attendant of the Lady. John Buroughs thus expressing himself in a letter unto me. The Princess Elizabeth with her Brother Henry Duke of Glocester, being by order of parliament to be removed to Carisbroke-castle in the Isle of Wight, (where his Most Ex∣cellent Maiesty was lately a Prisoner) were accordingly received by Mr. Anthony Mild may from the Earl and Countess of Leceister. at Penshurst in Kent, and began their unwilling journey on Friday 9. of August 1650. On the 16. of the same Month they were first lodged in Carisbroke-castle aforesaid. The Princess being of a melancholy temper, (as affected above her age with the sad con∣dition of her Family,) fell sick about the beginning of September following, and continu∣  for three or four days, having onely the Advise of Doctor Bignall a worthy and able  of Newport. After very many rare ejaculatory expressions, abundantly demon∣strating her unparalelled Piety, to the eternal honour of her own memory, and the astonish∣ment of those who waited on her, she took leave of the world on Sunday the eighth of the same September. Her body being embalmed, was carefully disposed of in a Coffin of Lead, and on the four  twentieth of the said Month, was brought (in a Borrowed Coach) from the Castle to the Town of Newport, attended thither with her few late Servants. At the end of the , the Corps were met and waited on by the Mayor and Aldermen thereof in their forma∣lities to the Church, where about the middle of the East part of the Chancel in Saint Thomas  Chappel, her Highness was interr'd in a small Vault purposely made, with an Inscription of the date of her death engraved on her Coffin. The  of Norway, where a Winters day is hardly an hour of clear light, are the  of wing of any Foul under the firmament, nature teaching them to bestir them∣selves, to lengthen the shortness of the time with their swiftness. Such the active piety of this Lady improving the little life alloted her, in running the way of Gods Commande∣. third daughter to King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born at  James's, March 17. Anno Domini 1637. She was a very pregnant Lady above , and died in her infancy when not full four years old. Being minded by thoseMistris Co∣nant a Rocker to whom she spake it.  her, to call upon God even when the pangs of death were upon her, I am not
able, saith she, to say my long prayer, (meaning the Lords-prayer) but I will say my short one, Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of death; this done, the little lambPsal. 13. 3. gave up the ghost. KATHARINE fourth daughter to King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born at White hall, (the Queen-Mother then being at Saint James's) and survived not above half an hour after her baptizing. So that it is charity to mention her whose memory is likely to be lost, so short her continuance in this life. The rather because her name is not entred as it ought, into the Register of Saint Martins in the fields, as indeed none of the Kings children save Prince Charles, though they were born in that Parish: And hereupon a story depends. I am credibly informed, that at the birth of every child of the King, born at White∣hall or Saint James's, full five pounds were ever faithfully paid to some unfaithful re∣ceivers thereof, to record the names of such children in the Register of Saint Martins. But the money being embiled (we know by some, God knows by whom,) no me∣morial is entred of them. Sad, that bounty should betray any to such baseness, and that which was intended to make them the more solemnly remembred, should occasion that they should be more silently forgotten. Say not, let the children of mean persons be written down in Registers, Kings chil∣dren are Registers to themselves, or all England is a Register to them. For sure I am, this common confidence hath been the cause, that we have been so often at a loss, about the nativities and other properties of those of Royal extraction. CHARLES STUART son to the Illustrious James Stuart Duke of York, by Anne daughter to the Right Honourable Edward Hide Earl of Clarendon, and Lord Chancellour of England, and Frances his Lady, descended of the Ancient Family of the Aylesburies, High-sheriffs for many years together of Bedford and Buckingham∣shire, in the reign of King Edward the second See our list of Sheriffs in that County. and third, was born at Worcester-house 22. day of October 1660. and christened by the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert L. Bishop of London, his Majesty and George Duke of Albemarle being his God-fathers, and Mary the Queen-mother his God-mother: He was declared Duke of Cambridge, a title which to the great honour of that University for these four hundred years, hath been onely conferred either on forraign Princes, or persons of the Royal Bloud. This Princely infant dyed May 5. 1661. Saints. Saint WULSY being a man reputed when living, (and reported when dead) of great vertue, and innocency; Math. est ad An. Dom. 958. Was by Saint Dunstan, created the first Abbot of West∣minster, where he lived many years very exemplary for his conversation, untill his death, which happened Anno Dom. 960. Then was his body buried in the same Monastery, and the 26. day of September was kept by the Citizens of London, with great Veneration of his miracle-working memory. Martyrs. I meet with none in this City, and in my mean Judgment it is most observable that London having two Pages (as I may term them) attending it, viz. Westminster and South∣wark, both joyned to it in buildings, should be so different from it in condition; in London we have no room to hold Martyrs, in the other two no Martyrs to take up any room. Inquiring the cause thereof, we find these three places (though contiguous not to say continued) in the raign of Queen Mary under three several jurisdictions; London un∣der bloudy Bonner who made havock of all he could come at: Southwark under poli∣tick Gardner, who took wit in his anger, of whom Vide Martyrs in Hantshire. formerly: This Westminster under John Fecknam Abbot thereof, with power Episcopal, a man cruel to none, courteous and charitable to all who needed his help or liberality.
Confessors. Rain (which Country-people say goeth by Planets,) goeth by Providence. * IAmos 4. 7. caused it to rain upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another. Persecution obser∣veth the same method, ordered by the same power and pleasure. A shower of bloud fell upon London, whilst Westminster the next City did escape. So that I find neither Mar∣tyr nor Confessor therein. Meeting with none before, let us proceed to Prelates since the Reformation. RICHARD NEILE was born in Kings-street in this City, and was bred in Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, he was afterwards Vicar of Chesthunt in the County of Hartford, presented thereunto by the honourable family of the Cecills; he was the first and last Native of this City, who became the Dean, and so the supreme magi∣strate thereof. Through many Bishopricks of Coventry and Lichfield, Durham and Win∣chester, he was at last preferred Arch-bishop of York, being also Privy Counsellor to King James and King Charles. He died Anno Domini 16. JOHN WARNER D. D. was born in the Parish of Saint So informed from his own mouth. Clements Danes, within the Precincts of this City, bred in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, at last preferred Bishop of Rochester. This worthy Bishop perceiving the want of a fixed Font in the Cathedral Church of Canterbury, bestow'd one upon it, whether more curious or costly, my Author W. Somner in the Antiquity of Cant. p. 181. could not decide it, being both ways so excellent and exquisite. A gift the more remarkable, be∣cause the Idem ibidem. first, which hath been offered by any private hand to that Church of later times. But I suspect now this Font it self is washed away in the deluge of our late wars under the notion of superstition. God hath given him a great Estate, and a liberal heart to make use of it. Keeping good Hospitality in the Christmas at Brumley, as he fed many Poor, so he freed himself from much trouble; being absent when the rest of the Bishops subscribed their Protest in Parliament, whereby he enjoy'd liberty in the restraint of others of his Order. He was an able and active advocate for Episcopacy, in the House of Lords speak∣ing for them as long as he had any voice left him, and then willing to have made signs in their iust defence, if it might have been permitted him. But it is now high time for me to put out my Candle when Day-light shines so bright, I mean to desist from charactering of persons who are so perfectly known to so many alive. I will only adde, this eminent Prelate hath since seen the happy restitution of his order, injoying again his former dignity, who now is (and long may be) living 1661. Statesmen. Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, youngest son to Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper, was born in York-house Anno 1560. For being demanded his age by Queen Elizabeth, he returned, that he was two years younger then her Majesties reign. He was bred in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, and there first fell into a dislike of Aristotles Philosophy, as Barren and Jejune, inabling some to dispute, more to wrangle, few to find out trueth, and none, if confining themselves to his Principles. Hence it was that afterwards he traded so largely in experiments, so that as Socrates is said to be the first, who stooped Towring Speculations into Practical Morality: Sir Francis was one of the first, who reduced Notional to Real and Scientifical Philoso∣phy. He was afterwards bred in Grays-Inn in the Study of our Municipal Law, attaining to great Eminency, but no Preferment therein, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth; Imputable to the envy of a great Person, who hindred his rising, for fear to be hindred by him if risen, and Eclipsed in his own profession. Thus the strongest wing of merit cannot mount, if a stronger weight of malice doth depress it. Yet was he even then Favorite to a Favorite, I mean, the Earl of Essex, and more true to him, then the Earl was to himself. For finding him to prefer destructive before displeasing Counsel, Sir
Francis fairly for sook, not hs person, (whom his pity attended to the grave) but pra∣ctises, and herein was not the worse friend, for being the better subject. By K. James he was made his Solicitor, and afterwards his Atturney, (then priviledged contrary to custome to it a member in Dom. Com.) and at last Lord Chancellor of* See his life written by Dr. Rawleigh England. His abilities were a clear conutation of two vulgar errors errors, (libells on learn∣ed men) First, that Judgement, Wit, Fancy, and Memory, cannot eminently be in conjunction in the same person, whereas our Knight was a rich Cabinet, fill'd with all four, besides a golden key to open it, Elocution. Secondly, That he who is something in all, is nothing in any one Art, whereas he was singular in singulis, and being In- at- all came off with credit. Such as condemn him for pride, if in his place, with the fift part of his parts, had been ten times prouder themselves; he had been a better Master if he had been a worse, being too bountiful to his servants, and either too confident of their honesty, or too conni∣ving at their falshood. The story is told to his advantage, that he had two Servants, one in all causes Patron to the Plantiffe, (whom his charity presumed always injured,) the other to the Defendant, (pitying him as compelled to Law,) but taking bribes of both, with this condition, to restore the money received if the Cause went against them? Their Lord ignorant hereof, always did unpartial Justice, whilst his men (making people pay for what was given them) by compact shared the money betwixt them, which cost their Master the loss of his office. Leading a private life, he much delighted to study in the shade of solitariness, and many useful discoveries in Nature were made by him, so that he may be said to have left nothing to his Executors and all to his Heirs, under which notion the learned of all ages may be beheld. His vast bounty to such who brought him presents from great persons occasioned his want afterwards, who in rewarding them so remembred that he had been Lord Chancellor, that he forgot that he was but the Lord Verulam. A Viscountry that began and ended in him dying issu'less, it being remarkable, that though we have had two Earls (of several Lord Burgh of Ireland, and Lord Henry Jermyn. families) of Saint Albans, yet was there no Lord Verulam, as if it were referved for that antient Roman Colony to be buried in its own reverend ruins and in this peerless Lords everlasting memory, much admired by English, more by out-landish men; Distance diminishing his faults to be invisible to forreign eyes, whilst we beheld his perfections abated with his failings. He died Anno Domini 1626. in the house of the Earl of Arundel at High-gate, and was buried in Saint Michaels Church in Saint Albans, Master Mutis his grateful servant erecting a Monument for him. Since I have read that his grave being occasionally opened, his scull, (the relique of civil veneration) was by one King a Doctor of Physick made the object of scorn and contempt, but he, who then derided the dead, is since become the laughing stock of the living. Writers. SULCARD of WESTMINSTER was an English-man by birth, bred a Benedictine Monke. He was one of an excellent wit, meek disposition, candid behaviour, and in great esteem with Bale de scripti Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 55. King Edward the Conessor. What Progress he made in learning, may easily be collected from what is recorded in an old Manuscript, In Westmonasterio vixerunt simul Abbas, Eadwinus & Sulcardus Coenobita: Sed Sul∣chardus doctrina major erat. He flourished Anno Domini 1070. under King William the Conquerour. GILBERT of WESTMINSTER bred first Monkc then Abbot thereof. He gave himself to the study of humane learning, then of Divinity, and through the guidance of Anselme Arch-bishop of Canterbury attained to great knowledge in the Scriptures. Afterwards he studied in France, visited Rome, in his return from whence he is reported to have had a disputation with a learned Jew, which afterwards he redu∣ced into the form of a Dialogue, and making it publique he dedicated it to Saint Anselme. He dyed Anno 1117. and was buried in Westminster. MATHEW of WESTMINSTER was bred a Monke therein, and as ac∣complished a Scholar as any of his age. Observable is the grand difference betwixt our English history, as he found it and as he left it. He found it like Polyphemus when
his eye was bored out, a big and bulky body, but blind. Memorable actions were either presented without any date which little informed, or too many dates which more distra∣cted the Reader. Our Mathew reduced such confused sounds to an Articulate and in∣telligible voice, regulating them by a double directory of time, viz. the beginnings and deaths of all the Kings of England and Arch bishops of Canterbury. He wrote one History from the beginning of the world to Christ; a second, from Christs Nativity to the Norman Conquest; a third; from thence to the beginning of King Edward the second, augmenting it aterwards with the addition of his life and King Edward the thirds. He named his book Flores Historiarum, and if sometimes (for it is but seldome) he presenteth a flower less fragrant, or blasted bud, the judicious Reader is not tyed to take what he tenders, but may select for his own ease a Nosegay out of the choicest flowers thereof. He dyed about the year 1368. Since the Reformation. BENIAMIN JOHNSON was born in this City. Though I cannot with all my industrious inquiry find him in his cradle, I can fetch him from his long coats. When a little child he lived in Harts-horn-lane near Charing-cross, where his Mother married a Bricklayer for her Second husband. He was first bred in a private school in Saint Martins Church, then in VVestminster school, witness his own Epigram 14. Epigram; Camden, most reverend Head, to whom I owe All that I am in Arts, all that I know. How nothing's that, to whom my Country owes The great renown and Name wherewith she goes, &c. He was Statutably admitted into Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, (as many years after incorporated a honorary Member of Christ-church in Oxford) where he continued but few weeks for want of further maintenance, being fain to return to the trade of his father in law. And let not them blush that have, but those that have not a lawful calling. He help'd in the building of the new structure os Lincolns-Inn, when having a Trowell in his hand, he had a book in his pocket. Some gentlemen pitying that his parts should be buried under the rubbish of so mean a Calling, did by their bounty manumise him freely to follow his own ingenuous inclinations. Indeed his parts were not so ready to run of themselves as able to answer the spur, so that it may be truly said of him, that he had an Elaborate wit wrought out by his own industry. He would sit silent in learned company, and suck in (besides wine) their several humors into his observation. What was ore in others, he was able to refine to himself. He was paramount in the Dramatique part of Poetry, and taught the Stage an ex∣act conformity to the laws of Comedians. His Comedies were above the Volge, (which are onely tickled with down right obscenity) and took not so well at the first stroke as at the rebound, when beheld the second time; yea they will endure reading, and that with due commendation, so long as either ingenuity or learning are fashionable in our Nation. If his later be not so spriteful and vigorous as his first pieces, all that are old will, and all that desire to be old, should excuse him therein. He was not very happy in his children, and most happy in those which died first, though none lived to survive him. This he bestowed as part of an Epitaph on his eldest son, dying in infancy. Epigram 45. Rest in soft peace and Ask'd, say here doth lye, Ben Johnson his best piece of Poetry. He dyed Anno Domini 1638. And was buried about the Belfry in the Abby-church at VVestminster.
Masters of Musick. CHRISTOPHER TYE Doctor of Musick, flourished in the reign of KingS. N. Henry the eight and King Edward the sixth, to whom he was one of the Gentlemen of their Chappel, and probably the Organist. Musick, which received a grievous wound in England at the disolution of Abbyes, was much beholding to him for her re∣covery; such his excellent skill and piety, that he kept it up in credit at Court and in all Cathedrals during his life. He translated the Acts of the Apostles into verse, and let us take a tast of his Poetry, In the former treatise to thee Dear friend Theophilus; I have written the veritie Of the Lord Christ Jesus. VVhich he to do and eke to teach; Began untill the day; In which the Spirit up did him fetch To dwell above for Aye. After that he had power to do Even by the Holy Ghost; Commandements then he gave unto His chosen least and most. To whom also himself did shew From death thus to revive: By tokens plain unto his few Even forty days alive. Speaking of Gods kingdome with heart Chusing together them; Commanding them not to depart From that Jerusalem. But still to wait on the promise Of his Father the Lord; Of which ye have heard me ere this Unto you make record. Pass we now from his Poetry (being Musick in words) to his Musick, (being Poe∣try in sounds) who set an excellent Composition of Musick of four parts, to the se∣veral Chapters of his aforementioned Poetry, dedicating the same to King Edward the sixth, a little before the death of that good Prince, and Printed it Anno Domini 1553. He also did compose many excellent Services and Anthems of four and five parts which were used in Cathedrals many years after his death, the certain date whereof I cannot attain. JOHN DOULAND was (as I have most cause to believe) born in this City; sure I am he had his longest life and best livelyhood therein, being Servant in the Chappel to Queen Elizabeth and King James. He was the rarest Musician that his Age did be∣hold: Having travailed beyond the Seas, and compounded English with Forreign Skill in that faculty, it is questionable whether he excell'd in Vocal or Instrumental Musick, A chearful Person he was passing his days in lawful meriment, truly answering the Anagram made of him, By Ralph Sadler Esq of Standon in Hartfordshire who was with him at Copen∣haguen. JOHANNES DOULANDUS  ANNOS LUDENDO HAUSI. Christian the fourth K. of Denmark coming over into England, requested him of K. James who unwillingly willing parted with him. Many years he lived (as I am credibly informed) in the Danish Court, in great favour and plenty, generally imployed to enter∣tain such English Persons of quality as came thither. I cannot confidently avouch his death at Denmark, but believe it more probably then their assertion, who report him returned and dying in England about the year 1615. Benefactors to the Publique. JAMES PALMER B. D. was born in this City and bred in Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge; The Company of Carpenters in London, gave him an exhibition to∣wards his maintenance there, or lent it him rather; For since, his bounty hath repaid them the Principle with plentiful consideration. He was afterwards for many years the constant Preacher of Saint Bridgets in Fleetstreet, the onely Church preferment he enjoyed: I perceive thus craft and cruelty may raise a quick and great, but plain fru∣gallity
(especially if vivacious) will advance a better and surer estate. Though se∣questred in these times; what he had formerly gained in his place, he hath since be∣stowed in building and endowing, over against the New Chappel in Westminster, a fair Almes-house for twelve poor people; besides this, many and great have his gifts been to Ministers poor widdows, and wonder not Reader, if they be unknown to me, which were unknown to his own left-hand, all this he did in his life time. O it giveth the best light when one carrieth his Lant-horn before him! The surest way that ones Will shall be performed, is to see it performed. Yea, I may say, that his poor people in his Almes-house are in some sort provided for, not onely from head to foot, but also from body to soul, he constantly preaching to them twice a week. He dyed Anno 1659. Memorable Persons. EDMOND DOUBLEDAY Esquire, was of a tall and proper person, and lived inS. N. this City. Nor had this large case a little jewell, this long body a lazy soul, whose acti∣vity and valour was adequate to his strength and greatness, whereof he gave this emi∣nent testimony. When Sir Thomas Knevet was sent November 4. 1605. by King James to search the Cellar beneath the Parliament-house, with very few, for the more privacy, to attend him, he took Master Doubleday with him. Here they found Gui Faux with his dark-lant-horn, in the dead of the night, providing for the death of many the next morning. He was newly come out of the Divels Closset, (so I may fitly term the inward room where the powder lay, and the train was to be laid,) into the outward part of the Cellar; Faux beginning to bussel, Master Doubleday instantly ordered him at his pleasure, up with his heels, and there with the Traytor lay the Treason flat along the floor, by Gods goodness detected, defeated. Faux vowed (and though he was a false Traitor, herein I do believe him,) that had he been in the inner room, he would have blown up himself and all the company therein. Thus it is pleasant musick to hear disarmed malice threaten, when it cannot strike. Master Doubleday lived many years after deservedly loved and respected, and died about the year of our Lord 1618. The Farewell. Seeing the well-being (yea being) of this City consisteth in the Kings Court and in the Courts of Justice, I congratulate the happy return of the one, praying for the long continuance of the other; yea, may the Lawyers in Westminster-hall never again plead in their Armour, (as they did in the time of Wyats rebellion,) but in their peaceable Gowns and Legal Formalities. Nor doth this Wish onely extend to the Weal of West∣minster, but all England. For no such dearth in a Land, as what is caused from a drought of Justice therein. For if judgement do not run down as Amos 5. 24. Waters, and righte∣ousness as a mighty Stream, Injustice like an Ocean will drown all with its inundation.
NOR FOLK hath the German Ocean on the North and East thereof, Suffolk severed by the river Waveny on the South-side, Cambridge-shire parted by the river Ouse, and a small part of Lin∣coln shire on the West; it extendeth full 50. miles from East to West, but from North to South stretcheth not above thirty miles. All England may be carved out of Norfolk, represented there∣in, not onely to the kind but degree thereof. Here are Fens and Heaths, and Light and Deep, and Sand and Clay-ground, and Med∣dows and Pasture, and Arable and Woody, and [generally] woodless land, so gratefull is this Shire with the variety thereof. Thus, as in many men, though perchance this or that part may justly be cavelled at, yet all put together, complete a proper person: so Norfolk collectively taken hath a sufficient result of pleasure and profit, that being sup∣plied in one part which is defective in another. This County hath the most Churches of any in England, (six hundred and sixty,) and, though the poorest Livings, yet (by some occult quallity of their good husban∣dry, and Gods blessing thereon,) the richest Clergy-men. Nor can there be given a greater demonstration of the wealth and populousness of this County, than, that in the late Act for an Assessment upon England, at the rate of sixty thousand pounds by the Month, for three Months, Norfolk with the City of Norwich, is rated at three thousand two hundred sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings, and four pence, the highest proportion of any Shire in England. And, though Norfolk hath little cause to please and less to pride it self in so dear purchased pre-eminence, yet it cannot but account it a credit, to see it self not undervalued. Natural Commodities. It shareth plentifully in all English Commodities, and aboundeth with the best and most. Rabbits. These are an Army of natural Pioners, whence men have learned cuniculos agere, the Art of undermining. They thrive best on barren ground, and grow fattest in the hardest frosts. Their flesh is fine and wholesome. If Scotish-men tax our language as improper, and smile at our wing of a Rabbit, let us laugh at their shoulder of a Capon. Their skins were formerly much used, when furs were in fashion, till of late our Ci∣tizens, of Romans are turned Grecians, have laid down their grave gowns, and took up their light cloaks; men generally disliking all habits, though emblemes of honour, if also badges of age. Their rich or silver-hair-skins, formerly so dear, are now levelled in prices with other colours, yea, are lower then black in estimation, because their wool is most used in making of hats, commonly (for the more credit) called Half-Beavers, though many of them hardly amount to the proportion of Semi-Demi-Castors. Herrings. Great store and very good of these are caught nigh Yarmouth, where once every year on the Feast of Saint Michael, is a Fair held for the sale of fish, and such the plenty of Herrings there constantly vented, that incredible the sum which is raised thereby. Indeed, the fishing for Herrings is a most gainful trade, fish though contemptable in it self, considerable in its company, swiming in such shoals, that what the Whale hath in bigness the Herring hath in number. (It may well mind such who excell in strength and valour, not to boast or be proud thereof, seeing the greatest courage may be soon pressed to death under unequal number.) Yea, Red-herrings in England mostly eaten for sauce to quicken the Appetite, serve in Holland and elsewhere for food to satisfy hunger.
I will conclude the Natural Commodities of this County, with this memorable passage, which I have read in a modernHartlibs Le∣gacy p. 97. Author; The Lord F. W. assured me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, that made above 10000l. sterl. of a piece of ground not forty yards square, and yet there was neither Mineral nor Metal in it. He ater told me, it was onely a sort of fine clay, for the making a choise sort of earthen ware; which some that knew it, seeing him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland, received so much money for it. My belief tireth in coming up to the top of this story, suspecting the addition of a cypher. But if it were so, how much would it have inriched us, if those mock∣China-dishes had been made in England. Manufactures, Worsteds. These first took their name fromCamd. Brit. in this County. Worsted a Village in this County, originally it is nothing but Woollen-thred spun very fine, and for the more strength twisted together: But O! it surpassesh my skill to name the several stuffs (being VVorsted disguised with VVeaving and Colouring) made thereof. It argueth the usefulness and publick profit of this commodity, (which first found a general repute in England toward the end of the raign of King Henry the sixth) that there are no fewer then fourteen Statutes now in force in the well ordering thereof to Merchantable proof; And appointing which of them may, which may not be Transpor∣ted. Not to speak of four VVardensStatutes 7. Edward 4. c. 3. of VVorsted VVeavers to be chosen yearly with∣in the City of Norwish, and other four out of the County of Northfolk, with their solemn Oath, Office and Authority. As for worsted Stockins they were first made in England Anno 1564. byStw's Chro. p. 869. VVilliam Rider an ingenious Apprentice living against Saint Magnus Church at the foot of Lon∣don Bridge: This William chancing to see a pair of knit worsted Stockins in the Lodging of an Italian Merchant, who had brought them from Manua, borrowed them, and ma∣king the like by that pattern, presented them to VVilliam Earl of Pembroke who first wore them in England. Proverbs. Norfolk dumplings.] This cannot be verified of any dwarfish, or diminutive stature of people in this County, being as tall of their bodies, and as tall of their arms too, I assure you, as any in England. But it relates to the fare they commonly feed on, so generally called. I wish, much good may it do them, and that their bodies thereby may be enabled for all natural, civil and spiritual performances. Norfolk VViles.] Such the skill of the common people hereof in our Common-Law, wherein they are so versed, ut si nihil sitCam. Brit. in Norfolk. litium, lites tamen ex juris apicibus serere callent. If I must go to Law, I wish them rather of my Counsel then my Adversaries. For whereas pedibus ambulando is accounted but a vexatious Suit in other Counties, here (where men are said to study Law as following the Plough tail) some would perswade us, that they will enter an action for their neighbours horse but looking over their hedge. Now, although we listen to this but as a jeer, yet give me leave to observe two parts in VViles. VVittiness which all must commend. VVickedness condemn. Sure I am, that inNum. 25. 18. Ephes. 6. 11. Josh. 9. 4. Scripture a VVile always male audit, is taken in an evil sense, as wherein the simplicity of the Dove is stung to death by the subtilty of the Serpent. But
no more hereof least Norfolk-men commence a Suit against me, though I verily be∣lieve many therein are of as peaceable dispositions as any in other places. A Yarmouth Capon.] That is a red-herring. No news for creatures to be thus disguised under other names, seeing Criticks by a Libyon bear, sub pelle Libystidis ursae, understand a Lion, no Bears being found in the land of Libya. And I believe few capons (save what have more fins then feathers) are bred in Yarmouth. But to countenance this expression, I un∣derstand that the Italian Friers (when disposed to eat flesh on Fridays) call a Capon, piscem è corte, a fish out of the Coop. He is arrested by the Baily of Marshland.] The aire of Marshland in this County is none of the wholesomest, being surrounded with the Sea and Fens on all sides. Hence it is that strangers coming hither, are clapt on the back with an ague, which sometimes lasts them longer then a Stuffe Suit. The best is when such prisoners have paid the Bailiffs Fees and Garnish, and with time and patience have weathered out the brunt of that disease, they become habited to the aire of the Country, and arrive in health at a very great age. Princes. I meet with no Prince since the Conquest taking his first breath in this County, pro∣bably, because so remote from the principal place of Royal Residence. Prelats. GILBERT BERKELEY was Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Norwich. born in this County, but descended from the ancient Barons of that name, as appeareth by his Armes. He was consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wells in the first of Queen Elizabeth, and sate therein 22. years. He died of a Lethargy being 80. years of age 1581. and is buried on the North-side of the Communion-table of his own Cathedral. JOHN AYLMER Brother to Sir Robert Aylmer Knight, was born, at Aylmer∣hall in the Parish of Tilsely in this County, as his nearest surviving relations have in∣formed me, from whom I have received the following information. When he was but a Child going toward school, Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk having some discourse with, took so much liking unto him, that after he had been bred some years in the University of Cambridge, he made him his Chaplain, and committed his daughter the Lady Jane Gray to his tuition. In the reign of Queen Mary he fled over beyond Sea, and was little less then mira∣culously saved from the Searchers of the Ship, by the ingenuity of a Marchant who put him into a great Wine-but which had a partition in the middle, so that Master Aylmer sate in the hind part, whilst the Searchers drank of the Wine which they saw drawn out of the head or other end thereof. Returning into England he was made Arch-Deacon of Lincoln, and at last Bishop of London. He was happy in a meet Yoke-fellow, having a gratious Matron to his wife, by whom he had many children, and one son to which Arch-bishop Whitgift was God∣father, and named him Tob-el, that is, The Lord is good, in memorial of a great delive∣rance bestowed on this childs mother. For when she was cast out of her Coach in London, (by a Mastiff casually seising upon the Horses) she received no harm at all, though very near to the time of her Travail. Bishop Aylmer was well learned in the Languages, a ready Disputant, and deep Di∣vine. He was eighteen years Bishop of London, and dying Anno 1594. in the 73. year of his age, had this for part of his Epitaph, which Bishop Vaugham (sometimes his Chaplain, afterwards his Successor) made upon him. Ter senos Annos Praesul, semul Exul & idem Bis Pugil in causa religionis erat. Eighteen years Bishop, and once Banish'd hence And twice a Champion in the Truths defence.
I understand it thus, once a Champion in suffering, when an Exile for religion, and again in doing, when chosen one of the disputants at Westminster against the Popish Bi∣shops Primo Elizabethae; except any expound it thus: once Champion of the Doctrine against Papists, and afterwards against the Discipline of the Non-Confromists, none more stoutly opposing or more fouly belibelled of them. God blessed him with a great estate, the main whereof he left unto Samuel Aylmer his eldest son, (High-sheriff of Suffolk in the reign of King Charles) and amongst his youngest sons (all well provided for) Doctor Aylmer Rector of Haddam in Hartford∣shire, was one of the most learned and reverend Divines in his generation. JOHN TOWERS was born in this County, bred Fellow of Queens-colledge in Cambridge; and became Chaplain to William Earl of Northampton, who bestowed on him the Benefice of Castle-Ashby in Northampton-shire. He was preferred Dean and at last Bishop of Peterborough. He was a good actor when he was young, and a great sufferour when he was old, dy∣ing (about the year 1650.) rich onely in Children and Patience. Nothing but sin is a shame in it self, and poverty as poverty (especially since our Saviour hath sanctified, it by suffering it) is no disgrace. Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. RALPH DE-HENGHAM so named from a fair Market-town in this Coun∣ty, was made Lord Chief-justice of the Kings-bench in Michaelmas term in the Sir H. Spelman in the Gossary pag. 416. second year of King Edward the first, when the King was newly returned from the Holy-land. He sate 16. years in that place (saving that one Winborne was for a Viz. Anno re∣gis 10. & 13. year or two inter∣posed) and at the general purging and garbling of the Judges, which happened in the 18. year of the aforesaid King, when all the Judges (except two, John de Tho. Walsing∣ham An. 1290. Metingham and Elias de Bekingham,) were cast out by the Parliament for their corruption, fined, banished and imprisoned, then this Ralph was merced in seven thousand marks, for bri∣bery, and ejected out of his place. Some will say, let him wither in silence, why do you mention him amongst the Worthies of our Nation? I answer, Penitence is the second part of Innocence, and we find this Ralph after his fine payed, made Chief-justice of the 6. Sept. 1. Ed. 11. inter Pat. Par. 1. Memb. 21. Common-pleas, sub recipiscendi fiducia, under the confidence generally conceived of his amendment. He died the next, being the 19. Anno Domini 1292. year of the raign of King Edward the first, he lies buried in the Church of Saint Paul, where he hath or had this Epitaph, Per versus patet hos Anglorum quod jacet hic flos Legum, qui tuta dictavit vera statuta. Ex Hengham dictus Radulphus vir benedictus. One must charitably believe that he played a good after-game of integrity, and if in∣joying longer life, he would have given a clearer testimony thereof. WILLIAM PASTON Esq. son of Clement Paston, Esq. and Beatrix his wife, (sister and heir to Jeffry Sommerton Esq.) was born at Paston in this County. He was learned in the laws of this Realm and first was Serjeant to King Henry the sixth, and was after by him preferred second Judge of the Common-pleas. I confess having confined our Catalogue to Capital Judges or Writers on the Law, he falls not under our method in the strictness thereof. But I appeal to the Reader himself, whether he would not have been highly offended with me, had I in silence passed over a person so deserving his observation. He was highly in favour with King Henry the sixth, who allowed him, besides the ordinary salary assigned to other Judges, one hundred and ten marks, (Reader behold the Standard of money in that age and admire) with two Gowns to be taken yearly out of the Exchequer, as by the ensuing letters Patents will appear; Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae, & Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus ad quos Praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem: Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali, & ut dilectus, & fidelis noster Willielmus Paston unus Justiti. nostrorum
de com. Banco Statum suum decentius manu tenere, & expensas, quas ipsum in officio pradicto facere oportebit, sustinere valeat; concessimus ei centum & decem marcas percipiendum singulis annis ad scaccarium nostrum, ad terminos Pasche & Sancti Michaelis per equales Portiones; & duas robas per annum percipien∣dum, unam videlicet cum Pellura ad festum Natalis Domini, & aliam cum Limra ad festum Pentecostes, ultra feodum consuetum, quamdiu ipsum Stare contigerit in officio supradicto. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes, teste meipso apud Westminst. XV. die Octobris anno regni no∣stri octavo. What Pellura is I understand, Furr, but what Limra is (if rightly written) I would willingly learn from another, though some are confident it is Taffata. I wonder the less at these noble favours conferred on the said William Paston Judge, for I find him in grace with the two former Kings, being made Serjeant by King Henry the fourth, and of is counsel for the Dutchie of Lancaster, and in the reign of King Henry the fifth, he was in such esteem with Sir John Falstofe Knight, that he appoin∣ted him one of his Feoffees, whom he enabled by a writing under his hand to recover debts from the Executors of King Henry the fifth. This William Paston married Agnes daughter and heir of Sir Edmond Berrey, by which marriage the Pastons rightly quarter at this day the several Coats of Hetherset, Wache∣sham, Craven, Gerbredge, Hemgrave and Kerdeston, and received both advancement in bloud and accession in estate. This said VVilliam Paston died at London, August 14. 1444. and lies buryed in Norwich; so that his corps by a peculiar exception do straggle from the Sepulture of their Ancestors, who from VVolstan de Paston (who three years after the ConquestOut of the book of Will. Botyner, fol. 20. sometimes He∣rauld to Sir John Falstofe, written in the reign of King Henry 6. and containeth all the ancient Gentry of this County. came into England to VVilliam Earl of Glandwill,) were all in∣terred at Paston. He lest rich revenues to John Paston Esquire, his eldest son, who married Margaret daughter and heir of John Mautby; and no mean Estate to VVilliam his second surviving son, who married Anne daughter to Edmond Duke of Somer∣set. Sir EDWARD COKE Knight, son of Robert Coke Esquire, and of VVinefred Knightly his wife, was born at Mileham in this County; bred, when ten years of age, at Norwich-school, and thence removed to Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. After four years continuance there, he was admitted into Cliffords-Inn-London, and the year fol∣lowing entered a Studient of the Municipal-law in the Inner-Temple. Such his profi∣ciency therein, that at the end of six years (exceeding early in that strict age) he was calld to the Bar, and soon after for three years chosen Reader in Lyons-Inn. Here his learned Lectures so spred forth his fame, that crouds of Clients sued to him for his counsel, and his own suit was the sooner granted, when tendering his affections in order to marriage, unto Briget daughter and Co-heir of John Paston Esquire. She was afterwards his incomparable wife, whose Portion moderately estimated, Viis & modis, amounted unto thirty thousand pounds, her vertues not falling under va∣luation, and she enriched her husband with ten children. Then began preferment to press upon him, the City of Norwich chusing him Re∣corder, the County of Norfolk their Knight to Parliament, the Queen her Speaker therein, as also successively her Solicitor and Attorney. King James honoured him with Knighthood, and made him Chief Justice, first of the Common-Pleas, then of the Kings-Bench. Thus beginning on a good bottome left him by his father, marrying a wife of extraordinary wealth, having at the first great and gainful practice, afterwards many and profitable Offices, being provident to chuse good penny-worths in pur∣chases, leading a thrifty life, living to a great age, during flourishing and peaceable times, (born as much after the Persecution under Queen Mary, as dying before our Ci∣vil Wars) no wonder if he advanced a fair estate, so that all his sons might seem elder brethren, by the large possessions left unto them. Some falsly character him a back-friend to the Church and Clergy, being a grand benefactour to the Church of Norwich, who gratefully under their publique seal ho∣noured him with the ensuing testimony,
Edwardus Coke Armiger, saepius & in multis difficillimis negotiis Ecclesiae no∣strae auxiliatus est, & nuper eandem contra Templorum Helluones, qui dominia, maneria & haereditamenta nostra devorare sub titulo obscuro (Concelatum di∣cunt) sponte suâ nobis insciis, & sine mercede ullâ legittimè tutatus est; atque eandem suam nostri defensionem, in perpetuam tantaerei memoriam, quam poste∣rorum, (si opus fuerit) magna cum industria & scriptis redegit, & nostrae Eccle∣siae donavit. As for the many Benefices in his own Patronage, he freely gave them to worthy men, being wont to say in his Law-language, that he would have Church-livings pass by Livery and Seisin, not Bargain and Sale. Five sorts of people he used to fore-design to misery and poverty; Chemists, Mono∣polizers, Concelers, Promoters, and Rythming Poets. For three things he would give God solemn thanks; that he never gave his body to physick, nor his heart to cruelty, nor his hand to corruption. In three things he did much applaud his own success; in his fair fortune with his wife, in his happy study of the laws, and in his free coming by all his Of∣fices, nec prece, nec pretio, neither begging, nor bribing for preferment. His parts were admirable, he had a deep judgment, faithful memory, active fancy; and the jewel of his mind was put into a fair case, a beautiful body, with a comely counte∣nance; a case, which he did wipe and keep clean, delighting in good cloaths, well worne, and being wont to say, that the outward neatness of our bodies, might be a Monitor of pu∣rity to our souls. In his pleadings, discourse and judgements, he declined all Circumlocutions, usually saying, The matter lies in a little room. In all places, callings and jurisdictions, he com∣mended modesty and sobriety within their boundaries, saying, If a River swells beyond its Banks, it loseth its own Channel. If any adverse party crossed him, he would patiently reply, If another punisheth me, I will not punish my self. In the highest Term of business he made Vacation to himself at his Table, and would never be perswaded privately to retract, what he had publikely adjudged, professing, he was a Judge in a Court, and not in a Chamber. He was wont to say, No wise man would do that in prosperity, whereof he should repent in adversity. He gave for his Motto, Prudens qui Patiens, and his practise was accordingly, especially, after he fell into the disfavor of King James. The cause hereof the Reader may find in our English Chronicles, whilst we behold, how he employed himself when retired to a private life, when he did frui suo infor∣tunio, and improv'd his loss to his advantage. He triumphed in his own innocency, that he had done nothing illegally, calling to mind the Motto which he gave in his rings when made Serjeant, Lex est tutissima Cassis, The Law is the safest Helmet. And now he had leisure to peruse what formerly he had written, even thirty books with his own hand, most pleasing himself with a Manual, which he called his Vade mecum, from whence at one view he took a prospect of his life pass'd, having noted therein most remarkables. His most learned and laborious works on the Laws, will last to be admired by the judicious posterity whilst ame hath a trumpet left her, and any breath to blow therein. His judgement lately passed for an Oracle in Law, and if since, the credit thereof hath causelesly been questioned, the wonder is not great. If the Prophet himself, living in an incredulous age, found ause to complain,Isa. 53. 1. Who hath believed our Report? it need not seem strange, that our licentious times have afford∣ed some, to shake the authenticalness of the Reports of any earthly Judge. He constantly had prayers said in his own house, and charitably relieved the poor with his constant almes. The foundation of Suttous-hospital (when indeed but a foun∣dation) had been ruined before it was raised, and crush'd by some Courtiers in the hatching thereof, had not his great care preserved the same. The Free-school at Thetford was supported in its being by his assistance, and he founded a School on his own cost at Godwick in this County. It must not be forgotten, that Doctor Whitgift (afterwards Arch-bishop of Can∣terbury) was his Tutor, who sent unto his Puple, when the Queens Atturney, a fair New Testament with this message; He had now studied Common-law enough, let him hereafter study the Law of God. Let me adde to this, that when he was under a cloud at Court, and outed of his
Judges place, the lands belonging to the Church of Norwich, which formerly he had so industriously recovered and setled thereon, were again called into question, being begged by a Peer, who shall pass nameless. Sir Edward desired him to desist, telling him, that otherwise he would put on his Gown and Cap, and come into Westminster-hall once again, and plead there in any Court in Justification of what he had done. He died at Stoke Poges in Buckingham-shire, on Wednesday the 3. of September being the 83. year of his age, whose last words were, Thy Kingdome come, Thy will be done. Sir THOMAS RICHARDSON Knight, was born at Mulbarton in this Coun∣ty, his father being Minister thereof. He was bred in the study of our Municipal-law, and became the Kings Serjeant therein. Afterwards, on the 28. of November 1626. he was sworn Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, that place having been void ten months before. But coming now to our own times, it is safest for me to break off. Virgil, I remem∣ber, put a period to his Eclogue with Et Hylax in limine latrat —VVe'l Verfifie no more, For do but hark, Hylax doth bark, at th' entrance of the Dore. Seeing many will be ready to carp, it is safest for me to be silent, whilst his Brass Monument on the South-side of VVestminster Abby, thus entertaineth the Reader; Deo Om. Thomae Richardsoni Iceni Equitis Aurati Humanum Depositum. Ille Juris Municip. omnes gradus exantlavit Conventus tertii ordinis ann. Jacobi Regis 21, & 22. Prolocutor extitit; Fori civilis (Communium Placitorum vocant) Supremum Magistratum quinquennium gessit; Ad summum tandem primarii per Angliam judicis Tribunal A Rege Carolo evectus: expiravit Anno aetatis 66. salutis MDCXXXIIII. Tho. Richardson fil. unicus Eques Aur. Baro Scotiae designatus Patri incomparabili posuit. This Judge married for his second Lady Elizabeth Beaumont, the sister (as I take it) of Mary Countess of Buckingham, and the Relict of........ Ashburnham Knight. She was by King Charles Created Baroness of Craumount in Scotland, and (though issueless by the Judge) the Honour descended to his Grand-child. Souldiers. ROBERT VENILE Knight, one I confess whose name I never heard of, till meeting with this memorable Note in a Modern Sir Rich. Baker Chron. 3. Ed. 3. p, 181. Historian; And here must not be forgotten, Robert Venile Knight, a Norfolk man; who when the Scots and English were ready to give battle, a certain stout Champion of great stature, commonly called Tournboll, coming out of the Scots Army, and challenging any English man to meet him in a single combate; this Robert Ve∣nile accepteth the challenge, and marching towards the Champion, and meeting by the way a certain black Mastife dog, which waited on the Champion, he suddenly with his sword cut him off at the loyns, and afterwards did more to the Champion himself, cutting his head from off his shoulders. This put me with blushing enough (that one so eminent in himself should be alto∣gether to me obscure,) upon the inquiry after this valiant Knight, but all my industry
could not retrive him in any author, so that he seems to me a kin to those spirits, who appear but once, and finally vanish away. Sir OLIVER HINGHAM was born, richly landed, and▪ buried in Hingham, an eminent Market-town in this County. A right valiant man, whom King Edward the third left Governour of Aquitain in France, an honorable, but difficult place, be∣ing to make good a great Country with a few men, against a fierce and numerous enemy. Yet he gave a good account of his trust. When the French lay before Bur∣deaux, the Citizens thereof, to abuse the enemies hopes, set open their gates, display∣ing the Golden-lilies, the French-armes on their Towers, as if they were theirs; the French were no sooner securely entred, but brave Oliver, Captain of this City, and Warden of the whole Country for King Edward, gave them such an Holinshead & Stow. entertainment, that they drank not so much Claret-wine in the City, as they left Bloud behi nd them. This happ'ned in the thirteenth year of the reign of King Edward the third. This Sir Oliver liv'd many years after, and was made Knight of the Garter, and lies buried at Hingham under a fair tomb of free-stone curiously wrought, with his re∣semblance in his Coat-Armour (having a Crowned Veavers Fnu. Mon. p. 817. Owle out of an Ivy-bush for his Crest) lying upon a Rock, beholding Sun, Moon, and Stars, (because a great Tra∣vailer) all lively set forth in metal, with four and twenty mourners about his monu∣ment. JOHN FASTOLFE Knight, was a native of this County, as I have just cause to believe, though some have made him a French-man, meerly, because he was Baron of Sineginle in France, on which account they may rob England of many other Wor∣thies. He was a Ward (and that the last) to John Duke of Bedford, a sufficient evi∣dence to such who understand time and place to prove him of English extraction. To avouch him by many arguments valiant, is to maintain that the sun is bright, though since the Stage hath been over bold with his memory, making him a Thrasonical Puff, and emblem of Mock-valour. True it is Sir John Oldcastle did first bear the brunt of the one, being made the make-sport in all plays for a coward. It is easily known out of what purse this black peny came. The Papists ailing on him for a Heretick, and therefore he must also be a coward, though indeed he was a man of arms, every inch of him, and as valiant as any in his age. Now as I am glad that Sir John Oldcastle is put out, so I am sorry that Sir John Fastolfe is put in, to relieve his memory in this base service, to be the anvil for every dull wit to strike upon. Nor is our Comedian excusable, by some alteration of his name, writing him Sir John Falstafe, (and making him the property of pleasure for King Henry the fifth, to abuse) seeing the vicinity of sounds intrench on the memo∣ry of that worthy Knight, and few do heed the inconsiderable difference in spelling of their name. He was made Knight of the Garter by King Henry the sixth, and died about the second year of his reign. Sir CLEMENT PASTON Knight, fourth son to Sir VVilliam Paston, son to Sir John Paston, a famous Soldier, and favorite to King Edward the fourth, (sent by him with the Lord Scales to conduct the Lady Margaret, the sister of the King, to her husband Charles Duke of Burgundy,) son to VVilliam Paston the Judge, was born at Paston in this County. When a youth he was at the burning of Conquest in France, and afterwards by King Henry the eight was made Captain of one of his ships of war, and in a Sea-fight took a French Gally, and therein the Admiral of France prisoner, called the Baron of Blancard, whom he brought into England, and kept at Castor nigh rarmouth, till he had payed 7000. crowns for his ransome, besides the spoil of the Galley, wherein he had a cup and two snakes of gold, which were the Admirals, and which Sir Clement used during his life on Festivals, and at his death bequeathed them to his family for a monument. He received divers wounds, and was left for dead at Muscleburough-field in Scotland. When Sir Thomas VVyat in the reign of Queen Ma∣ry, was worsted at Ludgate, and desired for the more civil usage to render himself to a Gentleman, he submitted himself (saith our Historian) to Sir Clement Paston. He served at New-haven, having command of some ships of Queen Elizabeth, and was pensioner to two Kings, and two Queens successively. So rare was his happiness, that he spent his old age honourably, quietly and in good house-keeping in this County, where at Oxnit,
he built a goodly house for hospitality, and a hospital hard by, for six poor serving-men, retainers to his name and family, allowing them convenient maintenance. He died Anno Domini 15.. and lieth buried in a fair tombe in the Church at Oxnit. Seamen. No County in England doth carry a top and top gallant more high in Maritime perfor∣mances, then Norfolk. Witness the proportion of Yarmouth alone in the ensuing Ca∣talogue of Ships, used by King Edward the third against Calis. The South-fleet Ships 493. The North-fleet Ships 217. Ships of London 25. Ships of Yarmouth 43. The Mariners thereof 9630. The Mariners thereof 4521. Mariners of London 662. Mariners of Yarmouth 1950. or 1075. Know Reader, I cannot with all my diligence and interest recover the Original of this Catalogue, as extant not in the Tower, (where by my friends favour I could do some∣thing) but in the Kings great VVardrobe in London, out of which it is cited by ourHackluit in his English Voyages, Vol. 1. p. 118. &c. Author. But our times (I fear) have brushed it away with the rest of the VVardrobe. However give me leave to make some Annotations thereon. 1. These Ships, as by their great number appeareth, were small vessels: Yet as good as any in that age of England; and better (witness their victories) then any in France. 2. The Proportion may seem strange that Yarmouth should afford, well nigh, twice as many Ships and Mariners, as London it self. 3. Except it was that the King spared London, at this time, as the sure reserve for his Navy, on all occasions. 4. Or except there be a mistake in the numbers, (figures in Writing, as well as figures in Rethorick may, with a small dash, have their Meiosis made an Hy∣perbole.) And the various Lections in the Mariners of Yarmouth doth some∣thing shake (though not shatter) the credit of the account. 5. The numbers may be very true, Yarmouth in that age being so populous a place, that (though but one Parish) a lamentable Plague in one year did sweep thenceCamd. Brit. in Norfolk. 7000 men to the grave. Thus, though the Church (and that very large) could never hold their Living, the Church yard could contain the Dead. Seeing persons alive will not be pressed in their Pews so close, as Corps may be crowded together in their Graves. But let us pro∣ceed to the particular Sea men of this County, and let none be offended if a Frier be put in the front before all the rest, viz. NICHOLAS of LYNNEBale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 6. Num. 25. born in that Town, bred in Oxford, and is gene∣rally accounted a Franciscan Frier. But myIdem ibidem. Author, being a Carmelite himself, makes him one of his own Order. And all acknowledge him an excellent Musician, Mathematician, and Astrologer. It is reported of him, how in the year 1330. being the thirty year of the reign of King Edward the third, he sailed, with others, to the most Northern Islands in the world. Then leaving his company, and taking his Astrolabe, he, by the help of Art∣Magick, (so Mathematicians are nick-named by the ignorant) went as far as the Pole it self, where he discovered four In-draughts of the Ocean, from the four opposite Quar∣ters of the World, from which many did conceive, as well the flowing of the Sea, as blasts of the Winds to have their Original. Were these things true, and had they been known to the Ancients, as it would have spared Philosophers much pains, in dispu∣ting the Moon the cause of the Motion of the Tide in the Sea, so had it spoiledIn the 2. of his Aeneid. Virgil his fancy, in making the Country of Aeolia the onely Magazene of the winds. Sure I am, Gerardus Mercator hath so graced the fancy of this Frier, that he made his description of the Countries about the Artick Pole, conformable to this his imagi∣nary
discovery, preferring to fill that his Map with a Fiction, then otherwise to leave it altogether empty. But the other Parts of his book have more solid and substantial truths, ór else weak were the Shoulders of his Atlas to support the world there∣with. But to return to Frier Nicholas. Dr. John Dee. One tells us he wrote a book of his discoveries, and intituled it Inventio Fortunata. Sure it is, he was highly honoured by our learn∣ed *Chaucer, witness his testimony of him, styling Freere N. Linne, A reverend Clerk. But all his learning could not sence him from death, which happened about the year 1360. and he was buried in Linne, the Town of his nativity. PETER READ what he was, his ensuing Epitaph on his Monument in the South-Isle in Saint Peter's Church in Norwich will fully acquaint you, Here under lieth the Corps of Peter Read Esquire, who hath worthily served not onely his Prince and Country, but also the Emperour Charles the fifth, both at his Conquest of Barbary, and his Siege at Tunis, as also in other places. Who had given him by the said Emperour for his valiant deeds the order of Barbary. Who died the 29. day of December in the year of our Lord God 1566. We place him among Sea men because finding first his mention inNol. p. 99. Hakluit's voyages, and Salt-water is the proper Element of the Pen of that Author. Secondly, because his service was performed at Tunis, a Port-town in a Sea expedi∣tion. Now, although we confess it follows not, that he was born in or about Norwich, because buried therein; (Vast oftimes the distance betwixt the Cradles and Coffins of far-travaillers,) yet let none dislike his placing here, but such who can disprove it, and depose the negative, that elsewhere he had his nativity. It is observable that this Sir Peter, Kinghted by the Emperour, as appears in his Epitaph, (let me adde Anno 1538.) is onely styled, not less modestly then truly Esq. upon his Monument. I confess some maintain that though higher honours (Baron, Count, &c.) are onely local to be owned by the person receiving them, in that place where they are given him: Yet that Knighthood given by a Sovereign Prince is universal and passeth currant, through all Christendome. But others, their equals, as stifly deny it, and one who is their superior, (I mean Queen Elizabeth) who in the case ofSee it dicuss'd at large in Camd. Eliz. Count Arundle, would not admit of any forreign honour conferred on her Subjects, avowing that her sheep should onely be known by her own Mark. Writers. JOHN BACONTHORPE was born in aBale script. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 1. Village so called in this County, bred a Carmelite in the Convent of Blackney, and afterwards studied first in Oxford, then in Paris, one remarkable on many accounts. First for the Dwarfishness of his stature, Scalpellum calami atramentum charta libellus, His Pen-knife, Pen, Ink-horn, one sheet of Paper, and any of his books would amount to his full height. As for all the books of his own making, put together, their burden were more then his body could bear. Secondly, for his high spirit in his low body. Indeed his soul had but a small Diocess to visit, and therefore might the better attend the effectual informing thereof. I have heard it delivered by a learned Doctor in Physick, (at the Anatomy lecture in London) who a little before had been present at the Emboweling and and Embalming of Duke Hamilton and the Lord Capel, that the heart of the former was the largest, the latter the least he had ever beheld, inferring hence, that contracted spirits act with the greatest vigorousness. Thirdly, for his high title, wherewith he was generally termed the resolute Doctor. Two sorts of people he equally disliked, Scepticks who are of none; and unconstant peo∣ple who are [successively] of all opinions, and whilst others turned about like the Wheel, he was as fixed as the Axletree in his own judgement. Yet this his resoluteness was not attended with censuring of such who were of another Opinion, where equal probability on either side allowed a latitude to dissent.
He groaped after more light then he saw, saw more than he durst speak of, spake of more then he was thanked for by those of his superstitios Order, amongst whom (saith Bale) neither before, nor after, arose the like for learning and religion. Most agree in the time of his death, Anno 1346. though dissenting in the place of his burial, assigning Blackney, Norwich, London, the several places of his Interment. JOHN GOLTON born at Tirington in this County, was Chaplain to William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, and first Master (by the appointment of the Founder) of Parker in his Skeletos Canta∣brigiensis. Gonvil-hall in Cambridge. Leland allows him a man plus quam mediocriter doctus & bonus, for which good qualities King So sairh Pitz. but mistaken, for it was K. Richard the se∣cond p. 382. Henry the fourth advanced him Arch-bishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. He was imployed to the Court of Rome in the heavy schisme betwixt Pope Urban the sixth and Clement the seventh, which occasioned his writing of his learned treatise, De causa Schismatis; and because, knowing the cause con∣duceth little to the cure without applying the remedy, he wrote another book De Reme∣diis ejusdem. It seemeth he resigned his Arch-bishoprick somewhat before his death, J. Wareus de script. Hib. p. 129. which happened in the year of our Lord 1404. ALAN of LYNNE was Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 7. Num. 54. born in that famous Mart-town in this County, and brought up in the University of Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and afterwards became a Carmelite in the Town of his nativity. Great his diligence in reading many and voluminous Authors, and no less his desire, that others with him should reap the fruit of his industry, to which end he made Indexes of the many Wri∣ters he perused. An Index is a necessary implement, and no impediment of a book, except in the same sense wherein the Carriages of an Army are termed Impedimenta. Without this, a large Author is but a labyrinth without a clue to direct the Reader therein. I con∣fess, there is a lazy kind of learning, which is onely Indical; when Scholars (like adders which onely bite the horse heels) nibble but at the Tables, which are calces librorum, neglecting the body of the book. But, though the idle deserve no Crutches, (let not a staff be used by them, but on them,) pity it is the weary should be denied the benefit thereof, and industrious Scholars prohibited the accommodation of an Index, most used by those who most pretend to contemn it. To return to our Alan, his Herculean labour in this kind doth plainly appear to me, who find it such a toil and trouble, to make but an Index of the Indexes he had made of the Authors following. 1 Aegidius 2 Alcuinus 3 Ambrosius 4 Anselmus 5 Aquinas 6 Augustinus 7 Baconthorpe 8 Basil 9 Bede 10 Belethus. Bles. 11 Bernard 12 Berthorius 13 Cassianus 14 Cassiodorus 15 Chrysostome 16 Cyril 17 Damascen 18 Gerard. Laodic. 19 Gilbert 20 Gorham 21 Gregory 22 Haymo 23 Hierome 24 Hilary 25 Hugo 26 Josephus 27 Neckam 28 Origen 29 Pamph. Eusebius 30 Phil. Ribot 31 Raban 32 Remigius 33 Richard All these De script. Brit. p. 553. I. Bale, professeth himself to have seen in the Carmelites Library at Norwich, acknow∣ledging many more which he saw not. Now, although it be a just and general complaint, that Indexes for the most part are Heteroclites, I mean, either redundant, in what is needless, or defective, in what is needful; yet the Collections of this Alan were allowed very complete. He flourished Anno 1420. and was buried at Lynne in the Convent of Carmelites. WILLIAM WELLS was born (saith De Ang. script. p. 609. Pitz.) at Wells, the Cathedral See in Somerset-shire, wherein no doubt he is mistaken: For, (be it reported to any indif∣ferent judgement, that) seeing this VVilliam had his constant converse in this County, (living and dying an Augustinian in his Covent at Lynne,) and seeing there is a VVells no mean Market-Town in this Shire, with more probability he may be made to owe his nativity and name to Norfolk. He was for twenty years Provincial of his Order in England, Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, an industrious man and good writer; abate only the Siboleth of Barbarisme, the fault of the age he lived in. He died and was buried at Lynne 1421.
JOHN THORPE was born in a Village so called in this County, bred a Carmelite at Norwich, and Doctor at Cambridge. Logick was his Master-piece; and this Dedalus wrote a book intituled the Labyrinth of Sophismes, and another called the Rule of Con∣sequences, for which he got the title of Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 7. Num. 100. Doctor Ingeniosus. This minds me of a Pro∣gnosticating Distick on the Physiognomies of two children, Hic erit Ingenuus non Ingeniosus, at ille Ingeniosus erit, non erit Ingenuus The later of these characters agreeth with our Thorpe, who had a pound of wit for a dram of good nature, being of a cruel disposition, and a violent persecutor of William White, and other godly Wickliffites. He died Anno Domini 1440. and lieth buried at Norwich. His name causeth me to remember his Name-sake of modern times lately deceased, even Mr. John Thorpe B. D. and Fellow of Queens-colledge in Cambridge, my ever honored Tutor, not so much beneath him in Logick, as above him in the skill of Divinity and an Holy conversation. JOHN SKELTON is placed in this County, on a double probability. First,A M P. because an ancient family of his name, is eminently known long fixed therein. Se∣condly, because he was beneficed at Dis a Market-town in Norfolk. He usually styled himself (and that Nemine contradicente, for ought I find) the Kings Orator and Poet Laureat. We need go no further for a testimony of his learning than to Erasmus, styling him in his letter to King Henry the eight, Britannicarum Literarum Lumen & Decus. Indeed he had seholarship enough, and wit too much; seeing Pitz. de Ang. script. in Anno 1529. one saith truly of him, Ejus sermo salsus in mordacem, risus in opprobrium, jocus in amaritudinem. Yet was his Satyrical wit unhappy to light on three Noli me tangere's, viz. the rod of a School∣master, the Couls of Friars, and the Cap of a Cardinal. The first gave him a lash, the second deprived him of his livelyhood, the third almost outed him of his life. William Lilly was the School-master, whom he fell foul with, though gaining no∣thing thereby, as may appear by his return. And this I will do for W. Lilly, (though often beaten for his sake) endeavour to translate his answer; Quid me Sceltone fronte sic apertâ Carpis, vipereo potens veneno? Quid versus trutinâ meos iniquâ Libras? dicere vera num licebit? Doctrinae, tibi dum parare famam, Et Doctus fieri studes Poeta, Doctrinam nec habes, nec es Poeta. VVith face so bold, and teeth so sharp Of Vipers venome, why dost carp? VVhy are my verses by thee weigh'd In a false scale? may truth be said? VVhilst thou to get the more esteem A learned Poet fain wouldst seem: Skelton thou art, let all men know it, Neither larned, nor a Poet. The Dominican Friars were the next he contested with, whose vitiousness lay pat enough for his hand; but such foul Lubbers fell heavy on all which found fault with them. These instigated Nix Bishop of Norwich, to call him to account for keeping a Concubine, which cost him (as it seems) a suspension from his benefice. But Cardinal VVolsey (impar congressus betwixt a poor Poet and so potent a Prelate) being inveighed against by his pen, and charged with too much truth, so persecuted him, that he was forced to take Sanctuary at VVestminster, where Abbot Islip used him with much respect. In this restraint he died June 21. 1529. and is buried in Saint Margarets Chappel with this Epitaph, J. Sceltonus Vates Pierius hic situs est. The word Vates being Poet or Prophet, minds me of this dying Skeltons prediction, foretelling the ruine of Cardinal VVolsey. Surely, one unskilled in prophecies, if well versed in Solomons Proverbs, might have prognosticated as much, that, Pride goeth be∣fore a fall. We must not forget, how being charged by some on his death-bed, for begetting
many children on the aforesaid Concubine; he protested, that in his Conscience he kept her in the notion of a wife, though such his cowardliness that he would rather con∣fess adultery, (then accounted but a venial;) than own marriage esteemed a capital crime in that age. Since the Reformation. JOHN BARRET was born of an honest family atJ. Bale in his book intituled Script. nostri temporis. Linne in this County, bred a Carmelite of White-Friars in Cambridge, when learning ran low, and degrees high in that University. For many usurped scarlets, qualified onely with ignorance and im∣pudence, (properties seldome parted) so that a Scholar could scarcely be seen for Do∣ctors, till the University sensible of the mischief thereby, appointed Doctor Cranmer (afterwards Arch-bishop of Canterbury) to be the Poser-general of all Candidates in Di∣vinity, amongst whom he stopt Barret for insufficiency. Back goes Barret to Linne, turns over a new, yea many new leaves, plying his book to purpose, whose former ignorance proceeded from want of pains, not parts; and in short time became a tollerable, a good, an excellent, and admirable scholar, and Com∣mencing Doctor with due applause, lived many years a painful Preacher in Norwich, always making honourable mention ofFox Acts and Mon. in the life of Arch∣bishop Cran∣mer. Doctor Cranmer, as the means of his happy∣ness. Indeed he had been ever, if not once, a dunce, who if not debarred had never deser∣ved his Degree. Bale saith that in the reign of Q. Mary, he returned to his vomit, and be∣came a great Papist. But his praises are better to be believed then his invectives, and seeing Wood not growing crooked, but warping with weight, may be straightned again, we charitably believe that though complying in times of persecution, he re∣turned to the truth in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, in the beginning whereof he died. EDMOND GOURNEY born in this County, was bred in Queens and Bennet∣Colledge in Cambridge, where he Commenced Bachelour of Divinity, and afterwards was beneficed in this Shire. An excellent scholar, who could be humorous and would be serious, as he was himself disposed; his humors were never prophane towards God, or injurious towards his Neighbours, which premised, none have cause to be displeased if in his fancies he pleased himself. Coming to me in Cambridge when I was studying, he demanded of me, the subject whereon I studied, I told him I was Collecting the Witnesses of the truth of the Protestant Religion through all ages even in the depth of Popery, conceiving it feasible though difficult to evidence them. It is a needless pains (said he) for I know that I am descended from Adam, though I cannot prove my pedigree from him. And yet Reader, be pleased to take notice he was born of as good a family as any in Norfolk. His book against Transubstantiation, and another on the second Commandement, are learnedly and judiciously written, he died in the beginning of our Civil Wars. Benefactors to the Publique. GODFREY BOLLEN Knight, Son of Jeffrey Bollen, was born atStow's Surv. p. 567. Salle in this County. Being but a second brother he was sent into the City to acquire wealth, ad aedificandum domum antiquam. Unto whose atchievements fell in both the blood and inheritance of his eldestFragmenta regalia. brother for want of Issue Male. By which ac∣cumulation he attained great wealth, and Anno Domini 1457. was Lord Mayor of Lon∣don. By his Testament made in the next year, he gave liberally to the Prisoners, Ho∣spitals, and (Viz. the Do∣nation of Sir Simon Eyre.) Lazer-houses. Besides, (Stow's Surv. p. 89.) he gave one thousand pounds (the greatest sum I meet with in that age to pious uses,) to poor Housholders in London: and two hundred pounds to those in Norfolk. But it was the height of his and our happiness that he was Great-grand-father by the Mothers side to Queen Elizabeth. JAMES HOBART was born in this County, though I dare not say at Halles∣hall, which he left to his posterity. He was Atturney-general, and of the Privy-coun∣sel to King Henry the seventh, by him dubbed Knight at such time as he Created Hen∣ry his Son Prince of Wales. This worthy Patriot (besides his many benefactions to his Parish-church in London,) built a fair Bridge over the riverCamd. Brit. in Norfolk. VVaveny, betwixt this
County and Suffolk, and a firm Cause-way thereby, with many other works of charity, so that the three houses of his issue, planted in this County, with fair possessions, may be presumed to prosper the better, for the piety of this their Ancestour. ANDREW PERNE was born atParker in his Sceletos Cantab▪ in Manuscript. Bilny, bred in Peter-house, whereof he was Fellow and Master, as also Proctor and Vice-chancellour of Cambridge and Dean of Ely. Very bountiful he was to his Colledge wherein he founded a Fellowship and Scholarships. Besides many rareSome have questioned whither the M. S. were of his gift. Manuscripts he acquired to their Library. But his memory ought most to be honoured (Saving Gods living Temples, is better then building dead Col∣ledges) on this account, because in the days of Queen Mary, he was the Skrene to keep off the fire of Persecution, from the faces and whole bodies of many a poor Protestant, so that by his means no Gremial of the University was martyred therein. I know he is much taxed for altering his Religion four times in twelve years, (from the last of King Henry the eight, to the first of Queen Elizabeth,) a Papist, a Prote∣stant, a Papist, a Protestant; but still Andrew Perne. However be it known, that though he was a Bending VVillow, he was no Smarting VVillow, guilty of Compliance not Cruelty, yea preserving many who otherwise had been persecuted. He was of a very facetious nature, excellent at Blunt-sharp Jests, and perchance sometimes too tart in true ones. One instance of many; This Dean chanced to call a Clergy-man fool, (who indeed was little better) who returned that he would com∣plain thereof to the Lord Bishop of Ely. Do (saith the Dean) when you please, and my Lord Bishop will Confirm you. Yet was Doctor Perne himself at last heart-broken with a Jest, (as I have been most credibly informed from excellent hands,) on this occasion. He was at Court with his Pupil Arch-bishop VVhitgift in a rainy afternoon, when the Queen was (I dare not say wilfully) but really resolved to ride abroad, contrary to the mind of her Ladies, who were on hors-back (Coaches as yet being not common) to attend her. Now one Clod the Queens Jester was imployed by the Courtiers to laugh the Queen out of so incon∣venient a Journey. Heaven (saith he) Madam diswades you, it is cold and wet; and Earth diswades you, it is moist and dirty. Heaven diswades you, this heavenly minded man Arch-bishop Whitgift; and Earth diswades you, your fool Clod, such a lump of clay as my self. And if neither will prevail with you, here is one that is neither Heaven nor Earth, but hangs betwixt both, Doctor Perne, and he also diswades you. Hereat the Queen and the Courtiers laugh'd heartily, whilst the Doctor look'd sadly, and going over with his Grace to Lambeth, soon saw the last of his life. Since the Reformation. Sir THOMAS GRESHAM was born in this County, bred a Mercer and Merchant in the City of London, where God so blessed his endeavours that he be∣came the Wealthiest Citizen in England of his age, and the founder of two stately Fabricks, the Old Exchange a kind of Colledge for Merchants, and Gresham-Colledge a kind of Exchange for Scholars. I have learn'd from Goldsmiths, that Vessels made of Silver and Guilt, are con∣stantly Burnished; seldome or never those few which are made of Massy Gold, whose real intrinsick worth disdaineth to borrow any Foyl from Art. Let lesser Do∣nations be amplified with rhetorical Prayses. Nothing need be said of this worthy Knights gifts, but his gifts, and take them truly copied from the Original of his Will, as followeth, First, concerning the building in London called the Royal Exchange, with all Shops, Cellars, Vaults, Tenements thereunto belonging; I will, and dispose one moity to the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, upon confidence that they perform the payments, and other intents hereafter limited. The other moity of the said buildings, to the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of Mercers, of the City of London, upon trust that they per∣form the payments, and other intents hereafter mentioned.
I Will and Dispose, that they the said Mayor and Commonalty, do give and distribute for the sustentation, maintenance, and finding four Persons, from time to time to be chosen, nominated, and appointed by the said Mayor, &c. to read the Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Musick, and Geometry, within mine own dwelling house in the Parish of Saint Hellens. I give and dispose, out of this moity, two hundred pouuds to be payed to the four Readres sufficiently learned, fifty pounds to each yearly. I likewise give the said Mayor, &c. fifty three pounds to be yearly dis∣tributed in manner following, Unto eight Almes-folks, whom the said Mayor, &c. shall appoint to in∣habit my eight Almes-houses in the Parish of St. Peters Poor, the summe of six pounds, thirteen shillings, four pence, to each of them to be payed at four usual terms, &c. I likewise Dispose out of this moity, fifty pounds yearly, to be distributed by the said Mayor, &c. To the Prisoners in New-gate, Lud-gate, the Kings-bench, the Marshalsey, the Counter in Wood-street; ten pounds to each prison, to be paid among the poor thereof. The other moity of the said building disposed to the Mercers, I Will and Dispose, out of it, to be by them paid one hundred and fifty pounds to the finding, &c. three persons to be by the Wardens, &c. chosen, nominated, and appointed to read the Lectures of Law, Physick, and Rhetorick. That the said Mercers shall out of their moity, yearly expend one hun∣dred pounds at four several Dinners, for the whole Company of the said Corporation, in the Mercers-hall in London, on every Quarter day. That they shall distribute to the several Hospitals of Christ-church, Saint Bartholomews, the Spittle at Bedlam, the Hospital for the poor in Southwark, and the Poultry-Counter, fifty pounds yearly in money or other provisions ten pounds, My Mansion house with the Gardens, Stables, &c. I give to the Mayor and Commonalty of London, and also to th Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of Mercery, to have and to hold in Common, upon trust and con∣fidence that they observe, perform, and keep my Will, and true meaning here∣after expressed. My Will, Intent, and Meaning is, that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and their Successors, and that the said Wardens and Commonalty of te Mercers, shall permit and suffer seven persons, by them from time to time to be elected and appointed as aforesaid, to meet and sufficiently learned to read the said seven Lectures, to have the occupation of all my said Mansion house, Gardens, &c. for them aud every of them there to inhabite, study, and daily to read the said several Lectures. And my Will is, that none shall be chosen to read any of the said Lectures, so long as he shall be mar∣ried, neither shall receive any Fee or Stipend appointed for the reading of the said Lectures. Moreover, I Will and Dispose, that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and Mercers, shall enjoy the said Royal Exchange, &c. for ever, severally by such moities as is before expressed; provided, they do in the tearm of fifty years provide and obtain sufficient and lawful Dispensations and
Licenses, warrant and authority, upon trust and confidence, and to the intent that they shall severally for ever maintain and perform the payment, charges, and all other intents and meanings thereof, before limited and expressed, ac∣cording to the intent and true meaning of these presents. And that I do require and charge the said Corporations and chief Gover∣nours thereof, with circumspect diligence, and without long delay, to pro∣cure and see to be done, and obtained such Licenses as they will answer for the same before Almigbty God, for if they, or any of them, should neglect to obtain such Licenses, no Prince nor Counsel in any degree, will deny or de∣feat the same; and if conveniently by my Will or other Conveyance, I might assure it, I would not leave it to be done after my Death. Then the same shall revert to my Heirs, whereas I do mean, the same to the Commonweale, and then their default thereof, shall be to the reproch and condemnation of the said Corporation before God. &c. This worthy Knight compleated his second change, I mean of a mortal life for a Blessed Eternity, on the 21. of November 1579. and lieth buried in the Parish Church of Saint Hellens. Sir WILLIAM PASTON Knight, son and heir to Erasmus Paston of Paston Esquire, is justly recounted a Publick Benefactour. True it is, the family whence he was extracted, were always forward in deeds of Charity. according to the devo∣tion of the days they lived in. Witness their ountiful donations to the Abbys of Saint Bennet in the Holme, and Bromholme in this County, after the Reformation; they had not (with too many) less heat, because more light, but continued the stream though they changed the Channel of charity. This Sir William erected a very fair school, with thirty pounds per annum, for the maintenance thereof at Northwalsam in this County, a deed no doubt acceptable to the God of heaven. Solomon saith, Teach a Child in the trade of his youth. But alas! it's above the reach of poor parents to teach their Children, lacking learning to do it themselves, and livelyhood to hire others, save where such good persons as this worthy Knight, have made provision for them. This Sir William married Francis the daughter of Sir Tho. Clear of Stokesby, and was Great-grand-father to Sir William Paston the bountiful pro∣moter of all my weak endeavours. HENRY HOWARD youngest son of Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, and bro∣ther to Thomas Howard last Duke of Norfolk, was bo atThe Conti∣nuer of Stows Annals pag. 1012. Shotesham in this County. He was bred a serious student for many years in Kings colledge in Cambridge, then in Trinity-hall,Cowels Epist. Ded. to his Institutions. going the ordinary path and pace to the degree of Mastership, with∣out any honorary advantage. Here he became a grea and general Scholar, witness his large and learned work intituled, A Dpensative against the poyson of supposed Pro∣phesies, and dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham. His fortune left him by his Father, was not great, and he lived privately all the reign of Queen Elizabeth, till King James advanced him in honour and wealth. Here, for variety sake, and the better to methodize our matter, we will make use of a distinction common in the Custome-house, about bills of lading, Inwards and Outwards, observing what greatness were imported and conferred on him, what gratitude was ex∣ported and performed by him.
Inwards. Outward. 1. King James Created him Baron of Marnehill in Dorset shire. 2. Earl of Northampton. 3. Lord Privy Seal. 4. Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports. 5. Knight of the Garter. 6. Cambridge chose him her Chancel∣lour. 1. He founded and endowed an Hospi∣tal for twelve poor women and a Go∣vernour, at Rising in this County. 2. Another for twelve poor men and a Governour, at Clun in Shropshire. 3. Another at Greenwich in Kent, for a Governour and twenty poor men, of whom eight are to be chosen out of Shotesham, the place of his nativity. He died the 15. of June 1614. and was buried in the ancient Chappel of the Castle of Dover. Memorable Persons. —SHARNBORN, born at, and Lord of Sharnborn a considerable Mannor in this County. This Manner William the Conquerour, out of the plenitude of his power conferred on one Warren a Norman Souldier. But Sharnborn was not so tame, as silently to set down, and suffer a stranger peace∣ably to possess his inheritance, which his English Ancestors for many years had injoyed, but fairly traversed his Title, (I will not say in Westminster-hall, as of later erection in the reign of King Rufus) but in that publick place, where Pleas were held in that age. Surely none but a Norfolk-man, durst go to Law with the Conquerour, and question the validity of his Donations. Yea brave Sharnborn got the better of the Suit, and the Kings grant was adjudged void. This is pertinently pressed by many to prove that King William (though in Name) was in very deed no Conquerour, but came in by composition to keep the Laws of England. Now as I am heartily sorrowful that Sharnborn possessed ever since, (almost 600. years) by that name and family, should in our age be sold, and aliened from it, (whose heir males are just now extinct) so am I cordially glad that it is bought by a worthy person, Francis Ash Esquire, which, with some limitation hath freely setled it (being of good yearly value) on Emanuel-colledge, and may they as long enjoy it as the for∣mer owners, if before that term, the Day of Judgement put not a Period to all earthly possessions. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Godfry Bullen Geffrey Bullen Salle Probably Mercer 1457 2 Bartholomew Rede Robert Rede Crowmer Goldsmith 1502 3 Richard Gresham John Gresham Holt Mercer 1537 4 John Gresham John Gresham Holt Mercer 1547 5 Thomas Cambell Robert Cambell Fullsam Iron-Monger 1609 6 John Leman John Leman Gillingham Fish-Monger 1616 7 Edward Barkham Edward Barkham South-Akere Draper 1621
The names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth 1433. William Bishop of Norwich. Commissioners to take the Oaths. John de Morley Chivaler. Robert Cliffton, mil. Knights for the shire. John Roys. Knights for the shire. Abbatis de Langle Abbatis de Creek Abbatis de Wendelyng Abbatis de Derham Prioris Sancte fidis Prioris de VValsyngham Prioris de Tetford Prioris de Linne Prioris de Yernemouth Prioris de Ingham Prioris de Cokysforde Prioris de Westar Prioris de Penteneye Prioris de Castelacre Prioris de Bromhill Prioris de Ghildham Prioris de Wyrmingheye Prioris de Bokynham Prioris de Bromholm Prioris de Hyking Prioris de Petreston Prioris de Flycham Prioris de Baeston Iohan. Clyfton, mil. Briani Stapulton, mil. Tho. Kerdeston Hen. Inglose, mil. Tho. Tudenham, mil. Rog. Harsick, mil. Hen. Richford, mil. Iohan. Curson, mil. Henry Grey Willieli Calthorp Iohan. Fitz-Rauf de Moris Thomae Willoughby Oliveri Groos Thomae Chaumbir Edmundi Winter Nich. Apilyerde VVill. Apilyerde Nicholai Castel Edmundi Stapulton Thomae Pigot Henrici Walpole Thomae Trusbute Willielmi Byllingford Willielmi Daubeney Thomae Astele Radulphi Lampet Iohannis Woodehouse Iohan. Berney de Redham Ioh. Berney de Wythingham Georgii Holkham VVillielmi Yelverton Edmundi VVychyngham Iohan. Heydon VVill. Grey de Merston VVillielmi Raimis Thomae Dengayne Iohannis Clepisby Iohannis Strange Richardi Gogh Christopheri Strange Henrici Catte Iohannis Bakon Henrici Nottyngham Henrici Sharyngton Roberti Martham VVillielmi Bellingford VValteri Aslak Thomae Lovell Thomae Shuldham Simonis Fincham VVill. VValton Thomae Derham Roberti Godard Thomae Kervile Hen. Stormer Iohan. Hamond Georg. Hethe Iohan. Fox de Castelacro Nich. Bokkyng Nich. Stonwell VVill. Spynk Thomae Chelton Iohan. Bekkeswell Iohan. Rysele Roberti Popyngeay Iohan. VVentworth VValt. Eton VVill. Thurleton VVill. Tweyth Edmundi Sekford Iohan. Michell Thomae Boys Iohan. Dory Iohan. Bacheler Thomae Selors Thomae Brigge Thomae Gurney VVill. Brampton Iohan. Clare Iohan. Austyn Iohan. Bolle Roberti Brom Iohan. Knight Galfridi Grey Iohan. Bullok Iohan. Brustbon Simonis Godknap Robert. Padyrys Robert. Blogge Rich. Chirche Ade Mundforth Iohan. Gigges VVill. Dyton Galfridi Craneweys Edmundi Massingham Osberti Mundford Tho. Fyssher Iohan. Seche VVill. Thakker VVill. Barbour Iohan. Crane Iohan. Holdernese Leonardi Claxton Tho. Fannyngham Tho. Iohan. Thursby Iohan. VVesinham Rich. Frank Nich. Frank Iohan. VVythe Iohan. Parlementer VVill. VVythe Rad. Brecham Roberti VValsyngham VVill. Kirton Iohan. Stannton Iohan. Miryoll Iohan. Syff
Tho. Spicer Tho. Salysbury Iohan. VVaryn Iohan. VVarner Rich. Lychour Iohan. Bury Iohan. Brekerope Edmundi Goldyng Iohan. Tylney Andr. Swanton VVill. Kellowe Iohan. Abbot Iohan. Frewill VVill. Stapulton Iohan. VVayte Iohan. Gybbon Rober. Brandon Nich. VVythe Iohan. Nicolasson Iohan. Andrewe Alexan. Draper Tho. Midleton Iohan. Thorn VVill. Sylk Simon. Body Nich. Benpre Edmund. Bonet Tho. Feltwell Rad. Midylton Rich. Baker Iohan. Howard Iohan. Eye Rich Deye Rich. Billingforth Iohan. Tremche Will. Bullman Will. Candelere VVill. Stokker Iohan. Bosse Iohan. Sturmy VVill. Fyrsk Iohan. Parker Sen. Hetersite Rog. Scot Iohan. Joye Hen. VVarner Tho. Manning Rich. Cans Tho. Norwold Iohan. Bredeman Georg. Palgrave Iohan. Rede. VVill. Ede Tho. Gyle Tho. Candeler Tho. Stywarp Iohan. VValpell Tho. Canon Iohan. Mortoft Rich. Vewtre Iohan. Alcok VVill. James Iohan. Tylls Rog. Brook Iohan. Bee VVill. Tanerham Rich. Baret Iohan. Loumour Tho. VValisch Galf. Brewster VVill. Newegate Iohan. Man Pet. Hokkeham VVill. Seyne Iohan. Monk Iohan. Lewes Iohan. Seforth Tho. Colles Iohan. Chapman Edmund. Clerk Tho. Bertram Rob. Norwich Iohan. Sweyn Iohan. Puttok Tho. Trunch Iohan. Wynse Iohan. Byrston Tho. Stipoard Rich. Cordy Iohan. Webbe Rich. VVode Iohan. Spark Iohan. Atte Mere Iohan. Ely Iohan. Dany Edmund. Wode Tho. Richeforth Iohan. Dawes Alani. Twykke Simon. Cook Nich. Parke. Iohan. Legge Rich. Henke Rob. Ling Tho. Monnsewes Tho. Yekesworth Iohan. Trench Iohan. Elyngham Iohan. Bettys Iohan. Porter Iohan. Bemys Iohan. Molitis Edw. Wylnby Will. Moletis Tho. Holley Nich. Holley Robert. Holley Simon. Dykone Iohan. Westhaw Edmund. Parker Galf. Fox Iohan. Draper Iohan. Homerston Hen. Aphagh Will. Atte Hagh Hugo. Bedenham VVill. Prentys Iohan. VVatterden Tho. Burgh Iohan. Doggyng Geor. VVyton VVill. Sparkam Iohan. Baily Hen. Thursby Iohan. Mersch Galf. Cobbe Denys VVellys Tho. Moket Edmund. Cole VVill. Cole Iohan. Scorowr Iohan. Reppes VValt. VVedurby Iohan. Brechinham VVill. Payn Alex. Payn Iohan. Brygg Iohan. Crosse Steph. Silvestre Bob. Teyser Tho. Bowde Iohan. Swayn, jun. Iohan. Grenede Folsham Rob. Kervyle Simon. Tyller Iohan. Arnald Rich. Carleton Edmund. Michell Iohan. VVodesende VVill. Stubbe Iohan. Lawyes Hen. Lesingham Iohan. Jucewode Nich. Rake VVill. Fox Iohan. Green VVill. Dallyng Nich. VVaterman VVill. Norwhich Iohan. Tasburgh Iohan. Brampton Robert. Brese Edmund. Ade Tho. Pye
Rich. Rede Johan. Gerard Johan. Dam Johan. Bernard Johan. Lford Tho. Stoagh Rich. Ballord Tho. Walsham Johan. Spany Johan. Penny Johan. Hastynges Rich. Stotevyle Tho. Arnald Robert. Elys Will. Granour Rich. Elys Johan. Berhyng Rog. Hoddes Will. Baily Johan. Crancle Nich. Baxter Robert. Dooke Nich. Pykeryng Robert. Kent Tho. Unphrny Walt. Heylot Tho. Rycheman Johan. Howard Johan. Levoth Johan. Annsell Robert. Fyllisson Rog. Calleston Tho. Halle Robert. Martham Galf. Walle Johan. Panne Johan. Cobald Johan. Phelipp Johan. Merschgate Robert. Cupper Tho. Eyre Johan. Cobbe Rich. Flykke Robert. Heyloth Johan. Mannyng Simon. Falsham Robert. Hendy Lauren. Oky Radulph. Bronnyng Johan. Pepyr Tho. Martyn Johan. Roche Johan. Span Oliv. Kevet Johan. Deynes Johan. Holler Johan. Fuller Johan. Puttok Edmund. Rysyng Robert. Atte Lee Johan. Broune de Weveton Johan. Meleman Tho. Brydge Thom. Roose Gals. Bolayn Will. Blonnevyse Edmund. Yonghousbond Edmund. Godewyn Tho. Twytwell Rich. Holdyche Johan. Holtman Robert. Randes Tho. Glaveyn Robert. Wyrmegey Tho. Person Robert. VVylly Johan. Maynard Johan. de Pulham VVillielm. Arnald de Crom∣mer Robert. Russell Johan. VVodewane Ade VVilliamson, & Robert. Cravell Sheriffs of Norfolk and Suffolk. HEN. II. Anno 1 Rich. Basset, & Alberi. de Veer Anno 2 Will. de Nova Villa, & Will de Jeaxmeto Anno 3 Will. de Caisuei, sive Caisuer Anno 4 Anno 5 Will. Anno 6 Anno 7 Anno 8 Anno 9 Will. de Chaisu Anno 10 Oggerus Dapifer, for 6 years. Anno 16 Barth. Glanvill, & Vinar. Capellanus, & Will. Bardull, for 6 years. Anno 22 Vinar. Capellanus, for 11 years. Anno 33 Vin. pro dimid. Anno & Will. fil. Hervei dimid. RICH. I. Anno 1 Will. filius Hervei Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rob. filius Rog. & Pet. de Edichfeld Anno 4 Rob. filius Rog. & Sam. de Salia Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Osber. de Longo Campo Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rob filius Rog. & Rich. de Gosfeld JOH. REG. Anno 1 Rob. filius Rog. & Rich. de Gosfeld Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Pet. de Mealton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Alex. de Dunham, & Alex. Banister Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. de Cornheard, for 4 years. Anno 12 Walt. de Huntingfeld, & Will. Esturmi Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Rob. fil. Rog. & Will. filius Rosicke Anno 15 Will. sive Walt. de Hun∣tingfeld, Will. Escurmi Anno 16 Johan. fil. Rob. & Rob. de Kent Anno 17 Johan. filius Rob. filius Rogeri HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Hubert. de Burge Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hu. & Ric. de Frefingfeld.
Anno 6 Hubert. & Rich. Ducket Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hub. & Tho. Ingolde∣thorpe Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Hugo. Rufus Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Herb. de Alencum, for 5 years. Anno 17 Rob. de Brivas Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Tho. de Heningham Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Tho. Ingoldesthorpe Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Rob. de Broyons Anno 24 Johan. de Ulecott Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Hen. de Heketon, & Hamo. Passeleve Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Hamo. Passeleve, for 6 years. Anno 34 Rob. de Savage, for 6 years. Anno 40 Will. de Swyneford Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Hamo. Hanteyn Anno 44 Hamo. & Hen. de Stanho Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Phil. Marnium, & Will. de Hekam Anno 47 Nich. Espigornel, for 5 years. Anno 52 Rob. de Norton Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. Giffard Anno 56 Idem. EDW. I. Anno 1 Will. Giffard Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rob. filius Johannis Anno 4 Walt. de Shelfhaugre Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Walt. Granimt Anno 7 Johan. Brito, & Will. de Bedham Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Will. de Doinge Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. de Rochinger, for 6 years. Anno 18 Rich. de Belhus Anno 19 Will. de Nedham Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Will. de Gerbe Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Will. de Rideston Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Will. de Sutton Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Will. de Ailton Anno 30 Rob. Hereward, for 5 years. Anno 35 Egid. de Mumpinzon EDW. II. Anno 1 Tho. de Sancto Omero Anno 2 Hen. de Seagrave Anno 3 Rob. Baygnard Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rob. & Alex. de Clave∣ringe Anno 7 Rich. de Claveringe Anno 8 Rich. de Retham Anno 9 Rich. & Alex. de Clave∣ringe Anno 10 Johan. de Fitton, & Will. de Rungeton Anno 11 Johan. Howard Anno 12 Johan. Seafoule Anno 13 Johan. Howard, & Edw. Hemingne Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno 17 Egid. de Wachesham Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Tho. de Lindringham, & Rob. de Walkefare Anno 2 Johan. de Londham Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rog. de Anno 6 Rog. de Bourne, & Rog. de Kirdston Anno 7 Rog. de Bourne, & Edw. de Baconsthorpe Anno 8 Johan. de Cailly Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rob. de Causton Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Johan. de Harsike Anno 13 Rob. Causton, & Joh. Harsike Anno 14 Rob. Anno 15 Tho. Belisforde Anno 16 Edw. de Creting Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Johan. Haward Anno 20 Will. de Midleton Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Johan. de Colby Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Will. de Midleton Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Edw. de Creting Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Tho. de Mareux Anno 30 Guido Seynclere Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Johan. de Battlesden Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Tho. de Sancto Omero for 4 years. Anno 39 Rog. Gyney Anno 40 Will. de Clere Anno 41 Tho. Morieux Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Rog. Holdich Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Edw. de Thopre Anno 46 Rob. Bacon Anno 47 Johan. Mantby Anno 48 Johan. Mantby Anno 49 Will. de Kirdeston Anno 50 Oliver. de Calthrope Anno 51 Johan. de Browes.
HENRY the Second. 16 BARTH. GLANVILL, & VINAR. CAPELLANUS.] It may seem strange that this Vinar. Capellanus, that is, Vini. the Chaplain, should be Sheriff so many years together. One would have sought for a person of his Pro∣fession, rather in the Pulpit, then in the Shire-hall. But in that age Men in Orders did not onely engross places of Judicature, but also such as had Military and Martial relation, whereof the Sheriffs place in some sort may seem to partake. Sure I am, that under the reign of King Charles, one prick'd Sheriff of Rutland escaped, by pleading that he was a Deacon. But now all this is said, this . the Chaplaine may still be a Lay∣man, seeing in England Multi Clerici sunt Laici, many Clerks by Name, are no Clerks by Profession. Chaplain may be his Surname, and the same with de Capella or Capell, a right ancient name I assure you. Sheriffs of Norfolk and Suffolk. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Johan. Harsikes   Or, a Chief indented Sable. 2 Steph. de Hales     3 Joh. de Mantby     4 Will. Winter   Checkey, Or and Sab. a Fess Arg. 5 Will. de     6 Joh. de Volveston     7 Joh. Tudenham     8 Andr. Cavendish Cavendish Sab. 3 Bucks-heads cabosed Arg. attired Or. 9 Rad. Bigot, mil.   Party per pale, Or and Vert, a Lion ramp. G. 10 Galf. Michell     11 Tho. Corsonn   Ermin. a Bend compone Arg. and Sable. 12 Idem. ut prius   13 Hugo. Fastolfe   Quarterly Or. and Az. on a Bend Gul. 3 Escalops Arg. 14 Rob. Carbonell     15 Johan. Knivett Bucknhā Arg. a Bend within a Border En∣grailed Sab. 16 Will. Winter ut prius   17 Will. Argente, m.   Gules, 3 Cups covered Argent. 18 Gilb. Debenham   S. a Bend'twixt 2 Crescents Or. 19 Tho. Corsonn ut prius   20 Idem. ut prius   21 Will. Rees   Arg. 3 -heads Gul. a Chief Or. 22 Idem. ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Gournay   Pale-wayes of 6 Pieces Or and Azure. 2 Joh. Heningham Edw. Oldhall   Quarterly, Or & G. a Border Sab. charged with Escallop-shels Arg. 3 Joh. Inglesthorpe   Gul. a Cross ingrailed Argent. 4 Rob. Ramsey   Gul. 3 Rams-heads Cabosed Arg. 5 Idem. ut prius   6 Nic. Winchinghā     7 Rob. Berney, mil. Parkhal R. Per Pale Gul. and Ermin. a Cross engrailed Ermin. 8 Will. Rees ut prius   9 Rad. Ramsey ut prius   10 Oliver. Groose   Quarterly Arg. and Az. on a Bend Sab. 3 Martlets Or. 11 Rob. Berney, mil. ut prius   12 Tho. Lovell   Arg. a Chv. Az. 'twixt 3 Squir∣rels Seiant Gul. HEN. V.     Anno     1 Edw. Oldhall     2 Ioh. Heaveninghā ut prius   3 Joh. Spencer   Quarterly, Arg. and G. a Bend S. in the 2. & 3. a Fret Or. 4 And. Botiller   Gul. a Fess Componee Arg. and S. 'twixt 6 Crosses Patee Fitche 5 Edw. Winter ut prius   6 Oliv. Groos ut prius Argent. 7 Joh. Fitz-   Gules, a Fess Vairee 8     9 Idem.     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Rob. Cliston, m.   Sab. semi of Cinque-foils and a Lion ramp. Arg. within a Border of the first, charged with Verdoy of Trefoyles of the second. 2 Joh. Shardlow   Ar. a Chev. G. 'twixt 3 Croslets Az. 3 Bri. Stapilton   Az. a Lion ramp. queve fourchee Or. 4 Oliver. Groose ut prius   5 Johan. Tirrey     6 Gilb. Debenham ut prius   7 Hen. Drury, ar. Halsted S. Arg. on a Chief Vert the letter Tau 'twixt 2 Mullets pierced Or. 8 Hen. Dray, ar.   Az. a Fess 'twixt 2 Cheverons Or. 9 Joh. Shardlow, m. ut prius   10 Joh. Ropley     11 Tho. Thudenhā, m.     12 Hen. Grey, ar. ut prius   13 Joh. Fitz-Rauf ut prius   14 Tho. Chambre     15 Johan. Hopton   Ermine on 2 Barrs Sab. 6 Mullets Or. 16 Joh. Heaveninghā ut prius   17 Tho. Brewes   Az. semy of Croslets and a Lion rampant Or. 18 Milo Stapilton ut prius   19 Ro. Chamberlain     20 Will. Calthrop   Checke Or and Az. a Fess Ermin. 21 Tho. Brewes ut prius   22 Joh. Fitz Rauf ut prius   23 Joh. Hopton, ar. ut prius   24 Will. Tirrel   Arg 2 Cheverons Azu. within a Border engrailed Gul. 25 Tho. Daniel     26 Phil. Wentworth   Sable, a  betwixt 3 Leo∣pards-heads Or. 27 Egid. Sto. Loe, ar.     28 Johan. Gray ut prius   29 Johan. Germin Rushbroke S. a Cressant 'twixt 2 Mullets Ar. 30 Johan. Clopton Suf. Sab. a bend Arg. 'twixt 2 Cotisses dauncette Or. 31 Tho. Sharnbrone     32 Joh. Denston     33 Joh. Wingfeld Lethering∣ham Arg. on a Bend Gul. Cotised Sa. 3 Wings of the first. 34 Joh. Clopton, ar. ut prius   35 Rich. Bothe, ar.   Arg. 3 Boars-heads erased Sable' Tusked Or. 36 gid. Sto. Loe, ar.     37 Will. Calthorpe ut prius   38 Phil. Wentworth ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Tho. Hayward, m     2 Tho. Mountgōery   Gu. a Cheveron betwixt 3 flower de  O 3 Idem. ut prius   4 Wil. Calthrope, ar. ut prius   5 Alex. Cressener     6 Will. Hopton, ar. ut prius   7 Tho. Mountgōery ut prius   8 Joh. Twyer    
9 Rog. Ree, ar.     10 Joh. Heveninghā ut prius   11 Will. Knivett, at. ut prius   12 Joh. Wingfeld, m. ut prius   13 Rog. Ree, mil.     14 Rob. Radliff     15 Joh. Hasting, ar.   Or a Maunch Gules. 16 Will. Calthorp, m. ut prius   17 Tho. Howard, mi.   Gul. a Bend'twixt 6 Croets fit∣chee Argent. 18 Rob. Radliffe, ar.     19 Will. Hopton, ar. ut prius   20 Will. Knivett, mi. ut prius   21 Alex. Cressener     22 Hen. Wenthworth ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Joh. Wingfeild. ar. ut prius   2 Rad. Willoughby Rich. Pole   Per Pale Or and Sab. a Saltire Engrailed Counterchanged. 3 Johan. Paston   Arg. 6 Flower de luces Az. a Chief indented Or. HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Johan. Paston ut prius   2 Em. Bedingfeld   Ermin. an Eagle displayed Gul. 3 Rad. Shelton, m.   Az. a Cross Or. 4 Rob. Lovell ut prius   5 Simon. Wiseman   Sab. a Cheveron Ermin. 'twixt 3 Cronells of a Tiltspear Arg. 6 Phil. Lewes, ar.     7 Rob. Brandon, .   Barry of 10 Arg. and Gul. over all a Lion rampant Or, Crowned per pale Arg. of the second. 8 Joh. Wingfeld, m. ut prius   9 Will. Carewe, m.     10 Rob. Southwell     11 Rog. Le Strange, a. Hunstantō Gul. 2 Lions passant Argent. 12 Rob. Curson, mil. ut prius   13 Edw. Arundell, m.     14 Phil. Calthrope, m. ut prius   15 Will. Bolein, mil.   Arg. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 Bulls∣heads Sab. arm'd Or. 16 Hum. Catesby, ar.     17 Rob. Clere, mil.   Arg. on a Fess Az. 3 Eagles Or. 18 Edw. Jeney, mil.     19 Idem.     20 Johan. Shelton ut prius   21 Idem. ut prius   22 Phil. Bothe, mil. ut prius   23 Rob. Brandon, m. ut prius   24 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ric. Wentworth ut prius   2 Joh. Hevingham ut prius   3 Rog. Townesend Raynham Az. a Cheveron Ermin. 'twixt 3 Scallops Arg. 4 Lio. Talmarsh, ar. Helmingham Argent, a Fret Sable. 5 Tho. Gibbon, ar.   Or, a Lion rampant Sab. debru∣sed with a Bend Gul. charged with 3 Escallops Arg. 6 Joh. Heydon, m.   Quarterly Arg. and Gul. a Cross 7 Ant. Wingfeld, m. ut prius Engrailed counterchanged. 8 Ric. Wentworth, m. ut prius   9 Will. Paston, ar. ut prius   10 Rog. Townsend, a. ut prius   11 Joh. Heydon, mil. ut prius   12 Hum. Wingfeld, a. ut prius   13 Th. Bedingfeld, m. ut prius   14 Joh. Shelton, mil. ut prius   15 Joh. Heveninghā ut prius   16 Ioh. Heydon, mil, ut prius   17 Rog. Towsend ut prius   18 Fran. Lovell, ar. ut prius   19 Phil. Filvey, mil.     20 Will. Paston, mil. ut prius   21 Edw. Bedingfeld, ut prius   22 Tho. Jermyn, ar. ut prius   23 Hen. Fermour, m.     24 Tho. LeStrange, m. ut prius   25 Tho. Lush, or Rush     26 Rich. Southwell     27 Walt. Hubard, m. Blickling S. an Estoile with 8 Points 'twixt 2 Flanches Ermin. 28 Will. Drury, mil. ut prius   29 Edm. Windham Cowtherk Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Lions∣heads Erased Or. 30 Fran. Lovell, mil. ut prius   31 Edw. Knivett, m. ut prius   32 Will. Fermoure, m.     33 Tho. Jermyn, mil. ut prius   34 Johan. , m. ut prius   35 Fran. Lovell, mil. ut prius   36 Will. Drury, mil. ut prius   37 Edw. VVindhā, m. ut prius   38 Hen. Hubbard, ar. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Joh. Robsart, mil.   Vert a Lion  Or, Valned in the Shoulder. 2 Nich. Le Strange ut prius   3 Edm. VVindhā, m. ut prius   4 VVill. VValgrave   Party per pale Arg. and Gules. 5 Joh. Robsat, mil. ut prius   6 Tho. Cornwallis Brome S. Sable Guttee Arg. on a Fess of the second, 3 Cornish Choughs of the first. PHILLIP. & MARI.     Anno     1 Tho. VVoodhouse Kimberly No. S. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cinque∣foils Ermin. 1,2 Joh. Shelton, mil. ut prius   2,3 Joh. Sulyard, ar. SUFFOL. Arg. a Cheveron Gul. 'twist 3 Pheons Sable, 3,4 Chri. Heydon, m. ut prius   4,5 Hen. Doly, mil.   Gul. 3 Bucks-heads Cabosed Arg. 5,6 Amb. Jermyn, ar. ut prius   ELIZAB. REG.     Anno.     1 Joh. Apleyard, ar. SUFFOL. Az. a Cheveron Or, 'twixt 3 Owls Arg. 2 Rob. VVingfeld, a. ut prius   3 Tho. Tindall, mil.     4 VVill. Buts, mil.     5 Tho. VVoodhouse ut prius   6 Owin. Hopton, m. ut prius   7 VVill. Paston, m. ut prius   8 Lion. Talling, ar.     9 Edw. Cre, ar. ut prius   10 VVill. VValgrave ut prius   11 Chri. Heydon, m. ut prius   12 Edw. VVitipole     13 Rad. Shelton, ar. ut prius   14 Amb. Jermyn, m. ut prius   15 Hen. Doly, ar. ut prius   16 Tho. Felton, ar. Playford G. 2 Lions passant Ermin. Crown∣ed Or. HENRY the Seventh. 14 PHILLIP CALTHROPE, Miles.] He was a very grave Gentleman, (and lived to a great age) yet withal of a very merry, and pleasant conceit, whereof take this instance. He sent as much cloth of fine French-tauney, as would make him a Gown, to a Tailor in Norwich. It happened, one John Drakes a Shoo-maker coming into the Shop, liked it so well, that he went and bought of the same as much for himself,
enjoyning the Taylor to make it of the same fashion. The Knight being informed hereof, commanded the Taylor to cut his gown as full of holes, as his Sheers could make, which purged J. Drakes of his proud humour, that he would never be of the Gentlemans fashion again. HENRY the Eight. 29 EDMUND WINDHAM.] He was a Gentleman of a fair Estate in this County, great Birth and Aliance, (whose Grand mother, was daughter to John Howard Duke of Northfolk,) but it seems somewhat given to his Passion. This caused him (in the 33. of this Kings reign) to strike Master Clere, a Gentleman of his own County, in the Kings Tennis Court. For this he was araigned in the great Hall at Greenwich, before Master Gage, Comptroler of the Kings Houshold, and other Justices, and one Quest of Gentlemen, another of Yeo∣men passed upon him, to enquire of the same stripe, by whom he was found guilty, and had Judgement to lose his right-hand. Then was he brought in to solemn execu∣tion, by Sir Willian Pickering Knight Martial, and confessing his fault, desired that the King of mercy would be pleased to take his left-hand, and spare his right; for there∣with (said he) I may hereafter be able to do his Grace service. The King informed hereof by his Justices, granted his full Pardon, neither to lose Hand, Land, nor Goods, but restored him to his liberty. See more of him in the third of King Edward the sixth. EDWARD the Sixth. 3 EDMUND WINDHAM, Mil.] Of him before in the twenty ninth of King Henry the eight, he now made good his former promise to the Son, which he made to his Father, of using his right-hand in the service of his Sovereign. For in this year Kets Rebellion began in this Couuty, which this Sheriff endeavoured, withal his power and policy to suppress, till at last it proved a task beyond his strength to perform. Queen MARY. 1 THOMAS WOODHOUSE, Mil.] Though he be the first of his Surname, whom we meet in our Catalogue, I find many of his family anciently employed in State-affairs. In a Manuscript-collection (extant in the Library of Sir Thomas Cotton) of persons summoned to Parliament, by King Edward the third, I read, 1. Rex dilecto Clerico suo Roberto de Woodhouse, Archidiacono de Richmund, Thesaurario salutem. Negotia nos & statum regni contingentia, &c. vobis mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, &c. 2. John Woodhouse, Esq was servant, and one of the Stow's Chro. p. 362. Executors to King Henry the fifth. 3. Sir VVilliam VVoodhouse, (neer related to our Sheriff) was Sir John Hay∣ward in the life of Edw. 6. p. 15. Vice-Admiral of our English fleet at Musoleburrough-field. 4. Philip VVoodhouse, Esq was very active at the taking of Cadiz, and Camdens Eliz. Anno 1596. Knight∣ed there for his good service, by the Earl of Essex. And ever since there hath been a Military inclination in this family, which hath ma∣nifested it self on several occasions.
Sheriffs of Norfolk alone. Name. Place. Armes. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     17 Tho. Townsend, ar. Rainham Az. a Cheveron Ermine, betwixt 3 Escallops Arg. 18 Drugo. Drury, ar.   Arg. on a Chief Vert the letter Tau betwixt 2 Mullets pierced Or. 19 Hen. Weston, mil.     20 Basing. Gaudy, ar.   Vert, a Tortois passant Argent. 21 Tho. Knivett, mi.   Arg. a Bend within a border en∣grailed Sab. 22 Edw. Clere, mil.   Argent, on a Fefs Azu. 3 Eaglets Or. 23 Arth. Heven nghā   Quarterly Or & G. a Border Sab. charged with Escallop-shels Arg. 24 Will. Paston, mil.   Arg. 6 Flower de luces Az. a Chief indented Or. 25 Will. Heydon, m.   Quarterly Ar. & G. a Cross in∣grailed counterchanged. 26 Hen. Woodhouse Kimberly Sab. a Cheveron'  3 Cinque∣oils Ermin. 27 Tho. Hogan, ar. Hen. Hogan, ar. ut prius Arg. a Cheveron ingrailed vary. Or & Gul. ' 3 Hurts each charged with 3 Lions legs erased Argent. 28 Nath. Bacon, ar. SUFFOL. Gul. on a Chief Arg. 3 Mullets Sable. 29 Clem. Paston, ar. ut prius   30 oh. Peiton, mil.   Sable, a Cross ingrailed Or. 31 Rob. Southwell     32 Hen. Dolney, ar.     33 Milo. Corbett, ar. Or, a Raven Proper. 34 Hen. Gaudy, ar. ut pri s   35 Bsing. Gaudy, m. ut prius   36 Phil. Woodhouse ut prius   37 Tho. Clere, ar. ut prius   38 Hum. Guibon, ar.   Or, a Lion rampant Sab. debrused with a Bend Gul. charged with 3 Escallops Arg. 39 Nich. Bacon, mil. ut prius   40 Clem. Spelman, m.   Sab. Platee proper, 2 Flaunches Argent. 41 Nath. Bacon, ar. ut prius   42 Ric. Jenkinson, ar.   Or, 2 Bars Gemells Gul. ' 3 Boars-heads and Necks Erased S. 43 Basen. Gaudy, m. ut prius   44 Arh. Hemingham ut prius   45 Edm. Doyley, & 1. Jac.   Gul. 3 Bucks-heads cabosed Arg. JAC. REG.     Anno     1 Edm. Doyley, ar. ut prius   2 Hen. Spelman, m. ut prius   3 Rad. Hare, mil.   Gul. 2 Bars▪ and a Chief indented Or. 4 Le'Stran. Mordant   Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Estoils Sable. 5 Hen. Gawdy, mil. ut prius   6 Hamo. Le Strange Hunstantō Gul. 2 Lions Passant Argent. 7 Tho. Barney, mil. Parkhal R. Per Pale Gul. and Ermin. a Cross engrailed Ermin. 8 Chri. Gawdy, mil. ut prius   9 Tho. Corbet, ar. ut prius   10 Tho. Lewer, mil.     11 Jac. Calthrope, m.   Checkee Or and Azu. a Fess Erm. 12 Joh. Heveningham ut prius   13 Ric. Jenkinson, ar. ut prius   14 Aug. Palgrave, m.   Azu. a Lion Passant Argent. 15 Anth. Drury, mil. ut prius   16 Tho. Holland, m.   Az. semy of Flower de luce a lion ramp. Guardant Arg. 17 Hen. Beddingfeld   Ermin. an Eagle desplayed Gul. 18 Tho. Heirne, mil.     19 Will. Yelvertō, ba.   Arg. 3 Lion cells rampant Gul. a Chief of the second. 20 Rich. Berney, bar. ut prius   21 Le'Stran. Mordant ut prius   22. Tho. Woodhouse ut prius   CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Holle, arm.   Or, on a Cheveron S. 3 Unicorns∣heads Erased Argent. 2 Car. LeGroose, m.   Quarterly, Arg. and Azu. on a Bend S▪ 3  Or. 3 Fran. Gawdy, ar. ut prius   4 Rob. Gawdy, mil. ut prius   5 Rog. Townsend, b. ut prius   6 Fran. Mapes, ar.     7 Tho. Pettus, ar. Recheath Gul. a fess Arg. ' 3  Or. 8 Jo. Hobart, m. & b. Blickling Sab. an Estoil with 8 points 'twixt 2 Flanches Ermin. 9 Will. Heveninghā ut prius   10 Joh. Wentworth ut prius   11 Edr. Barkham, m.   Arg. 3 Pallets Gul. over all a Cheveron. 12 Will. Paston, ar. ut prius   13 Edr. Asteley, ar.     14 August. Holt, . ut prius   15     16     17 Tho. Guibon, m. ut prius   18 Joh. Coke, ar.   Party per Pale Gul. and Azu. 3 Eagles displayed Argent. 19     20 Valen. Pell, mil.     21     22 Tho. Barney, ar. ut prius   Queen ELIZABETH. 18 DRUGO DRURY, Arm.] This Sir Dru being afterwards Knighted, was joyned in Commission with Sir Amias Paulet, to keep Mary Queen of Scots, and discharged his dangerous trust therein. It moveth me not, that I find both these Knights branded for Camd. Eliz. Anno 1584. Puritans, being confident, that Nick-name, in relation to them both, was first pronounced through a Popish mouth, causlesly offended at their Religion. King CHARLES. 5 ROGER. TOWNSEND Baronet.] He was a religious Gentleman, expending his soul in piety and charity, a lover of God, his Service, and Servants, A grave Mr. Bolton in his funeral Notes on Judge Nichols. Divine saith most truly, that incroach∣ments on the Church, are like breaches of the Seas, a thousand to one if they ever return. But this worthy Knight may be said to have turn'd the tide, restoring Impropriations
to the Church, to some hundreds in yearly valuation. He married Mary, daughter and co-heir of Horatio Lord Vere of Tilbury, by whom he had Sir Horace, who for his worth was deservedly Created a Baron at the Coronation of King Charles the second. The Farewell. And now being to take my leave of this County, I wish the inhabitants thereof may make good use of their so many Churches, and cross that pestilent Proverb, The nigher to the Church, the farther from God, substituting another (which will be a happy change) in the room thereof, viz. The more the Churches, the more sincere the Devotion.
NORWICH is (as you please) either a City in an Orchard, or an Orchard in a City, so equally are Houses and Trees blendid in it, so that the pleasure of the Country, and populousness of the City meet here together. Yet in this mixture, the inhabitants parti∣cipate, nothing of the rusticalness of the one, but altogether of the urbanity and civility of the other. Natural Commodities. Flowers. The Dutch brought hither with them, not onely their profitable crafts, but pleasu∣rable curosities. They were the first who advanced the use and reputation of Flowers in this City. A Flower is the best complexioned grass, (as a Pearl is the best coloured clay,) and daily it weareth Gods Livery, forMar. 6. 30. He cloatheth the Grass in the Field. Solo∣mon himself is out-braved therewith, as whose gallantry onely was adopted, and on him, theirs innate and in them. In the morning (when it groweth up) it is a Lecture of Divine Providence; In the evening, (when it is cut down withered) it is a Lecture of Humane Mortality. Single flowers are observed much sweeter then the double ones, (poor may be more fra∣grant in Gods nostrils then the rich) and let Florists assign the cause thereof, whether because the Sun doth not so much dry the Intricacies of such flowers which are Du∣plicated. Great the Art in meliorating of flowers, and the Rose of Roses [Rosa Mundi] had its first being in this City. As Jacob used an ingeniousGen. 3. 37. invention to make Laban's cattle speckled or ring-straked, so, much the skil in making Tulips feathered and variegated, with stripes of divers colours. In my judgement those flowers carry it clearly, which acquit themselves to a double sense, sight and smel, for though in some thing it may be true, Optime quae minime olent, yet in flowers (besides a negation of an ill) the position of a good sent, is justly required. Manufactures. Stuffs. It is an ill wind which bloweth no man good, even Storms bring VVrecks to the Ad∣miral. The cruelty of Duke D'Alva, as it blew the Dutch out off their own, brought them into this City, and with them their Manufactures, which the English quickly learned from them, until Norwich became the Staple of such Commodities for the whole Land. For the nimble wooffe its artificial dancing in several postures about the standing warpe, produceth infinite varieties in this kind. Expect not I should reckon up their several names, because daily increasing, and many of them are binominous, as which, when they begin to tire in sale, are quickned with a new name. In my child-hood there was one called Stand-far-of, (the embleme of Hypocrisie) which seemed pretty at competent distance, but discovered its cours∣ness, when nearer to the eye. Also Perpetuano, so called from the lasting thereof, (though but a counterfeit of the cloaths of the Israelites, which endured in the VVill∣derness 40.Deur. 29. 5. years,) Satinisco, Bombicino, Italiano, &c. Comineus saith, that a Favorite must have an handsome name, which his Prince may easily call on all occasions; so a pretty pleasing name, complying with the Byers fancy, much befriendeth a Stuffe in the sale thereof. By these means Norwich hath beaten Sudbury out of distance in the race of Trading. Indeed in the starting, (the South having the better of the North, and Bury or City, be∣ing before VVich or Vicus a Village,) Sudbury had the advantage, but now Norwich is come first to their Mark.
The Buildings. The Cathedral therein is large and spacious, though the roof in the Cloysters be most commended. When some twenty years since, I was there, the top of the Steeple was blown down, and an Officer of the Churce told me, That the wind had done them much wrong, but they meant not to put it up, whether the wrong or the steeple, he did not declare. Amongst private houses, the Duke of Norfolks palace is the greatest I ever saw in a City out of London. Here a covered Bowling-alley (the first I believe of that kind in England,) on the same token, that when Thomas, last Duke of Norfolk, was taxed for aspiring (by marriage of the Q to the Crown of Scotland,) he protested to Queen Elizabeth, that, when he was in his Bowling-alley atCamdens Eliz. Anno 1569. Norwich, he accounted himself as a King in Scotland. As for the Bishops Palace, it was formerly a very fair structure, but lately unleaded, and new covered with tyle by the purchasers thereof. Whereon a wag not unwittily, Thus Palaces are altered, we saw John Leyden, now Wat Tyler, next Jack Straw. Indeed there be many thatch'd houses in the City, so that Luther (if summoned by the Emperour to appear in this place) would have altered his expression, and said in∣stead of Tyles of the house, that if every Straw on the roof of the houses were a Divel, not∣withstanding he would make his appearance. However, such thatch is so artificially done (even sometimes on their Chancels) that it is no eye-sore at all to the City. Physicians. JOHN GOSLIN born in thisParker Scele∣tos Cantabr. manusc. City, was first Fellow, and afterwards Master of Caius-colledge in Cambridge, Proctor of the University, and twice Vice-chancellour thereof: a general Scholar, eloquent Latinist, a rare Physician, in which faculty he was Regius Professor. A strict man in keeping, and Magistrate in pressing the Statutes of Colledge and University, and a severe punisher of the infringers thereof. And here, courteous Reader, let me insert this pleasant passage (seeing Cato himself may some∣times smile) without offence. I remember when this Doctor was last Vice-chancellour, it was highly penal for any Scholar to appear in boots, as having more of the Gallant, then Civil Student there∣in. Now a Scholar undertook for a small wager, much beneath the penalty, to ad∣dress himself ocreated unto the Vice-chancellour, which was beheld by others as a de∣sperate adventure. Carrying his state in his Urinal, he craved his advise for an here∣ditary numness in his legs, (and something of truth therein) which made him in his habite to trespass on the Universities Statutes, to keep them warme. The Vice∣chancellour pitying instead of punshing him, prefcribed him his best receipts, and so by this fraus honesta, he effected his desires. This Doctor was a worthy Benefactour to Katharine-hall (to which he had no rela∣lion, save what his bounty created,) bestowing thereon the fair Bull-inn, of conside∣rable value. If he who giveth a nights lodging to a servant of God, shall not lose his reward, certainly he that bestoweth Inn and all upon the sons of the Prophets, shall find full compensation. The rather, because that Hall pent formerly for lack of ground, and complaining with the sons2 King. 6. 1. of the Prophets,—the place where we dwell, is too strait for us; may now say withGen. 26.  Isaac, The Lord hath made room for us; by this convenient addition. He died in his Vice-chancellour ship Anno 1625. JOHN CAIUS born in this City, son to Robert Caius, was bred Fellow in Gon∣vile hall in Cambridge. Hence he travailed into Italy, where he studied much and wrote several learned Treatises. Returned home, became Physician to Queen Mary, and improved Gunvile-hall into a Colledge. He bestowed good land on, erected fair build∣ings in, bequeathed thrifty statutes to, produced a proper Coat of Arms for, and im∣posed a new name on this Foundation, Gonvile and Caius Colledge. He wrote an
excellent book of the Antiquity of Cambridge. When King James passed thorough this Colledge, the Master thereof presented him A Caius de antiquate Cantabridgiae, fairly bound; to whom the King said, What shall I do with this book, give me rather Caius de Canibus, a work of the same Author very highly praised, but very hardly procured. Few men might have had a longer, none ever had a shorter Epitaph, FUI CAIUS. Writers since the Reformation. ROBERT WATSON born in this City, was excellently well skilled in the Laws, and (saith Bale) à Dispensatione sive Administratione domesticâ, (English it as you please) to Arcsh-bishop Cranmer. Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 9. Num. 81. Being imprisoned for his Religion, he often dis∣puted during his Restraint with several Papists, concerning Transubstantiation, and at length having gained his enlargement, wrote a Treatise in elegant Latine, (dedicating the same to such who with him suffered banishment for their Religion,) wherein he relateth the accidents of his life. I cannot attain to any certainty in the date of his death. Benefactors to the Publique. WILLIAM BAITMAN was born in this . Cata∣logue of the Bishops of Norwich. City, bred in Cambridge, and afterwards became first Arch-deacon; and then by King Edward the third made Bishop of this his Native See. One of an high spirit to maintain the profit and priviledges of his place, and I charitably presume him watchful over his sheep, (souls subjected to his charge) because he was so careful of his Deer, for the stealing whereof, he enjoyn∣ed Idem ibidem. penance to Robert Lord Morley, and making him perform them, in the Cathedral of Norwich, notwithstanding the Kings threatning Letters to the contrary. This Prelate in his travails beyond the Seas, perceiving that our English Common∣law was Out-lawed in those parts, and apprehending the absolute necessity that the English should have skill in the Cannon and Civil-laws, (for the managing of foreign Ne∣gotiations) erected a Colledge in Cambridge, called Trinity-hall, for the Study thereof. As he was Father to Trinity, he was Foster-father to Gonvil-hall, in the same University, re∣moving it to a more convenient place, building, and setling the Revenues thereof, ac∣cording to the Will of the Founder. King Edward the third, resolving to follow his Title to the Crown of France, sent this Bishop to the Pope, to acquaint him with his in∣tentions, in which Embassage he died at Avenion 1354. Since the Reformation. THOMAS LEGG was born in this Ex Annalibus Coll. Gonv. & Caii. City, bred first Fellow in Trinity, then Jesus-colledge in Cambridge, until he was chosen by Doctor Caius (then surviving) the nineteenthIn scelet Cnt. he is account∣ed but the 17. Master of Gonvil-hall, and the second of Gonvil and Caius-colledge. He was Doctor of the Law, and Arches, one of the Masters of the Chancery, twice Vice-chancellour of the University, and thirty four years Master of his Colledge therein. There needeth no other testimony for to avouch his great learning, then the Character given him by J. Lipsius, in his (hitherto unprinted) Epistle, In Antiquitatis studio, tam egregie, versatus es, ut id de Teipso potes quod de se Apollo Enni. A me omnes Cantabrigienses consilium expetunt in literis incerti, quos, ego, mea ope, ex incertis certos, compotesque consilii dimitto. This Doctor, though himself a serious man, used to recreate himself with delightful studies, observing gravity in his very pleasures. He composed a Tragedy of the De∣struction of Jerusalem, and having at last refined it to the purity of the Publique Stan∣dard some Plageary filched it from him, just as it was to be acted. He formerly had made a Tragedy of the life of King Richard the third, presented with great Applause (Queen Elizabeth I suppose being a beholder thereof) in Saint Johns-colledge-hall.
On the same token that John Palmer (afterwards Dean of Peterburough) who acted King Richard therein, had his head so possest with a Princelike humor, that ever after, he did what then he acted, in his Prodigal Expences, so that (the Cost of a Sovereign ill befiting the Purse of a Subject,) he died Poor in Prison, notwithstanding his great pre∣ferment. Great the bounty of Doctor Legg unto his Colledge, bequeathing 600. pounds for the building the East-part thereof; besides, several lesser liberalities. Yea, be it remem∣bred, that after Thomas Bacon, fifteenth Master of the Colledge, had been a Male∣factour thereunto, leaving it much indebted, the four succeeding Masters (ill examples avoided do good) Doctor Caius, Legg, Branthwaite, Gosling, (all natives of Norwich) were signall Benefactours, though Masters of, but Stewards for the House; making it, for the main, their Heir, at their decease. Doctor Legg died July 12. 1607. in the 72. year of his age. The Farewell. I heartily wish that this City may long flourish in its full lustre. In tendency where∣unto may the Thatch of all their houses by Divine Providence, be effectually secured from the merciless Element of fire, (as which knoweth not to be a King, but must be a Tyrant,) whose furious raging is seldome bounded, unless by the want of fewel to feed on. Yea, may their Straw in due time advance into Tyle, that thereby their houses may for the future be better fenced against an other Element, I mean the injury of Wind and Rain.
NORTHAMPTON-SHIRE being a long narrow Inland County, is stretched from North-east to South-west, and bordereth on more Counties then any other in England, being nine in num∣ber, viz. On the East. On the West. On the North. On the South. 1. Cambridgeshire 3. Warwickshire 4. Lincolnshire 7. Bedfordshire 2. Huntingtonshire   5. Rutland 8. Buckinghamshire     6. Leicestershire 9. Oxfordshire. It is as fruitful and populous as any in England, insomuch that sixteen several Towns with their Churches have at one view been discovered therein, by my eyes, Other men have discove∣red two and thirty. which I confess none of the best, and God grant that those who are sharper sighted, may hereafter never see fewer. Sure I am there is as little wast ground in this, as in any County in England, (no Mosses, Mears, Fells, Heaths, (Whitering, but a Beauty spot,) which elsewhere fill so many Shires with much emptiness,) Northamptonshire being an Apple, without Core to be cut out, or Rind to be pared away. Northamptonshire challengeth that all the Rivers running through, or by it, are its Natives, as bred in it, (which argueth the elevation, and height of the ground there∣of,) which I believe no other County in England can say. Besides, it lendeth two considerable Rivers Avon to Warwick, and Cherwell to Oxfordshire. The language of the common people is generally the best of any Shire in England. A proof whereof, when a Boy, I received from a hand-labouring-man herein, which since hath convinced my Judgement: We speak I believe (said he) as good English any Shire in England, because, though in the singing Psalms, some words are used to make the Meeter unknown to us; yet the last translation of the Bible, which no doubt was done by those learned men in the best English, agreeth perfectly with the common speech of our Country. Know Reader, that Doctor Bowle my worthy friend, and most skilful Botonographist, hath taken notice of a Heath in this County nigh to Stamford, whereof he giveth this Phytologia Bi∣tannica p. 82. commendation, as fine a place for variety of rare Plants, as ever I beheld. Who I am sure hath seen in this kind, as much, both here, and beyond the Seas, as any of his age and profession. Natural Commodities. Now though this Shire shares as largely as any in those profits which are generall to England, Grass, Corn, Cattle, &c. Yet it is most eminent for Salt-peter. In latine Sal Petrae, rather so called, because exudat è petris, it usually sweats out of rocks, then, because it is wrought up at the last to a rocky or a stony consistency. Some conceive it utterly unknown to the ancients, which learned Hoffman will not allow, onely it was disguised unto them, under the name of Sal nitrum, though our modern use was unknown unto them, that Pulvis nitrosus, or Gun-powder might be made thereof. It is  what will easily take fire, the best Test of the goodness thereof. But, why is Salt-peter (common to all Counties) insisted on in Northamptonshire? Because, most thereof is found in Dove-houses, and most Dove-houses in this great Corn County. Yet are not those Emblemes of innocency, guilty in any degree of those de∣structions, which are made by that, which is made thereof. All that I will adde of Salt-peter, is this, I have read in a learned Dr. Jorden of Mineral∣Baths c. 11. Writer that Salt-peter-men, when they have extracted Salt-peter out of a floor of earth one year, within three or four years after, they find more generated there, and do work it over again.
Pigeons. These of all fowls, live most sociably in a Common-wealth together, seeing their government is not, as Bees, Monarchical. They are generally reported without gall, understand it, their gall is not sequestred into a distinct vessel, as in other creatures. Otherwise we find the effects thereof in their animosities among themselves, (whose Bills can peck as well as kiss) as also (if their Crops be not clearly drawn,) in the bit∣terness of their flesh. They are most swift in flight, and the steerage of their Tails conduceth much to their steddy mounting upright. An envious man, having caught his neighbours Pigeons in a Net, feeding on his Stack, pluck'd off their Tails and let them go. Which, though they could fly forward home, yet were soon after found dead in the Dove coat, famished for want of food, as unable to fly up perpendicularly, and so out at the Lover. Pigeons, against their wills, keep one Lent for seaven weeks in the year, betwixt the going out of the old, and growing up of the new grain. Probably, our English would be found as docible and ingenious, as the Turkish Pigeons, which carry letters from Aleppo to Babilon, if trained up accordingly. But such practices, by these Wing∣posts, would spoil many a Foot-post, living honestly by that painful vocation. I find a grievous Indictment drawn up against the poor Pigeons for felony, as the grand plunderers of grain in this Land. My Sam. Hartlib. of Husband. his Legacy p. 227. Author computing six and twenty thousand Dove-houses in England and Wales, and allowing five hundred pair in each House, four bushels yearly for each pair, hath mounted the annual wast they make to an incredible sum. And, if the moity of his proportions hold true, Doves may be accounted the causers of dearth, and justly answer their Etimology in Hebrew Jonah, which is deduced from a root, signifying to spoil or to destroy. The Advocates for Pigeons plead, that they pick up such loose corn, which otherwise would be lost, and uselesly troden into the earth; that probably Divine Providence, which feedeth the fowls, by some natural instinct directeth them to such grain, which would be barren and fruitless, that their dung, incredibly fruitful for the manuring of ground, abun∣dantly recompenseth the spoil done by them. However, if Pigeons be guilty of so great stealth, they satisfie the law for the same, being generally kill'd for mans meat, and a corrected-pigeon (let blood under both wings) is both pleasant and wholesome nourishment. The Manufactures. This County can boast of none worth naming, whereof this the reason, sufficient the fruitfulness thereof in Corn, Grass, (and what not necessary for nature?) for it's plentiful subsistance. The Elder Brother who hath the inheritance of his own to main∣tain him, need not to be bound an Apprentice, let the younger turn Trades-man, and in∣large his narrow portion by his inaustry. It is enough for Northamptonshire to sell their Wooll, whilst that other Countrys make cloath thereof. I speak not this (though it be my Native ountry) to praise Northamptonshire men for not using, but that Northamp∣tonshire men may praise God for not needing Manufactures. However the Town of Northampton may be said to stand chiefly on other mens Leggs, where (if not the best) the most and cheapest boots and stockens are bought in England. I am credibly informed by a good friend, that the Manufacture of Cloathing hath by prudent and able persons, been endeavoured effectually (understand me in design not success) in this County, and yet (though fine their Wool) their Cloath ran so coarse, it could not be sold without loss; Thus God hath innated every Country with a Peculiar Genius, and when Art crosseth Nature, neither succeed, but both ex∣ceed, where both concurre. Buildings. As Saint Peter hath the Primacy of all the other Apostles, so the Cathedral dedicated unto him in this County, challengeth the Precedency of all in England, for a Majestick Western Front of Columel-work. But alas! This hath lately felt the misfortune of
other Fabricks in this kind. Yea, as in a Gangrean, one member is cut off to preserve the rest, so I understand the Cloysters of this Cathedral were lately plucked down to repair the Body thereof; and am heartily glad God in his mercy hath restored the onely remedy (I mean its lands) for the Cure thereof. As for Civil Structures, Holdenby-house lately carried away the credit, built by Sir Christopher Hatton, and accounted by him the last Monument of his Youth. If Flo∣rence be said to be a City, so fine that it ought not to be shown, but on Holy-days; Holdenby was a House, which should not have been shown, but on Christmas-day. But alas! Holedenby-house is taken away, being the Embleme of human happiness, both in the beauty and brittleness, short flourishing, and soon fading thereof. Thus one demo∣lishing Hammer, can undoe more in a day, then ten edifying Axes can advance in a Month. Next is Burleigh-house nigh Stamford, built by William Lord Cecil. Who so seri∣ously compareth the [late] state of Holdenby and Burleigh, will dispute wth himself, whither the Offices of the Lord Chancellour or Treasurer of England be of greater Revenues, seeing Holedenby may be said to show the Seal, and Burleigh the Purse, in their respective magnificence, proportionable to the power and plenty of the two great▪ Officers that built them. Withorpe must not be forgot, (the least of Noble Houses, and best of Lodges,) seeming but a dim reflection of Burleigh, whence it is but a Mile distant. It was built by Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter, to retire to (as he pleasantly said) out of the dust, whilst his great House of Burleigh was a sweeping. Castle Ashby the Noble Mansion of the Earl of Northampton succeeds, most beauti∣full before, a casual fire deformed part thereof. But seeing fire is so furious a plun∣derer, that it giveth whatsoever it taketh not away, the condition of this house is not so much to be condoled, as congratulated. Besides these, there be many others, no County in England, yeilding more Noble men; no Noble men in England, having fairer habitations. And although the Freestone whereof they be built, keepeth not so long the white innocence, as Brick doth the blushing modesty thereof; yet when the fresh luster is abated, the full state thereof doth still remain. The Wonders. There is within the Demeasnes of Boughton, (the Barony of the Right Honorable Edward Lord Mountague,) a Spring which is conceived to turn wood into stone. The truth is this, the coldness of the water incrustateth wood (or what else falleth into it) on every side with a stony matter, yet so that it doth not transubstantiate wood into stone. For the wood remaineth entire within, untill at last wholy consumed, which giveth occasion to the former erroneous relation. The like is reported of a Well in Candia with the same mistake, that Quicquid incidit lapidescit. But I have seen in Sidney-colledge in Cambridge, a Skull brought thence, which was candied over with stone within and without, yet so as the bone remained intire in the middle, as by a casual breach thereof did appear. This Skull was sent for by King Charles, (and whilst I lived in the house) by him safely again returned to the Colledge, being a Prince as desirous in such cases to preserve others propriety, as to satisfie his own curiosity. Medicinal Waters. Wellingborough-well. Some may conceive it called Wellingborough, from a sovereign Well therein anci∣ently known, afterwards obstructed with obscurity, and re-discovered in our days. But Master Camden doth marr their mart, avouching the ancient name thereof Wed∣lingburough. However thirty years since a water herein grew very famous, insomuch that Queen Mary lay many weeks thereat. What benefit her Majesty received by the Spring here, I know not, this I know, that the Spring received benefit from her Majesty, and the Town got credit and profit thereby. But it seems all waters of this kind have (though far from the Sea) their ebbing and flowing, I mean in esteem. It was then full tide with Wellingburough-well, which ever since hath abated, and now I believe is at low water in its reputation.
Proverbs. The Mayor of Northampton opens Oysters with his Dagger.] This Town being 80 miles from the Sea, Sea fish may be presumed stale therein. Yet have I heard that Oysters (put up with care, and carried in the cool,) were weekly brought fresh and good to Althrope, the house of the Lord Spencer at equal distance. Sweeter no doubt then those Oysters commonly carried over the Alpes, well nigh 300. miles from Venice to Viena, and there eputed (far fetch'd and deer bought) daintes to great persons, though sometimes very valiant their savour. Nor is this a wonder, seeing Plinny tell us, that our English Oysters did Romanis culinis servire, Serve the Kitchings of Rome; Pickled as some suppose, though others believe them preserved by an ingenious contrivance, (Epicures bear their brains in there bowels,) and some conceive them carried in their shells. But seeing one of their own Emperours gave for his Motto; Bonus odor hstis, melior Civis occisi; Good is the smell of an Enemy, but better the smell of a Citizen of Rome, killed. I say unto such a Roman∣Nose, stinking may be better then sweet Oysters, and to their Palates we'll leave them. He that must eat a buttered Fagot, let him go to Northampton.] Because it is the dearest Town in England for fuel, where no Coles can come by Water, and little Wood doth grow on Land. Camden saith of this County in gene∣ral, that it is, Silvis, nisi in ulteriori & citeriori parte, minùs laetus. And if so when he wrote, fifty years since, surely it is less wooddy in our age. What reformation of late hath been made in mens judgments and manners, I know not, sure I am, that deformation hath been great in trees and timber: who verily believe, that the clearing of many dark places, where formerly plenty of wood, is all the new light this age produced. Pity it is no better provision is made for the preservation of woods, whose want will be soonest for our fire, but will be saddest for our water, when our naval walls shall be decayed. Say not, that want of wood will put posterity, on witty inventions for that supply, seeing he is neither pious nor prudent parent, who spends his patrimony, on design that the industry and ingenuity of his son may be quick'ned thereby. Princes. ELIZABETH daughter of Sir Richard Woodevill, by the Lady Jaquet his wife, (formerly the relict of John Duke of Bedford,) was born at Grafton Honour in this County, in proof whereof many stronge The  had for∣merly for four generations lived at Graf∣ton, as appears by the Lger∣book of Pip∣well-Abbey. presumptions may be produced. Sure I am, if this Grafton saw her not first a child, it beheld her first a Queen, when married to King Edward the fourth. This Elizabeth was widow to Sir John Grey, who lost his life for the house of Lancaster; and Petitioned King Edward to take off the sequestration from her Joynter. Beauty is a good solicitress of an equal sute, especially where youth is to be the judge thereof. The King fell much inamored with her feature, whilst the Lady put her self into a chast posture, and kept a discreet distance, neither forward to accept, nor froward to decline his favonr. She confessed her self too worthless to be his wife, yet pleaded too worthy to be his wanton, till at last the King was content to take her upon her own terms, though a widow and his Subject. She got more greatness then joy, height then happiness by her marriage; her hus∣band keeping company with others for his pleasure, her for posterity: Nor was it long before the tempest of his lust drave him to another Shore, which had a greater share in his affections. This Lady liv'd to see the death of her husdand, murder of her two sons, restraint of her self, and rest of her children. And though her condition was altered and bet∣tered, by the marriage of her eldest daughter to King Henry the seventh, yet that cunning King, (who always weighed his love in the ballance of policy) was not over
dutiful to her, nor over-loving to her daughter. She dyed Anno Domini 14... But her memory is most remarkable to posterity for finishing Queens-colledge in Cambridge, (wherein I had my first breding, and for it, and all therein, shall ever have an unfeigned affection) begun by Queen Margaret, (wife to King Henry the sixth) an implacable enemy to her husband, so that the two houses of Lancaster and York had their first amity in that Foundation, a comfortable presage that in process of time they should be publikely and effectually united. RICHARD PLANTAGENET son to Richart Plantagenet Duke of York, was born at Fothinghay castle in this County. He was somewhat rumpled in his Mo∣thers womb, (which caused his crooked back) otherwise handsome enough for a Soldier. Ajax and Ulysses, Valour and Eloquence, met in his person, having as well a tongue to flatter, as an arm to fight. He compassed the Crown by cruelty, and the killing of his Nephews, the two Sons of King Edward the fourth. When King, he made good Laws, which never procured him the peoples love, as who beheld vice for his native colour, and virtue for his painted complexion, on design to make himself popular. He lost the Crown and his life in the battle of Bosworth, where it may be verified of him, what Livy saith of Hannibal, when beaten by Scipio, that in that fight he per∣formed all the offices of a wise General, and valiant Souldier, onely fortune did not befriend him. If any except that King Richard in this battle was too prodigal of his own person, engaging it too far for a General; his condition did excuse him herein, with whom it was all one, to dye, as too survive Success. His memory hath since met with a Modern George Buck. Esquire. Pen, who hath not onely purged, but praised it to the height, and pity it is, that so able an Advocate, had not a more meriting person to his Client. He was slain Anno Do∣mini 1435. KATHARINE PAR daughter to Sir Thomas Par, and last wife to King Henry the eighth, may probably be presumed a Native of this Shire. However to prevent cavils, we resign her over to Westmerland, where (God willing) we shall meet with her character. Saints. WERBURGH was daughter to Wolpher Prince of Mercia, who had his chief Camdns Brit. in this Coun∣ty. Palace of Residence at Wedon in the Street in this County, which place her father be∣stowed on her for her Portion. She was bred a Nun, under Saint Audery her Aunt, and Abbess at Ely, untill such time that she was able, of herself, to go alone without leading, in a Monastical life. Returning to Wedon, she turned that place which had been her fathers Palase, into a Monastery. Besides Wedon, she had the inspection of two other Monasteries, Trekingham in Lin∣colnshire, and Hamburge, noted by my The English Martyrology. In the third day of Feb. Author, neer Ely in Cambridgeshire, though no such place appear in any modern Maps or Catalogue. She parted herself, whilst living, successively betwixt these three places. But on her death-bed, commanded her body to be buried at Hamburge, when contrary to her Will, it was carried to the Monastery of Trekingham, and the gates thereof fast locked, and carefully watched, to keep so great a Treasure. Reader, if the day be as long with thee, when thou readest, as it was with me, when I wrote the ensuing story, time may the better be afforded, for the perusal thereof. My Idem ibidem. Author proceeds. Eut see a wonder. [It were well if we could see, whereas now, by his leave, we do but hear it,] They, which were appointed to watch the same, fell into a deep sleep, so as the people of Hamburge coming in the night for the Body, the gates, both of the Monastery and Church, were opened themselves without mens hands, and taking it away without any resistance, they interred it at Hamburge, as before her death she requested. Wonder not they were so ambitious for her body, for as Werburgh was her name, which by a R. Verstegan p. 212. great Antiquary is interpreted, the Keeper or Conserver of a Burgh or
Town, so all presumed she would prove a Tutelary Patroness to the place which posses∣sed her body, seeing Cujus miracu∣la in sugandis hinc anseribus, scriptores cre∣duli decanta∣runt. some have reported, that she hath miraculously driven away all Geese from Wedon, that they shall destroy no grain threabout. If this be true, then as a certain Jupiter amongst the Heathens, was called Camd. Brit. in Northampt. Jupiter  Jupiter the flie-flapper, who drave away those offensive Insects, let this Saint hereafter be termed Werburga , the chaser away of noisome Geese, which spoil grain, grass, and water, where they come. She died Anno Domini 675. her body was afterwards taken* Apud Pausio∣niam in Eliacis. up, and translated to Chester, where Hugh Lupus, somewhat after the Conquest, built the fair Monastery of Saint Werburghs to her memory, converted into a Cathedral by King Henry the eight. Martyrs. This County affordeth no Marian Martyrs, thanks be to a good and Gracious God, a meek and moderate man, David Pool Bishop of Peterburough, whom I here mention the more willingly, not knowing where to fix his Nativity. However Unus Homo nobis. One Martyr we had, not chargable on the Bishop, but his bloudy Arch-Deacons ac∣count, John Gurd of Syrsam a Shoo-maker burnt in Fox Acts and Monn. Anno 1557. Northampton. As for Augustine Dudley Parson of Castor, though some of his familly credibly in∣formed me, that he was Martyred, yet on enquiry, his fufferings amounted not to loss of life, and therefore the less wonder, that they escaped the drag-net of Master Fox's diligence. Cardinals. HENRY CHICHLEY was born at Higham Ferrers in this County, and by the Author of Antiquitates Britanicae, is avouched made Cardinal by the title of Saint Eusebius. But, because this appeareth not in his Epitaph on his Tombe, (wherein an exact inventory of all his dignities) the truth thereof is justly suspected, and I reserve his character to be ranked amongst the Benefactors to the Publique. Prelates. RICARD of NORTHAMPTON. ADAM of NORTHAMPTON. We compound them for several reasons. First, because natives of the same Town. Secondly, both going over into Ireland, there became Bishops of the same See. Thirdly, because the history of them is, single, so slender it cannot subsist alone, though twisted together; it is posible that their memories may support one the other. For we have nothing more of them, then the dates of their Consecrations and Deaths. The former Consecrated Sir James Ware de Praesu∣libus Lagentiae pag. 58. Bishop of Fer∣nose October the 13. 1282. dyed Anno 1304. The later Consecrated 1322. died Idem p. 59. October the 29. 1346. having first seen his Cathedral Church burnt and destroyed by the Rebells. WILLIAM le ZOUCH son to—Lord Zouch, was born at Haringworth in this County, as a Dr. Richard Zouch Professor of Law in Ox∣sord. branch of thar Honorable Family still alive, and Critical in their Pedigrees, hath credably informed me. From Dean he became Arch-bishop of York 1342. King Edward the third, going over to France, committed the North to the care of this Prelate. Soon after David King of Scots, with a great Army invaded it; he pro∣mised himself Cesars success, to Come and Conquer, See and Subdue. The rather, be∣cause he believed, that he floure of the English Chivalry being gone into France, onely Priests and Peasants were left behind. Our Arch-bishop with such forces as he could suddenly provide, bid him Battle at Durham, on Saint Lukes Eve, whereon the Scotch King found such a fast, he had little list to feast the day following, being routed and taken Prisoner. Hence a Poet of that age, Est pater invictus, sicco de stipite dictus.
Zouch in French signifying the dry stump of a stick. However his honorable Fa∣mily flourished as a Green Tree for many years, till withered in our memory, when Edward the last Lord Zouch, dyed without Issue male, in the beginning of King Charles. To return to our Prelate, he began a beautiful Chappel on the South-side of his Cathe∣dral, intending to be interred therein. But dying before the finishing thereof, was bu∣ried before the Altar of Saint Edmund 1352. ROBERT BRAYBROOKE was born at a Village in this County, well known for the carkase of a Castle therein. He was Consecrated Bishop of London, January 5. 1381. nd afterwards for six Months, was Chancellour of England. He dyed 1404. being buried under a Marble-stone in the Chappel of Saint Mary. Which is all we can re∣cover of this Prelate, and, if it be enough to satisfie the Readers hunger, he need not leave any thing for manners in the dish. LIONELL WYDEVILL, or WOODVILL was born at Grafton (since called Grafton honor) in this County, bred in the University of Oxford, whereof, for a time he was Chancellour, then made Bishop of Sarisbury 1482. As he was at first pre∣ferred, so his memory is still supported from sinking in Silence, rather by the Buttresses of his great relations, then the foundation of his own deserts. For he was Son to Jaquet Dutchess of Bedford, and Richard Wydevill E. of Rivers, Brother to Elizabeth Q. of England, Brother in-law to King Edward the fourth, Uncle to King Edward the fit, and Father (say some) to Stephen Gardiner Bishop of Winchester. Heart-broken with grief, with the Tragedies he beheld in his own family, caused by the cruelty of King Richard the third, he died about the year of our Lord 1484. Since the Reformation. JAMES MONTAUE son to Sir Edward Montague Knight, was born at Boughton in this County, bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge. He was afterwards Master, or rather Nursing father to Sidney-colledge. For he found it in Bonds to pay 20. Marks per annum to Trinity-colledge, for the ground whereon it is built, and left it free, assigning it a rent for the discharge thereof. When the Kings Ditch in Cambridge made to defend it by its Strength, did in his time offend it with its Stenche, he expended a hundred marks to bring running water into it, to the great conveniency of the Univer∣sity. He was afterwards Bishop first of Bath and VVells, then of VVinchester, being high∣ly in favour with King James, who did ken a man of merrit, as well as any Prince in Christendome. He translated the works of King James into Latine, and improved his greatness to do good offices therewith. He died Anno Domini 1618. and lyeth bu∣ried within his fair Monument, within his fairer Monument, I mean a goodly Tombe, in the Church of Bath, which oweth its well being and beauty to his Munificence. FRANCIS GODWIN son to Thomas Godwin Bishop of Bath and VVells, was born at Witness him∣self in his Cat. of Landas. Hanningham in this County, bred in Christs-church in Oxford Doctor of Divinity, and Sub-Dean of Exeter. He was born in the fourth year of the raign of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1561. and in the fortieth year of his age 1601. by her Ma∣jesty made Bishop of Landaffe. A bishoprick better proportioned to his modesty then merits, as which was much impaired by his predecessor, so that one did tuly say, A Anthony Kit∣chin who mard this See with selling and letting long leases. bad Kitching did for ever spoil the good Meat of the Bishops of Landaffe. He was a good Man, grave Divine, skilful Mathematician, pure Latinist, and incomparable Hi∣storian. The Church of Landaffe was much beholding to him; yea, the whole Church of England; yea, the whole Church Militant; yea, many now in the Church Trium∣phant had had their memories utterly lost on Earth, if not preserved by his painfull endeavours in his Catalogue of English Bishops. I am sorry to see that some have since made so bad use of his good labours, who have lighted their Candles from his Torch, thereby meerly to discover the faults of our Bishops, that their Personal fail∣ings may be an argument against the Prelatical function. He was translated by King James to the Bishoprick of Hereford, and died very aged in the reign of King Charles Anno Domini 162. JOHN OWEN was born at Burton- Latimers in this County, his father being the worthy and grave Minister thereof. He was bred a Fellow in Jesus-colledge in Cam∣bridge,
where he commenced Doctor of Divinity, and was Chaplain to King Charles, whilst he was a Prince. A modest man who would not own the worth he had in him∣self, and therefore others are the more ingaged to give him his due esteem. In the vacancy of the Bishop wrick of Saint Asaff, King Charles, being much troub∣led with two Competitours, advanced Doctor Owen (not thinking thereof) as an expe∣dient to end the Contest. Indeed his Majesty was mistaken in his birth, accounting him a Welch-man, but not in his worth, seeing he deserved a far better preferment. Besides he was, though not Ortus, oriundus è Wallia, and by his father (being a Welch∣man) he was related to all the best families in North-wales. He out-lived his Vote in Parliament, and survived to see all contempt cast on his Order, which he bare with much moderation, and dyed Anno Dom. 164.. ROBERT SKINNER D. D. was born at Pisford in this County, where his father was Minister, bred Fellow of Trinity-colledge in Oxford, afterwards an eminent Preacher in London, and Dean of............ Hence he was preferr'd Bishop of Bristol, and afterwards of Oxford, and is still, and long may he be, living. States-men. Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON was born (I collect at Holdenby) in this County, of a family rather ancient then wealthy, yet of no mean estate. He rather took a bate, then made a meal at the Inns of Court, whilst he studied the Laws therein. He came afterwards to the Court in a mask, where the Queen first took notice of him, loving him well for his handsome dancing, better for his proper person, and best of all for his great abilities. His parts were far above his learning, which mutually so assist∣ed each other, that no manifest want did appear, and the Queen at last preferred him Lord Chancellour of England. The Gown-men grudging hereat, conceived his advancement their injury, that one not thoroughly bred in the Laws, should be preferred to the place; How could he cure diseases unacquainted with their causes, who might easily mistake the Justice of the Common-law for Rigour, not knowing the true reason thereof. Hereupon it was, that some sullen Serjeants at the first refused to plead before him, until, partly by his power, but more by his prudence, he had convinced them of their errors, and his abi∣lities. Indeed he had one Sir Richard Swale Doctor of the Civil-laws (and that Law some say is very sufficient to dictate equity) his servant-friend, whose advice he fol∣lowed in all matters of moment. A scandal is raised, that he was popishly affected, and I cannot blame the Romanists, if desirous to countenane their cause with so considerable a person. Yet most ue it is that his zeal for the discipline of the Church of England gave the first being and life to this report. Fragmenta Regalia in his Character. One saith, that he was a meer Vegetable of the Court that sprung up at night, and sunk again at his noon, though indeed he was of longer continuance. Yet it brake his heart, that the Queen (which seldome gave boons, and never forgave due debts,) ri∣gorously demanded the present payment of some arrears, which Sir Christopher did not hope to have remitted, but did onely desire to be forborn; failing herein in his expecta∣tion, it went to his heart, and cast him into a mortal disease. The Queen afterwards did endeavour what she could to recover him, bringing as some say cordial broaths unto him with her own hands, but all would not do. Thus no Pullies can draw up a heart once cast down, though a Queen her self should set her hand thereunto. He dyed Anno Domini 1591. and is buried under a stately monument in the Qire of Saint Pauls. Sir WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS born at Milton in this County, mar∣ried the sister of Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland. Yea, he himself was Guil. Fitz∣Williams jam quintùm Hi∣berni Prorex. Camd. Eliz. An. 1587. five times Lord Deputy of that Kingdome, a sufficient evidence of his honesty and ability, seeing Queen Elizabeth never trusted twice, where she was once deceiv'd in a Minister of State. She so preserved him in the power of his place, that sending over Walter Earl of Essex (a person higher in honour) to be Governour of Ulster, it was ordered, that the Earl should take his Commission from the Lord Idem Anno 1573. Deputy. An intelligent Sir Joh Da∣vis in his dis∣covees of Ireland, pag. 257. pen alloweth him serviceable, towards the reduction of that King∣dome,
in two eminent particulars. First, in raising a composition in Mounster, then in setling the possessions of the Lords and Tenants in Monahan, one of the last acts of State (tending to the reformation of the civil government) perform'd in the reign of Queen Elizabeth. His vigilancy was most conspicuous in the Eighty-eight, when the routed Armado in its return, did look, dared not to land in Ireland, except against their wills driven by tempest, when they found the shore worse then the sea unto them. I confess, some Camden Anno 1588. impute the Irish Rebellion, which afterwards brake out to this Deputies severity, in imprisoning suspected persons for concealing Spanish goods, though this onely gave the Irish a mantle for their intended wickedness. He died Anno Domini 15... Sir ISAAC WAKE was born in this County, whose father Arthur Wake So am I in∣formed from Mr. George Wake late Fel∣low of Magda∣len-colledge in Oxford, and his near kinsman. Clerk was Parson of Billing, Master of the Hospital of Saint Johns in Northampton, and Canon of Christs-church, and son to John VVake of Sancy-forrest Esquire, of a most ancient and honorable family. He was bred Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford, Proctour and Oratour of that University, he was afterwards Secretary to Sir Dudley Carleton Secretary of State, and from his, was advanced into the Kings Service, and imployed Embassadour to Venice, where he neglected his own commodity, to attend his Majesties imployment, the reason that he died rich onely to his own Conscience. Coming from Venice he was appointed Leiger for France, and designed Secretary of State, had not death prevented him at Paris. He was accomplished with all qualifica∣tions requisite for publique Employment, Learning, Languages, Experience, Abilities; and what not? King Charles hearing of his death, commanded his Corps to be decently brought from Paris into England, allowing the expences for his Funeral, and enjoyning his neerest relations to attend the performance thereof. These accordingly met his bo∣dy at Bulloin in France, and saw it solemnly conveyed into England, where it was inter∣red in the Chappel of the Castle of Dover, Anno Dom. 16... Capital Judges and Writers on the Law. MARTIN de PATESHULL. Let him remain here, till any shall showAMP. me a Town called Pateshulle, in any other County of England; which village in this Shire, gave the name, and afforded the habitation to that ancient Camd. Brit. in Northampton∣shire. family. Though a Clergy-man, he was in the Sir Hen. Soel∣mans Gloss. verbo Justitia∣rius. first of King Henry the third, made Justice of the Lower-ench or Common-Pleas, wherein he continued for twelve years and upwards, as appeareth by the date of his death, out of an excellent Florilegus in An. 1226. be∣ing the 14. of Hen. 3. Author, Eodem anno obiit Martinus de Pateshulle, Decanus St. Pauli London. 18. Cal. Decem. vir mirae prudentiae, & Legum Regni peritissimus. He was the fourth Dean of Saint Pauls, as reckoned up in Bishop Godwin his Cata∣logue. In that age we see, Clergy men were not onely trusted with the spirit, (I mean the equity) but also with the letter of the Law, being Judges in those Courts, wherein were the most strictest proceedings. Sir THOMAS de BILLING was born in this County, (where two Villages, his namesakes, near Northampton,) and had his habitation in great state at Ashwell in this Shire. He was made Chief-Justice of the Kings-Bench in the Sir Hen. Spel∣man ut prius. sixth, and so con∣tinued till the one and twentieth of Edward the fourth, whose lands (and those very large) have since by the Camd. Bit. in Northampton∣shire. Lovels descended to the Shirlies. Nothing else have I to observe of him, save, that he married for his second wife Stows Surv. of London pag. 519. Mary the daughter and heir of Robert Nesenham of Conington in Huntingtonshire, the Relict of William Cotton, (whose issue possess her inheritance at this day,) and she lieth intomb'd in VVestminster. Sir WILLIAM CATESBYE was born in this County, where his family long flourished at Asby Saint Leger. He was first advanced by VVilliam Lord Hastinges, by whose countenance he came to the notice, then favour of Richard the third, though ill requiting it, when betraying him, who caused his preferment. Take his character (transcribing in this kind, is safer then inditing) from an Sir T. More Printing the continuation of J.  Chron fol. 56. Author above exception.
This Catesbye was a man well learned in the Laws of this Land, and surely great pity it was that he had not had more truth, or less wit. If any object, that being neither Lord Chief-Justice, Chief-Baron, nor any VVriter on the Law. He falleth not under my Pen, by the Charter of Method prefixed to this Catalogue, know that though formerly none, he was eminently all Officers, in every Court of Judicature, all the Judges shaking at his displeasure. Witness the Libel which Collingborn made, and which cost him his life for the same. The Ratlife. Rat, and the Catesby. Cat, and Lovel the Dog, Do govern all England under the K. Rich. the third who gave a Boar for his Crest. Hog. The time of his death is uncertain, but, because we find him not molested in the raign of King Henry the seventh, (which had he survived, surely had happened) it is probable he died before his Patron and Preferrer, King Richard the third. Sir RICHARD EMPSON. It is pity to part them, seeing Empson may be called the Catesbye to King Henry the seventh, as Catesbye the Empson to King Richard the third; both Country-men, eminent for having, odious for abusing their skill in Law; active for the Prince, injurious to the people. This Sir Richard was Chancel∣lour of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and from a Sieve-makers son, (at Towceter in this County where he was born) came to sift the estates of the most wealthy men in Eng∣land. For King Henry the seventh, vexed that he had refused Columbus his profer, (whereby the VVest-Indies being found out fortunately, fell to Ferdinand King of Spain,) resolved to discover Indies in England, and to this purpose made Empson Pro∣motor General, to press the Penal-Statutes all over the land. Impowred hereby, this prolling Knight did grind the faces of rich and poor, bring∣ing the grist thereof to the King, and keeping the toll thereof to himself, whereby he advanced a vast estate, which now, with his name, is reduced to nothing. He united the two houses of York and Lancaster in the Kings Coffers, taking no notice of parties or persons, for their former good service, but making all equally obnoxious to fines and forfeitures. But in the beginning of the reign of King Henry the eight, he was arraigned, condemed and beheaded, August the 17. 1510. Say not that Princes, if sacrificing their Ministers to popular fury, will want persons faithfully to serve them, seeing such exemplary justice will rather fright Officers from false disserving them; for in fine, no real profit can redoun to the Soveraign, which resulteth from the ruine of his Subjects. I must not forget how there was an old man in VVarwickshire, accounted very judi∣cious in Judicial Astrology, of whom Sir Richard Empson (then in his prime) did scof∣fingly demand, VVhen the Sun would Change, to whom the old man replyed, Even when such a wicked Camdens re∣mains. Lawyer as you go to Heaven. But we leave him to stand and fall to his own Master, and proceed. EDWARD MONTAGUE son of Thomas Montague, born at Brigstocke in this County, was bred in the Inner-Temple, in the study of the Laws, until his ability and integrity, advanced him Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-Bench, in the thirtieth of Hen∣ry the eight. He gave for his Motto, Equitas Justiae Norma. And although equity seemeth rather to resent of the Chancery, then the Kings-Bench, yet the best justice will be worm-wood without a mixture thereof. In his Times, though the golden showers of Abby-lands rained amongst great men, it was long before he would open his lap (scrupling the acception of such gifts) and at last received but little in propor∣tion to others of that age. In the thirty seventh of King Henry the eight, he was made Chief Justice of the Common-Pleas, a descent in honor, but ascent in profit, it being given to old age, rather to be thrifty then ambitious. In drawing up the Will of King Edward the sixt, and setling the Crown on the Lady Jane, for a time, he swam against the tide and torrent of Duke Dudley, till at last, he was carried away with the stream, as in our Church History, is largely re∣lated.
Outed of his Judges Office in the first of Queen Mary, he returned into Northamp∣tonshire, and what contentment he could not find in VVestminster-hall, his Hospital-hall at Boughton afforded unto him. He died Anno 1556. and lieth buried in the Parish∣Church of VVeekely. Sir AUGUSTIN NICOLLS Son to Thomas Nicolls, Serjeant at Law, was born at Eckton in this County. Now, though according to the rigor of our Funda∣mental Premises, he cometh not within our Cognizance under this Title, yet his merit will justifie us in presenting his Character. He was bred in the study of the Common-law, wherein he attained to such know∣ledge, that Queen Elizabeth made him a, King James his own, Serjeant; whence he was freely preferred one of the Judges of the Common-Pleas. I say freely, King James commonly calling him the Judge that would give no money. Not to speak of his moral qualifications, and subordinate abilities; He was renowned for his special Judiciary Endowments; Patience to hear both parties all they could say, a happy memory, a sin∣gular sagacity to search into the material circumstances, exemplary integrity, even to the rejection of gratuities after judgment given. His forbearing to travail on the Lords▪ day, wrought a reformation on some of his own Order. He loved plain and profitable Preaching, being wont to say, I know not what you call Puritanical Sermons, but they come neerest to my Conscience. The speech of Caesar is commonly known, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori, which Bishop Jewell altered and applyed to himself, Decet Episcopum concionantē mori; of this man it may be said, Judex mortuus est jura dans, dying in his calling, as he went the Northern Circuit, and hath a fair Monument in Kendall-church in Westmerland. Sir ROBERT DALLINGTON Knight, was born at Geddington in this County, bred a Bible-clerk (as I justly collect) in Bennet-colledge, and after became a School-master in Northfolk. Here having gained some money, he travailed over all France and Italy, being exact in his observations, and was after his return Secretary to Francis Earl of Rutland. He had an excellent wit and judgement, witness his most acurate Aporismes on Tacitus. At last he was Knighted and preferred Master of the Charter-house, where theDr. Gray. School-master at his first entering, wellcomed him with a Speech in Latine verse, spoken by a School-boy, but sure he was more then a Boy who indited it. It is hard to say, whether Sir Robert was more pleased or displeased with the last Distick therein, Partem oneris vestri minimā ne despice, curam Nec Pueros itcrum tedeat esse tuam. Do not the least part of your trust disdain, Nor grudge of Boys to take the care again. He lived to be a very aged man past seventy six, and died Anno Domini 162.▪ JOHN FLETCHER Son of Richard Fletcher D. D. was (as by proportion of time is collectible) born in this County, before his Father was Bishop of Bristol or London, and whilst as yet he was Dean of Peterborough. He had an excellent wit, which the back-friends to Stage-plays will say, was neither idle, nor well imploy'd. For he and Francis Beaumont Esquire, like Castor and Pollux, (most happy when in conjun∣ction) raised the English, to equal the Athenian and Roman Theater; Beaumont bringing the ballast of judgement, Fletcher the sail of phantasie, both compounding a Poet to admiration. Meeting once in a Tavern, to contrive the rude draught of a Tragedy, Fletcher un∣dertook to kill the King therein, whose words being over-heard by a listener (though his Loyalty not to be blamed herein) he was accused of High Treason, till the mistake soon appearing, that the plot was onely against a Drammatick and Scenical King, all wound off in merriment. Nor could it be laid to Fletcher's charge, whatOvid Metam. lib. 13. Ajax doth to Ulysses. Nihil hic Diomede remoto. When Diomede was gone, He could do nought alone. For surviving his partner, he wrote good Comedies himself, though inferiour to the former; and no wonder, if a single thread was not so strong as a twisted one. He
died (as I am inform'd) in London of the plague in the first of King Charles, 1625. Sir HENRY MONTAGUE Knight, third son to Sir Edward Montague Knight, grand-child to Sir Edward Montague Knight, Lord Chief-Justice of the Kings-bench, was born at Boughton in this County. One skilful in mysterious arts, beholding him when a School-boy, foretold that by the pregnancy of his parts, he would raise him∣self above the rest of his family, which came to pass accordingly. He was bred first in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, then in the Middle-Temple, where he attained to great learning in the Laws, and passed through many preferments, viz. 1. Sergeant at Law. 2. Knighted by King James, July 22. 1602. 3. Recorder of London. 4. Lord Chief-Justice of the Kings∣Bench, November 18. 1616. 5. Lord Treasurer of England, Decem. 16. 1620. 6. Baron of Kimbolton. 7. Viscount Mandevile. 8. President of the Council, Septem. 29. 1621. 9. Earl of Manchester. 10. Lord Privy-Seal. He wisely perceiving, that Courtiers were but as counters in the hands of Princes, raised and depress'd in valuation at pleasure, was contented rather to be set for a smaller sum, then to be quite put up into the box. Thus in point of place and prefer∣ment, being pleased to be what the King would have him, (according to his Motto, Movendo non mutando me,) he became almost what he would be himself, finaly ad∣vanced to an Office of great honour. When Lord Privy-Seal, he brought the Court of Requests into such repute, that what formerly was called the Almes-basket of the Chancery, had in his time well nigh as much meat in, and guests about it, (I mean Suits and Clients) as the Chancery it self. His meditations on Life and Death, written in the time of his health, may be presumed to have left good impressions on his own soul, preparatory for his dissolution, which happened 164.. Writers. JOHN of NORTHAMPTON, in Latine Johannes Avonius, was born in the Town of Northampton, in ipso Insulae umbilico, (saith Cen. 5. Num. 75. Bale) and is not mistaken in his proportion. This mindeth me of a village in this County, sufficiently known, com∣monly call'd Navesby, whose Orthography Criticks will have Navelsby, as in the middle of England. This John became a Carmelite in his native Town, and so ad∣dicted himself to the Study of Mathematicks, that he became one of the most emi∣nent in that age, for practical experiments. He was Author of a work which he called The Philosophers Ring. This was not like The Philosophers Stone, a thing meerly imaginary, nor yet was it a work of the Cyclopedy of Arts, (as the sound may seem to import,) but it was in plain truth a perpetual Almanack. I say Almanack, which word though many make of Arabick extraction, a greatVestegan of decayed in∣telligence, p. 58. Antiquary will have it derived from the Dutch, Al-mon-aght, that is to say, Al-mon-heed, the regard or observa∣tion of all Moons. However this work of John was beheld as a Master-piece of that age, and since commented upon by other Writers. He flourished Anno Do∣mini 1340. ROBERT HOLCOT was born in aCamden. Brit. in Nothamp∣tonshire. Village of this County so named, bred in the University of Oxford, and afterwards became a Dominican in Northampton. A deep Scholar, and yet commended to be prudent inBale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 8. rebus agendis, and accounted one of the greatest School-men in that age. Nor, was he onely a Candle, or dome∣stick light, confin'd within the walls of his own Country, but his learning was a pub∣lick Luminary to all Christendome, as appears by the praise whichDe script. Ec∣cles. sol. 136. Trithemius bestoweth upon him; Vir in Divinis Scripturis eruditissimus, & secularium literarum non ignarus; ingenio praestans, & clarus eloquio, declamator quoque sermonem egregius Scrip∣sit multa praeclara opuscula, quibus nomen suum posteris notificavit.
He died at Northampton of the plague Anno 1349, before he had finished his Le∣ctures on the seventh of Ecclesiastes. I say of the plague, which at that time so raged in England, that ourStows Ann. p. 245. Chroniclers affirm, scarce a tenth person of all sorts was left alive. Insomuch, that the Churches and Church-yards in London not sussicing for their interments, a new Church-yard was Consecrated in West-smithfield, whereinIdem ibidem. fifty thousand were buried, who at that time died of the pestilence. ROBERT DODFORD was born in a Village so called in this County, (where the Wirlyes, Gentlemen of good account, have long had their habitation) so named as I take it, from a Ford over the river Avon, and Dods Water-weeds, (commonly called by children Cats Tales) growing thereabouts. He was bred a Benedictine Monke in the Abby of Ramsey, and applied himself to the Study of theBale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 41. Hebrew Tongue, where∣with the Library (of which he was Keeper) in that Convent did much abound. He wrote Postills on the Proverbs, and other Sermons, which the envy of time hath inter∣cepted rom us. He is said to have flourished about the year 1370. by Bale, though Pitz, (on what account I know not) maketh him more ancient by an hundred years. PETER PATESHULL was no doubt born in that Village not far from North∣ampton, bred a Augustinian in Oxford, however falling afterwards into some dislike of his Order, he procured from Walter Dysse (Legate, to Pope Urbane the sixth) a Dispen∣sation to relinquish it, and was made the Popes Honorary Chaplain. Afterwards, by often reading the works of Wickliffe (but especially hisIdem Cent. 7. Num. 2. book of Real Universals) he became of his judgement, and after the death of Wickliffe, preached and promoted his doctrine; he wrote an Exposition of the Prophesie of Hildegardes, (a Stinging Com∣ment on a Netling Text,) and so taxed the pride and lasiness of all Friers, that his book was burnt by command from the Pope, and the Writer thereof had been burnt also, had he no seasonably secured himself by his flight beond the Seas. This mindeth me of a passage of a Frier, who burned a book of Peter Ramus, after the death of the Author thereof, and then, and there used this Distick, in some imita∣tion of Ovid, Parve nec invideo (sine me) Liber ibis in Ignem, Hei mihi quod Domino non licet ire tuo. Small Book, thy fate I envy not, (Without me) feel the Flame; O had it been thy Masters lot, He might have felt the Same. But our Pateshull was out of retch in Bohemia, betwixt which and England, a great in∣tercourse in that age, since King Richard the second had married a Sister of Wincelaus King of Bohemia. We behold him as an advancer of Wicklivisme in that Country, for which John Husse and Hierome of Prague were afterwards condemned. He flourished in the year of our Lord 1390. Since the Reformation. ROBERT CROWLEY was born in thisIdem Cent. 9. Num. 80. County, bred Master of Arts in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. It happ'ned that one Miles Hogheard, whomDe Ang. script. 1556. Pitz maketh a learned Writer, and intituleth him, Virum doctum, ptum, & in fide Catholica mirè zelosum, (though in Master Fox it appeareth by his own confession, that he was but an Hosier in London,) wrote railing books against the poor Protestants. Our Crowley took him to task, and confuted him in several Treatises. Under Queen Mary he fled over to Frankford, and returning, under Queen Elizabeth was made Vicar of Saint Giles without Cripple gate London, where he lieth buried under a fair plated stone in the hancel. He diedStows Suv. of London p. 313. on the 18. of June 1588. EUSEBIUS PAGET was born at ranford in this County, as Master Ephraim Paget, is aged son, late Minister of St. Edmond the King Lombard street, hath informed me. He was admitted at twelve years of age into Oxford, where, when a boy, heAs his said son related to me. brake his right-arme with carrying the Pax, though surely some casualty beside so light a weight concurred thereunto. He was commonly called the golden Sophister, and yet he proved no leaden Graduate. Many years he was a painful Minister in London, and was Author of that excellent book called the History of the Bible, and Caechisme of The fourty short questions, which hath done as much good to
nn▪ book learn'd people, as any of that kind. The certain date of his death I cannot attain. JOHN PRESTON D. D. was born at Heyford in this County, bred in Queens∣colledge in Cambridge, whose life (interwoven much with Church and State matters) is so well written by his Pupill Master Thomas Ball, that all additions thereunto, may seem carrying of Coals to New-castle. However, seeing he who carrieth Char-coal, (a different kind from the native Coal of that place,) may meet with a Chapman there, on the same confidence a word or two of this Doctor. Before he Commenced Master of Arts, he was so far from Eminency, as but a little above Contempt; Thus the most generous Wines are the most muddy, before they are fine. Soon after his skill in Phylosophy, rendred him to the general respect of the University. He was the greatest Pupil-monger in England in mans memory, having sixteen Fel∣low-Commoners (most heirs to fair estates) admitted in one year in Queens-colledge, and provided convenient accommodations for them. As VVilliam the Popular Earl of Nassaw, was said to have won a Subject from the King of Spain, to his own party, every time he put off his Hat; so was it commonly said in the Colledge, that every time, when Master Preston plucked off his Hat, to Doctor Davenant the Colledge∣Master, he gained a Chamber or Study for one of his Pupils. Amongst whom one Chambers a Londoner, (who dyed very young) was very eminent for his learning. Being chosen Master of Emanuell-colledge, he removed thither with most of his Pupills, and I remember, when it was much admired, where all these should find lodgings in that Colledge, which was so full already, Oh! (said one) Master Preston will carry Chambers along with him. The Party called Puritan, then being most active in Parliament, and Doctor Preston most powerful with them, the Duke rather used, then loved him, to work that Party to his complyance. Some thought the Doctor was unwilling to do it, and no wonder he effected not, what he affected not; others thought he was unable, that Party being so diffusive, and then, in their designs (as since in their practices) divided. How∣ever, whilst any hope, none but Doctor Preston with the Duke, set by and extolled, and afterwards, set by and neglected, when found useless to the intended purpose. In a word, my worthy friend fitly calls him, the Court Coment, blazing for a time, and faiding soon afterwards. He was a perfect Politician, and used (lapwing like) to flutter most on that place, which was furthest from his Eggs, exact at the concealing of his intentions, with that simulation, which some make to lye in the Marches of things lawful and unlaw∣full. He had perfect command of his passion, with the Caspian Sea, never ebbing nor flowing, and would not alter his compos'd pase for all the whipping, which Satyrical wts bestowed upon him. He never had wife, or cure of souls, and leaving a plenti∣full, no invidious estate, died Anno Domini 1628. July 20. Pass we now from one, who was all judgement and gravity, to an other, (place and time making the connexion) who was all wit and festivity, viz. THOMAS RANDOLPH born at Houghton in this County, was first bred in Westminster-school, then Fellow in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. The Muses may seem not onely to have smiled, but to have been tickled at his nativity, such the festi∣vity of his Poems of all sorts. But my declining age being superannuated, to meddle with such ludicrous matters, configneth the censure and commendation of his Poems (as also of his Country-man Peter Haulsted, born at Oundle in this County,) to younger Pens, for whom it is most proper. Master Randolph died Anno Dom. 163. NICHOLAS ESTWICK B. D. was born at Harowden (the Baronny of the Lord Vaux) in this County. A solid Protestant, to counterpoise Kellison a violent Papist, and native of the same Village. He was bred Fellow of Christs-colledge in Cambridge, being there beheld as a pious and judicious Divine, always cheerful without the least levity, and grave without any morosness. He was afterwards presented by the Lord Montague, Parson of Warton, where he lived a painful Preacher 40. years, less then a Deacon in his humility, and more then an Arch bishop in his own contentment. Hence he was [unwillingly willing] preferred by the Earl of Rutland to Botsworth in Lecester∣shire, where he had hardly inned one harvest, before, like a ripe Sheaf, he was brought
into the Barn of the grave. Thus though young Trees are meliorated with transplanting, yet old ones seldome live, and never flourish after their removal. Let his works witness the rest of his worth, some of whose books are published, others prepared for the Press, and I wish them a happy nativity, for the publique good. Coming to take his Fare∣well of his friends, he Preached on the Fore-noon, of the Lords-day, sickned on the After-noon, and was buried with his wife, in the same grave, in Warton Chancell, the week following 1657. Romish Exile Writers. MATTHEW KELLISON was born in this Pitz. p. 811. County at Harrowden, his fa∣ther being a Servant and Tenant of the Lord Vaux, in whose family his infancy did suck in the Romish Perswasions. He afterwards went beyond the Seas, and was very much in motion. 1. He first fixed himself at the Colledge of Rhemes in France. 2. Thence removed to the English-colledge at Rome, where he studied in Phylo∣sophy and Divinity. 3. Returned to Rhemes, where he took the Degree of Doctor. 4. Removed to Doway, where for many years he read School-Divinity. 5. Re-returned to Rhemes, where he became Kings Professor, and Rector of the University. So much for the travails of his Feet; now for the labours of his Hands, (the pains of his Pen) those of his own opinion can give the best account of them. He wrote a book to King James; which his Majesty never saw, and another against Sutliff, with many more, and was living 1611. Benefactors to the Publick. HENRY CHICHELY Son of Thomas and Agnes Chichely, was born at Higham-Ferrers in this County, bred in Oxford, and designed by Wickham himself (yet surviving) to be one of the Fellows of New-colledge; he afterwards became Chaplain to R. Metford Bishop of Sarum, who made him Arch-Deacon, which he exchanged for the Chancelours place of that Cathedral. This Bishop at his death made him his chief Executor, and bequeathed him a fair gilt Cup for a Legacy. By King Henry the fourth, he was sent to the Council of Risa, 1409. and by the Popes own hands was Consecrated Bishop of Saint Davids at Vienna, and thence was advanced Arch-bishop of Canterbu∣ry, by King Henry the fifth. During his reign in the Parliament at Leicester, a shrude thrust was made at all Abbies, not with a Rbated point, but with sharps indeed, which this Arch-bishop as a skilful Fencer fairly put by, though others will say he guarded that blow with a silver Buck∣ler; the Clergy paying to the King, vast sums of money, to maintain his Wars in France, and so made a forreign diversion for such active spirits, which otherwise in all probability would have Antidated the dissolution of Monasteries. Under King Henry the sixth he sat sure in his See, though often affronted by the rich Cardinal Beaufort of Winchester, whom he discreetly thanked for many injuries. A Cardinals Cap was proferred to, and declined by him, some putting the refusal on the account of his humility, others of his pride, (loath to be junior to the foresaid Cardi∣nal) others of his policy, unwilling to be more engaged to the Court of Rome. Indeed he was thorough-paced in all Spiritual Popery which concerned religion; (which made him so cruel against the VVicklevites,) but in secular Popery, (as I may term it, touch∣ing the interest of Princes) he did not so much as rack, and was a zealous assertor of the English Liberties against Romish Usurpation. Great his zeal to promote learning, as appears by three Colledges erected and endow∣ed at his expence and procurement. 1. One with an Hospital for the poor at Higham-Ferrers the place of his Nativity.
2. Saint Bernards in Oxford, afterwards altered and bettered by Sir Thomas VVhite into Saint Johns colledge. 3. All-souls in Oxford, the fruitful Nursery of so many Learned Men. He continued in his Arch-bishoprick (longer then any of his Predecessors for 500. years) full 29. years, and died April 12. 1443. WILLIAM LAXTON Son to John Laxton of Oundle in this County, was bred a Grocer in London, where he so prospered by his painful endeavours, that he was chosen Lord Mayor, Anno Domini 1544. He founded a fair School and Almeshouse at Oundle in this County, with convenient maintenance, well maintained at this day, by the Worshipful Company of Grocers, and hath been to my knowledge the Nursery of many Scholars, most eminent in the University. These Latine Verses are inscrib∣ed in the Front of the building. Oundellae natus, Londini parta labore, Laxtonus posuit Senibus perisque levamen. At Oundle born, what he did get In London with great pain, Laxton to young and old hath set A comfort to remain. He died Anno Domini 1556. the 29. of July, and lyeth buried under a fair Tombe in the Chancel of Saint Antonies London. Since the Reformation. NICHOLAS LATHAM was born at So saith the Inscription on his Monument. Brigtock in this County, and after∣wards became Minister of Al-saints Church in Barn-wells. This man had no consi∣derable Estate left him from his father, nor eminent addition of wealth from his friends, nor injoyed any Dignity in the Church of England, nor ever held more then one moderate Benefice. And yet by Gods blessing on his vivacious frugality he got so great an Estate, that he told a friend he could have left his son, had he had one, land to the value of five hundred pounds by the year. But though he had no Issue, yet making the Poor his heirs, he left the far greatest part of his Estate to pious uses; Founded several small Schools with salaries in Country Villages, and Founded a most beautiful Almes-house at Oundale in this County; and I could wish that all houses of the like nature, were but continued and ordered, so well as this is, according to the Will of the Founder. He died Anno Domini 1620. and lyeth buried in the Chancel of his own Parish, having lived 72. years. EDWARD MONTAGUE Baron of Boughton, and eldest son to Sir Edward Montague Knight, was born in this County, a Pious, Peaceable, and Hospitable Patriot. It was not the least part of his outward happiness, that having no male issue by his first wife, and marrying when past fifty years of age, he lived to see his son inriched with hopeful children. I behold him, as bountiful 2 Sam. 19. 35. Barsillai, superannuated for courtly pleasures, and therefore preferring to live honorably in his own Country, wherein he was generally beloved, so that popularity may be said to have affected him, who never affected it. For in evidence of the vanity thereof, he used to say, Do the common sort of people nineteen courtesies together, and yet you may loose their love, if you do but go over the stile before them. He was a bountiful Benefactor to Sidney-colledge, and build∣ed and endowed an Almes-house at VVeekley in this County. Psal. 73. 4. To have no bands in their death, is an outward favour many VVicked have, many Godly men want, amongst whom, this good Lord, who dyed in restraint in the Savoy, on the account of his Loyalty to his Sovereign. Let none grudge him the injoying of his judgement, a purchase he so dearly bought, and truly paid for, whose death happen∣ed in the year of our Lord, 164.. Memorable Persons. There is a Memorial entred on the Wall of the Cathedral of Peterburough, for one, who being Sexton thereof, interred two Queens therein, [Katharine Dowager, and Mary of Scotland,] more then fifty years interceeding betwixt their several sepultures:
This vivacious Sexton also buried two generations, or the people in that place twice over. Thus having built many houses (so I find Graves frequently called Domus Aeternales) for others, some (as it was fitting) performed this last office unto him. Thus though Sextons often meet with bad savours arising from Corps too much, (or rather too little) corrupted, yet is the instance of his long life aleadged, by such who maintain, that the smelling to perfect mold made of mens consumed bodies is a preservative of life. Lord Mayors.   Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Rest Will. Rest Peterborouh Grocer 1516 2 Will. Laxton John Laxton Yongdell Grocer 1544 3 Ralph Freeman Will. Freeman Northampton Clothworker 1633 Reader, this is one of the twelve Counties, whose Gentry were not returned into the Tower in the reign of King Henry the sixth. Sheriffs of Northampton. HEN. II. Anno 1 Rich. Basset, & Albrus de Vere Anno 2 Simon. filius Petri Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hugo. Gubion Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Simon. filius Petri, & Hugo. Gubion Anno 11 Simon. for 5 years. Anno 16 Rob. filius Gawini, for 5 years. Anno 21 Hugo. de Gundevill Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Tho filius Bernardi, for 6 years. Anno 30 Tho. & Rad. Morin Anno 31 Galfr. filius Petri Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. RICH. I. Anno 1 Gal. filius Petri Anno 2 Rich. Engaigne Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Gal. filius Petri, & Rob. filius Radulp. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gal. & Simon. de Patis∣hull Anno 7 Simon. de Patishull, for 4 years. JOH. REG. Anno 1 Simon. Patishull, for 5 years. Anno 6 Rob. de Sancei, & Hen. filius Petri. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Pet. de Stores, & Gilb. Groc. Anno 9 Wal. de Preston, & Joh. de Ulcot. ut Custos Anno 10 Walt. de Preston ut Custos Anno 11 Rob. de Braybrook ut Custos Anno 12 Rob. ut Custos Anno 13 Rob. & Hen. fil. ejus. Anno 14 Hen. Braybrook ut Custos Anno 15 Rob. & Hen. ut Custos Anno 16 Hen. de Braybrook ut Custos Anno 17 Idem. HEN. III. Anno 1 Falc. de Breantre, & Rad. de Bray, for 8 years. Anno 9 Rad. de Trublevil, & Rad. Washingbury, for 4 years. Anno 13 Stehp. de Segne, & Will. de Marawast, for 6 years. Anno 19 Hen. de Rada, for 5 years. Anno 25 Will. de Coleworth Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Alan. de Maidwell, for 6 years. Anno 33 Simon. de Thorp Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Rob. Bassett Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Will. de Insula. Anno 38 Hugo. de Manneby Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Will. de Insula Anno 41 Hugo. de Manneby Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Eustacius de Watford Anno 44 Simon. de Patishull Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Alanus de Tash Anno 48 Alanus de Insh Anno 49 Idem. Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Warin. de Basingburn, & Joh. de Oxenden Clic. Anno 52 Joh. de Moyne, & Nich. de Maunden. Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. de Boyvill EDW. I. Anno 1 Will. de Bowvill Anno 2 Gilb. de Kirkby, for 5 years. Anno 7 Tho. de Arden Anno 8 Rob. de Band Anno 9 Rob. de Band in Charta quidem Asp. H. for 9 years.
Anno 18 Joh. Druell, for 12 years. Anno 30 Rob. de Veer Anno 31 Joh. de Ashton, for 5 years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Anno 2 Almaric. de Nodardus, & Simon. de Greenhull Anno 3 Joh. de Willoughby Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gal. de Bradden Anno 7 Tho. Wale Anno 8 Eustac. de Barnby Anno 9 Joh. de Ashton Anno 10 Joh. de Hoby Anno 11 Joh. de Honby Anno 12 Joh. & Egid. de Cu∣gelio Anno 13 Joh. de Honby Egid. de Cugelio, & Joh. de Wittebur Egid. de Cu∣gegio, & Joh. de Wit∣tlebur Anno 14 Hum. de Basingburne, & Joh. Sto. Mauro Anno 15 Hum. Basingburne Anno 16 Anno 17 Joh. de Sto. Mauro, & Joh. Daundelin Anno 18 Joh. & Joh. Anno 19 Joh. Daudelin EDW. III. Anno 1 Will. de Sto. Mauro, & Simon. de Lanshall Anno 2 Will. de Sto. Mauro Anno 3 Tho. Wake Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Tho. de Buckton Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Will. Lovell, for 4 years. Anno 11 Tho. Wake Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Tho. Wake de Blis∣worth Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Tho. de Babenham Anno 17 Tho. de Buckton Anno 18 Rob. Pandeley Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Walt. Parles Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Rich. Blundel Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Pet. Mallore Anno 26 Walt. Parles Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Joh. de Kaynes, for 4 years. Anno 33 Andre. Landwath Anno 34 Walt. Parles Anno 35 Rich. Wydevill, for 8 years. Anno 43 Tho. de Preston Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Rich. Wydenell Anno 46 Rob. Hotot Anno 47 Simon. Ward Anno 48 Joh. Karnell Anno 49 Tho. de Preston Anno 50 Rob. Poterleyn Anno 51 Joh. Karnell Sheriffs of Northampton-shire. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Tho. de Preton Preston   2 Joh. Lions     3 Joh. Paveley   Erm. on a Fess Az. 3 Cros. Patee Or. 4 Joh. Widevill Graton Arg. a Fess and Canton Gules. 5 Johan. Lions     6 Ro. Atte Chaūbre   Argent, 3. Cheverons Sable. 7 Nich. Litlinges     8 Rog. Chaumbre ut prius   9 Joh. Widevill ut prius   10 Joh. Paveley ut prius   11 Ro. de la Chaūbre ut prius   12 Rad. Parles     13 Joh. Paveley, mi. ut prius   14 Joh. Widevill ut prius   15 Joh. Tindall Deane Arg. a Fess indented, & 3 Cres∣sants in chief Gul. 16 Joh. Mallore Winewick Or, 3 Lions passant gardant Sab. 17 Johan. Mulsho   Erm. on a Bend Sa. 3 Goats-heads erased Arg. armed Or. 18 Idem. ut prius   19 Idem. ut prius   20 Joh. Warwick   Checkee, Or and Azu. a Cheveron Ermin. 21 Joh. Mulsho ut prius   22 Idem. ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Warwicke ut prius   2 Joh▪ Cope, & Canons Ashby Arg. on a Cheveron Az. 'twixt 3 Roses G. slipped & leaved Ver. 3 flower de liz. Or. Joh. Chwood Warkworth Quarterly Arg. and Gul. 4 Crosses patee counterchanged. 3 Egid. Malorye     4 Warin. Lucyen     5 Idem.     6 Rich. Wedenhall     7 Tho. Widevill ut prius   8 Rad. Grene Grs-nortō Az. 3 Bucks trippan Or. 9 Rad. Parles     10 Tho. Mulsho ut prius   11 Tho. Widevill ut prius   12 Mat. Swetenham     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Tho. Wake Blisworth Or, 2 bars and 3 Torteauxes in chief Gules. 2 Rad. Grene ut prius   3 Tho. Widevill ut prius   4 Tho. Grene, mil. ut prius   5 Joh. Manutell     6 Tho. Wake ut prius   7 Tho. Pilkinton   Arg. a Cross pattance voided Gu. 8 Tho. Wodevill ut prius   9 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Tho. Wodevill ut prius   2 Tho. Holland Brackley Az. semide flower de liz. a Lion rampant gardant Arg. 3 Johan. Wakerley     4 Joh. Catesby Catesby A. 2 Lions passant Sab. Corone Or. 5 Tho. Chaumbre ut prius   6 Johan. Kivett     7 Tho. Widevill Grafton   8 Geor. Longvill . Billinge Gules, a Fess indented 'twixt 6 Cross Croslets Arg. 9 Will. Branuspatch     10 Joh. Colpeper   Arg. a bend engrailed Gules. 11 Tho. Chaumbre ut prius  
12 Tho. Wodevill ut prius   13 Tho. Wake ut prius   14 Joh. Holland, mi. ut prius   15 Will. Vaux Harrowdō Checkee Arg. and Gul. on a Chev. Az. 3 Roses Or. 16 Rich. Widevill ut prius   17 Tho. Chaumbre ut prius   18 Eustat. Burnby   Arg. 2 Bars a Lion passant Gard. in Chief Gul. 19 Tho. Holland ut prius   20 Tho. Green, mil. ut prius   21 Will. Catesby ut prius   22 Joh. Marbnry     23 Hen. Green Drayton Argent, a Cross engrailed Gules. 24 Walt. Mauntell     25 Tho. Wake ut prius   26 Joh. Holland, m. ut prius   27 Eustat. Burnby ut prius   28 Will. Vaux ut prius   29 Tho. Wake ut prius   30 Will. Catesby, ar. Ashby S leg. Ut prius. 31 Nich. Griffin, ar. Dingly Sab. a Griffin sergeant Argent. 32 VVill. Vaux ut prius   33 Tho. Green, mil. ut prius   34 Will. Catesby, m. ut prius   35 Nich. Griffin, ar. ut prius   36 Tho. Geen, ar. ut prius   37 Rob. Olney, Catesby   38 Will. Miuntell, ar.     EDW. IV.     Anno     1 VVill. Fairsax, ar.   Arg. 3 Barrs Gemelles Gul. over all a Lion rampant Sable. 2 Tho. VValker, ar.     3 Idem.     4 VValr. Mountell     5 Hen. Green, ar. Draiton Ut prius. 6 Hen. Hudleston   Gules, Frettee Argent. 7 Rad. Hastings   Argent. a Maunch Sable. 8 Rog. Salisbury, ar.   Gul. a Lion rampant Arg. crowned betwixt 3 Cressents Or. 9 Guido. VValston     10 VVill. Newenham     11 Rad. Hastings ut prius   12 Joh. Hulcot     13 Hen. Hudleston ut prius   14 Rich. Griffin, ar. ut prius   15 Ric. Knightley, ar. Fawsley Quarterly Ermin. and Or 3 Pales Gules. 16 Nullus Tile. jun. in hoc Rotulo.     17 Rog. Salsbury ut prius   18 VVill. Chaumbre ut prius   19 Will. Catesby, m, ut prius   20 VVill. Newenham.     21 Rob. Pemberton, a. Rushden Ag. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Buckets Sab. Handled and Hooped Or. 22 Tho. Lovell Astwell Barry Nebuly of 6 Or and Gules. RICH. III.     Anno     1 Rob. VVittelbury     2 Rog. VVake, ar. ut prius   3 Rich. Burton, ar.   Az. a Fess'twixt 3 Talbots heads erased Or. HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Hen. Veer, ar. Addin tō Quarterly Gu. and Or, in the first a Mullet Argent. 2 Rich. Knightlev ut prius   3 Guido. VVolston     4 David. Phillipps     5 Tho. Haliswood   Ar. on a Cheveron Gu. 3 Lozenges Ermin. betwixt 3 Oulets Sab. on a Chief Az. 3 Nut-trees Or. 6 Tho. Lovel, ar. ut prius   7 Guid. Walston, m.     8 Rob. VVitlebury     9 Joh. Danvers, ar.   Gul. a Cheveron Argent, 'twixt 3 Mullets of 6 points Or. 10 Joh. Dyve, ar. Haddon Partee per pale Arg. and Gul. a Fess Azure. 11 Nich. Vaux, mil. ut prius   12 VVill. Hertwell     13 Will. Salisbury, ar. ut prius   14 Hum. Catesby, ar. ut prius   15 Rich. Burton, ar. ut prius   16 Fulc. Wodhull, a.     17 Nich. Vaux, mil. ut prius   18 Tho. Andrews, ar. Harlston Gules, a Saltire Or, surmounted with another Vert. 19 Joh. Dyve, ar. ut prius   20 Nich. Griffin, mil. ut prius   21 Tho. Lovell, ar. ut prius   22 Joh. Tresham, ar. Rushton Partee per Saltire Sa. and Or, 6 Trefoils of the second. 23 Tho. Cheyne, mil.   Checky Or and Az. a Fess Gules, Fretty Ermin. 24 Joh. Mulshow, ar. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Tho. Parre, mil. Greēs Nortō Arg. 2 Bars Az. a border engrailed Sable. 2 Ric. Knightley, m. ut prius   3 Joh. Spew, ar.     4 Rad. Lane, ar. Horton Partee per Pale Az. and Gul. 3 saltires Argent. 5 Joh. Catesby, ar. ut prius   6 Rob. Mathew, ar. Braden   7 Nich. VVodehull     8 Nich. Vaux, mil. ut prius   9 VVill. Parre, mil. ut prius   10 Will. Gascoighne   Arg. on a Pale Sable, a Lucies∣head erased Or. 11 Tho. Lucy. mil.   Gul. Crusuly Or 3 lucies Hauriant Argent. 12 Joh. Mulshow, ar. ut prius   13 VVill. Parre, mil. Horton   14 Joh. Clarke, mil.   See our observations on the 21. year. 15 Wil. Fitz. Wil. sen. Milton Lozengy Arg. and Gules. 16 Tho. Tresham, ar. ut prius   17 Walt. Mntel, m.     18 Hum. Stafford, m.   Or, a Chveron Gu. and a quarter Ermin. 19 Nich. Odell, ar.     20 Will. Fitz. Will. m. ut prius   21 Joh. Clarke, mil. Stamford Azure, Fretee Argent. 22 Rich. Cave, ar.   Azure, a Fess Ermin. betwixt six Seameaves-heads Erased Argent. 23 VVill. Spencer, m. & David: Sissill, ar. Althorp Stamford Barry of 10 Arg. and Azu. on 6 Escucheons Sab. as many Lions rampant of the first. 24 David. Cecill, ar. ut prius   25 VVill. Parr, mil. ut prius   26 Tho. Griffin, mil. ut prius   27 Joh. Clarke, mil. ut prius   28 VVill. Nnhā     29 VVill. Parr, mil. ut prius   30 Anth. Catesby, ar ut prius   31 Tho. Tresham. m. ut prius   32 VVill. Newenham.     33 Rob. Kikeman, m.     34 Rich. Catesby, m. ut prius   35 Tho. Brudenell, ar. Dean Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt 3 Caps Az. turn'd up Ermin. 36 Tho. Griffin, mil.     37 Joh. Cope, ar. ut, prius   38 Tho. Cave, ar. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Hum. Stafford, m. ut prius   2 Tho. Tresham, m. ut prius   3 Rich. Catesby, m. ut prius   4 Tho. Andrews, ar. ut prius   5 Joh. Spencer, ar. ut prius   6 Tho. Lovell, ar. ut prius   PHILLIP. & MARI.     Anno     1 Tho. Cave, mil. ut prius   1,2 Val. Knightley, m. ut prius   2,3 Tho. Tresham, m. ut prius   3,4 Tho. Andrews, m. ut prius   4,5 Joh. Fermor, mil.   Arg. a Fess S. 'twixt 3 Leopards∣heads Erased Gules. 5,6 Joh. Spencer. mil. ut prius   ELIZAB. REG.     Anno     1 Ew. Montague, ar. Boughton Arg. 3 Fusils in Fess, Gul. a bor∣der Sable.
2 Tho. Lovell, ar. Astwell Barry Nebule of six Or and Gul. 3 Tho. Spencer, ar. Althrop Arg. a fess Ermin. 'twixt 6 Sea∣maves-heads erased Arg. 4 Tho. Catesby, ar. Ashby St. leg Arg. 2 Lions passant Sab. Corone Or. 5 Rob. Lane, mil. Horton Partee per pale Azu. and Gul. 3 Saltyrs Argent. 6 Edm. Brudenel, ar. Deane Argent, a Cheveron Gul. betwixt three Caps Azure, turned up Ermin. 7 Hum. Stafford, m. Blatherwick Or, a Cheveron Gul. and a quarter Ermin. 8 Edw Elmes, ar. Lilford Ermin. 2 Bars Sab. each charged with 5 Elme-leaves transposed Or. 9 Ric. Knightley, m. Fawesly Quarterly Erm. & Or, 3 Pales G. 10 Tho. Andrews, ar. Cherwellō Gul. a Cross Or surmounted of another Vert. 11 Will. Sanders, ar. *     12 Ed. Mountague, m. ut prius * Partee per pale Sab. and Arg. 3 13 Joh. Spencer, mil. ut prius Elephants-heads Counterchang∣ed. 14 Tho. Lovel, ar. ut prius   15 Tho. Tresham, ar. Rushton Parte per Saltyre Sab. and Or 6 Treoils of the second. 16 Edm. Onley, ar.     17 Rog. Cave, ar. Stanford Azure, Frettee Argent. 18 Tho. Brooke, ar. Gr. Okely Or, on a Fess Azu. 3 Scallops of the first. 19 Edm. Brudnell, m. ut prius   20 Tho. Cecil, mil. Burghley Barry of 10 Arg. and Azu. on 6 Eeuscheons Sable, as many Lions rampant of the first. 21 Will. Chauncy, ar. Edgecorte Or, 3 Cheveronels engrailed Gul. 22 Rich. Knightly, m. ut prius   23 Joh. Isham, ar. Longport Gul. a fess and 3 Piles in chief Wavee, in Point Argent. 24 Edw. Griffin, ar. Dingley Sab. a Griffin surgeant Argent. 25 Joh. Spencer, mil. ut prius   26 Euseb. Isham, ar. ut prius   27 Barth. Tate, ar.     28 Tho. Andrews, ar. ut prius   29 Edw. Saunders, ar. ut prius   30 Ed. Mountague, m. ut prius   31 Gor. Farmer, mi. Easton Arg. a fess Sab. 'twixt 3 Leo∣pards-heads erased Gul. 32 Joh. Spencer, mi. ut prius   33 Edw. Watson, ar. Rockinghā Argent, on a Cheveron engrailed Az. 'twixt 3 Martlets S. as many Crescents Or. 34 Anth. Mildmav, ar. Apethorp Arg. 3 Lions rampant Azure. 35 Thob. Chauncy, ar. ut prius   36 Joh. Read, ar.   Gul. on a bend Arg. 3 shovellers Sab. beaked Or. 37 Edw. Mountagne ut prius   38 Tho. Molsho, ar. Thingdon Ermi. o a Bend Sab. 3 Goats∣heads erased Arg. armed Or. 39 Rich. Chetwood, a.     40 Eras. Draydon, ar. Can. Ashby Az. a Lion ramp. in chief a Globe 'twixt 2 Stars Or. 41 Will. Browne, ar.     42 Ed. Mountague, ar. ut prius   43 Rob. Spencer▪ mil.   Quarterly Arg. and Gul. the se∣cond and third charged with a Fret Or, over all on a Bend Sab. 3 Escalops of the first. 44 Geo. Sherley, ar. * Astwell   45 Will. Tate, ar. & 1. Jac.     JAC. REG.   * Paly of 6 Or and Azu. a Canton Ermin. Anno     1 VVill. Tate, ar.     2 Art. Fhrogkmortō   Gul. on a Cheveron Arg. 3 barrs gemeee Sable. 3 Joh. Freeman, ar. Gr. Billing   4 Will. Samuell, m.     5 Wil. Fitz-Will. m. Milton Lozengee Arg. and Gules. 6 Tho. Elmes, ar. Gs Nortò Ut prius. 7 VVill. Saunders, ut prius   8 Tho. Tresham, m. Newton Ut prius. 9. Joh. Isham, mil. ut prius   10 Euse. Andrews, m. ut prius   11 Joh. VViseman, ar.   Sa. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cronells [or Spear Burs] Arg. 12 VVill. VVillmer, a. Sywell   13 God. Chibnall, ar. Orlebere   14 Tho. Brooke, mil. ut prius   15 Hat. Farmer, mil. ut prius   16 Sim. Norwich, mil. Branton   17 Eras. Dryden, bar. ut prius   18 Lodi. Pembertō, m. Rushton Arg. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 Buckets Sab. Handled and Hooped Or. 19 Joh. Hanbury, mil. Kelmarsh   20 Mose. Troyoll, ar.     21 Edw. Shugburgh, a. Nazeby Sab. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mul∣lets Arg. 22 VVil. Chauncy, m ut prius   CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Ric. Knightley, ar. ut prius   2 Joh. Davers, mil.   Gul. a Cheveron inter 3 Mullets Or. 3 Joh. VVorley, ar. Dodford   4 Hen. Robinson, m. Cransley   5 Tho. Elmes, ar. ut prius   6 Fran. Nicholls, ar. Faxton   7 Joh. Hewett, bar. Heington Sab. a Cheveron Counter-battille betwixt 3 Owles Arg. 8 Lo. Watson, m. & b. ut prius   9 Rich. Samwell, m.     10 Joh. Driden, bar. ut prius   11 Caro. Cokaine, ar. Rushton Argent, 3 Cockes Gules. 12 Rob. Banaster, m.   Argent, a Cross Patee Sable. 13 Joh. Handbury, m. ut prius   14 Phil. Hollman, ar.     15 Chri. Yelvertō, m. Easton Arg. 3 Lioncels rampant Gul. a Cheif of the second. 16 Anth. Haslewood     17 VVill. Wilmer, m.     18     19 Edr. Farmer, ar. ut prius   20 Idem.     21     22 VVill. VVard, ar.   Azure, a Cross patee Or. HENRY the Sixth. 16 RICHARD WIDEWILL, aliàs WODEVILL.] He was a vigorous Knight, and married Jaquet Dutchess of Bedford, of most anti∣ent extraction in this County, which (as it appears in the leigder Book of Sipwell Abby) had flourished four generations before him at Grafton-honor in this County. Malicious therefore the cavil of Richard Duke of York, (which the Stage Poet hath got by the end,) affirming, that they were made noble, who were not worth a Noble, when this Knight was by his Son-in-law King Edward the fourth, Created Earl of Rivers; and although his Issue-male failed in the next generation, yet am I confident, that besides the apparent Royal loine, an ordinary Herauld, may with little pains, derive all the ancient Nobility of England from his six daughters, most honorably mar∣ried. 23 HENRY GREEN.] He was a very wealthy man (but of a different family from those of Greens-Norton, as appears by his Armes,) who first built the fair House of Draiton in this County. He had one sole daughter and heir Constance, married to John Stafford Earl of Wilt∣shire,
to whom she bare Edward Stafford Earl of Wiltshire, who died without Issue; so that her large inheritance devolved unto the family of the Veers; of whom In the 1 of K. Henry anon. HENRY the Seventh. 1 HENRY VEER, Ar.] He was son to Richard Veer Esquire, of Addington, by Isabel his wife, sister and [at last] sole heir to Henry Green of Drayton Esquire, of whom In 23. of Henry 6. formerly. This Henry was afterwards Knighted, and dying without Issue-male, Elizabeth his daughter and co▪ heir was married to John first Lord Mordant, to whom she brought Draiton-house in this County, and other fair lands, as the partage of her portion. NICHOLAS VAUX, Mil.] He was a jolly Gentleman, both for Camp and Court, a great Reveller, good as well in a March as a Masque, being Governour of Guines in Picardie, whom King Hen. the eight, for his Loyalty and Valour, Created Baron of Harouden in this County, Ancestor to Edward Lord Vaux now living. This Sir Nicholas, when young, was the greatest Gallant of the English-Court; no Knight, at the marriage of Prince Arthur, appearing in so costly an equipage; when he wore a gown of purple velvet, pight with pieces of gold, so thick and massive, that it was valued (besides the silk and furs) at Stows Chro. p. 483. a thousand pounds, and the next day wore a Colar of S. S. which weighed (as Goldsmiths reported) eight hundred pounds of nobles. Some will wonder, that Empson and Dudley (the Royal Promoters then in prime) did not catch him by the Collar, or pick an hole in his Gown, upon the breach of some rusty penal sumptuary Statute; the rather, because lately the Earl of Oxford was heavily fined for supernumerous attendance. But know, that King Henry could better bear with ▪ then greatness in his Subjects, especially, when such expence cost imself nothing, and conduced much to the solemnity of his Sons Nuptials. Besides, such plate, as wrought, employed Artizans, as massive, retain'd its intrinsecal value, with little loss, either of the owners, or Common-wealth. HENRY the Eight. 1 THOMAS PAR, Mil.] His former residence was at Kendal-Castle in Westmerland, whence he removed into this Country, having married Maud, one of the daughters and co-heirs of Sir Thomas Green of Mills in Cat. of Honour p. 1026. Green-Norton. He was father to Queen Katharine Par, (which rendereth a probability of her nativity in this County) and to William Marquiss of Northampton; of whom hereafter. 15 WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS Sen. Mil.] This must be the person of whom I read this memorable passage, in Pag. 89. Stows Survey of London. Sir William Fitz-Williams the elder, being a Merchant-Taylor, and servant some∣time to Cardinal Wolsey, was chosen Alderman of Bread-street-Ward in London, Anno 1506. Going afterward to dwell at Milton in Northampton∣shire, in the fall of the Cardinal, his former Master, he gave him kind enter∣tainment there, at his house in the Country. For which deed, being called before the King, and demanded how he durst entertain so great an Enemy to the State; his Answer was that he had not contemptuously or wilfully done it, but onely, because he had been his Master, and (partly) the means of his greatest fortunes. The King was so well pleased with his Answer, that saying, himself had few such servants, immediately Knighted him, and afterwards made him a Privy Counsel∣lour. But we have formerly spoken of the benefactions of this worthy Knight in the County of Essex, whereof he was Sheriffe in the sixth of King Henry the eight.
17 WILLIAM PAR, Mil.] I have cause to be confident, that this was he who being Uncle and Lord Chamber∣lain to Queen Katharine Par, was afterwards by King Henry the eight, Created Baron Par of Horton. Left two daughters onely, married into the Families of Tressame and Lane. The Reader is requested to distinguish him from his Name-sake Nephew, Sheriffe in the 25. of this Kings reign; of whom hereafter. 21 JOHN CLARKE, Mil.] I find there was one Sir John Clarke Knight, who in the fifth of Henry the eight, at the Siege of Terrowane took prisoner Lewis de Orleans, Duke of Longevile, and Mar∣quiss of Rotueline. This Sir John bare, for his paternal Coat, Argent on a Bend Gules, three Swans proper, between as many Pellets. But afterwards, in memory of his service aforesaid, by special Gwil. dspla. Herald pag. 2 Edition. . command from the King, his Coat armour was rewarded with a Canton Sinister Azure, and thereupon a Demi-ramme mounting Argent, armed Or, between two Flowers de lices in Chief of the last, over all a Batune dexter-ways Argent, as being the Arms of the Duke his prisoner, and by Martial-law belonging to him. He lieth buried in the next County, viz. in the Church of Tame in Oxfordshire, where his Coat and cause thereof is expressed on his Monument. If this be not the same with Sir John Clarke our Sheriffe, I am utterly at a loss, and desire some others courteous direction. All I will adde is this; If any demand why this Knight did onely give a parcel, and not the entire Arms of the Duke his prisoner, a learned Camd. in rem. Antiquary returns this satisfactory answer, That he who aketh a Christian Captive is to give but part of his Arms, (to mind him of charitable moderation in using his success) intimating withall, that one taking a Pagan prisoner, may justifie the bearing of his whole Coat by the laws of Armory. I must not conceal that I have read in a most excellent Manuscript, (viz.) the View of Staffordshire, made by Sampson Erderswicke Esquire; That one William Stamford in that County, had good land given him therein, for taking the Duke of Longevile pri∣soner, August the 16. in the fifth of King Henry the eight. History will not allow two Dukes of Longevile Captives, and yet I have a belief for them both, that Sir John Clarke, and William Stamford were causae sociae of his Captivity, and the King remu∣nerated them both, the former with an addition of honour, the later with an accession of Estate. 23 WILLIAM SPENCER, Miles, & DAVID SISILL, Arm.] 24 DAVID CECILL, Arm.] Sir William Spencer dying [it seems] in his Sherivalty, David Sissill supplied the remainder of that, and was Sheriffe the next year. This David had three times been Alderman R. Butcher in Srvey of Samsord p. 43. of Stamford, (part whereof called Saint Martins is in this County,) viz. 1504. 1515. and 1526. and now twice Sheriffe of the County, which proves him a person both of Birth, Brains, and Estate; seeing in that age, in this County so plentiful of capable persons, none were advanced to that office, except Esquires at least of much merrit. The different spelling of his name is easily answered, the one being according to his extraction, of the Sitsilts of Alterynnis in Herefordshire, the other according to the vulgar pronunciation. All I will adde is this, that his Grand-child William Cecil, (afterwards Baron of Burghley, and Lord Treasurer of England) being born Camd. Elz. in Anno 1598. Anno 1521. was just ten years of age, in the Sherivalty of this David his Grand-father. 25 WILLIAM PAR, Mil.] He was son to Sir Thomas Par, of whom before. Ten years after, viz. in the 35. year of his reign, King Henry the eight (having newly married his Sister Queen Katharine Par,) made him Lord Par of Kendall, and Earl of Essex, in right of Anne Bourcher his wife. King Edward the sixth, Created him Marquiss of Northampton. Under Queen Mary, he was condemned for siding with Queen Jane, but pardoned his life, and re∣stored to his lands, as by Queen Elizabeth to his honour. Much was he given to Mu∣sick and Poetry, and wanted not personal valour, not unskillful, though unsuccessful in Military Conduct, as in the imployment against Ket. He died Anno Domini 1571. without Issue.
Queen MARY. 1 THOMAS TRESSAM, Mil.] He was a person of great command in this County, and was zealous (against the Court Faction) in proclaiming and promoting Q. Mary to the Crown; She therefore in gratitude, made him the first and last Lord Prior, of the re-erected Order of Saint Johns of Jerusalem. Dying without Issue, and being buried in Rushton Church, his large lands descended to his Kinsman and Heir Thomas Tressam; of whom hereafter. Queen ELIZABETH. 6 EDMUND BRUDENELL, Arm.] This is that worthy person, of whom (afterwards Knighted) Master Brit in North∣hamptonshire. Camden en∣tereth this honorable memorial, Equibus Edmundus Brudenel Eques auratus, non ita pridem defunctus, veneran∣dae antiquitatis summis fuit cultor, & admirator. He may seem to have entailed his learned and liberal inclinations and abilities, on his (though not son) heir, Thomas Lord Brudenell of Stoughton, then whom none of our Nobility, more able in the English Antiquities. 15 THOMAS TRESSAM, Arm.] The Queen Knighted him in the 18. year of her reign at Kenelworth. Hard to say whether greater his delight, or skill in buildings, though more forward in beginning, then fortunate in finishing his fabricks. Amongst which the Market-house at Rothwell, adorned with the armes of the Gentry of the County, was highly commendable. Having many daughters, and being a great house-keeper, he matched most of them into Honorable, the rest of them into Worshipful and Wealthy Families. He was zealous in the Romish perswasion, (though as yet not convicted) which afterwards cost him a long confinement, in Wisbich-Castle. 20 THOMAS CECILL, Mil.] He was eldest son to Sir William Cecill, then Baron of Burghley, who would not have him by favour excused from serving his Country. He afterwards was Earl of Exeter, and married Dorothy one of the Co-heirs of the Lord Latimer. These joyntly bestowed one hundred and eight pounds per annum, on Clare-hall in Cam∣bridge. 24 THOMAS ANDREWS, Arm.] He Camd. Eliz. Anno 1587. attended the Execution of the Queen of Scots, at Fotheringhay-Castle, demean∣ing himself with much gravity, to his great commendation. 34 ANTHONY MILEMAY, Esq.] He was son to Sir Walter, Privy-Councellor, and Founder of Emanuel-colledge, this Anthony was by Queen Elizabeth Knighted, and sent over into France on an Embassy, upon the same token, he was at Geneva the same time; (Reader I have it from uncon∣trolable intelligence) when Theodore Beza, their Minister, was convented before their Consistory, and publiquely checqu'd for peaching too eloquently; He pleaded, that what they called eloquence in him, was not affected, but natural, and promised to endeavour more plainness for the future. Sir Anthony, by Grace Co-heir to Sir Hen∣ry Sherington, had one daughter Mary, married to Sir Francis Fane, afterwards Earl of Westmerland. 43 ROBERT SPENCER, Mil.] He was the fifth Camdens Bit. in Northamp. Knight of his Family, in an immediate succession, well allied and extracted, being a branch descended from the Spencers Earls of Gloucester and Guill. Disply of Heraldry. pag. 274. fist Edit. Winchester. By King James in the first of his reign, he was Created Baron Spencer of VVormeleiton in the County of VVarwick. He was a good Patriot, of a quick and clear spirit, as by one passage may appear. Speaking in Parliament of the valour of their English ancestors, in defending the liberties of the Nation. Your ancestours, (said the Earl of Arundel) were keeping of sheep, (that Lord and his predecessours being known for the greatest Sheep-masters in England,) when those liberties were defended. If they were in keeping of sheep (return'd
the other) Yours were then in plotting of Treason. Whose Wilson in the life of King James. animosities for the pre∣sent cost both of them a confinement, yet so that afterwards the Upper House Ordered reparations to this Lord Spencer, as first, (and causelesly) provoked. This Lord was also he, who, in the first of King James, was sent (with Sir VVilliam Dethick principal King of Armes,) to Frederick Duke of VVirtenberge, elected into the Order of the Garter; to present, and invest him with the robes and ornaments thereof, which were accordingly, with great solemnity, performed in the Cathedral Stows Chron. pag. 128. of Stud∣gard. King JAMES. 2 ARTHUR THROGKMORTON, Mil.] He was son to that eminent Knight, Sir Nicholas Throgkmorton, (of whom in VVar∣wick▪ shire) and his Sister was married to Sir VValter Raleigh. This Sir Arthur was a most ingenious Gentleman, and dying without Issue-male, his large estate was parted amongst his four daughters married to the Lord Dacres, the Lord VVotton, Sir Peter Temple of Stow Baronet, and Sir Edward Partridge. 3 JOHN FREEMAN, Arm.] He died without Issue, and was a most bountiful Benefactour to Clare▪ hall in Cam∣bridge, giving two thousand pounds to the founding of Fellowships, and Scholarships therein. 12 WILLIAM WILLMER, Arm.] He was the first Pensioner, as Doctor James Mountague the first Master, and Sir John Brewerton first Scholar of the House in Sidney-colledge, being all three of them, (but in several proportions) Benefactours to that Foundation. 22 WILLIAM CHAUNCY, Mil.] These have been very (but I know not how) antient in this County, but far antien∣ter in Yorkshire. For I meet with this Inscriptiou on a Monument at Sabridgeworth in Hertfordshire. Hic jacent Johannes Chancy, Ar. filius & heres Johannis Chancy, Ar. filii & heredis Willielmi Chancy, Mil. quondam Baronis de Shorpenbek in Com. Ebor. & Anna uxor ejus una filiarum Johannis Leventhorpe, Ar. qui quidem Johan∣nes obiit VII. Maii MCCCCLXXIX. & Annaii Decemb. MCCCCLXXVII. quorum animabus. It appeareth to me by a well proved pedegree, that Henry Chancy Esq. of Yardlebury in Hertfordshire, is the direct descendant from the aforesaid John Chancy, whose Epitaph we have inserted. King CHARLES. 7 JOHN HEWET, Baronet] He had not one foot of land, nor house (hiring Hemington of the Lord Mountague) in the whole County, though several The 9. of Edw. 2. Lincoln 4. Edw. 3, 9, 5. Edw. 3, 4. Statutes have provided, that the Sheriffe should have sufficient land in the same Shire, to answer the King and his people. The best is, this Baronet had a very fair estate elsewhere. And as our English proverb saith, VVhat is lost in the Hundred, will be found in the Shire: so what was lost in the Shire, would be found in the Land. However, this was generally beheld as an injury; that, because he had offended a great Courtier, the Sherivalty was by power imposed upon him. The Farewell. The worst I wish this my Native County is, that Nine (a River which some will have so term'd from Nine Tributary Rivolets) were Ten, I mean made navigable, from Peter∣burg, to Northampton. A design which hath always met with many back-friends, as private profit is (though a secret) a Sworn enemy to the general good. Sure I am the Hollanders, (the best copy of thrift in Christendome) teach their little ditches to bear Boats. Not that their waters are more docible in this kind, then ours, but they are the more Ingenious and Industrious School-master, of the lesson of publick advantage making every place in their Province, to have access unto every place there∣in, by such cheap transportation.
NORTHUMBERLAND hath the Bishoprick of Durham (seperated by the river Dervent running into Tine) on the South, Cumberland on the South-west, the German Ocean on the East, & Scot∣land on the North and West; parted with the river Tweed, Cheviot∣hills, and elsewhere, (whilst our Hostility with the Scots) Mutuo Metu, with Mutual Fear, now turned into Mutual Faith, both Nations know∣ing their own, and neither willing to invade the bounds of others. It is somewhat of a Pyramidal Form, whose Basis objected to the South, extendeth above 40. whilst the shaft thereof narrowing Northward ascend∣eth to full 50. miles. Nature hath not been over indulgent to this County in the fruitfulness thereof, yet it is daily improved, since (to use theIsai. 2. 4. Prophets expression) they have beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and Spears into Pruning-hooks; and surely such Plough-shares make the best furrows, and such comfortable Pruning-hooks cut with the best edge. It must not be forgotten, how before the uniting of England and Scotland, there lay much wast ground in the Northern part of this County, formerly disavowed (at lest∣wise not owned by any,) onely toStows Chro. pg. 819. avoid the charges of the common defence. But afterwards, so great, sudden, and good the alteration, that the Borders becoming safe, and peaceable, many Gentlemen inhabiting therabouts, finding the antient wast ground to become very fruitful, in the fourth of King James put in their claimes, and began to contend in Law about their Bounds, challenging their Hereditary right therein. The Buildings. One cannot rationally expect fair Fabricks here, where the Vicinity of the Scots made them to build, not for state but strength. Here it was the rule with ancient Ar∣chitects, what was firm, that was fair, so that it may be said of the Houses of the Gen∣try herein, Quot mantiones, tot munitiones, as either being all Castles or Castle-like able to resist (though no solemn siege) a tumultary incursion. Before we come to the Worthies of this County, be it premised, that Northumland is generally taken in a double acception; First as a County, (whose bounds we have fore∣assigned,) and secondly, as a Kingdome, extending from Humber to Edenborough-frith, and so taking in the Southern-part of Scotland. Here then we have an oportunity to cry quits with Demster, the Scotish Historian, and to repair our selves of him for chal∣lenging so many English-men to be Scots. Should we bring all them in for Northum∣berlanders which were born betwixt Berwick and Edenborough, whose nativities we may in the rigor of right justifie to be English, if born therein, whilst the tract of ground was subjected to the Saxon Heptarchy. But because we will have an unquestionable title to what we claim to be ours, we are content to confine our selves to Northumberland in the County-Capacity thereof. Proverbs. To carry Coals to Newcastle.] That is to do, what was done before, or to busy ones self in a needless imployment. Pa∣rallel to the Latine, Aquam mari infundere, Sidera Coelo addere, Noctuas Athenas; To carry Owles to Athenes, which place was plentifully furnished before with fowle of that feather. From Berwick to Dover three hundred miles over.] That is, from one end of the land to the other. Semnable the Scripture expres∣sion, From Dan to Ber-sheba. Such the Latine Proverbs, A carceribus ad metam; A capite ad calcem, when one chargeth thorough an employment, from the beginning to the end thereof. To take Hectors cloake.] That is, to deceive a friend who confideth on his faithfulness; and hereon a story doth depend. When Thomas Piercy Earl of Northumberland, Anno 1569. was routed in the Rebellion which he had raised against Queen Elizabeth, he hid himself in the
house of one Hector Armestrong of Harlaw in this County, having confidence he would be true to him, who notwithstanding for money betrayed him to the Regent of Scotland. It was observed that Hector, being before a rich man, fell poor of a sudden, and so hated generally, that he never durst go abroad, insomuch, that the Proverb to takeBishop Carle∣ton in Thank∣ful Rem. c. 2. Hectors cloak, is continued to this day among them, when they would express a man that betrayeth his friend, who trusted him. We will not lose a Scot.] That is, we will lose nothing, how inconsiderable soever, which we can save, or recover. Parallel to the Scripture expression, VVe will not leave an Hooffe behind us. This Pro∣verb began in the English borders, when, during the enmity betwixt the two Nations, they had little esteem of, and less affection for a Scotch-man, and is now happily super∣seded, since the Union of England and Scotland into Great Britain. A Scottish mist may wet an English-man to the skin.] That is, small mischeifs in the beginning, if not seasonably prevented may prove very dangerous. This limitary Proverb hath its original in these parts, where mists may be said to have their fountain North, but fall South of Tweed, arising in Scotland, and driven by the winds into England, where they often prove a sweeping and soaking rain. Sure I am our late Civil War began there, which since hath wet many an English-man in his own hearts blood, and whether at last the Scotch have escaped dry that is best known to themselves. A Scotish-man, and a Newcastle-grind-stone, travail all the world over.] The Scots (Gentry especially) when young, leave their Native land, (hard their hap, if losers by their exchange) and travail into foreign parts, most for maintenance, many for accomplishment. Now no ship sets safe to sea without a Carpenter, no Car∣penter is able without his tools, no tools useful without a Grind-stone, no Grind-stone so good as those of Newcastle. Some indeed are fetch'd from Spain, but of so soft a grit, that they are not fit for many purposes. Hence it is that these Grind-stones, though mostly in motion, may be said fixed to ships as most necessary thereunto. If they come, they come not;] And If they come not, they come.] We must fetch an Oedipus from this County, to expound this riddling Proverb, customary in the wars betwixt the Crowns of England and Scotland. For the cattle of people living hereabout, turn'd into the common pasture, did by instinct and cu∣stome return home at night, except violently intercepted by the Free-booters, and Borderers, who living between two Kingdomes, owned no King, whilst Vivitur ex rapto, Catch who catch may. Hence many in these parts, who had an herd of kine in the morning, had not a cow-tail at night, and alternatly proved rich and poor, by the trade aforesaid. If therefore these Borderers came, their cattle came not; if they came not, their cattle surely returned. Now although a sprigg of these Borderers hath late∣ly been revived (disguised under the new name of Moss-Troopers) yet the union of the two Kingdomes, hath, for the main, knock'd this Proverb out of joynt, never (I hope) to be wholy set again. Scotish Proverbs currant in this County. Scotish Prov. by David Fer∣gusson Minister at Dunfermline. Litera L▪ Lang or ye cut Falkland-wood with a penknife.] It is spoken of such who embrace unproportionable, and improbable means, to ef∣fect the ends propounded to themselves, to as much purpose as to lave the sea with a cockle shell. Falkland was one of the King of Scotland his Royal Palaces in Fife, having a bony wood (whereof great want in the South of this Land, where one can hardly find a stick to beat a dog) about it, so that an axe is proper, and no penknife (fit onely to fell a forrest of feathers with the timber of quills therein) for such employ∣ment. He is anIdem Lit. H. Aberdeens man, taking his word again.] It seems the men of that Town, a fair Haven in the County of Mar, have formerly been taxed for breach of promise. I hope it true (if ever of either) onely of the old Aberdeen, now much decayed, and famous onely for Salmon-fishing. If of the new,
then I believe it of the Townes-men, not Scholars living in the University, founded by Bishop Elfinston. However, we have Prov. in Glo∣cestrshire, You are a man of Duresly. formerly observ'd, what is to be believed in such satyrical Proverbs. He was born in August.] At the first hearing thereof I took it for a fortunate person, that month beginning the return of profit, for the pains of the year past. I know amongst the Latines some months were counted more unhappy then others, witness the by word Mense Maio nubunt male. But since I perceive a man may miss his mark, as well by over, as under shooting it. And one may be too serious in interpreting such common speeches. For I am informed by a Scotish man, that it is onely the Periphrasis of a licorish person, and such said to be born in August, whose Tongues will be the Tasters of every thing they can come by, though not belonging to them. A Yule feast may be quat at Pasche.] That is Christmas-cheer may be digested, and the party hungry again at Easter. No happiness is so lasting but in short time we must forego, and may forget it. The Nor∣thern parts call Christmas-Yule, (hence the Yule-block, Yule-oakes, Yule-songs, &c.) though much difference about the cause there. Some more enemies to the ceremony, then cheer of Christmas, to render that Festival the more offensive, make the word of Paganish extraction, deriving it from Julus the son of Aeneas. An Etymology fetch'd far from England, and farther from truth. But to omit many forced and feigned deductions, that worthy Dr. Henry Hammond. Doctor hits the mark, bringing it from the Latine Jubilo (a word as ancient as Varro) signifying the rural shouting for joy, so that it is a name general for festivals, as Lammas Yule, &c. though Christmas be so called without any addition, as the Feast  above all others. It is more then probable, that the Latines, borrowed their Jubilo from the Hebrew  the long sound of the trumpet, whence their Jubilee got the name. And seeing Christs▪birth was a freeing us from the slavery of sin, I see not how Yule can be cavill'd at in that signification. Saints. Saint EBBA was born in Northumberland, being daughter to Edilfrid the King thereof: When her father was taken prisoner, she got hold of a boat in Humber, and passing along the raging Ocean, she safely landed at a place in Merch in Scotland, which is call'd the Promontory of Saint Ebb unto this day. Becoming Prioress of Coldingham in that Country, to preserve her own and fellow∣Nuns chastity from the Pagan Danes, She cut off her own Nose, and perswaded the rest to do the like; that their beauty might be no bait, whilst their deformity did secure their virginity. Sure I am, that since, more have lost their Noses in prosecution of their Wantonness, then in preservation of their Chastity. As for the Danes, being offended that these Nuns would not be the objects of their lusts, they made them the subjects of their fury, burning them and their Monastery together. But such the reputed holiness of Saint Ebb, that many Churches, commonly called Camd. Brit. pag. 745. Saint Tabbs, are in North-England dedicated unto her, and her memory is continued in the name of Ebb-Chester, a little Village in the Bishoprick of Durham. She flourished about the year 630. Prelates since the Reformation. GEORGE CARLETON was born in this County (nigh the Borders of Scot∣land) at Norham, his father being the Keeper of the Important Castle therein; bred in Merton-colledge in Oxford. Hear what our English Camd. Brit. in Northumberl. pag. 816. Antiquary saith of him, Whom I have loved in regard of his singular knowledge in Divinity, which he professeth; and in other more delightful Literature, and am loved again of him, &c. He was one of the four Divines sent by King James to the Synod of Dort, each of them there observed in their respective Eminencies. In Carletono praelucebat Episcopalis gravitas, in Da∣venantio subactum Judicium; in Wardo multa lectio; in Hallo expedita concionatio. Doctor Carleton was then Bishop of Landaffe, and afterwards of Chichester. His good affecti∣ons
appear in his Treatise, entituled, A thankful Remembrance of Gods mercy. Solid Judge∣ment in his Confutation of Judicial Astrology, and clear invention in other Juvenile exer∣cises. Indeed when young, he was grave in his manners, so when old he was youthful in his parts, even unto his death, which happened in the first of King Charles. VALENTINE CARY was born at Parker in his Sceletos Cantab. M. S. Barwick (which though North of Tweed is reduced to this County,) extracted from the Carys Barons of Hunsdon. He was first Scholar of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, then Fellow of Christs-colledge, afterwards of Saint Johns again, and at last Master of Christs-colledge, so that I meet not with any his Peer herein, thus bounded and rebounded betwixt two foundations. But the best is, they both had one and the same Foundress, Margaret Countess of Rich∣mond. He was Vice-chancelour of Cambridge, Anno 1612. Dean of Saint Pauls, and at last Bishop of Exeter. A complete Gentleman and excellent Scholar. He once unex∣pectedly owned my nearest Relation in the high commission court, when in some distress, for which courtesie, I, as heir to him, who received the favour, here publickly pay this my due thanks unto his memory. Though some contest happened betwixt him and the City of Exeter; yet I am credibly informed when that City was visited with the Sickness, he was bountiful above expectation, in relieving the poor thereof. He died Anno Domini 1626. and lyes buried under a plain stone in the Church Survey of London p. 776. of Sain Pauls, London. Though he hath another Monument of Memorial in the Church of Exeter. RICHARD HOLEWORTH D. D. was born at Newcastle in this County, preferred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, Rector of Saint Peters in the Poor of London, Arch-deacon of Huntington, and at last Master of Emanuel-colledge. During his continuance in London, he did Dominari in concionibus, and although it be truly observed, that the People in London, honour their Pastors (as John Baptist)  for an hour, (or short time,) yet this Doctor had his hour measur'd him by a large glass, continuing in publick esteem till the beginning of these Civil Wars; when the times turn'd, and he standing still, was left to the censure of factious innovatours. Most candid his disposition, and if he had the infirmity of ingenious Persons to be Cholerick, he prevented others checking it in him, by checking it first in himself. He suffered long imprisonment in Ely-house and the Tower, for a Sermon he made when Vicechancellour of Cambridge, and at last restored to his Liberty, waited on his Ma∣jesty in the Isle of Weight. He is here entred amongst the Bishops, because profered Bristol, but refused it; and such who know least of his mind, are most bold to conjecture the cause of it. He sleighted not the smalness thereof, because such his Manners, Loyal∣ty, and Conscience, that he would have thanked his Sovereign for an injury, much more for a smaller courtesie. Wherefore such onely shoot by the aime of their own fancies, who report him to have said he would not wear a Bristol stone. Sure I am that England had, if any more able, none more zealous to assert Episcopacy; and let that suffice us, that he esteemed the acceptance thereof in that juncture of time, unsafe and unseasonable for himself; he afterwards took the Deanary of Worcester, though he received no profit, the place received honour from him, being the last who was entituled (and indeed it was no more) with that dignity. Pity it is so learned a person left no monuments (save a Sermon) to Posterity, for I be∣hold that Posthume-work as none of his, named by the Transcriber, the Valley of Vision, a Isai. 22. 1, 5. Scripture expression, but here mis-placed. Valley it is indeed, not for the fruitful∣ness but lowness thereof, (especially if compared to the high parts of the pretended Author,) but little vision therein. This I conceived my self in Credit and Conscience concerned to observe, because I was surprised to Preface to the Book, and will take the blame, rather then clear my self, when my innocency is complicated with the accusing of others. Dying about the year 1650. he was buried in his own Parish Church in Saint Peters Broad-street, his ancient friend Doctor Jefferies of Pembrook-hall taking for his Psal. 102. 11. Text. My days are like a shadow that decline. Thomas Rich and Richard Abdi Esquires, his Execu∣tors and worthy friends, ordering his funeral with great solemnities and lamentation.
Souldiers. To speak of this County in general, it breedeth most hardy men. He who dedu∣ced the Merches, (so truly called from Mercke a limitary bound) from frequent march∣ing, and warlike expeditions therein, missed the word, but hit the matter. These Bor∣derers have been embroyled in several Battles agtinst the Scotch, witness the Battle of Chevy-chase, whereof Sir PhilipIn his defence of Poesie. Sidney is pleased to make this mention. Certainly I must confess my own barbarousness, I never heard the old song of Percy and Douglas, that I found not my heart moved more then with a Trumpet, and yet it is sung but by some blind Crowder, with no rougher voice then rude style, which being so evil apparell'd in the dust and bweb of that uncivil age, what would it work trimmed in the gorgeous eloquence of Pindar? True it is, the story is not true in the letter and latitude thereof, no Earl of Nor∣thumberland being ever killed in Chevy-chase, as by the perusall of the ensuing Cata∣logue will appear. 1 Henry Percy the first Earl, lost his life in a battle against King Henry the fourth, Anno Domini 1408. 2. Henry Percy his Grand-child, the second Earl, was slain on the side of King Henry the sixth, against King Edward the fourth, Anno 1455. 3. Henry his Son taking part with K. Henry the sixth, was slain at Touton-field, in the first of King Edward the fourth. 4. Henry his Son, promoting a Tax for the King, was kill'd, in a tumultuous rout at Cockledge, eighteen miles from York, in the fourth of King Henry the seventh. 5. Henry his Son, died a natural death, in the eighteenth of King Henry the eight. 6. Henry his Son, died peaceably at Hackney neer London, the nine and twentieth of King Henry the eight; in whose reign the Scene is laid for the aforesaid Trajedy in Chevy-chase. This I thought fit to have said, partly, to undeceive people, least long possession might create a Title in their belief to the prejudice of truth; partly, that the noble Family of the Percy's, (what need a good head of hair wear a Perriwig,) for birth and valour equal to any subjects in Christendome, should not be beholding to an untruth to commend their martial Atchievement. Yet though there be more fancy in the ver∣nish, there is much faith in the ground-work of this relation, presenting a four-fold truth to posterity. First, that on light causes, heavy quarrels have happened, betwixt the Scotch and English in the Borders. Secondly, that the Percy's with other Families in this County, (mentioned in this Ballade,) were most remarkable therein. Thirdly, that generally the English got the better in these broils. Lastly, that for the most part they were Victories without Triumphs, wherein the Conquerour might sigh for his Conquest, so dear the price thereof. Physicians. WILLIAM TURNER was born atBale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 95. Morpeth in this County, bred in the University of Cambridge, where he became an excellent Latinist, Grecian, Oratour, and Poet. He was very zealous in the Protestant Religion, writing many books in the de∣fence thereof, and much molested for the same by Bishop Gardner and others; he was kept long in durance, and escaping at last by Gods Providence, fled over beyond Sea. At Ferrara in Italy he Commenced Doctor of Physick, there gaining his degree with ge∣neral applause. He wrote a greatIdem ut priw. Herball, and a book of Physick for the English Gentry, as also several Treatises of Plants, Fishes, Stones, Mettals, &c. He went after∣wards into Germany, where he lived in great Credit and Practise, and as I conjecture died there in the reign of Queen Mary. Reader, I conceive him worthy of thy special notice, because he was both a Confessor and Physician; qualifications which meet not every day in the same Person.
THOMAS GIBSON. It is pity to part him from the former, because symbo∣lising in many particulars of concernment. Both 1. Born in this County, and in the same Town ofBale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 54. Morpeth. 2. Flourishing atthe self same time. 3. Physicians by Profession, and it is said of this Thomas, that he did aegritudinum sanationesIdem ibidem. incredibiles, Incredible cures of Diseases. 4. Writing of the same Subject, of the nature of Hearbs. 5. Professed enemies to Popery. This Thomas wrote many other Books, and one Entituled, The Treasons of the Prelates since the Conquest, which work had it come to the hand of a modernMaster Will. Spring. Authour, happily it might have much helped him in that Subject. He was alive in the last of Queen Mary, and Bale sendeth forth a hearty Prayer for the continuance of his heth and happiness. Writers. RALPH FRESBOURNE was born in thisBale de script. Brit. Cent. 4.  Num. 1. & Pitz. in Anno 1274. County, bred a Souldier, Scholar, Travailer, (being a man of great estate) and at last turn'd a Frier. He attended Ri∣chard, Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Romans, into the Holy-land. Here he came acquainted with the Friers living on Mount Carmel, which were then much molested with the inrodes of Pagans. Our Ralph, pitying their condition, and much taken with their sanctity and (as some say) miracles, brought them over with him into Eng∣land, and built them an house at Holme nigh Alnwick in Northumberland, In loco Car∣melo Syriae non dissimili, saith myBale t prius. Author, In a place not unlike to Carmel in Syria.* Isai. 37. 24. Thus pence are like shillings, and as Carmel had an Hill, with the river Kishon running under it, aThe Lord Vssey was so great a bene∣factour to this Covent, that by some he is reputed the founder there∣of. Forrest beside it, and the Mid-land-Sea some three miles from it▪ so this had the river Alne, a Park adjoyning, and the German-Sea at the same distance. But Northumberland was but a cold Carmel for these Friers, who soon got themselves warmer nests in Kent, Essex, London, and where not? Multiplying more in England, then in any other Country, asFastorum lib. 8. Mantuan observeth, and hath not ill expressed. Cur apud Anglorum populos ita creverit, audi: Anglicus in Syrias veniens exercitus olim, Achonem Tyrii positam prope litora ponti, Quae priùs occurrit, subit is oppresserat armis. Hear, why that they so much in England thriv'd: When th' English earst in Palestine arriv'd, The City Acon on the shore of Tyre, As next at hand, with arms did soon acquire. And after some verses interpos'd. Ista duces tanta intuiti miracula, secum In patriam duxere viros, quibus arma negabant, In laribus sedem Assyri: & templa domosque Construxere novas. Pauc is it a fruit annis Relligio, quasi virga solo depact a feraci, Et veluti palmes robur translata recepit. The Captains seeing so great wonders wrought, These Friers with them into England brought, What war deni'd at home, they here anew Churches and Houses built. In years but few Increasing twig-like set by happy band, Or tree transplanted to a fruitful land. This Ralph wrote Books of pious exhortations and Epistles, and after he had been fourteen years provincial of his own Order, died and was buried at Holme aforesaid, Anno Domini 1274. JOHANNES SCOTUS. We have formerly asserted the very Scociety of this Scotus his nativity to belong to England, and have answered the objections to the con∣trary. He wasCamdens Brit. in Northumb. born at Dunston, a village in the Parish of Emildon in this County, as appeareth by a writing in a book of his in Merton-colledge, wherein he was bred. He was a Franciscan by Order, and of such nimble and solid parts, that he got the title of Doctor subtilis. Hitherto all School-men were (like the world before the building ofGen. 11. 1. Babel) of one language, and of one speech, agreeing together in their opinions, which hereafter were divided into two Regments, or Armies rather, of Thomists and Scotists, under their several Generals opposing one another. Scotus was a great stickler against the Thomists for that sinful opinion, that the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin; which if so, how
came she to Luke 1. 47. rejoyce in God her Saviour? He read the Sentences thrice over in his so∣lemn Lectures, once at Oxford, again at Paris, and last at Colen, where he died, or was kill'd rather, because falling into a strong fit of an Apoplexy, he was interred whilst yet Camdens Brit. in Northum. alive, as afterwards did appear. Small amends were made for his hasty burial, with an handsome monument erected over him, at the cost of his Order, (otherwise whether as Scot, Scholar, or Franciscan, he had little wealth of his own,) in the Quire before the High Altar. On his Monument are inscribed the names of Pitz de Illust. Ang. Script. pag, 393. fifteen Francis∣cans, viz. three Popes, and two Cardinals on the top, and ten Doctors (whereof six Eng∣lish) on the sides thereof, all his Contemporaries, as I conceive. He died Anno Dom. 1308. Benefactors to the Publick. STEPHEN BROWN Grocer, son of John Brown, was born at Newcaste upon Tine in this County, afterwards Knighted and made Lord Mayor of London Stows Surv. of London pag. 564. 1438. In which year happened a great and general famine, caused much by unseasonable wea∣ther, but more by some (Huckstering Husbandmen) who properly may be termed Knaves in grain, insomuch, that wheat was sold for three shillings a bushel, (intollera∣ble according to the standard of those times,) and poor people were forced to make bread of fern roots. But this Sir Stephen Brown, sent certain ships to Dantz, whose sea∣sonable return with Rye, suddenly sunk grain to reasonable rates, whereby many a languishing life was preserved. He is beheld one of the first Merchants who in want of Corn, shewed the Londoners the way to the Barn-door, I mean, into Spruseland, prompted by charity, (not covetousness) to this his Adventure. He may be said that since his death, he hath often relieved the City on the like occasion, because as Lib. ono . 70. Symmachus well observeth, Author est, bonorum sequentium qui bonum relinquit ex∣emplum. ROBERT WOODLARKE was born saith my John Scot in his tables of Cambridge. Author at Wakerly in this County. True it is, in my late Church History I have challenged him for Northampton∣shire. Because there is no Consult. Speeds Alphabetical tables, & vil∣lare Anglica∣num. VVakerly in Northumberland. Because there is a VVakerly in Northamptonshire. But on second thoughts, I resige him clear to this County, loth to higgle for a letter or two (misprinted perchance) in the name of a Town. This VVoodlarke was the last of the first Original Fellows, and third Provost of Kings-colledge in Cambridge. He bought three tenements in Miln-street, and (by a Mortmain procured from King Ed∣ward the fourth,) erected of them a small Colledge, by the name of Saint Katha∣rines-hall. As is the man, so is his strength, great matters cannot be expected from so private a person, who never attained to any Prelatical preferment, who was bountiful to his Foundation to the utmost of his ability. Herein he stands alone, without any to ac∣company him, being the first and last who was Master of one Colledge, and at the same time Founder of another. This his Zoar hath since met with many worthy Bene∣factours, who have advanced it to be considerable both in buildings and revenues. The date of his death I cannot with any certainty affix. Memorable Persons. MACHELL VIVAN is a Scotish-man by his birth, but because beneficed in this County so many years, shall (by the Readers leave) pass for an English-man, so far, as to be here inserted. The rather, because he will minister to the present and future ages, just matter of admiration, as by the perusing of the ensuing letter, from my cre∣dible friend, well know in London, (where his surviving Father, was not long since the Prime Magistrate thereof,) will appear. There is an acquaintance of mine, and a friend of yours, who certified me, of your desire of being satisfied of the truth of that relation I made,
concerning the old Minister in the North. It fortuned in my journey to Scotland, I lay at Alnwick in Northumberland, one Sunday by the way; and understanding from the Host of the house where I lodged, that this Mi∣nister lived within three miles of that place, I took my horse after dinner, and rid thither, to hear him preach, for my own satisfaction. I found him in the Desk, where he read unto us, some part of the Common-prayer, some of Holy Davids Psalmes, and two Chapters, one out of the Old, the other out of the New Testament, without the use of Spectacles. The Bible, out of which he read the Chapters, was a very small Printed Bible. He went afterwards into his Pulpit, where he prayed and preached to us about an hour and half. His Text was, Seek you the Kingdome of God, and all things shall be added unto you. In my poor judgement, he made an excellent good Sermon, and went cleaverly through, without the help of any Notes. After Sermon, I went with him to his house, where I proposed these several following Questions to him. Whether it was true, the book reported of him concerning his hair? whether or no he had a new set of Teeth come? whether or no his Eye-sight ever failed him? and whether in any measure he found his strength renewed unto him? He answered me distinctly to all these, and told me, he understood the News-book reported his hair to become a dark brown again, but that is false, he took his Cap off, and shewed me it. It is come again like a childs, but rather flaxen, then either brown or gray. For his Teeth, he hath three come within these two years, not yet to their perfection; while he bred them he was very ill. Forty years since he could not read the biggest Print without Spectacles, and now (he blesseth God) there is no Print so small, no written hand so small, but he can read it without them. For his Strength, he thinkes himself as strong now, as he hath been these twenty years. Not long since he walked to Alnwick to dinner and back again, six North-country miles. He is now an hundred and ten years of age, and ever since last May, a hearty body, very chearful, but stoops very much. He had five children, after he was eighty years of age, four of them lusty lasses, now living with him, the other died lately, his wife yet hardly fifty years of age. He writes himself Machell Vivan, he is a Scotish-man, born near Aberdeen. I forget the Towns name where he is now Pastor, he hath been there fifty years. Your assured loving friend, Thomas Atkin. Windsor 28. Septem. 1657. A most strange accident! For waving the Poetical fiction of Aeson his Re-juvenescency in Medeas Bath, it will hardly be paired. To begin with Scripture, Caleb (or All-heart) his professing himself as able for any action at eighty, as Josh. 4. 11. forty years before, speaketh no renovation, but continuation of his strength. And whereas Psam. 103. 5. David saith, that his youth was renewed as an Eagles, he is to be understood in a Metapborical, yea Spiritual sense, of the vigorousness, and sprightfulness of grace in his heart, seeing otherwise his great debilitation doth appear at 1 King. 1. 1. seventy years, scarce a moity of this mans a age. As for the many miracles, wrought by our Saviour, though extending to the cleansings of Leapers, Curing Diseases, Casting out Divels, yea, Reviving the Dead, yet they never countermanded nature in this kind, by recruiting the strength of an aged person. As for humane History, I meet not with any to mate him in all particulars. The nearest
that treadeth on his heels, is the Countess of Desmond, married in the reign of King Edward the fourth, and yet alive Anno 1589. and many years since, when she was well known to Sir Walter Raleigh, and to all the Nobles and Gentlemen in Mounster. But chiefly to the Earls (for there was a succession of them worn out by her vivacity) of Desmond, from whose expectation she detained her jointer. The Lord Bacon casteth up her age to be an hundred and fourty at least, adding withall, Ter per vices dentisse, That she recovered her Teeth, after her casting them three several times. All I will adde is this, had this happened in foreign parts, addicted to Popery, near the shrine of some Saint, superstition with her sickle, might have reaped a great harvest thereby. ........ ANDERSON a Townsman and Merchant of Newcastle, talking with a friend on Newcastle-bridge, and fingering his ring, before he was aware let it fall into the river, and was much troubled with the loss thereof, untill the same was found in a fish caught in the river, and restoredVox Piscis Printed Anno 1626. pag. 13. unto him. The same is reported by Herodotus in his third book, of Polycrates a petty King, and the Minion of fortune, and may be an instance of the recurrency of remarkable accidents, according toEccles. 1. 9. Solomons observation, There is no new thing under the sun. The names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth 1433. Thomas Bishop of Duram, Commissioners to take the Oaths. Ralph Earl of VVestmerland.   Thomas Lilborn, Knights for the Shire.   John Carington. Knights for the Shire.   Rob. Umfravile, mil. Rad. Gray, mil. Rob. Ogle, senior. mil. Rob. Ogle, jun. mil. Johan. Bertram, mil. Will. Elmeden, mil. Johan. Midleton, mil. Will. Svynbarn, mil. Johan Maners, mil. Math. Whitfeld, mil. VVill. Carnaby Johan. Fenwyk Johan. Midelton Tho. Ilderton Rob. Raymes Tho. Haggerston Rob. Maners Laur. Acton Tho. Gray de Norton Tho. Blekensop Row. Thirwall Ric. Fetherstanhalgh Gilb. Rotherford VVill. Muschaunce Gilb. Eryngton VVill. Clenell Johan. Heron de Ne∣therton Tho. Reed de Redes∣dale Roger. Ushere Tho. Midleton Joh. Ellerington Joh. Park Rich. Lilburne Tho. Elwick Joh. Eryngton Nic. Heron de Meldon Joh. Trewyk Joh. Chestre Lion. Chestre Joh. Horsley de Hor∣sley Jaco. Buk de Morpath Observations. The Fable is sufficiently known of the contest betwixt the Wind and the Sun, which first should force the Travailer to put off his cloaths. The Wind made him wrap them the closer about him, whilst the heat of the Sun, soon made him to part with them. This is moralized in our English Gentry, such who live South-ward near London, (which for the stre thereof I may fitly call the Sun of our Nation,) in the warmth of wealth, and plean f pleasures, quickly strip and disrobe themselves of their Estates and Inheritance; whilst the Gentry living in this County, in the Confines of Scotland, in the VVind of VVar, (daily Alarumed with their blustering enemies) buckle their Estates (as their armour) the closer unto them; and since have no less thriftily defended their patrimony in Peace, then formerly they valiantly maintained it in War. The Commissioners of this County did not over weary themselves in working, when they returned these persons, presenting no underwood, yea, no standels, but only tymber-oaks, men of great wealth and worship in this Shire, as appears by the thin∣ness of their number, but one and twenty.
Sheriffs of Northumberland. HEN. II. Anno 1 Odardus Anno 2 Will. de Vesci Milo Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Will. de Vesci Milo, for 9 years. Anno 16 Rog. Statevill, for 15 years. Anno 31 Rog. de Glanvill, for 3 years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Rog. de Glanvill Anno 2 Will. de Stutevill, & Re∣gin. Basset Anno 3 Nul. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo Anno 4 Anno 5 Anno 6 Hug. Bardoph. for 4 years. Anno 10 Idem, & Ob. fil. Will. JOH. REG. Anno 1 Hugo. Bardolfe Anno 2 Will. Stutevill, & Joh. Laleman Anno 3 Rob. filius Rog. & Rad. de Furnell, for 3 years. Anno 6 Anno 7 Anno 8 Rob. filius Rog. & Rob. de Kent Anno 9 Rob. filius Rog. & Ang. de Corvo Anno 10 Rob. filius Rog. & Tho. Haltem Anno 11 Rob. filius Rog. & Will. de Blunvill Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Aimericus Archid. Dunelm, & Phil. Anno 17 Phil. de Ulecot, & Will. de Stratton HEN. III. Anno 1 Phil. de Ulcot, for 4 years. Anno 5 Rob. de Wittester alias (Wirceser) Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Will. Briewere, jun. & Rog. Langford Anno 8 Will. Briever, jun. ut Custos, & Tho. de Tetleburn Anno 9 Joh. filius Rob. & Will. Coniers, for 3 years. Anno 12 Joh. filius Rob. Anno 13 Bri. fil. Alani, & Hug. de Magneby, for 3 years. Anno 16 Bri. fil. Alani, & Joh. de Mersley, for 4 years. Anno 20 Rich. Anno 21 Hu. de Bolebet, & Alan. de Kirkby, for 7 years. Anno 28 Hug. de Bolebet, & Rob. de Camho, for 3 years. Anno 31 Will. Heyrun, for 11 years. Anno 42 Joh. de Plesset Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Tho. filius Mich. Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Adam. de Gesenor, & Hug. de Hereford Clicus. Anno 47 Adam. de Cresenor, & Joh. Lidegreynes, for 5 years. Anno 52 Wischardus de Charny Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Rich. de Charny, for 3 years. EDW. I. Anno 1 Rob. de Hampton, for 3 years. Anno 4 Joh. de Lichegreynes, for 3 years. Anno 7 Walt. de Cannblion Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Tho. de Dyneleston, for 8 years, Anno 17 Rich. Knoul. for 5 years. Anno 22 Hu. Gobium, for 3 years. Anno 25 Joh. de Kirkby Anno 26 Rob. de Balliclo Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Rog. Mynot Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Joh. de Camblion Anno 31 Lucas Talboys Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Joh. de Creppinge, & Joh. de Sheffeld, for 3 years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Rob. de Fandon Anno 2 Guid. Charroum Anno 3 Johan. de Cannton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Will. de Felton, & Joh. de Cannton, for 3 years. EDW. III. Anno 1 Joh. de Insula, & Joh. de Fenwick Anno 2 Joh. de Littlebourne, for 5 years. Anno 7 Anno 8 Rog. Mauduit Anno 9 Hob. Dardins, for 3 years. Anno 12 Wil. Felton, for 6 years. Anno 18 Rob. Bertram, & Rob. de Fenwicke Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Rob. Reyms Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Johan. Clifford Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Anno 25 Joh. Coupeland, for 3 years. Anno 28 Anno 29 Anno 30 Anno 31 Alan. de Strocker Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Hen. de Strocker Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Johan. Heronn Anno 36 Rog. de Widrington Anno 37 Rich. de Horsele Anno 38 Hen. de Strocher, for 5 years. Anno 43 Rich. de Horsele, for 3 years. Anno 46 Rob. Umfravil Anno 47 Tho. Surtis Anno 48 Johan. Fenwicke Anno 49 Barthram. Monboucher Anno 50 Tho. de Ilderton Anno 51 Rob. Umfravil
EDWARD the third. 25. JOHN COUPELAND.] This was he, who five years ago, (viz. in the 20. of this Kings reign) took David Bruce, King of Scotland prisoner, in the battle at Nevils-Cross. Buchanan, an Author not always to be credited, in the concernments of his own Nation, (seldome allowing victory to the English valour, but either to their treachery, or unequal numbers,) reporteth, how Coupeland, having disarm'd his Royal Prisoner, DuosRerum Scoti∣carum lib. 9. fol. 89. pag. 2. pugno dentes excussit, which I will not English, as confident never done by English-man, our Chro∣nicles taking no notice of such a cruelty, but that he treated him with strictness, be∣seeming a Prisoner; and respect, becoming a Prince; until he had surrendered him to King Edward, who rewarded him with Knight-hood; and lest his honour, without means to support it, should seem burdensome to him, and contemptible to others, He gave him five hundred pounds per annum, to be paid four hundred out of the Customes of London, the other out of those of Berwick, until such time as lands of the same value, were setled on him, and his heirs for ever. Sheriffs of Northumberland. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Bert. Monboucher     2 Tho. Surties     3 Brt. Monboucher     4 Idem.     5 Adom. de Atholl   G. on a Cheveron Or, 3 Estoiles S. 6 Rob. de Clifford   Checky Or and Azu. a Fess Gules. 7 Johan. Heronn     8 Hen. de Percy, Com. Morthumb. Alnwick Or, a Lion rampant Azure. 9 Idem. ut prius   10 Idem. ut prius   11 Idem. ut prius   12 Rd. de Eure   Quarterly Or and Gul. on a Bend Sab. 3 Escalops Argent. 13 Idem. ut prius   14 Joh. de Filton, m.     15 Hen. de Percy Com. Northumb. ut prius   16 Idem. ut prius   17     18     19     20 Hen. de Percy ut prius   21 Idem. ut prius   22 Joh. de Fenwick Fenwick Per pale Gul. and Arg. 6 Martlets counterchanged. HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Hen. de Percy fil. Com. Northumb. ut prius   2 Ger. Heron, m. & Rob. Umfravill   Argent, a Fess betwixt 6 Cinque∣foiles Gules. 3 Joh. Milford, m.     4 Joh. Clavering, m.   Quarterly Or and Gul. a bend Sa. 5     6 Rob. Umfravill, m. ut prius   7 Rob. Lisle, mil.   Or a Fess betwixt 2 Cheverons S. 8 Rob. Herbotell     9 Tho. Grey   Gul. a Lion ramp. within a Border engraild Arg. 10 Rob. Tempest   Arg. a bend betwixt 6 Martlets S. 11 Joh. Widrington   Quarterly Arg. & Gu. a bend Sab. 12 Joh. Bertram   Or, an Orle Azure. HEN. V.     Anno     1 Joh. Maveres   Or, 2 Bars Az. a Chief Gules. 2 Edw. Hastings, m.   Argent, a Maunch Sable. 3 Rob. Lisle ut prius   4 Joh. Wderington ut prius   5 Rob. Ogle   Arg. a Fess betwixt 3 Cressants G. 6 Edw. Hastings ut prius   7 Will. Elmeden     8 Tho. Surtis     9 Idem.     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Joh. Bertram, m. ut prius   2 Joh. Midleton     3 Joh. Bertram, mil. ut prius   4 Joh. Widerington ut prius   5 Will. Lambon     6 Hen. Fenwick, ar. ut prius   7 Will. Carnaby, ar.     8 Joh. Woderington ut prius   9 Joh. Bertram ut prius   10 Rog. Woderington ut prius   11 Joh. Midleton     12 Math. Whitfeld   Argent, a bend betwixt 2  engrailed Sable. 13 Joh. Bertram. m. ut prius   14 Rog. Woderington ut prius   15 Will. Eure, mil. ut prius   16 Rob. Ogle, mil. ut prius   17 Joh. Bertram ut prius   18 Rob. Herbotell, m.     19 Joh. Heron Gawby   20 Idem.     21 Rog. Woderington ut prius   22 Joh. Heron     23 Rob. Claxston     24 Will. Haringe     25 Tho. Wellden     26 Bertr. Herbotell     27 Tho. Nevill, mil.   Gules a Saltire Argent. 28 Ro. de Woderingtō ut prius   29 Rog. Thornton     30 Joh. Heronford     31 Rob. Mitford     32 Joh. Burcester     33 Rob. Mavers, ar. ut prius   34 Rad. Grey, mil. Chillingham Gules, a Lion rampant within a Border engrailed Argent. 35 Joh. Heron, mil.     36 Rog. Thornton     37 Will. Bertram ut prius   38 Rad. Grey, mil. ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Joh. Midleton, mil.     2 Georg. Lumley, m.     3 Idem.     4 Rob. Maures, mil. ut prius  
5 Ger. Woderington ut prius   6 Will. Bowes, m.   Emin. 3 Bows bent Gules. 7 Joh. Nevill. mil. ut prius   8 Geor. Lumley, m.     9 Idem.     10 Idem.     11 Idem.     12 Joh. Woderington ut prius   13 Idem. ut prius   14 Idem. ut prius   15 Hen. Com. North. ut prius   16 Idem. ut prius   17 Idem. ut prius   18 Idem. ut prius   19 Idem. ut prius   20 Idem. ut prius   21 Idem. ut prius   22     RICH. III.     Anno     1 Hen. Com. North. ut prius   2 Rad. Herbotle, m. subvic.     3 Hen. Com. North. ut prius   4 Rob. Maneret, m.     HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Hen. Com. North. ut prius   2 Idem. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 Nullus Ti. Com.     5 in hoc Rotulo.     6     7     8     9 Rog. Fenwick, ar. ut prius   10     11     12 Rob. Grey Horton Ut prius. 13 Geor. Taylboys, m.   Argent, a Cross Saltire, and Chief Gules on the last, 3 Escallops of the first. 14     15     16     17 Edw. Radcliff, m.   Arg. a Bend engrailed Sable. 18     19 Rad. Eure, mil. ut prius   20     21 Tho. Ilderton, m.     22     23 Nich. Ridley, ar.     24     HEN. VIII.     Anno     Nich. Ridley, ar.     2 Idem.     3 Idem.     4     5     6     7 Rad. Fenwick, ar. ut prius   8     9     10 Chri. Thirkill, ar.     11 Georg. Skelton, ar.     12 Chri. Dacre, mil.   Gules, 3 Escallops Argent. 13 Will. Elleker, ar.   Argent, a Fess betwixt 3 Water∣bougets Gules. 14     15     16 Will. Elleker, m. ut prius   17 Will. Heron, mil.     18 Will. Eure, mil. ut prius   19 Cut. Ratcliffe, ar. ut prius   20     21     22   Recorda Manca. 23     24     25     26     27     28     29     30     31     32 Joh. Woderington ut prius   33 Leon. Cornaby, m.   Ermin. 2 Bars Vert. 34 Joh. de Lavale, m.   Arg. 2 Bars Azu. over all a flower de liz Or. 35 Tho. Hilton, mil.     36 Joh. Collingwood     37 Tho. Hilton, mil. ut prius   38 Joh. Horsley, ar.     EDW. VI.     Auno     1 Joh. de Lavele, m. ut prius   2 Tho. Hilton, mil. ut prius   3 Joh. Foster, mil.   Arg. a Cheveron Vert 'twixt 3 Hunters-horns Sable. 4 Joh. Gray, mil. ut prius   5 Rob. Collingwood     6 Joh. Witherington ut prius   PHILLIP. & MARI.     Anno     1 Joh. de Lavele, m. ut prius   1, 2     2, 3     3, 4     4, 5     5, 6 Geo. Rtcliffe, m. ut prius   ELIZAB. REG.     Anno     1 Joh. Witherington ut prius   2 Alb. Fetherston▪ Gul. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Fea∣thers Argent. 3 Rob. Lawson, ar. Haugh   4 Hen. Percy, mil. ut prius   5 Rad. Grey, mil. ut prius   6 Tho. Foster, ar. ut prius   7 Joh. de Lavele, ar. ut prius   8 Georg. Heron, ar.     9 Cut. Carnaby, ar.     10 Cut. Collingwood     11 Rob. Raydes, ar.     12 Nich. Ridley, ar.     13 Joh. deLavele, m. Geor. Heron, m▪ ut prius   14 Tho. Foster, ar. ut prius   15 Cut. Caneyby, ar.     16 Tho. Grey, mil. ut prius   17 Rob. de Lavele, m. ut prius   18 Rob. Midleton, ar.     19 Fran. Russell, mil.   Arg. a Lion rampant Gul. on a Chief Sable, 3 Escallops of the first. 20 Will. Fenwicke, ar. ut prius   21 Hen. Witheringtō ut prius   22 Cut. Colingwood     23 Joh. Heron, ar.     24 Rad. Grey. ar, ut prius   25 Rob. de Lavele, ar. ut prius   26 Jam. Ogle. ar. ut prius   27 Rich. Radley, ar.     28 Rob. Cluding, ar.     29 Hen. Anderson, ar.     30 Idem.     31 Will. Fenwick, ar. ut prius   32 Ale. Ftherston, ar. ut prius   33 Rad. Grey. ar. ut prius   34 Rob. de Lavele, ar. ut prius   35 Rad. Grey, ar. ut prius   36 Tho. Bradford, ar.     37 Idem.     38 Geor. Muschmpe   Or, 3 Bars Gules. 39 Edw. Grey. ar. ut prius   40 Idem. ut prius   41 Tho. Midleton, ar.     42 Ge. Muschamp, ar. ut prius   43 Edw. Talbot, ar.   Arg. 3 Lions ramp. Purpure.
44 Nich. Foster, ar.   Argent, a Chveron Vert 'twixt 3 Hunters-horns Sable. 45 Will. Selby, jun. ar. & 1 Jacob.     JACO. REG.     Anno     1 Will. Selby, jun. ar.     2 Rad. de Lavale, ar. ut prius   3 Hen. Witheringtō ut prius   4 Will. Selby, mil.     5 Geor. Selby. mil.     6 Rad. de Lavale, m. ut prius   7 Edw. Talbot, ar. ut prius   8 Joh. de Lavale, ar. ut prius   9 Rad. Grey, mil. ut prius   10 Claud. Foster, ar. ut prius   11 Rad. Seldy, mil.     12 Joh. Clavering, m.   Quarterly Or and Gul. a Bend S. 13 Hen. Anderson, m.     14 Will. Selby, mil.     15 Rob. Brandlinge     16 Tho. Midleton, ar.     17 Joh. Fenwicke, m. ut prius   18 Mat. Foster, ar. ut prius   19 Rad. de Lavale, m. ut prius   20 Will. Muschampe ut prius   21 Joh. Clavering, m. ut prius   22 Joh. de Lavale, m.   Ermine 2 Bars Vert. CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Cutb. Heron, ar.     2 Fran. Bradling, ar.     3     4 Tho. Swinborn, m. & duobus Tumid.     5     6 Rob. Bradling, ar.     7 Nic. Towneley, ar.     8 Nich. Tempest, m. ut prius   9 Tho. Midleton, ar.     10     11 Will. Carniby, m.     12 Will. Witheringtō   Quarterlr Arg. & Gul. a Bend S. 13 Rob. Bewick, ar.     14     15     16 Ingratum bello     17 debemus Inane.     18     19     20     21     22     The Reader is sensible of more blanks and interruptions, in these Sheriffs, then in any other Catalogue, whereof this reason may be assigned; because the Sheriffs of Northumberland never accompted to the Kings Majesty in his Exchequer, (from which accompts the most perfect List is made) until the third year of King Edward the sixth Yea, they assumed such liberty to themselves, as to siese the issues and profits of their Baylwick, and convert them to their own use, with all other Debts, Fines, and Amerce∣ments, within the said County, and all Emoluments accrueing from Alienations, Intru∣sions, Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, and the like. This, though it tended much unto the detriment, and loss of the Crown, was for many years connived at, chiefly to incourage the Sheriffs in their dangerous office, who in effect, lay constant Perdues against the neighbouring Scots. But after that, their care was much lessened, by setling the Lord-Wardens of the Marches, it was in∣acted in the third Anno 2. & 3 Edwardi 6. cap. 34. of King Edward the ixth, that the Sheriffs of Northumberland should be accountable for their office, as others, in the Exchequer. Queen ELIZABETH. 19 FRANCIS RUSSELL, Mil.] He was son to Francis, and father to Edward Earl of Bedford. He married Julian daughter (whom In Caral. of Honou. p. 440. Mills calls Elionar, and makes her co-heir) to Sir John Foster afore∣said, which occasioned his residence in these parts. It happened on a Truce-day, June 27. 1585. that the English meant to treat, whilst the Scots meant to fight, being three thousand to three hundred. Now, though it was agreed betwixt them, (to use the words of the Limitary-laws) that they should not hurt each other with word, deed, or look, they fell on the English, in which tumult this worthy Knight lost his life. And, because seldome single funerals happen in great Families, his Father died the same week in the South of England. The Farewell. Being now to take our leave of Northnmberland, I remember what I have read of Sir Robert Umfrevile, a native of this County, how he was commonly called Stows Chro. pag. 338. Robin Mendmarket, so much he improved trading hereabouts, in the reign of King Henry the fonrth. It will not be amiss to wish this County more Mendmarkets, that the general complaint of the decay of traffick may be removed. I confess the Knight bettered the Markets, by selling therein the plentiful plunder which he had taken from the Scots, but I desire it done by some ingenious, and not injurious design, that none may have just cause to complain.
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE. NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE hath York-shire on the North, Lincoln∣shire on the East, Leicester-shire on the South, and Derby shire on the West: Nor can I call to mind any County besides this, bounded with four, and but four, Shires, (and those towards the four cardinal points) without any parcels of other Shires interposed. The pleasantness thereof may be collected from the plenty of Noble-men, many having their Barronies, and more their Residence, therein: It is divided into two parts, the Sand and the Clay, which so supply the defects one of another, that what either Half doth afford, the whole County doth enjoy. Natural Commodities. Glycyrize or Liquoris. England affordeth hereof the best in the world for some uses, this County the first and best in England: Great the use thereof in Physick, it being found very pectoral and soveraign for several diseases. A stick hereof is commonly the spoon prescribed to Patients, to use in any Lingences or Loaches: If (as Aeneas his men were forced to eat their own Trenchers) these chance to eat their Spoons, their danger is none at all. But Liquoris formerly dear and scarce, is now grown cheap and common, because growing in all Counties. Thus plenty will make the most precious thing a drug, as silver was nothing respected in Jerusalem in the dayes of Solomon. Wonders. We must not forget how two Ayres of Lannards were lately found in Sherwood For∣rest. These Hawks are the natives of Saxony, and it seems, being old and past flying at the game, were let or did set themselves loose, where meeting with Lanerets, enlarged on the same terms, they did breed together, and proved as excellent in their kind, when managed, as any which were brought out of Germany. Proverbs. Many talk of Robin Hood, who never shot in his Bow.] That is, many discourse (or prate rather) of matters wherein they have no skill or ex∣perience. This Proverb is now extended all over England, though originally of Not∣tingham-shire extraction, where Robin Hood did principally reside in Sherwood Forrest. He was an Arch robber, and withall an excellent Archer; though surely the Draytons Po∣ly-Olbion, song 26. p. ▪ Poet gives a twang to the loose of his Arrow, making him shoot one a cloth-yard long, at full forty score mark, for compass never higher than the breast, and within less than a foot of the mark. But herein our Author hath verified the Proverb, talking at large of Robin Hood, in whose Bow he never shot. One may justly wonder that this Archer did not at last hit the mark, I mean, come to the Gallows for his many robberies, but see more hereof in the Memorable Persons of this County. To sll Robin Hoods penny-worths.] It is spoken of things sold under half their value; or if you will, half sold half given. Robin Hood came lightly by his ware, and lightly parted therewith; so that he could afford the length of his Bow for a yard of Velvet. Whithersoever he came, he carried a Fair along with him, Chapmen crowding to buy his stollen Commodities. But seeing The receiver is as bad as the thief, and such buyers are as bad as receivers, the cheap Pen∣ny-worths of plundered goods may in fine prove dear enough to their Consciences. As wise as a man of Gotham.] It passeth publickly for the Periphrasis of a Fool, and an hundred Fopperies are feigned and fathered on the Town-folk of Gotham, a Village in this County. Here two things may be observed:
1. Men in all Ages have made themselves merry with singling out some place, and fixing the staple of stupidity and stolidity therein. Thus the Phrygians were accounted the fools of all Asia, and the Anvils of other mens wits to work upon, serò sapiunt Phryges, Phryx nisi ictus non sapit. In Grecia take a single City, and then Abdera in Thracia carried it away for Dull-heads, —Martial. l. 10. Abderitanae pectora plebis habes. But for a whole Countrey commend us to the Boetians for Block-heads, and Baeotium ingcnium is notoriously known. In Germany auris Baetava is taken by theIdm l. 6. Poet for a dull Ear, which hath no skill in witty conceits. 2. These places thus generally sleighted and scoffed at, afforded some as witty and wise persons as the world produced: Thus Plutarch himself (saithA lg. Beoti∣um genium. Eras∣mus) was a Baeotian, and Erasmus a Batavian or Hollander, and therefore (his own copy-hold being touch'd in the Proverb) he expoundeth auris Batava a grave and severe Ear. But to return to Gotham, it doth breed as wise people, as any which causelesly laugh at their simplicity. Sure I am, Mr. William de Gotham, fifth Master of Michael-house in Cambridge, Anno 1336. and twice Chancellor of the University, was as grave a Go∣vernor as that Age did afford. And Gotham is a goodly large Lordship, where the an∣cient and right well respected Family of St. Andrews have flourished some hundreds of years, till of late the name is extinct in, and lands divided betwixt, Female co-heirs, matched unto very worshipful persons. The littleButters of Bees, p. 17. Smith of Nottingham, Who doth the work that no man can. England hath afforded many rare workmen in this kind, whereof he may seem an Ap∣prentice to Vulcan, and inferiour onely to his Master, (in making the invisible Net) who made a Lock and Key, with a Chain of ten links, which a Flea could draw. But what this little Smith and great workman was, and when he lived, I know not; and have cause to suspect, that this of Nottingham is a periphrasis of Nemo, Ou Tis, or a person who never was: And the Proverb, by way of Sarcasm, is applied to such, who being conceited of their own skill, pretend to the atchieving of impossibilities. Martyrs. I meet with none within this County, either before or in the Marian dayes, impu∣ting the later to the mild temper of Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, and Diocesan thereof. Yet find we a Martyr, though not in this, yet of this, County; as a Native thereof here following. THOMAS CRANMER was born atFox his Acts and Monu∣ments, p. 1859 Arse lackton (Speed calls it Astackton) in this County, and being bred in Jesus college in Cambridge became Archbishop of Canter∣bury; and at last (after some intermediate failings) valiantly suffered for the Truth at Oxford, An. Dom. 1556. March 22. Two hungry meals (saith our English Proverb) makes the third a gluttn. This may al∣so be inverted, Two glutton meals require the third an hungry one, fasting being then ne∣cessary lest Nature be surcharged. If the Reader hath formerly perused Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, and my Ecclesiastical History, Cranmer his story is so largely rela∣ted in those two books, there is danger of his surfet if I should not now be short and sparing therein: onely one memorable passage omitted by Mr. Fox (and that's a won∣der) I must here insert out of an excellentBishop God∣win in his Ca∣talogue of the Archbishops of , p. 206. Author. After his whole body was reduced into ashes, his heart was found intire and untouch'd. Which is justly alledged as an argument of his cordial integrity to the truth, though fear too much and too often prevailed on his outward actions: So that what the Holy Spirit recoreth of King2 Chron. 15. 17. Asa, was true of him,—Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his dayes, though good man he was guilty of many and great imperfe∣ctions. The like to this of Cranmer is reported of Zuinglius, Quòd cadavere flammis ab hosti∣bus tradito, cor exuri non potuerit, His foes making this a sign of the obduration and hard∣ness
of his heart, his friends of the sincerity thereof. And thus saith my moderate and learnedThuanus Obit. doct. vir. Anno 153. Author, Adeo turbat is odio aut amore animis, ut fit in religionis dissensioni∣bus, pro se quis{que} omnia superstitiosè interpretatur, Their minds being so disturbed with hatred or love, as it comes to pass in dissentions of Religion, every one interprets all things superstitiously for his own advantage. The best is, our Religion, wherein it dif∣fers from Romish Errors, hath better demonstration for the truth thereof, than those Topical and Osier accidents, lyable to be bent on either side, according to mens fancies and affections. Prelates since the Reformation. WILLIAM CHAPPELL was born at Lexington in this County, and bred a Fel∣low in Christs college in Cambridge, where he was remarkable for the strictness of his Conversation. No one Tutor in our memory bred more and better Pupils, so exact his care in their Education. He was a most subtile Disputant, equally excellent with the Sword and the Shield, to reply or answer. He was chosen Provost of Trinity col∣lege in Dublin, and afterwards Bishop of Corke and Rosse: Frighted with the Rebellion in Ireland he came over into England, where he rather exchanged than eased his con∣dition, such the wofulness of our civil wars. He dyed Anno 1649. and parted his E∣state almost equally betwixt his own Kindred and distressed Ministers, his charity not impairing his duty, and his duty not prejudicing his charity. Capital Judges. Sir JOHN MARKHAM, descended of an ancient Family, was born at Markham in this County, and brought up in the Municipal Law, till being Knighted by Edward the Fourth, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the place of Sir John Fortescue. These I may call the two Chief Justices of the Chief Justices, for their sig∣nal integrity: For though the one of them favoured the House of Lancaster, the other of York, in the Titles to the rown; both of them favoured the House of Justice in matters betwixt party and party. It happened thatFabian p. 497 & Hoinshed p. 670 & Stow in the 12. of Edward the 4. Sir Thomas Cooke, late Lord Mayor of London, one of vast wealth, was cast before hand at the Court, (where the Lord Rivers, and the rest of the Queens Kindred, had pre-devoured his Estate) and was onely for Formalities sake to be con∣demned in Guild-hall, by extraordinary Commissioners in Oyer and Terminer, whereof Sir John Markham was not the meanest. The Fact for which he was arraigned, was for lending money to Margaret the Wife of King Henry the Sixth: this he denyed, and the single testimony of one Haukins, tortured on the Rack, was produced against him. Judge Markham directed the jury (as it was his place, and no partiality in point of Law to do) to find it onely Misprision of treason; whereby Sir Thomas saved his lands though heavily fined, and life though long imprisoned. The King was highly displea∣sed at him, and vowed he should never sit on the Bench any more. And here I hope it will not trespass on the grave character of this Judge, to insert a modern and pleasant passage, being privy my self to the truth thereof. A Lady would traverse a suit of Law against the will of her husband, who was conten∣ted to buy his quiet by giving her her will therein, though otherwise perswaded in his judgment the cause wold go against her. This Lady dwelling in the Shire-town, invited the judge to dinner, and (though thrif∣ty enough of her self) treated him with smptuous entertainment. Dinner being done, and the cause being called, the judge clearly gave it against her: And when in passion she vowed never to invite any Judge again; Nay, Wife (said he) vow never to invite a just Judge any more. Well, King Edward was so vexed, that Sir Iohn Markham was outed of his Chief-ju∣stice-ship, and lived privately but plentifully the remainder of his life, having fair lands by Margaret his wife, (daughter and co-heir of Sir Simon Leke of Cotham in this County) besides the Estate acquired by his Practice and paternal Inheritance.
Seamen. EDWARD FENTON (Brother to Sir Jeffrey Fenton, of whomTitle of Wri∣ters. hereafter) was born in this County, whose nature inclined him wholly to Sea-service; and disdaining to go in a trodden path, he was ambitious to discover unknown passages. His At∣chievements in this nature are related at large in Mr. Hackluit, and excellently contra∣cted in an Epitaph on his Monument in Depthford Church in Kent, erected by the Right Honourable Roger Earl of Corke, who married his Brothers daughter. Memoriae perenni Edwardi Fenton, Reginae Eliza∣bethae olim pro corpore Armigeri, Jano O-Neal, ac post eum Comite Desmoniae, in Hibernia turbantibus, fortissimi Taxiarchi, qui post lustratum improbo ausu, Septentrionalis Plagae Apochryphum mare, & excus∣sas variis peregrinationibus inertis Naturae latebras, Anno 1588. in celebri contra Hispanos Naumachia, meruit Navis Praetoriae Navarchus. Obiit Anno Domini 1603. Some dayes after the death of Queen Elizabeth. Observe by the way how God set up a generation of military men, both by Sea and Land, which began and expired with the Reign of Queen Elizabeih, like a suit of clothes made for her, and worn out with her: For Providence designing a peaceable Prince to succeed her, (in whose time mar∣tial men would be rendred useless) so ordered the matter, that they all almost attended their Mistress, before or after, within some short distance, unto her grave. Writers. WILLIAM MANSFEILD (named no doubt from, and) born at that noted Market Town in this County, was bred a Dominican, and for his skill in Logicks, Ethicks, Phy∣sicks, and Metaphysicks in his Age highly applauded. And because some prize a Dram of Forraign before a pound of Home-bred praise, know that In quarto li∣bro suorum praedicatorum. Leander Bononiensis (though mistaking his Name Massettus) giveth him the Appellation of Inclytus Theolo∣gi Professor. He defended Thomas Aquinas against Henricus Gandavensis, (though both of them were dead long before) and got great Credit thereby. Bale, (who is not usu∣ally so civil in his expressions) Script. Brit. cent. 5. num. 2. saith that he did strow branches of Palms before Christs Asse, which if so, was (I assure you) no bad employment. He flourished, Anno Dom. 1320. WILLIAM NOTTINGHAM was first Prebendary, then Chanter of York, bred an Augustinian, and fourteen years the Provinciall of his Order. Resigning which place, he went on some great employment to Rome, and returning thence by Genoa, fell sick and recovered of the Plague, being therein a Monument of Divine Mercy to prove that di∣sease (though in it self Mortale) not alwayes Mortiferum. Amongst the many Books he wrote, his Concordance on the Evangelists was most remarkable, which I behold as a Leading-piece in that kind, though since it hath met with many to follow it; A worthy work to shew the Harmony betwixt those four Wri∣ters, though it hath met with many to decry the design, being accounted by
Some Impossible. Others Unnecessary. As if there were Contradictions herein past reconciling, whose opinion cannot be reconciled with Piety; seeing the four Gospels are Indited by one and the same Spirit of Unity and Verity, of Truth and Concord, whilst in two sentences really contrary, one must be false of necessity. As if it were nothing but the reconci∣ling of those who never fell out. Whereas indeed, there are many seeming oppositi∣ons therein to raise the reputation thereof. Intellecta ab omnibus sunt neglecta a pluri∣mis, and some necessary difficulty be∣comes Scripture, to quicken our prayers, pains, and patience to understand it. Script. Brit. cent. 5. num. 44. Bale giveth him this Lukewarme (call it hot, because coming from his mouth) com∣mendation, non omnino impius in voluminibus, quae composuit. He dyed, and was bury∣ed at Lecester. Anno Dom. 1336. ROBERT WORSOP was born (saith Script. Bri. cent. 5. num. 76 Bale) in the County, mistaken for the Di∣cese of York, seeing Worsop is notoriously known to be in Nottingham-shire. He was bred an Augustinian in the convent of Tick-Hill not far from Doncaster, where he wrote many Books, the one called the Entrance of the Sentences. Bale saith, that at last he was made a Bishop, not naming his Diocese, and no such Prelate appearing in our En∣glish Catalogue it rendereth it suspicious, that either he was some Suffragan, or some Titulary Bishop in Greece. He dyed, and was buryed at Tick Hill, about the year 1360. Since the Reformation. Sir JEFFREY FENTON Knight, born in this County, was for twenty seven* J. Waraeus de script. Hib. p. 137. years Privy-Counsellour in Ireland to Queen Elizabeth and King James. He transla∣ted the History of Francis Guicciardine out of Italian into English, and Dedicated it to Queen Elizabeth, he deceased at Dublin October 19. 1608. and lyeth buryed in St. Patricks Church under the same Tombe with his Father-in Law Dr. Robert Weston, sometimes Chancellour of Ireland. JOHN PLOUGH was born in this Bale in his book termed Scriptors no∣stri temporis, p. 111. County, a pious and learned Minister of the Word; who for his conscience fled over into Basil in the Reign of Queen Mary. It happened that a Book came over into the hands of the English Exiles, written a∣gainst the Marriage of Ministers, by one Miles Hoggard, a silly Hosier in London, but highly opinioned of his learning. It was debated amongst the English, whether this Book should be passed over with neglect, or answered. And here the Reader is re∣quested to pardon this digression, as proper enough for my profession. Solomon hath two Prov. 6. 4. 5. Proverbs, the one immediately succeeding, yet seemingly crossing the other, Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like nto him. Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit. Some Mr. Cart∣wright upon the place. will have the first precept given to Magistrates (who are not to make their Authoitry cheap, by ingaging against fools) and the later to belong to all Christians. O thers distinguish that an answer according to his folly may be twofold; by way of comply∣ing with it, which may not; and confuting of it which ought to be done. Most make a difference between the railing fool and the reasoning fool: the former to be ordered, as Hezekiah did 2 Kings 18. 36. Rabshakeh, Answer him not a word. But if he be a reasoning fool, who will offer to argue conceited of himself, take him off his speed, with a short and seaso∣nable return. Such a fool this Hoggard was adjudged, whom John Plough undertook to answer, and cut his combe so close, that the other appeared no more. He dyed in the begin∣ning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. WILLIAM BRIGHTMAN was born in Nottingham (where some of his brethren were lately alive) bred Fellow of Queen Colledge in Cambridge, and aftewards benefi∣ced at Haunes in Bedfordshire. No lover of Conformity, yet no hater of Conformists; being
charitable to such, who in judgement dissented from him. His Memory is most re∣markeable for his Comment on the Revelation, by some Protestants approved, praised, admired; by others sleighted, contemned, condemned. Pro. 1. His very name Brightman imports something of illumination and clearness therein. 2. He makes many hard places to be plain, and mysteries to be histories, by his Comment. 3. He foretold many things forty years ago, which we see performed in our dayes. Con. 1. Names are casual, and even Lucian himself, as bad as he was, had as much of light and lustre in his name. 2. He makes many plain places hard, and histories to be mysteries by his mis-in∣terpretation; expounding the seven Asian Churches, then literally extant, to be Germany, France, England, &c. 3. Shooting so many Arrows, no wonder if fome few, rather by hap than aim, hit the mark. Sure I am that Time and Mr. Brightman will expound the hardest places in the Re∣velation, but what credit is to be given to the later alone, I will not engage. Such who dislike Mr. Brightmans writing, could not but commend his Angelical li∣ving, who had so much of Heaven in his heart. Walking thorough the vineyard of this world, he pluckt and eat a few grapes, but put up none in his Vessel, using wealth as if he us'd it not. His Clay-cottage did crack and fall down in the same minute, so sudden was his death: But he who dyed daily, could on no day be said to dye suddenly, being alwayes prepared for his dissolution, which happened Anno Dom. 16—. Memorable Persons. ROBERT HOOD was (if not by birth) by his chiefest abode this Country-man. His words are taken out of Iohn Major. See his Brit. in North-riding in York-shire. Cambden calls him praedonem mitissimum, the gentlest thief that ever was: and know, Reader, he is entered into our Catalogue, not for his thievery but for his gentleness. Take the character of his (though not good) less bad behaviour from the pen of our Draytons Po∣ly-Olbion, song 26. p. 123. Poet: From wealthy Abbots chests, and Churles abundant store, What oftentimes he took, he shar'd amongst the poor: No lordly Bishop came in lusty Robins way, To him before he went, but for his Pass must pay: The widow in distress he graciously reliev'd, And remedied the wrongs of many a Virgin griev'd. But who made him a Judge? or gave him a Commission to take where it might best be spared, and give where it was most wanted? His principal residence was in Shirewood Forrest in this County, though he had another haunt (he is no Fox that hath but one hole) near the Sea in the North-riding in York-shire, where Robin Hoods Bay still retaineth his name: Not that he was any Pirat, but a Land-thief, who retreated to those unsuspected parts for his security. One may wonder how he escaped the hand of Justice, dying in his bed, for ought is found to the contrary: But it was because he was rather a merry than a mischievous thief, (complementing passengers out of their purses) never murdering any but Deer, and this popular Robber feasted the Vicinage with his Venison. He played his pranks in the reign of King Richard the First, about the year of our Lord 1100. THOMAS MAGNUS. He was an exposed child, left by his mother in the Parish of Newark. What the Ovid. Met. Poet saith of the father of Cadmus (commanding his son to find his lost sister Europa, or else never to return) that he was,
Facto piu & sceleratus eodem. Expressing in one act a mind, Which was both cruel, and was kind. may be applied to the mother of this and all such Foundlings. Now it happened that some York shire Clothiers coming in the dark, (very early or late) did light on this child, and resolved to pay both for his nursing and education, the charge whereof would not be great, equally divided betwixt them, according to the Proverb, Multorum manibus grande levatur onus. An heavy work is light to do, When many hands are put thereto. First then they took order he should be baptized in Newark by the name of Thomas, (probably the best person in their company) and because all of them had Interest alike in him, for his Sirname they assigned him Amang-us, which is amongst us in the Nor∣thern pronunciation. They were very careful in his breeding. I confess, Aristotle urgeth it as an argument against the breeding of children in common, that the care of all will effectually be the care of none, and so the children be neglected. Not so here, where this Thomas, though he had a Common-wealth of Foster-fathers, was very well brought up in lear∣ning, and became an excellent scholar and States-man, being imployed in many forreign Embassies. Then took he on him the name of Cambdens Re∣mains, p. 146. Dr. Magnus, (and was famous thereby both at home and beyond the Seas) on which account he might claim kindred with Pompeius Magnus, Carolus Magnus, and Albertus Magnus, and whom not, who was Great for arts, arms, or otherwise? It soundeth much in his commendation, that he for∣got not his gratitude to the Town of his Nativity, where he erected a fair school, with o∣ther Benefactions. He flourished (as I take it) under King Henry the Eight. Lord Mayors. I cannot on my best inquiry recover any Native of this County who ever attai∣ned to this place of Magistracy; but am informed, that now the feet of one do tread near unto the Thrshold of that Dore of Honor, and doubt not but when he hath first en∣tered and opened the way, there will be others soon found to follow him. The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. John Archbishop of York Commissioners to take the Oaths. Humfrey Earl of Stafford   Richard Stanhop One of the Knights for the Shire.   Tho. Cheworth, chiv. Iohan. Zouche, chiv. Will. Plumton, chiv. Hug. Welughby, chiv. Roberti Strelley, chiv. Hen. Perponnt, chiv. Rob. Makam, chiv. Gerv. Clston, chiv. Will. Meryng, chiv. Hug. , chiv. Ioh. Cokfeld armig. Radulphi Makerell Thome Nevyll Roberti Brewce Thome Stanton Rad. Leek Richardi Sutton Thome Stanhope Iacobi Stanhope Thome Curson Willielmi Byrton Henrici Perponnt Hugonis Hercy Iohannis Wastnes Iohannis Gaitford Gorgii Clay Iohannis Husse Iohannis Hiklinge Ioh. Barbour de Leek Thome Stannton de Sutton Roberti Doyle Rogeri Perponnt Thome Hercy Richardi Bevercotes Reberti Moresby Roberti Morewode Iohannis Clifton Roberti Dunham Iohannis Serlby Willielmi Wilbram Thome Genely Thome Schfeld Thome Anne Iohannis Rolley Iohannis atte Vikars Willielmi Boson Edm. Nornamuyle
Richardi Gatford Iohannis Becard Willielmi Remston Richardi Strelly Thome Meryng Willielmi Lassels Iohannis Powerr Willielmi Powerr Ioh. Lek de Halom Thome Okere Philippi Barley Thome Warberton Iohannis Alferton Willielmi Alferton, filius ejus Richardi Ranchestere de Wirssope Iohannis VVhite de Colyngam Iohannis Glouseter de Carcoston Richardi Walfeld de Newerk Roberti Kelom de Newerk Willielmi Skrynishire de Muskham Roberti Garnon de Muskham Ioh. Kelom de Kelom Rob. Darley de Thorp Thome Columboll de Thorp Riginaldi Shawe de Estwayte Gervasii Bampton de Beston Iohannis Mathewe de Sterroppe Willielmi Crecy de Markham Petri Creci de Mark∣ham Roberti Forsett de Grynley Will. Lord de Retford Roberti Wytham de Orston Radulphi tuffin de Mansfeld Wodhous Iohannis Brannspath de Ragnell Ioh. Brannspath filius ejus de Ragnell Tho. Brannspath de Ragnell Rad. Barre de Ragnell Iohannis Crostes de Ragnell Iohannis Melton de Mormanton Willielmi Clerk de Gedlynge Radulphi Wilbram de VVestmerkham Galfridi Botelere de VVelhagh Rob. Norton de Kirton Iohannis Milnere de Allerton Will. Haley de Sutton Iohan. Morehagh de Mansfeld Ioh. Arnall de Arnall Iohan. Spondon de Newerk Iohan. Dennett de Newerk Hugonis Garnon de Muskham Iohan. Crumwell de Charleton Rob. Crumwell filius ejus, de eadem Willielmi Daynell de Egmanton Edm. Berkyn de Al∣lerton Henrici Payser de Clypston Simonis Caldewell de Laxton Roberti Bliton de Cannton Rob. Waryn deWanton Williel. Drapour de Welhagh Iohannis Carleton de Blithe Tho. Bagley de Blithe Walteri Carleton de Carleton VVill. Hogekyngson de Misterton Ioh. Darnall de Mi∣sterton Williel. Lyndrike de Stockwith Willielmi Browet de Walkryngham Richardi Caxton de Tuxford Iohannis Parlethorpe de Laxton Tho. Grengorge de Allerton. Sheriffs. This County had the same Sheriffs with Derby-shire untill the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth, wherein they were divided, and since which time these were the particular Sheriffs of this Shire. Name. Place. Armes. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     10 Tho. Cowper, ar.   Azure a Tortois erected Or. 11 Ioh. Biron, ar.   *Gules, a Saltyr Ermin. 12 Ioh. Nevil, ar. Grove † Az. in a Chief Or, a Lion is∣suant G. and  Arg. 13 Rob. Markham, ar. †     14 Gerv. Clifton, mil. Clifton Sable semi de cinque-soils, a Lion ramp. Arg. 15 Will. Hollis, mil. b Houghton   16 Th. Stanhope, mil. c Shelford b Ermine 2. Piles sable. 17 Hen. Perpoynt, ar. d Holme c Quarterly Ermine and Gul. 18 Geo. Chaworth, ar. e Wiverton d Arg. a Lion ramp. sable in an Orb of cinque-soils Gul. 19 Tho. Markham, ar. ut prius   20 Ioh. Biron, ar.   e Azure, two cheverons, Or. 21 Fra. Willoughby, m.   Or, on 2. bars Gul. 3. Water∣bougets arg. 22 Go. Nevil, ar. ut prius   23 Will. Sutton, ar. Arundel Arg. a quarter S. a crescent G. 24 Fran. Molineux, ar. Teversha. Az. a cross moline quater pier∣ce Or. 25 Rob. Markham, ar. ut prius   26 Brian Lasles, ar.   Argent 3. Chaplets Gules. 27 Ioh. Sydenham, ar. Some. shi. Sab. 3. Rams argent. 28 Geo. Chaworth, m ut prius   29 Tho. Stanhope, mil. ut prius   30 Fra. Willoughby, m. ut prius   31 Ioh. Biron, mil.     32 Th. Thornhough, ar     33 Ioh. Hollis, ar. ut prius   34 Ioh. Basset, ar.   Or, 3. Piles G. a Canton Erm 35 Fra. Willoughby, ar. ut prius   36 Will. Sutton, ar. ut prius   37 Rich Whalley, ar.     38 Ioh. Biron, ml.     39 Ioh. Thorold, ar.   Sable, 3. Goats salient Gules. 40 Hn. Chaworth, ar. ut prius   41 Brian Lasels, ar. ut prius   42 Edw. No ar.   Az. a Lion passant Or betwixt 3. Flower  arg. 43 Hen. Perpoint, ar. ut prius   44 Rog. Ascough, mil.   Sable. a Fess Or, between 3. Asses passant, arg. JACOB.     Anno     1 Will. Reyner, mil.     2 Gab. Armstrong, ar.   G. 3. right hands coped and ar∣med bar-wayes proper. 3 Will. Sutton, mil. ut prius   4 Will. Cowper, ar. ut prius   5 Io. Thornhough, ar.     6 Hen. Sachererell, ar   Arg. on a Saltyre 5. Water∣bougets of the first. 7 Ioh. Molineux, ar. ut prius   8 Ger. Clifton, mil. ut prius   9 Ioh. Molineux, mil. ut prius   10 Ioh. Biron, mil.     11 Geo. Perkins, mil.    
12 Ro. Williamson, ar. Eastmark. Or, a Cheveron Gules betwixt 3. Tresoils, Sab. 13 Rob. Perpoynt, ar. ut prius   14 Geo. Lassels, mil. ut prius   15 Io. Thornhough, m.     16 Tho. Barton, ar.     17 Will. Reason, ar.     18 Tho. Hutchinson, m     19 Ioh. White, mil.     20 Ioh. Digby, ar.   Azure, a Flower de luce, Arg. 21 Math. Palmes, ar.   Gul. 3. flower de luces, Arg. a Chie Varry. 22 Edw. Goldinge † & . Markham, ar. CAROL, I. ut prius † Gules, a Cheveron Or, be∣twixt 3. Besants. Anno     1 Tim. Pusey, ar.     2 Fran. Williamson. ut prius   3 Tho. Hewet, mil.   Sab. a Chev. counter-Battilee betwixt 3. Owles, Arg. 4 Jer. Teresy, ar.     5 Ith. Perkins, ar.     6 Rob. Sutton, ar. ut prius   7 Tho. White, ar.     8 Tho. Bolles, ar.   Az. 3. Cups Arg. holding as many Boars heads erected, Or 9 Ioh. Melish, ar.*     10 Ioh. Biron, mil.   * Az. 2. Swans Arg. betwixt as many Flanches Ermine. 11 Har. Wasteneys, b. † Hendon   12 Geo. Lassels, mil. ut prius † Sab. a Lion ramp. Arg. colle∣red, Gules. 13 Fra. Thorohaugh, m     14 Ioh. Chaworth, ar. ut prius   15 Tho. Williamson, ar. ut prius   16 Gilb. Edw. Nevil, ar. ut prius   Q. Elizadeth. 15. WILLIAM HOLLIS, Mil.] This was that steddy and constant House-keeper, who for his hospitality and other e∣minent vertues, was commonly called The good Sir William: A most honourable title, seeing of Gods two grand Epithets, Optimus, Maximus, the former is imbraced by too few, the later affected by too many. This Sir William was son to Sir William Hollis, Lord Mayor of the City of London, father to John Hollis Lord Houghton of Houghton created Earl of Clare in the 22. of King Charles the First; and Grand-father to the Right Honourable John the present Earl of Clare. K. James. 13. ROBERT PERPOINT, Armig.] He was afterwards created Baron Perpoint and Viscount Newark, and afterwards in the fourth of King Charles the first, Earl of Kingston upon Hull. One descended of right ancient and noble extraction, whose Ancestors coming over with the Conqueror, first fixed at Hurst-erpoint in Sussex, thence removed into this County. I find this remark∣able passage recorded of Henry de Perpoint, who flourished in those parts in the begin∣ning of King Edward the First. Claus. 8 Edvardi 1. membrana tertia in dorso in Tur. Londin. Memorandum, quod Henricus de  die Lunae in  Octab. Sancti Michae∣lis, venit in  apud Lincoliam, & publicè dixit quod sigillum suum amisit, & protestabatur quod si aliquod instrumentum cum sigillo illo post tempus illud inveniretur consignatum, illud nullius esse valoris vel momenti. Memorand. That Henry de  on Munday the day after the Octaves of St. Michael, came into the Chancery at Lin∣coln, and said publickly that he had lost his Seal, and protested that if any instrument were found sealed with that Seal after that time, the same should be of no value or effect. He appeareth a person of prime quality, that great prejudice might arise by the false use of his true Seal, if found by a dishonest person, so that so solemn a protest was con∣ceived necessary for the prevention thereof. Robert Perpoint, a Descendent from this Henry, was by King Edward the third sum∣moned as a Com. Brit. in Nottingham-sh. Baron to Parliament, but died (as I am informed) before he sate therein, which hindered the honour of Peerage from descending to his posterity. But this Robert Perpoint was Robert the younger, in distinction from his Name-sake∣Ancestor, who lived in great dignity under King Edward the Third, as by the follow∣ing Record will appear.
Claus. 49 Hon. 3. in dorso memb. 6. Rex Priori S. Johannis Jerusalem in An∣glia salutem. Cum dilectus & fidelis noster Robertus de Petroponte, qui fidei nostrae & Edwardi primogenti nostri hactenus constan∣ter adhaesit, in conflictu habito apud Lewes captus esset ab inimicis nostris & detentus in prisona Hugonis le Despenser, donec per sep∣tingentas marcas finem fecisset▪ cum eodem pro edemptione sua, unde Walerandus de Mun∣ceaus se praefato Hugoni pro praedicto Roberto obligavit per quandam chartam de feoffa∣mento, & scripta obligatoria inter ipsos con∣fecta, quae vobis liberata fuerant custodienda, ut dicitur: Nos ipsorum Roberti & Wale∣randi indempnitatt prospicere, & eidem Ro∣berto gratiam facere volentes specialem: vo∣bis mandamus, firmiter injungentes, quod cartas & scripta praedicta eidem Rober∣to & Walerando, vel eorum alteri, sine mo∣rae dispendio deliberari faciatis; & nos inde versus vos servabimus indempnes. In cujus, &c. Teste Rege apud Westmonasterium 15. die Octobris. The King to the Prior of St. John Je∣rusalem in England greeting. Whereas our beloved and faithful Robert Perpoint, who hitherto hath constantly adher'd to our trust, and of our first born Edward, was taken by our enemies in a skirmish at Lewes, and kept in the prison of Hugh le Dispenser, untill by seven hundred marks he had made an end with him for his ran∣soming, whereupon Walerand of Mun∣ceaus bound himself to the forenamed Hugh for the foresaid Robert by a certain charter of feoffment, and obligatory wri∣tings made betwixt them, which as is said were delivered to you to be kept: We, willing to provide for the safety of the said Robert and Walerand, and to do a special favour to the same Robert, do command you firmly injoyning, that ye cause the foresaid charters and writings without any delay to be delivered to the same Robert and Walerand, or to one of them; and we shall thenceforth save you harmless. Witness the King at Westminster the 15. day of October. Whoso seriously considereth how much the Mark, and how little the Silver of our Land was in that Age, will conclude seven hundred marks a ransom more proportionable for a Prince than private person. The best was, that was not paid in effect, which by command from the King was restored again. The Farewell. There is in this County a small Market Town called Blithe, which my John Norden in his Descrip∣tion of Hart-ford-shire, voce Benington. Author will have so named à jucunditate, from the mirth and good fellowship of the Inhabitants there∣in. If so, I desire that both the name and the thing may be extended all over the Shire, as being confident that an Ounce of mirth, with the same degree of grace, will serve God more and more acceptably than a pound of sorrow.
OXFORD-SHIRE hath Bark-shire (divided first by the Isis, then by the Thames) on the South, Glocester-shire on the West, Buckingham-shire on the East, Warwick and Northampton Shires on the North. It aboun∣deth with all things necessary for mans life; and I understand, that Hun∣ters and Falconers are no where better pleas'd. Nor needeth there more pregnant proof of plenty in this place, than that lately Oxford was for some years together a Court, a Garrison, and an University; during which time it was well furnished with provisions on reasonable rates. Natural Commodities. Fallow Deer. And why of these in Oxford shire? why not rather in Northampton-shire, where there be the most, or in York shire, where there be the greatest Parks in England? It is be∣cause John Rous of Warwick telleth me, that at Woodstock in this County was the most ancient Park in the whole Land, encompassed with a Stone-wall by King Henry the First. Let us premise a line or two concerning Parks, the case, before we come to wha tis contained therein. 1. The word Parcus appears in Varro, (derivd no doubt à parcendo, to spare or save) for a place wherein such Cattle are preserved. 2. There is mention once or twice in Camb. Brit. in Oxford-shire. Dooms-day Book of Parcus silvestris bestia∣rum, which proveth Parks in England before the Conquest. 3. Probably such ancient Parks (to keep J. Rous in credit and countenance) were onely paled, and Woodstock the first that was walled about. 4. Parks are since so multiplyed, that there be Idem ibid. more in England than in all Eu∣rope besides. The Deer therein, when living, raise the stomachs of Gentlemen with their sport; and, when dead, allay them again with their flesh. The fat of Venison is conceived to be (but I would not have Deer-stealers hear it) of all flesh the most vigorous nourish∣ment, especially if attended with that essential addition which Virgil coupleth there∣with, Implentur veteris Bacchi, pinguis{que} ferinae, [Old Wine did their thirst allay, fat Venison hunger.] But Deer are daily diminished in England, since the Gentry are necessitated into thrift, and forced to turn their pleasure into profit, Jam seges est ubi Parcus erat; and since the sale of Bucks hath become ordinary, I believe, in proess of time the best sto∣red Park will be found in a Cooks shop in London. Wood. Plenty hereof doh, more hath grown in this County, being daily diminished. And indeed the Woods therein are put to too hard a task in their daily duty, (viz. To find fewel and timber for all the houses in, and many out of, the Shire;) and they cannot hold out, if not seasonably relieved by Pit-cole found here, or Sea-cole brought hither. This minds me of a passage wherein Oxford was much concerned; When Shot-over Woods (being bestowed by King Charles the First on a Person of Honour) were likely to be cut down, the University by Letters laboured their preservation, wherein this a∣mong many other pathetical expressions, That Oxford was one of the eyes of the Land, and Shot-over Woods the hair of the Eye-lids; the loss whereof must needs prejudice the sight, with too much moisture flowing therein. This retrenched that design'd for the pre∣sent; but in what case those Woods stand at this day, is to me unknown.
Buildings. The Colleges in Oxford, advantaged by the vicinity of fair Free-stone, do for the ge∣nrality of their structure carry away the credit from all in Christendom, and equal any for the largness of their endowments. It is not the least part of Oxfords happiness, that a moity of her Founders were Pre∣lates, (whereas bridge hath but three Episcopal Foundations, Peter-house, Trinity∣hall, and Jesus) who had an experimental knowledge, what belonged to the necessities and conveniences of Scholars, and therefore have accommodated them accordingly; principally in providing them the patronages of many good Benefices, whereby the Fellows of those Colleges are plentifully maintained, after their leaving of the Uni∣versity. Of the Colleges University is the oldest, Pembroke the youngest, Christ-church the greatest, Lincol (by many reputed) the least, Magdalen the neatest, Wadham the most uniform, New-college the strongest, and Jesus college (no fault but its unhappiness) the poorest; and if I knew which was the richest, I would not tell, seeing concealment in this kind is the safest. H-college is most proper for Southern, Exeter for Western, Queens for Northern, Brazen-nose for North-western men, St. Johns for Londoners, Jesus for Welsmen; and at other Colleges almost indifferently for men of all Coun∣tries. Merton hath been most famous for School-men, Corpus Chresti (formerly called  Gollegium) for Linguists, Christ-church for Poets, All-souls for Orators, New∣college for Civilians, Brazen-nose for Disputants, Queens college for Metaphysicians,  for a lae series of Regius Professor's; Magdalen for ancient, St. Johns for mo∣dern Prelates: and all eminent in some one kind or other. And if any of these Colle∣ges were transported into forreign parts, it would alter its kind, (or degree at least) and presently of a College proceed an University, as equal to most, and superiour to many,  beyond the Seas. Before I conclude with these Colleges, I must confess how much I was posed with a passage which I met within the Epistles of Erasmus, writing to his familiar friend Lu∣dvicus Vives, then residing in Oxford, in collegio Apum, in the College of Bees, accor∣ding to his direction of his Letter: I knew all Colleges may metaphorically be rer∣med the Colleges of Bees, wherein the industrious Scholers live under the rule of one Master: In which respect In Epistola ad Rusticum mo∣nachum. St. Hierom advised Rusticus the Monk to busie himself in making Bee-ives, that from thence he might learn, Monasteriorum ordinem & Regiam disciplinam, the order of Monasteries and discipline of Kingly government. But why any one College should be so signally called, and which it was, I was at a loss; till at last seasonably satisfied that it was Corpus Christi: whereon no unpleasant story doth depend▪ In the year Butler of Bees, p. 23. 1630. the Leads over Vives his Study being decayed, were taken up and new cast, by which occasion the Stall was taken, and with it an incredible mass of Honey. But the Bees, as presaging their intended and imminent destruction (whereas they were never known to have swarmed before) did that Spring (to preserve their famous kind) send down a fair swarm into the Presidents Garden: The which in the y 1633 yielded two Swarms, one whereof pitched in the Garden for the President, the other they  up as a new Colony into their old Habitation, there to continue the memory of this  Doctor, as the University styled him in a Letter to the ardinal. It seems the Bees were Aborigines, from the first building of the Colledge, being called Collegium Apum in the Founders Statutes, and so is John Claymd, the first President thereof, saluted by I cstigatio∣nem Chrysost. conciuncula∣rum defato. Eras. The Library. If the Schools may be resembled to the Ring, the Library may the better be com∣pared to the Diamond therein: not so much for the bunching forth beyond the rest,
as the preciousness thereof, in some respects equalling any in Europe, and in most kinds exceeding all in England, yet our Land hath been ever , much given to the love of Books, and let us Fleet the Cream of a few of the primest Libraries in all ages. In the infancy of Christianity, that at York bare away the Bell, founded by Arch∣Bishop Egbert (and so highly praised by Alevinus in his Epistle to Charles the Great) but long since abolished. Before the dissolution of Abbies, when all Cathedrs and Convents had their Li∣braries, that at Ramsey was the greatest Rbbin, spake the most and best Hebrew, aboun∣ding in Iewish, and not defective in other Books. In that age of Lay Libraries (as I may term them, as belonging to the City) I behold that pertaining to Guild-Hall as a principal, ounded by Richard Whington, whence three Stow in his Survey of Lon∣don. Cart loads of choice Manuscripts were carried in the raign of King Edward the sixth on the promise of [never performed Restitution.] Since the Reformation, that of Benet in Cambridge hath for Manuscripts exceeded any (thank the cost and care of Mathew Parker) Collegate Library in England. Of late Cambridge Library, augmented with the Arch-Episcopal Library of Lambeth, is grown the second in the Land. As for private Libraries of Subjects, that of Treasurer Burlies was the best for the use of a States-man, the Lord Lumlies for an Historian, the late Earl of Arundels for an Herald, Sir Robert Cottons for an Antiquary, and Arch-Bishop Ushers for a Divine. Ma∣ny other excellent Libraries there were o particular persons, Lord Brudnels, Lord Hat tons, &c. routed by our Civil Wars, and many Books which scaped the execution are fled, [transported] into France, Flanders, and other forraign parts. To return to Oxford Library (which stands like Di amongst her Nymphs, and) sur∣passeth all the rest for rarity and multitude of Books; so that if any be wanting on any Subject, it is because the world doth not afford them. This Library was ounded by Humphrey the Good Duke of Gloster; confounded in the raign of Edward the sixth, by those who I list not to name; re-founded by worthy Sir Thomas Bodley, and the bounty of daily Benefactors. As for the Kings Houses in this County Woodstock is justly to be preferred, where the Wood and Water Nymphs might equally be pleased in its uation. Queen Eliza∣beth had a great affection for this place, as one of her best Rmembrancers of her condi∣tion, when a prisoner here (in none of the best lodgings) in the raig of her Sister. Here she escaped a dangerous fire, but whether casual or intentional God knoweth. Here hearing a Milk-maid merrily singing in the Park, she desired exchange of Estates, preferring the poorest liberty before the richest resraint. At this day it is a fair, wa for∣merly a fairer fabrick, if the Labyrinth built here by King Henry the second, answered the Character of Curiosity given it by Authors. But long since the Labyrinth (time without the help of Ariadne her Clue of Silk, can unravel and display this most intri∣cate building) is vanished away. Nor must Eon hard by be forgotten, which though some sullen Soul may re∣count amongst the costly tries, the more ingenious do behold as Arts pretty Comment, as Natures pleasant Text, both so intermingled, that Art in some sort may seem tu∣ral, and Nature artificial therein. It was made by Thomas Bshel, Es sometimes ser∣vant to Francis Bacon Lord Voram. Now because mens expectations are generally tired with the tedious growing of wood, here he set hedges of full growth (which thri∣ved ll well) so that where the former left no plants, the following year found trees grown to their full perfection. In a word, a melancholy mind may hear feast it self to a surfeit with variety of entertainments. But Rarities of this nature are never sufficient∣ly described till beheld. Proverbs. You were born at Hogs-Norton.] This is a Village, properly called Hoch-Norton, whose inhabitants (it seems formerly) were so rustical in their behaviour, that boarish and clownish people are said born at Hogs-Norton.
To take a Burford-bait.] This it seems is a bait, not to stay the stomach, but to lose the wit thereby, as resolved at last into drunkenness. If the fair Market of Burford in this County be so much guil∣ty of this foul sin, it is high time to damne the words of this Proverb, and higher to detest the practice thereof. Otherwise Burford-bait may have an hook therein, to choak such souls as swallow it, without their sincere and seasonable repentance. Banbury Zeale, Cheese, and Cakes.] I admire to find these joyned together in so learned an Author as Mr. Cambden, affir∣ming*Brit. in Ox∣ford-shire, pa 376. that Town fam'd for these three things, Quam male conveniunt? and though Zeal be deservedly put first, how inconsistent is it with his gravity and goodness, to couple a spiritual grace with matters of corporeal repast: so that if spoken in earnest, it hath more of a prophane than pious Pen; if in jest, more of a Libeller than Historian. But to qualifie the man, no such words are extant in the Latine Cambden, where on∣ly we read, Nunc autem coniciendo caseo oppidum notissimum castrum ostendit, &c. Secondly, it being in the English translated by Philemon Holland, was at the first (as I have been credibly informed) a litteral mistake of the Printers (though not confessed in the Errata) set forth in Anno Dom. 1608. Zeal being put for Veal in that place. But what casual in that, may be suspected wilful in the next and last Edition, Anno 1637. where the error is continued out of design to nick the Town of Banbury, as repu∣ted then a place of precise people, and not over-conformable in their carriage. Sure I am that Banbury had a gracious, learned, and painful Mr. William Whaley, of whom hereas∣ter in this County. Minister, and this Town need not be ashamed of, nor grieved at what Scoffers say or write thereof; only let them adde Knowledge to their Zeal, and then the more of Zeal the better their condition. He looks as the Devil over Lincoln.] Some fetch the original of this Proverb from a stone picture of the Devil, which doth (or lately did) over-look Lincoln Colledge. Surely, the Architect intended it no farther than for an ordinary Antick, though beholders have since applied those ugly looks to envious persons, repining at the prosperity of their neighbours, and jealous to be over∣topt by their vicinity. The Latines have many Proverbs parallel hereunto, to express the ill aspects of ma∣levolent spectators, as, Cyclopicus Obtutus, and the Cyclops, we know, were deformed at the best (envy makes a good face look ill, and a bad, look worse) Vultus Titanicus, Vultus Scythicus, Limis oculis os oblique inspicere, Thynni more videre, To look like a Thuny, a Fish, which, as Aristotle saith, hath but one eye, and that, as some will have it, on the left side; so full is malice of sinister acceptions. To return to our English Proverb, it is conceived of more antiquity than either of the fore-named Colledges, though the secundary sense thereof lighted not unhappily, and that it related originally to the Cathedral Church in Vd. surain Lincoln shire. Lincoln. Testons are gone to J. Heywood in his five hundred Epi∣grams, num. 63 Oxford to study in Brazen-nose.] This Proverb began about the end of the raign of King Henry the eighth, and happily ended about the middle of the raign of Queen Elizabeth, so that it continued in use not full fifty years. This the occasion thereof▪ King Henry the eighth, as his In-comes, so his Out-goings were greater than any English Kings since the Conquest. And it belongs not to me to question the cause of either. Sure it is, as he was always taking, he was always wan∣ting; and the Showre of Abby-Lands being soon over, his drought for money was as great as ever before. This made him resolve on the debasing thereof, Testons espe∣cially (a Coin worth six pence, corruptly called Tester,) so that their intrinsick value was not worth above three shillings four pence the ounce, to the present profit of the So∣veraign, and future loss of the Subjects. Yea, so allayed they were with Copper (which common people confound with Brass) and lookt so red therewith, that (as my Author saith) they Idem. num. 64 blusht sor shame, as conscious of their own corruption. King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary earnestly endeavoured the reduction of money to the true Standard (and indeed the Coin of their stamping is not bad in its self) but could not compass the calling in of all base money, partly through the shortness of their Raigns, and partly through the difficulty of the design. This by politick de∣grees
was effected by Queen Elizabeth, with no great prejudice to the then present age, and grand advantage to all posterity, as is justly mentioned on her Monument in Westminster. Send Verdingales to Heywood in his five Hun∣dred Epigrams, Num. 55. Broad-Gates in Oxford.] This will acquaint us with the Female Habit of former Ages, used not only by the gadding Dinahs of that age, but by most sober Sarahs of the same, so cogent is a com∣mon custom. With these Verdingales the Gowns of Women beneath their wstes were pent-housed out far beyond their bodies, so that posterity will wonder to what purpose those Bucklers of Past-board were employed. Some deduce the name from the Belgick Verd gard (derived they say from Virg, a Virgin, and Garder, to keep and preserve) as used to secure modesty, and keep wan∣tons at distance. Others more truly fetch it from Vertu and Galle, because the scab and bane thereof, the first inventress thereof being known for a light House-wife, who under the pretence of modesty, sought to cover her shame, and the fruits of her wan∣tonness. These by degrees grew so great, that their wearers could not enter (except going sidelong) at any ordinary door, which gave the occasion to this Proverb. But these Verdingales have been disused this fourty years, whether because Women were con∣vinced in their consciences of the vaity of this, or allured in their fancies with the novelty of other fashions, I will not determine. Chronica si penses, cum pugnent Oxonienses, Post aliquot mēses volat ira per Angliginenses Mark the Chronicles aright▪ When Oxford Scholars fall to fight, Before many months expir'd England will with wa be fir'd. I confesse Oxoniensis may import the broils betwixt the Townsmen of Oxford, or Towns men and Scholars; but I conceive it properly to intend the contests betwixt Scholars and Scholars, which were observed predictional, as if their animosities were the Index of the Volume of the Land. Such who have time may exactly trace the truth hereof through our English Histories. Sure I am, there were shrewd bickerings betwixt the Southern and Northern men in Oxford in the reign of King Henry the third, not long before the bloody War of the Barons did begin. The like happened twice under King Richard the second, which seemed to be the Van-curreer of the fatal fights betwixt Lancaster and York. However this observation holds not negatively, all being peaceable in that place, and no broils at Oxford, sounding the alrum to our late civil dissentions. Princes. RICHARD Son to King Henry the second, and Queen Eleanor (was the sixth King since the Conquest, but second Native of England) born in the City of Oxford, Anno 1157. Whilest a Prince he was undutiful to his Father, or to qualifie the matter, over∣dutiful to his Mother, whose domestick quarrels he always espoused. To expiae his of∣fence when King, he with Philip King of France undertook a voyage to the Holy Land, where thorough the Treachery of Templary cowardize of the Greeks, diversity of the Climate, distance of the place, and differences betwixt Christian Princes, much time was spent, a mass of money expended, many lives lost, some honour atchieved, but little profit produced. Going to Palestine, he suffered ship-wrack, and many mischiefs on the coasts of Cyprus; coming for England thorow Germany, he was tost with a worse Land-Tempest, being (in pursuance of an old grudge betwixt them) taken prisoner by Leopaldu Duke of Austria. Yet this Coeur de Lion, or Lion-hearted King (for so was he commonly called) was no less Lion (though now in a Grate) than when at liberty, abating nothing of his high spirit in his behaviour. The Duke did not undervalue this his Royal Prisoner, prizing his person at ten years purchase, according to the [then] yearly revenue of the English Crown. This ransome of an hundred thousand pounds be∣ing paid, he came home; first reformed himself, and then mended many abuses in the
Land, and had done more, had not an unfortunate Arrow shot out of a besieged Ca∣stle in France, put a period to his life, Anno Dom. 1199. EDMUND, youngest Son to King Edward the first by Queen Margaret, was born at Woodstock, Aug. 5. 1301. he was afterwards created Earl of Kent, and was Tutor to his Nephew King Edward the third. In whose raign falling into the tempest of false, injurious and wicked envy, he was beheaded, for that he never dissembled his natural brotherly affection toward his Brother deposed, and went about when he was (God wot) murdered before (not knowing so much) to enlarge him out of prison, perswa∣ded thereunto by such as covertly practised his destruction. He suffered at Winchester the ninteenth of March, in the fourth of Edward the third. EDWARD, Eldest Son of King Edward the third, was born at Woodstock in this County, and bred under his Father (never abler Teacher met with an apter Scholar) in Marshal Discipline. He was afterwards termed the Black Prince, not so called from his complexion, which was fair enough (save when Sun-burnt in his Spanish expedition) nor from his conditions, which were courteous (the constant attender of Valour;) but from his atchievements dismal and black, as they appeared to the eyes of his enemies, whom he constantly overcame. But grant him black in himself, he had the fairest Lady to his Wife this Land and that age did afford, viz. Joane Countess of Salisbury and Kent, which though for∣merly twice a Widow, was the third time married unto him. This is she whose Ga∣ter (which now flourisheth again) hath lasted longer than all the Wardrobes of the Kings and Queens in England since the Conquest, continued in the Knighthood of that Order. This Prince died before his Father at Canterbury in the 46. year of his age, Anno Dom. 1376. whose Maiden success attended him to the grave, as never foyled in any undertakings. Had he survived to old age, in all probabilities the Wars between York and Lancaster had been ended before begun, I mean, prevented in him, being a person of merit and spirit, and in Seniority before any suspicion of such divisions. He left two Sons, Edward who died at seven years of age, and Richard, afterwards King, second of that name, both born in France, and therefore not coming within the compass of our Catalogue. THOMAS of Woodstock, youngest Son of King Edward the third, and Queen Phi∣lippa, was sirnamed of Woodstock, from the place of his Nativity. He was afterward Earl of Buckingham and Duke of Gloucester, created by his Nephew King Richard the second, who summoned him to the Parliament, by the Title of the Kings loving Uncle. He married Isabel one of the Co-heirs of Humphrey Bohun Earl of Essex, in whose right he became Constable of England; a dangerous place, when it met with an unruly ma∣nager thereof. But this Thomas was only guilty of ill tempered Loyalty, loving the King well, but his own humors better, rather wilful than hurtful; and presuming on the old maxime, Patruus est loco Parentis, An Uncle is in the place of a Father. He observed the King too nearly, and checked him too sharply; whereupon he was conveyed to Calis, and there strangled. By whose death King Richard being freed from the causeless fear of an Uncle, became exposed to the cunning Plots of his Cousin German, Henry Duke of Lancaster, who at last deposed him. This Thomas founded a fair Colledge at Playsie in Essex, where his body was first buried with all Solemnity, and afterward translated to Westminster. ANNE BEAUCHAMP was born at Mr. Dugdale in his Illustra∣tion of War∣wick-shire, pag 334. Cavesham in this County. Let her pass for a Princess (though not formally) reductively, seeing so much of History dependeth on her, as, Elevated. Depressed. 1. Being Daughter (and in fine sole Heir) to Richard Beaucamp, that most Martial Earl of Warwick. 2. Married to Richard Nevil Earl of Sarisbury and Warwick, commonly called
the Make-King, and may not she then by a courteous proportion be termed the Make∣Queen? 3. In her own and Husbands right, she was possessed of one hundred and fourteen Manors in several Shires. 4. Isabell, her eldest daughter, was married to George Duke of Clarence, and Anne, her younger, to Edward Prince of Wales, son of Henry the sixth, and after∣wards to King Richard the third. 1. Her Husband being killed at Barnet fight, all her land by Act of Parliament was setled on her two Daughters, as if she had been dead in Nature. 2. Being attainted (on her Husbands score) she was forced to flye to the San∣ctuary at Beauly in Hant-shire. 3. Hence she got her self privately into the North, and there lived a long time in a mean condition. 4. Her want was increased after the death of her two daughters, who may be presumed formerly to have secretly sup∣plyed her. I am not certainly informed when a full period was put by death to these her sad ca∣lamities. Saints. St. FRIDESWIDE was born in the City of Oxford, being daughter to Didan the Duke thereof. It happened that one Algarus, a noble young man, sollicited her to yield to his lust, from whom she miraculously escaped, he being of a sudden struck Pol. V. l. 5. hist. Breviar. sec. usum Sa∣rum. M. S. Rob. Buck. blind. If so, she had better success than as good a Virgin, the daughter to a greater and better father, I mean Thamar daughter of King David, not so strangely 2 Sam. 13. 14 secured from the lust of her brother. She was afterward made Abbess of a Monastery, erected by her father in the same City, which since is become part of Christ-church, where her body lyeth buried. It happened in the first of Queen Elizabeth, that the Scholars of Oxford took up the body of the wife of Peter Martyr, who formerly had been disgracefully buried in a dunghill, and interred it in the Tomb with the dust of St. Frideswide. Sandrs de sòl. Angl. l. 3. p. 344. Sanders ad∣deth, that they wrote this Inscription, (which he calleth Impium Epitaphium) Hic re∣quiescit Religio cum uperstitione: though the words being capable of a favourable sense on his side, he need not have been so angry. However we will rub up our old Poetry, and bestow another upon them: In tumulo fuerat Petri quae Martyris uxor, Hic cum Frideswida virgine jure jacet. Virginis intactae nihilum cum cedat honori, Conjugis in thalamo non temerata fides. Si facer Angligenis cultus mutetur, (at absit!) Ossa suum ervent mutua tuta locum. Intom'd with Frideswide, deem'd a Sainted maid, The Wife of Peter Martyr here is laid. And reason good, for Women chaste in mind, The best of Virgins come no whit behind. Should Popery return, (which God forefend!) Their blended dust each other would deend. Yet was there more than eight hundred years betwixt their several deaths, Saint Frideswide dying Anno 739. and is remembred in the Romish Calendar on the nine∣teenth day of October. St. EDWOLD was younger Gul. Malm. J. de Pont. Angl. hac de. Mrbert in fest. S.S. Brother to St. Edmund King of the East-Angles, so cruelly martyred by the Danes, and after his death that Kingdom not onely descended to him by right; but also by his Subjects importunity was pressed upon him. But he declined both, preferring rather a sollitary life and heavenly contemplation. In pur∣suance whereof he retired to Dorcester in this County, and to a Monastery called Corn∣house therein, where he was interred, and had in great veneration for his reputed mira∣cles after his death, which happened Anno Dom. 871. St. EDWARD the CONFESSOR was born at Speed▪ Chro. in the life of this King. I slip in this County, and became afterwards King of England, sitting on the Throne for many years, with much peace and prosperity. Famous for the first founding of Westminster Abby, and many other worthy ahievements. By Bale he is called Edvardus simplex, which may signifie either shallow or single; but (in what sense soever he gave it) we take it in the later. Sole and single he lived and dyed, never carnally conversing with St. Edith his Queen: which is beheld by diffe∣rent persons according to their different judgments, (coloured eyes make coloured ob∣jects)
some pitying him for defect or natural Impotence; others condemning him as affecting singelness, for want of Conjugal affection; others applauding it as an high pece of  and perfection. Sure I am, it opened a dore for forreign Competitors, and occasioned the Conquest of this Nation. He dyed Anno Dom. 1065. and lyeth buryed in Westminster Abby. Cardinals. ROBERT PULLEN or Bishop God∣win in h Ca∣talogue of Cardina's. Pullain or Pulley or Puley or Bullen or Pully, for thus vari∣ouslyS. N. is he found written. Thus the same name passing many mouths seems in some sort to be declined into several Cases, whereas indeed it still remaineth one and the same word, though differently spelled and pronounced. In his youth e studied at Paris, whence he came over into England in the reign of King Henry the Fist, when learning ran very low in Oxford, the university there being first much afflcted by Herald the Dane, afterwards almost extinguished by the cruelty of he Conqueror. Our Pullen improved his utmost power with the King and Prelates for the restoring thereof, and by his J Bale & J. Pits de script. Bit. praying, preaching, and publick reading, gave a great advancement thereunto. Remarkable is his character in the Chronicle of Cied by Mr.  in Oxsord-shire. Osny, Robertus Pulenius scriptur as divin as quae in Anglia obsolverant apud Oxoniam legere cpit, Robert Pullen began to read at Oxford the holy scriptures which were grown out of fashion in England. The fame of his lerning commended him beyond the Seas, and it is remarkable, that whereas it is usual with Popes (in policy to unravel what such weaved who were before them) three successive Popes continued their love to, and increased honours upon him: 1. Innocent courteously sent for him to Rome. 2. Celestine created him Cardinal of St. Eusebius, Anno 1144. 3. Lucius the second made him Chancellor of the Church of Rome. He lived at Rome in great respect, and although the certain date of his death cannot be collected, it happened about the year of our Lord, 1150. THOMAS JOYCE or Jorce, a . script. . cent. 4. num. 89. & Pits in Anno 1311. Dominican, proceeded Doctor of Divinity in Ox∣ford,S. N. and living there he became Provincial of his Order, both of England and Wales. From this place without ever having any other preferment, Pope Clement the fifth created him Cardinal of St. Sabine; though some conceive he wanted breadth propor∣tionable to such an height of dignity, having no other revenue to maintain it, Cardinals being accounted Kings fellow, in that Age. Others admire at the contradiction be∣twixt Fryers pofession and practice, that persons so low should be so high, so poor so rich; which makes the same men to , that so chaste might be so wanton. He is remarkable on this account, that he had Idem ut prius. six brethren all Dominicans. I will not listen to their compaison, who resemble them to the seven sons of Acts 15. 14. Sceva, which were Exorcists; but may term them a week of brethren, whereof this Rubricated Car∣dinal was the Dominical letter. There want not those who conceive great vertue in the youngest son of these seven, and that his Touch was able to cure the Popes Evil. This Thomas, as he had for the most time lived in Oxford, so his Corps by his own desire were buried in his Convent therein. He flourished Anno Dom. 1310. Prelates. HERBERT LOSING was born in Godwins  of the Bishops of Norwich, pag. 8. Oxford, his father being an Abbot, seeing wives in that Age were not forbidden the Clergy, though possibly his father turned Abbot of Winchester in his old age, his son purchasing that preferment for him. But this Herbert bought a better for himself, giving nineteen hundred pounds to King William Rufus for the Bishoprick of Thetford. Hence the Verse was made, Filius est Praesul, pater Abbas, Simon uterque.
Meaning that both of them were guilty of Simony, a fashionable sin in the reign of that King, preferring more for their gifts than their endowments. Reader, pardon a digression: I am confident there is one, and but one, sin frequent in the former Age, both with Clergy and Laity, which in our dayes our Land is not guil∣ty of, and may find many compurgators of her innocence therein: I mean the sin of Si∣mony, seeing none in our Age will give any thing for Church livings; partly because the persons presented thereunto have no assurance to keep them, partly because of the uncertainty of Tithes for their maintenance. But whether this our Age hath not added in sarilege what it wanteth in simony, is above my place to discuss, and more above my power to decide. To return to our Herbert, whose character hitherto cannot entitle him to any room in our Catalogue of Worthies; but know that afterwards he went to Rome, (no such clean washing as in the water of Tyber) and thence returned as free from fault as when first born. Thus cleansed from the Leprosie of simony he came back into England, re∣moved his Bishoprick from Thetford to Norwich, laid the first stone, and in effect fini∣shed the fair Cathedral therein, and built five beautiful Parish Churches. He dyed Anno Dom. 1119. See more of his character, on just occasion, in Suffolk under the title of Prelates. OWEN OGLETHORP was (saith my Bishop God∣win in his Bi∣shops of Car∣lile. Author) born of good parentage, and IA M P. conjecture a Native of this County, finding Owen Oglethorp his Kinsmn twice High∣Sheriff thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. He was President of Magaalen Col∣lege in Oxford, Dean of Windsor, and at last made Bishop of Carlile by Queen Mary. A good natur'd man, and when single by himself very plyable to please Queen Elizabeth, whom he crowned Queen, which the rest of his Order refused to do: but when in con∣junction with other Popish Bishops, such principles of stubbornness were distilled into him, that it cost him his . However an Sir John Har∣rington in his Addition to Bishop God∣win. Author tells me, that the Queen had still a favour for him, intending his restitution either to his own or a better Bishoprick, upon the promise of his general conformity, had he not dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy, 1559. Since the Reformation. JOHN UNDERHILL was born in the City of  of New-college, Anno 1563. Oxford, sirst bred in New college, and afterwards Rector of Lincoln-college in that University; Chaplain to Queen Eli∣zabeth, and esteemed a good Preacher in those dayes. The Bishoprick of Oxford had now been void 22. years; and some suspected that so long a Vacancy would at last terminate in a Nullity, and that See be dissolved. The ause that Church was so long a widow, was the want of a competent Estate to prefer her: At last the Queen 1589. appointed John underhill Bishop thereof. An ingeni∣ous Sir John Har∣rington in the Bishops of Ox∣sord. Pen (but whose accusative suggestions are not alwayes to be believed) hinteth a suspition, as if he gave part of the  portion this Church had to a great Courtier, which made the match betwixt them. He dyed 1592. and lyeth buried in the middle Quire of Christs Church. JOHN BANCROFT was born at Ascot in this County, and was advanced by Arch∣bishop Bancroft his Uncle, from a Student in Christ-church, to be Master of university∣college in Oxford. Here it cost him much pains and expence in a long suit to recover and settle the ancient Lands of that Foundation. Afterwards he was made Bishop of Oxford, and during his sitting in that See he renewed no Leases, but let them run out for the advantage of his successor. He obtained the Royalty of Shot-over for, and an∣nexed the Vicarige of Cudsden to, his Bishoprick; where he built a fair Palace and a Chappel, expending on both about three thousand five hundred pounds; Cujus munificentiae (said the Oxford Orator of him to the King at Woodstock) debemus, quod in∣certi Laris Mitra, surrexerit è pulvere in Palatium. But now by a retrograde motion that fair building, è Palatio recidit in pulverem, being burnt down to the ground in the late wars, but for what advantage, as I do not know, so I list not to enquire. This Bishop dyed Anno Dom. 1640.
States=Men. Sir DUDLEY CARLETON Knight, was born in this County, bred a Student in Christ-church in Oxford. He afterwards was related as a Secretary to Sir Ralph Winwood Ambassador in the Low-Countries, when K. James resigned the cautionary Towns to the States. Here he added so great experience to his former learning, that afterwards our King imployed him for twenty years together Ambassador in Venice, Savoy, and the united Provinces; Anne Garrard his Lady (co-heir to George Garrard, Esq) accompa∣nying him in all his travels, as is expressed in her Epitaph in Westminster Abby. He was by King Charles the first created Baron of Imbercourt in Surrey, and after∣wards Viscount Dorchester, marying for his second wife the daughter of Sir Henry Glen∣ham, the Relict of Paul Viscount Banning, who survived him. He succeeded the Lord Conway, (when preferred President of the Council) in the Secretary-ship of State, be∣ing sworn at White-hall, Decemb. 14. 1628. He dyed without issue Anno Dom. 163.. assigning his burial (as appears on her Tomb) with his first wife, which no doubt was performed accordingly. Souldiers. Of the NORRISES and the KNOWLLS. No County in England can present such a brace of Families contemporaries, with such a bunch of Brethren on either, for eminent atchievements. So great their states and stomachs, that they often justled together: and no wonder if Oxford-shire wanted room for them, when all England could not hold them together. Let them be consi∣dered root and branch, first severally, then conjunctively. Father. Mother. Father. Mother. Henry Lord Nor∣ris (descended from the Viscounts Lo∣vels) whose father dyed in a man∣ner Martyr for the Queens mother, ex∣ecuted about the businesse of Anna Bullen. Margaret, one of the daughters and heirs of John Lord Williams of Tame, Keeper of Queen Elizabeth whilest in restraint under her sister, and civil unto her in those dange∣rous dayes. Sir Francis Knowlls Treasurer to the Q. houshold, & Knight of the Garter, (who had been an exile in Germany under Q. Mary) deriving him∣self from Sir Robert Knowlls that con∣quering Comman∣der in France. —Cary, sister to Henry Lord Huns∣don, and Cousin∣german to Queen Elizabeth, having Mary Bullen for her mother. Thus Queen Elizabeth beheld them both, not onely with gracious but grateful eyes. Ricot in this County was their chief habitation. Thus the Husband was allied to the Queen in conscience, (Fellow-sufferers for the Protestant cause) the Wife in kinred. Grays in this County was their chief dwel∣ling. Their Issue. 1. William, Marshall of Barwick, who dyed in Ireland, and was father to Francis afterward Earl of Bark-shire. 2. Sir John, who had Cambdens Ez. in Anno 1578. three horses in one day killed under him in a Battel a∣gainst the Scots. But more of him here∣after. 3. Sir Thomas, President of Munster. Being hurt in a Fight, and counting it a scratch rather then a wound, he scorned to have it plaistered; as if the Balsom of his
body would cure it self: but it rancled, festred, gangreen'd, and he dyed thereof. 4. Sir Henry, who dyed about the same time in the same manner. 5. Maximilian, who was slain in the war of Britain. 6. Sir Edward, who lead the Front at the taking of the Groyn; and fought so va∣liantly at the Siege of Ostend. Of all six he onely survived his Parents. Their Issue. 1. Sir Henry, whose daughter and sole heir was married to the Lord Paget. 2. Sir William, Treasurer of the hous∣hold to K. James, by whom he was crea∣ted Baron Knowlls, May 3. 1603. Viscount Wallingford, 1616. and by K. Charles 1. in the first of his reign Earl of Banbury. 3. Sir R. father to Sir Robert Knowlls of Greys, now living. 4. Sir Francis, who was living at, and chosen a Member of the late Long Parlia∣ment; since dead, aged 99. 5. Sir Thomas, a Commander in the Low-Countries. 6. Lettice, though of the weaker sex, may well be recounted with her brethren, as the strongest pillar of the Family. Se∣cond wife she was to R. Dudley, Earl of Lei∣cester, and (by a former husband) mother to R. Devereux Earl of Essex; both prime Favourites in their Generations. The Norrises were all, Martis pulli, men of the sword, and never out of military im∣ployment. The Knowlls were rather valiant men than any great souldiers, as little ex∣perienced in war. Queen Elizabeth loved the Knowlls for themselves, the Norrises for themselves and herself, being sensible that she needed such martial men for her service. The Norrises got more honour abroad, the Knowlls more profit at home, conversing con∣stantly at Court; and no wonder if they were the warmest, who sate next to the Fire. There was once a Challenge passed betwixt them at certain Fragmenta Rgalia in Knowlls. Exercises, to be tryed between the two Fraternities, the Queen and their aged Fathers being to be the Spe∣ctators and Judges, till it quickly became a at quarrel betwixt them. Thus, though at the first they may be said to have fenced with rebated Rapiers and swords buttoned up, in merriment onely to try their skill and strength, they soon fell to it at sharps indeed, seeking for many years together to supplant one another, such the heart-smoking, and then heart-burning betwixt them. And although their inclinations kept them asunder, the one Brother-hood coming seldom to Court, the other seldomer to Camp; yet the Knowlls are suspected to have done the Norrises bad offices, which at last did tend to their mutual hurt; so that it had been happy for both, had these their contests been seaso∣nably turned into a cordial compliance. Sir JOHN NORRIS must be resumed, that we may pay a greater Tribute of re∣spect to his memory. He was a most accomplished General, both for a charge, which is the Sword; and a retreat, which is the Shield, of War. By the later he purchased to himself immortal praise, when in France he brought off a small hand-full of English from a great arm-full of enemies; fighting as he retreated, and retreating as he fought; so that alwayes his Reer affronted the Enemy. A retreat worth ten victories got by sur∣prise, which speak rather the fortune, than either the valour or discretion of a Ge∣nerall. He was afterwards sent over with a great Command into Ireland, where his success neither answered to his own care, nor others expectation. Indeed hitherto Sir John had fought with right-handed enemies in France and the Netherlands, who was now to fight with left-handed foes, for so may the Wilde-Irish well be termed, (so that this great Ma∣ster of Defence was now to seek a new guard) who could lye on the coldest earth, swim through the deepest water, run over what was neither earth nor water, I mean, bogs and marishes. He found it far harder to find out than fight his enemies, they so secured them∣selves in Fastnesses. Supplies, sown thick in promises, came up thin in performances; so slowly were succours sent unto him. At last a great Lord was made Lieutenant of Ireland, of an opposite party to Sir John; there being Animosities in the Court of Queen Elizabeth, (as well as of later Princes) though her general good success rendred them the less to the publick notice of posterity. It grieved Sir John to the heart, to see one of an opposite Faction should be brought over his head, in so much that some conceive his working soul broke the cask of his body, as wanting a vent for his grief and anger; for going up into his Cham∣ber, at the first hearing of the News he suddenly dyed, Anno Dom. 1597.
Queen Elizabeth used to call the Lady Margaret, his mother, her own Crew, being (as it seemeth) black in complexion, (a colour which no whit unbecame the faces of her Martial issue;) and upon the news of his death sent this Letter unto her, which I have transcribed from an Authntick Copy. To the Lady Norris. 22 Sept. 1597. My own Crow: Harm not your self for bootless help, but shew a good example to comfort your dolorous Yoke-fellow. Although We have deferred long to represent to you Our grid thoughts, because We liked full ill to yield you the first reflection of misfor∣tune, whom We have alwayes rather sought to cherish and comfort; yet knowing now, that Necessity must bring it to your ear, and Nature consequently must move both grief and passion in your heart; We resolved no longer to smother, neither Our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of Our grief for your loss. Wherein, if it be true, That society in sorrow works diminution, We do assure you by this true messen∣ger of Our Mind, that Nature can have stirred no more dolorous affection in you as a Mother for a dear Son, than gratefulness and memory of his service past, hath wrought ms his Sovereign, apprehension of Our miss for so worthy a Servant. But now that Natures common work is done, and he that was born to dye hath paid his tribute, let that Christian discretion stay the flux of your immoderate grieving, which hath instructed you both by Example and Knowledge, that nothing in this kind hath happened, but by GODS Divine Providence. And let these lines from your loving and gracious Sovereign serve to assure you, that there shall ever appear the lively character of Our Estimation of him that was, in Our gracious care of you and yours that are left, in valuing rightly all their faithful and honest endeavours. More at this time We will not write of this unpleasant subject, but have dispatched this Gent. to visit both your Lord and you, and to condole with you in the true sense of your love, and to pray that the world may see, what time cureth in a weak mind, that Discretion and Moderation helpeth in you in this accident, where there is so just cause to demonstrate true Patience and Moderation. Your gracious and loving Sovereign, E. R. Now, though nothing more consolatory and pathetical could be written from a Prince, yet his death went so near to the heart of the Lord, his ancient father, that he dyed soon after. Writers. JOHN HANVILE took his name (as I conceive) from Hanwell a Village in thisA M P. County, (now the habitation of the ancient Family of the Copes) seeing none other in England, both in sound and spelling, draweth nearer to his Sirname. He proceeded Master of Arts in Oxford, then studied in Paris, and travelled over most parts in Chri∣stendom. He is commonly called Bale de script. Brit. cent. 3. nu. 49. Archithrenius, or Price of lamentation, being another Jeremy and man of mourning. He wrote a book, wherein he bemoned the errors and vices of his own Age; and himself deserved to live in a better: Yet this doleful Dove could peck as well as grone, and somtimes was Idem ibid. satyrical enough in his passion, there be∣ing but a narrow age betwixt grief and anger; and bitterness is a quality common to them both. He flourished under King John, Anno 1200. and after his return from his travels, is conceived by some to have lived and dyed a Benedictine of St. Albans.
JOHN of OXFORD was no doubt so named from his birth in that City; other∣wise had he onely had his Education or eminent learning therein, there were hundreds Johns of Oxford as well as himself. Hector Boethius In the Pre∣face of his Hi∣story to James King of Scot∣land. sirnamed him a Vado Boum, and ow∣neth him the next Historian to Jeffrey Monmouth in age and industry. He was a great Anti-Becketist, as many more in that Age of greater learning (except stubornness be made the standard thereof) than Becket himself: Being Bale de script. Bri. cent. 3. num 42. Dean of old Sarm, and Chap∣lain to King Henry the second, he was by him imployed with others, to give an account to the Pope (but I question wheher he would take it) of the Kings carriage in the busi∣ness of Becket. He was preferred Anno 1175. Bishop of Norwich, where he repaired his Bishop God∣win in th Bi shop o Nor∣wich. Cathedral, lately defaced with fire, built a fair Almes-house, and Trinity-church in Ipswich. His death happened Anno Dom. 1200. ROBERT BACON, Ble de scrip. Brit. cent. 4. num. 4. & Pts in Anno 1248 first Scholer of, afterward a familiar Friend to, St. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, was bred a Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and when aged be∣cameS. N. a Dominican or preaching Fryer; and for his Sermons he was highly esteemed by King Henry the third. He was M. Paris An 1233. p. 386. Lepidus & Cynicus, and a most profest enemy to Peter Roach Bishop of Winchester. Mathew ParisAnno 128. p 747. gives him and another (viz. Richard de Fishakle) this praise, Quibus non erant majores, imò nec pares (ut creditur) viventes in Theologia, & aliis scientiis: and I listen the rather to his commendation, because being himself a Benedictine Monk, he had an antipathy against all Fryers. I behold this Robert Bacon as the senior of all the Bacons, which like tributary streams disembogued themselves, with all the credit of their actions, into Roger Bacon, who in process of time hath monopolized the honour of all his Sirname-sakes in Oxford. Our Robert dyed Anno Dom 1248. ROBERT of OXFORD was not onely an Admirer, but Adorer of Thomas Aqui∣nas his contemporary; accounting his Opinions Oracles, as if it were a venial sin to doubt of, and a mortal to deny any of them. Mean time the Bishop of Paris, with the consent of the Masters of Sorbonne, (the great Champions of liberty in this kind) granted a licence to any Scholer, Opinari de opinionibus, to guess freely (and by conse∣quence to discuss in Disputations) any mans Opinions, which as yet by a general Coun∣cil were not decided matters of faith. Our Rober, much offended thereat,Bale de script. Brit. cent. 4. wrote not onely against Henricus Gandavensis and Aegiius Romanus, but also the whole Col∣lege of Sorbonne: an act beheld of many as of more boldness than brains, for a private person to perform. He flourished under King Henry the third, Anno Dom. 1270. JEFFREY CHAUCER was by most probability born at Woodstock in this County, though other places lay stiff claim to his Nativity. Berk-shires title. Londons title. Oxford shires title. Leland confesseth it like∣ly that he was born in Ba∣rochensi provincia, andIn his Brit. in Berk-shire. Mr. Cambden avoweth that Dunington-castle nigh un∣to Newburie was anciently his Inheritance. There was lately an old Oake standing in the Park called Chaucers Oake. The Author of his life, set forth 1602. proveth him born in London, out of these his own words in the Testament of love: Also in the Citie of London, that is to me ot deare and swéete, in which I was foorth growne; and more kindely love have I to that place than to any other in yerth, (as every kindely creature hath full ap∣petite to that place of his kind∣ly ingendure. Besides, Mr. Cambden praiseth Mr. Edmund Spen∣cer the Londoner for the best Poet,In his Eliza∣beth, An. 1598. Ne Chaucero qui∣dem concive excepto, Chau∣cer himself his fellow-citi∣zen not being excepted. Leland addeth a proba∣bility of his birth in Ox∣ford-shire, andIn his Brit. in Oxford-shire Cambden saith of Woodstock, Cu ni∣hil habeat quod ostentet, H∣merum nostrum Anglicum, Galfredum Chaucerum a∣lumnum suum fuisse gloria∣tur. Besides,D Ang. script. Anno 1400. . Pits is po∣sitive that his father was a Knight, and that he was born at Woodstock. And Queen Elizabeth passed a fair stone-house next to her Palace in that Town, unto the Tenant by the name of Chaucers house, whereby it is also known at this day.
Now, what is to be done to decide the difference herein? Indeed Appion the Gram∣marian would have Homer (concerning whose Birth-place there was so much contro∣versie) raised ab Inferis, that he might give a true account of the place of his Nativity. However our Chaucer is placed hee, (having just grounds for the same) untill stronger reasons are brought to remove him. He was a terse and elegant Pot, (the Homer of his Age) and so refined our English Tongue, Bale d . . . 7 num. 14. Ut inter expolitas gentium linguas potuit rectè quidem connumerari. His skill in Mathematicks was great, (being instructed therein by Joannes Sombus and Nicholas of Linn) which he evidenceth in his book De Sphaera. He being Contemporary with Gower, was living Anno Dom. 1402. Since the Reformation. THOMAS LYDYATE. Now I find the old sentence to be true, Difficile fugitivas mortuorum memorias retrahere, seeing all my industry and inquiry can retrive very little of this worthy person; and the Reader, I hope, will not be angry with me, who am so much grieved with my self for the same. Indeed contradicting qualities met in him, E∣minency and Obscurity; the former for his Learning, the later for his Living. All that we can recover of him is as followeth▪ He was born at New-college Reg. in Anno 1593. Alkerton in this County, bred first in Winchester school, then in New college in Oxford, being admitted therein Iune 22. 1593. An admirable Mathematician, witness these his learned Works left to posterity: 1. De variis Annorum Formis. 2. De natura Coeli & conditione Elemen∣torum. 3. Praelectio Astronomica. 4. De origine Fontium. 5. Disquisitio Phisiologica. 6. Explicatio & additameutnm Arg. temp. nat. & ministerii Christi. In handling of these subjects, it seems, he crossed Scalliger, who was highly offended thereat, conceiving himself such a Prince of Learning, it was high Treason for any to doubt of, much more deny, his opinion: Yea, he conceited his own Judgment so cano∣nical, that it was Heresie for any inferiour person to differ from the same. Shall Scalliger write a book of the Emendation of Times, and should any presume to write one of the Emendation of Scalliger? especially one no publick Professor, and so private a person as Lydyate? However this great Bugbear Critick, finding it more easie to contemn the per∣son, than confute the arguments of his Adversary, sleighted Lydyate as inconside∣rable, jeering him for a Prophet, who indeed somewhat traded in the Apocalyptical Divinity. Learned men of unbiassed judgments will maintain, that Lydyate had the best in that Contest, but here it came to pass what Eccle. 9. 16. Solomon had long before observed, Neverthe∣less the poor mans wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. He never attained higher Church-preferment than the Rectory of Alkerton the Town of his Nativity, and deserted that (as I have cause to suspect) before his death. Impute his low condition to these causes, 1. The nature of his Studies, which being Mathematical and Speculative, brought not, , Grist to the mill. 2. The nature of his Nature, being ambitious of Privity and Concealment. 3. The death of Prince Henry, (whose Library-keeper he was) and in whose Grave Lydyates hopes were interred. 4. His disaffection to Church-discipline, and Ceremonies used therein: though such wrong his memory, who represent him an Anabaptist. His modesty was as great as his want, which he would not make known to any. Sir William Boswell, well understanding his worth, was a great friend unto him; and so was Bishop Williams. He dyed about Westminster, as I take it, in the year of our Lord, 1644. Happy had it been for posterity, if on his death-bed he could have bequeathed his Learning to any surviving Relation. Sir RICHARD BAKER Knight, was a Native of this County, and High-Sheriff
thereof in the 18. of King James, Anno Dom. 1621. His youth he spent in learning, the benefit whereof he reaped in his old age, when his Estate thorough Surety-ship (as I have heard him complain) was very much impair'd: But God may smile on them, on whom the World doth frown; whereof his pious old age was a memorable in∣stance, when the storm on his Estate forced him to flye for shelter to his studies and de∣votions. He wrote an Exposition on the Lords prayer, which is corrival with the best Comments which professed Divines have written on that subject. He wrote a Chronicle on our English Kings, imbracing a method peculiar to himself, digesting Ob∣servables under several heads, very useful for the Reader. This reverend Knight left this troublesome world about the beginning of our Civil wars. WILLIAM WHATELEY was born in Banbury, (whereof his father was twice Mayor) and bred in Christs-college in Cambridge. He became afterwards Minister in the Town of his Nativity; and though generally people do not respect a Prophet or Preacher when a Man, whom they knew whilest a Child; yet he met there with deser∣ved reverence to his Person and Profession. Indeed he was a good Linguist, Philoso▪ pher, Mathematician, Divine; and (though a Poetical Satyrical Pen is pleas'd to pass a jeer upon him) free from Faction. He first became known to the world by his book cal∣led the Bride-bushe, which some say hath been more condemned than confuted, as maintaining a Position rather odious than untrue: But others hold that blows given from so near a Relation to so near a Relation, cannot be given so lightly, but they will be taken most heavily. Other good Works of his have been set forth since his death, which happened in the 56. year of his age, Anno Dom. 1639. JOHN BALLE The sub∣stance of his Character is taken out of his life writ∣ten by Mr. Sa∣muel Clarke. was born at Casfigton (four miles North-west of Oxford) in this County, an obscure Village, onely illustrated by his Nativity. He proceeded Batche∣lor of Arts in Brazen-nose college in Oxford, (his Parents purse being not able to main∣tain him longer) and went into Cheshire, untill at last he was beneficed at Whitmore in the County of Stafford. He was an excellent School man and School-master, (qualities seldom meeting in the same man) a painful Preacher, and a profitable Writer, and his Treatise of Faith cannot sufficiently be commended. Indeed he liv'd by faith, having but small means to maintain him, (but 20▪ pounds yearly Salary, besides what he got by teaching and boording his Scholers) and yet was wont to say he had enough, enough, enough: Thus contentment consisteth not in heaping on more fuell, but in taking away some fire. He had an holy facetiousness in his discourse, when his friend having had a fall from his horse, and said that he never had the like deliverance; Yea, (said Mr. Balle) and an hundred times when you never fell; accounting Gods preserving us from, equal to his rescuing us out of, dangers. He had an humble heart free from passion, and though somewhat disaffected to Ceremonies and Church-discipline, confuted such as conceived the corruptions therein ground enough for a separation. He hated all New Lights and pretended Inspirations besides Scripture; and when one asked him whe∣ther he at any time had experience thereof in his own heart, No (said he) I bless God, and if I should ever have such phantasies, I hope God would give me grace to resist them. Notwithstanding his small means he lived himself comfortably, relieved others chari∣tably, left his children competently, and dyed piously October the 20. Anno Dom. 1640. WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH was born in the City of Oxford, so that by the benefit of his birth he fell from the lap of his mother into the armes of the Muses. He was bred in Trinity college in this University; an acute and subtil Disputant, but unset∣led in judgment, which made him go beyond the Seas, and in some sort was conciled to the Church of Rome: but, whether because he found not the respect he expected, (which some shrewdly suggest) or because his Conscience could not close with all the Romish corruptions, (which more charitably believe) he returned into England, and in testimony of his true conversion wrote a book entituled, The Religion of Protestants a safe way to salvation, against Mr. Knot the Jesuit: I will not say, Malo nodo malus quae∣rendus est cuneus, but affirm no person better qualified than this Author, with all neces∣sary accomplishments to encounter a Jesuit. It is commonly reported that Dr. Pri∣deaux compared his book to a Lamprey, fit for food if the venemous string were taken
out of the back thereof: a passage in my opinion inconsistent with the Doctors appro∣bation, prefixed in the beginning of his book. This William Chillingworth was taken prisoner by the Parliament Forces at Arundel castle, and not surprised and slain in his studies, as Archimedes at the sacking of Syracuse, (as some have given it out) but ws safely conducted to Chichester, where notwithstanding hard usage hastened his disso∣lution. DANIEL FEATLY D. D. was born in (or very near to) the City of Oxford, his father being a servant of Corpus-Christi college, and this his son Fellow thereof. Here he had the honour to make the Speech in the College, at the Funeral of Dr. Reynalds. Some men may be said to have mutinous parts, which will not obey the com∣mands of him who is the owner of them: Not so this Doctor, who was perfect Ma∣ster of his own Learning. He did not, as Quintilian saith of some, Occultis thesaur is incumbere; but his learning was, in numerato, for his present using thereof. He was as good in the Schools as in the Pulpit, and very happy in his Disputes with Papists; for in the Conference with F. Fisher, (when Fisher was caught in his own Net) though Dr. White did wisely cast that Net, Dr. Featly did help strongly to draw it to the shore. It seems, though he was in, yet he was not of, the late Assembly of Divines; as whose body was with them, whilest his heart was at Oxford: Yea, he discovered so much in a Letter to the Archbishop of Armagh, which being intercepted he was pro∣ceeded against as a Spie, and closely imprisoned, though finding some favour at last, he dyed in the Prison College at Chelsey, Anno Dom. 1643. His Wifes son hath since communicated to me his Pocket-Manual of his memorable observations, all with his own hand; but alas to be read by none but the writer thereof. JOHN WHITE (descended from the Whites in Hant-shire) was born at Where his father held a Lease from New-college. Stanton∣St. Johns in this County, bred first in Winchester, then New-college in Oxford, whereof he was Fellow; and fixed at last a Minister at Dorchester in Dorcet-shire well nigh forty years. A grave man, yet without moroseness, as who would willingly contribute his shot of facetiousness on any just occasion. A constant Preacher, so that in the course of his Ministery he expounded the Scripture all over, and half over again; ha∣ving an excellent faculty in the clear and solid interpreting thereof. A good Gover∣nor, by whose wisdom the Town of Dorchester (notwithstanding a casual merciless fire) was much enriched; Knowledge causing Piety, Piety breeding Industry, and In∣dustry procuring Plenty unto it. A beggar was not then to be seen in the Town, all able Poore being set on work, and impotent maintained by the profit of a publique Brew house, and other collections. He absolutely commanded his own Passions, and the purses of his Parishioners, whom he could wind up to what height he pleased on important occasions. He was free from covetousness, if not trespassing on the contrary: and had a Patriarchal influ∣ence both in Old and New-England, yet towards the end of his dayes Factions and fond Opinions crept in his flock; a new generation arose, which either did not know, or would not acknowledge this good man; disloyal persons, which would not pay the due respect to the Crown of his old age, whereof he was sadly and silently sensible. He was chosen one of the Assembly of Divines, and his judgment was much relied on therein. He married the sister of Dr. Burges, the great Non-conformist, (who af∣terwards being reclaimed wrote in the defence of Ceremonies) by whom he left four sons, and dyed quietly at Dorchester, Anno Dom. 164.. I hope that Eccles. 9. 15 Solomons observation of the poor wise man, who saved the little City, [Yet no man remembred him] will not be verified of this Town, in relation to this their deceased Pastor, whom I hope they will not, I am sure they should not, forget, as a person so much meriting of them in all considerations. His Comment on some part of Genesis is lately set forth, and more daily expected.
Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. THOMAS TISDALL, of Glimpton in this County, Esquire; deceasing Anno 1610. bequeathed five thousand pounds to George Abbot then Bishop of London, John Bennet Knight, and Henry Aray Doctor of Divinity, to purchase Lands for the main∣tainance of seven Fellows and six Scholers: which money deposited in so careful hands, was as advantagiously expended for the purchase of two hundred and fifty pounds per annum. It fell then under consideration, that it was pity so great a bounty (substantial enough to stand of it self) should be Some inten∣tions there were to have made it an ad∣dition to Bali∣ol Colledge. adjected to a former Foundation; whereupon a new College (formerly called Broad-gates-hall in Oxford) was erected therewith by the name of Pembroke-College, which since hath met with some considerable Benefactors. May this the youngest College in England have the happiness of a youngest child, who com∣monly have in their mothers love, what they lack in the land of their father. We must not forget, that the aforesaid Thomas Tisdall gave many other charitable Legasies, and deserved very well of Abington-school, founding an Usher therein. Memorable Persons. ANNE GREENE, a person unmarried, was indicted, arraigned, cast, condemned and executed, for killing her child, at the Assizes at Oxford, Decemb. 14. 1650. After some hours her body being taken down, and prepared for dissection in the Anatomy∣schools, some heat was found therein, which by the care of the Doctors was improved into her perfect recovery. Charitable people interpret her so miraculous preservation a Compurgator of her innocence. Thus she intended for a dead, continues a living Anatomy of divine Providence, and a monument of the wonderful contrivances there∣of. If Hippolytus, revived onely by Poetical fancies, was surnamed Virbius, because twice a man; why may not Mulierbia, by as good proportion, be applied to her? who since is married, and liveth in this County in good reputation. Lord Mayors. Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1. John Norman John Norman Banbury Draper 1453 2. Thomas Pargitor John Pargitor Chippingnorton Salter 1530 3. Michael Dormer Jeffrey Dormer Tame Mercer 1541 The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. William Bishop of Lincoln   William de Lovell, chiv. Commissioners to take the Oaths. Stephen Haytfeld Knights for the Shire.   Richard Quatermayns Knights for the Shire.   Tho. Wikeham, chiv. Lodowici Grevill Iohannis Wisham Iohan. Banufo Humphridi Hay Iohannis Tyso Will. Thomlyns Thome Andrey Thome atte Mille Iohannis Benet Rad. Archer Ioh. Archer Thome Willes Iohannis Perysson Ioh. Crosse de Sibford Thome Eburton Thome Kynch Willielmi Brise Willielmi Dandy Richardi Stanes Iohannis Wallrond Iohannis Daypoll Iohannis Fabian VVill. Page Iohannis Mose Williel. Seton Iohannis Pytte Thome Helmeden Tho. Scholes Thome Sperehawke Thome Gascoine Thome Clere Ioh. Goldwell Williel. Goldwell Iohannis White Thome Lynne Will. Smith de Blox∣ham Thome Chedworth Willielmi Haliwell
Ioh. Chedworth Ioh. de Berford Robert: Qinaton Richardi atte Mille Willielmi Mason Willielmi almer Thome Tymmes Ioh. Cross de Drayton Alexandri Byfeld Iob. Andrew de Bo∣dycote Thome Serchesden Theme Feteplace, ar. Tho. Hastyng, ar. Will. wallweyn, ar. Ioh. Hille ar. Ioh. Lcmilt Thome Mayor Iohannis Hood Will. Gayte Iohannis Martyn Thome Martyn ill. Fycheler Will. Brayn Nicholai Wenne Iohannis Leche Will. Leche Richardi Fremantle Roberti Carpenter icardi Colas ill. Coteler Richardi Coteler Iohannis Punter Henrici Suthwik Ihannis Fawlour Iohannis Moser Ioh Wynchelcombe Will. Style Thome Vyncent ohannis Bcdyll Iohannis Trilling Thome Marshall Iohannis Walker Will. walker Simonis Walker Thome Brys Thome Mede Ioh. Freman de Pole Thome Chalkele Ioh. Godefllawe Iohannis Abraham Iohannis Turfray Richardi Howkyn Rob. Bocher de Witte∣ney Iohannis Rous Stephani Cornewaill Iohannis Iurdan Iohannis Bronne Iohannis Willeney Wllielmi Fellawe Iohannis Pere Iohan. Bray Richardi Wellwe Willielmi Wynn Will. Whittington Willielmi Dagbill Will. Dustelyng Iohannis Danvers Thome Mason Iohan. Aylsworth Iohan. Waver Henici Frebody Richardi Hapour VVill. Shitford Roberti Shitford Hugonis Culworthe Ioh. Danus ∣dynton Richardi Touchestre Thome Blexham Rogere Predy VVill. Drynkwater Thome VVykham de Swalelyf VVill. VVillingham Roberti Campden VValteri Snappe Richardi Rue Thome Spycer Ioh. Draper Thome Peny Thome Harys Iohannis Flore Will. Rothe Ioh. Etterton VVill. VVitteney Will. Wych Ioh. Potter Ioh. Fletewell Richardi Eton Ioh. arner Will. Standell Richardi Sclaytey de Shorldbury Ioh. Folke Tho. Takle Bayle Thome Abbatis de Eynesham Richardi Walkestede, chiv. Ioh. Blount, ar. Will. Marmyon Thome Halle Ioh. Lydier Will. Berkingham Will. Rash Ioh. Whighthill Roberti Croxford Thome Carwell Thome Yerman Ioh. Somerton Will. Somerton Roberti Hare Court Simonis Somerton Thome Harlyngrigge Will. Horncastle Ioh. Yerman Ioh. Colles Ioh. Bourman de Da∣dyngton Thome Magon Thome Pricket Thome Pebworth Walteri Jouster Rogeri Jouster Ioh. Cobwell Ioh. Bingham Ioh. Tymmes Will. Frere Thome Maykyn Richardi Tanner de Wodstock Willielmi Weller Ioh. Swift Richardi Stevenes Richardi Marchall Richardi Chapman Thome Snareston Ioh. Bridde Richardi Aston Will. Parsons Thome Payne Ioh. Nethercote Stephani Humpton Will. Romney Ioh. Romney Roberti Rye Will. Swift Will. Harryes Ioh. Tanner de Eyne∣sham Will. Madle Thome Millward Ioh. Fisher Ioh. Webbe Edm. Rammesby Iacobi Howes Iac. Bocher de Stuns∣feld Ioh. Megre Ioh. Hae de Barton Phillippi Frere Ioh. Frere Ioh. Stowe Ioh. Knight Ioh. Kemster Will. Kemster Rob. Quaynaton Rob. More, ar. Rob. Alkerton Ioh. Chorleton Ioh. Eburton, jun. Ioh. Eburton, sen. Thome Eburton Ioh. Yonge Ioh. Balle Thome Balle Ioh. Eureshawe Galfridi Crewe Will. Tommys Will. Ayltan Ioh. Stokes Ioh. Walle Will. Smith de Che∣pyng Norton Iohannis Howes Thome Howes Willielmi Hide Rogeri Milton Iohannis Stacy Richardi Gurgan Iohannis Halle Iohannis Sampson Willielmi Sampson Thome Churchehill Thome Cogeyn Willielmi Cogeyn Richardi Bury Willielmi Houchyns Iohannis Channdyt Willielmi Bagge Will. Rollandright Thome Fayreford Ioh. Martyn Thome Tackle Will. Weller Ioh. Maynard Richardi Couper de Eastan Will. Wrench o h. Halle de Shor∣Ithamton Willielmi Tunford
Iohannis Tunford Iohannis Parkyns Rob. Raynald Ioh. Mucy Will. Carter de Over∣norton Tho. Balle de parva Rowlan-right Ioh. Hammond Ioh. Halle Ioh. Payne Ioh. Shawe Ioh. Silver Ioh. Brewes Tho. Spillesby Ioh. Salman Ioh. Potter, jun. Pri∣oris de Burcestre Ioh. Langeston Rogeri Powre Will. Anderne Ioh. Aston Ioh. Cornwaile Richardi Purcell Iacobi Samwell Rich. Fitz▪water Tho. Wyonbssh Ioh. Togood Rich. Togood Ioh. Spere Ioh. Shoue Nicholai Norris Thome Chapman Willielmi Durbare Thome Hoggys Thome Gurdon Tho. Markham Iohannis Lile Iohannis Sylvester Iohannis Balegh Iohannis Chantclere Ioh. Huntingdon Will. Baldyngton Iohan. Burdon Iohannis Fellipps de Overfayford Iohaunis Fellipps de Netherfayford Ioh. Smith de Mel∣lington Thome Smith de ea∣dem Iohan. Notebene de Fencote Will. Fitz water Ioh. Felmersham Iohannis Abbatis de Oseneye Iohannis Abbatis de Thame Edm. Prioris sancti Frideswide Tho. Baldington, jun. Tho. Baldington, sen. Ioh. Iacket Thome Welles Thome Longe Ioh. Ellys Rob. Crakeall Willielmi Tyller Ioh. Dogge Andree Sparewe Will. Loy, sen. Ioh. Chamberleyn Ioh. Shrovcbury Roberti Reve Ioh. Fryday Ioh. Mayhon Ioh. Hamond Will. Halfeknight Hugonis Benet de Thame VVill. Collyngrig Thome Credy Ioh. Savage bayly Ioh. Clifton Abbatis Dorcacestr. Ioh. Harpeden, chiv. Hug. Wolf, chiv. Thome Chancer, ar. Rich. Drayton, ar. Rich. Restold, ar. Petri Feteplace, ar. Will. Wikham, ar. Ioh. Fitz-Elys, ar. Reg. Barantyn, ar, Will. Lynde, ar. Rob. Simeon, ar. Drugonis Barantyn Ioh. Bedford Edmundi Forster Rich. Gilot Thome Chibenhurst Thome atte Hide Rogeri Radle Petri Shotesbroke Iohannis Hide Will. Ravenyng Willielmi Borde Williel. Skyrmet Iohannis Elmes Thome Vine Ioh. Hertilpole Tho. Clerk bayly Ioh. Bayly de Pu∣riton Iohannis Badley VVill. Bosenhe Thome Bartelot Rich. Calday Iohannis Crips Williel. North Iohannis atte Water Roberti atte Water Rich. Forster Thome Denton Thome atte Well de Garsingden Iohannis Holt Nicholai Neuby Ioh. Thomley Will. Bele Iohannis Lowe Rob. Hye Ioh. Bullery Ioh. Fitz Aleyn Ioh. Waly by clerici Thome Tretherft Tho. Balingdon, sen. Ioh. Smith Ioh. Skynner Rich. English Rob. Powlegh Nich. atte Water Iohannis Hawe Thome Dodde Thome Bartelet Will. Padenale Ade Hastyng Ioh. Tho Baker de Wat∣lington Richardi Hurry Ioh. Tours Thome Muttyng Thome Deven Ioh. Martyn Will. Somer Ioh. Romsey Ioh. Yonge Will. Caturmayn ill. Hervey Hen. Benefeld Will. North Nicholai Wotton de Kingston Ioh. Temple Ioh. Fynamour Rich. Malpas Ioh. Boure Rob. Gorewey Ioh. Stafford Rich. Saddock Ioh. atte Lee Will. Derenden. The Commissioners in this County appear over-diligent in discharging their trust: For, whereas those in other Shires flitted onely the Cream of their Gentry, it is su∣spicious that here they made use of much thin Milk, as may be collected from their numerousness in a County of so small content. I could wish they had spent part of their pains on some other places, seeing we have so little of great, and nothing of some Shires in this kind. But I see nothing will here fall out adequate to our desires in all particulars, but still we shall conceive our selves to have cause to complain, of some∣thing redundant and something defective.
Sheriffs. Although Oxford and Berk-shires be divided by the Thames, and in the Saxon Heptarchy were under two different Kingdoms, Oxford-shire belonging to Mercia, and Berk-shire to the West Sax∣ons; yet after the Conquest they were united under one Sheriff, untill the nineth year of Queen Elizabeth, as by their Catalogue formerly presented in Berk-shire doth plainly appear: Since that year for the more effectual discharge of the Office, and greater ease of the Subjects, each have had several Sheriffs, and Oxford-shire as followeth: Name. Place. Armes. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     9 Ric. Fines, mil. Broughtō. Azure, 3. Lions rampant, Or. 10 Hum. Ashfeld, ar.     11 Will. Taverner, ar. Water E.   12 Tho. Gibbons, ar.     13 Ric. Waynman, m: Tame Pa. Quarterly G. & Az. a Cross Patonce, Or. 14 Ioh. Danvers, ar. †   † G. a Chev. inter 3. Mullets, O. 15 Hen. Rainford, ar.     16 Will. Babington, m.   Ar. ten Torteauxes, -3. 2. & 1. 17 Mich. Molyns, ar.     18 Rob. Doyle, mil. & Ioh. Coop, ar. ut infra ut infra   19 Will. Hawtry, ar.     20 Ric. Corbet, ar.   Or, a Raven proper. 21 Edm. Bray, ar.     22 Ric. Hudleston, ar.   Gul. Frettee Arg. 23 Tho. Denton, ar.     24 Anth. Cope, ar. Hanwell Arg. on a Chev. Az. betwixt 3. 25 Ric. Fines. ar. ut prius Roses, G. slipped and leaved, 26 On. Oglethop, ar. a Newingt. Vert, 3. Flower de luces, Or. 27 Ioh. Doyle, ar. b   a Arg. a Chev. varry Or and 28 Idem. ut prius Vert, betwixt 3. Boyes heads 29 Mich. Blount, ar. c Maph Du. sable cut of G. 30 Ioh. Danvers, ar. ut prius b Or, two Bends, Arg. 31 Will. Clarke, ar.   c Barry Formy Neble of 6. 32 Will. Spencer, ar. d Yardingt. Or and Sable. 33 Anth. Cope, mil. ut prius d Quarterly Ar. & G. a Fret. 34 Ro. Chamblayn, a. e   Or. on a Bend sab. 3. Esca∣lops of the first. 35 Fran. Stonard, ar. f Stonard   36 Ric. Fenys, mil. ut prius e Gul. a Cheveron Arg. betwixt three Escalops, Or. 37 Oni. Oglethorpe, ar ut prius   38 Will. Freer, ar. g Water E. f Az. two Bars Dancettee Or, a Chief Arg. 39 Gorg. Broome, ar.     40 Mich. Blount, ar. ut prius g Gul. two Flanches Or, three VVheat-ears erect in Fess counterchanged. 41 Fran. Curson, ar.     42 Will. Greene, ar.     43 Will. Pope, ar. Wiscot Per pale, Or & Az. on a chev. betw. 3. Griffins heads era∣zed, 4. Flower de luces, all counterchanged. 44 Ric. Farmer, mil.*   * Arg. a Fess sab. twixt three Leopards heads erazed, Gul. JACOB.     Anno     1 Anth. Cope, mil. ut prius   2 Gorg. Tipping, ar.     3 Iac. Harrington, m.   Sable, a Fret. Arg. 4 Tho. Temple, mil. Buckin Arg. on two Bars sab. 6. 5 Roland. Lacy, mil.   Martlets, Or. 6 Hen. Samborne, ar.     7 Mich. Dormer, mil.   Az. ten billets, 4. 3. 2. & 1. 8 Bene. Winchcōbe, a   Or in a Chief of the second, a Lion issuant sable. 9 Tho. Moyle, ar. †   † Gul. a Mule passant, Arg. 10 Will. Clerke, mil.     11 Hen. Lee, bar. Dichley Arg. a Fess betw. 3. cressants, S. 12 Edw. Dunch, ar.   S. a chev. betw. 3. Towers, Arg. 13 Tho. Read, ar.   G. a saltire twixt 4. Garbs, O. 14 Th. Spencer, m. & b. ut prius   15 Ioh. Curson, mil.     16 Edw. Fenner, ar.     17 Will. Cope, m. & b. ut prius   18 Ric. Baker, mil.     19 Fra. Stoner, mil. ut prius   20 owlan. Lacy, ar.     21 Will. Aishcombe, m     22 Walt. Dunch, ar. ut prius   CAROL. I.     Anno     1 Ric. Blount, mil. ut prius   2 Ric. Lovelace, mil. modo dom. Lovelace & Cope Doyley, mil. Berk-shire ut prius Gul. a Chief indented sable, 3. Martlets, Or. 3 Ric. Wenman, mil. modo dom. Wenman ut prius ut prius   4 Rob. Dormer, mil. ut prius   5 Will. Cobb, mil. Adderbury   6 Ioh. Lacy, mil.     7 Ioh. Harborne, ar.     8 Tho. Coghill, ar. modo Miles. Blehing. Gules, on a Cheveron Arg. 3. Ogresses, a Chief sable. 9 Ioh. Mellor, mil.     10 Pet. Wentworth Miles Baranit.   Sable, a Cheveron betwixt 3. Leopards heads, Or. 11 Fran. Norris, mil.   Quarterly Arg. & Ga. a Fret, or with a Fess Az. 12 Will. Walter, ar.* Saresden *Az. 3. Eagles displayed, Arg 13 T. Peniston, m. & b. †   †Arg. 3. Cornish-choughs prop. 14 Ioh. Doyly, ar. ut prius   15 Rad. Warcoppe, ar.     16 Ric. Libb, ar.     17 Tho. Tippin, ar.     18     19     20     21     22     23     24     Q. Elizabeth. 11. WILLIAM TAVERNER, Arm.] This was he, who in the year of his Sherivalty came to Oxford, and went up into the Pulpit at St. Maries with a sword by his side, and a gold chain about his neck; where he made a Sermon (or an Oration rather) to the University, the stuff, or rather bom∣bace whereof we have set down in our Ecclesiastical History. Now though this was an odde act wherein his zeal was conceived by most to trespass on his discretion, yet was
it born the better in those darker dayes from a person well-affected in Religion, and ab∣horring to invade the Ministerial Function. 18. ROBERT DOYLE, Mil.] This year (if I mistake not) were the black Assizes at Oxford, wherein (contrary to the common course) the Prisoners caused the death of the Judge, (Chief-Baron Bell) the Sheriff, some of the Lawyers, many of the Justices, and most of the Jury; besides other persons of Quality there present. It was generally imputed to the stench of the priso∣ners clothes and bodies: for whereas other offensive smells are open enemies, and vio∣lently assaulting the brain warn men in some sort to avoid or resist them; a Gaol∣stench trecherously pretendeth alliance, (as made of man-sweat) and so insinuates it self with the less suspicion and more danger into the spirits. 31. WILLIAM CLARKE, Arm.] He was son, or (if the same with Sir VVilliam Clarke, Sheriff in the 10. of K. James) grand-child to Sir John Clarke of Northampton-shire in the 21. of K. Henry the eight, whose Armes, with the honourable augmentation, and the worthy cause thereof, are there largely described. 36. RICHARD PENYS, Mil.] He was a worthy Gentleman, and bred Fellow (being the Founders Kinsman) of New∣college in Oxford. He was also lineally descended from James Lord Say and Seal, Tre∣surer of England, in the reign of K. Henry the sixth, and in consideration thereof was 1. Jacobi created Lord Say and Seal. He dyed Anno Dom. 1612. William Fenys, his eldest son, was since created Viscount Say and Seal, and is still alive. K. Charles I. 3. RICHARD WENMAN, Mil.] This worthy Knight was by K. Charles the first created, first Baron Wenman of Chil∣maynam in the County of Dublin, and then Viscount Wenman, of Tuant in the County of Galloway, both in the Kingdom of Ireland, by Letters Patents dated at Cambrey the 25. of July 1628. 4 Caroli. The Farewell. As for the poorer sort of Husbandmen in this County, I wish there may be more Sir Henry Kebles for their sakes: This Knight (though a Native of London, and Lord Mayor thereof) had such an affection for this and Warwick-shire, that he singled out an hundred and fifty of the poorest Husbandmen therein, and gave each of them a new Stows Survey of London, p. 89 Plough-share and a new Coulter of Iron; and in my mind that is the most charitable Charity, which inableth decayed industry to follow its Vocation.
RUTLAND-SHIRE is by a double Diminutive called by Mr. Cambden, Angliae Provinciola minima. Indeed it is but the Pestel of a Lark, which is better than a quarter of some bigger bird, having the most cleanly profit in it: No place so fair for the Rider, being more fruitful for the Abider therein. Banshing the fable of King Rott, and their fond conceit, who will have Rutland so called from Roet, the French word for a Wheel, from the rotundity thereof, (being in form almost exactly orbicular) it is so termed, quasi Red-land; for as if Nature kept a Dye-vat herein, a reddish tincture discoloureth the earth, stones, yea the very flieces of the sheep feeding therein. If the Rabbins observation be true, who distinguish betwixt Arets, the general element of the earth; and Adamah, red ground, from which Adam was taken and named; making the later the former refined: Rutlands soil on the same reason may lay claim to more than ordinary purity and perfection. Buildings. Burgley on the Hill belonged formerly to the Lords Harrington, but since so beauti∣fied with buildings by the Duke of Buckingham, that it was inferiour to few for the House, superiour to all for the Stable; where horses (if their pabulum so plenty as their stabulum stately) were the best accommodated in England. But alas, what saith Me∣nedemus to Chremas in the Comedy? Filium unicum adolescentulum habeo. Ah quid dixi habere me? immo habui: so may Rutland say, I have; yea I had one most magni∣ficent house: this Burgley being since demolished in our Civil war, so just was the Poets ancient Invective, Mars, Mars, bane of men, slaughter-stain'd, spoiler of houses. But when we have first sufficiently bemoned the loss of so many worthy men in our late war, if then we have still any sorrow left, and tears to spare, we will spend them in lamenting the razing and ruining of so many stately structures. Wonders. How it will appear to the Reader I know not, but it is wonderful in my apprehen∣sion, that this County, so pleasant, so fruitful, almost in the middle of England, had not one absolute or entire Abby therein; producing onely two small appurtenances (of inconsiderable value) to Convents in other Counties, viz. Okehame, under the custody of the Pri∣ory of St. Anne by Coventry, founded by William Dalby, for two Chaplains and twelve poor; receiving in all one and twenty pounds per annum. Brook, a Cell to Killingworth, founded by Walkeline de Ferrers Baron of Okeham, for black Canons, valued at the dissoluti∣on at fourty three pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. The like cannot be parallell'd in England, chuse so great a parcel of good ground where you please. Shew me so fair a bunch of sweet grapes, which had no more flies to suck them: Nor can I conjecture any competent cause thereof, except because Ed∣ward the Confessor by his Will gave all Rutland to Westminster Church, which though rescinded by King William the Conqueror, yet other Convents perchance might be scrupulous to accept, what once belonged to another Foundation.
Proverbs. Rutland Raddleman.] I meet in an Draytons Po∣ly-olbion. Author with this blazon, as he termes it, of Rutland-shire, though I can scarcely recover the meaning thereof▪ Rad here is the same with red, (onely more broadly pronounced) as Radcliffe de ru∣bro clivo Redcliffe: Raddleman then is a Reddleman, a Trade (and that a poor one) onely in this County, whence men bring on their backs a pack of red stone or Oker, which they sell to their neighbouring Countries for the marking of sheep, well nigh as scer∣nable (and far less hurtful to the wooll) as Pitch-brands made on their flieces. Saints. St. Tibba. Because this County is Princeless, I mean affords no Royal Nativities, we begin with Saints, and here almost we are at a loss, finding but one worshipped therein, and probably a Native thereof. But seriously peruse, I pray, the words of our Camb. Brit. in Rutland∣shire, p. 526. Author, speaking of Rihall a Village in this County, VVhere, when superstition had so bewitched our Anchestours, that the multitude of their pety Saints had well neere taken quite away the true God, one Tibba, a pety Saint or Goddesse, reputed to be the tutelar patronesse of Hawking, was of Fowlers and Fal∣coners worshipped as a second Diana. This Saint of Falconers doth stive so high into the air, that my Industry cannot flye home after the same, so as to give a good account thereof to the Reader. All that I can retrive of her is digested into these following particulars: 1. She was a Female, whose sex (dubious in the English) is cleared in the Latine Cambden, Tibba minorum gentium Though it be Diva in his first and quarto ediion, yet it is Sancta in his last, I mean in the text whereon I rely, though Diva again in the Margin. Sancta. 2. Though gentium may import something of Heathenism, Sancta carries it cleer for Christianity; that she was no Pagan Deity amongst the Britons, (who were not our Ancestors but Predecessors) but a Popish she-Saint amongst the Saxons. 3. She could not be St. Ebba, a Virgin Saint of whom formerly in Northumber∣land, whom the Country-people nick-name Tabbs for St. Ebbs. 4. My best inquiry making use of mine own and friends industry, perusing Au∣thors Caesar. Baron. Not. in Marty∣riolog. Rom. Fran. Haaeus de vitis Sanct. rent. Sur. Carthusian. Pel. de  ▪ catal. Sanct. &c. proper to this purpose, cannot meet with this Tibb with all our industry. But I will trouble my self and the Reader no longer with this Saint, which if she will not be found, even for me let her be lost; onely observe, after that superstition had ap∣pointed Saints to all Vocations, (St. Luke to Painters, St. Crispin to Shoomakers, &c.) she then began to appoint Patrons to Recreations; and surely Falconers [generally] according to the Popish principles, if any need a Saint, both to protect them in their de∣speare Riding, and pray for a pardon for their profane oaths in their passions. A Post-script. at last we have found it. She was no Pagan Deity but a Saxon Saint, as plainly appeareth, because the passage concerning her is commanded to be expung'd out of Cambden by the Printed at Madrid by Lewes Sanchez Ano 1612. Index expurgatorius, bearing a Pique thereat, as grating against their superstitious practice. The same no doubt with Tibba, Virgin and Anchoress▪ who living at M. S. de vitis sanct. Muler. Angl. p. 177. Dormundcaster, dyed with the reputation of holiness about the year 660. However, Reader, I am not ashamed to suffer my former doubts and disquisiti∣ons still to stand, though since arrived at better information.
Benefactors to the Publick. WILLIAM BROWNE Esq twice Alderman of Stamford, Merchant of the Staple, was (as I am credibly informed) extracted from the ancient Family of Brownes of Tll∣Thorp in this County. He built on his own proper cost the beautiful Steeple, with a great part of the Church, of All-Saints in Stamford, and lyeth therein with his wife buried in a Chappel proper to his Family. He also erected Anno 1493. the old Bead-house in that Town, for a Warden, Confrater, twelve poor old men, with a Nurse-woman to attend them: To this he gave the Manor of Swayfeld (seven miles from Stamford) worth four hundred pounds per annum, besides divers Lands and Tenements elsewhere. I am loth to insert, and loth to omit, what followeth in my Mr. Richard Butcher in his Survey of Stamford, p. 39. Author, viz. That the pious and liberal gift is much abused by the avarice and mis-imployment of the Governors thereof: and charitably do presume, that such faults (if any) are since, or will be, suddenly a∣mended. Since the Reformation. JOHN HARINGTON the elder, son to Sir James Harington, was born at Exton in this County, where their ancient Family had long flourished. A bountiful House∣keeper, dividing his hospitality between Rutland and Warwick-shire, where he had a fair habitation. He was one of the Executors to the Lady Frances Sidney, and a grand Be∣nefactor to the College of her founding in Cambridge. King James created him Ba∣ron of Exton, and his Lady, a prudent woman, had the Princess Elizabeth committed to her government: When the said Princess was married to Frederick Prince Pala∣tine, this Lord (with Henry Martin Doctor of the Laws) was sent over to the Palati∣nate, to see her Highness setled at Hidleburgh, and some formalities about her Dowry and Joynture performed. This done, (as if God had designed this for his last work) he sickned on the first day of his return, and dyed at Wormes in Germany, on St. Bar∣tholomews day Anno Dom. 1613. The Lord John his son (of whom in Warwick-shire) did not survive him a year; both of them signally eminent, the one a pattern for all good fathers, th'other for all gracious sons; and pity it is the last had not issue to be a president to all grand-children: but God thought it fit, that here the Male-issue of that honourable Family should expire. Memorable Persons. —JEFFEREY was born in the Parish of Okeham in this County, where his father was a very proper man, broad-shouldered and chested, though his son ne∣ver arived at a full Ell in stature. And here we may observe Lib. 7. cap. 16 Pliny his observati∣on not true, , In plenum autem cuncto mortalium generi inorem staturam indies fieri, propemo∣dum observatur, rarosque patribus proceriores, &c. It seems that Families sometimes are chequered, as in brains so in bulk, that no cer∣tainty can be concluded from such alternations. His father, who kept and ordered the baiting Bulls for George Duke of Bucking∣ham, (a place, you will say, requiring a robustious body to manage it) presented him at Burleigh on the Hill to the Duchesse of Buckingham, being then nine years of age, and scarce a foot and half in height, as I am informed by credible John Arm∣strong of Chesbunt. persons then and there present, and still alive. Instantly Jefferey was heightned (not in sta∣ture, but) in condition, from one degree above rags into Silk and Sattin, and two tall men to attend him. He was without any deformity wholly proportionable, whereas often Dwarfs, Pig∣mes in one part, are Giants in another. And yet, though the least that England ever
saw, he was a proper person compared to him, of whom Lib. 6. fab. 19. Sabinus doth write, in his Comment upon the Metamorphosis: Vidit Italia nuper virum justa aetate, non majorem cubito, circumferri in caveâ Psitta∣ci, cujus viri meminit in suis scriptis Hiero∣nymus Cardanus. There was lately to be seen in Italy a man of a ripe age not above a cubit high, carried about in a Parrets cage, of whom Hierome Cardan in his Writings makes mention. It was not long before he was presented in a cold baked Pye to King Charles and Queen Mary at an entertainment, and ever after lived (whiles the Court lived) in great plenty therein, wanting nothing but humility, (high mind in a low body) which made him that he did not know himself, and would not know his father, and which by the Kings command caused justly his sound correction. He was, though a Dwarf no Dastard, a Captain of horse in the Kings Army in these late civil wars, and afterwards went over to wait on the Queen in France. Here being provoked by Mr. Crofts, who accounted him the object, not of his an∣ger but contempt, he shewed to all, that Habet musca suum splenum, and they must be lit∣tle indeed that cannot do mischief, especially seeing a Pistol is a pure leveller, and puts both Dwarf and Giant into equal capacity to kill and to be killd: For the shooting the same Mr. Crofts he was imprisoned. And so I take my leave of Jefferey, the least man of the least County in England. The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. William Bishop of Lincoln Commissioners to take the Oaths. William de Souche de Harring∣worth, chiv.   Thomas Grenham Knights for the Shire.   William Beaufo Knights for the Shire.   Iohannes Basinges de Empyngham, mil. Iohannes Colepepar▪ de Exton, mil. Henricus Plesington de Burley, mil. Robertus Browne de Wodehead, ar. Robertus Davis de Tykencoat, ar. Iohannes Browne de Tygh. ar. Iohannes Plesington de Wissenden, ar. Thomas Flore de Oakham, ar. Franciscus Clerke de Stoke-dry, ar. Iohannes Chycelden de Brameston, ar. Iohannes Sapcoat de Keton, merchant Robertus Whitwell de eadem, gentleman Iohannes Clerk de Wissenden, merch. Willielmus Lewis de Oakham, merch. Iohannes Brigge de eadem, merch. Ioh. Basset de North Luffenham, gent. Iacobus Palmer de eadem, gent. Iohannes Palmer de eadem, gent. Willielmi Sheffeild de Seyton, gent. Iohannes Sadington de eadem, gent. Rob. Sousex de Mar∣ket Overton, gent. Iohannes Vowe de Whitwell, gent. Willielmus Pochon de Wissenden, gent. Willilmus Swafeld de Braunston, gent. Henricus Breton de Keton, gent. Willilmus Uffingon de Pilton, gent. Thomas Luffenham de Winge.
Sheriffs. It remaineth now that we give in a List of the Sheriffs of this Shire; and here Rutland con∣ceiveth it to sound to her credit, that whereas other Shires ten times bigger than this, (viz. Norfolk and Suffolk) had but one Sheriff betwixt them; this little County never took-hands to hold with a partner, but had alwayes an entire Sheriff to it self; though anciently the same person (general∣ly honourable) discharged the Office for many years together, as by the ensuing Catalogue will appear. SHERIFFS From the year of King To the year of King Richard de Humet Tenth of Henry 2. Six and twenty of Henry 2. William Molduit six and twentieth of Henry 2. first of Richard 1. Anna Brigg dispensat. first of Richard 1. second of Richard 1. William Albeney & William Fresney second of Richard 1. nineth of Richard 1. William Albevine solus nineth of Richard 1. first of King John Benedic de Haversham first of King John second of King John Robert Malduit second of King John fifth of King John Ralph Normanvill fifth of King John twelfth of King John Robert de Braibro & Henry fi∣lius ejus twelfth of King John second of Henry 3. Alan Basset second of Henry 3. twelfth of Henry 3. Jeffrey de Rokingham twelfth of Henry 3. thirty eight of Henry 3. Ralph de Greneham thirty eight of Henry 3. forty third of Henry 3. Anketyn de Markinall forty third of Henry 3. first of Edward 1. Peter Wakervill & William Bovile first of Edward 1. nineth of Edward 1. Alberic de Whitleber nineth of Edward 1. seventeenth of Edward 1. Edmund Earl of Cornwall seventeenth of Edward 1. twenty nineth of Edward 1. John Burley twenty nineth of Edward 1. thirtieth of Edward 1. Marg. widow to Edmund Earl of Cornwall thirtieth of Edward 1. sixth of Edward 2. Marg. widow of Pierce Gave∣ster Earl of Cornwall sixth of Edward 2. nineth of Edward 2. Hugo de Audley nineth of Edward 2. seventeenth of Edward 2. Edmund Earl of Kent brother to the King seventeenth of Edward 2. first of Edward 3. Hugo de Audley Earl of Glo∣cester first of Edward 3. twenty second of Edward 3. William de Bohun Earl of Northampton twenty second of Edward 3. thirty third of Edward 3. William Wade thirty third of Edward 3. thirty eight of Edward 3. Humphrey de Bohun thirty eight of Edward 3. forty seventh of Edward 3. John de Witlesbrough forty seventh of Edward 3. forty nineth of Edward 3. Simon Ward forty nineth of Edward 3. first of Richard 2.
Sheriffs. Name. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Ioh Wittlebury     2 Tho de Burton   Azure, a Fess betwixt 3 Tal∣bots heads erazed, Or. 3 Ioh. Basings     4 Will. Moorwood     5 Ioh. de Wittlesbury     6 Will. Flore Okeham Ermins, a Cinque-foil, Erm. 7 Walt. Skarle     8 Ioh. de Calveley     9 Rob. de Veer   Quarterly Gules & Or in the fist, a Mullet, Arg. 10 Idem ut prius.   11 Ioh. Wittebury     12 Walt. Skarles     13 Edw. comes Rutland for eight years.   Quarterly France and Engl. a Label Arg. charged with 9. Torteaes. 1 Tho. Ondeley     22 Idem.     HEN. IV.     RECORDA MANCA, All this Kings reign.     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Tho. Ondeley     2 Iac. Bellers   Party per pale, G. & S. a Lion ramp. Arg. crowned, Or. 3 Ioh. Boyvill*     4 Tho. Burton, mil. ut prius * Gul. a Fess Or, between 3. Saltires hut, Arg. 5 Rob. Browne     6 Rob. Chisdden     7 Ioh. Pensax     8 Th. Burton, mil. ut prius   9 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Tho. Burton ut prius   2 Ioh. Ondeby     3 Ioh. Davies, mil. Tickenco.   4 Ioh. Colepeper Exton Arg. a bend engrailed, Gul. 5 Hen. Plesington, m. Burley Azure, a cross Pae betwixt 4. Martlets, Arg. 6 Tho. Burton, mil. ut prius   7 Ioh. Denys     8 Ioh. Colepeper ut prius   9 Tho. Flore ut prius   10 Hen. Plesington, m. ut prius   11 Ioh. Boyvile ut prius   12 Will. Beaufo   Ermine, on a bend Azure, 3. inque-foils, Or. 13 Rob. Davies & Ioh. Pilton     14 Ioh. Branspath     15 Hugo. Boyvile ut prius   16 Laur. Sherard   Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt 3. Torteauxes. 17 Will. Beaufo ut prius   18 Tho. Burton ut prius   19 Hen. Plesington, m. ut prius   20 Tho. Flore ut prius   21 Will. Beaufo ut prius   22 Tho. Barkeley   Gules, a Cheveron betwixt ten Cinque-foils, Arg. 23 Ioh. Basings, mil.     24 Will. Walker     25 Ioh. Boyvile ut prius   26 Will. Haselden     27 Hugo Boyvile ut prius   28 Rob. Fenne   Arg. on a Fess Az. 3 escalop∣shels of the first, a Bordure engrailed as the second. 29 Tho. ut prius   30 Will Hon     31 Rob. Sherard ut prius   32 Rob. ut prius   33 . ut prius   34 Will. Haselden     35 Tho. Flore, ar. ut prius   36 Tho. Dale     37 Rob. Fenne ut prius   38 Everard. Digby Dry-stoke Azure, a Flower de lys, Arg. EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Ioh. Francis     2 Tho. Palmer     3 Idem.     4 Will Greenham, ar▪     5 Tho. Flore, ar. ut prius   6 Ric. Sopcotts, mil.   Sab. 3. Dovecoats, Arg. 7 Will. Browne Tolethorp Sable, 3. Mallets, Arg. 8 Galfr. Sherard ut prius   9 Ioh. Dale, ar.     10 Tho. Flore, ar. ut prius   11 Brian. Talbot, ar.     12 Tho. Berkley, mil. ut prius   13 Will. Haselden     14 Ioh. Pilton, ar.     15 Will. Browne ut prius   16 Ioh. Sapcote ut prius   17 David. Malpas   Arg. a Cross patee, Az. 18 Hen. Mackworth Normant. Per pale indeed Erm. & S. a Chev. Gul. , Or. 19 Ioh. Pilton     20 Galfr. Sherard ut prius   21 Will. Palmer     22 David. Malpas ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Will. Browne Stamford ut prius 2 Galf. Sherard ut prius   3 Ioh. Pilton     HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Everard. Digby Martinth. Arg. on a Fess Azure, 3 Lo∣zenges, Or. 2 Will. Browne ut prius   3 David. Malpas ut prins   4 Maur. Berkley ut prius   5 Iho. Sapcots ut prius   6 Ioh. Digby, mil. ut prius   7 Rob. Harrington, a.   Sable, a Frettee, Arg. 8 Christoph. Browne ut prius   9 Ioh. Pilton     10 Tho. Sherard ut prius   11 Tho. Sapcots, ar. ut prius   12 Geo. Mackworth ut prius   13 Rob. Harrington, a. ut prius   14 Everard. Digby, ar. ut prius   15 Ioh. Chisleden     16 Christ. Browne, ar. ut prius   17 Ioh. Digby ut prius   18 Ioh. Harrington ut prius   19 Maur. Berkley ut prius   20 Will. Pole     21 Tho. Sherard ut prius   22 Ric. Flowre, ar. ut prius   23 Ioh. Coly, ar.     24 Ever. Feilding, mil. Martins T. Argent on a Fess Az. three Fusils, O. HEN. VIII.     Anno.     1 Christ. Browne, ar. ut prius   2 Edw. Sapcote ut prius   3 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   4 Ioh. Harrington, ar. ut prius   5 Everard. Digby, ar. ut prius   6 Tho. Brokesby, ar.     7 Ioh. Caldecott     8 Ioh. Harrington ut prius  
9 Ion. Digby, mil. ut prius   10 Everard. Digby, ar. ut prius   11 Will. Filding, ar. ut prius   12 Io. Harington, ju. a▪ ut prius   13 Io. Harington, se. ar. ut prius   14 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   15 Ioh. Digby, mil. ut prius   16 Fn. Bowne, ar. ut prius   17 Ioh. aldecot, ar.     18 Will. Filding, ar. ut prius   19 Edw. Sapcors ut prius   0 Everrd. Digby, m. ut prius   21 Edw. Caesby, ar.   Argent, two Lions passant S. crowned, Or. 2 Geo Mackworth, ar. ut prius   23 Edw. Sapots, ar. ut prius   24 Evrard. Digby, m. ut prius   25 Ioh. Hrington, ar. ut prius   26 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   27 Edw. Sapcots, ar. ut prius   8 Andr. Nowell, ar. Booke Or, srttee Gul. a Canton Erm. 29 Ti. Burdenell, ar. ut ina   30 Fra. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   3 Rich. Cecell, ar.   Barry oten Arg. & Az. on 6. Escutcheons Sable, as many Lions rampant of the first. 32 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius   33 Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius   34 Edw. , ar. ut prius   35 Fra. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   36 Go. Sherard, ar. ut prius   37 Anch. Browne, ar. ut prius   38 Edw. Sapcots, ml. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Anth. Colly, ar.     Simon. Dgby, ar. ut▪ prius.   3 Kenelm. Digby, ar. u prius.   4 Andr. Noell, ar. ut prius.   5 Anth. Colly, ar.     6 Ioh. Harington, m ut prius.   Iac. Harington, ar. ut prius   MAR. REG.     Anno     1 Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius   2 Simon. Digby, ar. ut prius   3 Fra. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   4 Andr. Nll, ar. ut prius   5 Anth. Browne, ar. ut prius   6 Edw. Brudenell, ar.   Arg. a Cheveron G. betwixt 3 Capps Az. turned up Erm. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Anth. Colly, ar.     2 Iac. Harington, mil▪ ut prius   3 Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius   4 Geo. Sherard, ar. ut prius   5 Will. Caldecot, ar.     6 Go. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   7 Ioh. Floure, ar. ut prius   8 Iac. Harington, m. ut prius   9 Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius   10 Anth. Colly, ar.     11 Ioh. Floure, ar. ut prius   12 Maur. Berkley, ar. ut prius   13 Anth. Browne ut prius   14 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   15 Tho. Cony, ar.   Sab. a Bar and two Barrulets twixt 3. Conies currant Arg. 16 Rob. Sapcots, ar. ut prius   17 Will. Caldecot, ar.     18 Anth▪ olly, ar.     19 Ioh. Floure, ar. ut prius   20 Iac. Harington, mil. ut prius   21 Mich. Caesby, ar. ut prius   22 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   23 Will. Feilding, ar. ut prius   24 Roger. Smith▪ ar. Leicest sh Gules on a Cheveron Or, be∣twixt 3. Bzants, 3. Croslets sormee fichee. 25 Anth. Colley, ar.     26 Tho. Coney, ar. ut prius   27 Kenelm. Digby ut ps   28 Iac. Harington, m. ut prius   29 Andr. Nowell, mil. ut prius   30 Geo. Sheffeild, ar. Seaton Arg. a Cheveron twixt three Garbes, Gules. 31 Rob. Sapcots, ar. ut prius   32 Hen. Harenten, ar. ut priu   33 Will. Feilding, ar. ut prius   34 Roger. Smith, ar. ut prius   35 Iac. Harington, m. ut prius   36 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius   37 Andr. Nowell, mil. ut prius   38 Will. Feilding, ar. ut prius   39 Hen. Ferrers, ar.   Arg. on a Bend Gul. cotized▪ Sab. 3 Horshooes, Arg. 40 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius   41 Tho. Mackworth, ar ut prius   42 Andr. Nowell, mil. ut prius   43 Iac. Harington, m. ut prius   44 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius   JACOB.     Anno     1 Will. Bodendin, ar.     2 Will. Boulstred, m.     3 Basil. Feilding, ar. ut prius   4 Hen. Barkley, ar. ut prius   5 Guido. Palmes,     6 Edw. Nowell, mil. ut prius   7 Tho. Mackworth, ar. ut prius   8 Will. Halford, ar. Leicest. sh Arg. a Greyound passant on a Chief Sab. 3 Flower de liz. of the feild. 9 Ioh. Elmes, ar.* North H.   10 Rob. Lane, mil.     11 Anth. Andrews, ar.   * Erm. 2 bars Sab. each char∣ged with 5. Elm leaves tran∣sposed, Or. 12 Fran. Bodinden, ar.     13 Ed. Noell, m. & bar. ut prius   14 Rich. Cony, mil. ut prius   15 Guido. Palmes, m.     16 Abr. Iohnson, ar.     17 Rich. Halford, ar. ut prius   18 Anth. Colley, ar.     19 Ed. Haringtō, m. & b Ridlingtō ut prius 20 Rob. Lane, mil.     21 Rob. Tredway, ar.     22 Ioh. Osborne, ar.   Quarterly Erm. and Azure, a cross Or. CAROL. I.     Anno     1 Guido. Palmes, m.     2 Will. Gibson, mil.     3 He. Mackworth, ar ut prius   4 Ever. Fawkener, ar.     5 Ioh. Huggeford, ar.     6 Ioh. Wingfeild, mil.   Arg. a bend Gul. cotized Sab. 3 Wings of the first. 7 Ric. Hal ford, ar. ut prius   8 Anth. Colley, mil.     9 Ric. Hickson, ar.     10 Fran. Bodington, m.     11 Hen. Mynne, mil.     12 Edw. Harington, mil. & bar. ut prius   13 Edw. Andrews, ar.     14 Ioh. Barker, ar.     15 Tho. Levett, ar.     16 Rob. Horsman, ar. Stretton   17 Tho. Wayte, ar.     18     19     20     21     22 Abel Barker    
Henry VII. 16. CHRISTOPHER BROWNE, Arm.] This Sheriff came over with King Henry the seventh, and assisted him against Richard the third  for which good service King Henry the eight granted to Francis Browne (son of our Sheriff) of Council to the Lady Margaret, the following Patent: HEnricus octavus Dei gracia Angliae, Franciaerex, fidei defensor, & dominus , omnibus ad quos praesentes Litterae pervenient, salutem. Sciatis quod no de gratia nostra speciali conessimus pro nobis & heredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est, dilecto nostro Francisco Browne armigero, quod ipse ad totam vitam suam non ponatur, impanellet. nec juret. in Assisis juratis inquisitionibus attin∣ctis seu aliis recognitionibus aut juratis quibuscunque, licet ille seu eorum aliquis tangant nos vel heredes nostros, ac licet nos vel heredes nostri soli aut conjunctim cum aliis sit una pars. Concessimus etiam, ac per presentes conced mus eidem Fran∣cisco, quod ipse de cetero non fiat Vicecomes nec Escaetor nostri vel heredum nostro∣rum in aliquo comitatu regni nostri Angliae: Et quod ipse ad offic. vic. Escaetoris superius recitat. habend. exercend. faciend. recipiend. aut occupand. ullo modo per nos vel heredes nostros assignet. ordinet. seu compellet. aut aliqualit. artet. ullo modo nec ad ascend. jurat. super aliqua triatione, arrainatione alicujus Assisae coram qui∣buscun{que} justic. nostris vel heredum nostrorum ad Assisis capiend. assign. aut aliis justic. quibuscunque; & quod non ponatur nec impanelletur in aliqua magna As∣sisa infra regni nostri Angliae inter partes quascunqne contra voluntatem suam licet nos vel heredi nostri sit una pars. Et ulterius de habundanciori gratia nostra con∣cessimus praefato Francisco, quod si ipse ad aliqua officia superdict. seu aliquod prae∣missorum eligat. ipse{que} & officia superdict. recusavit, extunc idem Franciscus ali∣quem contemptum deprdit. poenam fortisfitur. aut aliquos exutos fines, redemptiones seu amerciament. quaecun{que} occasione omissionis sive non omissionis aut alicujus eo∣rundem nullatenus incurrat fortisfaciat aut perdet; sed quod praesens carta nostra de exemptione coram quibuscun{que} justic. nostris & hered. nostr. ac in quocun{que} loco aut curia de record. per totum regnum nostrum praedict. super demonstratione ejus∣dem chartae nostrae, abs{que} aliquo brevi praecept. seu mandat. aut aliquo alio superinde habend. seu persequend. vel aliqua proclamatione faciend. praefato Francisco alloce∣tur. Concessimus etiam, & per praesentes concedimus eidem Francisco, quod ipse de cetero durante vita sua in praesentia nostra aut hered. nostrorum, aut in praesentia alicujus, sive aliquorum magnatum, dominorum spiritualium vel temporalium, aut aliquorum aliorum regni nostri, quorumcun{que} quibuscun{que} temporibus futuris pilio sit coopertus capite, & non exuat aut deponat pilium suum à capite suo occasione vel causa quacun{que} contra voluntatem aut placitum suum; & ideo vobis omnibus & singulis, aut quibuscunque Justic. Judicibus, Vicomitibus, Escaetoribus, Coronatori∣bus, Majoribus, praepositis Balivis & aliis officiariis & ministris nostris & hered▪ nostrrum firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod ipsum Franciscum contra hanc con∣cessionem nostr. & contra tenorem exegent. aut effect. praesent. non vexetis, perturb. molest. in aliquo seu gravetis. In cujus reitestim. has literas nostras fieri fecimus Pa∣tentes. Teste meipso apud Westm. sexto die Julii, anno regni nostri decimo octavo. Per ipsum Regem & de dat. praedict. authoritate Parliamenti.
Tolethorpe (the chief place of residence at this▪ day of Christopher Browne Esquire, who hath born the office of Sheriff in this County, 1647.) was by Deed conveyed un∣to John Browne from Thomas Burton Knight, in the fiftieth year of King Edward the third. I meet with a Browne Lord Mayor of London, 1479. the son of John Browne of Oakham. The Farewell. Let not the Inhabitants of Rutland complain, that they are pinned up within the confines of a narrow County; seeing the goodness thereof equals any Shire in Eng∣land for fertility of ground: But rather let them thank God, who hath cast their lot into so pleasant a place, giving them a goodly heritage.
SHROP-SHIRE hath Cheshire on the North, Staffordshire on the East; Worcester, Hereford and Radnorshires on the South: Montgomery and Den∣bighshires on the West. The length thereof from North to South is 34 Miles, and the generall breadth thereof about 26 Miles. I behold it really (though not so Reputed) the biggest Lund-lock-shire in England. For although (according to Mr. Speeds mea-suring) it gathereth but one hundred thirty four miles (short of Wiltshireby five) in Circumference; Yet though less in compasse, it may be more in Content, as lesse angular in my eye, and more approaching to a Circle, the form of greatest capacity. A large and lovely County generally fair and fruitful, affor∣ding Grasse, Grain, and all things necessary for Mans sustenance, but chiefly abounding with Naturall Commodities. Iron. It is the most impure of all Metals hardly meltable (but with Additaments) yea malleable and ductible with difficulty. Not like that at Damascus, which they refine in such sort, that it will melt at a Bellovius. Lamp, and yet so tough that it will hardly break. Some impute the grossenesse of our English Iron to our water, not so proper for that purpose, as in Spain, and other parts, and the Poet telleth us of Turnus his Sword. Virg. Aeneid. 12. Ensem quem Dauno igni potens Deus ipse parenti Fecerat, & Stygia candentem extinxerat unda. Sword which god Vulcan did for Daunus fixe, And quenched it when firy hot in Stix. However many Vtensils are made of the Iron of this County, to the great profit of the Owners, and no losse (I hope) of the Common-wealth. Coale. One may observe a threefold difference in our English-Coale. 1 Sea-coale, brought from Newcastle. 2 Land-coale, at Mendip, Bedworth, &c. and carted into other Counties. 3 What one may call River or Fresh-water-Coale, digged out in this County, at such a di∣stance from Severne, that they are easily ported by Boat into other Shires. O ifthis COALE could be so charcked as to make Iron melt out of the Stone, as it maketh it in Smiths Forges to be wrought in the Bars. But Rome was not built all in one day, and a NEW WORLD of Experiments is left to the discovery of Posterity. Manufactures. This County can boast of no one, her ORIGINAL, but may be glad of one to her DERIVATIVE: viz. the VVelsh-Freeses brought to Oswastre, the staple of that com∣modity, as See the Majors of London in this County. hereafter hall be observed. The Buildings. No County in England hath such a heap of Castles together, insomuch that Shropshire may seeme on the VVest, divided from VVales with a VVall of continued Castles. It is much that Mr. Speed which alloweth but one hundred See his Map General of England. eighty six in all England, accounteth two and thirty in this See his de∣scription of Shropshire. County. But as Great Guns so usefull in the side of a ship, are uselesse in the middle thereof, so these Castles formerly serviceable, whilst Shropshire was the verge of English Dominions, are now neglected, this Shire being almost in the middest of Eng∣land, since VVales was peaceably annexed thereunto. As for the Houses of the Gentry of this County, as many of them are fair and handsome, so none amount to an extraor∣dinary Eminence.
Medicinall Waters. There is a Spring at Pitch-ford, in this Shire, which hath an oily unctuous matter swimming upon the water thereof. Indeed it is not in such plenty as in a River neer to Agricola de natura, &c. lib. 1. cap. 7. Solos in Cilicia, so full of that liquid substance, that such as wash therein, seem anoint∣ed with Oile: nor so abundant, as in the Springs neer the Cape of S. Helen, wherewith (as Josephus Acosta reports) men use to pitch their Ropes and Tackling. I know not whether the sanative virtue thereof hath been experimented, but am sure, that if it be Bitumen, it is good to comfort the Nerves, supple the Joynts, drye up Rheumes, cure Palsies and Contractions. I have nothing more to say of Bitumen, but that great the affinity thereof is with Sulphur, save that Sulphur hath ingression into Mettal, and Bitumen none at all. Here I purposely passe by D. Jorden of mineral Bathes' pag. 26. Okenyate in this County, where are Allum springs, whereof the Dyers of Shrewsbury make use instead of Allum. Proverbs. He that fetcheth a VVife from Shrewsbury, must cary her into Staffordshire, or else shall live in Cumberland. The Staple-wit of this vulgar Proverb consisting solely in similitude of sound, is scarce worth the inserting. Know then that (notwithstanding the literall allusion) Shrewsbu∣ry affordeth as many meeke Wives, as any place of the same proportion: Besides, a Profitable Shrew well may content a reasonable man, the Poets faining Juno, chase and thrifty, qualities which commonly attenda shrewd nature. One being demanded; How much shrewishnesse may be allowed in a VVife? Even so much (sayed he) as of Hops in Ale, Whereof a small quantity maketh it both last the longer in it selfe, and taste the better to the owner thereof. The Case is altered quoth PLOWDEN.] This Proverb referreth its originall to Edmund Plowden, an eminent Native and great Lawyer of this County, though very various the relations of the occasion thereof. Some relate it to Plowden his faint pleading at the first for his Client, till spurred on with a better Fee: which some will say, beareth no pro∣portion with the ensuing Character of his Integrity. Others refer it to his altering of his Judgement upon the Emergencie of new matter formerly undiscovered: It being not Constancie but Obstinacie to persist in an old error, when convinced to the contrary by cleer and new Information. Some tell it thus, That, Plowden being of the Romish perswasion, some Setters trapanned him (pardon the prolepsis) to hear Masse: But after∣wards Plowden understanding, that the pretender to Officiate was no Priest, but a meer Lay-man (on designe to make a discovering) Oh! The case is altered quoth Plowden: No Priest, no Masse. As for other meaner Origination of this Proverb, I have neither List nor Leasure to attend unto them. Princes. RICHARD PLANTAGENET, second Son to Edward the fourth, and Elizabeth his Queen, was born at Stows Chro. pag. 703. Shrewsbury 1472. He was created by his Father Duke of York, and affianced to Anne, Daughter and Heir to John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. But be∣fore the nuptials were solemniz'd, his cruel ncle, the Duke of Glocester, maried him to a grave in the Towre of London. The obscurity of his burial gave the advantage to the report, that he lived in Perkin Warbeck, one of the Idols which put politick King Henry the seventh to some danger, and more trouble, before he could finally suppresse him. GEORGE PLANTAGENET, youngest son to Edward the fourth, and Elizabeth his Queen, was born at Idem Ibid. Shrewsbury. He was like Plautus his Solsticial Flower, Qui re∣pentinò ortus, repentinò occidit, dying in the infancie of his infancie. Some vainly conceive (such conjectures may be safely shot, when no body can see, whether they hit or misse the mark) that, had this George surviv'd, he would have secured the lives of his two elder Brethren, whose ncle Duke Richard durst not cut thorow the three-fold Cable of Royal Issue. A vain surmise, seeing when Tyrants hands are once wash'd in blood, two or three are all one with their cruelty.
Saints. MILBURGH daughter to Meroaldus Prince of Mercia, had the fair Mannor of Wenlock in this County, given to her by her Father for her portion. She, quitting all wordly wealth, bestowed her Inheritance on the Poor, and answered her name of Milburgh, which (as an Verstegan pag. 266. Antiquary interpreteth) is Good, or Gracious to Town and City. Living a Virgin, she built a Monastery, in the same place, and departed this life about the year 664. Four hundred years after, in the Reign of William the Conquerour, her Corps (disco∣vered by Miracles wrought thereby) were taken up sound and uncorrupted, to the admi∣ration of the beholders, (saith my The English Martyrology, on the 13 day of February. Authour) and surely had I seen the same, I would have contributed my share of wondring thereunto. This I am sure of, that as good a Saint, Lazarus by name, by the confession of his own Sister did John 11. 39. stink when but four dayes buried. Her Relicts inshrined at Wenlock, remained their in great state, till routed in the reign of King Henry the Eighth. OSWALD was King of Northumberland, who, after many fortunate battels fought, was vanquished and slain at last by Penda, the Pagan King of the Mercians, at a place in this County called after his name Oswaldstre (now a famous Market-Town in the Marches) thereby procuring to his memory the reputation of Saint and Martyr. Be pleased, Reader, to take notice, that all battels of this nature, though they were quarrels or armed-suits, commenced on a civil or temporal account for the extending or defending their Dominions; yet were they conceived (in that age especially) to have a mixture of much Piety and Church-concernment therein, because fought against Infidels, and so conducing consequentially to the propagation of the Faith; the reason that all Kings kill'd in such service, atchieved to themselves the veneration of Saints and Martyrs. Say not that King 1 Sam. 31. 3. Saul might be Sainted on the same account, mortally wounded in a pitcht field fought against the Vncircumcised Philistins; both because in fine he slew himself, and his former life was known to be notoriously wicked. Where∣as our Oswald was alwayes pious, and exceedingly charitable to the Poor. His arm cut off, it seems, from the rest of his body, remained, said Bede, whole and incorrupt, kept in a silver Case in S. Peters Church at Bamborough, whilest his Corps was first buried at Peterborough, and afterwards (in the Danish persecution) translated to English Mar∣tyrology. pag. 165. Bergen in Flanders, where it still remaineth. The fifth of August was in our Kalendar consecrated to his memory, save that the Thanks-giving for the defeating of Gowries-Conspiracy, made bold to justle him out, all the reign of king James. His death hapned Anno Domini 635. Confessors. This County afforded none, as the word is reconfined in our Preface. But if it be a little enlarged, it bringeth within the compasse thereof, THAMAS GATAKER Narrative of the life o Th. Gataker juni∣or, after the Sermon prea∣ched at his Funeral. younger son of William Gataker, was a branch of an An∣cient Family, so firmely planted by Divine providence at Gatacre-Hall in this County, that they have flourished the owners thereof, by an noninterrupted succcession, from the time of King Edward the Confessor. This Thomas being designed a Student for the Law, was brought up in the Temple, where in the raign of Queen Mary he was often present at the examination of persecuted people. Their hard usage made him pity their persons, and admirable patience to approve their opinions. This was no sooner percei∣ved by his Parents (being of the Old perswasion) but instantly they sent him over to Lovain in the Low-Countries, to win him to a compliance to the Popish Religion, and for his better encouragement setled on him an estate of One hundred pound per annum, old Rent. All would not do. Whereupon his Father recalled him home, and revoked his own grant; to which his Son did submit, as unwilling to oppose the pleasure of his Parents, though no such Revocation could take effect without his free consent. He afterwards diverted his mind from the most profitable, to the most necessary Study; from Law, to Divinity: and finding Friends to breed him in Oxford, he became the profitable Pastor of S. Edmonds in Lumbard-street, London, where he died Anno leaving Thomas Gatakèr his Learned Son, (Vide Learned Writers in London. of whom formerly) heir to his Paynes and Piety.
Prelates. ROBERT of SHREWSBURY was in the reign of King John (but I dare not say by him) preferred Bishop of Bangor 1197. Afterwards the King, waging war with Leo∣line Prince of Wales, took this Bishop prisoner in his own Cathedral Church, and enjoyned him to pay B. Godwin, in his Bishops of Bangor. Three hundred Hawkes for his ransome. Say not that it was improper that a Man of Peace should be ransomed with Birds of Prey, seeing the Bishop had learnt the Rule, Redime te captum quam queas minimo. Besides 300 Hawkes will not seem so inconsi∣derable a matter, to him that hath read, how in the reign of King Charles an English Noble Man (taken prisoner at the Ile H. le Strange in the History of K. Charles. Ree) was ransomed for a Brace of Grey-hounds. Such who admire where the Bishop on a sudden should furnish himself with a stock of such Fowl, will abate of their wonder, when they remember that about this time the Men of Norway (whence we have the best Hawkes) under Magnus their General, had possessed themselves of the Neighbouring Iland of Camdens Brit. Anglesea. Anglesea. Besides he might stock himself out of the Aryes of Pembrook-shire, where Idem in Pem∣brook-shire. Perigrines did plentifully breed. How ever, this Bishop appeareth something humerous by one passage in his Will, wherein he gave order that his Body should be buried in the middle of the Market place B. Godwin in Bishops of Bangor. of Shrews∣bury. Impute it not to his profaness and contempt of Consecrated ground, but either to his humility accounting himself unworthy thereof, or to his prudential fore-sight, that the fury of Souldiers (during the intestine War betwixt the English and Welsh) would fall fiercest on Churches, as the fairest market, and men, preferring their profit before their Piety, would preserve their Market-places, though their Churches were destroyed. He died Anno 1215. ROBERT BURNEL, was son to Robert, and brother to Hugh Lord Burnel, whose Prime Seat was at Acton-Burnel-Castle in this County. He was by King Edwàrd the First preferred Bishop of Bath and VVells, and first Treasurer, then Chancelor of England. He was well vers'd in the Welsh affairs, and much us'd in managing them; and that he might the more effectually attend such employment, caused the Camdens Brit. in Salop. Court of Chancery to be kept at Bristol. He got great Wealth wherewith he enriched his kindred, and is supposed to have rebuilt the decayed Castle of Acton-Burnel on his own expence. And to decline envy for his secular structures left to his heirs, he built for his Successors the beautiful Hall at VVells, the biggest room of any Bishops Palace in England, pluck'd down by Sir John Gabos (afterwards executed for Treason) in the reign of King Edward the Sixth. English and Welsh affaires being setled to the Kings contentment, he employed Bishop Burnel in some businesse about Scotland, in the Marches whereof he died, Anno Domini 1292. and his body, solemnly brought many miles, was buried in his own Ca∣thedral. WALTER de WENLOCK Abbot of Westminster, was, no doubt, so named from his Nativity in a Market Town in this County. I admire much that Matthew of VVest∣minster writeth him VVilliam de VVenlock, and that a Monk of VVestminster should (though not miscall) mis-name the Abbot thereof. He was Treasurer Register of Westminster Abbey. of England to King Edward the First betwixt the twelfth and fourteenth year of his reign, and enjoyed his Abbots Office six and twenty years lacking six dayes. He died on Christmasse day at his Mannor of Periford in Glocester-shire 1307, and was buried in his Church at VVestminster, besides the High-Altar before the Presbutery, without the South dore of King Edward's Shrine, where Abbas VValterus non fuit Auserus is part of his Epitaph. RALPH of SHREWSBURY, born therein, was in the third of King Edward the Third preferred Bishop of Bath & VVells. Being consecrated without the Popes privity (a daring adventure in those dayes) he paid a large sum to expiate his presumption therein. He was a good Benefactor to his Cathedral, and bestowed on them a Chest Port∣cullis-like, barred with iron, able to hold out a siege in the view of such as beheld it. But, what is of proof against Sacriledge? Some Thieves (with what Engines, unknown) in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Godwin in the Bishops of of Bath and Welles. forced it open. But this Bishop is most memorable for erecting and endowing a spacious structure for the Vicars-Choral of his Cathedral to inhabit together, which in an old Picture is thus presented.
The Vicars humble petition on their knees. Per vicos positi villae, Pater alme, rogamus, Ut simul uniti, te dante domos, maneamus. To us dispers'd ith' streets, good Father, give, A place where we together all my live. The gracious answer of the Bishop, sitting. Vestra petunt merita quod sint concessa petita, Ut maneatis ita, loca fecimus haec stabilita. Your merits crave that what you crave, be yeilded, That so you may remain, this place we've builded. Having now made such a Palace (as I may term it) for his Vicars, he was (in obser∣vation of a proportionable distance) necessitated in some sort to enlarge the Bishops Seat, which he beautified and fortified Castle-wise, with great expence. He much ingratiated himself with the Country people by disforasting Mendip, Beef better plea∣sing the Husbandmans palate than Venison. He sate Bishop thirty four years, and dying August 14. 1363. lieth buried in his Cathedral, where his Statue is done to the life,Godwin, Ibid. Vivos viventes vultus vividissimè exprimens, saith my Authour. ROBERT MASCAL, Was bred (saith Bale in) and born (saith De Illust. Ang. script. pag. 591. Pitz positively) at Ludlow in this County, where he became a Carmelite. Afterwards he studied in Oxford, and became so famous for his Learning and Piety, that he was made Confessor to Henry the Fourth, and Counsellor to Henry the Fifth, Promoted by the former Bishop of Hereford. He was one of the Three English Prelates which went to (and one of the Two which re∣turned alive from) the Council of Constance. He died 1416 being buried in the Godwin in Bishops. Church of White-Friers in London, to which he had been an eminent Benefactor. RICHARD TALBOTE was born of Honourable Parentage in this County, asIacobs Wa∣reus, de Praesu∣libus Lageniae. pag: 28. Bro∣ther unto John Talbote, the first Earl of Shrewsbury. Being bred in Learning, he was con∣secrated Arch-bishop of Dublin in Ireland 1417. He sate two and thirty years in that See (being all that time a Privy Counsellor to King Henry the Fifth and Sixth) twice Chief Justice, and once Chancelor of Ireland. He deserved well of his Church (founding six petty Canons, and as many Choristers therein) yea, generally of all Ireland, writing Idem de script. Hiber∣nia. pag. 131. a Book against James Earl of Ormond, wherein he detected his abuses during his Lieutenancy in Ireland. He died August the 15. 1449. and lieth buried in Saint Patricks in Dublin under a marble stone, whereon an Eitaph is written not worthy the inserting. The said Richard was unanimously chosen Arch-bishop of Armagh, a higher place, but refused to remove, wisely preferring Safety, above either Honor or Profit. GEORGE DAY was born in this Parker in his Skellitos Can∣tabrigiensis, in the Provosts of Kings Colledg. County, and successively Scholer, Fellow and Provost of Kings Colledge in Cambridge. Which he reteined with the Bishoprick of Chichester, to which he was consecrated 1543. A most pertinacious Papist, who though he had made some kind of Recantation in a Sermon (as I find it entred in king Edward the Sixth his own Diary) yet either the same was not satisfactory; or else he relapsed into his errours again, for which he was deprived under the said king, and restored again by Queen Mary. He died Anno Dom. 1556. Prelats since the Reformation. WILLIAM DAY was brother to the aforesaid George Day. I find no great diffe∣rence betwixt their age, seeing Mr. Hatcher in his Manu∣script. Cata∣logue, of Fel∣lows of Kings Colledge. George Day was admitted in Kings Colledge, Anno 1538. VVilliam Day was admitted in the same Colledge Anno 1545. Yet was there more than forty years betwixt the dates of their deaths. George Day died very young Bishop of Chichester, Anno Dom. 1556. VVilliam Day died very old Bishop of VVinchester, Anno 1596.
But not so great was the difference betwixt their Vivacity, as distance betwixt their Opinions: the former being a Rigid Papist, the later a Zealous Protestant. Who request∣ing of his Brother some Money to buy Books therewith, and other necessaries, was re∣turned with this denialB. Godwin in the Catal. of the Bishops of Winchester. That he thought it not fit to spend the goods of the Church on him who was an enemy of the Church. However, this William found the words of Solomon true,Prov. 18. 24. And there is a friend who is nearer than a Brother; not wanting those who supplyed his necessities: He was Proctor of Cambridge, 1558, and afterwards was made by Queen Elizabeth (who highly esteem∣ed him for his Learning and Religion) Provost of Eton and Dean of Windsor, two fair preferments (parted with Thames, but) united in his person; The Bishoprick of Win∣chester he enjoyed scarcely a whole year, and dyed as aforesaid, 1596. Statesmen. Sir THOMAS BROMLEY, was borne at Bromley in this County, of a right ancient Family, I assure you; bred in the Inner Temple, and Generall Solicitor to Queen Elizabeth. He afterwards succeeded Sir Nicholas Bacon, in the Dignity of Lord Chancellor, Aprill 25. 1579. Now although it was difficult to come after Sir Nicholas Bacon, and not to come after him: Yet such was Sir Thomas his Learning and Integrity (being charactred by myCamden in his Eliz. Anno 1587. Authors, Virjuris prudentia insignis:) That Court was not sensible of any considerable alteration. He possessed his place about nine years, dying Anno 1587, not being 60 yearsIdem Ibid. old. Hereby the pregnancie of his parts do appear, seeing by proportion of time he was made the Queens Solicitor before he was 40, and Lord Chancellor before he was 50 years old. Learning in Law may seem to run in the veins of that name, which since had a Baron of the Exchequer of his Alliance. Sir CLEMENT EDMONDS was born atSo his neer Kinsman in∣formed me. Shrawardine in this County, and bred Fellow in All-Souls Colledge in Oxford, being generally skilled in all Arts and Sciences. Witness his faithfull Translations of, and learned Illustrations on, Caesars Commentaries. Say not that Comment on Commentary was false Heraldry, seeing it is so worthy a work, that the Authour thereof may pass for an eminent instance to what perfection of Theorie they may attain in matter of War, who were not acquainted with the Practick part thereof, being only once employed by Queen Elizabeth, with a dispatch to Sir Fran∣cis Vere which occasioned his presence at the Battail at Newport: For he doth so smartly discusse pro and con, and seriously decide many Martiall Controversies, that his judge∣ment therein is praised by the best Military Masters. King Iames taking notice of his Abilities, made him Clerke of the Council, and Knighted him: And he was at last preferred Secretary of State, in the vacancy of that place, but, prevented by Death, acted not therein. He died Anno 16.. and lies buried at Preston in Northamptonshire, where he purchased a fair Estate, which his Grandchilde doth possess at this day. Capitall Judges and Writers on the Law. EDMUND PLOWDEN, was borne at Plowden in this County, one who excellent∣ly deserved of our Municipall Law, in his learned Writings thereon: but consult his en∣suing Epitaph, which will give a more perfect account of him. Conditur in hoc Tumulo corpus Edmundi Plowden Armigeri. Claris ortus Parentibus, apud Plowden in Comitatu Salop. natus est; à pueritia in literarum studio liberaliter est educatus, in provecti∣ore vero aetate Legibus, & juris prudentiae operam dedit. Senex jam factus, & annum aetatis suae agens 67. Mundo valedicens, in Christo Jesu sanctè obdormivit, die sexto mensis Februar. Anno Domini, 1584. I have rather inserted this Epitaph inscribed on his Monument on the North side of the East end of the Quire of Temple Church in London, because it hath escaped (but by what
casualty I cannot conjecture) Master Stow in his Survey of London. We must add a few words out of the Character Mr.His Eliza∣beth. An. 1584. Camden gives of him. Vitae integritate inter homines suae professionis nulli secundus. And how excellent a medly is made, when honesty and ability meet in a man of his Pro∣fession! Nor must we forget how he was Treasurer for the Honourable Society of the Middle-Temple, Anno 1572. when their magnificent Hall was builded: He being a great advancer thereof. Sir JOHN WALTER, son to Edmund Walter, Chief Justice of South-Wales, was born at Ludlow in this County, and bred a Student of our Common-Laws, wherein he atteined to great Learning, so that he became, when a Pleader, eminent; when a Judge, more eminent; when no Judge, most eminent. 1 Pleader.] The Character that Learned James Thuanus,Obiit Doct. Vir. in Anno 1565. in vita Joan. . gives of Christopher Thuanus his Father, being an Advocate of the Civil Law, and afterwards a Senator of Paris, is exactly agreeable to this Worthy Knight; Ut bonos a calumniatoribus, tenuiores a poten∣tioribus, doctos ab ignorantibus opprimi non pateretur. That he fuffered not good men to be born down by slanderers, poor men by more potent, Learned men by the ignorant. 2 Judge.] Who (as when ascending the Bench, entering into a new temper) was most passionate as Sir John, most patient as Judge Walter; and great his gravity in that place. When Judge Denham, his most upright and worthy Associate in the Western Circuit once said unto him, My Lord, you are not merry; Merry enough (return'd the other) for a Judge. 3 No Judge.] Being outed of his place, when Chief Baron of the Exchequer, about the Illegality of the Loan, as I take it. He was a grand Benefactor (though I know not the just proportion) to Jesus Colledge in Oxford, and died AnnoStow Surv. of Lon. in the Rem. pag. 910. 1630. in the Parish of the Savoy, bequeathing 20 l. to the Poor thereof. EDWARD LITLETON born atSo am I in∣formed by his two Suviving Brothers, the one a Serjeant at Law, the o∣ther a Dr. in Divinity. Mounslow in this County, was the eldest son to Sir Edward Littleton, one of the Justices of the Marches, and Chief Justice of North∣Wales. He was bred in Christ-Church in Oxford, where he proceeded Batchelor of Arts, and afterward one of the Justices of North-Wales, Recorder of London, and Sollicitor to king Charles. From these places he was preferred to be Chief Justice of the Common∣Pleas, when he was made Privy Counsellor; thence advanced to be Lord Keeper and Baron of Mounslow, the place of his Nativity. He died in Oxford and was buried in Christ Church, Anno 1645. Souldiers. Sir JOHN TALBOT was born (as all concurring indications do avouch) at Black∣Mere in this County, the then flourishing (now ruined) House, devolved to his Family by marying the Heir of the Lord Strange of Black-Mere. Many Honourable Titles de∣servedly met in him, who was, 1 Lord Talbot, and Strange, by his Paternal extraction. 2 Lord Furnival and Verdon, by maryage with Joan, the daughter of Thomas de Nevil. 3 Earl of Shrewsbury in England, and Weisford in Ireland, by creation of King Henry the Sixth. This is that terrible Talbot, so famous for his Sword, or rather whose Sword was so famous for his arm that used it. A Sword with badSum Talboti pro vincere ini∣micos meos. Latin upon it, but good Steel within it, which constantly conquered where it came, insomuch that the bare fame of his approach, frighted the French from the Siege of Burdeaux. Being victorious for twenty four years together, successe failed him at last, charging the enemy neer Castilion on unequal termes, where he with his Son the Lord Lisle were slain with a shot July 17. 1453. Hence forward we may say, Good night to the English in France, whose victories were buried with the body of this Earl, and his body enterred at White-Church in this County. Sir JOHN TALBOT, son to Sir John Talbot aforesaid, and Vicount Lisle in right of his Mother. Though he was slain with his Father, yet their ashes must not be so hudled
together, but that he must have a distinct commemoration of his valour. The rather, because a Noble Sir Walter Rleigh in Histor. of the World. lib. 5. pag. 455. Pen hath hinted a parallel, betwixt him and Paulus Aemilius the Roman General, which others may improve. 1 Aemilius was overpowred by the forces of Hannibal and Asdrubal to the loss of the day. 2 Corn. Lentulus intreated Aemilius (sitting all bloodied upon a stone) to rise and save himself, offering him his horse and other assistance. 3 Aemilius refused the proffer, adding withall, That he would not again come under the judgment of the people of Rome. 1 The same sad success attended the two Talbots, in fight against the French. 2 The Father advised the son, by escape to reserve himself for future fortune. 3 His son crav'd to be excused, and would not on any termes be perswaded to for∣sake his father. In two considerables Talbot far surpass'd Aemilius, for Aemilius was old, grievously, if not mortally wounded: our Lord in the flower of his youth, unhurt, easily able to escape. Aemilius accountable for the over-throw received, the other no wayes answer∣able for that daye's mis-fortune, being (as we have said) the 17 of July 1453. Learned Writers. ROBERT of SHREWSBURY. Take, Reader a tast of the different Spirits of Writers concerning his Character. Leland's Text. Eadem opera, & religionem celebrabat, & literas. With the same endeavour He plied both Religion and Learning. Script. Brit. Cent. 2. num. 76 Bale his Comment. Per religionem fortassis Monachatum intelligit, per literas Sophistica praestigia. It may be he meaneth Monkery by Religion and by Learning Sophistical fallacies. I confess he might have imployed his pains better. But Bale proceeds, de Consultis Ruthenis, consulting (not the Russians, as the word sounds to all Criticks) but the Men of Ruthin in Wales. He wrote the Life and Miracles of S. Winfride, flourished Anno 1140. DAVID of CHIRBURY, a Carmelite, was so named from his Native place in the West of this County, bordering on Mountgomery-shire. A small Village I confesse, yet which formerly denominated a whole hundred, and at this day is the Barony of the Lord Herbert. He was, saith Leland, (whom I take at the second hand on the trust of John In Appendice Ilus Ang. scrip. pag. 832. Pits) Theologiae cognitione clarus. And going over into Ireland, was there made Episcopus Dormorensis, Bishop of Drummore, as I take it, He is said Idem Ibid. to have wrote some Books, though not mentioned in Bale, and (which is to me a wonder) no notice taken of him by that Judicious Knight Sr. James In his Book, de Scriptoribus Hibernicis. Ware. So that it seems his Writings were either few, or obscure. Returning into England he died, and was buried in his Native County at Ludlow, in the Convent of the Carmelites, Anno Dom. 1420. Since the Reformation. ROBERT LANGELAND, forgive me, Reader, though placing him (who lived one hundred & fifty years before) since the Reformation: For I conceive that the Morning-star belongs rather to the Day, then to the Night. On which account this Robert (regulated in our Book not according to the Age he was in, but Judgement he was of,) may by Pro∣lepsis be termed a Protestant. He was born at Bale de script. Brit. cent. 6. num. 37. Mortimers-Clibery in this County eight miles from Malvern-Hills: was bred a Priest, and one of the first followers of J. Wickliffe, wanting neither Wit, nor Learning, as appears by his Book called, The vision of Pierce Plowgh-man, and hear what Character a most Learned Mr. Selden in his notes on Poliolbion. pag. 109. Antiquary giveth thereof. It is written in a kind of English meeter, which for discovery of the infecting corruptions of those times, I preferre before many of the more seemingly serious Invectives, as well for Invention as Judgement. There is a Book first set forth by Tindal, since, exemplied by Mr. Acts and Monuments. pag. 398. Fox, called The
Prayer and complaint of the Plowghman, which though differing in title and written in prose, yet be of the same subject at the same time, in the same Language, I must referre it to the same Authour: and let us observe a few of his strange words with their signifi∣cations. 1 Behotef 1 Promiseth 2 Binemen 2 Take away 3 Blive 3 Quickly 4 Fulleden for 4 Baptized 5 Feile times 5 Oft times 6 Forward. 6 Covenant. 7 Heryeth 7 Worshipeth 8 Homelich 8 Household 9 Lesew 9 Pasture 10 Leude-men 10 Lay-men 11 Nele 11 Will not 12 Nemeth for 12 Taketh 13 Seggen 13 Do say 14 Swevens 14 Dreams 15 Syth 15 Afterwards. 16 Thralles 16 Bond-men. It's observeable that Pitzaeus (generally a perfect Plagiary out of Bale) passeth this Langland over in silence: and why? because he wrote in oppositum to the Papal Interest: Thus the most Light finger'd Thieves will let that alone, which is too hot for them. He flourished under King Edward the Third, Anno Dom. 1369. THOMAS CHURCHYARD was born in the Town of Shrwesbury, as himself doth affirm in his Book made in Verse of the Worthines of VVales, taking Shropshire within the compass, making (to use his own expression) Wales the Park, and the Marches to be the Pale thereof. Though some conceive him to be as much beneath a Poet, as above a Rbimer, in my opinion his Verses may go abreast with any of that age, writing in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth. It seems by this his Epitaph in Mr. Camdens Remains, that he died not guilty of much Wealth. Come Alecto lend me thy Torch, To find a Church-yard in a Church-porch: Poverty and Poetry his Tomb doth enclose, Wherefore good nighbours be merry in Prose. His death, according to the most probable conjecture, may be presumed about the eleventh year of the Queens Reign Anno Dom. 1570. THOMAS HOLLAND D. D. was born in this Herologia Anglica, pag. 238. County, in finibus & limitibus Cam∣briae, in the confines and Marches of Wales, bred in Exeter Colledge in Oxford, and at last became Rector thereof. He did not with some only sip of Learning, or at the best but drink thereof: but was Mersus in Libris, Drowned in his Books, so that the Scholar in him almost devoured all other Relations. He was, saith the Authour, of his Funeral Sermon so familiar with the Fathers, as if he himselfe had been a Father. This quality commended him to succeed Dr. Lawrence Humphrid, in the place of Regius Professor, which place he discharged with good credit for twenty years together. When he went forth of his Colledge on any journey for any long continuance, he alwayes took this solemn Valedi∣ction of the Fellowes. Idem ibid. I commend you to the love of God, and to the hatred of Popery and Superstition. His extemporaries were often better than his praemeditations, so that he might have been said to have been out, if he had not been out. He died in March Anno Dom. 1612. and was buried in Oxford with great solemnity and lamentation. ABRAHAM WHELOCK was born in White-church Parish in this County, bred Fellow of Clare-Hall, Library-keeper, Arabick Professor, and Minister of St. Sepulchers in Cambridge. Admirable his industry, & no lesse his Knowledg in the Oriental tongues, so that he might serve for an Interpreter to the Queen of Sheba coming to Salomon, and the Wise Men of the East who came to Herod, such his skill in the Arabi and Persian Language. Amongst the Western Tongues he was well vers'd in the Saxon, witness his fair and true Edition of Bede. He translated the New Testament into Persian, and printed it, hoping in time it might tend to the conversion of that Country to Christianity. Such as laugh at his design as ridiculous, might well forbear their mirth, and seeing they expended neither penny of cost nor hour of pains therein, might let another enjoy his own inclination. True it is he that sets an acorn, sees it not a timber-oak, which others may behold, and if such
Testaments be conveyed into Persia, another age may admire what this doth deride. He died, as I take it, Anno Dom. 1654. Benefactors to the Publick. Sir ROGER ACHLEY born at Survey of London, p. 577. Stanwardine in this County. He beheld the whole City of London as one Family, and himself the Major 1511 (for the time being) the Master thereof. He observed that poor people, who never have more than they need, will sometimes need more than they have. This Joseph collected from the present plenty, that a future famine would follow, as in this kind, a Lank constantly attendeth a Bank. Wherefore he prepared Leaden-Hall, (therefore called the Common Garner) and stored up much Corn therein, for which he deserved the praise of the Rich, and the blessing of the Poor. Since the Reformation. Sir ROWLAND HILL, son of Richard Hill, was born at Stows Sur∣vey of London, p. 584. Hodnet in this County, bred a Mercer in London, whereof he was Lord Major 1549. Being sensible that God had given him a great estate, he expressed his gratitude unto him In Giving maintenance to a fair▪ School at Drayton in this County, which he built and endowed, besides six hundred pounds to Christ-Church-Hospital, and other bene∣factions. In D. VVillet, in his Caal. of Protestant Char. Forgiving at his death all his Tenants in his Mannors of Aldersy and Sponely, a years Rent. Also enjoyning his Heirs, to make them new Leases of one and twenty years, for two years Rent. As for the Cause-wayes he caused to be made, and Bridges built (two of stone con∣teining Stows Sur∣vey of London, pag. 90. eighteen arches in them both) seeing hitherto it hath not been my hap to go over them, I leave his piety to be praised by such passengers, who have received safety, ease, and cleaness, by such conveniences. He died Anno Dom. 15.. ¶ A note to the Reader. I have heard the natives of this County confess and complain of a comparative dearth (in proportion to other Shires) of Benefactors to the publick. But sure, Shropshire is like to the Mulberry, which putteth forth his leaves last of all Trees, but then maketh such speed, (as sensible of his slowness with an ingenious shame) that it over∣taketh those trees in Fruit, which in Leaves started long before it. As this Shire of late hath done affording two of the same surname still surviving, who have dipp'd their hands so deep in charitable morter. Sir Dub'd by K. Charles the II at the Hague, when sent thithera Com∣missioner for the City of London. THOMAS ADAMS, Kt. was born at Wem in this County, bred a Draper in London, where God so blessed his honest industry, that he became Lord Major thereof 164.. A man, who hath drunk of the bitter waters of Meribah without making a bad face thereat, cheerfully submitting himself to Gods pleasure in all conditions. He gave the house of his nativity, to be a Free School (that others might have their breeding, where he had his birth) and hath liberally endowed it. He liveth in due honor and esteem and, I hope, will live to see many years, seeing there is no better Collurium or Eye-salve to quicken and continue ones sight, than in his life time to behold a building erected for the publick profit. WILLIAM ADAMS Esq. was born at Newport in this County, bred by Trade a Haberdasher in London, where God so blessed his endeavours, that he fined for Alderman in that City. God had given him an heart and hand proportionable to his estate, having founded in the Town of his nativity a School-house in the form following. 1 The building is of Brick, with Windowes of free stone, wherein the School is Threescore and ten in length, and two and twenty foot in breadth and height. 2 Over it a fair Library furnished with plenty and choise Books. At the South end, the lodgings of the Schoolmaster, whose salary is sixty; On the North the Ushers, whose stipend is thirty pounds per annum. 3 Before the front of the School a stately Crupto-porticus, or fair walk all the length of
the School, with Pillars erected, and on the top thereof a leaden Tarras, with Railes, and Barristers. 4 Two Alms-houses for poor people, at convenient distance from the School, with competent maintenance. 5 Two Gardens a piece, for School-master and Usher, with well nigh two Acres of ground for a place for the Scholars to play in. 6 The Rent for the maintenance thereof deposed in the hands of Trustees, a year before, that in case of casualty there may be no complaint. 7 More intended for the settlement of exhibitions to Scholars chosen hence to the University, as God hereafter shall direct the founder. But who for the present can hold from praising so pious a performance. Come Momus, who delight do'st take, Where none are found, there faults to make: And count'st that cost, and care, and pain, Not spent on thee, all spent in vain. See this bright structure, till that smart Blind thy blear-eyes, and grieve thy heart. Some Cottage-Schools are built so low, The Muses there must groveling go. Here, whilst Apollo's sharp doth sound, The Sisters Nine may dance around; And Architects may take from hence The Pattern of magnificence. Then grieve not, Adams, in thy mind, 'Cause you have left no Child behind: Unbred! unborn, is better rather If so, you are a second Father To all bred in this School so fair, And each of them thy Son and Heir. Long may this Worthy person live to see his intentions finished and compleated, to his own contentment. Memorable Persons. THOMAS PARRE, son of John Parre, born at Alberbury in the Parish of Winnington in this County, lived to be above one hundred and fifty years of age, verifying his Anagram Thomas Parre. Most rare hap. He was born in the reign of King Edward the Fourth, one thousand four hundred eighty three, and two moneths before his death was brought up by Thomas Earle of Arundel (a great lover of Antiquities in all kinds) to Westminster. He slept away most of his time, and is thus charactered by an eye witness of him From head to heel his body had all over, A quick-set, thick-set nat'ral hairy cover. Change of Air and Diet (better in it self, but worse for him) with the trouble of many Visitants or Spectators rather are conceived to have accelerated his death, which happened Westminster, November the 15, 1634, and was buried in the Abbey-Church, all present at his burial, doing homage to this our aged Thomas de Temporibus. Lords Majors. Name Father Place Company. Time 1 Roger Acheley Thomas Acheley Stanwardine Draper 1511 2 Rowland Hill Thomas Hill Hodnet Mercer 1549 3 Thomas Lee Roger Lee Wellington Mercer 1558 4 Thomas Lodge William Lodge Cresset Grocer 1562 5 Rowland Heyward George Heyward Bridg North Clothworker 1570 6 Robert Lee Humphry Lee Bridg North Merchant Tailor 1602 7 John Swinnerton Tho. Swinnerton Oswestry Merchant Tailor 1612 8 Francis Jones John Jones Glaverley Haberdasher 1620 9 Peter Probey Not Recorded White-church Grocer 1622 10 Allen Cotton Ralph Cotton White-church Draper 1625 11 George Whitmore Will. Whitmore Charley Haberdasher 1631 12 Thomas Adams Thomas Adams Wem Draper 164. See we here a Jury of Lords Majors born in this (which I believe will hardly be pa∣allel'd in a greater) County. All [no doubt] Honestmen, and true.
The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the twelfth year of Henry the Sixth 1433. A] VVilliam, Bishop of Coven. & Leichf. Commissioners to take the Oaths. B] John de Talbot, Knight. C] Richard Laken, Knights for the Shire. VVilliam Boerley. Willielmi Malory, Militis Johannis Fitz-Piers Willielmi Lodelowe Thomae Hopton, de Hopton Richardi Archer Johannis Wynnesbury Thomae Corbet, de Ley Thomae Corbet, de Morton Johannis Bruyn, senioris Thomae Charleton Richardi Peshale Thomae Newport Georgii Hankeston Johannis Brugge Thomae Banastre Hugonis Harnage Leonardi Stepulton Hugonis Cresset Johannis Skryven Willielmi Poynour Richardi Neuport Richardi Horde Nicholai Sandford Griffin Kynaston Johanuis Bruyn, junioris Hugonis Stepulton Simonis Hadington Alani Wetenhull Richardi Sonford Johannis Otley Edwardi Leighton, de Mershe Edmundi Plowden Thomae Mardford Rogeri Bromley Richardi Lee Humfridi Cotes VVillielmi Leighton Richardi Horton Willielmi Welascote Richardi Husee Johannis Wenlok Willielmi Mersheton Walteri Codour Ricdardi Gerii VVillielmi Bourden. A] This VVilliam was VVilliam Hieworth, Bishop of Coventry and Leichfield, of whomVVilts Prela: here after. B] Sir John Talbot, (though here only additioned Knight) was the Lord Talbot, and eight years after created Earl of Shrewsbury, of whomVide Soul∣diers in this County. before. C] Richard Laken, the same Family with Lacon, whose Seat was at VVillily in this County, augmented both in Bloud and Estate by the Matches with the Heirs of 1Camb. Brit. in Salop. Harley. 2 Peshal. 3 Passilew. 4 Blunt of Kinlet. My hopes are according to my desires that this Ancient Family is still extant in this County, though I suspect shrewdly shattered in Estate. The Commissioners of this Shire were neither altogether Idle, nor very Industrious: having made but a short and slender return, only of 45 principal persons therein. Sheriffes of Shropshire. HEN. II. Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. filius Alani, for 5 years together. Anno 7 Guido Extraneus, for 5 years together. Anno 12 Gaufrid. de Ver, for 4 years together. Anno 16 Gaufrid. de Ver, & Will. Clericus. Anno 17 Guido Extraneus, for 9 years together. Anno 26 Hugo Pantulfe, for 8 years to∣gether. RICH. I. Anno 1 Will. filius Alani, & Reginal. de Hesden. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. filius Alani, & Will. de Hadlega. Anno 4 Will. filius Alani, for 4 years together. Anno 8 Will. filius Alani, & Regi∣nald. de Hedinge. Anno 9 Will. filius Alani, & Wido. filius Roberti. Anno 10 Will. filius Alani Masculum. JOHANNES. Anno 1 Will. filius Alani, & VVar∣rus de VVililegh. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 VVill. filius Alani, & Reiner de Lea. Anno 4 G. filius Petri, & Richardus, de Ambresleg. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Thomas de Erolitto & Ro∣bertus de Alta Ripa. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Thomas de Erdington, for 9 years together. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Ranul. Com. Cestriae, & Hen. de Aldetheleg. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Ranul. Com. Cestriae, & Philippus Kinton. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Ranul. Com. Cestriae. Anno 9 Johannes Bovet. Anno 10 Idem.
Anno 11 Hen. de Aldithle. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Hen. de Aldithle, & VVill. de Bromley. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Petr. Rival. & Rob. de Haye, for 4 years together. Anno 21 Johannes Extraneus, & Ro∣bertus de Acton. Anno 22 Johannes Extraneus, for 11 years together. Anno 33 Thomas Corbet Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Robertus de Grendon, for 5 years together. Anno 40 Hugo Acover Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 VVillielmus Bagod Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Jacobus de Audeley, for 7 years together. Anno 52 VValterus de Hopton Anno 53 Idem. EDW. I. Anno 1 Roger. de Mortuo Mari. Anno 2 Idem Anno 3 Idem Anno 4 Bago de Knovile Anno 5 Idem Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Rogerus Sprengehuse, for 8 years together. Anno 15 Dominus de Ramesley Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Robertus Corbet Anno 18 VVill. de Tickley, (ive Tittle) for 6 years together. Anno 24 Radulphus de Schirle. Anno 25 Idem Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Tho. Corbet Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Richardus de Harleigh. Anno 30 Idem Anno 31 VValter de Beysin Anno 32 Idem Anno 33 Johannes de Acton Anno 34 Johannes de Dene Anno 35 Idem EDW. II. Anno 1 Rogerus Trumvine Anno 2 Johannes Extraneus, & Hugo de Crofts. Hugo de Crofts Anno 4 Idem Anno 5 Hugo de Audeley Anno 6 Idem Anno 7 Idem Anno 8 VVill. de Mere. Anno 9 Rogerus de Cheyney Anno 10 Rogerus Trumwine Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Robertus de Grendon Anno 13 Nul. Tit. Vicom. in hoc Rot. Anno 14 Nec in hoc. Anno 15 Johannes de Swinerton Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Hen. de Bishburne Anno 18 Idem Anno 19 Idem EDW. III. Anno 1 Joh. de Hinckley, & Hen. de Bishburn Anno 2 Idem Anno 3 Johannes Hinckley Anno 4 Idem Anno 5 Henricus de Bishburn Anno 6 Idem Anno 7 Richardus de Peshal Anno 8 Idem Anno 9 Johannes de Hinckley Anno 10 Simon de Ruggeley Anno 11 Richardus de Peshal Anno 12 Idem Anno 13 Simon de Ruggeley Anno 14 Idem Anno 15 Adam de eshal Anno 16 Thomas de Swinerton Anno 17 Idem Anno 18 Johannes de Aston Anno 19 Richardus Com. Arundel, for 31 years together. Anno 50 Richardus Peshall Anno 51 Petrus de Careswel. Name. Place Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Brian. de Cornwel Burford Ar. a Lion ramp. Gu. crowned Or, a border Sa. Beazante. 2 Johannes Ludlow Hodnet Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable. 3 Joh. de Drayton Drayton   4 Rogerus Hord   Ar. on a Chief Or, a Raven proper. 5 Iohannes Shery     6 Edw. de Acton Aldenham Gu. 2 Lions passant Arg, betwixt 9 croslets, Or. 7 Ioh. de Stepulton   Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable. 8 Edw. ac Acton ut prius   9 Nich. de Sandford Sandford Parteper Cheveron, Sable and Er. 2 Boarsheads coupee in chief, Or. 10 Robert. de Lee Lee-hall Gu. a Fess componee, Or, & Az. betwixt 8 Billets Argent. 11 Ioh. * Mowetho   Alias * Mowellio, quaere. 12 Rob. de Ludlow ut prius   13 Edw. de Acton ut prius   14 Ioh. de Stepulton ut prius   15 Will. Huggeford     16 Hen. de Winesbury   Az. on a Bend, betwixt 2 cotises, Or, 3 Lions Gules. 17 Ioh. de Eyton Eyton Or, a Fret, Azure. 18 Thomas de Lee ut prius   19 VVill. VVorthie     20 VVill. Huggeford     21 Adamus de Peshal   Argent, a Cross formee, fleury, Sable, on a Canton, Gules, a Wolfs-head erased of the field. 22 Idem. ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Io. Cornwal, Mil. ut prius   2 VVill. Huggeford, & Iohan. Daras     3 VVill. Banaster VVem Argent, a Cross Patee Sable. 4 Tho. Newport Arcol Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, be∣twixt 3 Leopards heads Sable. 5 Idem. ut prius   6 Ioh. Cornwail, Mil. ut prius   7 Tho. de VVitton VVitton Or, on a Cheveron, Sable, 5 Plates. 8 VVill. Brounshul     9 Ioh. Boreley Broms-croft Catle Arg. a Fesse checque Or, and Az. upon a Lions ramp. Sable, armed Gnles. 10 Rog. Acton ut prius   11 Edw. Sprengeaux     12 Robertus Tiptot   Argent, a Saltire ingrailed, Gules. HEN. V     Anno     1 Rob. Corbet, Mil. Morton Or, a Raven proper. 2 Rob. Corbet, Mil. ut prius   3 Rich. Laken, Mil.   Quarterly per Fesse indented, Er∣min and Azure. 4 Geor. Hankeston     5 VVill. Ludelowe ut prius   6 Adam Peshal, Mil. ut prîus   7 Rob. Corbet ut prius   8 Iohannes Bruyn   Azure, a Crosse Molin, Or. 9 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Iohannes Bruyn ut prius   2 Hugo Harnage Cund Argent, 6 Torteauxes.
3 Tho. le Sange   Gules, 2 Lions passant, Argent. 4 VVill. Boy ut prius   5 Tho. Corbet ut pius   6 VVill. Lichfeld     7 Ioh. Winnesbury ut prius   8 Hugo Bugh, & Thomas opton   Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 flower de Luces, Ermin.   Hopton Gu. Seme de Cross croslets a Lion Ramp. Or. 9 Rich. Achet     10 Iohannes Bruyn ut prius   11 Iohannes Ludlow ut prius   12 . Corbet, de Ley ut prius   13 Hugo Crsset Upton Cresset Azure, a Cross within a Border ingrailed, Or. 14 Rob. Inglefeld BERK-sh. Barry of 6 Gules and Agent, on a chief, Or, a Lion passant Azure. 15 VVill. Ludlow ut prius   16 VVill. Liechfield     17 Hum. Low     18 Nicholaus Eyton ut prius   19 Idem ut prius   20 Iohannes Burgh ut prius   21 VVill. Ludlow ut prius   22 Thomas Corbet ut prius   23 Nicholus Eyton ut prius   24 Hugo Cresset ut prius   25 Fulcho Sprencheaux     26 VVill. Ludlow ut prius   27 Io. Burgh, Mil. ut prius   28 Rogerus Eyon ut prius   29 Thomas Herbert Chirbury Per pae Azure & Gules, 3 Lions ramp, Argent. 30 VVill. Laken ut prius   31 Ioh. Burgh, Mil. ut prius   32 Robertus Corbet ut prius   33 Ncholaus Eyton ut prius   34 VVill. Mitton   Per Pale Gules nd Azure, au Eagle  with 2 he, Or. 35 Tho. Hord, Arm. ut prius   36 Fulco Sprencheaux     37 Tho. Cornwail, ar. ut prius   38 Rob. Cober, Mil. ut prius   EDVV. IV.     Anno     1 Hum. Blout, Ar. Kin six.   Sable. 2 Rog. Kinston, ar. Horey See oues in  ▪ 3 Idem ut prius   4 Ioh. Burgh, Mil. ut prius   5 Rich. Lee Armig. ut prius   6 Rob. Eyon, ar. ut prius   7 Hum. Blount, ar. ut prius   8 Ioh. Leighton, ar. Watlesbury Quarterly per  indented Or, and Gules. 9 Rob. Cresset, Ar. ut prius   10 Rog. Knaston, ar. ut prius   11 Rog. Kaston, Mi. ut prius   12 Rob. Charleton, ar   Or, a Lion rampant, Gules. 13 VVill. Newport ut prius   14 Iohan. Leighton ut prius   15 Hum. Blount, Mil. ut prius   16 Iohannes Hi     17 Rich. Laken, Ar. ut prius   18 Rich. Ludlow, Mil. ut prius   19 Richardus Lee ut prius   20 Th. Blount, Arm. ut prius   21 Ioh. Harley, Mil.   Or, a end cotised, Sable. 22 Ioh. Leighton, ar. ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Thomas Mitton ut prius   2 Thomas Hord. ut prius   3 Rob. Cresser, & Gilber. Talbot, Mil. ut prius Gules, a Lion Rampant, and a border ingraied, Or▪ HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Talbot, mil. ut prius   2 Rich. Laken, mil. ut prius   3 Thomas Hord. ut prius   4 Edward▪ Blount ut prius   5 Rich. Ludlow, mil. ut prius   6 Iohan. Newport ut prius   7 VVill. Young, mil. Kenton Or, 3 Roses, Gules. 8 Edw▪ Blount, ar. ut prius   9 Tho. Blount, mil. ut prius   10 Th. Leighton, mil. & Rich. Lee, armig. ut prius     ut prius   11 Rich. Lee, armig. ut prîus   12 Tho. Screvin, arm. Fradgly Argent, Guttee Gules, a Lion rampant, Sable. 13 Rich. Laken, Mil. ut prius   14 Rich. Harley, Mil▪ ut prius   15 VVil. Otteley, ar. Pichford Argent, on a Bend Azure, three Garbes, Or▪ 16 Ioh. Newport, Ar. ut prius   17 Tho. Blount, Mil. ut prius   18 Pet. Newton, ar. Heytley Argent, a Cross Sable, fleury, Or▪ 19 Idem. ut prius   20 Geo. Manwayring, arm. CHESH Argent, two Barres, Gules. 21 Th. Cornwail, mil. ut prius   22 Rob. Corbet, Mil. ut prius   23 Th▪ Kinaston, mil. ut prius   HEN. VIII.         1 Th. Laken, arm. ut prius   2 Ioh. Newport, ar. ut prius   3 Th. Scriven, arm. ut prius   4 Pe. Newton, ar. ut prius   5 ill. Otteley, ar. ut prius   6 Tho. Laken, arm. ut prius   7 Th. Cornwall, mil. ut prius   8 Rob. Pigot, armig. Chetwin Erin, 3 Fusiles in Fesse, Sable▪ Pet. ewton, arm. ut prius   10 Tho. Blount, mil. ut prius   11 Th. Cornwall, mil. ut prius   12 Ioh. Salter, armig. Oswarey Gules, 10 Billets Or, 4, 3, 2, & 1 13 Geo. Bromley, ar. Bromley Quarterly per Fesse indented, Arg. and Or. 14 Pet. Nwton, arm. ut prius   15 Thomas Vernon Hodnt Argent, Frettee, Sable, a Canton, Gules. 1 Th. Cornwall, mil. ut prius   17 . Corbet de ley, ar.     18 Tho. Screvin, arm. ut prius   19 Ioh. Talbot, mil. Albighton   20 Rob. Nedeham, ar. Shenton Argent, a Bend ingrailed, Azure, betwit 2 Bcks-heads, Sable▪ 21 Rog. Corbet, arm. ut prius   22 Th. Cornwal, Mi. ut prius   23 Th. Manwayring ut prius   24 Th▪ Laken, miles. ut prius   25 Th. Talbot, miles ut prius   26 Tho. Vernon, arm. ut prius   27 Rob. Nedeham, M. ut prius   28 Ioh. Corbet, arm. ut prius   29 Ioh▪ Talbot, miles. ut prius   30 Rich▪ Manwayring ut prius   31 Rich. Laken, arm. ut prius   32 Rob. Nedeham, mi. ut prius   33 Ioh. Talbot, mil. ut prius   34 Th. Newport, mil. ut prius   35 Rich. Mitton, ar. ut prius   36 Rich▪ Manwayring ut prius   37 Th. Vernon, arm. ut prius   38 Th. Le, armig. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 VVill. Young, ar. ut prius   2 Rich. Cornwal, ar. ut prius   Tho. Newport, ar. ut prius   4 Andr. Corbet, mil. ut prius   5 Rich. Newpot, ar. ut prius   6 Ric. Manwayring (mil▪ ut prius   PHIL▪ Rex, & MAR. Reg.     Anno     1 Adam Milton, m.     2 Nic. Cornwal, ar. ut prius   3 Andr. Corbet, mil. ut prius  
4 Rich. Leveson, mil. Lilleshall Az. 3 Laurel-leaves slipped, Or. 5 Rich. Newport, ar. ut prius   6 Th. Farmour, arm.   Argent, a Fesse Sable, between 3 Lions-heads erased, Gules. ELIZ. Reg.     Anno     1 Rich. Mitton, Ar. ut prius   2 Rich. Corbet, arm. ut prius   3 Rich. Cornwal, ar. ut prius   4 Arth. Manwayring ut prius   5 Geor. Blount, mil. ut prius   6 Rob. Nedeham, ar. ut prius   7 Hum. Oslow, ar. Onslow Argent, a Fesse Gules, betwixt 6 Merlins Sable, beaked and legged, Or. 8 Th. Charlton, arm. & Th. Eaton, armig. ut prius   9 Edw. Leighton, ar. ut prius   10 Rich. Newport, mi. ut prius   11 And. Corbet, mil. ut prius   12 Rol. Laken, arm. ut prius   13 Will. Gratewood, A.     14 Th. Powel, armig. Worthen Arg. 3 ars-heads coupee, Sable. 15 Roub. Pigot, arm. ut prius   16 Ioh. Hopton, arm. ut prius   17 Walt, Leveso, ar. ut prius   18 Art. Maynwaing, m. ut prius   19 Fanc. Lawley, ar. Spoon-Hill Argent, a Cross Fomee through∣out, Or and Sable. 20 VVill. Young. arm. ut prius   21 Edw. Cornwal, ar. ut prius   22 VVil. Gratewood, a.     23 Th. VVilliams, ar. Willaston Sa. 3 Nags-heads erased, Ermin. 24 Carolus Fox, arm. Chain ham Ar. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Foxes beads erased, Gules. 25 Rich. Cresset, arm. ut prius   26 Roul. Barker, am. Haghmond Gules, a Fess checky Or and Az. betwixt 6 Annulets of the Se∣cond. 27 Fran. Newprt, ar. ut prius   28 Rob. Nedeham. ut prius   29 Edw. Leighton, ar. ut prius   30 Th. Cornwall, ar. ut prius   31 Andr. Charleton, . ut prius   32 VVill. Hopton, ar. ut prius   33 Rob. Eyton, armig. ut prius   34 Rich. Corbet, arm. ut prius   35 Rob. Powel, armig. ut prius   36 Frances Albany, ar. Fern-Hill Arg. on  Fess betwixe 3 cinque∣foiles Gules, a Gray-ond cur∣rant, Or. 37 Rob. Nedeham, ar. ut prius   38 Edw. Scriven, arm. ut prius   39 Carolus Fox, arm. ut prius   40 Edw. Kinaston, mi ut prius   41 Hum. Lee, armiger. ut prius   42 Franc. Newport, a. ut prius   43 Franc. Newton, ar. ut prius   44 Rog. Kiaston, ar. ut prius   45 Rog. Owen, mil. Condover Arget, a Lion rampant Sable, a Canton of the field. JACOB. Rex     Anno     1 Rog. Owen▪ mil. ut prius   2 Hum. Briggs, arm. Haughton Gu. 2 Bars gemels, Or, on a Canton, Sa. a Cressent of the first. 3 He. Walop, mil. Red-Castle Argent, a Bend Wavy, Sable. 4 Rob. Nedeham, m. ut prius   5 Ed. Fox, miles. ut prius   6 Rob. Purslow, mil. Sidbury Ar. a Cross ingrailed fleury Sa. a Bor∣der of the same forme Gu. ezance. 7 Rich. Mitton, arm. Holston Per Pale Gu. and Az. an Eagle dis∣played with 2 heads, Arg. 8 Bonham. Norton, a. Stretton Or, 2 Bars Gules, on a Chief, Azure, an Ineschoucheon Ermin. 9 Fran. Laken, mil. Kinlet Quarterly per Fess indented, Ermin and Azure. 10 Tho. Gervis, mil.     11 Ioh. Cotes, armig. Woodcoat Quarterly Ermin, and paly of six, Or and Gules. 12 Tho. Piggot, ar. ut prius   13 Th. Cornwal, Mil. ut prius   14 Rolan. Cotton, mi. Blla-Porte Aza a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cotton∣Skeans Arg. 15 Rob. Owen, Arm. ut prius   16 Tho. Harris, Arm. Boreatton Or, 3 Vrchins Azure, 17 Will. VVhitmore, ar Appley Vert, Frety, Or. 18 VValter Barker, ar. ut prius   19 h. Edwads, Arm. Creete Gules, a Cheveron, engrailed between 3 Boars heads erased, Or. 20 VVill. Owen, Mil. ut prius   21 VValt. Piggot, Ar. Chetwin Ermin, 3 Fusils in Fsse, Sable. 22 Tho. Jones, arm.     CAR. Rex.     Anno     1 Fran. Charleton, ar. Appley   2 Ric. Newport, Mil. High Arol Ar. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt 3 Leo∣pards heads, Sable. 3 Rich. Prince, arm. Shrwsbury Gu. a Saltir Or, over all a Cross in∣grailed, Ermin. 4 Ioh. Corbet, Barr. Stoake Or, 2 Ravens in Pale proper, a border ingrailed, Gules. 5 VValt. Acton, ar▪ Aldenhm Gu. 2 Lions passant Arg. between 9 Crosses croslets, Fitched, Or. 6 Hum. VValcot, ar. VValcot Ar. a Chever. inter 3 chess-Rooks, Er. 7 Tho. Ieland, arm. Abrington Gul. 6 fleur de Luces, Argent. 8 Phil. Eyton▪ Mil. Eyton Or, a Fret, Azure. 9 Tho. Thynne, Mil. Caus Castle Barry of 10 Or and Sable. 10 Ioh. Newton, arm. Heytleigh ut prius Arg. a Cross Sable fleury, Or. 11 Rob. Cobet, arm.     12 Paulus Harris, mil. ut prius   13 VVil. Pierpoint, ar. Tong-Castl Arg. a Lion Ramp. Sab. in an Orbe of Cinquefoiles, Gules.   14 Rich. Lee▪   Gules, a Fess Coponee, Or and Az. betwixt 8 Billels, Argen. 15 Rog. Kinnaston, ar ut prius   16 Th. Nicholas, arm. Shrewsbury   17 Ioh. VVelde, ar VVillye   18 Bellum nobis     19 hoc fecit     20 inane.     21     22 Rob. Powel, ar. T Park Arg. 3 Boars-heads copee, Sable▪ RICHARD the Second. 9. NICHOLAS de SANDFORD.] This ancient Name is still extant, at the same place in this County in a worshipful equipage; Wellfare a dear token thereof. For in the List of such as compounded for their reputed delinquency in our late Civil VVars, I find Francis Sandford, of Sandford Esq. paying four hundred fifty nine pounds for his com∣position. Yet I believe the Gentleman begrudged not his mony in preservation of his own integrity, acting according to the information of his conscience, and the practice of all his Ancestors. I understand that the said Francis Sandford was very well skill'd in making VVarlike Fortifications. HENRY the IV. 1 JOHN CORNWALL, Miles.] A Person remarkable on several accounts. 1 For his high Extraction, descended from Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of the Almains, as his Arms do evidence. 2 Prosperous Valour under King Henry the Fifth in France, there gaining so great Treasure, as that therewith heCamd. Brit▪ in Bedfordshire. built his fair house at Amp-hi in Bedford∣shire, 3 Great Honour, being created by King Henry the Sixth Baron Fanhop, and Knight of the Garter. 4 Constant Loyalty, sticking faster to King Henry the Sixth, than his own
Crown did, faithfully following after the other forsook him. 5 Vigorous vivacity, con∣tinuing till the reign of King Edward the Fourth, who dispossessed him of his Lands in Bedford-shire. 6 Chearful disposition, pleasantly saying: That not He, but his fine House at Amp-hill, was Camd. ut prius. guilty of high Treason: happy! that he could make mirth at his misery, and smile at the loosing of that, which all his Frowns could keep no longer. Know Reader that if this J. Cornwal, shall (which I suspect not) prove a distinct person, from this his Kinsman and Namesake, none will blame me for taking here a just occasion of speaking of so eminent a Man, who elsewhere came not so conveniently under my Pen. EDWARD the Fourth. 2 ROGER KINASTON, Ar.] I cannot satisfie my self in the certain Arms of this ancient Family (much augmented by match with HORD) finding them giving sundry [all good and rich] Coats in several Ages, but conceive they now fix on, Ar. a Lion ramp. Sa. RICHARD the Third. 1 THOMAS MITTON.] He, in obedience to King Richard's commands, apprehen∣ded the Duke of Buckingham (the Grand Engener to promote that Usurper) in the house of Humphry Banaster, who for the avaricious desire of a thousand pounds betrayed the Duke unto the Sherif. 3 GILBERT TALBOT Mil.] He was son to John Talbot, second Earl of Shrews∣bury, of that name. In the time of his Sherivalty, Henry Earl of Richmond (afterwards King Henry the Seventh) marching with his men to bid battle to King Richard the Third, was met at Shrewsbury by the same Sir Gilbert, with two thousand men well appointed (most of them Tenants and Retainers to his Nephew George fourth Earl of Shrewsbury, then in minority) whence forward and not before, his Forces deserved the name of an Army. For this and his other good service in Bosworth-field King Henry rewarded him with fair Lands at Grafton, in VVorcester-shire, made him Governour of Calis in France, and Knight of the Garter, and from him the present Earl of Shrewsbury is descended. I conceive it was rather his son than himself, to whom King Henry the Eight (fearing a sudden surprise from the French) wrote briefly and peremptorily That he should instantly fortifie the Castle of Calis. To whom Governour Talbot unprovided of ne∣cessaries as briefly as bluntly replyed, That he could neither fortifie nor fiftifie without money. Queen ELIZABETH. 45 ROGER OWEN, Miles.] He was the son of Sir Thomas Owen, the Learned and religious Justice of the Common Pleas, who lieth buried on the South side of the Quire of Westminster Abbey. This Sir Roger, most eminent in his Generation, deserved the Character given him by Mr. In Shrop∣shire. Camden. Multiplici doctrinâ tanto Patre dignissimus. He was a Member of Parliament, Vndecimo Jacobi, (as I take it) when a great Man there∣in (who shall be nameless) cast a grieveous, and general Aspersion on the English Quo genere hominum nihil est putidius. Clergy. This Sir Roger appeared a Zelot in their defence, and not only removed the Bastard [Calumny] from their doores, at which it was laid, but also carried the Falshood home to the true Father thereof, and urged it shrewdly against the Person, who in that place, first revived the Aspersion. King JAMES. 14 ROWLAND COTTON, Miles.] Incredible are the most true relations, which many eye-witnesses, still alive, do make of the Valour and Activity of this most ac∣complished Knight. So strong, as if he had been nothing but bones: so nimble, as if he had been nothing but sinewes. CHARLES the First. 2 RICHARD NEWPORT, Miles.] Signal his Fidelity to the king, even in his lowest condition, by whom he was deservedly rewarded with the Title of Baron of High-Arcol in this County, being created at Oxford the 14 of October, 1642. His sonne Francis Lord Newport at this day honoureth his honour with his Learning and other na∣tural accomplishments. Farewell. May this Shire, by Divine Providence, be secured from the return of the Sweating sicknesse, which first began and twice raged in the Town of Shrewsbury. The Cure was discovered, too late to save many, yet soon enough to preserve more thousands of Men viz. by keeping the Patient in the same posture wherein he was seized, without Food or Physick, and such who so weathered out the disease, for twenty four hours, did cer∣tainly escape.
SOMERSET-SHIRE hath the Severn-sea on the North, Glocester∣shire on the North-east, Wilts-shire on the East, Dorcet-shire on the South, and Devonshire on the West. Some will have it so called from the Summerlinesse, or temperate pleasantnesse thereof. With whom we concurre, whilst they confine their Etimologies to the Air; dissent, if they extend it to the Earth, which in winter is as winterly, deep and dirty, as any in England. The truth is, it is so named from Sommerton, the most ancient Town in the County. It stretcheth from East to West 55 miles, and from North to South 42 miles. No Shire can shew finer ware which hath so large measure, being generally fruitful though little moistry be used thereon. The Inhabitants will tell you that there be several single Acres in this Shire (believe them of the larger sise and sesqui-jugera if measured) which may serve a good round Fa∣mily with bread for a year, as affording a bushel of Wheat for every week therein, a proportion not easily to be parallel'd in other places. Naturall Commodities. Lead. Plenty of the best (for the Kind thereof) is digged out of Myndip-hills. Indeed it is not so soft, pliant and equally fusile, as that in Derby-shire, not so proper for sheeting, because when melted it runs into knots, & therefore little known to, and less used by our London∣Plumbers. For being of a harder Nature it is generally transported beyond the Seas, and imploy'd to make Bullets and Shot, for which purpose't is excellent. May Forreigners enjoy wild Lead to kill Men, whilst we make use of tame Lead to cover Houses, and keep people warm and dry therein. 'Tis almost incredible what great summes were advanced to the Bishops of Bath and Welles by the benefit of Lead, since the later end of Queen Elizabeth, Bishop Still is said to have had the Harvest, Bishop Montague the Cleanings, Bishop Lake the Stubble there∣of, and yet considerable was the Profit of Lead to him and his Successors. Lapis Calaminaris. Plenty hereof is also found in Myndip-Hills, and it is much used in Physick (being very good as artificially ordered for the clearing of the sight) and more by Mettalists. For Brass, no original, but a compound Mettal is made of this Stone and Copper, and becometh more hard than Copper alone, and therefore the more serviceable for many other purposes. And now the Ridle in Nature which so long hath posed me, is at last explained, viz. How it can come to pass that Brass, being made of the best Copper with much Art and Industry, is notwithstanding afforded some Pence in the Pound cheaper, than Copper itself. This cometh to pass because the Calaminary-stone being of it self not worth above six pence in the pound, doth in the composition metalescere, turn Metal, in the mix∣ture thereof, whereby the mass and Bulk of Brass is much advanced. I have no more to observe of this Stone, save that it was first discovered in this County in that juncture of time when the Copper Mines were newly r-discovered in Cumberland, God doubling his gift by the seasonable giving thereof. Cheefe. The Best and Biggest in England are made at Chedder, in this County. They may be called Corporation Cheeses, made by the Join-Daryes of the whole Parish, putting their Milk together, and each one, Poor and Rich, receive their share according to their proportion. So that some may think, that the Unity and Amity of those Female Neighbours, living so lovingly together, giveth the better Runnet and Relish to their handiwork. If any aske, why as good Cheese may not be made in the Vicenage, where the soil is as rich, and the same Houswifry? it will be demanded of them, why (nailes must be driven out with nailes) the like Cheese in Colour, Tast and Tenderness may not be made at Cremona, as at Parma, both lying in Lombardy, near together, and sharing equally in
all visible advantages of fatness and fruitfulness. The worst fault of Chedder Cheese is, they are so few and dear, hardly to be met with, save at some great Mans Table. Woad. In Latine Glastum, or Glaustum, was much used by the Ancient Brittains, for the paint∣ing of their Faces: for I believe it will hardly be proved, that they dye their whole bo∣dies. Say not, painted terriblenesse, is no terriblenesse, rather ridiculous than formidable, seeing Vizards are more frightful than mens own faces. This Woad gave the Brittains a deep black tincture, as if they would blow up their enemies with their Sulphureous countenances. Our Dyers make much use thereof, being Color ad Colorem, the Stock (as I may say) whereon other Colours are grated. Yea, it giveth them truth and fruithfulnesse, who without it prove fading and hypocritical. This Herb doth greatly impair the ground it groweth on; profitable to such to set, who have land to let without Impeachment of Waste, it being long before it will re∣cover good grass therein. I have placed Woad (which groweth in all rich places) in this County, because (as I am informed) it groweth naturally therein (hardly to be de∣stroyed) especially about Glassenbury. Insomuch that a Learned M. . Langly late School∣master of Pauls. Critick, and my Worthy good friend had almost perswaded me, that from this Glastum, that Town taketh its de∣nomination. Mastiffes. Smile not, Reader, to see me return to course Creatures amongst the Commodities of this County. Know, they are not (like Apes) the fooles and jesters, but the useful Servants in a Family, viz. the Porters thereof. Pliny observes, that Brittain breed's cow∣ardy Lions, and couragious Mastiffes, which to me seems no wonder, the former being whelp'd in prison, the later at liberty. An English Mastiffe Anno 1602 did in effect worst a Lion, on the same token, that Prince Henry allow'd a kind of pension for his maintenance, and gave strict Stows Annu∣als, pag. 336. order That he that had fought with the King of Beasts should never after encounter any inferiour Creatures. Our English Mastiffes are in high reputation beyond the Seas, and the story is well known, that when an hundred Molossi were sent hence a present to the Pope; a Lack∣Latin Cardinal, standing by, when the Letter was read, mistooke Molossos for so many Mules. Surely had Brittain been then known to the Ancient Romans, when first (instead of manning,) they Dogged, their Capitol, they would have furnished themselves with Mastiffes fetched hence for that purpose, being as vigilant as, more valiant then, any of their Kind. For the City of St. Malow in France is Garrisoned with a Regiment of Doggs, wherein many ranks are of English Extraction. Hence it is that an Drayton in his Polyolbion. Authour tells me, that it passeth for the Blazon of this County, Set the Band-Dog on the Bull. It seems that both the Gentry and Country-folk in this Shire, are much affected with that pastime, though some scruple the lawfulness thereof. 1 Man must not be a Barrater, to set the Creatures at variance. 2 He can take no true delight in their Antipathie, which was the effect of his sin. 3 Mans Charter of Dominion empowers him to be a Prince, but no Tyrant over the Creatures. 4 Though Brute Beasts are made to be 2 Pet. 2▪ 12. destroyed, they are not made to be tormented. Others rejoyn, that God gave us the Creatures as well for our pleasure as necessity: that some nice consciences, that scruple the Baiting of Bulls, will worry men with their vexatious cruelties. All that I dare in∣terpose is this, that the tough flesh of Bulls is not onely made more tender by baiting, but also thereby it is discoloured from Ox-beef, that the Buyer be not deceived. Manufactures. Taunton Serges are eminent in their Kind, being a fashionable wearing, as lighter than Cloath, yet thicker than many other Stuffs. When Dionysius sacrilegiously plundred Jove his Statue of his Golden Coat (pretending it too cold for Winter, and too hot for Summer) he bestowed such a vestimēt upō him to fit both Seasons. They were much sent into Spain, before our late War therewith, wherein Trading (long since complained of to
be dead) is now lamented generally as buried, though hereafter it may have a resurre∣ction. The Buildings. Of these the Churches of Bath and Wells are most eminent. Twins are said to make but one Man, as these two Churches constitute one Bishops See. Yet as a Twin oft-times proves as proper a person as those of single Births. So these severally equal most, and ex∣ceed many Cathedrals in England. We begin with Bath considerable in its several conditions, viz. the beginning, obstru∣cting, decaying, repairing, and finishing thereof. 1 It was begun by Oliver King Bishop of this Diocess in the reign of Henry the Seventh and the West end most curiously cut and carved with Angels climbing up a Ladder to Heaven. But this Bishop died before the finishing thereof. 2 His Death obstructed this structure so that it stood a long time neglected, which gave occasion for one to write on the Church-wall with a Char-coal. O Church I wail thy woeful plight, Whom King, nor Card'nal, Clark, or Knight Have yet restor'd to ancient right. Alluding herein to Bishop King who begun it, and his four Successors in thirty five years, viz. Cardinal Adrian, Cardinal Wolsey, Bishop Clark, and Bishop Knight, contri∣buting nothing to the effectual finishing thereof. 3 The decay and almost ruin thereof followed when it felt in part the Hammers which knocked down all Abbyes. True it is the Commissioners profered to sell the Church to the Towns-men under 500 Marks. But the Towns-men fearing if they bought it so cheape to be thought to cozin the King: so that the purchase might come under the compasse of concealed lands, refused the profer. Hereupon the Glass, Iron, Bells, and Lead (which last alone amounted to 480 Tun) provided for the finishing thereof were sold and sent over beyond the Seas, if a ship-wrack (as some report) met them not by the way. 4 For the repairing thereof, collections were made all over the Land in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, though inconsiderable, either in themselves, or through the corruption of others. Onely honest Mr. Billet (whom I take to be the same with him, who was de∣signed Executor, to the Will of William Cecil Lord Burghley) disbursed good sums to the repairing thereof, and a Stranger under a fained name took the confidence thus to play the Poet and Prophet on this Structure. Be blithe fair Kirck, when Hempe is past, Thine Olive, that ill winds did blast, Shall flourish green for age to last. Subscribed Cassadore. By Hempe understand Henry the Eight, Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, King Philip, and Queen Elizabeth. The Author I suspect had a Tang of the Cask, and being parcel-popish expected the finishing of this Church at the return of their Religion, but his prediction was verified in a better sense, when his Church 5 Was finished by James Montague Bishop of this See, disbursing vast sums in the same, though the better enabled thereunto by his Mines at Mynedep, so that he did but re∣move the Lead from the bowels of the Earth to the roof of the Church, wherein he lies enterred under a fair Monument. This Church is both spacious and specious, the most lightsome as ever I beheld, pro∣ceeding from the greatness of the Windows, and whiteness of the Glass therein. All I have more to add is only this, that the parable of Jotham [Judg. 9. 8.] is on this Church most curiously wrought (in allusion to the Christian Sirname of the first Founder thereof,) how the Trees going to choose them a King, profered the place to the OLIVE. Now when lately one OLIVER was for a time Commander in Chief in this Land, some (from whom more Gravity might have been expected) beheld this Picture as a Prophetical Prediction, so apt are English fancies to take fire at every spark
of conceit. But seeing since that Olive hath been blasted bottom, his Root and Bran∣ches, this pretended Prophecy with that observation the reason is withered away. As for the Cathedral of Wells it is a greater so darker than that of Bath, so that Bath may seem to draw devotion with the pleasantnesse, Wells to drive it with the solemnity thereof, and ill tempered their Minds who will be moved with neither. The West Front of Wells is a Master-piece of Art indeed, made of Imagiry in just proportion, so that we may call them Vera & spirantia signa. England affordeth not the like. For the West end of Excester beginneth accordingly, it doth not like Wells persevere to the end thereof. As for the Civil Habitations in this County (not to speak of Dunstar Castle, having an high ascent, and the effect thereof, a large prospect by Sea and Land) Mountague built by Sir Edward Philips, Master of the Roles, is a most magnificent Fabrick. Nor must Hinton St. George, the House of the Lord Poulet be forgotten having every stone in the Front shaped Doule-wayes, or in the form of a Cart-nail. This I may call a Charitable Curiosity, if true what is traditioned. That about the reign of King Henry the Seventh, the owner thereof built it in a dear year, on purpose to imploy the more poor people thereupon. The Wonders. VVockey Hole in Mendip-hills some two miles from VVells. This is an underground∣Concavity, admirable for its spacious Vaults, stony Walls, creeping Labyrinths, the cause being un-imaginable, how and why the Earth was put in such a posture, save that the God of Nature is pleased to descant on a plain hollowness, with such wonderful contrivances. I have been at, but never in this Hole, and therefore must make use of the description of a Learned eye Dr. Hakewil in his Apolog. lib. 5. pa. 6,. Witness. Entring and passing through a good part of it with many lights. Among other many strange Rarities, well worth the observing; VVe found that water which incessantly dropped down from the Vault of the Rock, though thereby it made some little dint in the Rock, yet was it turned into the Rock it self, As manifestly appeared even to the judgment of sense, by the shape, and colour, and hardnesse; It being at first of a more clear and glassie substance then the more ancient part of the Rock, to which no doubt but in time, it hath been and will be assimulated: And this we found not in small pieces, but in a very great quantity, and that in sundry places enough to load many Carts; From whence I inferre that as in this Cave, so no doubt in many other, (where they searched) the Rocks would be found to have increased immediately by the dropping of the water, besides that increase they have from the Earth in the Bowels thereof, which still continuing as it doth, there can be no fear of their utter failing. Medicinal Waters. BATH is well known all England and Europe over, far more useful and wholesome though not so stately as Dioclesian his Bath in Rome, (the fairest amongst 856 in that City, made onely for pleasure and delicacy) beautified with an infinite of Marble Pillars, (not for support but ostentation,) so that Salmuth saith, fourteen thousand men were imployed for some years in building thereof. Our Baths-waters consist of 1 Bitumen, (which hath the predominancy,) sovereign to discuss, glutinate, dissolve, open obstructions, &c. 2 Niter, which dilateth the Bitumen, making the solution the better, and water the clearer. It clenseth and purgeth both by Stool and rine, cutteth and dissolveth gross Humours. 3 Sulphur, In regard whereof, they dry, resolve, mollifie, attract, and are good for Uterine effects, proceeding from cold and windy Humours. But how thes Waters come by their great heat, is rather controverted than conclu∣ded amongst the Learned. Some impute it to Wind or Airy Exhalations, included in the Bowels of the Earth, which by their agitation and attrition (upon Rocks and narrow passages) gather Heat, and impart it to the Waters. Others ascribe it to the heat of the Sun, whose Beams piercing through the Pores of the Earth, warm the Waters, and therefore anciently were called Aquae Solis, both because dedicated to, and made by the Sun.
Others attribute it to quick-lime, which we see doth readily heat any water cast upon it, and kindleth any combustible substance put therein. Others referre it to a Subterranean fire kindled in the bowels of the Earth, and actually burning upon Sulpher and Bitumen. Others impute the heat (which is not destructive but generative joyned with moi∣sture) to the fermentation of several minerals. It is the safer to relate all, than reject any of these Opinions, each having both their Opposers and Defenders. They are used also inwardly, in Broths, Beere, Juleps, &c. with good effect. And although some mislike it because they will not mixe Medicaments with Ali∣ments, yet such practice beginneth to prevail. The worst I wish these waters is, that they were handsomly roofed over (as the most eminent Bathes in Christendome are,) which, (besides that it would procure great benefit to weak persons,) would gain more respect hither in Winter Time or more early in the Spring; or more late in the Fall. The Right Honourable James Earle of Marleborough, undertook to cover the Crosse-Bath at his own charge, and may others follow his resolution, it being but fit, that where God hath freely given the Jewel, Men bestow a Case upon it. Proverbs. VVhere should I be bore else thn in Tonton Deane? This is a parcel of Ground, round about Tonton, very pleasant and populous, (as con∣teining many Parishes) and so fruitful, to use their Phrase with the Zun and Zoil alone, that it needs no manuring at all. The Peasantry therein are as Rude as Rich, and so highly conceited of their good Country (God make them worthy thereof) that they conceive it a disparagement to be born in any other place: as if it were eminently all England. The Beggars of Bath. Many in that place, some natives there, others repairing thither from all parts of the Land, the Poor for Alms, the pained for ease. Whither should Fowl flock in an hard frost, but to the Barn-door? Here all the two seasons the general confluence of Gentry. Indeed Laws are daily made to restrain Beggars, and daily broke by the connivence of those who make them: it being impossible, when the hungry Belly barks, and bowels sound, to keep the tongue silent. And although Oil of whip be the proper plaister for the cramp of lazinesse, yet some pity is due to impotent persons. In a word, seeing there is the Lazars-Bath in this City, I doubt not but many a good Lazarus, the true object of Charity may beg therein. Saints. DUNSTAN was born in the Town Lives of the Saints. of Glassenbury in this County. He afterwards was Abbot thereof, Bishop of London & VVorcester, Archbishop of Canterbury, and at last for his promoting of Monkery, reputed a Saint. I can add nothing to, but must subtract some∣thing from, what I have written of him in my Church History. True it is he was the first Abbot of England, not in time but in honour, Glassenbury being the Proto-Abbaty then and many years after, till Pope Adrian advanced St. Albans above it. But, whereas it followeth in my Century 10! pag. 129. Book, That the title of Abbot till his time was unknown in England, I admire by what casualty it crept in, confess it a foul mistake, and desire the Reader with his Pen to delete it. More I have not to say of Dunstan, save that he died, Anno Dom. 988. and his skill in Smithery was so great, that the Gold-smiths in London are incorpo∣rated by the Name of the Company of St. Dunstans. Martyrs. JONH HOOPER was born in this Terrae Somer∣setensis alum∣nus Bale, de Script. Brit. cent. 8. num. 86. County, bred first in Oxford, then beyond the Seas. A great Scholar and Linguist, but suffering under the notion of a proud man, onely in their Judgments, who were un-acquainted with him. Returning in the reign of king Edward the Sixth, he was elected Bishop of Glocester, but for a time scrupuled the
acceptance thereof, on a double account. First, because he refused to take an Oath tendered unto him. This Oath IIn my Eccles. History. conceived to have been the Oath of Canonical obedience: but since, (owing my information to my Worthy Friend, the Learned Dr. John Hacket,) I confess it the Oath of Supremacy, which Hooper refused, not out of lack of Loyalty but store of Conscience. For, the Oath of Supremacy as then modelled, was more than the Oath of Supremacy, injoyning the receivers thereof conformity to the Kings commands in what alterations soever he should afterwards make in Religion. Which implicite and un∣limited obedience, Learned Casuists allow onely due to God himself. Besides, the Oath concluded with So help me God and all his Angels and Saints. So that Hooper had just cause to scruple the Oath, and was the occasion of the future re∣forming, whilst the King dispensed with his present taking thereof. The second thing he boggled at, was the wearing of some Episcopal habiliments, but at last it seemeth, consented thereunto, and was Consecrated Bishop of Glocester. His adversaries will say, that the refusing of One is the way to get Two Bishopricks, seeing afterward he held Worcester in Commendam therewith. But, be it known that as our Hooper had double dignity, he had treble diligence, painfully preaching Gods Word, piously living as he preach'd, and patiently dying as he liv'd, being martyred at Glocester Anno 155-. He was the onely native of this Shire suffering for the testimony of the Truth, and on this account we may honour the memory of Gilbert Bourn Bishop of Bath and Wells in the reign of Queen Mary, who persecuted no Protestants in his Diocese to Death, seeing it cannot be proved that one Lush was ever burnt though by him condemned. I mention Bishop Bourn here the more willingly, because I can no where recover the cer∣tainty of his Nativity. Prelates. JOCELINE ofTaken gene∣rally out of Bp. Godwin. WELLS. Bishop Godwin was convinced by such evidences, as he had seen, that he was both born and bred in Welles, becomming afterwards the Bishop thereof. Now whereas his Predecessors stiled themselves Bishops of Glaston, (especially for some few years after their first Consecration) He first fixed on the Title of Bath and Wells, and transmitted it to all his Successors. In his time the Monks of Glassenbury, being very desirous to be only subjected to their own Abbot, purchased their Exemption, by parting with four fair Mannors to the See of Wells. This Joceline, after his return from his five years Exile in France, (banished with Archbishop Langton on the same account of obstinacy against King John) layed out him∣self wholely on the beautifying and enriching of his Cathedral. He erected some new Prebends, and to the use of the Chapter, appropiated many Churches, increasing the revenues of the Dignities, (so fitter called than Profits so mean then their mainte∣nance) and to the Episcopal See, he gave three Mannors of great value. He with Hugo Bishop of Lincoln was the joynt Founder of the Hospital of St. Johns in Wells, and on his own sole cost, built two very fair Chappels, one at VVokey, the other at VVells. But the Church of VVells was the Master-piece of his Works, not so much repaired, as re∣built by him, and well might he therein have been afforded a quiet repose. And yet some have plundered his Tomb of his Effigies in Brasse, being so rudely rent off, it hath not only defaced his Monument, but even hazarded the ruin thereof. He sat Bishop (which was very remarkable) more than thirty seven years, (God to Square his great undertakings giving him a long life to his large heart) and died 1242. FULKE of SAMFORD was born in this County, but in which of the Samfords (there being four of that name therein & none elsewhere in England) is hard (and not necessary) to decide. He was first preferred Treasurer of St. Pauls in London, and then by Papal Bull declared Archbishop of Dublin,Sir James Ware, in the Archbishops of Dublin. 1256. Mr. Paris calleth him Fulk Basset by mistake. He died in his Mannor of Finglas 1271, and was buried in the Church of St. Patrick, in the Chappel of St. Maries which likely was erected by him. JOHN of SAMFORD. It is pity to part Brethren. He was first Dean of St. Patrick in Dublin, (preferred probably by his Brother) and for a time Eschaetorr James Ware, ut sup. of all Ireland.
Indeed the Office doth male audire, sound ill to ignorant eares, partly because the vicinity thereof to a worseviz. Cheater. word (Esquire and Squire, are known to be the same) partly be∣cause some by abusing that Office, have rendred it odious to people, which in it self was necessary and honourable. For the name Eschaetor cometh from the French word Escheoir, which signifieth to Happen or Fall out, and He by his place is to search into any Profit ac∣crewing to the Crown by casualty, by the condemnation of Malefactors, Persons dying without an Heir, or leaving him in minority, &c. and whereas every County in England hath an Eschaetor; This John of Samford being Eschaetor General of Ireland, his place must be presumed of great Trust from the King, and Profit to himself. He was Canonically chosen and by King Edward the first confirmed Archbishop of Dublin 1284, mediately succeeding (John de Derlington interposed) his Brothet Fulke therein, and I cannot readily remember the like Instance in any other See. For a time he was Chief Justice of Ireland, and thence was sent (with Anth Bishop of Durham) Embasadour to the Emperour: whence returning he died at London 1294. and had his Body carried over into Ireland (an Argument that he was well respected) and buried in the Tomb of his Brother in the Church of St. Patricks. THOMAS BECKINTON was born atNew Coll. Reg. in Anno 1408. Beckinton in this County, bred in New∣Colledge Doctor in the Laws, and Dean of the Arches, till by King Henry the Sixth he was advanced Bishop of Bath and VVelles. AAll extracted & contracted out of Bishop Godwin his Bishops of Bath & Wells. good 1 States-man; having written a Judicious Book to prove the Kings of En∣gland to the Crown of France, notwithstanding the pretenced Salique-Law. 2 Church-man; (in the then notion of the Word) professing in his Will, that he had spent six thousand Marks in the repairing and adorning of his Palaces. 3 Towns-man; besides a Legacy given, to the Town where he was born, he built at VVells, where he lived, a fair Conduit in the Market-place. 4 Subject; alwayes loyal to King Henry the Sixth, even in the lowest con∣dition. 5 Kinsman; plentifully providing for his alliance with Leases, without the least prejudice to the Church. 6 Master; bequeathing five pounds a piece to his chief, five Marks a piece to his meaner Servants, and fourty shillings a piece to his Boys. 7 Man; He gave for his Rebus (in allusion to his Name) a burning Beacon, to which he answered in his Nature, being a burning and a shining light. Witnesse his many benefactions to VVells Church, and the Vicars therein; VVinchester, New, Merton, but chiefly Lincoln-Colledg in Oxford, being little lesse than a second Founder thereof. A Beacon (we know) is so called from Beckoning, that is, making signs, or giving notice to the next Beacon. This bright Beacon doth nod and give hints of bounty to future ages, but it is to befeared, it will be long before his signs will be observed, understood, imi∣tated. Nor was it the least part of his prudence, that (being obnoxious to King Edward the Fourth) in his life time he procured the confirmation of his Will under the broad Seal of England, and died January the 14, 1464. RICHARD FITZ-JAMES Doctor at Law, was born at Redlinch in this County, of right ancient and worshipful extraction, bred at Merton Colledge in Oxford, whereof he became Warden: much meriting of that place, wherein he built most beautiful Lodgings, expending also much on the repair of St. Maries in Oxford. He was preferred Bishop first of Rochester, next of Chichester, last of London. He was esteemed an excellent Scholar, and wrote somePitzeus, in Appendice. Books, which if they ever appeared in publick, never descended to posterity. He cannot be excused for being over busie with fire and faggot in persecuting the poor Servants of God in his Diocess. He deceased Anno 1512. lyeth buried in his Cathedral (having contributed much to the adorning thereof) in a Chappel-like Tomb, built (it seems) ofBp. Godwins words are  materie. Timber, which was burnt down when the steeple of St. Pauls was set on fire, Anno 1561. This Bishop was brother to Judg Fitz-James, Lord Chief Justice, who with their mutual support much strengthned one another in Church and State.
To the Reader. I cannot recover any native of this County, who was a Bishop since the Reforma∣tion, save only John Hooper, of whom formerly in the Catalogue of Martyrs. States-men. Sir AMIAS POULET, Son to Sir Hugh, grand-Child to Sir Amias Poulet, (who put Godwin in the life of K. Henry the 8. Cardinal Wolsey, then but a Schoolmaster, in the Stockes) was born at Hinton Saint George in this County. He was Chancelor of the Garter, Governour of the Isles of Jersey and Gernsey, and Privy Counsellor to Queen Elizabeth, who chiefly committed the keep∣ing of Mary Queen of Scots to his fidelity, who faithfully discharged his trust therein. I know the Romanists rail on him, as over-strickt in his Charge; but indeed without cause, for he is no unjust Steward, who to those under him alloweth all his Masters allowance, though the same be ut of the scantest proportion. Besides it is no news for Prisoners (es∣pecially if accounting their restraint unjust) to find fault with their Keepers meerely for keeping them. And such who complain of him, if in his place, ought to have done the same themselves. When Secretary Walsingham moved this Knight to suffer one of his Servants to be bribed by the Agents of the Queen of Scots, so to compasse the better intelligence, he would in no terms yield thereunto. Such conniving at, was consenting to; and such con∣senting to, in effect was commanding of such falshood. Whereupon the Secretary was fain to go further about, and make use of an Instrument at a greater distance, who was no menial servant to Sir Amias. He died Anno Dom. 15.. And was buried in London, in St. Martins in the fields, where his Epitaph is all an allusion to the three Swords in his Arms, and three words in his Motto, Gardez la Foy, Keep the Faith. Which harping on that one string of his fidelity, (though perchance harsh musick to the ears of others) was harmonios to Queen Eliza∣beth. Capital Judges. JOHN FITZ-JAMES Knight, was born at Redlinch in this County, of right ancient and worthy Parentage, bred in the Study of our Municipal Laws, wherein he proved so great a Proficient, that by King Henry the Eighth, He was advanced Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. There needs no more be said of his merit, save that King Henry the Eighth preferred him, who never used either Dunce or Done in Church or State, but Men of Ability and Activity. He sate above thirteen years in his Place, demeaning himself so, that he lived and died in the Kings favour. He sate one of the Assistants when Sir Thomas More was arraigned for refusing the Oath of Supremacy, and was shrewdly put to it to save his own Conscience, and not incurre the Kings displeasure. For Chancellor Audley Supream Judge in that place, (be∣ing loath that the whole burthen of Mores condemnation should lye on his shoulders alone) openly in Court asked the advice of the Lord Chief Justice Fitz-James, whether the Indictment were sufficient or no? to whom our Judge warily returned. My Lords all, by St. Gillian (which was ever his Oath) I must Mr. More in the printed life of his grand-father Sr. Tho. More, pag. 334. needs confesse, that, if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful, then the Indictment is not in my conscience insuf∣ficient. He died in the thirtyeth year of King Henry the Eighth, and although now there be none left at Redlinch of his Name and Family, they flourish still at Lewson in Dorsetshire, descen∣ded from Alured Fitz-James (brother to this Judge, and to Richard Bishop of London) whose Heir in a direct line Sir John Fitz-James Knight I must acknowledge a strong encourager of my weak endeavours. JOHN PORTMAN, Knight, was born of Wealthy and Worshipful Extraction at Portmns Orchard in this County, a fair Mannor; which descended to him by Inheri∣tance, the Heir of the Orchards being matcht into his Family. He was bred in the Study of the Common Law, attaining to such eminency therein, that June 11, the second of Queen Mary he was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench continuing two years in
the place, and dying therein for ought I find to the contrary, and a Baronet of his name and Linage flourisheth at this day with a great and plentiful Estate. DAVID BROOKE, Knight, born at Glassenbury, son to John Brook, Esq. who (as I read in In the Ori∣ginal of his last visitation of Somesetsh. Claréntiaux) was Serjeant at Law to King Henry the Eighth. Our David was also bred in the study of our Laws, and in the First of Queen Mary was made Chief Baron of the Exchequer, but whether dying in, or quitting the place in the First of Queen Elizabeh I am not informed. He married Katharine daugher of John Lord Shandois, but died without Issue. JAMES DIER, Knight, younger son to Richard Dier Esq. was born at Roundhill in this County, as may appear to any by the Heralds Visitation thereof, and doth also to me by particular information from his relations. He was bred in the study of our Municipal Law, and was made Lord Chief Justice of the  Pleas, Primo Eliz. continuing therein Sir H. Spl∣mans Gloss. 24 years, longer (if my eye or Arith∣metick fal me not) than any in that place before or after him. When Thomas Duke of Northfolk was Anno 1572 arraigned for Treason, this Judge was present thereat on the same token, that, when the Duke desired Council to be assigned him pleading that it was granted to Humphry Stafford in the reign of King Henry the Seventh, our Judge re∣turned unto him, That Stafford had it allowed him Camdens E∣liz. An. 1570. only as to Point of Law, then in dispute, viz. Whether he was legally taken out of the Sanctuary, but as for matter of Fact, neither he, nor any ever had, or could have any Councel allowed him, a course observed in such Cases, unto this day. But let his own Works praise him in the Prov. 31. 31. Gaes, (is known for the place of publick Justice amongst the Jews) Let his Learned Writings, called his Commentaries or Reports evidence his Abilities in his Profession. He died in 25 Eliz. (though married) without any Issue; and there is a House of a Baronet of his name (descended from an elder son of Richard father to our Judge) at Great Stoughton in Huntington-shire, well improved I believe with the addition of the Judges Estate. Sr. JOHN POPHAM of most ancient descent was born at Huntworth So it appears to me on my best examina∣tion. in this County. In his youthful dayes he was as stout and skilful a Man at Sword and Buckler, as any in that age, and wild enough in his recreations. But Oh! if Quick-silver could be really fixed, to what a treasure would it amount? Such is wild Youth seriously reduced to Gravity, as by this young man did appear. He applied himself to a more profitable Fencing, the study of the Laws, therein atteining to such eminency, that he became the Queens Attourny, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of England. Being sent Anno 1600, by the Queen with some others to the Earl of Essex, to know the cause of the confluence of so many Military Men unto his House, the Souldiers therein detained him for a time, which some did make to Tantamount to an imprison∣ment. This his violent detention Sir John deposed upon his Oath at the Camdens E∣liz. An. 1600. Earls Trial; which I note the rather for the rarity thereof, that a Lord Chief Justice should be produ∣ced as witness in open Court. In the Beginning of the reign of king James his Justice was exemplary on Theeves and Robbers. The Land then swarmed with people which had been Souldiers, who had never gotten, (or else quite forgotten) any other vocation. Hard it was for peace to feed all the Idle mouthes which a former war did breed, being too proud to begge, too lazy to labour. Those infected the Highwayes with their Felonies, some presu∣ming on their multitudes, as the Robbers on the Northern Rode, whose knot (other∣wise not to be untyed) Sr. John cut asunder with the Sword of Justice. He possessed King James how the frequent granting of pardons was prejudicial to Justice, rendring the Judges to the contempt of insolent Malesactors; which made his Majesty more sparing afterward in that kind. In a word, the deserved death of some scores, preserved the lives and livelyhoods of more thousands: Travellers owing their safety to this Judges severity many years after his death, which happened Anno Dom. 16. Souldiers. JOHN The effect of what followes is taken out of the Irish An∣nals at the end of Camd Britt. COURCY, Baron of Stoke-Courcy in this County, was the first Englishman
who invaded and subdued Ulster in Ireland, therefore deservedly created Earl thereof. He was afterward surprised by Hugh Lacy (corrival for his Title) sent over into England, and imprisoned by King John in the Tower of London. A French-Castle, being in controverfie, was to have the Title thereof, tried by Combate, the Kings of England and France beholding it. Courcy being a lean lank body, with staring eyes, (prisoners with the wildnesse of their looks, revenge the closenesse of their bodies) is sent for out of the Tower to undertake the Frenchman, and because enfcebled with long durance, a large bill of fare was allowed him to recruit his strength. The Monsieur, hearing how much he had eat and drank, and guessing his courage by his stomack o rather stomack by his appetite, took him for a Canibal who would devoure him at the last course, and so he declined the Combate. Afterwards the two Kings, desirous to see some proof of Courcy's strength, caused a steel Helmet to be laid on a block before him. ourcy looking about him  grimme countenance (as if he intended to cut with his eyes as well as with his arms) sundered the Helmet at one blow into two pieces, striking the Sword so deep into the wood, that none but himself could pull it out again. Being demanded the cause why he looked so sternly, Had I (said he) failed of my design, I would have killed the Kings and all in the place; words well-spoken because well taken, all persons present being then highly in good humour. Hence it is, that the Lord Courcy, Baron of Ringrom, second Baron in Ireland, claim a priviledge (whether by Patent or Pre∣scription, Charter or Custome I know not) after their first obeisance, to be covered in the Kings presence, if processe of time had not antiquated the practice. His devotion was equal to his valour, being a great Founder and endower of Religi∣ous Houses. In one thing he fouly failed, turning the Church of the Holy Trinity in Down, into the Church of St. Patrick, for which (as the Story saith) he was condemned, never to return into Ireland, though attempting it fifteen several times, but repell'd with foul weather. He afterwards went over and died in France, about the year 1210. MATTHEW GOURNAY was born at Stoke-under-Hamden in this County, where his Family had long flourished since the Conquest, and there built both a Castle and a Colledge. But our Matthew was the honour of the House, renowned under the reign of King Edward the Third, having fought inCamdens Brit. in this Coun. seven several signal set Battails, viz. 1 At the siege of d'Algizer, against the Sarazens. 2 At the Battail of Benemazin, against the same. 3 Sluce, a Sea-fight against the French. 4 Cressy, a Land-fight-against the same. 5 Ingen, Pitch'd fights against the French 6 Poictiers, Pitch'd fights against the French 7 Nazaran, under the Black Prince, in Spain. His Armour was beheld by Martial Men with much civil veneration, with whom his faithful Buckler was a relique of esteem. But it added to the wonder, that our Matthew, who did lie and watch so long on the bed of honour, should die in the bed of peace, agedCamden, ut prius. ninety and six years, about the beginning of King Richard the Second. He lieth buried under a fair Monument in the Church of Stoke aforesaid, whose Epitaph legible in the last age, is since (I suspect) defaced. Sea-men. Sir AMIAS PRESTON Knight, was descended of an Ancient Family, who have an Habitationat Cricket, nigh Creukern in this County. He was a Valiant Souldier, and Active Sea-man, witnesse in 88. when heCamdens Eliz. in 88. seized on the Admiral of the Galiasses, wherein Hugh de Moncada the Governour making resistance, with most of his Men, were burnt, or killed, and Mr. Preston (as yet not Knighted) shared in a vast Treasure of Gold taken therein. Afterwards Anno 1595, he performed a victorious travels 3 part, pag. 578. Voyage to the West-Indies, wherin he took by assault the Ile of Puerto Santo, invaded the Ile of Coche, surprised the Fort and Town of Coro, sacked the stately City of St. Jago, put the Town of Cumana to ransome,
entred Jamaica with little loss, some profit, and more honour, safely returned, within the space of six months to Milford Haven in Wales. I have been informed from excellent hands, that on some dis-tast he sent a Challenge to Sr. Walter Raleigh, which Sr. Walter declined without any abatement to his Valour (wherein he had abundantly satisfied all possibility of suspicion) and great advancement of his Judgement. For having a fair and fixed Estate, with Wife and Children, being a Privy Counsellor, and Lord Warden of the Stannereys, he thought it an uneven ly to stake him∣self against Sr. Amias, a private, and (as I take it) a single person, though of good birth and courage, yet of no considerable Estate. This also is consonant to what he hath written so judiciously about Duels, condemning those for ill Honours, where the HangmanHist. of the World, lib. 5. pag. 548. gives the Garland. However these two Knights were afterwards reconciled, and Sr. Amias (as I collect) died about the beginning of the reign of King James. Learned Writers. GILDAS, sirnamed the WISE was bornUsher, De▪ Brit. Eccl. Pri∣mord. in his Chronologies. in the City of Bath, and there∣fore it is that he is called Badonicus. He was eight years junior to another Gildas called Albanius, whose Nativity I cannot clear to belong to our Brittain. He was also o∣therwise sur-stiled, Querulus, because the little we have of his Writing is only a Complaint. Yet was he none of those whom the 18. Apostle condemneth. These are Murmurs, Complainers, &c. (taxing only such who either were impious against GOD, or uncharitable against men, complaining of them either without cause or without measure,) whilst our Gildas only inveigheth against the sins, and bemoaneth the sufferings of that wicked and woful age wherein he lived, calling the Clergy Montes Malitiae, the Brittons generally, Atramentum seculi. He wrote many Books, though we have none of them extant at this day (some few fragments excepted, inserted amongst the Manuscript Canons) but his aforesaid History. This makes me more to wonder that so Learned a Critick as Dr.In his second Book de Hist. Lat▪ in the end of the 25 . Gerrard  should attribute the Comedy of Aulularia in Plautus to this our Gildas, meerely because that Comedy is otherwise commonly called Querulus. Whereas indeed their language is different, that in Aulularia tolerably pure (though perchance courser than the rest in Plautus) whilst the style of Gildas is hardly with sense to be climbed over, it is so harsh and barbarous. Besides I do not believe that Gildas had a drop of Comical bloud in his venes, or any inclination to mirth and festivity, and if he had prepared any thing Scenical to be acted on the Theater, certainly it would have been a Tragedy relating to the ruin and destruction of his Nation. Some variety there is about the date of his death, which most probably is assigned, Anno 570. MAURICE SOMERSET carried this County of his Nativity about with him in his Name, and was bred first a Cistercian Monk in Ford-Abbey, then studied in Oxford, and became a good Writer both in Prose and Verse. His deserts preferred him Abbot of Wells, which in his old age he resigned, loving Ease above Honour. Some Books he dedi∣cated to his Diocesan, Reginald Bishop of Bath, andPitzeus, Ae∣tat. 12 nu. 271. flourished Anno 1193. ALEXANDER of ESSEBIE is (saith myBale de Script. Brit. Cent. 4. nu. 1. Authour) by some accounted a Somerset, by others a Staffordshire man; and therefore by our fundamental Laws, (laid down in our Preface, to decide differences about nativities) falls to the share of this County. He was the Prince of English Poets in his age, and in imitation of Ovid de Fastis, put our Christian Festivals into Verse, setting a copy therein to Baptista Mantuanus. Then leaving Ovid he aspired to Virgil, and wrote the History of the Bible (with the lives of some Saints) in an Heroical Poem; and though falling far short of Virgil, went beyond himself therein. He afterward became Prior ofQure, where this is. Esseby-Abbey, belonging to the Augustins and flourished under King Henry the Third, Anno Dom. 1220. ADAMUS de MARISCO, or ADAM of MARSH was born in thisBale, De script. Brit. cent. 4. nu. 12 Et Pitz. in Ano 1657. County, where there be plenty of Marshes in the Fenny part thereof. But I take Brent-marsh as the principal, the most probable place for his Nativity. It seemeth that a foggie Air is no hinderance to a refined Wit, whose Infancy and Youth in this place was so full of preg∣nancy. He afterwards went to Oxford, and there became D. D. It is argument enough to perswade any indifferent man into a belief of his Abilities, because that Robert Groshead
that Learned and Pious Bishop of Lincoln, made use of his paines, that they might jointly peruse, and aompare the Scripture. He became afterwards a Franciscan Frier in Worcster, and furnished the Library thereof with most excellent Manuscripts, for then began the Eulation in England betwixt Monasteries, which should outvie other for most and best Books. He flourished Anno Dom. 1257. I cannot grieve heartily for this Adam his losse of the Bishoprik of Ely, because Hugo de Balsham his corrival got it from him, the Founder of Peter house in Cambridge. Since the Reformation. HENRY CUFF was born at St. George Hinton in this County, as the late Lord Powlet, Baron thereof, did inform me, though none of that name left there at this day. He was afterwards fellow of Merton Colledge in Oxford, and Secretary to Robert Earl of Essex, with whom he ingaged in his rising, Anno 1600. being arraigned at Westminster for his life. Sir Edward Cook (then but the Queens Attourney) disputed Syllogistically against him, whom Cuffe an admirable Logician could caeteris paribus well have encountred. But power will easily make a solecisme to be a silogisme. The most pregnant proof brought against him was a Verse out of Lucan alledged by him. For when the Earl sit∣ting in consultation with his Complices demanded their advice, whether he should pro∣ceed in their design, or desist, Mr. Cue returned Viribus utendum est quas ecimus, Arma ferenti The words the Poet are somewhat dif∣ferent. Omnia dat, qui justa negat. This I may say proved his Neck▪verse being attested against him, for which he suffered. He wrote an excellent Book of the difference of the Ages of man, a rare piece indeed, though not altogether so hard to be procured as worthy to be perused. Sr. JOHN HARRINGTON Knight, where born I know not, sure I am he had S. N. a fair Estate at Kelston neer Bath in this County, and is emiment for his Confessor Extraction. In his con∣tinuance of Bishop God∣win in his Bi∣shops of Win∣chester. His Father only for carrying a Letter to the Lady (afterwards Queen) Elizabeth, by Bishop Gardiner kept twelve monthes in the Tower, and made to spend 1000 pounds ere he could get free of that trouble. His Mother servant to the Lady Elizabeth, was by Gardiners command sequestred from her, as an Heretick, and her husband en∣joyned, not to keep company with her. Queen Elizabeth was Godmother to this Sir John, and he was bred in Cambridge, where Doctor Still was his Tutor, but whether whilst he was Fellow of Christs, or Master of St. Johns, is to me unknown. He afterward proved one of the most ingenious Poets of our English Nation, witnsse his translation of Orlando Furioso out of the Italian, dedicated to the Lady Elizabeth, since Queen of Bohemia, and the several pieces of his own invention. It happened that while the said Sir John repaired often to an Ordinary in Bath, a female Attendress at the Table, neglecting other Gentlemen which sat higher, and were of greater Estates, applyed her self wholly to him, accommodating him with all ne∣cessaries, and prebenting his asking any thing with her officiousnesse. She being demand∣ed by him, the reason of her so careful waiting on him? I understand, said she, you are a very Witty man, and if I should displease you in any thing, I fear you would make an Epigram of me. A posthume Book of his is come forth, as an Addition to Bishop Godwins Catalogue of Bishops; wherein (beside mistakes) some tart reflections in Uxoratos Episcopos, might well have been spared. In a word, he was a Poet in all things save in his wealth, leaving a fair Estate to a Learned and Religious Son, and died about the middle of the reign of King James. SAMUEL DANIEL was born not far from So am I cer∣tified by some of his [late sur∣viving] ac∣quaintance. Taunton in this County, whose Fa∣culty was a master of Musick: and his harmonious Mind, made an impression on his Sons Genius, who proved an exquisite Poet. He carried in his Christian and Surname two Holy Prophets, his Monitors so to qualifie his Raptures, that he abhorred all prophaness. He was also a judicious Historian, witness his Lives of our English Kings since the Conquest, until King Edward the Third, wherein he hath the happiness to reconcile Bre∣vity with Clearnesse, qualities of great distance in other Authours. A work since commen∣dably continued, (but not with equal quicknesse and judgment) by Mr. Trusal. He was a Servant in Ordinary to Queen Anne, who allowed him a fair Salary. As
the Tortoise burieth himself all the Winter in the ground, so Mr. Daniel would lye hid at his Garden-house in Oldstreet, nigh London, for some Months together, (the more re∣tiredly to enjoy the Company of the Muses,) and then would appear in publick, to con∣verse with his Friends, whereof Dr. Cowel, and Mr. Camden were principal. Some tax him to smack of the Old Cask, as resenting of the Romish Religion, but they have a quicker Palatthan than I, who can make any such discovery. In his old Age he turn'd Husbandman, and Rented a Farm in Wiltshire nigh the Devises. I can give no account how he thrived thereupon. For though he was well vers'd in Virgil, his fellow Hus∣bandman-Poet, yet there is more required to make a rich Farmer, than only to say his Georgicks by heart, and I question whether his Itaian will fit our English Husbandry. Besides, I suspect that Mr. Daniel his fancy was too fine and sublimated to be wrought down to his private profit. However he had neither a Bank of wealth or lank of want, living in a competent con∣dition. By Justina his wife he had no child, and I am unsatisfied both in the Place and Time of death, but collect the latter, to be about the end of the reign of King James. HUMPHRY SIDENHAM was born at Dalverton in this County, of a most Ancient and Worshipful Family, bred Fellow of Wadham Colledge, so Eloquent a Preacher that he was commonly called Silver-tongued Sidenham. But let his own printed Sermons, (and espe∣cially that, called the Athenian Babler) set forth his deserved praise, who died since our Civil distempers, about the year 1650. Romish-exile Writers. JOHN GIBBON was undoubtedly born in this County, though herein Pitts presents us with an untoward and left-handed direction, Pits de Ang. Scrip. pa. 788. Patrica Somersetensis Diocesis Wintoniensis. Now either Wnchester is imprinted for Wells, or he was born in this County in some peculiar belonging to Winchester, which See hath large revenues about Taunton. Leaving the Land for his Religion, Pope Gregory XIII. collated on him a Canons place in the Church of Bonn. This he soon quitted, and became Rector of the Jesuits Colledge in Triers, he wrote a Book against G. Schon Professor at Heydelberge in vindication that the Pope was not Antichrist. Being indisposed in health, his hearing of the defeat of the Spanish Armado, was no cordial unto him, and died Anno 1589. ROBERT PERSON was born in this Pits de Ang. scrip. An▪ 1610 † Camdens E∣liz. 1580. County, bred in Baliol-Colledge in Oxford, till for his viciousness he was expelled thence with disgrace. Running to Rome, and there finishing the course of his studies, he with Campian were the first brace of English Jesuits, who returned hither 1589 to preserve this Nation. Two years after he escaped hence, and got beyond the Seas. One of a troublesome spirit, wherewith some moderate Romanists were so▪offended, that (during his abode here) they once resolved to Idem ibid. resign him up to the Queens Offi∣cers. He had an ill natured Wit, biassed to Satyricalnesse. A great States-man, and it was not the least part of his policy to provide for his own safety; who would look on, direct, give ground, abet on other mens hands, but never plaid so, as to adventure him∣self into England. He wrote a shrewd Book of the Succession to the English-crown, setting it forth under the false name of Idem, Anno 1594. Dolman (a dulsecular Priest, guilty of little Learning, and less policy) dedicating the same to the Earl of Essex. He had an authoritative influence on all English Catholicks, nothing of importance being agitated by them, but Person had a finger, hand, arm therein. He was for 23 years Rector of the Colledge at Rome, where he died Anno Dom. 1610. JOHN FEN was born at New-Coll. Regist. Anno 1555. Montacute in this County, bred in New-Colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelour in Laws, continuing there, till (Anno Dom. 1562) for his Popish activity, he was ejected by the Queens Commissioners. Then for a time he lived Schoolmaster at St. Edmunds-bury, till outed there on the same account. Hence he fled over into Flnders, thence into Italy, whence returning, at last he was fixed at Lovain. He wrote many, and translated more Books, living to finish his Jubile, or Fiftieth year o exile beyond the Seas, where he died about the years of our Lord 1613. Let me add that this John Fen, mindeth me of another of the same surname and as violent on conrary principles, viz. Humphrey Fen, a non-conformist Minister, living about Coventry,
who in the preface to his last Will, Made such a Protestation against the Hierarchy and Ceremonies, that when his Will was brought to be proved, the See Master Clark, in the life of Juliane Harring. pag. 461. Preface would not be suffered to be put amongst the Records of the Court, as which indeed was no Limb, but a Wen of his Testament. JOHN COLLINGTON was born in this Pits Angl. script. pag. 807. County, bred in Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford. Going beyond the Seas and there made Priest, he returned into England, and with Campian was taken, cast into the Tower of London, and condemned, but afterwards reprieved, enlarged and sent beyond the Seas. Hence he returned, and for 30 years together zelously advanced his own Religion, being Assistant to the two Arch-Priests, and he himself supplied the Place in the vacancy betwixt them. He could not but be a very aged Man; who▪ though in restraint, was alive 1611. Benefactors to the Publik. The Lady MOHUN. Reader, know, I can surround the Christian Names of her nerest Relations. Her Husband was John, the last Lord Mohun, of Dunstor. Her eldest daugh∣ter Philip, married to Edward Duke of York, her second Elizabeth, to William Montacute Earl of Salisbury, her youngest Maud, matcht to the Lord Strange of Knockyn, bu her own Christian Name I cannot recover. However, she hath left a worthy memory behind her, chiefly on this account, that she obteined from her Husband, so much good ground for the Commons of the Town of Dunstor as she could in oneCamdens Brit. in this County. day, (believe it a Summer one for her ease and advantage) compasse about, going on her naked feet. Surely no Ingenious Scholar beheld her in that her charitable perambulation, but in effect vented his wishes in the Virg. Eclog. decimâ. Poets ex∣pression, Ah! tibi nè teneras tellus secet aspera plantas. The certain date of her death is unknown, which by proportion is conjectured in the reign of King Henry the Fifth. Since the Reformation. NICHOLAS WADHAM of Merrifield in this County Esq. had great length in his extraction, breadth in his Estate, and depth in his liberality. His Hospital house was an Inn at all times, a Court at Cristmas. He married Dorothy, daughter to the Secretary, sister to the first Lord Peters. Absolom, having no children, reared up for himself a2 Sam. 18. 18 Pillar to perpetuate his name. This Worthy pair, being Issueless, erected that, which hath, doth, and will afford many Pillars to Church and State, the uniform and regular (nothing defective or superfluous therein) Colledge of Wadham in Oxford. Had this worthy Esquire (being a great Patron of Church-Livings) annexed some Benefices thereunto (which may be presumed, rather forgotten than neglected by him) it had for compleatenesse of Fabrick and endowment equalled any English Foundation. If he was (which some suggest) a Romanist in his Judgement, his charity is the more commendable, to build a place for persons of a different perswasion. Whilst we leave the invisible root to the Searcher of hearts, let us thankfully gather the good fruit, which grew from it. He died before his Colledge was finished, his Estate by Co-heirs des∣cending to Strangwayes, Windham, White, &c. and he lyeth buried with his wife under a stately Monument in the fair Church of Illminster. PHILIP BISS was extracted from a worshipful Family in this County, who have had their habitation in Spargrave for some descents. Being bred Fellow, and Doctor in Divinity in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, he was afterwards preferred Arch-Deacon of Taunton. A Learned Man and great lover of Learning. Now though it be most true what Reverend Bishop Hall was wont to say, Of Friends and Books good and fw are best. Yet this Doctor had good and many of both kinds. And at his death bequeathed his Library (consisting of so many Folio's as were valued at one thousand pounds) to Wadham Colledge, then newly founded. This Epitaph was made upon him, wherein nothing of wit, save the Verbal-Allusion, which made itself without any pains of the Author thereof. Camdens re∣mains, pag. 380 Bis fuit hic natus, puer & Bis, Bis juvenisque. Bis vir, Bisque senex, Bis Doctor, Bisque Sacerdos. I collect by probable proportion that his death happened about the year 1614.
Memorable Persons. Sir JOHN CHAMPNEIS son of Robert Champneis, was born at Chew in this County, but bred a Skinner in London, and Lord Major thereof 1535. Memorable he is on this account, that, whereas before his time there were no Turrets in London (save what in Churches and publick structures) he was the first private man, who in his house, next Cloth-workers Hall, built Sows Sur∣vey of London pag. 137. one to oversee his neighbours in the City, which delight of his eye was punished with blindness some years before his death. But seeing, prying into Gods secrets is a worse sin than over-looking mens houses; I dare not concurre with so Censorious an Idem Ibidem. Author, because every consequent of a fact is not the punishment of a fault therein. THOMAS CORIAT, Though some will censure him as a person rather ridiculous, than remarkable, he must not be omitted. For first, few would be found to call him Fool, might none do it save such, who had as much Learning as himself. Secondly, if others have more Wisdom than he, thankfulnesse and humility is the way to preserve and increase it. He was born at Odcombe nigh Evil in this County, bred at Oxford, where he attained to admirable fluency in the Greek tongue. He carried folly (which the charitable called merri∣ment) in his very face. The shape of his head had no promising form, being like a Sugar∣loaf inverted, with the little end before, as composed of fancy and memory, without any common-sense. Such as conceived him fool ad duo and something else ad decem, were utterly mista∣ken. For he drave on no design, carrying for Coin and Counters alike: so contented with what was present, that he accounted those men guilty of superfluity, who had more suits and shirts than bodies, seldom putting off either, till they were ready to go away from him. Prince Henry allowed him a pension and kept him for his Servant. Sweet-meats and Coriat made up the last course at all Court-entertainments. Indeed he was the Courtiers Anvil to trie their Witts upon, and sometimes this Anvil returned the Hammers as hard knocks as it received, his bluntnesse repaying their abusinesse. His Book known by the name of Coriat's Crudities, nauceous to nice Readers, for the rawnesse thereof, is not altogether useless though the porch be more worth than the Palace, I mean the Preface of other mens mock-commending verses thereon. At last he undertook to travail unto the East-Indies by land, mounted on an horse with ten toes, being excellently qualified for such a journey. For rare his dexterity (so properly as consisting most in manual signs) in interpreting and answering the dumb to∣kens of Nations, whose language he did not understand. Besides, such his patience in all distresses, that in some sort he might seem, cool'd with heat, fed with fasting, and re∣fresh'd vvith weariness. All expecting his return with more knowledge (though not more wisdom) he ended his earthly pilgrimage in the midst of his Indian travail, about (as I collect) the year of our Lord 1616. Lord Majors. Name Father Place. Company Time 1 John Champneis Robert Champneis Chew Skinner 1535 2 George Bond Robert Bond Trul Haberdasher 1588 Know Reader, this is one of the Ten pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose Gentry were not by the Commissioners returned into the Tower in the 12 of K. Henry the sixth. Sheriffes. This County had the same with Dorsetshire until the ninth year of Queen Elizabeth, since which time these following have born the Office in this County alone. Name Place Armes ELIZ. Reg.   Crosses Formee, Argent. 9 Maur. Berkley, mil. Bruiton Gules, a Cheveron between 10 10 Geo. Norton, Mil.     11 Hen. Portman, ar. Orchard Or, a flower de Luce Azure. 12 Th Lutterel, ar. Dunst. Ca. Or, a Bend betwixt 6 Martlets, S. 13 Geo. Rogers, arm. Canngton Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Bucks currant Sa. attired Or. 14 Joh. Horner, arm. Melles Sable, 3 Talbots passant Arg. 15 Io. Sydenham, arm. Bropton Argent, 3 Rams Sable. 16 Ioh. Stowel, Miles. Stawel Gules, a Cross Lozengee Argent 17 Christop. Kenne, ar. Conswick Ermin, 3 half Moons, Gules. 18 Tho. Mallet, arm. Enmore Azure, 3 Escallops Or. 19 Geo▪ Sydenham, ar. ut prius   20 Joh. Colles, arm.     21 Ioh. Brett.     22 Maur. Rodney, ar. Rodney Ske Or, 3 Eglets displayed, Purpure. 23 Hen. Newton, arm.   Arg. on a Cheveron Az 3 Garbs, Or.
24 Ioh. Buller, arm.   Sa. on  plain Cross Arg. quarter pierced, 4 Eaglets of the field. 25 Ar. Hopton, arm. VVitham Argent, 2 Barrs Sable, each with 3 Mullets of six points, Or. 26 Gar. Hawley ar. †     27 Nic. Sidenham, ar. ut prius † Vert, a Saltir ingrailed Or. 28 Ioh. Clifton, miles, Brringtō Sable, Semee of Cinquefoils, a Lion rampant, Arg. 29 Hen. Berkley, mil. ut prius   30 Edw. Sainthorp, ar.     31 Sam. Norton, arm.     32 Hugo , ar. ut prius   33 Ioh. Harington, ar.   Sable, a Frt, Argent. 34 Geo. Speke, ag. Argent, 2 Barrs Azure, over all an Eagle displayed, Gules▪ 35 Geo. Lerel, arm. ut prius   36 Hen. Walrond.   AMP. 37 Ioh. Francis, arm. Combe flouree Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mullets Gules, pierced. 38 Ioh. Stowel, mil. ut prius   39 Ioh. Colles, arm.     40 Ioh. Gennings, ar. urron Azure, a Chveron Or, betwixt 3 Bzants on a Chief Emin, 3 Cinquesoils, Gules. 41 Go. Rodney, arm. ut prius   42 Hugo Portman, mil. ut prius   43 Ioh. Mallet, amig. ut prius   44 Joh. May, amig. Charterhouse Hyden, Sable, a Ceveron Or, betwixt 3 Roses Arg, a Chief of the second. 45 Edw. Rgers, ut prius   IAC. Rex.     Anno     1 Edw. Rogers, arm. ut prius   2 Ioh. Windham, mil. Orchard Azure, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Lions ds erased, Or. 3 Tho. Horner, arm. ut prius   4 Ioh. Porman, arm. ut prius   5 Edw. Hext, miles. Ham Or, a Castle betwixt 3 Pole-Axes Sable. 6 Edw. Gorges, mil. Wraxal Masculy, Or and Azure. 7 Geo. Lutterel, arm. ut prius   8 Francis Baber, arm. Chew Mag. Arg. on a Fess Gules, 3 Falcons heads erased, of the first. 9 Io. Rodney, mil. & Hugo Smith, miles ut prs     Aston Gules, on a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cinquefoils Or, pierced, as many Leopads heads, Sable. 10 Rob. Hendley, ar. Leigh Aza, Lion Ramp. Arg. crowned Or, within a border of the se∣cond, Entoye of 8 Torteauxes. 11 Nat. Still, arm.     12 Ioh. Horner, mil. ut prius   13 Barth. Michel, m. & Ioh. Colls, ar   Partee per Fess G. & S. a Cv Ar. betwixt 3 Swans proper. 14 Ioh. Paulet, arm. Hinton S. Geor. Soble, 3 Swords in py Agent. 15 Rob. Hopton, arm. ut prius   16 Theod Newton, m. ut prius   17 Io. Trevilian, arm. Necombe Gus, a Demi-hose, Argnt, illing out of the aves of the Sea. 18 Hen. Hendley, ar. ut prius   16 Marmad. Gēnings, a ut prius   20 Edw. Popham, ar.   Argent, on a chief Guls, 2 Buks heads, Or. 21 VVill. ancis, ar. ut prius   22 Th. VVindham, ar. ut prius   CAR. Rex.     Anno     1 Rob. Philip, mil. Montacute Arg. a Chveron btween 3  Gs, 2 Ioh. Symmes, arm. Pounsford Azure, 3 Scallops in Base, Or. 3 Ioh. Latch, am. Langford r. on a fess Wavy 3 . Or, be∣tween as many  G. 4 Ioh. Stowel, miles ut prius   5 Tho. Thynne, mil. WILT-Sh. Barree, of 10, Or and Sble. 6 Fr. Dodington, m. Loxton Sable, 3 Hunters horns, Arg. 7 Th. Lutterl, arm. ut prius   8 VVill. VValrond, ar ut prius   9 Ioh. Carew, miles   Or, 3 Lions passant, Sable, ar-med and Lang, Gul. 10 Hen. Hodges, arm. Hasilbee Or, 3 Cressants and in a Canton 11 Ioh. Baster, arm. AMP. Sa. a Dcal Crown of the first. 12     13     14 VVill. Evvens, ar.   Sable, a Fess between 2 flower de Luces, Or. 15     16     17 Bellum nobis     18 haec Otia     19 fecit.     20     21     22 Rich. Cole, arm. Nailsle Partee per Pale Ar. & G▪ a Bull pass. countrechanged. King JAMES. 14 JOHN PAULET, Armiger.] He was son to Sr. Anthony Paulet (Governour of Jersey) by the sole daughter of Henry Lord Norrice, being the sole sister to the Brood of many Martial Bre∣thren. A very accomplisht Gentleman of quick and clear parts, a bountiful housekeeper, so that King Charles consigned Monsieur Soubize unto him, who gave him and his retinue many months li∣beral entertainment. The said King afterwards created him Baron Paulet of Hinton St. George, in this County, descended to him from the Denbaudes, the ancient owners thereof. He married Elizabeth the daughter and sole Heir of Christopher Ken of Ken-Castle in the same Shire Esquire, whose right honourable son and heir John Lord Paulet now succeedeth in that Barony. Modern Battles. None have been fought in this County, which come properly under this Notion: Indeed the Skirmish at Martials Elm (something military and ominous in the name thereof) fought 1642 made much Noise in mens eares, (a Musket gave then a greater Report, than a Canon since.) And is re∣membred the more, because conceived first to break the Peace of this Nation, long restive and rusty in ease and quiet. As for the encounter at Lang-port, where the Kings Forces under the Lord Goring were defeated by the Parliaments, July 12, 1645; It was rather a Flight than a Fight, like the Battle of Spurres (fought many years since) the Horse by their speed well saving themselves, whilst the poor Foot (pawned in the place) paid dearly for it. And hence forward the Sun of the Kings cause declined, verging more & more Westward, till at last it set in Cornwal, and since (after a long and dark night) rose again by Gods goodness in the East, when our Gracious Sovereign arrived at Dover. The Farewel. May he, who bindeth the Sea in a girdle of sand, confine it within the proper limits thereof, that Somerset-shire may never see that sad accident return, which hap'ned here 1607. When by the irruption of the Severn-Sea, much mis∣chief was, more had been done, if the West-wind had continued longer with the like violence. The Country was over∣flown, almost 20 mil. in length, and 4 in breadth, and yet but 80 persons drowned therein. It was then observeable, that creatures of contrary natures; Dogs, Hares; Foxes, Conies; Cats, Mice; getting up to the tops of some hills, dis∣pensed at that time with their antipathies, remaining peaceably together, without sign of fear or violence one towards another: To lesson men in publick dangers, to depose private differences, and prefer their safety, before their revenge.
BRISTOL, more truly Bright-Stow, that is Illustrious or Bright dwelling, answers its Name in many respects. Bright in the situation thereof, conspi∣cuous on the rising of a Hill; Bright in the Buildings, fair and firm; Bright in the Streets, so cleanly kept, as if scoured (where no Carts, but sledges are used) but chiefly Bright, for the Inhabitants thereof, having bred so many eminent Persons. It standeth both in Somerset and Glocest-shires (and yet in neither, it being a Liberty of it self) divided into two parts, by the River Avon, conjoyned with a Bridge, which being built on both sides, counterfeiteth a continued street, for which strangers at the first sight do mistake it. The houses of the Merchants herein are generally very fair, and their Entries, though little and narrow, lad into high and spatious Halls which Form may mind the Inhabitants thereof of their passage to a better place. Naturall Commodities. Diamonds. These are the Stars of the Earth, though such but dimme ones, which St. Vincents Rock near to this City doth produce. Their Price is abated by their paleness and softnesse, to which we may add their Number and Nearness; For, were they but few and far fetched, their value would be advanced; They are not those Unions, Pearles so called, because thrifty Nature only affordeth them by Uniones quia nui duo simul reperientur. Plin. Nat. hist. lib. 9. cap. 35. one and one; seeing that not only Twins but Bunches and Clusters of these are found together. Were this Rock of raw Diamonds removed into the East-Indies, and placed where the Beams of the Sun might sufficiently concoct them, probably in some hundreds of years they would be ripened into an Orient perfection. All I will add is this; a Lady in the reign of Queen Elizabeth would have as patiently digested the Lye, as the wearing of False Stones or Pendants of counterfeit Pearl, so common in our Age; and I could wish it were the worst piece of hypocrisy in Fashion. Manufactures. Gray-Sope. I behold Bristol as the staple-place thereof, where alone it was anciently made. For though there be a place in London nigh Cheapside called Sopers-lane, it was never so named from that Commodity made therein (as some have supposed) but from Alen le Soper, the long since owner thereof. Yea, it is not above an hundred and fifty years, by the con∣fession of the Stows Sur∣vey pag. 265. Chronicler of that City, since the first Sope was boyled in London. Before which time the Land was generally supplyed with Castile from Spain, and Gray∣sope from Bristol. Yea, after that London medled with the making thereof, Bristol-sope (notwithstanding the portage) was found much the Idem in his first table, ver∣bo Sope. cheaper. Great is the necessity thereof, seeing without Sope, our bodies would be no better than dirt, before they are turned into dust, men whilst living, becoming noisome to themselves and others. Nor lesse its antiquity; For although our modern Sope made of Pot-ashes and other ingredients, was unknown to the Ancient, yet had they , something which effectually supplied the place thereof, making their Woollen clear, their Linnen-Cloth cleanly. Christ is compared by the Mal. 3. 2. Prophet to Fullers sope, in Hebrew Borith, which word Arias Montanus in his Interlineary Bible reteineth untranslated, but in his Comment (following the example of St. Hierom) on the place, rendreth it Herba fullonum, expounding it to be Saponaria, in English Sopeworth. Indeed, both Dodoneus and Gerardus writeth thereof, This plant hath no use in Physick. Yet, seeing nature made nothing in vain, Sopeworth cannot justly be charged as useless, because purging (though not the body) the Clothes of a man, and conducing much to the neatnesse thereof. The Buildings. Ratcliffe Church in this City clearly carrieth away the credit from all Parish-Churches in England. It was founded by Cannings (first a Merchant who afterwards bame a Priest,
and most stately the ascent thereunto by many stairs, which at last plentifully recompen∣ceth their pains who climb them up with the magnificent structure both without and within. If any demand the cause why this Church was not rather made the See of a Bishop then St. Augustins in this City much inferiour thereunto, such may receive this reason thereof; That this (though an intire stately structure) was not conveniently accomodated like St. Augustins (formerly a great Monastery) with publick Buildings about it for the Palace of a Bishop, and the Reception of the Dean and Chapter. However as the Town of Hague in Holland would never be Walled about as accounting it more credit to be the Biggest of Villages in Europe, than but a Lesser City, so Ratcliffe-Church esteemeth it a greater grace to lead the Van of all Yet some have informed me that it only is a chappel of Ease to the Mother Church of Bedmister. Parochial, than to follow in the Rear after many Cathedral Churches in England. Medicinal Waters. St. Vincents Well lying West of the City, under St. Vincents Rock, and hard by the River, is sovereign, for Sores and Sicknesses, to be washt in, or drunk of, to be either out∣wardly or inwardly applyed. Undoubtedly the Water thereof runneth through some Mineral of Iron, as appeareth by the rusty ferruginous taste thereof, which it re∣taineth, though boiled never so much. Experience proveth that Beer brewed thereof is wholesome against the Spleen; and Dr. Samuel VVard afflicted with that malady, and living in Sidney-Colledge was prescribed the constant drinking thereof, though it was costly to bring it thorough the Severn, and narrow seas to Lin, and thence by the River to Cambridge. But men in pain must not grudge to send far to purchase their ease, and thank God if they can so procure it. Proverbs. Bristol Milk.] Though as many Elephants are fed as Cows grased within the Walls of this City, yet great plenty of this Metaphorical Milk, whereby Xeres or Sherry-Sack is intended. Some will have it called Milk, because (whereas Nurses give new-born Babes in some places Pap, in other water and sugar) such Wine is the first moisture, given Infants in this City. It is also the entertainment of course, which the courteous Bristolians present to all Strangers, when first visiting their City. Martyrs. The moderation of John Holyman, Bipshop of this City is much to be commended who in the reign of Queen Mary, did not persecute any in his Diocess. And yet we find Rich. Sharpe, Tho. Benion, and Tho. Hale, martyred in this City, whose Bloud, the Inquisitor thereof will visit on the account of Fx. Mar∣tirolog. pag. 2052. Dalbye the cruel Chancellour of this Dio cess. Prelates. RALPH of BRISTOL born in this City, was bred (as I have cause to conceive) in the Neighbouring Covent of Glassenbury. Going over into Ireland, first he became Trea∣surer of St. Patricks in Dublin, then Episcopus Darensis, Bishop of Kildare. He wrote the life of Lawrence Arch-Bishop of Dublin, and granted (saith my Sir I. ware, in Episcopis Darensibus. Author) certain Indulgences to the Abbey of Glassenbury in England, probably in testimony of his Gratitude for his Education therein. He died, Anno Dom. 1232. Since the Reformation. TOBIAS MATTHEW, D. D. was born in this Sir Iohn Harrington in his continua∣tion of Bishop Godwi. City, bred first in St. Johns, then in Christ-Church in Oxford, and by many mediate Preferments became Bishop of Durham, and at last York. But it will be safest for my Pen now to fast (for fear for a Surfeit) which formerly In my Church Hist. Book 11. pag. 133. feasted so freely on the Character of this Worthy Prelate, who died 1628. Sea-men. No City in England (London alone excepted) hath, in so short a Time bred more Brave and Bold Sea-men, advantaged for Western Voyages by its situation. They have not only been Merchants, but Adventurers, possessed with a Publick Spirit, for the General Good.
Aiming not so much to return wealthier, as wiser, not alwayes to en-rich themselves, as in∣form Posterity by their Discoveries. Of these, some have been but meerly casual, when going to fish for Cod, they have found a Country, or some eminent Bay, River, or Hauen of importance unknown before. Others were intentional, wherein they have sown ex∣periments, with great pains, cost, and danger, that ensuing Ages may freely reap benefit thereof. Amongst these Sea-men we must not forget HUGH Hacluit's Engl. Voyages the 3d. volum. pag. 10▪ ELIOT a Merchant of this City, who was in his Age the prime Pilot of our Nation. He first (with the assistance of Mr. Thorn his fellow-Citizen) found out New∣found-land, Anno 1527. This may be called Old-found-land, as senior in the cognizance of the English, to Virginia and all our other Plantations. Had this Discovery been as fortunate in publick Encouragement, as private Industry, pro∣bably before this time, we had enjoyed the Kernel of those Countries whose Shell only we now possess. It's to me unknown when Eliot deceased. Writers. THOMAS NORTON was born in this City, and if any doubt thereof, let them but consult the Initial syllables in the six first, and the first line in the seventh chapter of his Ordinal, which put together compose, Thomas Norton of Briseto A parfet Master you may him trow. Thus his modesty embraced a middle way betwixt concealing and revealing his name, proper for so great a Professor in Chymistry as he was, that his very name must from his Book be mysteriously extracted. He was scarce twenty eight In his Ordi∣nal pag. 88. years of Age, when in fourty dayes (believe him for he saith so Ibid. pag. 33. of himself) he learn'd the perfection of Chymistry, taught, as it seems, by Mr. George Ripley. But, what saith the Poet? Non minor est virtus, quàm quaerere, parta tueri. The spight is, he complaineth, that a Merchants wife of Bristol stole from him the Elixir Ibid. pag. 34. linea 33. of life. Some suspect her to have been the wife of William Cannings (of whom before) contemporary with Norton, who started up to so great and sudden Wealth, the clearest evidence of their Theatrum Chimicum made by Elias Ashmole, Esq. pag. 441. conjecture. The admirers of this Art are justly impatient, to hear this their great Patron traduced by the Pen of De Angl. scrip. pag. 666. J. Pits and others, by whom he is termed Nugarum opifex in frivola scientia, and that he undid himself, and all his friends who trusted him with their money, living and dying very poor about the year 1477. JOHN SPINE. I had concluded him born at Spine in Bark-shire nigh Newbury but for these diswasives. 1. He lived lately under Richard the Third, when the Clergy began to leave off their Local Surnames, and in conformity to the Laity, to be called from their Fathers. 2 My J. Pits. de scrip. Ang. pag. 673. Author, peremptorily saith he was born in this City. I suspect the name to be Latinized Spineus by Pits, and that in plain English he was called Thorn, an ancient Name I assure you in this City. However he was a Carmelite, and a Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, leaving some Books of his making to posterity. He died and was buried in Oxford, Anno Dom. 1484. JOHN of MILVERTON. Having lost the Fore, I must play an After-game rather than wholely omit such a Man of Remark. The matter is not much, if he, be who was lost in Somerset-shire, (where indeed he was born at Milverton) be found in Pits. . 14. Num. 889. Bristol, where he first fixed himself a Frier Carmelite. Hence he went to Oxford, Paris, and at last had his abode in London. He was Provincial General of his Order thorough England, Scotland and Ireland, so that his Jurisdiction was larger than King Edward the Fourth's, under whom he flourished. He was a great Anti-Wiliffist, and Champion of his Order both by his writing, and preaching. He laboured to make all believe, that Christ himself was a Carmelite (Professor of wilful Poverty) and his high commending of the Poverty of Friers, tacitly condemned the Pomp of the Prelates. Hereupon the Bishop of London, (being his Diocesan) cat him
into the Jaile from whom he appealed to Paul the II. and coming to Rome, he was for three years ept close in the Prison of St. Angelo. It made his durance the more easie, having theBale cent. 8. num. 44. company of Platina the famous Papal Biographist, the Neb of whose Pen, had been too long in writing dangerous Truth. At last he procured his Cause to be referred to Seven Cardinals, who ordered his enlargement. Returning home into England, he lived in London in good repute. I find him nomi∣nated Bishop ofBale & Pits ut prius. St. Davids, but how he came to miss it, is to me unknown. Perchance he would not bite at the bait, but whether because, too fat to cloy the stomack of his mortified Soul, or too lean to please the appetite of his concealed covetousness, no man can decide. He died and was buried in London 1486. WILLIAM GROCINE was born in this CityNew Col. Register, anno 1467. and bred in Winchester-School, Where he, when a Youth, became a most excellent Poet. Take one instance of many. A pleasant Maid (probably his Mistris, however she must be so understood) in a Love∣Frolick pelted him with a Snow-ball, whereon he extemporeBale de scrip. Brit. cent. 9. num. 5. & Pits in anno 1520. made this Latin Tetrastick, MeThese Veses are printed a∣mong Petroni∣us his Frag∣ments, bg a Farrago of many Verses later, than that ancient Author. nive candenti petiit mea Julia: rebar Igne carere nivem, nix tamen ignis erat. Sola potes nostras extinguere Julia flammas, Non nive, non glacie, sed potes ignes pari. A snow-ball white at me did Julia throw, Who would suppose it? Fire was in that snow Julia alone can quench my hot desire, But not with snow, or Ice but equal fire. He afterwards went over into Italy, where he had Demetrius Calchondiles and Politian for his Masters. And returning into England was Publick Professor of the Greek Tongue in Oxford. There needs no more to be added to his Honour, save that Erasmus in his Epistles often owns him pro Patrono suo, & praeceptore. He died Anno 1520. Romish Exile Writers. JOHN FOWLER was born in BristolPits de Ang. scrip. anno 159. bred a Printer by his occupation, but so Learned a Man, that (if the Character given him by one of his ownIdem ibid. perswasion be true) he may pass for our English Robert, or Henry Stephens, being skilful in Latin and Greek, and a good Poet, Oratour, and Divine. He wrote an abridgment of Thomas his Summes, the Translation of Osorius into English, &c. Being a zealous Papist he could not comport with the Reformation, but conveyed himself and his Presse over to Antwerp, where he was signally serviceable to the Catholick Cause, in printing their Pamphlets, which were sent over, and sold in England. He died at Namurch 1579. and lies there buried in the Church of St. John the Evangelist. Benefactors to the Publick. ROBERT THORN was born in this City, as his ensuing Epitaph doth evidence. I see it matters not what the Name be, so the Nature be good. I confesse Thorns came in byGen. 3. 8. mans curse, and our Saviour saith,Matt. 7. 27 Do men gather Grapes of Thorns. But this our Thorn, (God send us many Copices of them) was a Blessing to our Nation, and Wine and Oil may be said freely to flow from Him, being bred a Merchant-Tailor in London, he gave more thanStows Sur∣vey of Lond. pag. 90. Four thousand four hundred fourty five pounds to pious uses. A Sum sufficient, therewith to build and endow a Colledge, the time being well considered, being towards the beginning of the reign of King Henry the Eighth. I have observed some at the Church-dore cast in six pence with such ostentation, that it rebounded from the Bottom, and rung against both the sides of the Bason (so that the same piece of Silver was the Alms and the Givers Trumpet,) whilst others have dropt down silent 5 shillings without any noise. Our Thorn was of the second sort, doing his Charity effectually, but with a possible privacy. Nor was this good Christian abroad, worse (in the Apostle-phrase) than an Idel at home in not providing for his Family, who gave to his poor Kindred, (besides Debt forgiven unto them) the sum of five thousand one hundredIdem ibid. fourty two pounds. Grudge not Reader to peruse his Epitaph, which though not so good as he deserved, is better than most in that Age. RobertusIdem pag. 193 cubat hic Thornus, Mercator Honestus, Qui sibi legitimas Arte paravit opes. Huic vitam dederat parvo Bristolia quondam, Londinum hoc tumulo clauserat ante diem.
Ornavit studiis patriam, virtutibus auxit, Gymnasium erexit sumptibus ipse suis. Lector, quisquis ades, requiem cineri, precor, ora Supplex, & precibus numina flecte tuis. He died a Batchelour, in the fourtieth year of his Age, Anno Domini 1532, and lieth buried in Saint Christophers, London. Since the Reformation. MARY DALE, better known by the name of Mary Ramsey, daughter of William Dale Merchant, was born in this City.Stows Sur∣vey of London pag. 124. She became afterward second Wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey Grocer and Lord Major of London, Anno 1577, and surviving him was thereby possessed of a great Estate, and made good use thereof. She founded two Fellowships and Scholarships in Peter-House in Cambridge, and profered much more, if on her terms it might have been accepted. For most certain it is that she would have setled on that House Lands to the value of five hundred pounds per annum and up∣wards, on condition that it should be called the Colledge of Peter and Mary. This DoctorSo was I in∣formed by Dr. Seaman, lat Master of that Colledge. Soams, then Master of the House, refused, affirming that Peter, who so long lived single, was now too old to have a Feminine Partner. A dear jest to loose so good a Benefactres. This not succeeding the stream of her Charity was not peevishly dried up (with those who in matters of this nature will do nothing, when they cannot do what they would do) But found otherIdem in his description o Christ Church channels there in to derive it self. She died Anno Dom. 1596, and lieth buried in Christs-Church in London. THOMAS WHITE D. D. was born in this City and bred in Oxford. He was afterwards related to Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland, whose Funeral Sermon he made, being accounted a good Preacher in the reign of Queen Elizabeth Indeed he was accused for being a great Pluralist, though I cannot learn, that at once he had more than one Cure of Soules, the rest being Dignities. As false is the Aspersion of his being a great Vsurer; but one Bond being found by his Executors amongst his Writings of one thousand pounds, which he lent gratis for many years to the Company of Merchant-Tailors, whereof he was Free, the rest of his Estate being in Land and ready money. Besides other Benefactions to Christ-Church, and a Lecture in St. Pauls, London, he left three thousand pounds for the Building of Sion Colledge to be a Ramah for the Sons of the Prophets in London. He built there also a fair Alms-house for Twenty poor Folk, allowing them yearly six pounds a piece. And another at Bristol, which as I am informed, is better endowed. Now as Camillus was counted a second Romulus, for enlarging and beautifying the City of Rome, So Mr. John Simpson Minister of St. Olaves, Hart-street London, may be said a second White, for perfecting the aforesaid Colledge of Sion, building the Gate-house with a fair Case for the Library, and endowing it with Threescore pounds per annum. Dr. Thomas White died Anno Dom. 1623. Lord Majors. Name Father Company Time John Aderley John Aderly Ironmonger 1442 Thomas Canning John Canning Grocer 1456 John Young Thomas Young Grocer 1466 The Farewel. I am credibly informed that one Mr. Richard Grigson Cittizen hath expendeth a great Sum of money in new casting of the Bells of Christ-Church, adding tunable Chymes unto them. Surely he is the same person, whom I find in the printed List of Com∣pounders to have paid One hundred and sive pounds for his repuetd Delinquency in our Civil Wars, and am glad to see one of his perswasion (so lately purified in Goldsmiths-Hall) able to go to the Cost of so chargeable a Work. I wish Bristol may have many more to follow his Example, though perchance in this our suspicious Age it will be conceived a more discreet and seasonable desire not to wish the increase, but the continuance of our Bells, and that (though not taught the descant of Chymes) they may retein their plain song for that publick use to which they were piously intended.
STAFFORD-SHIRE hath Cheshire on the North-West; Darby-shire on the East and North-East; Warwick, and Worcester-shires on the South; and Shrop-shire on the West. It lieth from North to South in form of a Lozenge, bearing fourty in the length from the points thereof, whilst the breadth in the middle exceeds not twenty six miles. A most pleasant County: For, though there be a place therein still called Sinai-park (about a mile from Burton) at first so Burtons De∣script. of Lei∣cest. pag. 119. named by the Abbot of Burton, because a vast, rough, hillie ground, like the Wilderness of Sinai in Arabia, yet this, as a small Mole, serves for a soil to set off the fair face of the County the better. Yea, this County hath much beauty in the very solitude thereof, witness Beau-Desert, or the Fair Wildernesse, being the beautiful Barony of the Lord Paget. And if their Deserts have so rare Devises; Pray then, how pleasant are their Paradises. Indeed most fruitful are the Parts of this Shire above the Banks of Dove, Butchers being necessitated presently to kill, the Cattle fatted thereupon, as certainly knowing that they will fall in their flesh, if removed to any other Pasture, because they cannot but change to their loss. Natural Commodities. The best Alabaster in England (know Reader, I have consulted with Curious Artists in this kind) is found about Castle-Hay in this County. It is but one degree beneath White Marble only more soft and brittle: However, if it lye dry fenced from weather, and may be let alone, long the during thereof. Witness the late Statue of John of Gaunt in Pauls, and many Monuments made thereof in Westminster remaining without breck or blemish to this day. I confess Italy affords finer Alabaster, (whereof those Imagilets wrought at Ligorn are made) which indeed Apes Ivory in the whiteness and smoothness thereof. But such Alabaster is found in small Bunches and little proportions, it riseth not (to use the Language of Work-men) in great Blocks, as our English doth. What use there is of Alabaster Calcined in Physick, belongs not to me to dispute. Only I will ob∣serve, that it is very Cool, the main reason why Matt. 26. 7. Mar. 13. 14. Luke 7. 37. Mary put her ointment so precious into an Alabaster Box, because it preserved the same from being dried up, to which such Liquors in hot Countries were very subject. Manufactures. Nailes. These are the Accommodators general to unite Solid Bodies, and to make them to be con∣tinuous: Yea coin of gold and silver may be better spared in a Common-wealth than Nailes. For, Commerce may be managed without mony by exchance of Commodities, whereas hard bodies cannot be joyned together so fast, and fast so soon and soundly without the media∣tion of Nailes. Such their service for Firmness and expedition, that Iron Nailes will fasten more in an hour than Wooden Pins in a day, because the latter must have their way made, whilst the former make way for themselves. Indeed there is a fair House on London Bridge commonly called None-such, which is reported to be made without either Nailes or Pins with crooked Tennons fastened with wedges and other (as I may term them) circumferential devices. This, though it was no labour in vain▪ because at last attaining the intended end, yet was it no better than a vain labour according to the Rule in Logick frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. But seeing the owner of that House had his harmless humour therein, and paid dear, no doubt, to his Workmen for the same; There is no cause that I or any other should find fault therewith. The Buildings. I have presented the Portraicture of the Church of Lichfield in my Church-History, with the due praise of the neatness thereof. But now, alas! the Body thereof is become
a very carcase ruined in our late Civil Wars. The like Fate is likely to fall on the rest of our Cathedrals, if care be not taken for their reparations. I have read of Duke d'Alva, that he promised Life to some Prisoners, but when they petitioned Him for food, he returned he would grant them life but no meat, by which Criticism of courteous cruelty the poor people were starved. If our This Note written in Bad Times seven years since, I thought not sit to put out. Cathedrals have only a Bare Being, and be not supplied with seasonable repairs, (the daily ood of a Fabrick) soon will they be famished to nothing. As for the Close at Lichfield, I have been credibly informed, that the Plague (which long had raged therein) at the first shooting of Canon at the Siege thereof did abate, im∣puted by Naturalists to the violent purging of the Air by the Bullets, but by Divines to Gods goodness, who graciously would not have two Miseries of War and Plague afflict one small Place at the same Time. Pass we now to Civil Buildings in this Shire. TUTBURY CASTLE is a stately place, and I dare take it on the credit of an excellent Samps. Er∣derswick in his Manuscript Survey of this Shire. Witness, that it hath a brave and large Prospect (to it, in it, and from it) Northward it looks on pleasant Pastures; Eastward on sweet Rivers and rich Meadowes; Southward on a goodly▪ Forest, and many Parks (lately no fewer than twelve) belonging thereto or holden thereof. It was formerly the Seat of the Lord Ferrars Earl of Derby, and how it was forfeited to the Crown is worth our observing. Robert de Idem Ibid. Ferrars Earl of Derby siding with Simon Mumford against King Henry the Third, was fined at fifty thousand pounds to be paid, Pridie Johan. Baptist. next following. I know not whether more to admire at the suddeness of payment, or vastness of the Sum: seeing an hundred thousand pounds was the Randsom set by the Emperour on our King Richard the First, and it shaked all the Coers of England in that Age, (without the help of Church-plate to make it up.) Well, these Lords following were the security bound for the Earls true payment at the time appointed. 1 Henry son to Rich. King of the Romans 2 Will. Valence Earl of Pembroke. 3 John de Warren Earl of Surrey▪ 4 Will. Beauchampe Earl of Warwick. 5 Sir Roger de Summary. 6 Sir Thomas de Clare. 7 Sir Robert Waond. 8 Sir Roger Clifford. 9 Sir Hamond le Strange. 10 Sir Bartholomew de Sudeley. 11 Sir Robert Bruse, all being then Ba∣rons of the Land. But Earl Robert unable to advance the money at the time appointed, and unwilling to leave the Lords, his Bail, under the Kings lash, surrendred his Lands (and Tutbury Castle amongst the rest) to the clear yearly value of three thousand pounds into the Kings hands; redeemable, when he or his Heirs should pay down on one day fifty thousand pounds, which was never performed. The English Clergie much pittied John the son of this Earl Robert, who presented a pe∣tition to the Pope, informing his Holiness, that the English Clergie were willing to give him money by way of Contribution to redeem his Estate, but durst not, because com∣manded to the contrary under the pain of the Popes curse. And therefore he craved his Apostolical Indulgence therein. Something I find was restored unto him, but Tutbury was too sweet a morsel to return, being annexed to the Dutchy of Lancaster. John of Gaunt built a fair Castle there, walled on three sides by Art, and the fourth by its natural steepness. DUDLEY CASTLE must not be forgotten, highly and pleasantly seated, and in the reign of King Edward the Sixth well built, and adorned by John Dudley Duke of Northumberland, whereon a story worth the reporting doth depend. The afore-said Duke Mr. Dugdale in his Illustra∣tion of War∣wick-shire in the Catalogue of the Earls of Warwick. deriving himself (who truly not yet decided) from a younger Branch of the Lord Dudley thirsted after this Castle in regard of the name and the honourableness of the House, some having avouched that the Barony is annexed to the lawful possession thereof, whether by purchase or descent. Now finding John Sutton the Lord Dudley (Grand-father to the last Baron) a weak man exposed to some wants and intangled with many debts, he by the help of those Money-Merchants wrought him out of his Castle. So that the Poor Lord turned out of doores and left to the charity of his Friends for subsistance was commonly called the Lord Quondam. But after the execution
of that Duke Queen Mary sympathizing with Edward the son of this poor Lord (which Edward had married Katharine Bruges her maid of Honour and sister to the Lord Shandois) restored him to the Lands and Honour which justly belonged to his Father. Proverbs. In AprilCs Brit. in this County. Doves flood, Is worth a Kings good. DOVE a River parting this and Derby-shire, when it overfloweth its Banks in April is the Nilus of Stafford∣shire much Battling the Meadowes thereof. But this River of Dove as overflowing in April feeds the Meadowes with fruit∣fulness, so in May and June choakes the sand grain'd with Grit and Gravel to the great detriment of the owners thereof. Wotton . under Weaer, Where God came never. It is time that this old prophane Proverb should die in mens mouths for ever. I confess in common dis∣course God is said to come to what he doth approve, to send to what he only permits, and neither to go nor send to what he doth dislike and forbid. But this distinction, if granted, will help nothing to the defending of this prophane Proverb, which it seems took it's wicked original from the situation of Wotton, so covered with Hills from the light of the Sun a dismal place, as report representeth it. But were there a place indeed, where God came never, how many years purchase would guilty consciences give for a small abode therein, thereby to escape Divine Justice for their offences. Saints. Authors do as generally agree about a grand Massacre committed by the Pagans under Dioclesian on the Brittish Christians in the place where Litchfield now standeth, I say, they as generally agree in the fact, as they disagree in the number: some making them Two hundred, others five, others seven. And one Author (certainly he was no Millenary in his Judgement) mounts them to just 999. Indeed many were martyred in those dayes both in Brittain, and elsewhere, whose names and numbers are utterly un∣known, so true is the expression ofIn his 27th Homil. in E∣van. Gregory the Great; Ipse sancti Martyres Deo nume∣rabiles, nobis arenam multiplicati sunt, quia quot sint, a nobis comprehendi non possunt, novit enim eos tantum ille, qui (ut habet Tsalmus 126.) numerat multitudinem Stellarum, & omnibus eis nomina vocat. St. BERTELIN was a Britton of a Noble Birth and lead an Eremitical Life in theCwden nd Sped their descriptions of this Cunty. Woods near Stafford, anciently called Bethiney, (contracted it seems for Bertiliney) something of solitariness still remaining in his Memory as being so alone, it hath no me∣morable particulars of his accounts to accompany it. WOLFADUS. RUFFINUS It was pitty to part them seeing they were loving in their lives, and in their death they were not divided. They were sons to Wol∣erus, the Pagan King of Mercia and a Tyrant to boot, who hating Christianity and finding these times to profess privately to practice it, was so enraged that nothing but their bloud would quench his anger. Wolfadus was taken and martyred at Stone in this County: Whilst his younger (if not twin brother) Ruffinus came little more behind him at his death, then he started before him at his birth, seeking to hid himself in a woody place (where since the Chappel ofS. Er. Ms: Burnweston hath been built) was there by his Herod-father found out and murthered. They were by succeding ages rewarded with reputation of Saintip. This Massacre happened Anno Domini.... Cardinals. REGINALD POLE was born atCamds Brit. in Eglish in Stafford∣shire. Stoverton Castle in this County Anno 1500. He was second son unto Sr. Richard Pole, Knight of the Garter, and Frater qit. Bvan in ita Pol. pag. 344. consobrinus (a relation which I cannot make out in reference to him) to Henry the Seventh. His mother Margaret Countess of Salisbury, was Neice to King Edward the Fourth, and daughter to Geoge Duke of Clarence. This Reginald was bred in Corpus-Christi-Colledge in Oxford, preferred afterward Dean of Exeter▪ King Henry the Eighth highly favoured and sent him beyond the Seas, allowing
him a large Pension, to live in an equipage suitable to his birth and alliance. He studied at Padua, conversing there so much with the Patricians of Venice, that at last he degene∣rated into a perfect Italian; so that neither love to his Country, nor gratitude to the King, nor sharp Letters of his Friends, nor fear to lose his present, nor hopes to get future preferments, could perswade him to return into England, but that his pensions were withdrawn from him. This made him apply his studies the more privately in a Venetian-Monastery, where he attained great credit for his Eloquence, Learning, and good Life. Such esteem forreign Grandees had of his great Judgment, that Cardinal Sadolet having written a large Book in the praise of Philosophy, submitted it wholy to his Censure. Pole as highly com∣mended the Work, as he much admired, that a Cardinal of the Church of Rome, would conclude his old age with writing on such a subjectIdem pag. 345. applying unto him the Verses of Virgil, Est in conspectu Tenedos notissima fama Insula dives opum, Priami dum regna manebant, Nunc tantum sinus & statio male fidacarinis. From Troy may th'Ile of Tenedos bespide Much fam'd when Priams kingdom was in pride, Now but a Bay where ships in danger ride. These far fetch'd lines He thus brought home to the Cardinal, that though Philosophy had been in high esteem, whilst Paganisme was in the prime thereof, yet was it but a bad Harbour for an aged Christian, to cast his Anchor therein. It was not long before he was made Deacon-Cardinal, by the Title of St. Mary in Cos∣medin, by Pope Paul the Third, who sent him on many fruitless and dangerous Embas∣sies to the Emperour and the French King, to incite them to War, against King Henry the Eighth. Afterwards he retired himself to Viterbo in Italy, where his House was ob∣served the Sanctuary of Lutherans, and he himself became a racking, but no thorough-paced Protestant. In so much, that being appointed one of three Presidents of the Council of Trent, he endeavoured (but in vain) to have Justification determined by Faith alone. During his living at Viterbo, he carried not himself so cautiously, but that he was taxed for begetting a base Child, which PasquilIdem pag. 348. published in Latine and Italian Verses, affixed in the season of liberty on his lawless pillar. This Pasquil is an Authour, eminent on many accounts. First, for his self-conceale∣ment, being Noscens omnia, & notus nemini. Secondly, for his intelligence, who can display the deeds of midnight at high noon, as if he hid himself in the holes of their bed∣staves, knowing who were Cardinals Children, better than they knew their Fathers. Thirdly, for his unpartial boldness. He was made all of tongue and teeth, biting what e're he touch'd, and it bled what e're he bit; Yea, as if a General Council and Pasquil were only above the Pope, he would not stick to tell where he trod his holy Sandals awry. Fourthly, for his longevity, having lived (or rather lasted) in Rome some hun∣dreds of years, whereby he appears no particular person, but a successive corporation of Satyrists. Lastly, for his impunity, escaping the Inquifition whereof some assign this reason, because hereby the Court of Rome comes to know her faults, or rather to know that their faults are known; which makes Pasquils converts (if not more honest) more wary in their behaviour. This defamation made not such an impression on Poles credit, but that after the death of Paul the Third, he was at midnight in the Conclave chosen to succeed him. Pole re∣fused it, because he would not have his choice a deed of darkness, appearing therein not perfectly Italianated in not taking preferment, when tendred, and the Cardinals beheld his refusal as a deed of dulness. Next day expecting a re-election, he found new morn∣ing new minds, and Pole being reprobated, Julius the Third, his professed enemy, was chosen in his place. Yet afterwards he became Alterius Orbis Papa, when made Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury by Queen Mary. He was a person free from passion, whom none could anger out of his ordinary temper. His youthful Books were full of the Flowers of Rhetorick, whilst the withered stalkes are only found in the Writings of his old Age, so dry their style, and dull their conceit. He died few hours after Queen Mary, November the 17, Anno 1558.
Prelates. EDMUND STAFFORD was Bishop God∣win in the Bishops of Ex∣eter. Brother to Ralph, first Earl of Stafford, and con∣sequentially must be son to Edmund Baron Stafford. His Nativity is rationally with most probability placed in this County, wherein his father, (though Landed every where) had his Prime Seat, and largest revenues. He was by King Richard the Second preferred Bishop of Exeter, and under King Henry the Fourth, for a time, was Chancellour of England. I meet with an Mr. Philpot in his Cara∣logue of Lord Chancellors, pag. 53. Authour who doth make him Bishop first of Rochester, then of Exter, and lastly of York. But of the first and last altum silentium in Bishop Godwin, whom I rather believe. He was a Benefactor to Stapeltons-Inn in Oxford, on a three-fold account, viz. Of 1 Credit, first calling it Exeter Colledge, whereby he put an obligation on the Bishop of that See, favourably to reflect thereon. 2 Profit, adding two Fellowships unto it, and setling Lands to maintain them. 3 Safety, which consisteth in good Statutes, which here he wisely altered and amended. He sat in his See 24 years, and dying 1419 was buried under an Alabaster Tomb in his own Cathedral. WILLIAM DUDLEY son of John Dudley, the Godwi in the Bishops of Durham. Eighth Baron Dudley, of Dudley-Castle in this County, was by his Parents designed for a Scholar, and bred in University Colledge in Oxford, whence he was preferred to be Dean of Windsor and afterwards was for six years Bishop of Durham. He died Anno 1483 at London, and lies buried in Westminster on the South side of St. Nicholas Chappel. EDMUND AUDLEY Son to the Lord Audley of Heyley in this County, whose sir∣name was Touchet. I am informed by my worthy Friend that skilful Antiquary M•. Tho. Barlow of Oxford, that this Edmund in one and the same Instrument writeth himself both Audley and Touchet. He was bred in the University of Oxford, and in processe of time he built the Quire of Saint Maries therein a new on his own charge, adorning it Organ , which I think imports no more than a Musical Organ. He was preferred Bishop first of Rochester, then of Hereford, and at last ofBishop God∣win in the Bi∣shops of Sa∣rum. Salisbury. He died at Ramsbury, August 23, 1624, and is buried in his own Cathedral on the South side of the Altar in a Chappel of excellent Artifice of his own erection. Not meeting with any Bishops born in this County since the Reformation, let us proceed. Lawyers. Sr. THOMAS LITTLETON, Knight. Reader, I have seriously and often perused his life, as written by Sr. Edward Coke, yet not being satisfied of the certainty of his Na∣tivity, am resolved to divide his Character betwixt this County and Worcester-shire. He was son to Thomas Westcote, Esq. and Elizabeth Littleton his wife, whose mother being daughter and heir of Lord Coke, in his Preface to Littletons Tenures. Thomas Littleton, Esq. and bringing to her husband a great Inhe∣ritance, indented with him before marriage, that her Virgin-sirname should be assu∣med and continued in his posterity. He was bred Student of the Laws in the inward Temple, and became afterwards Serjant, and Steward of the Court of the Marshal-sea of the Kings Houshold, to Henry the Sixth. By King Edward the Fourth in the sixth of his Reign, he was made one of the Judges of the Common Pleas; and in the fifteenth of his Reign by Him created Knight of the Bath He is said by our Learned Camd. Brit. in Stafford∣shire. Antiquary to have deserved as well of our Common, as Justinian of the Civil-Law; whose Book of Tenures (dedicated by him to Richard his second son, who also studied the Laws) is counted oraculous in that kind, which since hath been commented on by the Learned endeavours of Sr. Edward Coke. He married Johan one of the daughters and co-heirs of William Boerley, of Bromsecraft Castle in Salop, by whom he had three sons, Founders of three fair Families still flou∣rishing.
1 William. 2 Richard. 3 Thomas. Fixed at Frankley, in this County, where his Poste∣rity is eminently extant. Whose Issue by Alice daugh∣ter & heir of Will. Winsbury, remain at Pillerton-Hall, in Shropshire. Who by Anne daughter and heir of John Botreaux hath his lineage still continuing in Worcesier-shire. This Reverend Judge died the 23 of August, in the one and twentieth of King Edward the Fourth, and lieth buried under a very fair Monument in the Cathedral of Worcester. EDMUND DUDLEY Esq. was son to John Dudley Esq. second son to John Sutton, first Baron of Dudley as a Learned Antiquary hath beheld his Pedegree derived. But his descent is controverted by many, condemned by some, who have raised a report that John father to this Edmund was but a S. E. Ms. Carpenter born in Dudley Town, (and therefore called John Dudley) who travailing Southward to find work for his Trade lived at Lewis in Sussex, where they will have this Edmund born, and for the pregnancy of his parts brought up by the Abbot of Lewis in Learning. But probably some who afterwards were pinched in their purses by this Edmund did in revenge give him this Bite in his reputation, in∣venting this Tale to his disparagement. I must believe him of Noble Extraction, because qualified to marry the daughter and heir of the Viscount Lisle, and that before this Edmund grew so great with King Henry the Seventh, as by the age of John his son (after∣wards Duke of Northumberland) may probably be collected. He was bred in the study of the Laws, wherein he profited so well, that he was made one of the Puis-née Judges, and wrote an excellent Book compounded of Law and Policy (which hitherto I have not seen) intituled the J. Bale, & J. Stow. Tree of the Common-wealth. But what saith Columella? Agricolam arbor ad fructum perducta delectat. A Husbandman is delighted with the Tree of his own planting when brought to bear fruit. Judge Dudley knew well how to turn a Land into the greatest profit of his Prince, which made him implyed by King Henry the Seventh to put his penal Statutes in execution, which he did, with se∣verity, cruelty, and extortion, so that with Sr. Richard Empson Viis & modis (vitiis & modis rather) they advanced a mighty Mass of Money to the King, and no mean one to themselves. King Henry the Eighth coming to his Crown, could not pass in his progress for com∣plaints of people in all places, against these two wicked Instruments, who with the two Prov. 30. 14 daughters of the horse leach were alwayes crying, give, give, and therefore he resolved to discharge their protection and to resign them to Justice, so that they were made a peace∣offering to popular anger 1510, and were executed at Tower-hill. Sir, THOMAS BROMLEY, Knight. Reader, I request thee that this short note may keep possession for his Name and memory, until he may be fixed elsewhere with more as∣surance. He was in the first of Queen Mary, Octob. 8. made Lord Chief Justice of the Spelman's Glossary verbo Justiciarius. Kings Bench, holding his place hardly a year; but, whether quitting his Office or dying therein is to me unknown. Souldiers. JOHN BROMLEY, Esq. branched from the Bromleys in Shrop-shire, but born and Holinshd pag. 51. living in this County at Bromley, followed the fortunate Arms of King Henry the Fifth in France. It happened, that in a Battle near Corby the French (according to their fashion▪ furious at first) fell so fiercely on the English, that they got away the Kings Standard of GUIEN to the great dismay of our Army. But Bromley's heart had no room for fear or grief, anger had so wholely possessed it: Insomuch, that valiantly he recovered the Captive Standard, and by his exemplary Prowess largely contributed to that dayes Vi∣ctory. Hereupon Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier conferred on him a yearly pension of Idem Ibid. fourty pounds during his life. Afterwards in the sixth of King Henry the Fifth Anno 1418 he was not only Knighted by the King for his venturous Activity, but also made Captain of Dampfront, and Great Constable of Bossevile le Ross in France: Yea, and rewarded by the King with fourty pounds in Land a year to him and his heirs the Patent whereof is ex∣tant in the Tower, and exemplified in my Holinshed pag. 563. Author. He appears to me no more than a plain Knight, or a Knight Batchelour: But were it in the power of my Pen to create a Banneret, he should, for the Reason premised, have that Honour affixed to his Memory, who, as we conjecture, died about the middle of the reign of King Henry the Sixth.
JOHN DUDLEY Duke of Northumberland (where born uncertain) was son to Ed∣ward Dudley, Esq. (of whomIn the Law∣yers of this Couny. hereafter) and would willingly be reputed of this County, a Descendent from the Lord Dudley therein, whose memory we will gratifie so far as to believe it. He lived long under King Henry the Eighth who much favoured him, and the Servant much resembled his Master, in the equal contemperament of Vertue and Vices, so evenly matched, that it is hard to say, which got the Mastery in either of them. This John was proper in person, comely in carriage, wise in advising, valiant in adventuring, and gene∣rally (till his last project) prosperous in success. But he was also notoriously wanton, intollerably ambitious, a constant dissembler, prodigeously profuse, so that he had sunk his Estate, had it not met with a seasonable support of Abbey Land, he being one of those who well warmed himself with the chipps, which fell from the felling of Mo∣nasteris. King Henry the 8th. first Knighted, then created him Vicount Lisle, Earle of Warwick, and Duke of Norhumberland. And under Queen Mary he made himself almost King of England, though not in Title, in power, by contriving the settling of the Crown on Queen Jane his daugher in Law, till successe failed him therein. And no wonder if that design missed the mark, which besides many rubbs it met with at hand, was thrown against the general bias of English affection. For this his treasonable practises he was ex∣ecuted in the First of Queen Mary, much bemoaned by some Martial men, whom he had formerly indeared in his good service in the French and Scotish Wars. He left two sons who survived to great Honour. Ambrose Earl of Warwick heir to all that was good, and Robert Earl of Leicester heir to all that was great in their Father. The BAGNOLS. Something must be premised of their Name and extraction. The Bagenhalts (commonly called Bagnols) were formerly a Family of such remark in this County, that before the reign of King Henry the Eighth, there scarce passed an Ancient piece of evidence which is not attested byS.E.Ms. one of that Name. But (see the uncertainty of all humane things) it afterwards sunck down (to use my Authours language) into aIdem in his description of the Town of Bagenhale. Plebean Condition. But the sparks of their gentle Bloud (though covered for a time under a mean estate) have since blazed again with their own worth and valour when Ralph and Nicholas sons to John Bagnol of Newcastle in this County were both Knighted for their good service, the one in Mustle-Borough fight, the otherin Ireland. Yea, as if their courage had been hereditary. Their sons Samuel and Henry were for their Martial merit advanced to the same degree. Sea-men. WILLIAM MINORS. Reader, I remember how, in the Case of the Ship-money, the Judges delivered it for Law, that, England being an Island, the very Middle-land-Shires therein are all to be accounted as Maritime. Sure I am the Genius even of Land-lock-Counties acteth the Natives with a Maritime dexterity; The English generally may be resembled to Ducklings, which, though hatched under a Hen, yet naturally delight to dabble in the Water. I mean, though born and bred in In-Land places, (where neither their Infancy nor Childhood ever beheld Ship or Boat) yet have they a great Inclinatio and Aptnesse to Sea-service; And the present subject of our Pen is a pregnant proof thereof. This William, son to Richard Minors, Gent. of Hallenbury-Hall, was born at Uttoxater in this County, who afterwads coming to London, became so prosperous a Mariner, that he hath safely returned eleven times from the East-Iudies: whereas in the dayes of our Grand∣Fathers, such as came thence twice, were beheld as Rarities; thrice, as Wonders; four times, as Miracles. Much herein (under Divine Providence) is to be attributed to the Make of our English Ships, now built more advantageous for sailing, than in former Ages. Besides, the oftner they go, the nearer they shape their Course, use being the mother of Perfe∣ctnesse. Yet whilst others wonder at his happiness in returning so often, I as much commend his moderation in going no oftner to the East-Indies. More men know, how to get enough than, when they have gotten enough, which causeth their Coveteousness to increase with their wealth. Mr. Minors, having advanced a competent Estate, quitted the water to
live on the land, and now peaceably enjoyeth, what he painfully hath gotten, and is li∣ving in, or near, Hartford at this present year 1660. Writers. JOHN STAFFORD, born in the Shire-Town of this County, was bred a Fran∣ciscan. No contemptible Philosopher and Divine, but considerable Historian, who wrote a Latin History of Englands affaires. Authors are at an absolute loss, when he lived and are fain by degrees to screw themselves into a general notice thereof. He must be since the year 1226, when the Franciscans first fixed themselves in our Land. He must be before John Ross, who flourished Anno 1480, under Edward the Fourth, and maketh honourable mention of him. Therefore with proportion and probability he is collected to have written about 1380. WILLIAM dePits. de Ang. script. in ap∣pendice, pag. 854. LICHFIELD, so termed from the place of his Nativity, applied himself to a study of Divinity, whereof he became Doctor, and afterwards Rector of All-hallowes the Great in Thames-street, London. He was generally beloved for his great Learning, and godly lie. He wrote many Books both Moral and Divine, in Prose and Verse, one intituled The complaint of God unto sinful Men. There were found in his Study after his deathStows Sur∣vey of London pag. 251. Three thousand four score and three Sermons of his own writing. He died Anno Dom. 1447. being buried under a defaced Monument in the Quire of his own Church. ROBERT WHITTINGTON born atBale cent. 9▪ numb. 43. & Pits. aetat. 16. numb. 940. Lichfield, was no mean Grammarian: Indeed, he might have been greater, if he would have been less, Pride prompting him to cope with his Conquerors, whom he mistook for his Match. The first of these was Will. Lillie, though there was as great difference betwixt these two Grammarians, as betwixta Verb defective, and one perfect in all the Requisites thereof. The two other were William Horman, and Alderedge, both eminent in the Latin Tongue: But some will carp at the best, who cannot mend the worst line in a Picture, the humour of our Whittington, who flourished 1530. Since the Reformation. HENRY STAFFORD, Baron of Stafford in this County, was son unto Edward Duke of Buckingham attainted and beheaded under King Henry the Eighth. This our Henry, though loosing his Top and Top-Gallant (his Earledom and Dukedome) in the tempest of the Kings displeasure, yet still he kept his Keel, his Barony of Stafford. The less he pos∣sessed of his Fathers Lands, the more he enjoyed of himself. It was not sullenesse or re∣venge, but free choice, which made him betake himself to his studies, wherein he became eminent. I place him confidently not a trans, but Cis-reformation-man for translating the Book of Dr. Fox Bishop of Hereford (a favourer of Luther) into English, Of the Difference of the power Ecclesiastical and Secular. A Subject profitable in all; seasonable (not to say necessary) in our Times: For as the Water and Earth making but one Globe take their mutual advantages to enlarge themselves, so these two powers united under one King in our land, wait their opportunities to advance their respective Jurisdictions, the right stating whereof would conduce much to the publick Peace. This LordPits. anno 1558. died (I dare not say the more the pitty) some moneths before the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1558. SAMPSON ERDERSWIK, Esq. was born at Sandon near Stafford in this County, of a Right Worshipful and ancient Extraction. He was a Gentleman accomplished with all Noble qualities, affability, devotion, and Learning. 'T is hard to say whether his Judgement or Industry was more in matters of Antiquity. Bearing a tender respect to his native Country and desiring the honour thereof: he began a description (ntituled A view of Stafford-shire,) Anno Domini 1593, conteining the same till the day of his death. A short, clear, true, impartial work, taken out of ancient evidences and Records, the Copies whereof in Manuscripts are deservedly
valued for great Rarities. This is he, who, when I often groped in the dark, yea feared to fall in matters concerning this County, took me by the hand (Oh! for the like Con∣ductors in other Counties) and hath led me safe by his direction. He was much de∣lighted with decency of Gods House, which made him on his own cost to repaire & new Glaze the Church of Sandon, wherein (to prevent neglect of Executors) he erected for himself a goodly Monument of Free-stone with his proportion cut out to the life, and now lieth therein interred. He died April the 11, 1603, and let his Elogie of Mr. Britt. in this Couny. Camden serve for his Epitaph; Venerandae Antiquitatis fuit Cultor Maximus. THOMAS ALLEN was born in this County, deriving his original from Allanus de Samps. Er∣deswick Ma∣nuscrip. Buc∣kenhole, Lord of Buckenhole, in the reign of King Edward the 2d. He was bred in Glocester-Hall in Oxford a most excellent Mathematician, where he succeeded to the skill and scandal of Frier Bacon, (taken at both, but given I beleeve by neither) accounted a Conjurer. In∣deed vulgar eyes, ignorant in Opticks, conceit that raised which is but reflected, fancy every shadow a spirit, every spirit a Divel. And when once the repute of a Conjurer is raised in vulgar esteem, it is not in the power of the greatest Innocence and Learning to allay it. He was much in favour with Robert Earl of Leicester, and his admirable writings of Mathematicks are ltent with some private possessors, which envy the publick profit thereof. He died a very aged man towards the end of the reign of King James. HENRY and ROBERT BURTON Brethren, and eminent Authors in their several kinds, were, as some say, born at Fald in this County. But Leicester-shire preten∣ding some probability to their Nativities, hath by the Alphabetical advantage preven∣ted this Shire, and carried away their See in Lei∣cester-shire Writers since the Re∣formation. Characters therein. Besides these deceased WRITERS, Reader, I have Three in my eye, who are (and long may they be) alive, as different, as eminent in their liberal inclinations. Edward Leigh, of Rushwel-Hall Esq. whose Critica Sacra with many other worthy works will make his Ju∣dicious Industry known to posterity. Elias Ashmole, Esq. born in Litchfield, critically skilled in Ancient Coins, Chymistry, Heraldry, Mathematicks, what not? John Lightfood, D. D. who for his exact insight in Hebrew, and Rabbinical Learning hath deserved well of the Church of England. But forgive me, Reader, I have forgot myself and trespassed on my Fundamental Rules. Romish Exile Writers. WILLIAM GIFFORD. Though this Ancient and Worshipful Name be diffused in several Counties; I have satisfied my self in fixing him here, as an Extract of the Fa∣mily of Chillington. He was a man of much Motion, and my Pen is resolved to follow him, as able to Travel with more Speed, less Pain, and Cost, 1 From his Fathers house he went to, and lived four years in Oxford. 2 Thence (with his School-master) he went over to Lovain, where he got Pits. de Il∣lust. Angl. scrip. pag 809. Lau∣ream Doctoralem in Artibus, was made Master of Arts. 3 Then, studying Divinity there under Bellarmin, was made Batchelour in that Profession. 4 Frighted hence with War went to Paris. 5 Removed to Rheams, where he eleven years professed Divinity. 6 Doctorated at Pont-Muss in Lorain. 7 Highly prized by Henry Duke of Guise and Cardinal Lewis his brother, who gave him a Pension of two hundred Crowns a year. 8 After their death he went to Rome, where he became Dean of St. Peters in the Isle for ten years. 9 Returning to Rheams he was made Rector of the Vniversity therein. 10 At fifty years of Age bidding farewel to the World, he became a Benedictine at Delaware in Lorain. Thus far Pitseus: (acquainting us, that he was alive 1611) on whose Stock give me leave to graft, what followeth; This Dr. Gifford was afterwards advanced Arch-bishop of Rheams by the favour of the Duke of Guise, who is shrewdly suspected to have quar∣tered to heavily on the profit of that place. However our Gifford gained so much, as therewith to found not only a Covent for English Monks at St. Mallowes in France, but also at Paris for those of the same profession. Remarkable Charity, that an Exile (who properly had no home of his own) should erect Houses for others.
Benefactors to the Publick. This County, I confess, is exceeded by her Neigbours in this particular; and I meet with few either ancient or eminent Benefactions therein. Yet besides a air School at Wolver-Hampton built by Sr. Stephen Jennings Lord Major of London, and another erected by Mr. Thomas Allen at tceter, I am credibly informed, that MARTEN NOEL, Esq. born in the Couny-Town of Stafford, bred Srivener in London, hath fairly built and largely endowed an Hospital in Stafford aforesaid▪ The Crown Mual amongst the Roman wa no given to every Souldier, who scaled the Walls, but onely to him, who footed them first: on which account a Garland of Glory is due to this Gentleman, whose Foundation (as I am certified) is the first [considerable] Fabrick of that kind in this County. I is to be hoped, that as the zeal of 2 Cor. 9. 2. Achaia provoked many, o this good Leader will invite may Followers to succeed him, living in London this present 1660. Memorable persons. THOMAS TARLTON. My intelligence of the certainty of his birth-place, co∣ming too late, (confessed by the REM. marginal mark) I fix him here, who indeed was born at Condover in the neighbouring County of Shrap-shire, where still some of his Name and Relations remain. Here he was in the field keeping his Fathers Swine, when a Servant of Robert Earl of Leicester (passing this way to his Lords Lands in his Barony of Denbighe) was so highly pleased with his happy unhappy answers, that he brought him to Court, where he became the most famous Jester to Queen Elizabeth. Many condemn his (vocation I cannot term it, for it is a coming without a calling) Im∣ployment as unwarrantable. Such maintain, that it is better to be a Fool of Gods making, born so into the World, or a Fool of Mans making jeered into it by general Dirision, than a Fool of one's own making, by his voluntary affecting thereof. Such say also, he had better continued in his Trade of Swine-keeping, which (though more painful, and less profitable) his conscience changed to loss, for a Jesters place in the Court, who, of all men have the har∣dest account to make for every idle word that they abundantly utter. Others alledge in excuse of their Practises; That Princes in all Ages were allowed their  whose Virtue consisted in speaking any thing without control: That Jesters often heal what Flatterers hurt, so that Princes, by them arive at the notice of their Errors, seeing Jesters carry about with them an Act of Indemnity for whatsoever they say or do: That Princes over-burdered with States-business must have their Diversions, and that those words, are not censurable for absolutely idle, which lead to lawful delight. Our Tarlton was Master of his Faculty. When Queen Elizabeth was serious (I dare not say sullen) and out of good humour, he could un-dumpish her at his pleasure. Her highest Favorites, would in some Cases, go to Tarleton, before they would go to the Queen, and he was their Vsher to prepare their advantagious access unto Her. In a word He told the Queen more of her faults, than most of her Chaplains, and cured her Melancholy better than all of her Physicians. Much of his merriment lay in his very looks and actions, according to the Epitaph written upon him Hic itus est cujus poterat vox, actio, vultus, Ex Heraclito reddere Democritum. Indeed the self same words, spoken by another, would hardly move a merry man to smile, which uttered by him, would force a sad soul to laughter. This is to be reported to his praise, that his Jests never were prophane, scurrilous, nor Satyrical, neither trespassing on Piety, Modesty, or Charity, as in which plurimum inerat sa∣lis, mutum aceti, aliquid sinapis, nihil veneni. His death may proportionably be assigned, about the end of Queen Elizabeth. JAMES SANDS, of Doctor Hac∣will in his A∣pology, pag. 283. Horborn, (nigh Bremingham but) in this County, is most remarkable for his Vivacity, for he lived 140 and his wife 120 years. He out lived five Leases of twenty one years a piece, which were made unto him after his Marriage. Thus is not the age of Man so Vniversally contracted, but that Divine Providence sometimes draweth it
out to an extraordinary length, as for other reasons so to render the longevity of the primi∣tive Patriarchs more credible. He died about the year 1625. WALTER PARSONS born in this County was first Apprentice to a Smith, when he grew so tall in stature, that a hole was made for him in the Ground to stand therein up to the knees, so to make him adequate with his Fellow work-men. He afterwards was Porter to King James; seeing as Gates generally are higher than the rest of the Building, so it was sightly that the Port should be taller than other Persons. He was propor∣tionable in all parts, and had strength equal to height, Valour to his strength, Temper to his valour, so that he disdained to do an injury to any single person. He would make nothing to take two of the tallest Yeomen of the Guard (like the Gizard and Liver) under his Arms at once and order them as he pleased. Yet were his Parents (for ought I do understand to the contrary) but of an ordinary stature, whereat none will wonder who have read what De Civitate Dei lib. 15. cap. 23. St. Augustine reports of a Wo∣man which came to Rome (a little before the sacking thereof by the Goths) of so Giantlike a height that she was far above all who saw her, though infinite Troopes came to behold the spectacle. And yet he addeth Et hoc erat maximae admirationis, quod ambo parentes ejus, &c. This made men most admire, that both her Parents were but of ordinary stature. This Parsons is produced for proof, that all ages affords some of extraordinary height, and that there is no general decay of Mankind in their Dimentions, which if there were, we had ere this time shrunk to be lower than Pigmyes not to instance in a lesse propor∣tion. This Parsons died Anno Dom. 162.▪ Lord Majors. Name. Father. Place. Company. Time 1 William Taylor. John Taylor. Ecclestone. Grocer. 1468 2 Stephen Jennings. Will. Jennings. Wolverhampton. Merchant-Tailor. 1508 3 Richard Pipe. Richard Pipe. Wolverhampton. Draper. 1578 4 James Harvey. Will. Harvey. Cottwalton. Iron-monger. 1581 5 Stephen Slany. John Slany. Mitton. Skinner. 1595 6 William Rider. Thoms Rider. Muclestone. Haberdasher. 1600 7 Hugh Hamersley Hugh Hamersley. Stafford. Haberdasher. 1627 The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the 12 year of K. Henry the Sixth. Anno Dom. 1433. Commissioners to take the Oathes. William Bishop of Covent. and Liech. Humphry Earl of Stafford. Knights for the Shire Hugh Ardeswyk. Thomas Arblastier. Johannis Sutton, chiv. Johannis Bagot, chiv. Rogeri Aston, chival. Johannis Gruffith, chi. Johannis Gresley, chiv. Thomae Stanley, arm. Radulphi Egerton, ar. Radulphi Basset, arm. Roberti Harecourt, ar. Philippi Chetwynd, ar. Richardi Bagot, arm. Roberti Whitgrave, ar. Thomae Barbour, arm. Willielmi Grevel, arm. Thomae Detheck, arm. Thomae Goyne, armig. Johannis Miners, ar. Tho. Oker, arm. senioris. Tho. Oker, arm. junioris. Johannis Minerel, arm. Richardi Peshale, armi. Hugonis Wrotesley, arm. Riehardi Hareconrt, ar. Sampsonis Ardiswick, ar. Johannis Winesbury, ar. Thomae Swinerton, arm. Willielmi Newport, arm. Johannis Hampton, arm. Humphry Low, armiger Richardi Lone, armig. Willieimi Lee, armiger. Willielmi Everdon, ar. Willielmi Leveson, arm. Nicolai Warings, arm. Jacobi Leveson, arm. Rogeri Wirley, armig. Cornelii VVirly, armig. Johannis Whatecroft, ar. Gerardi de Ringeley, ar. Richardi Pety, armig. VVillielmi Hexstall, ar. Edwardi Doyle, arm. Richardi Selman, arm. David. Cawardyn, arm. Thome Swynfen, arm. Richardi Rugeley, ar. Johannis Broghton, arm. Johannis Atwell; arm. Thomae Cotton, armig. Johannis Cotton, arm. Aymeri Cotton, armig. Thomae VVolseley, ar. Johannis Colwich, ar. Roberti Swinerton, ar Rogeri Swineshede, ar Th. VVhitington, ar. Joh. More, armiger Thome More, arm. Joh. Askeby, arm. Joh. Mollesley, arm. Joh. Horewold, ar. VVill. Saltford, ar. VVil. Leventhorp, ar. VVill. Corbyn, gent. Joh. Corbyn, gent. Thomae VValton, ar. Reg. Bro de Oake, ar. Johannis Sheldon, ar.
Radulphi Frebody, arm. VVill. Bradshaw, arm. Joh. Bonghay, gent. Joh. Burton, gent. Roberti Stokes, armig. Joh. Cumberford, armig. Nicolai Thiknes, armig. Aegidii, Swinerton, arm. Thomae VVolaston, gent. Hugonis Holyns, gent. Thomae Lokewood, gent. Thomae Stafford, gent. Nicolai Norman, gent. Richardi Snede, gent. VVillielmi Orme, gent. Hugonis Greneway, gent. Humfridi Clerkeson, Rogeri Bealchier. VVillielmi Sondbache. Johannis Brennere. Richardi Vicarus. Johannis VVylot. Thomae Bowyer. Johannis Ruggeley. Petri Goldsone. Nicholai Flaxale. Thomae Brette. Thomae Neweno. Richardi Banastre. VVillielmi Fouke. Rogeri Milnes. Richardi Bisheton. Roberti Onowyne. Roberti Berdusmore. Humfridi VValker, of Ke∣stren. VVillielmi Bowdel, of the Mere VVillielmi Sherred. VVillielmi Broke Henrici Monyfold. Stephani Bagonnal. Thomae Glyfe. Hugnis Bertam. Sheriffs. HEN. II. Anno 1 Milo de Gloucest. Anno 2 Robertus de Stafford, for 6 years together. Anno 8 Alex. Clericus, for 18 years together. Anno 26 Thomas Noel, for 8 years to∣gether. RICH. I. Anno 1 Thomas Noel Anno 2 Tho. de Cressewel Anno 3 Hugo Coventriensis Episc. & Robertus filius Walleram Anno 4 Hugo Coventr. Episcopus & Rober. de Humant, frater ejus. Anno 5 Hugo Episcop. Coventr. & Richardus Maresse. Anno 6 Hugo Bardulfe Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hugo de Caucombe, for 2 years together. JOH. Regis. Anno 1 Galfr. filius Petri & Tho. de Erdington, for 5 years to∣gether. Anno 6 Tho. Erdington, & Robertus de alta Ripa. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Tho. de Erdington, for 9 years together. HEN. III. Anno 1 Ranul. Com. Cestr. & Hen. de Aldicheleia, for 4 years to∣gether. Anno 5 Ranul. Comes Cest. & Phil. de Kinton, for 3 years together. Anno 8 Ranul. Com. Cestr. Anno 9 Joh. Bonet, for 3 years together. Anno 12 Hen. de Aldich & Robertus de Leia. Anno 13 Hen. de Aldich & Will. de Bromley. for 4 years together. Anno 17 Robertus de Haga, for 4 years together. Anno 21 Joh. Extraneus, & Robertus de Acton. Anno 22 Joh. Extraneus, for 10 years together. Anno 32 Thomas Corbet. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Rober. Grendon, for 6 years together. Anno 40 Hugo de Acovere. Anno 41 Hugo de Acovere. Anno 42 Will. Bagod, for 3 years toge∣ther. Anno 45 Will. de Covereswel, & Jac. de Aldahell. Anno 46 Jaco. de Aldahell, for 7 years together. EDW. I. Anno 1 Radul. de Mortuo Mari, for 3 years together. Anno 4 Bogo de Knovil, for 3 years together. Anno 7 Rogerus Springhuse, for 7 years together. Anno 14 Rogerus Springhuse, & Lio∣nine Ramesley, for 3 years to∣gether. Anno 17 Robertus Corbet. Anno 18 Will. Tictely, for 6 years to∣gether. Anno 24 Radul. de Schirle, for 3 years together. Anno 27 Thomas Corbet. Anno 28 Idem Anno 29 Richardus de Harleigh Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Walter de Beysin. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Johannes de Acton Anno 34 Johannes de Dene. Anno 35 Idem. EDW. II. Anno 1 Rogerus Trumwinne Anno 2 Johannes Extraneus. Anno 3 Hugo de Crofts. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hugo de Andecle, for 3 years together. Anno 8 Will. de Mere. Anno 9 Rogerus de Cheyne. Anno 10 Rogeri Trumwinne. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Robertus de Grendon, for 3 years together. Anno 15 Johannes de Swinerton. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Henricus de Bishburn, for 3 years together. EDW. III. Anno 1 Johannes de Hinkele & Henricus de Bishburn Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Johannes de Hinkele Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Henricus de Bishburn Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Richardus de Peshal Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Johannes de Hinkeley Anno 10 Simon de Ruggeley. Anno 11 Richardus de Peshal, & Simon de Ruggeley, for 4 years together. Anno 15 Adam de Peshal Anno 16 Thomas de Swinerton Anno 17 Idem Anno 18 Johannes de Aston Anno 19 Henr. Com. Derby, for 17 years together Anno 36 Johannes de Swinerton Anno 37 Robertus de Grendon Anno 38 Johannes de Perton
Anno 39 Philippus de Lutteley, for 4 years together Anno 43 Henricus Pius Anno 44 Johannes de Perton Anno 45 Idem Anno 46 Johannes de Gresley Anno 47 Nicholaus de Stafford Anno 48 Johannes de Verdon Anno 49 Johannes Bassey Anno 50 Nicholaus de Stafford Anno 51 Petrus de Careswel Anno 52 Walterus de Hopton Anno 53 Willielmus de Canereswel. HENRY the Third. 1 Ranul. Com. Cestr. & Henr. de Aldicheleia] This Henricus of Aldicheleia was the first Lord Audley in this County, and Founder of that Noble Family so long famous for Martial Atchievements. I meet with a S. E. Ms. Record extant in the Tower, too long to tran∣scribe, wherein King Henry the Third confirmed unto him not only many Lands of his own Donation, but what other persons of quality in this County had bestowed on him. 1 Nich. de Verdun gave him Aldithlege. 2 Hugh de Lacy gave him Coulton. 3 Eutropius Hastang gave him Cold Norton. 4 Will. de Betleigh gave him Betleigh. 5 Harvey de Stafford gave him Heleigh. 6 Egidius Erdington gave him Shagbourn. 7 Herbert Rusbin gave him Stanweare. 8 Eugenulphus Greasly gave him Tunstal. Chaderley. 9 Alice his Wife gave him Chell. Normancot. 10 Margaret Strange gave him Nerle. Brudnap. 11 Alice Hartoate gave him Weston. 12 Joan Noel gave him Weston. 13 Peter Morton gave him Hauksley, Bagley, and Morton. All, or most of these were great Mannors cum pertinentiis. What man of men was this Henry that so many of both Sexes should center in their bounty upon him, was it for fear, or love, or a mixture of both. But I have no calling to inquire into the cause thereof, and if they were pleased to give, none will blame him for receiving them. Heleigh, the fifth Mannor here mentioned was afterwards the prime Seat of the Lord Audley, who also had great Lands in Devon-shire, where formerly we have spoken of him. Their heir-Males failing about the reign of King Henry the Sixth, Joan one of their heirs was married to Sir John Tutchet, whose son Sir John assumed the Title of Baron Audley and was Ancestor to the present Lord Audley Earl of Castle-haven in Ireland. EDWARD the Third. 18 John de Aston.] I have not met with a more Noble Family, measuring on the Level of flat and un-advantaged Antiquity. They have euer borne a good respect to the Church and Learned Men, and not without just reason, seeing Roger de Molend Bishop of Litchfield in the reign of King Henry the Third gave Haywood in this County Rogero de AstonS. E. Ms. Valecto suo, to Roger de Aston his servant. This Roger was son to Ralph Aston, and father unto Sir John Aston, whose succession is thus ordered, 1 Sir John Aston, afore-named. 2 Sir Thomas Aston, his son. 3 Sir Roger Aston, his son. 4 Sir Robert Aston, his son. 5 John Aston, his son Esq. 6 Sir John Aston, his son Knight Banneret. 7 Sir Edward Aston, his son. 8 Sir Walter Aston, his son. 9 Sir Edward Aston, his son. 10 Sir Walter Aston, his son. This last Sir Walter was employed by King James Embassador unto Spain. He married Gertrude sole daughter of Sir Thomas Sadler of Standon in Hartford-shire. Nor must it be forgotten, that that Pious Poet Mr. In his Poly∣olbion the 12. Song. Michael Drayton confesseth, that his Muse oft found safe and sweet retreat, at Tixhall, the habitation of this Family, and thus windeth up his well-wishing for them; Whose bounty still my Muse so freely shall confesse, That when she lacketh words, then signs shall it expresse.
SHERIFFS. Place. Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Brian. Cornwall SHROPs. Arg. a lion ramant Gules, armed Az. in a Border Sab. Bezant. 2 Will. Calleson     3 Ioh. de Verdon   Or, a Fret Gules. 4 Rog. de Wirley Hampshed Ar. a Cheve. ingrail. betw. 3 Bugle horns, Sa. 5 Will. Wa shall   Arg. a Fox passant, Sable. 6 Idem ut prius   7 Humf. de Stafford   Or, a Cheveron Gules, a Quarter Ermin. 8 Will. de Walshal ut prius   9 Rog. Manneyson     10 Adomar. de Lichfeld     11 Will. Chetwin Ingestree. Azure, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mullets, Or. 12 Humf. de Stafford ut prius   13 Will. VValshall ut prius   14 Ioh. Delves Apedale. Ar. a Cheveron Gu. Fretty, Or, be∣twixt 3 Delfs Sable. 15 Ioh. Swinerton   Argent, a Cross formet Flurt, Sa. 16 Will. de     17 Adam. de Lichfield     18 Rob. Frances   Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 spread Eagles, Gules. 19 Rob. Mannesin     20 VVill. VValshall ut prius   21 Idem ut prius   22 Idem. ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 VVill. Sharshal, mi.     2 Rob. Mannesin, mil. & Wil. Newport, m.   Arg. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt 3 Leopards heads, Sable. 3 Rob. Frances ut prius   4 Humf. Stafford ut prius   5 Idem ut prius   6 VVill. Newport ut prius   7 VVill. VValshal ut prius   8 Will. Newport, mil. ut prius   9 Rob. Frances, mil. ut prius   10 Tho. Aston, mil. Haywood Argent, a Fesse, and 3 lozenges in Chief, Sable. 11 Ioh. Delves ut prius   12 Tho. Giffard. Chilling∣ton. Azure, 3 irrups leathered, Or. HEN. V.     Anno     1 Ioh. Basset, mil. Drayton. Or, 3 Piles Gules, a Canton Erm 2 Rob. Babthorpe     3 Ioh. Delves ut prius   4 Rich. Vernon   Argent, Frettee Sa. a Canton, Gu. 5 Ioh. Meverel Throwley Arg. a Griffin segreant, Sable. 6 VVill. Trussel   Or, a Cross formee fleury, Gules. 7 Humf. Haighton     8 Ioh. Delves ut prius   9 Idem. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Tho. Gresley, mil.   Varry, Ermin and Gules. 2 Hug. Erdeswick, ar. Sandon. Or, on a Cveron Gu. 5 Bezants. 3 Ni. Montgomery, m.   Or, an Eagle displayed, Azu. 4 Iohan. Bagor, mil. Blithfield. Argent, a Cheveron Gules betwixt 3 Martlets, Sable. 5 Roger. Eston     6 Ric. Vernon, mil. ut prius   7 Phil. Chetwin ut prius   8 Tho. Griffith   Gules, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Helmets, Argent. 9 Ni. Montgomery, m. ut prius   10 Rog. Aston, mil. ut prius   11 Radul. Egerton   Argent, a lion rampant Gules be∣tween 3 Pheons, Sable. 12 Thom. Stanley   Ar. on a Bend Az 3 stags-heads, O. 13 Rob. Stelley, mil. NOTIN. Paly of six Argent and Azure. 14 Rich. Peshale Horsley. Argent, a Cross Formee floyre, Sa. on a Canton Gules, a Wolfs head erazed, of the first. 15 Phil. Chetwin, mil. ut prius   16 Radul. Basset ut prius   17 Thomas Sanley ut prius   18 Thomas Gresley ut prius   19 Humf. Lowe     20 Radulpus Aucher     21 VVillielmus Mitton   Per Pale Az. and Gules, an Eagle with 2 heads dispayed, Or. 22 Nic. Mountgomery ut prius   23 Thomas Blount   Barry Nebule of 6 O and Sable. 24 Ioh. Griffith, mil. ut prius   25 Humf. Blount▪ ut prius   26 Tho. Ferrers, arm. Tāworth. Varry, Or and Gules. 27 Idem. ut prius   28 Humf. Swinerton ut prius   29 Ioh. Stanley, arm. ut prius   30 Tho. Astley Patshall AMP. 31 Robertus Aston ut prius   32 Rich. Bagot, arm ut prius   33 Th. Cotton, ar. sive Lotton   Let the Name first be agreed on. 34 Ioh. Delves, armig. ut prius   35 Ioh. Coles, arm.   Quarterley Erm. and Paly of six, Or and Gules. 36 VVill. Mitton, arm ut prius   37 Hug Egerton, arm. ut prius   38 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius   EDW. IV.     1 Walt. Wrotesly Wrotsley, Or, 3 Piles▪ Sable a Canton Erm. 2 Ioh. Harecourt, ar.   Or, two Barrs Gules. 3 Idem. ut prius   4 Humf. Peshal ut prius   5 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius   6 Tho. Basset, arm. ut prius   7 Ioh. Harecourt, ar. ut prius   8 Iohan. Acton, arm.   Gules, 2 Lions passant Argent betwixt 9 croslets, Or. 9 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius   10 Ran. Brereton, mil.   Argent, 2 Barrs, Sable. 11 Hen. Beaumont, mi.   Azure, semee de flowers de Lis, a Lion rampant, Or. 12 Walt. Griffith, mil. ut prius   13 Will. Bass. ut prius   14 Geo. Stanley ut prius   15 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius   16 Ioh. Ashton ut prius   17 Hug. Egerton, ar. ut prius   18 Rich. Bagot ut prius   19 Nic. Mountgomery ut prius   20 Ioh. Aston ut prius   21 Will. Basse, mil. ut prius   22 Humf. Stanley, mi. ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Ni. Montgomery, ar. ut prius   2 Th. Worlseley, mil.     3 Marm. Constable, m. & Hum. Stafford, m. YORKsh. ut prius Quarterly Gules and Vary, a Bend, Or. HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Humf. Stanley ut prius   2 Hen. Willoughby   A M P. 3 Will. Harper   Argent, a Lion rampant in a Bor∣dure engrailed, Sable. 4 Hug. Peshal ut prius   5 Th. Gresley, mil. ut prius   6 Ranul. Oker   , if not the same with Oke over▪ 7 Rog. Draycot, ar.   Or, Fretty Gules on a Canton, Ar. a Cross Patee, Azure. 8 Ric. Wrotesly, ar. ut prius   9 Humf. Stanley, mil. ut prius   10 Ric. Harecourt, mil. ut prius   11 Ioh. Mitton, arm. ut prius   12 Ioh. Draycot, arm. ut prius   13 Tho. Gresley, arm. ut prius   14 Will, Harper, arm. ut prius   15 Ioh. Ferrers, mil. ut prius   16 Iohan. Aston, arm. ut prius   17 Ric. Wrotesley, ar. ut prius   18 Will. Harper, arm. ut prius   19 Ioh. Draycot. mil. ut prius   20 Will. Smith, arm.     21 Idem ut prius   22 Ludovic. Bagot, mi. ut prius   23 Ioh. Mitton, arm. ut prius   24 Ioh. Aston, mil. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Gard, arm. ut prius   2 Th. Nevil, arm. Chenston-Park Gules, on a Saltire Argent, an Annulet, Sable. 3 Ioh. Egerton, arm. ut prius   4 Ioh. Mitton, arm. ut prius   5 Ioh. Aston, mil. ut prius   6 Will. Chetwin, ar. ut prius  
7 Th. Nevil▪ arm. ut prius   8 Ric. Wrotesley, ar ut prius   9 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius   10 Rad. Egerton, m. ut prius   11 Edward Grey, mi.   Barry of six Argent, and Azure, 3 Torteauxes in Chief, a Label of 3 points o the fist. 12 Lodo. Bagot, mil. ut prius   13 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius   14 Will. Smith, mil. ut prius   15 Ed. Littleton; mil. Plehall Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Escallops shels, Sable. 16 Edward Grey, mil. ut prius   17 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius   18 Ioh. Blount, ar.   Barry Nebule of 6 Or, and Sab. 19 Ioh. Vernon, ar. ut prius   20 Edw. Ashton, arm.   Argent, a Fess and 3 lozenges in Chief, Sable. 21 Th. Giffard, arm. ut prius   22 Ioh. Giffard, arm. ut prins   23 Wil. Wrotesley, r. ut prius   24 Ioh. Vernon, arm. ut prius   25 Phi. Draycot, mil. ut prius   26 Edw. Ashton, mil. ut prius   27 Will. Chetwin, ar. ut prius   28 Ioh. Dudley, mil.   Or, a lion rampant tail forked, Vert. 29 Geo. Gresley, mil. ut prius   30 Ioh. Vernn, arm. ut prius   31 Edw. Littleton, ar. ut prius   32 Edw. Ashton, mil. ut prius   33 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius   34 Will. Basset, mil. ut prius   35 Th. Fitzherbert, ar.   Argent, a Chief varry Or and Gules, a Bend ingrailed Sable. 36 Geo. Gresley, mil. ut prius   37 Ioh. Harecourt, m. ut prius   38 Iac. Leveson, & Walt. Wrotesley, ar. ut prius Quarterly Gules and Azure 3 sinister hands couped, Arg. EDVV. VI.     Anno     1 Fran. Meverel, ar. ut prius   2 Io. Fleetwood, ar. Cakewish. Partee per Pale Nebule Az. & O. 6 Martlets in Pale counterch. 3 VVill. Snead, mil. Bradwel. Argent, a Sithe & flowre de luce in the middle of the Shield, able. 4 Ed. Littleton, ar. ut prius   5 VVil. Basset, mil. ut prius   6 Go. Blount, mil. ut prius   PHIL. Reg. & MAR. Reginae.     Anno     1 Th. Giffard, mil. ut prius   1.2 T. Fitzherbert, m ut prius   2.3 Pe. , mil. ut prius   3.4 Edw. Ashton, mil. ut prius   4.5 Io. Harecourt, m. ut prius   5.6 VVill. Snead. mil. ut prius.   ELIZ. Reg.     Anno     1 Hum. VVells, ar.     2 Rad. Bagnol, mil.   Ermin, 2 Barrs Or, over all a lion rampant Azure. 3 Ioh. Leveston, ar. ut prius   4 VVill. , ar. ut prius   5 Ed. Litteton, mil. ut prius   6 Rad. Oker, arm.     7 Io. VVrotesley, a. ut prius   8 Sim. Harecourt, a. ut prius   7 Io. Skrimshere, ar.   Gules, a lion rampant Or, with∣in a Border, Varry. 10 Io. Fleetwood. ar. u pius   11 Ric. Bagot, . ut pius   12 VValt. Ashton, ar. ut prius   13 Th. rentham, ar   Argent, 3 Griffns-heads Sable, langued Gules. 14 Geor. Blount, mil. ut prius   15 Ioh. Giffard, arm ut prius   16 Th. Horwood, ar. Compton Argent, a Cheveron, betwixt 3 Bucks-heads caboshed, Sable. 17 Rad. Addley, ar. . Argent, on a cheveron Sable, 3 Mullets of the fst. 18 Rad. Snead, arm. ut prius   19 Ric. Bagot, arm. ut prius   20 Io. Chetwyn, arm. ut prius   21 Th. Trentham, ar. ut prius   22 VValt. Ashto, m. ut prius   23 Edw. Littleton, ar. ut prius   24 Iohannes Grey, ar. ut prius   25 Th. Grey, ar. ut prius   26 Edw. Leigh, am.   Gules, a Cross ingrailed Argent, in the first quarter a lozenge. 27 Rad. Okever, ar.   Ermin on a Chief , 3 Be∣zants. 28 VValt. Leveson, ut prius   29 VVill. Basset, arm. ut prius   30 Ioh. Bows, mil. Elford Ermin, 3 Bowes, Sable. 31 Rob. Stanford, ar.   Argent, 3 Barres Azure, on a Canton Gules, a hand holding a broken fauchion, Or. 32 Edw. Eston, mil.     33 Tho. Leveson, ar. ut prius   34 . Trentham, mi. ut prius   35 Ed. Littleton, mil. ut prius   36 Hen. Griffith, ar. ut prius   37 Rad. Sneade, arm. ut prius   38 Th. Horwood, ar. ut prius   39 Will. Crompon. ar Stone Argent on a Chief Ver, 3 Pheons Or. 40 Wal. Wrotesley, a. ut prius   41 Walt. Bagot, a m. ut prius   42 Will. Chetwyn, ar. ut prius   43 Will. Skevingtō, a.   Argent, 3 Bulls-heads erazed, Sable. 44 Edw. Leigh, arm. ut prius   45 Walt. Bagot, ar. ut prius   JAC. Reg.     Anno     1 Walt. Bagot, ar. & ut prius   Edw. Leigh. ut prius   2 Wil. Horwood, mil. ut prius   3 Gilb Wakeing, m.     4 Ed. Brabazon, mil.   Gules, on a Bend Argent, 3 Marets of the first. 5 Walt. Chetwyn, m ut prius   6 Ia. Skrimshere, a. ut prius   7 Walter. Hevenin∣gham, arm. Aon Quarterley Or and Gules, a Bor∣der Sable, with Scallop shels, Argent. 8 Simon VVeston, m     9 Fr. Trentham, arm. ut prius   10 Th. Meverel, arm.   Argent, Griffin Segreant, Sable. 11 Th. Littleton, mil. ut prius   12 Rich. Fleetwood, Barr. ut prius   13. Ioh. Peshal, mil. & Barr. ut prius   14 Ioh. Offley, mil.   Argent, on a Cross Azure Formee Flure a lion passant Or, between 4 Cornish Choughs, Sable. 15 Hug. VVrotesley, ut prius   16 Th. Skrimshere, a. ut prius   17 Hen. Leigh, arm. ut prius   18 Ed. VVinso. arm.     19. Rad. Snede, arm. ut prius   20 Will. Cumberford, a     21 Will. Skeffington, arm. ut prius   22 Ed. Stanford, ar. ut prius   CAR. I.     Anno     1 Th. Pakes, arm.     2 Herveus Bago, Baronet. ut prius   3 Will. Bowyer, mil. Knipeley Argent, a lion rampant betwixt 3 Crosse croslets , ul. 4 Ioh. Bowes, arm. ut prius   5 Ioh. Cotes, arm. ut prius   6 Will. Wollaston, ar.   Sable, 3 pierced Mullets Argent. 7 Th. Broughton, ar Langdon Argent, 2 Bars Gules, on a Can∣ton of the second, a Cross of the first. 8 Th. Horwood, mil. ut prius   9 Hen Griffith, Bar. ut prius   10 Humf. Wyrley, ar. Hampsted Argent, 3 Bugle-horns Sable, stringed Vert. 11 Ric. Pyot, & Humf. Wyrley, ar. ut prius   12 Ed. Littleton, Bar. ut prius   13 Ioh. Skevington, a. ut prius   14 Io. Skrimshere, ar. ut prius   15 Ioh. Bellot, arm.     16 Ioh. Agard, arm.     17 Ed. Mosely, Bar.   Sable, on a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mallets Argent, as many Mullets, Gules. 18     19 Simon* Rudgeley,     20   * Argent, on a Chev Sable, 3 Mullets of the first. 21     22 Th. Kynnersley, armiger.   Azure,  de crosses croslet, a lion rampant, Argent.
RICHARD the Second. 1 BRIAN CORNWAL.] He  also this year Sheriff of Shrop-shire so that the two adjacent Counties were under his inspection. 4 ROGER de WIRLEY] When I observe how this Gentleman is fixed in his Generation, I cannot satisfie my self, whether he lived nearer unto his Ancestor Rober de Wirley, who flourished in this County under King Henry the 2d. (if not before) or whether he approached nearer unto his Descendent S John Wirley that learned Knight now living at Hampsteade. In my Arithmetick he is equally distanced from them both. HENRY the Sixth. 12 THOMAS STANLEY.] His true name was Audley. For, after that Adam, youngest Brother to James Lord , had married the daughter and heir of Henry de Stanley, William their son assumed the sir-name ofCamd. Rem. pag. 142. Stanley, & transmitted it to his posterity. As for this Thomas Stanley, till I be clearly convinced to the contrary, he shall pass with me for the same person, whom King Henry the Sixth made Lord Stanley, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord Chamberlain of his Household; and father unto Thomas Stanley, whom King Henry the Seventh created the first Earle of Derby. 34 JOHN DELVES, Esq.] He is the last of that Ancient Family appearing in this Catalogue, who were fixed in this County in the reign of King Edward the Third. This Sir John Delves (for he was afterwards Knighted) left one daughter and sole heir called S. E. Ms. Helene, married unto Sir Robert Sheffield Knight and Recorder of London, Ancestor unto the present Earl of Moulgrave. EDWARD the Fourth. 1 WALTER WROTESLEY.] He was lineally descended from S HughCadens Brit. in this County. Wrotesley, one of the first Founder of the most Noble Order of the Garter. HENRY the Eighth. 28 JOHN DUDLEY.] I had thought his Ambition had been too high to come under the Roof of such an Office, and discharge the place of a Sheriff. But know, that as yet Sir John Dudley, was but Sir John Dudley, a Plain, but powerful Knight, who not long after∣wards, viz. the 38th. of King Henry the Eighth was created Viscount Lisley, and then Earl of Warwick, in the first of King Edward the sixth,Reader by this be pleased to rectifie, what before [not so xa∣ctly] was writ∣ten of his Ho∣nour, in his Character un∣der the title of Souldiers. and in the fifth of the said King, Duke of Northumberland. However now he waited at Assizes, on the Itinerant Judges who afterwards made all the Judges of the Land (Justice Hales alone excepted) attend on him, and dance after the Pipe of his pleasure, when the Instrument was drawn up (Testament I can hardly term it) whereby the two Sisters of King Edward the sixth, were dis-inherited. King CHARLES. 3 WILLIAM BOWYER Knight.] Thomas Bowyer his Ancestor, from whom he is lineally descended, did in the reign of King Richard the Second marry S. E. Ms. Katharine daughter and heir of Robert Knipersley, of Knipersley in this County, with whom he had a fair Inheritance. The Bowyers of Sussex (invited thither some 200 years since by an Earl of Northumberland) are a younger Branch from these in Stafford-shire. BATTLES. At Hopton Heath in this County in March 1643, a fierce fight happened betwixt the Kings and Parliaments Forces, on a ground full of Cony-borroughs, therefore affording ill footing for the Horse. But an equal disadvantage on both sides is no disadvantage on either. The Royalists may be said to have got the Day, and lost the Sun which made it, I mean the truly Loyal and Valiant Spencer Earl of Northampton, though still surviving as in his grateful me∣mory, so in his Noble and Numerous Issue, no less deservedly honoured by others then mutually loving amongst themselves. The Farewel. To take our Vale of Stafford-shire. I wish that the Pit-coal (wherewith it abound∣eth) may seasonably and safely be burnt in their Chimnies, and not have their burning antedated, before they be digg'd out the Bowels of the Earth. The rather, because I have Burton in his description of Leicest. pag. 218. read, how in the year 1622 there was found a Coal-mine actually on fire, between Willingsworth and Weddesbury in this County. I find not by what casualty this English Aetna was kindled, nor how long it did continue. And although such combustions be not so terrible here, as in the South of Italy, where the sulphureous matter more inrageth the fury of the fire, yet it could not but cause much fright and fear to the people thereabouts.
SUFFOLK hath Norfolk on the North, divided with the Rivers of Little Ouse and Waveny, Cambridge-shire on the West, the German Ocean on the East, and Essex parted with the River Stoure on the South thereof. From East to West it stretcheth fourty five miles, though the general breadth be but twenty, saving by the Sea-side, where it runneth out more by the advantage of a Corner. The Air thereof generally is sweet and by the best Speed in his description of Suffolk. Physicians esteemed the best in England often prescribing the Receit thereof to the Consumptionish-Patients. I say generally sweet, there being a smal parcel nigh the Sea-side not so excellent, which may seem left there by Nature, on purpose to advance the purity of the rest. Naturall Commodities. Cheese. Most excellent are made herein, whereof the finest are very thin, as intended not for food but digestion. I remember when living in Cambridge, the Cheese of this County was preferred as the best. If any say that Scholars palates are incompetent Judges, whose hungry appetites make course Diet seem delicates unto them, let them know, that Panta∣leon the Learned Dutch Physician Camd. Brit. in Suffolk. counted them, equal at least, with them of Parma in Italy. Butter. For Quantity and Quality this County doth excel, and venteth it at London, and else∣where. The Child, not yet come to, and the old Man, who is past the use of Teeth eateth no softer, the Poor Man no cheaper, (in this Shire) the Rich no wholesomer food, I mean in the morning. It was half of our Saviours Bill of Fare, in his Infancy Butter Esaiah 7. 15 and Hony shall he eat. It is of a Cordial, or if I may say, Antidotal Nature. The story is well known of a Wife which desiring to be a Widow incorporated Poison in the Butter, whereon her Husband had his principal repast. The poor man finding himself strangely affected, repaired to a Physician, who by some Symptomes suspecting poison, demanded of his Patient which was his chiefest Diet. The sick man told him, that he fed most con∣stantly on Butter. Eat Butter still (return'd the Physician) which hitherto hath saved your Life, for it corrected the poison, that neither the malignity thereof, nor the malice of the wife, could have their full operation. Manufactures. Cloathing. Here it will not be amiss to insert a passage which I meet with in an Industrious An∣tiquary Weavers Fu∣neral Monu∣ments, pag. 770. as relating to the present subject. The Manufacture of Cloathing in this County hath been much greater, and those of that Trade far richer, I perswade my self, heretofore than in these times, or else the Heirs and Executors of the deceased were more careful that the Testators dead Corps should be interred in more decent manner, than they are now a-dayes; Other∣wise I should not find so many Marbles richly inlaid with Brass, to the memory of Cloathiers in fore-going Ages, and not one in these later seasons. All the Monuments in the Church of Neyland which bare any face of comliness, and Antiquity are erected to the memory of Cloathiers, and such as belong to that Mystery. Some perchance would assign another reason, viz. Because Monuments formerly were conceived to conduce much to the happiness of the deceased (as bespeaking in their Epitaphs the Suffrages of the living in their behalf) which errour is vanished away since the Reformation; all which being fully beleeved weakneth not the observation, but that Sufflk Clothiers were Wealthier in former than in our Age. Buildings. This County hath no Cathedral therein, and the Parochial Churches [generally fair] no one of transcendent eminency; But formerly it had so magnificent an Abbey∣Church in Bury, the Sun shined not on a fairer, with Leland in his description of Bury. three lesser Churches waiting
thereon in the same Church-yard. Of these but two are extant at this day, and those right stately structures; And if the Servants we so much commend, What was the Mistriss whom they did attend? Here I meet with a passage affected me with wonder, though I know not how the Reader will resent it: It is avouuched by all Stow▪ Speed, Mills, Vincent, Weaver, &c. Authors; That Mary youngest sister to King Henry the Eighth, Relict to Lewis the Twelfth King of France, afterwards married to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, died on Mid-summer Eve 1533, and was buried in the Abbey Church in Bury. But it seems her Corps could not protect that Church from de∣molishing, which in few years after was levelled to the ground. I read not that the Body of this Princess was removed to any other place, nor doth any monument here remain to her memory, though her King-Brother and second Husband survived the destruction of that Church. A strange thing! save that nothing was strange in those dayes of confusion. As for the Town of Bury it is sweetly seated and fairely built, especially since the year 1608. About which time it was lamentably defaced with a casual Fire, though since God hath given them Beauty for Isaiah 61. 3. Ashes. And may the following Distich (set up therein) prove Prophetical unto the place. Burgus ut antiquus violento corruit igne, Hic stet, dum flammis terra polusque flagrent. Though furious fire the old Town did consume, Stand This, till all the World shall flaming fume. Noris the School a small Ornament to this Town founded by King Edward the Sixth, being itself a Corporation, now (as well as ever) flourishing under Mr. Stephens, the able Master thereof. Amongst the many fair houses of the Gentry in this County Long Melford must not be forgotten, late the house of the Countess Rivers, and the FIRST FRUITS of PLUNDERING in England; and Sommerley Hall (nigh Yarmouth) belonging to the Lady Wentworth, well answering the Name thereof: For here Sommer is to be seen in the depth of Winter in the pleasant walks, beset on both sides with Firr-trees green all the year long, besides other curiosities. As for Merchants houses, Ipswich Town (corrival with some Cities for neatness and greatness) affordeth many of equal handsomness. Proverbs. Suffolk Milk.] This was one of the Staple-Commodities of the Land of Canaan, and certainly most wholesome for Mans Body, because of Gods own chosing for his own People. No County in England affords better and sweeter of this kind, lying opposite to Holland in the Netherlands, where is the best Dairy in Christendom, which mindeth me of a passage betwixt Spinola and Grave Maurice. The Spanish General being invited to an entertainment by the afore-said Prince at Breda (as I take it) when Lemons and Oranges were brought in for sauce at the first Coure, What a brave Country is my Masters (quoth de Don) affording this fair fruit all the year long. But when Cream was brought up to close the Feast, Grave Maurice returned, What a brave Country is ours that yeildeth this fruit twice every day? Suffolk fair Maids.] It seems the God of Nature hath been bountiful in giving them beautiful complexions, which I am willing to believe so far forth as it fixeth not a comparative disparagement on the same Sex in other Counties. I hope they will labour to joyn gracious hearts to fair faces; otherwise I am sure there is a Divine Proverb of infallible truth, Prov. 1. 22. As a Jewel of gold in a Swines snout, so is a fair Woman which is without discretion. Suffolk siles.] It is a measuring cast, whether this Proverb pertaineth to Essex or this County, and I believe it belongeth to both, which being inclosed Countries into petty quillets abound with high stiles troublesome to be clambred over. But the owners grudge not the pains in climbing them, sensible that such severals redound much to their own advantage. You are in the high way to Needham.] Needham is a Market-Town in this County, well stokt (if I mistake not) with poor People, though I believe this in no degree did
occasion the first denomination thereof. They are said to be in the high way to Needham who do hasten to poverty. However these fall under a distinction, some go, others are sent thither: Such as go embrace several wayes, some if Poor, of Idleness; if Rich, of Carelesness, or else of Pro∣digality. Others are sent thither against their wills by the powerful oppression of such, who either detain or devour their Estates. And it is possible some may be sent thither by no Default of their own, or visible cause from others, but meerly from Divine Justice, in∣sensibly dwingling their Estates, chiefly for trial of their Patience. Wherefore, so many wayes leading to Needham from divers quarters, I mean from dif∣ferent causes; It is unjust to condemn all persons meeting there, under the Censure of the same guiltness. Princes. EDMUND MORTIMER, son to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, Grand-child ofA M P. Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, and of Philippa sole daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, may passe with the charitable Reader for a Prince, since he paid so dear for the same, as will appear. I confess it impossible to fix his Nativity with assurance, (having not hitherto read any record which reached it) the rather because of the vastness of his patrimony; and several habitations In England In the Marches of VVales whence he had his honour. In Ireland Clare-Casle, with many other Mannors in Suf∣folk. VVigmore in Hereford-shire. Trim, Conaught, with large Lands in Ul∣sier.   Ludlow in Shrop-shire.   But most probable it is that he was born where he was buried, at Clare. After the death of King Richard the Second, he was the next heir to the Crown. Happy had he been, if either nearer to it, so as to enjoy the honour thereof; or farther off, so as not to be envied and suspected for his Title thereunto by King Henry the Fourth. Now, all the harm, this Earl had done King Henry, was this, that King Henry held from him his lawful Inheritance. Yea, this meek Mortimer was content to wave the Crown, so be it he might but enjoy his private Patrimony, which he could not without many molestations from the King. For, this is the nature of some Men to heap injuries on those they have wronged, as if the later injuries would give a countenance of Justice to the former. He employed this Edmund in a War against Owen Glendour, the Welsh Rebel, on the same design that 1 Sam. 18. 25. Saul sent David to fight against, and fetch the fore-skins of the Phi∣listins. If he prov'd Conquerour, then was King Henry freed from a professed Foe; if conquered, then was he rid of a suspected Subject. But Mortimer went by the worst, and being taken prisoner, the King (though often solicited) never endeavoured his en∣largement; till at last he dearly ransomed himself. Yet did he but exchange a Welsh for an Irish prison, kept 20 years in rtraint in his own Castle of Trim, in the end of the reign of cunning King Henry the Fourth, all the reign of couragious King Henry the Fifth, and the beginning of the reign of innocent King Henry the Sixth, their different tempers meeting in cruelty against this poor Prisoner. He died Anno Domini 1454. without Issue, leaving Anne his sister, his heir, and lieth buried in Clare, as is aforesaid. Saints. St. EDMUND King of the East-Angles. Hear what falshoods are hudled together in our English Martyrology, written (as he terms himself) By a Catholick Priest, Permi Superiorum. 1608. pag. 319 on the 20 of November. At Hexam in Northumberland the passion of St. Edmund King and Martyr, who being a Saxon by Bloud, born in the City of Noremberg in that Province, and Nephew to Offa King of the East-Angles. First, Hexam in Northumberland, should be Hoxton in this County, where St. Edmund was martyred. Secondly, there is no City Noremberg in Brittain, nor Europe save that in Germany. This is enough to make us distrust what he writeth afterwards, viz. that, When the
said St. Edmund was cruelly murdered by the Danes, and when the Christians, seeking his Corps, were lost in a Wood, did call one to another, Where art? Where art? Where art? The martyred head answered, Here, Here, Here. However, God forbid, that this Authors fauxities should make us undervalue this worthy King and Martyr, cruelly tortured to death by the Pagan Danes, and by an old Author thus not unhansomely express'd. Ex lib. Abb. de Rufford in Bib. Cott. Utque cruore suo Gallos Dionysius ornat: Graecos Demetrius: gloria quisque suis. Sic nos Edmundus nulli virtute secundus, Lux patet, & patriae gloria magna suae. Sceptra manum, diadema caput, sua purpura corpus Ornat ei, sed plus vincula, mucro, cruor. As Denis by his death adorneth France: Demetrius Greece: each credit to his place: So Edmunds lustre doth our Land advance, Who with his vertues doth his Country grace. Scepter, Crown, Robe, his hand, head, corps renouns, More famous for his bonds, his bloud, his wounds. His death happened Anno Domini 870. whose body was placed in a goodly shrine, richly adorned with jewels, and precious stones at Bury in this County. These all are vanish'd, whilst the name of St. Edmund will ever remain in that Towns denomination. ROBERT GROSTHEAD. ehosaphat seeing four hundred Prophets of Baal together, and suspecting they were too many to be good, cast in that shrewd question; Is there not here a 1 King. 22. 7. Prophet of the Lord besides? and thereupon Micaiah was mentioned unto him. Possible the Reader seeing such swarms of Popish Saints in England, will demand; Is there not et a Saint of the Lord besies? and I conceive my self concerned to return a true answer, that there is Robert Grosthead by name, whom now we come to describe. He was born in this Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 4▪ num. 18. County, bred in Oxford, where he became most eminent for Religion and Learning in all kind of Languages, Arts and Sciences, and at last was prefer∣red Bishop of Lincoin, 1235. He wrote no fewer than three hundred Treatises, whereof most are extant in Manuscript in Westminster Library, which Dr. Williams (his Successor in the See of Lincoln) intended So Mr. Go∣land the learn∣ed Library keeper (lately deceased) in∣formed me. to have published in three fair Folio Volumes, had not the late troublesome Times dis-heartned him. Thus our Civil Warrs have not only filled us with Legions of lying Pamphlets, but also deprived us of such a Treasure of Truth, as this worthy Mans works would have proved to all posterity. He was a stout Opposer of Popish-Oppression in the Land, and a sharp Reprover of the Corruptions of the Court of Rome, as we have largely declared in our Ecclesiastical History. Such the Piety of his Life and Death, that, though loaded with Curses from the Pope, he generally obtained the Reputation of a Saint. Bellarmine starts a De Sanct. Beatit. cap. 10. Question, whether one may pray lawfully to him & paint his Picture in the Church, who is not Canonized by the Pope? and very gravely he determineth (a short line will serve to fadom a shallow water) that privately he may do it, and that a Picture of such a Man may be painted in the Church, provided his head be not encompassed with a Radiated Circle as particular to Canonized Saints. Thus our Learned and Pious Robert must want that addition of a Glory about his Picture, and the matter is not much, seeing no doubt having Turned many to righteousness, he doth shine in Heaven as the brightness of Dan. 12. 3. the Firmament. Whose death happened Anno Domini 1254. Martyrs. ROWLAND TAYLOR. Where born unknown (though some without any assu∣rance have suggested his Nativity in Yorkshire) was bred in Cambridge, and became head of Borden Hostle nigh (if not now partly in) Cajus Colledge, where he commenced Doctor of the Laws. Hence he was by Archbishop Cranmer presented to the Rectory of Hadley in this County. He was a great Scholar, painful Preacher, charitable to the Poor, of a comly Countenance, proper Person, (but inclining to corpulency) and chearful behaviour. The same devotion had different looks in several Martyrs, frowning in Stern Hooper, weeping in meek Bradford, and smiling constantly in pleasant Taylor. Indeed some have censured his merry Conceits as trespassing on the gravity of his calling, especially when just before his death. But surely such Romanists, who admire the temper of Sr. Thomas More jesting with the Axe of the Executioner, will excuse our
Taylor for making himself merry with the Stake. But though it be ill Jesting with edged Tooles (whereof Death is the sharpest,) yet since our Saviour hath blounted it, his ser∣vants may rather be delighted than dismayed with it. Not long after Doctor Taylor set Archbishop Cranmer who was his Patron, a Copy of Patients, who indeed wrote after it, but not with so steady a hand, and so even a Character of constancy. Taylor was martyred at Hadley, February 9, 1555. ROBERT SAMUEL was Minister of Barfold in this County, who by the cruelty of Hopton Bishop of Norwich and Downing his Chancellour, was tortured in Prison. Not to pre∣serve, but to reserve him for more pain. He was allowed every day but three mouthfuls of Bread, and three spoonfuls of water. Fain would he have drunk his own Urin, but his thirst-parched body afforded none. I read how he saw aFox Acts d Mnum. pag. 709. Vision of one all in white, comforting and telling him, that after that day he never should be hungry or thirsty; which came to passe accordingly, being within few hours after martyred at Ipswich, August 31, 1555. Some report that his body when burnt, did shine as brightIdem ibidem. as burnish'd silver, Sed parcius ista. Such things must be sparingly written by those who would not only avoid untruths, but the appearance thereof. Thus loath to lengthen mens tongues reporting what may seem improbable, and more loath to shorten Gods hand in what might be miraculous, I leave the relation, as I found it. Besides these two, I meet with more than twenty by name martyred (Confessors doubling that number) whose ashes were scattered all over the County, at Ipswich, Bury, Bekles, &c. It is vehemently suspected, thatFox Maty∣rol. pag. 1912. three of them burnt at Bekles had their death antedated before the Writ, de Haeretico comburendo, could possibly be brought down to the Sheriff. And was not this (to use Tertullians Latin in some different sense) Festinatio homicidii? Now though Chaity may borrow a point of Law to save life, surely Cruelty should not steal one to destroy it. Cardinals. THOMAS WOLSEY, was born in the Town of Ipswich, where a Butcher, a very honest Man, was his Father, though a Poet be thus pleased to descant thereon, Brave Priest who ever was thy Sire by kind, Wolsey of Ipswich ne're begat thy mind. One of so vast undertakings, that our whole Book will not afford room enough for his Character; the writing whereof I commend to some eminent Person of his Foun∣dation of Christ-Church in Oxford. He was made Cardinal of St. Cecily and died heart-broken with grief at Leicester 1530. without any Monument, which made a greatDr. Cbet in his Iter Boreale. Wit of his own Colledge thus lately complain, And though from his own store Wolsey might have A Palace, or a Colledge for his grave, Yet here he lies interr'd, as if that all Of him to be remembred were his fall. Nothing but earth to earth, nor pompous weight Upon him but a pebble or a quaite, If thou art thus neglected, what shall we Hope after death, that are but shreds of thee? This may truly be said of him, he was not guilty of mischievous pride, and was gene∣rally commended for doing Justice, when Chancellour of England. Prelates. HERBERT LOSING was born in this County, as our * Antiquary informethBale cent. 2. pag. 171. us; In Pago Oxunensi in Sudovolgia Anglorum Comitatu natus: but, on the perusing of all the Lists of Towns in this County, no Oxun appeareth therein, or name, neighbouring thereon in sound and syllables. This I conceive the cause why Bishop Godwin, so confi∣dently makes this Herbert born Oxoniae, in Oxford, in which County we have formerly placed his Character. However, seeing Bale was an excellent Antiquary, and being himself a Suffolk-man, must be presumed knowing in his own County; and conceiving it possible that this Oxun was either an obscure Church-less-Village, or else is this day disguized under an∣other
name, I conceive it just that as Oxford-shire led the Front, Suffolk should bring up the Reer of this Herberts description. Indeed he may well serve two Counties, being so different from himself and two persons in effect. When young, loose and wild, deeply guilty of the sin of Simony: When old, nothing of Herbert was in Herbert, using commonly the words ofWill. Mal∣msbury. St. Hie∣rome; Erravimus juvenes, emendemus senes, When young we went astray, when old we will amend; Now, though some controversie about the place of his birth, all agree in his death, July 22, 1119; and in his burial, in the Cathedral Church of Norwich. RICHARD ANGERVILE, son to S•. Richard Angervile Knight, was born atHence com∣monly called Richardus de urgo. Bury in this County, and bred in Oxford, where he attained to great eminency in Learning. He was Governour to King Edward the Third whilst Prince, and afterwards advanced by Him to be successively his Cofferer, Treasurer of his Wardrobe, Dean of Wells, Bishop of Duresme, Chancellour, and lastly Treasurer of England. He bestowed on the poor every week Eight Quarters ofGodwin in his Bishops of Durham, pag. 131. Wheat baked in Bread. When he removed from Duresme to Newcastle (twelve short miles) he used to give eight pounds sterling in Alms to the Poor, and so proportionably in other places betwixt his Palaces. He was a great lover of Books, confessing himselfin his Book called Philo∣biblos. Exsiatico quodam librorum amore potenter abreptum, in so much that he alone had more Books than all the Bishops of England in that Age put together, which stately Library by his Will he solemnly bequeathed to the Univer∣sity of Oxford. The most eminent Foreigners were his Friends, and the most Learned Englishmen were his Chaplains, untill his death which happened Anno 1345. JOHN PASCHAL, was born in thisBale de scrip. Brit, centur. 5. num. 95. County (where his name still continueth) of Gentle Parentage, bred a Carthusian and D. D. in Cambridge. A great Scholar and po∣pular Preacher. Bateman Bishop of Norwich, procured the Pope to make him the umbra∣tile Bishop of Scutari, whence he received as much profit, as one may get heat from a Glow-worm. It was not long before, by the favour of King Edward the Third, he was removed from a very shadow to a slender substance, the Bishoprick of Landaffe; wherein he died Anno Domini 1361. SIMON SUDBURY, aliàs, TIBALD, was born at Sudbury, as great as most, and ancient as any Town in this County. After many mediate preferments (let him thank the Popes provisions) at last he became Arch-bishop of Canterbury. He began two Synods with Latin Sermons in his own person, as rare in that age as blazing stars, and as ominous; for they portended ill successe to Wickliffe and his followers. However this Simon Sud∣bury, overawed by the God of Heaven, and John Duke of Lancaster, did not (because he could not) any harm unto him. He was killed in the Rebellion of J. Straw and Wat. Tyler, Anno Domini 1381. And although his shadowey Tomb (being no more than an honourary Cenotaph) be shown at Christ-Church in Canterbury; yet, his substantial Monument, wherein his Bones are deposited, is to be seen in St. Gregories in Sudbury, under a Marble stone some∣times inlayed all over with Brass, some four yards long, and two broad, saith mineWeavers Fun. Mn. pag. 743. eye∣witnesse-Authour (though I confesse I never met with any of like dimension) so that in some sense I may also call this a Cenotaph, as not proportioned to the bulk of his Body, but height of his Honour and Estate. THOMAS EDWARDSTON, so named from his Birth-place Edwarston in this County (a VillageCamd. Brit. in Suffolk. formerly famous for the Chief Mansion of the Ancient Family of Mounchensey) bred first in Oxford, then an Augustinian Eremite in Clare. He was a great Scholar, as his Works evidence, and Confessor to Lionel Duke of Clarence, whom he attended into Italy, when he married Joland daughter to John Galeaceus Duke of Milan. J. Pits conceiveth him to have been an Arch-bishop in Ireland, which is utterly dis∣owned by Judicious SirDe script. Hib. lib. . pag. 126. James VVare. And indeed ifDe script. Brit. cent. 7. num. 7. Bales words (whence Pits deriveth his intelligence) be considered, it will appear, he never had Title of an Arch-bishop, sed cujusdam Archi-Episcopatus curam accepit, He undertook care of some Arch-bishoprick, probably commended in the vacancy thereof to his inspection. And why might not this be some Italian Arch-bishoprick, during his attendance on his Patron there, though afterwards (preferring privacy before a pompous charge) he returned into his Native Country, and died at Clare. Anno 1396. THOMAS PEVREL, was born of good Parentage, in thisBale de scrip. Brit. cent. 7. num. 49. County, bred a
Carmelite, and D. D. in Oxford. He was afterwards by King Richard the Second made Bishop of Ossory in Ireland. I say by King Richard the Second, which minds me of a me∣morable passage, which I have read in an excellent Author. It may justly seem strange, which is most true, that there are three Bishopricks in Ire∣land in the Province of Ulster, by name, Derry, Rapho, and Clogher, which neither Queen Elizabeth, nor any of her Progenitors did ever Sir John Da∣vis in his trea∣tise of Irland, pag. 255. bestow, though they were the undoubted Patrons thereof. So that King James was the first King of England that did ever supply those Sees with Bishops, so that it seems, formerly the Great Irish Lords in those parts preferred their own Chaplains thereunto. However the Bishopricks in the South of the Land, were ever in the disposal of Our Kings, amongst which Ossory was one, bestowed on our Peverel. From Ireland he was removed to Landaffe in Wales, then to VVorchester in England, being one much esteemed for Learning, as his Books do declare. He died, according to Bishop Godwins account, March the 1, 1417, and lieth buried in his own Cathedral. STEPHEN GARDINER, was born in Bale, Pis. Gdwin, &c▪ Bury St. Edmunds, one of the best aires in England, the sharpness whereof he retained in his Wit and quick apprehension. Some make him Base-son to Lionel VVoodvile, Bishop of Salisbury, which I can hardly beleeve, Salisbury and St. Edmunds-Bury being six score miles asunder. Besides, time herein is harder to be reconciled than place. For, it being granted an errour of youth in that Bishop, and that Bishop vanishing out of this World 1485. Gardiner in all probability must be allowed of greater age than he was at his death. It is confess'd by all, that he was a man of admirable natural parts, and memory espe∣cially, so conducible to Learning, that one saith, Tantum scimus quantum meminimus. He was bed Doctor of Laws in Trinity-hall in Cambridge, and after many State-Em∣bassies and employments, he was by King Henry the Eighth made Bishop of VVinchester. His malice was like what is commonly said of white powder, which surely discharged the Bullet, yet made no report, being secrete in all his acts of cruelty. This made him often chide Bonner, calling him Sir John Har∣rington in the Bishop▪ of Winchester. Asse, though not so much for killing poor people, as not for doing it more cunningly. He was the chief Contriver of what we may call Gardiners-Creed, though consisting but of six Articles, which caused the death of many, and trouble of more Protestants. He had almost cut off one who was, and prevented another for ever being a Queen, I mean Katharine Par and the Lady Elizabeth, had not Divine Providence preserved them. He complied with King Henry the Eighth, and was what he would have him; opposed King Edward the Sixth, by whom he was imprisoned and depriv'd; acted all under Queen Mary, by whom he was restored, and made Lord Chancellour of England. He is reported to have died more than half a Protestant, avouching that he believed himself and all others onely to be justified by the merits of Christ; which if so, then did he verifie the Greek and Latine Proverb, Saepe Olitor valde verba opportuna loqutus. The Gardiner oft times in due season Speaks what is true, and solid reason. He died at VVhite-hall of the Gout, November the 12th. 1555. and is buried by his own appointment on the Northside of the Quire, over against Bishop Fox, in a very fair Mo∣nument. He had done well, if he had parallell'd Bishop Fox (Founder of Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford) in erecting some publick work, the rather because he died so rich, being reported to have left fourty thousand Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 8. num. 88. Marks in ready money behind him. However on one account his memory must be commended for improving his power with Queen Mary to restore some Noble Families formerly depressed. My Sir John Har∣rington, ut prius. Author instanceth in some descendane from the Duke of Norfolk, in the Stanhops and the Arundels of VVarder Castle. To these give me leave to adde the Right Ancient Family of the Hun∣gerfords, to whom he procured a great part of their Patrimony, seased on by the Crown, to be restored. Since the Reformation. JOHN BALE was born at In vita sua cen. 8. nu. 10. Covie in this County, five miles from Donwich, and was brought up in Jesus-Colledge in Cambridge, being before, or after a Carmelite in Norwich.
By the means of Thomas Lord Wentworth, he was converted to be a Protestant. This is that Bale who wrote a Book De scriptoribus Britannicis, digested into nine Centuries, not more beholding to Leland, than I have been to Bale in this Work, and my Church-History. Anno 1552, February the 2d. he was consecrated at Dublin, Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, whence on the death of King Edward the Sixth, he was forced to flie (some of his ser∣vants being slain before his eyes) and in his passage over the sea, was taken prisoner by Pirates, sold, ransom'd, and after many dangers safely arrived in Switzerland. After the death of Queen Mary, he returned into England, but never to his Irish Bishoprick, preferring rather a private life, being a Prebendary of the Church of Canter∣bury. One may wonder, that being so Learned a Man, who had done and suffered so much for Religion, higher promotion was not forced upon him, seeing about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, Bishopricks went about begging able men to receive them. But pro∣bably he was a person, more Learned than discreet, fitter to write than to govern, as un∣able to command his own passion, and Biliosus Balaeus passeth for his true Character. He died in the sixty eighth year of his Age at Jac. Waraeus de scrip. Hib. lib. 2. pag. 136. Canterbury (Anno Domini 1563, in the moneth of November) and was buried in the Cathedal Church therein. JOHN MAY was born in this Scellet. Cant. of Parker Ma∣nuscript. County, bred in the niversity of Cambridge, where∣of he became Proctor 1545, Elected Master of Katharine-hall 1564, Vice-Chancellour 1569, and at last consecrated Bishop of Carlile, Sept. 27, 1577, continuing eleven years in that See, and died in April 1598. JOHN OVERAL, D. D. born a Hadley in this County, was bred in the Free-School therein, till sent to St. Johns, then to Trinity Colledge in Cambridge whereof he was Fellow, and there chosen Regius Professr; one of the most profound School-Divines of the English Nation. Afterwards by the Queens absolute mandate (to end a contention betwixt two Corrivals) not much with his will he was made Master of Katharine-hall. For when Archbishop Whitgift joyed him of the place, he returned that it was Terminus diminuens, taking no delight in his preferment. But his Grace told him, That (if the injuries, much more) the less courtesies of Princes must be thankfully taken, as the Ushers to make way for greater, as indeed it came to passe. For, after the death of Dr. Nowel, he was (by the especial recommendation of Sr. Fulke Grevil) made Dean of St. Pauls. Being appointed to preach before the Queen, he pro∣fess'd to my Father (most intimate with him) that he had spoken Latin so long it was troublesome to him to speak English in a continued Oration. He frequently had those words of the Psalmist in his mouth, Psal. 89▪ 11? VVhen thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his beauty to consume away like a moth, surely every man is vanity. I cite it the rather out of the new Translation (something different from the old) be∣cause he was so eminent an Instrument employed therein. King James made him Bishop of Norwich, where he was a discreet presser of Conformity, on which score he got the ill will of many dis-affected thereunto, and died Anno 1618. LEONARD MAW, was born at * Rendlesham in this Connty, a remarkable placeScellet. Cant. of Mr. Parker Manusc. Iassure you, which, though now a Country Village, was anciently the Residence of the Kings of the East-Angles. Where King Redwald, a Mongrel Christian, kept at the same time Altare & Bed▪ Arulam, the Communion Table, and Altars for Idols. He was bred in Cambridge, where he was Proctor of the University, Fellow, and Master of Peter-house, after of Trinity Colledge, whereof he deserved well, shewing what might be done in five years by good Husbandry to dis-ingage that Foundation from a great debt. He was Chaplain to King Charles whilst he was a Prince, and waited on him in Spain, by whom he was preferred Bishop of Bath and Wells. He had the Reputation of a good Scholar, a grave Preacher, a mild man, and one of Gentil Deportment. He died Anno Domini 163.. RALPH BROUNRIG, D. D. was born at Ipswich of Parents of Merchantly con∣dition. His Father died in his Infancy, and his Mother did not carelesly cast away his youth (as the first Broachings of a Vessel) but improved it in his Education at School, till he was sent to Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, and afterwards became Scholar and Fellow thereof. King James coming to Cambridge, was (amongst others) entertained with a Philosophy Act, and Mr. Brounrig was appointed to perform the Joco-serious part thereof, who did both to the wonder of the Hearers.
Herein he was like himself, that he could on a sudden be so unlike himself and in∣stantly vary his words and matter from mirth to solidity. No man had more ability, or less inclination to be Satyrical, in which kind posse & nolle is a rarity indeed. He had wit at will, but so that he made it his Page, not Privy Councellour, to obey, not direct his Judgement. He carried Learning enough in numerato about him in his pockets for any Discourse, and had much more at home in his chests for any serious Dispute. It is hard to say whether his loyal memory, quick fancy, solid judgement, or fluent utte∣rance, were most to be admired, having not only flumen, but fulmen eloquentiae, being one who did teach with Authority. When commencing Bachelour in Divinity, he chose for his Text, Vobis autem, &c. Philip. 1. 29 It is given to you, not only to beleeve, but suffer in the behalf of Christ. A Text somewhat Pro∣phetical to him, who in the Sequele of his life met with affronts to exercise his Prudence and Patience, being afterwards defied by some, who [almost] Deified him before, in whose Eyes he seemed the blacker, for wearing white sleeves, when 1641 made Bishop of Exeter. I was present at his Consecration Sermon, made by his good Friend Doctor Younge, taking for his Text, The waters are risen, O Lord, the waters are risen, &c. wherein he very gravely com∣plained of the many invasions which Popular violence made on the Priviledges of Church and State. This Bishop himself was soon sadly sensible of such Inundations, and yet by the Procrity of his parts and piety, he not only safely waded thorough them himself, but also, (when Vice-Chancellour of Cambridge) by his prudence raised such Banks, that those overflowings were so not destructive, as otherwise they would have been to the University. He continued constant to the Church of England, a Champion of the needful use of the Liturgie, and for the Priviledges of Ordination to belong to Bishops alone. Un∣moveable he was in his principles of Loyalty, witness this instance. O. P. with some shew of respect unto him, demanded the Bishops Judgement (non plus't it seems himself) in some business, to whom he returned, My Lord, the best counsel I can give you, is, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, with which free answer O. P. was rather silenced than satisfied. About a year before his death, he was invited by the Society of both Temples to be their Preacher, admirably supplying that place, till strong fits of the Stone, with Hydro∣pical Inclinations, and other distempers incident to phletorick Bodies, caused his death. I know all Accidents are minuted and momented by Divine Providence, and yet I hope I may say without sin, his was an untimely death, not to himself (prepared thereunto) but as to his longer life vvhich the prayers of pious people requested, the need of the Church requi∣red, the date of Nature could have permitted, but the pleasure of God (to which all must submit) denied. Otherwise he vvould have been most instrumental to the composure of Church differences, the deserved opinion of whose goodness had peaceable possession in the hearts of the Presbyterian party. I observed at his Funeral that the prime persons of all Perswasions were present, whose Judgements going several wayes met all in a general grief for his decease. He was buried on the cost of both Temples, to his great, but their greater honour. The Reader is referred for the rest, to the Memorials of his life, written by the Learned Doctor John Gauden, who preached his Funeral Sermon, and since hath succeeded him, both in the Temple and Bishoprick of Exeter. His dissolution happened in the 67th. year of his Age, Decemb. 7, 1659, and was buried the week following in the Temple Church. States-men. S•. NICHOLAS BACON, Knight, was born in this County, not far from the famous Abbey of St. Edmunds Bury, and I have read that his Father was an Officer be∣longing thereunto. His name I assure you is of an Ancient Gentry in this Shire as any whatsoever. He was bred in Bennet Colledge in Cambridge, to which afterwards he proved a bountiful Benefactor, building a beautiful Chappel therein. He afterwards applied himself to the study of the Common Law: and was made Attour∣ney to the Court of Wards, whence he was preferred Lord Keeper of the Great Seal in the First of Queen Elizabeth, 1558. He married Anne, second daughter to S•. Anthony Cook, of Giddy-hall in Essex, Governour to King Edward the Sixth. And it is worthy of
our observation, how the Sates-men in that Age were arched together in affinity, to no small support one to another. Sir John Cheek, Secre∣tary to K. Edward the Sixth, whose si∣ster was first wife to Sr William Cecil Se∣cretary to the same King. Sir Will. Cecil afore∣said for his second wife married the wives sister unto this Sir Nicholas Ba∣con, Lord Keeper. Sr. Francis Walsingham Secretary to Queen Elizabeth had a sister married unto Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellour of the Exchequer. Sir Franc. Walsingham was also brother in Law unto Sir Tho. Randolph, that grand States-man & Am∣bassador. To return to Sir Nicholas Bacon he was condemned by some who seemed wise, and com∣mended by those that were so, for not causing that Satute to be repealed (the Queen re∣lying on him as her Oracle of Law) whereby the Queen was made illegitimate in the dayes of her Father. For this wise States-man would not open that Camden in the First of Q. Eliz▪ wound, which time had partly closed, and would not meddle with the variety, yea, contrariety of Statutes in this kind, whereby people would rather be perplexed than satisfied; but derived her right from another Statute which allowed her succession, the rather, because Lawyers maintain; That a Crown once worn cleareth all defects of the wearer thereof. He continued in his Office about eighteen years, being a Man of rare wit and deep experience, Cui fuit ingenium subtile in corpore crasso. For he was loaden with a corpulent body, especially in his old Age, so that he would be not only. out of breath, but also almost out of life, with going from Westminster-hall to the Star-chamber, in so much when sitting down in his place, it was some time before he could recover himself. And therefore it was usual in that Court, that no Lawyer should begin to speak till the Lord Keeper held up his staffe as a signal to him to begin. He gave for his Motto, Mediocria Firma, and practised the former part thereof Medio∣cria; Never attaining, because never affecting, any great Estate. He was not for Invidious Structures (as some of his Contemporaries) but delighted in Domo Domino pari. Such as was his house at Gorhambury in Hartfordshire. And therefore when Queen Elizabeth coming thither in progresse, told him, My Lord, your house is too little for you; No Madam (returned he no less wittely than gratefully) But it is your Highness that hath made me too great for mine house. Now as he was a just practiser of the first part of this Motto Mediocria, so no doubt, he will prove a true Prophet in the second part thereof Firma, having left an Estate rather good than great to his posterity, whose eldest son Sir Edward Bacon in this County was the first Baronet of England. He died on the 20th. of February, 1578, and Iieth buried in the Quire of St. Pauls. In a word he was a goodman, a grave States-man, a Father to his Country, and Father to Sir FRANCIS BACON. Sir WILLIAM DRUERY, was born in this County, where his Worshipful Fa∣mily had long flourished at Haulsted. His name in Saxon soundeth a Pearle, to which he answered in the pretiousness of his disposition, clear and hard, innocent and valiant, and therefore valued deservedly by his Queen, and Country. His youth he spent in the French Wars, his middle in Scotland, and his old Age in Ire∣land. He was Knight Marshal of Barwick, at what time the French had possessed them∣selves of the Castle of Edenburgh, in the minority of King James. Queen Elizabeth em∣ployed this Sir William with 1500 men to besiege the Castle, which service he right wor∣thily performed, reducing it within few dayes to the true owner thereof. Anno 1575 he was appointed Lord President of Mounster, whether he went with com∣petent Forces, and executed impartial Justice in despite of the Opposers thereof. For as the Sign of Leo, immediately precedeth Virgo and Libra in the Zodiack, so no hope that innocency will be protected, or Justice administred in a Barbarous Country where power and strength do not first secure a passage unto them. But the Earl of Desmond opposed this good President, forbidding him to enter the County of Kerry, as a Palatinate, peculiarly appropriated unto himself. Know by the way as there were but four Palatinates in England, Chester, Lancaster∣Durham and Ely, (whereof the two former many years since were in effect invested in th
Crown) there were no fewer than eight Palatinates in Ireland, possessed by their Respective Dynasts, claiming Regal Rites therein, to the great retarding of the absolute Conquest of that Kingdom. Amongst these (saith my Author) Kerry became the Sanctuary of sin, and Refuge of Rebels, as out-lawed from any English Jurisdiction. Sir William, no whit terrified with the Earls threatning, entred Kerry, with a com∣petent Train, and there dispenced Justice to all persons, as occasion did require. Thus with his seven-score men, he safely forced his return through seven hundred of the Earls, who sought to surprise him. In the last year of his life, he was made Lord Deputy of Ire∣land, and no doubt had performed much in his place, if not afflicted with constant sick∣ness, the fore-runner of his death atCamdens Eliz. hoc anno. Waterford, 1598. Sir ROBERT NAUNTON, was born in this County, of Right ancient Extra∣ction, some avouching that his Family were here before, others that they came in with the Conqueror, who rewarded the chief of that Name for his service with a great Inheretrix gi∣ven him in marriage. In so much that his Lands were then estimated at (a vast sum in my Judgment) sevenWeaver his Fun. Monum. pag. 751. hundred pounds a year. For along time they were Patrons of Alderton in this County, where I conceive Sir Robert was born. He was first bred Fellow Commoner in Trinity Colledge, and then Fellow of Trinity∣Hall in Cambridge. He was Proctor of the University, Anno Domini 160 0/1, which Of∣fice according to the Old Circle returned not to that Colledge but once in fourty four years. He addicted himself from his youth to such studies, as did tend to accomplish him for Publick imployment. I conceive his most excellent piece called Fragmenta Regalia, set forth since his death, was a fruit of his younger years. He was afterwards sworn Secretary of State to King James on Thursday the eighth of January, 1617. which place he discharged with great ability and dexterity. And I hope it will be no offence here to insert a pleasant passage. One Mr. Wiemark a wealthy Man, great Novilant, and constant Pauls walker, hear∣ing the News that day of the beheading of Sir Walter Raleigh: His head (said he) would do very well on the shoulders of Sir Robert Naunton, Secretary of State. These words were complained of, and Wiemark summoned to the Privy Councel, where he pleaded for himself, that he intended no dis-respect to Mr. Secretary, whose known Worth was above all detraction; Only he spake in reference to an old Proverb, Two heads are better than one. And so for the present he was dismissed. Not long after, when rich men were called on for a Contribution to St. Pauls, Wiemark at the Councel-Table subscribed a hundred pounds, but Mr. Secretary told him two hundred were better than one, which be∣twixt fear and charity Wiemark was fain to subscribe. He died Anno Domini 163.. leaving one daughter, who first was married to Paul Vicount Banning, and after to the Lord Herbert, eldest son to Philip Earl of Pembroke. Capital Judges. JOHN de METINGHAM was born in this County (where Metingham is a Vil∣lage in VVang ford Hundred not far from Bongey) and was Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the reign of King Edward the Third. It isSpelman's Gloss. verbo Iusticiaius. reported, to his eternal praise that when the rest of the Judges (18 Edw. 3.) were fined and outed for corruption, this Metingham and Elias de Beckingham continued in their places, whose innocence was of proof against all accusations, and asNum. 13. 6, . Caleb and Josha amongst the Jury of false Spies, so these two amongst the Twelve Judges onely retained their integrity. King Ed∣ward in the 20th of his reign directed a Writ unto him about the stinting of the number of the Apprentices and Attourneys at Law, well worth the inserting.
D.Edward. Rot. 5. in dor∣so de Apprenti∣ciis & Attor∣nais. Rex injunxit John de Metin∣gham & Sociis suis, quod ipsi per dis∣creionem eorum provideant & Ordinent numerum certum è quolibet Comitatu de melioribus & legalioribus & liben∣tius add scentibus, secundum quod intel∣lexerint, quod Curiae suae & populo de regno melius valere poterit, &c. Et videturRegi & ejus Consilio quod Septies viginti sufficere poterint. Apponant tamen praefati Justiciarii plures, si viderint esse faciendum, vel numerum anticipent. The Lord the King hath enjoyned John de Me∣tingham and his Assistants, that they according to their discretion provide and ordain a certain number out of every County of such persons vvhich according to their understanding, shall appear unto them of the better sort and most Legal and most vvillingly applying themselves to the learning of the Lavv, vvhat may better
avail for their Court and the good of the people of the Land, &c. And it seems likely to the King and his Councel that Sevenscore may suffice for that purpose. However the afore-said Justices may add more if they see it ought to be done, or else they may lessen the number. Some conceive this number of sevenscore confined only to the Common Pleas, whereof Metingham was Chief Justice. But others behold it as extended to the whole Land, this Judge his known integrity being intrusted in their choice and number, which number is since much increased, and no wonder, our Land being grown more populous, and the people in it more litigious. He died Anno Domini.... Sir JOHN CAVENDISH Knight, was born at Cavendish in this County, (where his name continued until the reign of King Henry the Eighth) bred a Student of the Mu∣nicipal-Law, attaining to such learning therein, that he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings (or Upper) Bench, July 15, in the 46th. of King Edward the Third, discharging his place with due commendation, untill his violent death on the fifth of King Richard the Second on this occasion. John Raw, a Priest, contemporary with Jack Straw and Wat Tyler, advanced Robert West∣broome, a Clown, to be King of the Commons in this County, having no fewer than fifty thousand followers. These for eighth dayes together, in savage sport, caused the heads of great persons to be cut off, and set on Poles to kisse andSpeed's Chro. in Rich. the Second, pag. 608. whisper in one an∣others ears. Chief Justice Cavendish chanced then to be in the Country, to whom they bare a double pique; one, because he was honest, the other, learned. Besides, they received fresh news from London, that one John Cavendish his kinsman, had lately kill'd their Idol Wat Tiler in Smithfield. Whereupon they dragg'd the Reverend Judge with Sir John of Cam∣bridge, Prior of Bury, into the Market-place there, andLib. Eliers. M. S. in Bil. Cotton. beheaded them. Whose inno∣cent bloud remained not long unreveng'd, by Spencer the Warlike Bishop of Norwich, by whom this rascal rabble of Rebels was routed and ruined 1381. Reader, be charitably pleased that this Note may (till better information) preserve the Right of this County unto Sir ROBERT BROKE, a great Lawyer, and Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the reign of Queen Mary. He wrote an Abridg∣ment of the whole Law, a Book of high account. It insinuateth to me a probability of his birth herein, because (Lawyers generally purchase near the place of their Birth) his Posterity still flourish in a Worshipful equipage at Nacton nigh Ipswich in this County. Souldiers. Sir THOMAS WENTWORTH of Nettlested in this County, of a younger Family (confessed by the Crescent in his Coat) descended from the Wentworths of Wentworth-Wood∣house in York-shire, was created Baron VVentworth by King Henry the Eighth. He was a stout and valiant Gentleman, a cordial Protestant, and his Family a Sanctuary of such Pro∣fessors, JohnDe scripts Brit. cent. 8. num. 10. Bale comparing him to the good Centurion in the Gospel, and gratefully ac∣knowledging him the cause of his conversion from a Carmelite. The memory of this good Lord is much (but unjustly) blemished, because Calis was lost the Last of Queen Mary under his government. The manner hereof was huddled up in our Chronicles (least is best of a bad business) whereof this the effect. The English being secure by reason of the late conquest at St. Quintin, and the Duke of Guise having notice thereof, he sate down before the Town at the time (not when2 Sam. 11. 1. Kings go forth to, but return from battle) of mid-Winter, even on New-years-day. Next day he took the two Forts of Rise-bank and Newnam-bridge (wherein the strength of the City consisted) but whether they were undermined or undermonied it is not decided, and the last left most suspicious. Within three dayes the Castle of Calis, which commanded the City and was under the command of Sir Ralph Chamberlain, was taken, the French wading thorough the ditches (made shallower by their artificial cut) and then entering the Town, were repulsed back by Sir Anthony Ager, Marshal of Calis, the only man, saith
Chrn.  g. 632. †Speed's Hist. pag. 856. Stow, who was kill'd in the fight (understand him of note:) † Others, for the credit of the business, accounting four score lost in that service. The French re-entring the City the next being Twelfth-day, the Lord Wentworth De∣puty thereof, made but vain resistance, which (alas) was like the wriggling of a Worms∣tail after the head thereof is cut off, so that he was forced to take what terms he could get, viz. That the Townsmen should depart (though plundred to a groat) with their lives; and himself with fourty nine more ▪ such as the Duke of Guise should chose, should remain prisoners to be put to ransome. This was the best news brought to Paris, and worst to London, for many years before. It not only abated the Queens cheer, the remnant of Christmas, but her mirth all the dayes of her life. Yet, might she thank her self for loosing this Key of France, because hanging it by her side with so slender a string, there being but five hundred Souldiers effectually in the Garrison, too few to manage such a piece of importance. The Lord Wentworth, the second of June following, was solemnly condemned for Treason, though un-heard, as absent in France, which was not only against Christian cha∣rity, but Roman Justice, Festus confessing it was not fashionable amongst them, To deliver any man to die before he, which is Acts 25. 16. accused, have the accusers face to face, and have licence to answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him. It was well for this Lord that he was detained in France till his ransome was paid, and Queen Mary dead, who otherwise probably had lost his life, if he had had his liberty. But Queen Elizabeth coming to the Crown, he found the favour, or rather had the Ju∣stice to be tried again, and wasCamden's Eliz. Anno 1559. acquitted by his Peers, finding it no treachery, cowar∣dise or carelesness in him, but in Sr. John Harlston and Sr. Ralph Chamberlain, the one Go∣vernour of Rise-Bank, the other of Calis-Castle, for which they were both condemned to die, though their judgment was remitted. This Lord was the only person I have read of, who thus in a manner played Rubbers when his head lay at stake, and having lost the fore, recovered the after-game. He died a very aged man 1590. Sea-men. THOMAS CAVENDISH, of The sub∣stance of what followeth is taken out of Mr. Hacklits voyages, the last part, pag. 803. Trimley in this County Esq. in pursuance of his generous inclination to make foreign discoveries for the use and honour of his Nation, on his own Cost victualled and furnished three Ships (the least of Fleets) as followeth, Tunn. 1 The Desire, Admiral of 120 2 The Content, Vice-Admial of 40 3 The Hugh-Gallant, Rere-Admiral of 40 All three managed by 123 persons, with which he set sail from Plymouth the 21th. of July, 1586. So prosperous their winds, that by the 26 of August they had gone nine hundred and thirty leagues to the South of Africa. Then bending their course South-West, January the 7th. they entred the mouth of the Magellan-straits; Straits indeed, not only for the narrow passage, but many miseries of hunger and cold, which Mariners must encounter therein. Here Mr. Cavendish named a Town Port-famine, and may never distressed Sea∣man be necessitated to land there. It seems the Spanjards had a design, so to fortifie these Straits in places of advantage, as to ingross the passage that none, save themselves, should enter the Southern Sea. But God the promoter of the publick good destroyed their intended Monopoly, sending such a mortality amongst their Men, that scarce five of five hundred did survive. On the 24 of February they entred the South-sea, and frequently landed as they saw occasion. Many their conflicts with the Natives, more with the Spanjards, coming off Gainers in most, and Savers in all encounters, that alone at Quintero excepted, April 1, 1587, when they lost twelve Men of account, which was the cause that the June following they purposely sunk the Rere-Admiral, for want of Men to manage her. Amongst the many prizes he took in his passage, the St. Anne was the most conside∣rable, being the Spanish Admiral of the Southern-sea, of seven hundred Tuns. How∣ever our Cavendish boarded her with his little Ship (a Chicken of the game will adven∣ture
on a greater fowl, and leap where he cannot reach) and mastered her though an hun∣dred and ninety persons therein. There were in the Ship an hundred and two and twenty thousand Pezos In English Money 4880 pounds. (each worth eight shillings) of gold, the rest of the lading be∣ing Silks, Sattins, Musks and other rich Commodities. Mr. Cavendish his mercy after, equaled his valour in the fight, landing the Spaniards on the Shore, and leaving them plentiful provisions. Surrounding the East-Indies, and returning for England, the Ship called the Content did not answer her name, whose Men took all occasions to be mutinous, and stayed behind in a road with Stephen Hare their Master, and Mr. Cavendish saw her not after. But he, who went forth with a Fleet, came home with a Ship, and safely landed in Plymouth, Sept. 9, 1588. Amongst his Men three most remarkable, Mr. John Way their Preacher; Mr. Thomas Fuller of Ipswich their Pilote; and Mr. Francis Pretty of Eyke in this County, who wrote the whole History of their Voyage. Thus having circumnavigated the whole Earth, let his Ship no longer be termed the Desire, but the Performance; He was the third Man, and second English Man, of such uni∣versal undertakings. Not so successeful his next and last Voyage, begun the 26th. of August, 1591, when he set sail with a Fleet from Plymouth, and coming in the Magellan-straits neer a place by him formerly named Port-esire, he was the November following, casually severed from his Company, not seen or heard of atervvard. Pity, so illustrious a life should have so obscure a death. But all things must be, as Being it self vvill have them to be. Physicians. WILLIAM BUTLER vvas born atSo am I in∣formed by Mrs Crane in Cam∣bridg; to whose husband he left his Estate. Ipswich in this County, vvhere he had one only brother, who going beyond sea turned Papist, for which cause this VVilliam was so of∣fended with him, that he left him none of his Estate. I observe this the rather, because this VVilliam Butler was causlesly suspected for Popish inclinations. He was bred Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, where he became the Aesculapius of our Age. He was the first English man who quick' ned Galenical Physick with a touch of Paracelsus, trading in Chy∣mical Receits vvith great successe. His eye vvas excellent at the instant discovery of a cadaverous face, on which he vvould not lavish any Art: this made him at the first sight of sick Prince Henry, to get himself out of sight. Knowing himself to be the Prince of Physicians, he would be observ'd accordingly: Complements would prevail nothing with him, intreaties but little, surly threatnings would do much, and a witty jeere  any thing. He was better pleased with presents than money, loved what was pretty rather than what was costly, and preferred rarities before riches. Neatness he neglected into slovinlyness; and, accounting cuffs to be manacles, he may be said not to have made himself ready for some seven years together. He made his humoursomnesse to become him, wherein some of his Profession have rather aped than imitated him, who had moro∣sitatem aequabilem, and kept the tenor of the same surliness to all persons. He was a good Benefactor to Clare-Hall, and dying 1621, he was buried in the Chancel of St. Maries in Cambridge under a fair Monument. Mr. John Crane, that expert Apothecary and his Executour, is since buried by him, and if some eminent Surgeon was interred on his other side, I would say, that Physick lay here in state with its two Pages attending it. Writers. HUMPHREY NECTON, was born (though Necton be in Northfolk) in thisBae cent. 4▪ um. 24. County, and quitting a fair fortune from his Father, professed poverty and became a Carmelite in Norwich. Two Firstships met in this Man, for he Handselled the House-Convent, which Philip Wat in of Cowgate, a prime Citizen, (and almost I could beleeve him Mayor of the City) did after the death of his Wife in a fit of sorrow give with his whole Estate to the Car∣melites. Secondly, He was the first Carmelite, who in Cambridge took the Degree of Doctor in Divinity. orsome boggled much thereat as false Heraldry in Devotion, to super-induce
a Doctoral hood over a Friers Coul, till our Necton adventured on it. For though Poverty might not affect Pride, yet Humility may admit of Honour. He flourished under King Henry the Third, and Edward the First, at Norwich, and was buried with great solemnity by those of his Order, Anno Dom. 1303. JOHN HORMINGER was born of good Parents in thisBale de scrip. Brit. & Pits∣aetat. 14 num. 450. County, and became very accomplished in Learning. It happened that travelling to Rome he came into the com∣pany of Italians (the admirers only of themselves, and the Slighters-General of all other Nations,) vilifying England, as an inconsiderable Country', whose Ground was as barren, as the people Barbarous. Our Horminger, impatient to hear his Mother▪land traduced, spake in her defence, and fluently Epitomized the commodities thereof. Returning home he wrote a Book De Divitiis & Deliciis Angliae, of the Profit and Pleasure of England; which had it come to my hand, O how advantageous had it been to my present design! He flourished 1310. THOMAS of ELY was born in this County. For though Cambridge-shire boasteth of Ely (so famous for the Cathedral) yet is there Monks-Ely in Suffolk, the Native Town of this Thomas, who followed the foot-steps of his Countryman Necton, being a Carmelit (but in Ipswich) and afterwards Doctor in the University of Cambridge, aith myBale cent. 4. num. 65. Author, of Both Divinities. But the same hand, which tieth, untieth this knot, giving us to understand that thereby are meant Scholastical and Interpretative Divinity, seeming to import them in that Age to have been distinct Faculties, till afterwards united, as the Civil and Common Law, in one profession. Leaving his Native Land, he travelled over the seas with others of his Order, to Bru∣ges in Flanders, and there kept Lectures and Disputations, as one Gobelike (a formidable Author) informeth myBale ut prius. Informer, till his death about 1320. RICHARD LANHAM was born at a Market-Town well known for Cloathing in this County, and bred (when young) a Carmelite in Ipswich. He made it his only request to the Trefect of his Convent, to have leave to study in Oxford, which was granted him, and deservedly, employing his time so well there, that he proceeded Doctor with publick applause. Lelands Pencil paints him Pious and Learned, but Bale cometh with his spunge, and in effect deletes both, because of his great Antipathy to the VVicklevites. However his Learning is beyond contradiction, attested by the Books he left to Posterity. Much difference about the manner and place of his death, some making him to decease in his Bed atPolidor. Virgil. Bristol, others to be beheaded in London with Sudbury Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and Hales Master of St.  of Jerusalem) by the Rebellious Crew of VVat Tyler, who being a Misogrammatist (if a good Greek word may be given to so Barbarous a Rebel) hated every man that could write or read, and were the more incensed against Lanham for his eminent Literature. He died Anno Dom. 1381. JOHN KINYNGHAM was born in thisBale cent. 6. num. 4. County, bred a Carmelite first in Ipswich, then in Oxford, being the 25th. Prefect of his Order, in England and Ireland, Confessor to John of Gant and his Lady. He was the first who encountred VVickliffe in the Schools at Oxford, disputing of Philosophical Subtilties, and that with so much Ingenuity, that VVickliffe, much taken with the Mans modesty, prayedIdem ibidem. heartily for him that his Judgement might be convinced. But whether with so good successe, wherewith Peter Martyr besought God on the same account for See the life of Bernard Gilpin. Gilpin, I know not. He died a very aged man Anno 1399, and was buried at York far, I confesse, from Ipswich his first fixation. But it was usual for Prefects of Orders, to travel much in their Visita∣tions. JOHN LYDGATE was born in this County at aCamd. Brit. in Suffolk. Village so called, bred a Bene∣dictine Monk in St. Edmunds-Bury. After some time spent in our English Universities, he travelled over France and Italy, improving his time to his great accomplishment. Re∣turning, he became Tutor to many Noble-mens sons, and both in Prose and Poetry was the best Author of his Age. If Chaucers Coin were of a greater weight for deeper learning, Lydgates were of a more refined Standard for purer language, so that one might mistake him for a modern Writer. But because none can so well describe him as him∣self, take an Essay of hisHistory of the life and death of He∣ctor, pag. 316. and 317. Verses, excusing himself, for deviating in his Writings from his Vocation.
I am a Monk by my profession, In Berry, call'd John Lydgate by my name, And wear a habit of perfection; (Although my life agrees not with the same) That meddle should with things spiritual, As I must needs confess unto you all. But seeing that I did herein proceed, King Hen. 4. At his command, whom I could not refuse, I humbly do beseech all those that read Or leasure have this story to peruse, If any fault therein they find to be Or error, that committed is by me; That they will of their gentleness take pain, The rather to correct and mend the same Than rashly to condemn it with disdain, For well I wot it is not without blame, Because I know the Verse therein is wrong, As being some too short and some too long. For Chaucer that my Master was, and knew What did belong to writing Verse and Prose, Ne're stumbled at small faults, nor yet did view With scornful eye the Works and Books of those That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt At any man, to fear him or to daunt. He lived to be 60 years of age, and died about the year 1444, and was buried in his own Convent with this Epitaph, Mortuus saeclo, superis superstes Hic  Lydgate tumulatus urna, Qui fuit quondam celebris Britannae Fama Poesis. Dead in this World, living above the skie. Intomb'd within this Urn doth Lydgate lie In former time fam'd for his Poetry All over England. As for the numerous and various Books, which he wrote of several subjects,De script. Brit. centur. 8. num. 7. Bale pre∣senteth us with their perfect Catalogue. JOHN BARNYNGHAM, born at a Village so named in this cent. 8. num▪ 11. County, was bred a Carmelite in Ipswich, and afterwards proceeded Doctor in Oxford, thence going to Serbon (the Cock-pit of controversies) was there admitted to the same Degree. Trithemius takes notice of his parts and perfections, allowing him Festivum ingenium & ad quodcunque deflexum, having a subtile and supple Wit, so that he could be what he would be, a great Master of Defence in the Schools, both to guard and hit. Bale saith, he saw his Works in Cambridge fairly written in four great Volumes. Weary with his long Race beyond the seas, he returned at last to the place whence he started, and retiring to his Convent, whereof he was Ruler at Ipswich, died there January 22, 1448. JOHN of BURY was an Augustinian in Clare, Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, Pro∣vincial of his Order thorough England and Ireland, no mean Scholar and a great opposer of Reginald Peakock and all other Wicklevites. He flourished Anno 1460. THOMAS SCROOPE was born at Bradley in thisBale de scrip. Brit. cent. . num. 53. J. Pitz. de .  pag. 681. anno 1491. County, (but extracted from the Lord Scroop in York-shire) who rolled through many professions. 1 He was a Benedictine, but found that Order too loose for his conscience. 2 A Carmelite of Norwich as a stricter profession. 3 An Anchorite (the dungeon of the prison of Carmelitisme) wherein he lived twenty years. 4 Dispensed with by the Pope, he became Bishop of Drummore in Ireland. 5 Quiing his Bishoprick, he returned to his solitary life, yet so, that once a week he used to walk on his bare eet and preach the Decalogue in the Villages round about. He lived to be extreamly aged, for about the year 1425 cloathed in sack-cloath and girt with an iron chain, he used to cry out in the streets, That new Jerusalem, the Bride of the Lamb, was shortly to come down from Heaven▪ prepared for her Spouse▪ Revel. 21 and that with great joy he saw the same in the spirit. Thomas Waldensis the great Anti-Wicklevite, was much offended thereat; protesting, it was a scandal and disgrace to the Church. However our Scroope long out-lived him, and died aged well nigh 100 years, Non sine sanctitatis opinione, say both Bale and ; And it is a wonder they meet in the same opinion. He was buried at  in this County, Anno 1491. Since the Reformation. RICHARD SIRS was born in the edge of this County (yet so, that Essex seemeth
to have no share in him) nigh Sudbury and was bred a Fellow of St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge. He proved afterwards a most profitable Preacher to the Honourable Society of Grais-Inn, whence he was chosen Master of St. Katharine-hall in Cambridge. He found the House in a mean condition, the Wheel of St. Katharine having stood still (not to say gone backwards) for some years together, he left it replenished with Scholars, beautified with Buildings, better endowed with Revenues. He was most eminent for that grace, which is most worth, yet cost the least to keep it, (viz.) Christian humility. Of all points of Divinity he most frequently pressed that of Christs Incarnation, and if the Angels desired to pry into that Mystery, no wonder if this Angelical Man had a longing to look therein. A Learned Divine imputed this good Doctors great humility to his much meditating on that point of Christs humiliation, when he took our flesh upon him. If it be true what some hold in Physick, that Omne par nutrit suum par, that the Vitals of our Body are most strengthned by feeding on such Meat as are likest unto them, I see no absurdity to maintain, that Mens souls improve most in those graces, whereon they have most constant meditation, whereof this worthy Doctor was an eminent instance. He died in the 58th year of his Age, Anno Domini 1631. WILLIAM ALABLASTER was born at Hadley in this County, and by marriage was Nephew to Doctor John Still, Bishop of Bath and Wells. He was bred Fellow in Trinity Colledge in Cambridge. A most rare Poet as any our Age or Nation hath pro∣duced: witnesse his Tragedy of Roxama admirably acted in that Colledge, and so pa∣thetically; that a Gentle-woman present thereat (Reader I had it from an Author whose credit it is sin with me to suspect) at the hearing of the last words thereof, sequar, sequar so hideously pronounced, fell distracted and never after fully recovered her senses. He attended Chaplain in Calis-voyage on Robert Earl of Essex, where he was so affected with the beauty of Popish Churches and the Venerable respect the Papists gave to their Priests, that he staggered in his own Religion. There wanted not those of the Romish party to force his fall, whom they found reeling; working on his Ambition, who complained of the slownesse of preferment in England, which followed not so fast as in due time to overtake his deserts; so that soon after he turned a Papist. Yet it was not long before he was out of love with that perswasion; so that, whether because he could not comport with their discipline, who would have made him (who conceived himself at the top) begin again (according to their course) at the bottom of Hu∣mane Learning; Or, because (which I rather charitably beleeve) that upon second thoughts he seriously disgusted the Romish superstition, he returned into his own Country. It was not long before he was made Prebendary of St. Pauls, and Rector of the rich Par∣sonage of Tharfield in Hartford-shire. He was an excellent Hebrician and well skilled in Cabalistical Learning, witnesse his Clerum in Cambridge when he commenced Doctor in Divinity, taking for his Text the first words of the first Book of Chronicles Adam, Seth, Enos. Besides the literal sense, as they are proper names of the Patriarchs, he mined for a mystical meaning, Man is put or placed for pain and trouble. How well this agreeth with the Original belongs not to me to enquire; This I know, it had been hard (if not impossible) for him to hold on the same rate, and reduce the proper names in the Genealogies following to such an Appellativeness, as should compose a continued sense. He died Anno Domini 163.. SAMUEL WARD was born at Haveril in this County, where his Father had long been a painful Minister of the place, and I remember I have read this Epitaph written on his Monument in the Chancel there, which I will endeavour to translate; Quo si quis scivit scitiùs, Aut si quis docuit doctiùs, At rarus vixit sanctiùs; Et nullus tonuit fortiùs. Grant some of knowledge greater store, More Learned some in teaching; Yet few in life did lighten more, None thundred more in preaching. He bred his son Samuel in Cambridge in Sidney Colledge, whereof he became Fellow, being an excellent Artist, Linguist, Divine and Preacher. He had a sanctified fancy, dex∣terous in designing expressive pictures, representing much matter in a little model. From Cambridge he was preferred Minister in, or rather of Ipswich, having a care over
and a love from all the Parishes in that populous place. Indeed he had a magnifick Vertue (as if he had learned it from the Load-stone, in whose qualities he was so knowing) to attract peoples affections. Yet found he foes as well as friends, who complained of him to the High Commission, where he met with some molestation. He had three Brethren Ministers, on the same token that some have said, that these four put together, would not make up the abilities of their Father. Nor were they themselves offended with this Hyperbole, to have the Branches lessened, to greaten their Root. One of them, lately dead, was benefic'd in Essex, and following the counsel of the Poet, Ridentem dicere verum, Quis vetat? What doth forbid but one may smile, And also tell the Truth the while? hath in a jesting way in some of his Books delivered much Smart-Truth of this present Times. Mr. Samuel died 163.. JOHN BOISE, Born at Elmeseth in this County, being son of the Minister thereof. He was bred first in Hadley-School, then in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, and was de∣servedly chosen Fellow thereof. Here he (as a Volonteer) read in his bed a Greek Lecture to such young Thomas  one of them; See the narrative at the end of his Funeral Ser∣mon. Scholars, who preferred Antelucana studia before their own ease and est. He was afterwards of the Quorum in the translating of the Bible, and whilst St. Chryso∣stome lives Mr. Boise shall not die, such his learned pains on him in the edition of Sir Henry Savil. Being Parson of Boxworth in Cambridge-shire and Prebendary of Ely, he made a quiet End about the beginning of our Warlike disturbances. Romish Exile Writers. ROBERT SOUTHWEL was born in this County, as Pitseus affirmeth, who although often mistaken in his locality, may be believed herein, as professing himself fami∣liarly acquainted with him at Rome. But the matter is not much, where he was born, seeing, though cried up by men of his own Profession for his many Books in Verse and Profe, he was reputed a dangerous enemy by the State, for which he was imprisoned and executed, March the 3, 1595. Benefactors to the Publick. ELIZABETH, Vincent in his corrections of Brooks his errors. third daughter of Gilbert Earl of CLARE and wife to John Burgh Earl of Ulster in Ireland, I dare not say was born at, but surely had her greatest Honor from Clare in this County. Blame me not, Reader, if I be covetous on any account to recover the mention of her Memory, who Anno 1343 founded Clare-Hall in Cambridge, since augmented by many Benefactors. Sir SIMON EYRE, son of John Eyre, was born at Brandon in this County, bred in London first an Upholster, then a Draper. In which Profession he profited, that he was chosen Lord Mayor of the City 1445. On his own cost he built Leaden-Hall (for a Com∣mon Garner of Corn to the City) of squared Stow's Su∣vey of London pag. 163. stone in form as it now sheweth, with a fair Chappel in the East side of the Quadrant. Over the Porch of which he caused to be writ∣ten, Dextra Domini exaltavit me, The Lords right hand hath exalted me. He is elsewhere stiled Hoorandus & famosus Mercator. He left five thousand Marks, a prodigious sum in that age, to charitable uses, so that if my sight mistake not (as I am confident it doth not) his bounty like 1 Sa. 10. 3 Saul stands higher than any others from the shoulders upwards. He departed this life the 18th. of September, Anno Domini 1459. and is buried in the Church of St. Mary Woolnoth in Lumbard-street, London. THOMAS SPRING, commonly called the Rich Clothier, was I believe born, I am sure lived and waxed Wealthy at Laneham in this County. He built the Carved eavers . Mon. pag. 77 Chap∣pel of Wainscot, in the North-side of the Chancel, as also the Chappel at the South-side of the Church. This Thomas Spring, senior, died Anno 1510, and lieth buried under a Monu∣ment in the Chappel of his own erection. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM COPPINGER born at Bucks-Hall in this County, where his Family
flourisheth at this day in a good esteem. He was bred a Fish-monger in London, so prosper∣ing in his Profession that he became Lord Mayor Anno 1512. He gave theStow's Sur∣vey of London Anno 1512. half of his Estate (which was very great) to pious uses and relieving of the poor. His bounty mindeth me of the words of Zacheus to our Saviour;Luke 19. 8. Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man by false ac∣cusation, I restore him fourefold. Demand not of me whether our Coppinger made such plentiful restitution, being confident there was no cause thereof, seeing he never was one of the Publicans, persons universally infamous for extortion▪ Otherwise I confess, that that charity, which is not bottom'd on Justice, is but built on a foundred foundation. I am sorry to see this Gentlemans ancient Arms (the Epidemical disease of that Age) substracted (in point of Honour) by the addition of a superfluous Bordure. Sir WILLIAM CORDAL, Knight. Where ever he was born, he had a fair EstateS. N. at Long-Melford in this County, and lieth buried in that fair Church under a decent Mo∣nument. We will translate his Epitaph, which will perfectly acquaint us, with the great Offices he had, and good offices he did to posterity: Hic Gulielmus habet requiē Cordellus, avito Stemmate qui clarus, clarior ingenio Hic studiis primos consumpsit fortiter annos, Mox & Causarum strenuus actor er at. Tanta illi doctrina inerat, facundia tanta, Ut Parlamenti publica Lingua foret. Postea factus Eques, Reginae arcana Mariae Consilia, & Patriae grande subibat opus. Factus & est Custos Rotulorum, urgente senecta In Christo moriens cepit ad astra viam. Pauperibus largus victum vestemque ministrans, Insuper Hospitii condidit ille domum. Here William Cordal doth in rest remain, Great by his birth, but greater by his brain, Plying his studies hard his youth throughout, Of Causes he became a Pleader stout. His learning deep such cloquence did vent, He was chose Speaker of the Parliament. Afterwards Knight Q. Mary did him make, And Counsellor, State-work to undertake; And Master of the Rolls, well worn with age Dying in Christ heaven was his utmost stage Diet and clothes to poor he gave at large, And a fairAt Melford afore-said. Almshouse founded on his charge. He was made Master of the Rolls November 5th. the Fifth of Queen Mary, continuing therein till the day of his death theJ. Philpot in his Catal. of the Masters of the Rolls. 23th of Queen Elizabeth. Sir ROBERT HICHAM Knight, and Serjeant at Law, was born (if not at) near Nacton in this County, and was very skilful in our Common-Law. By  practice he got a great Estate, and purchased the fair Mannor of Framlingham of the Earl of Suffolk. Herein he met with many difficulties (knots which would have made another mans Axe turn edge to hew them off) so that, had he not been one of a sharp Wit, strong Brains, powerful Friends, plentiful Purse and indefatigable Diligence, he had never cleared the Title thereof to him and his heirs. I am willing to beleeve that gratitude to God (who gave him to wade thorough so many Incumbrances and land safely at last on the peaceable possession of his Purchase) was the main motive inclining him to leave a great part of his Estate to pious uses, and prin∣cipally to Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge. He departed this life a little before the beginning of our Civil Wars. Memorable Persons. JOHN CAVENDISH Esq. was born at Cavendish in this County, bred at Court, a Servant in ordinary attendance on King Richard the Second, when Wat Tyler played Rex in London. It happ'ned that Wat was woundly angry with Sir John Newton Knight, (Sword∣Bearer to the King then in presence) for devouring his distance, and not making his ap∣proaches mannerly enough unto him; Oh the pride of a self-promoting Pesant! Much bussling a rising thereabout, Sir William Walworth, Lord Mayor of London, arrested VVat and with his Dagger wounded him; and being well stricken in years, wanted not valour but vigour to dispatch him. He is seconded by John Cavendish standing by, who twice or thrice wounded him mortally; mySpeed in his Chron. pag. 607. Author complaining, That his death was too worthy, from the hands of honourable persons, for whom the Axe of the Hangman had been
too good. I would have said, the Hlter of the Hangman. But it matters not, by whom a Traitor be kill'd, so he be kill'd. Hereupon the Arms of London were augmented with a Dagger, and, to divide the Ho∣nour equally betwixt them, if the Heaft belonged to Walworth, the Blade, or point thereof at least, may be adjudged to Cavendish. Let me add that King Richard himself shewed much wisedome and courage in managing this matter, so that in our Chronicles he appeareth wiser Youth than Man; as if he had spent all the stock of his discretion in appeasing this tumult, which happened, Anno Dom. 1381. Sir THOMAS COOK, Knight. Sir WILLIAM CAPELL, Knight. I present these pair of Knights in parallels, because I find many considerable occurren∣ces betwixt them in the course of their lives; 1 Both were natives of this County, born not far asunder. Sir Thomas at Lvenham, Sir William at Stoke-Neyland. 2 Both were bred in London, free of the fame Company of Drapers, and were Lord∣Mayors of the City. 3 Both by Gods blessing on their industry attained great Estates, and were Royal-Mer∣chants indeed. The later is reported by tradition (since by continuance consolidated into Historical truth) that, after a large entertainment made for King Henry the Seventh, he concluded all with a Fire, wherein he burnt many Bonds, in which the King (a Bor∣rower in the beginning of his Reign) stood obliged unto him; (a sweet perfume (no doubt) to so thrifty a Prince) not to speak of his expensive Frolick, when at another time he drank a dissolved Pearl (which cost him many hundreds) in an health to the King. 4 Both met with many molestations, Sir Thomas being arraigned for lending money (in the reign of King Edward the Fourth) hardly escaped with his life (thank a good God, aSee Judge Markham his life in Notting∣ham-shire. just Judge and a stout Jury) though griveously fined, and long imprisoned. As for Sir William, Empson and Dudley fell with their bodies so heavy upon him, that they squeased many thousand pounds out of his, into the Kings Coffers. 5 Both died peaceably in Age and Honour, leaving great Estates to their Posterities. The Cooks flourishing lately at Giddy-Hall in Essex, in a Worshipful, as the Capels at Had∣ham in Hartford-shire now in an Honourable condition. Nor must it be forgotten, that Elizabeth, daughter to Sir William Capel, was married to William Powlet Marquess of Winchester, and Mildred, descended from Sir Thomas Cook to William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, both their husbands being successively Lord Treasurers of England, for above fifty years. Sir Thomas Cook lieth buried in the Church of Augustine∣, London. Sir William Capel in the South-side of the Parish Church of St. Bartholomews (in a Chappel of his own addition) behind the Exchange, though the certain date of their deaths do not appear. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Michel John Michel Ekelingham Stock-Fishmonger He was Ma∣yor again 1436 1422. 2 Henry Barton Henry Barton Myldenhal Skinner 1428. 3 Roger Oteley Will. Oteley Vfford Grocer 1434. 4 John Paddesley Simon Paddesley Bury St. Edmunds Gold-smith 1440. 5 Simon Eyre John Eyre Brandon Draper 1445. 6 William Gregory Roger Gregory Myldenhal Skinner 1451. 7 Thomas Cook Robert Cook Lavenham Draper 1462. 8 Richard Gardiner John Gardiner Exning Mercer 1478. 9 William Capel John Capel Stoke-Neyland Draper 1503. 10 William Coppinger Walter Coppinger Buckshal Fish-monger 1512. 11 John Milborn John Milbourn Long-Melford Draper 1521. 12 Roger Martin Lawrence Martin Long-Melford Mercer 1567. 13 John Spencer Richard Spencer Walding-Field Cloath-worker 1594. 14 Stephen Some Thomas Some Bradley Grocer 1598. Reader, this is one of the twelve pretermitted Shires, the Names of whose Gentry were not returned into the Tower in the reign of King Henry the Sixth.
Sheriffs. Know that this County and Nhfolk had both one Sheriff until the seventeenth year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, a List of whose names we formerly have presented in the description of Northfolk. Place Armes. Reg. ELIZ     Anno     17 Rob. Ashfield, ar. Netherhall Sable,  Fesse ngrailed betwixt 3 flower de Luces, Arg. 18 Ioh. , arm.   Sable, a Fesse checkee Or and Azure betwixt 3 Naggs heads erazed, Argent. 19 Will. Spring, mil. Lanham Argent, on a Cheveron between 3 Martlets Gules, as many Cinquefoiles of the Field. 20 Rob. Jermin, mil. Rushbrook Sable, a Cressant betwixt  Mul∣lets, Argent. 21 Philip. Parker, mil. Arwerton Argent, a Lion passant Gules be∣twixt 2 Barrs Setheron 3 Be∣znts, in Chief as many Bucks heads abosed of the third. 22 Th. Bernardiston, m. Kedington Azure, a Fesse Dauncette Ermin, betwixt 6 Crosles, Argent. 23 Nich. Bacon, mil. Culfurth Gules, on a Chief  2 Mul∣lets, Sable. 24 Will. Drury, mil. Halsted Argent, on a Chief Vert, the letter Tau betwixt 2 Mullets pierced Or. 25 Carol. Framling▪ ham, miles.     26 Ioh. Gurdon, arm. Assington S. 3 Leopards heads jessant flow∣ers de Luce, Or. 27 Will. Clopton, a.   Sable, a Bend Argent betwixt 2 Cotises dauncette, Or. 28 Geo▪ Clopton, ar. ut prius   29 Franc. Jermy, arm.   Arg. a Lion ramp. gardant Gules. 30 Phil. Tilney, arm. Shelleigh Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Griffins-heads erazed, Gules. 31 Will. Walgrave, m. Party per Pale Argent, and Gu. 32 Tho. Rowse, arm.   Sable, 2 Barrs engrailed Argent. 33 c. Garnish, arm.   Ar. a chev. engr. Az. bet. 3 scallops Sab. 34 Lionel Talmarsh, . Helminghā Argent, Fretty Sable. 35 Rob. Forth, arm.   † Or, 3 Buls-heads coupee Sable. 36 Tho. †Cro, arm. Saxmundhā * Ar. on a fess Gu. 3. Garbs Or, be∣tween 2 cheverons Az. charged with Escallops, Arg. 37 Will. Spring, mil. ut prius   38 Tho. *Eden, arm.     39 Antho. Wingfield, Letherin∣gham Argent, a Bend Gules cotised able, 3 Wings of the first. 40 Hen. Warner, ar.     41 Antho. Felton, ar. Playford Gules, 2 Lions passant Ein, crowned Or. 42 Edw. Bacon, arm. ut prius   43 Edwin. Withipol. Christ Church in Ipswich. Party per pale Or and Gules, 3 Lions pssant regardant, ar∣med Sable, langued Argent, a Bordure interchanged. 44 Tho. Stutvile, . Dallam , Argent and Gules, a Lion rampant Sable. Nicol. Bacon, miles ut prius   Reg. JACO.     Anno     1 . Bacon, miles. ut prius   2 Edm. Bokemham, armiger,     Tho. Playters, arm. Bendy Wavy of six Argent and Azure. 4 Antho. Penning, ar.     Ioho. Wentworth, armiger.   Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Leo∣pads heads, Or. 6 Lionel Talmarsh, ar ut prius   7 Geo. le Hunt, miles.     8 Thom. Tilney, arm. ut prius   9 Calthorp Parker, mil. ut prius   10 Martin Stutevil. ut prius   11 Rob. Brook, miles.   AMP. 12 Rob. Barker, mil.   Perfess embatt'led Or and Azure 3 martlets counterchanged. 13 Tho. Clench, arm.     14 Lio. Ialmarsh, m. B. ut prius Azure, a Cheveron Argent. 15 Edw. Lewkenor, m.     16 Io. Wentworth, m. ut prius   17 Hen. North, miles.   Azure, a Lion passant Or, be∣tween 3 Flower de , Ar. 18 Will. Spring, miles. ut prius   19 Will. Wetle, arm.     20 Rob. Brook, arm.     21 N. Bernardiston, m ut prius   22 Galf. Pittman, arm.     Reg. CAROL.     1 Sam. Aylemer, arm. Cleydon Argent, a Cross Sable betwixt 4 Cornish  proper. 2 Joha. Prescot, mil.   S. a Chev. betwixt 3 , Ar. 3 Maur. Barrowe, ar.   S. 2 swords in Saltire Ar.  betw. 4 flowers de luce Or, with∣in a Bordure compone of the se∣cond and 4 Brampt. Gourden, a. ut prius   5 Hen, Hookenham, a.     6 Iohan, Acton, arm.     7 Rob. Crane, miles. Chyston Ar. a Fess betw. 3 Cross  fitchee Gu. 8 Will. *Some, miles.     9 Edw. Bacon, miles. ut prius Gules, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mallets, Or. 10 Ioha. Barker, arm. ut prius   11 Ioha. Rouse, miles. ut prius   12 Phil. Parker, mil. ut prius   13 Ed. Duke, armiger. Brampton Az a Cheveron betwixt 3  Argent membred Gules. 14 Ioh. Clench, arm.     15 Sim. Dewes, miles. Stow-Hall Or, 3 Quatersoils, Gules▪ 16 VVill. Spring, arm. ut prius   17 Will. , a     18 Maur. Barrowe, ar ut prius   19     20 Ioha. Cotton, arm     21     22 Tho. Blosse, arm.     Queen ELIZABETH. 18 JOHN HIGHAM Arm.] I find this passage in the Ingenious Michael Lord Montaigne in France, in his Essay * of Glory,Lib. . cap. 16. I have no name which is sufficiently mine. Of two I have the one common to all my Race, yea and also to others. There is a Family at Paris, and another at Mont∣pellier, called Montaigne, another in Brittanny, and one in Zantoigne, surnamed de la Montaigne. The removing of one only syllable, may so confound our Web, as I shall have a share in their Glory, and they perhaps a part of my shame. And my Ancestors have heretofore been surnamed HEIGHAM, or HIQUEM a surname which also belongs to an House well known in England. Indeed the Highams (so * named from a Village in this County) were, (for I suspect. . [in English] in Suffolk
them extinct) a right Ancient Family, and Sr Clement Heigham, (Ancestor to this John our Sheriff,) who was a Potent Knight in his Generation, lies buried under a fair Tomb in Thorning-Church in Northfolk. 20 ROBERT JERMIN, Miles] He was a Person of singular Piety, a bountiful Benefactor to Emanuel-Colledge, and a man of great command in this County. He was Father to Sir Tho. Jermin (Privy Concellour and Vice-Chamberlain to King Charles the First) Grandfather to Thomas and Henry Jermin Esquires. The younger of these being Lord Chamberlain to our present Queen Mary, and sharing in her Majesties sufferings during her long Exile in France, was by King Charles the Second deservedly advanced Baron, and Earl of St. Albans. 23 NICHOLAS BACON Miles.] He was son to Sir Nicholas and elder Brother to Sir Francis Bacon, both Lord Chancellors of England, and afterward by King James in the ninth of his reign on the 22 of May created the first Baronet of England. 36 THOMAS CROFTS, Armiger.] He was a Man of Remark in his generation; Father to Sir John Crofts, Grand-father to. . . . Crofts, who for his Fidelity to his Sove∣reign during his suffering condition, and for several Embassies, worthily performed to the King of Poland and other Princes, was created Baron Crofts by King Charles the Second. CHARLES the First. 15 SIMONDS DEWES Miles.] This Sir Simonds was Grand-child unto Adrian Dwes descended of the Ancient Stem of Des Ewes Dynasts or Lords of the Dition of Kessel in the Dutchy of Gelderland: who came first thence, when that Province was wasted with Civil War in the beginning of King Henry the Eighth. He was bred in Cambridge as appeared by his printed speech (made in the long Par∣liament) wherein he indeavoured to prove it more Ancient than Oxford. His Genious addicted him to the study of Antiquity. Preferring Rust before Brightness, and more con∣forming his mind to the Garbe of the former than mode of the moderne times. He was stu∣dious in Roman Coin to discriminate true ones from such as were cast and counterfeit. He passed not for Price to procure a choice piece, and was no less careful in conserving than curious in culling many rare Records. He had plenty of pretious Medals, out of which a methodical Architect might contrive a fair Fabrick for the benefit of posterity. His Treasury afforded things as well new as old, on the token that he much admired that the Ordinances and Orders of the late Long Parliament did in Bulks and number exceed all the Sta∣tutes made since the Conquest. He was loving to Learned Men to whom he desired to do all good offices, and died about the year of our Lord 1653. The Fare-wel. To conclude our description of Suffolk, I wish that therein Grain of all kinds may be had at so reasonable rates, that rich and poor may be contented therewith. But if a Fa∣mine should happen here, let the poor not distrust Divine providence, whereof their Grand-fathers had so admirable a testimony 15. . When in a general dearth all over Eng∣land, plenty of Pease did grow on the Sea-shore near Dunwih (never set or sown by humane industry) which being gathered in full ripeness, much abated the high prices in the Markets, and preserved many hundreds of hungry Families from famishing.
SURREY hath Middlesex (divided by the Thames) on the North, Kent on the East, Sussex on the South, ant & Bark-shires on the West. It may be allowed to be a Square (besides its Angular expatiation in the South-west) of two and twenty miles, and is not unproperly compared to a Cynamon-tree whose Bark is far better than the Body thereof. For the skirts and borders bounding this Shire are rich and fruitful, whilst the ground in the inward parts thereof is very hungry and barren, though by reason of the clear Air and clean wayes full of many gentile habitations. Naturall Commodities. Fullers-Earth. The most and best of this kind in England (not to say Europe) is digged up nigh Rygate in this County. It is worth 4 d. a Bushel at the Pit; 16 d. at the Wharfe in London, 3 s. at Newbury, and Westward twice as dear. Double the use thereof in making Cloath, to scoure out stains, and to thicken it, or (to use the Trades-mans term) to bring it to proof. Though the transporting thereof be by Law forbidden, yet private profit so preponde∣reth the publick, that Ships ballasted therewith are sent over into Holland, where they have such Magazins of this Earth, that they are ready (on their own rates) to furnish us therewith, if there should be any occasion▪. And now we are mentioning of Earth, near Non-such is a Vein of Potters-Earth, much commended in its kind, of which Crusibles are made for the melting of Gold, and many other necessary Utensils. Wall-Nuts. As in this County, and in Cash-Haulton especially, there be excellent Trouts: so are there plenty of the best Wall-nuts in the same place, as if Nature had observed the Rule of Physick, Post Pisces Nuces. Some difficulty there is in cracking the Name thereof, why Wall-Nuts; having no affinity with a VVall, whose substantial trees need to borrow nothing thence for their support. Nor are they so called, because walled with shels, which is common to all other Nuts. The truth is, Gual or VVall to the old Dutch signifieth strange or exotick, (whence VVelsh, that is Foreigners) these Nuts being no natives of England or Europe, and probably first fetch'd from Persia, because called Nux Persique in the French tongue. Surely, some precious worth is in the Kernels thereof (though charged to be some∣what obstructive and stopping of the stomack) because provident nature hath wrapped them in so many coverts; a thick green one (alling off when ripe) an hard yellowish, and a bitter blackish one. As for the timber of the VVall-nut-tree, it may be termed an English Shittim-wood for the fineness, smoothness, and durableness thereof, whereof the best Ta∣bles, with stocks of Guns and other manufactures are made. Box. The best, which England affords, groweth about Darking in this County, yet short in goodness of what is imported out of Turky. Though the smel and shade thereof be accounted unwholesome; not only pretty toys for children, but useful tooles for men, and especially Mathematical Instruments are made thereof. But it is generally used for Combes, as also by such as grave Pictures & Arms in wood, as better because harder than Pear-tree, for that purpose. For mine own part, let me speak it with thankfulness to two good Lords and Patrons, it hath not cost me so much in Wood and Timber of all kinds, for the last ten years, as for Box for one twelve-moneth. Manufactures. Gardening. I mean not such which is only for pleasure (whereof Surrey hath more than a share with
other shires) to feast the sight and smell with flowers and walks, whilst the rest of the body is famished, but such as is for profit, which some seventy years since was first brought into this County, before which time great deficiency thereof in England. For we fetcht most of our Chries from Flanders, Apples from France, and hardly had a Messe of Rath-Ripe pease but from Holland, which were dainties for Ladies, they came so far and cost so dear. Since Gardening hath crept out of Holland to Sandwich in Kent and thence into this County, where though they have given six pounds an Aker and upward, they have made their Rent, lived comfortably and set many people on work. Oh, the incredible profit by digging of Ground! For though it is confess'd that the Plough beats the Spade out of distance for speed (almost as much as the Press beats the Pen) Yet what the spade wants in the Quantity of the Ground, it manureth, It recompenceth with the plenty of the Fruit it yeildeth; that, which is set, multiplying a hundred fold more than what is sown. 'Tis incredible how many poor people in London live thereon, so tat in some seasons, Gardens feed more poor people than the Field. It may be hoped that in process of time Anis-seeds, Cumin-seeds, Caraway-seeds, (yea Rice it self) with other Garden VVare now brought from beyond the seas, may hereafter grow in our Land, enough for it's use, espe∣cially if some ingenious Gentlemen would encourage the Industrious Gardiners by letting Ground on reasonable rates unto them▪. Tapestry. Pass we from Gardening a kind of Tapestry in Earth, to Tapestry, a kind of Gardening in Cloath. The making hereof was either unknown, or un-used in England, till about the end of the reign of King James, when he gave two thousand pounds to Sir Francis Crane, to build therewith an House at Morecleark for that purpose. Here they only imitated Old Patterns, until they had procured one Francis Klein a German to be their Designer. This F. Klein was born at Rostock, but bred in the Court of the King of Denmark at Coppenhagen. To improve his skill he travelled into Italy, and lived at Venice, and became first known unto Sir Henry VVootton, who was the English Lieger there. Indeed there is a stiff contest betwixt the Dutch and Italians which should exceed in this Mystery, and therefore Klein endeavoured to unite their perfections. After his return to Denmark he was invited thence into England by Prince Charles, a Virtuoso, Judicious, in all Liberal∣Mechanical Arts, which proceeded on due proportion. And though Klein chanced to come over in his absence, (being then in Spain) yet King James gave order for his entertainment allowing him liberal accommodations, and sent him back to the King of Denmark with a Letter, which for the form thereof, I conceive not unworthy to be inserted, trans-scribing it with my own hand, as followeth, out of a Copy compared with the Original, Jacobus Dei Gratia magnae Britanniae, Franciae & Hiberniae Rex, fidei Defensor, Serenissimo Principi ac Domino, Domino Christiano Quar∣to eadem gratia Daniae, Norvegiae, Vandalorum & Gothorum Regi, Duci Slesuici, Holsatiae, Stormariae, & Ditmarsiae, Comiti in Olden∣burg & Delmenhorsh, Fratri, Compatri, Consanguineo, & Affini nostro charissimo salutem & felicitatem Serenissimus Princeps Fra∣ter, Compater, Consanguineus & Affinis charissimus. CUm Franciscus Klein Pictor, qui litteras nostras fert, in animo habere indicasset, (si Vestra modo Serenitate volente id fieret) filio nostro Principi Walliae operam suam locare, accepimus be∣nevolè id a Vestra Serenitate fuisse concessum, data non solum illi quamprimum videretur discedendi venia, verùm etiam sumptibus ero∣gatis ad iter, quo nomine est quod Vestrae Serenitati gratias agamus. Et nos quidem certiores facti, de illius in Britanniam jam adventu,
quanquam absente filio nostro, satis illi interim de rebus omnibus pro∣speximus. Nunc vero negotiorum causâ in Daniam reversurus, tenetur ex pacto quam primum id commode poterit ad nos revenire; Quod ut ei per vestram Serenitatem facere liceat peramanter rogamus. Vestra interea omnia, fortunas, valetudinem, Imperium Deo commendantes Optimo Maximo. Datum è Regia nostra Albaula die Julii 8 Anno 1623. Serenitatis Vestrae Frater Amantissimus JACOBUS Rex. I perceive that Princes, when writing to Princes subscribe their names, and generally superscribe them to subjects. But the K. of Denmark detained him all that Summer, (none willingly part with a Jewel,) to perfect a piece which he had begun for him before. This ended, then over he comes, and settled with his Family in London, where he received a Gratuity of an hundred pounds per annum, well paid him, until the beginning of our Civil Wars. And now Fervet opus of Tapestry at More-clark, his designing being the soul, as the working is the body of that Mystery. Buildings. There are two most beautiful Palaces in this County, both built by Kings. First Richmond by King Henry the Seventh, most pleasantly seated on the Thames. A building much beholding to Mr. Speed, representing it in his Map of this County. Otherwise (being now plucked down) the form and fashion thereof had for the future been for∣gotten. None-such the other, built by King Henry the Eighth, whereof our English Camden in the description of Surrey. Antiquary hath given such large commendations. Indeed what Sebastianus Cerlius, most skilful in building, spake of the Pantheon at Rome, may be applyed to this Pile, that it is Ultimum exmplar consummatae Architecturae. But grant it a Non-such for building (on which account this and Windsor Castle are onely taken notice of in the description of Sebastian Braune) yet in point of clean and neat situation, it hath Some-such, not to say some Above-such. Witness Wimbleton in this County, a daring Structure, built by Sir Thomas Cecil, in eighty eight, when the Spanjards invaded, and (blessed be God) were conquered by our Nation. Medicinal Waters. Ebsham. They were found on this occasion some two and fourty years since (which falleth out to be 1618.) One Henry Wicker in a dry Summer and great want of water for Cattle, discovered in the Concave of a Horse or Neats-footing, some water standing. His su∣spicion that it was the stale of some Beast, was quickly confuted by the clearness thereof. With his Pad-staffe he did dig a square hole about it, and so departed. Returning the next day, with some difficulty he recovered the same place, (as not sufficiently particularized to his memory in so wide a Common) and found the hole, he had made, filled and running over with most clear water. Yet Cattle (though tempted with thirst) would not drink thereof, as having a Mineral tast therein. It is resolved that it runneth through some veins of Alume, and at first was only used outwardly for the healing of Sores. Indeed simple wounds have been soundly and sud∣denly cured therewith, which is imputed to the Abstersiveness of this Water, keeping a wound clean, till the Balsome of Nature doth recover it. Since it hath been inwardly taken, and (if the Inhabitants may be believed) diseases have here met with their Cure, though they came from contrary causes. Their convenient distance from London addeth to the Reputation of these Waters, and no wonder if Citizens comming thither, from the worst of smoakes into the best of Airs, find in thselves a perfective alteration.
The Wonders. There is a River in this County which at a place called the Swallow, sinketh unto the Earth and surgeth again some two miles off nigh Letherhead, so that it runneth (not in an intire stream but) as it can find and force its own passage the interjacent distance under the Earth. I listen not to the Country people telling it was experimented by a Goose which was put in, and came out again with life (though without feathers;) But hearken seriously to those who judiciously impute the sudden subdency of the Earth in the in∣terstice aforesaid to some underground hollowness made by that water in the passage thereof. This River is more properly termed Mole, then that in Spain is on the like occasion called Anas, that is, a Ducke or Drake. For Moles (as our Surrey-Riv▪er) work under ground, whilst Ducks (which Anas doth not) dive under water. So that the River Alpheus may more properly be intituled Anas, if it be true what is Virgil. . 3. reported thereof; that, spring∣ing in Peloponesus, it runneth under the Sea and riseth up again in Sicily. Nor may we forget a Vault (wherein the finest sand I ever saw) nigh Rygate, capable conveniently to receive five hundred Men, which subterranean-Castle in ancient time was the Receptacle of some great Person, having several Rooms therein. If it be meerly Natural i doth curiously imitate Art▪ if purely Artificial, it doth most lively simulate Nature. Proverbs. The vale of Holms-dale, Never won, ne ever shall. This proverbial Ryme hath one part of History, the other, of Prophecy therein; and if on examination, we find the first to be true, we may believe the other the better. Holms-dale lieth partly in this Shire, and partly in Kent. And indeed hath been happy in this respect, that several battles being fought therein and thereabouts, betwixt our Saxon Kings (the true owners of the Land) and the Danes, the former proved victorious. Thus was not Holms-dale won pro una & altera & tertia vice. But I.hope I may humbly mind the men of Holms-dale that when King William the Con∣queror had vanquished King Harold at Battail in Sussex, he marched with his Army dire∣ctly to London through the very middle and bowels of Holms-dale, ▪and was it not Won at that time? However, if this Vale hath not been Won hitherto, I wish and hope it never may be hereafter, by a Forreign-Nation invading it. Princes. HENRY eldest son of K. Henry the Eighth and Queen Katharie Dowager, was born at Speeds Chro. pag. 789. Richmond in this County, Anno Domini 1509. on the first of January. As his Parents were right glad for this Newyears-gift of Heavens sending, so the greater their grief when within two moneths he was taken away again. The untimely death of this Prince, as also of another son by the same Queen (which lived not to be Christ'ned) was alleaged by King Henry the Eighth in the publick Court held in Black-Friars, London, about his Divorce; as a punishment of God upon him, for begetting them on the Body of his Brothers wife. This short-liv'd Prince Henry was buried in Westminster the twenty-third of February. HENRY of OATLANDS, (so I have heard him called in his Cradle) fourth and youngest son of King Charles the First and Queen Mary, was born at Oatlands in this County Anno 1640. This I thought fit to observe both because I find St. James's by some mistaken for the place of his Birth, and because that house wherein he was born is buried in effect, I mean taken down to the ground. He was commonly called Duke of Glocester by a Court Prolepsis (from the King, manifesting his intentions in due time to make him so) before any Solemn Creation. Greatness being his only guilt, that he was the son of a good King (which many men would wish, and no child could help.) The then present Power, more of coveteousness than kindness (unwilling to maintain him either like or unlike the son of his Father) permitted him to depart the Land, with scarce tolerable Accommodations and the promise of a [never-performed] Pension; for his future Support. A passage, I meet with in my worthy Dr. Hylyn in his life and reign of King  pag. 17. Friend concerning this Duke, deserveth to be written in letters of Gold.
In the year 1654, almost as soon as his two Elder Brethren had removed themselves into Flanders, he found a strong practise in some of the Queens Court to seduce him to the Church of Rome, whose temptations he resisted beyond his years, and thereupon was sent for by them into Flanders. He had a great appetite to Learning and a quick digestion, able to take as much as his Tutors could teach him. He fluently could speak many, understood more Modern Tongues. He was able to express himself in matters of importance presently, properly, solidly, to the admiration of such who trebled his Age. Judicious his Curiosity to inquire into Navigation, and other Mathematical Mysteries. His Courtesie set a lustre on all, and commanded mens Affections to love him. His life may be said to have been All in the night of affliction, rising by his Birth a little be∣fore the setting of his Fathers, and setting by his Death a little after the rising of his Brothers peaceable Reign. It seems Providence, to prevent Excess, thought fit to temper the ge∣neral mirth of England with some mourning. With his Name-sake Prince Henry he com∣pleated not twenty years, and what was said of the Sir Francis Nethersole in his Fu, Orat. on Prince Henry, pag. 16. Unkle, was as true of the Nephew: Fatuos a morte defendit ipsa insulsitas; si cui plus caeteris aliquantulum salis insit (quod mi∣remini) statim putrescit. He deceased at Whitehall on Thursday the 13th. of September 1660, and was buried (though privately) solemnly, Veris & spirantibus lacrymis, in the Chappel of King Henry the Seventh. Martyrs. I meet with few (if any) in this County, being part of the Diocess of Politick Gar∣diner. The Fable is well known of an Ape, which having a mind to a Chest-nut lying in the fire, made the foot of a Spannel to be his tongs, by the proxy whereof he got out the Nut for himself. Such the subtlety of Gardiner, who minding to murther any poor Pro∣testant, and willing to save himself from the scorching of general hatred, would put such a person into the fire by the hand of Bonner, by whom he was sent for up to London and there destroyed. Confessors. ELEANOR COBHAM daughter to the Lord Cobham of Sterborough-Castle in this County, was afterwards married unto Humphrey Plantaginet, Duke of Glocester. This is she who, when alive, was so persecuted for being a Wickliffie and for many hainous crimes charged upon her. And since her memory hangs still on the file betwixt Confessor and Malefactor. But I believe that the voluminous paines of Mr. Fox in vindicating her in∣nocency against the Cavils of Alane Cope and others, have so satisfied all indifferent people that they will not grudg her position under this Title. Her troubles happened under King Henry the Sixth, Anno Domini 14... Prelates. NICHOLAS of FERNHAM, or, de Fileceto, was born at Fernham in this County, and bred a Physician in Oxford. Now our Nation esteemeth Physicians, little Physick, little worth, except far fetcht from foreign parts. Wherefore this Nicholas to acquire more skill and repute to himself, travelled beyond the Seas. First he fixed at Paris, and there gained great esteem▪ . Paris in anno 1. 29. accounted Famosus Anglicus. Here he continued until that ni∣versity was in effect dissolved, thorough the discords betwixt the Clergy and the Citizens. Hence he removed, and for some years lived in Bononia. Returning home his fame was so great, that he became Bale de script. Bit. pag. 293. Physician to King Henry the Third. The Vivacity and health of this Patient (who reigned longer than most men live) was an effect of his care. Great were the gits the King conferred upon him, and at last made him Bishop of Chester. Wonder not, that a Physician should prove a Prelate, seeing this Fernham was a general Scholar. Besides, since the Reformation, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, we had J. Coldwel, Doctor of Physick, a Bishop of Sarum. After the Resignation of Chester he ac∣cepted of the Bishoprick of Durham. This also he surrendred, (after he had sitten nine years in that See) reserving only three Isackson's Chron. Mannors for his maintenance. He wrote many Books, much esteemed in that Age, of the practice in Bale ut sup. Thysick and use of Herbs, and died in a private life 1257.
WALTER de MERTON was born at Merton in this County, and in the reign of King Henry the Third, when Chancellors were chequered in and out, three times he discharged that Office. 1 Anno 1260 placed in by the King, displac'd by the Barons, to make room for Nicholas of Ely. 2 Anno 1261. when the King (counting it no Equity or Conscience, that his Lords should obtrude a Chancellor on him) restored him to his place, continuing therein some three years. 3 Anno 1273. when he was replaced in that Office for a short time. He was also preferred Bishop of Rochester, that a rich Prelate might maintain a poor Bishoprick. He founded Merton-Colledge in Oxford, which hath produced more famous School-men, than all England (I had almost said Europe) besides. He died in the year 1277, in the fifth of King Edward the First. THOMAS CRANLEY was in all probability born at, and named from Cranley (in Blackheath Hundred) in this County. It confirmeth the conjecture, because I can not find any other Village so named in all England. Bred he was in Oxford, and became the first Warden of New New-Coll. Register anno 1380. Colledge, thence preferred Arch-bishop of Dublin in Ireland. Thither he went over 1398, accompanying Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey and Lieutenant of Ireland, and in that Kingdom our Cranley was made by King Henry the Fourth Chancellour and by King Henry the Fifth Chief Justice thereof. It seems, he finding the Irish possessed with a rebellious humour, bemoaned himself to the King in a terse Poem of 106 Ver∣ses, which Leland perused with much pleasure and delight. Were he but half so good, as some make him, he was to be admired. Such a Case, and such a Jewel, such a presence and a Prelate clear in Complexion, proper in Stature, bountiful in House-keeping and House-repairing, a great Clerk, deep Divine, and excellent Preacher. Thus far we have gone along very willingly with our . Marlebur∣gensis of the Witers of Ie∣land. Author, but now leave him to go alone by himself, unwilling to follow him any farther for fear of a tang of Blasphemy, when bespeaking him, Thou art fairer than the children of men, full of grace are thy lips, &c. Anno 1417 he returned into England being fourscore years old, sickned and died at Faringdon, and lieth buried in New-Colledge Chappel, and not in Dublin, as I. Bale & J. Pit. some have re∣lated. NICHOLAS WEST was born at Mr. Hatchers Manuscript of the Fellows of Kings Cll. Putney in this County, bred first at Eaton, then at Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, where (when a youth) he was a Rakel in grain. For, something crossing him in the Colledge, he could find no other way to work his Revenge than by secret setting on fire the Masters lodgings, part whereof he burnt to the ground. Immediately after this Incendiary (and was it not high time for him?) left the Col∣ledge, and this little Herosratus lived for a time in the Country, debauched enough for his conversation. But they go far who turn not again. And in him the Proverb was verified, Naughty Boyes sometimes make good Men, he seasonably retrenched his wildness, turn'd hard Student, became an eminent Scholar and most able States-man, and after smaller promotions was at last made Bishop of Ely, and often employed in forreign Embassies. And now, hath it been possible, he would have quenched the fire he kindled in the Colledge with his own tears, and in expression of his penitence became a worthy Benefactor to the house, and re-built the masters Lodgings firm and fair from the ground. No Bishop of England was better attended with Menial Servants, or kept a more bountiful house, which made his death so much lamented, Anno Dom. 1533. Since the Reformation. JOHN PARKURST was born at Bale de scr. Brit. and d∣win in the Bihops  No. wich. Gilford in this County, bred first in Magdalen then in Merton-Colledge in Oxford. Here it was no small part of praise, that he was Tutor, yea Mecenas, to John Jewel. After his discontinuance returning to Oxford, it was no small comfort unto him to hear his Pupil read his Learned humanity-Lectures to the Somato Christians, (Reader I coyn not the word my self, but have took it in Payment from a good D.  in the  lie of Jewe pa. 26. hand) that is, to those of Corpus Chrisi Colledge, to which house then Jwel was removed. Hereupon Mr. Parkhurst made this Distich;
Olim discipulus mihi chare Juelle, fuisti Nunc ero discipulus te renuente tuus. Dear Jewel, Scholar once thou wast to me, Now gainst thy will I Scholar turn to thee. Indeed he was as good a Poet as any in that Age, and delighted to be an Anti∣Epigrammatist to John See Fox his Acts and mon. pag. 1471. VVhite Bishop of VVinchester, whom in my opinion he far surpassed both in Phrase and fancy. Mr. Parkhurst, when leaving Oxford, was presented Parson, shall I say, or Bishop of Cleve in Glocester-shire; as which may seem rather a Diocess than a Parish for the rich Revenue thereof. But let none envy Beneficium opimum beneficiario optimo, A good living to an incum∣bent who will do good therewith. He laid himself out in works of Charity and Hospitality. He used to examine the Dr. Humphry in the Latin life of Jewel pag. 30. Pockets of such Oxford Scholars as repaired unto him, and alwayes recruited them with necessaries, so that such who came to him with heavy hearts and light purses, departed from him with light hearts and heavy purses. But see a sudden alteration. King Edward the Sixth dies, and then he, who formerly entertained others, had not a house to hide himself in. Parkhurst is forced to post speedily and secretly beyond the Seas, where he remained all the reign of Queen Mary, and pro∣viding for his return in the First of Queen Elizabeth, was robbed of that little he had, by some Searchers appointed for that purpose. Were not these Thieves themselves robbed, I mean of their expectation, who hoped to enrich themselves by Pillaging an Exile and a Poet? It grieved him most of all that he lost the fair Idem pag. 99. Copy of his Epi∣grams, though afterwards with much ado he recovered them from his foul papers. These at last he put in print Et juvenilem  senex edidit, without any trespass on his gravity, such his Poems being so witty that a young man, so harmless that an old man need not be of them ashamed. Being returned into England he was by Queen Elizabeth preferred to the Bishoprick of Norwich, and was consecrated B. Godwin in his Bishops of Norwich. Sept. the 1, 1560. 14 years he sate in that See, and died 1574. THOMAS RAVIS was born of worthy Parentage at So expressed in his Epitaph on his monu∣ment in St. Pauls. Maulden in this County, bred in Christ-Church in Oxford, whereof he was Dean, and of which University he was twice Vice-Chancellor. Afterwards, when many suitors greedily sought the Bishoprick of Glocester then vacant, the Lords of the Councel *requested Doct. Ravis to accept thereof. As he was not very willing to go hither, so (after his three years abode there) those of Glocester were unwilling he should go thence, who in so short a time had gained the good liking of all sorts, that some who could scant brook the name of Bishop were Sir J. Har∣rington in his Additional supply to B. Godwins Ca∣talogue of Bishop pa. 32. content to give (or rather to pay) him a good Report. Anno 1607 he was removed to London, and there B. Godwin in his Bishops of London. died on the 14th. of December 1609. and lieth buried under a fair Tomb in the wall at the upper end of the North-part of his Cathedral. ROBERT ABBOT D. D. was born at Guilford in this County, bred in  Colledge in Oxford, whereof he became Principal, and Kings Professor of Divinity in that University. What is said of the French, so graceful is their Garbe, that they make any kind of Cloathes become themselves, so general was his Learning, he made any liberal imployment beseem him, Reading, VVriting, Preaching, Opposing, Answering, and Modera∣ting, who could dis-intangle Truth though complicated with errours on all sides. He so routed the reasons of Bellarmin, the Romish Champion, that he never could rally them again. Yet Preferment (which is ordered in Heaven) came down very slowly on this Doctor, whereof several Reasons are assigned, 1 His Humility affected no high Promotion. 2 His Foes traduced him for a Puritan, who indeed was a right godly Man and cor∣diat to the Discipline, as Doctrine of the Church of England. 3 His Friends were loath to adorn the Church with the spoil of the University and marre a Professor to make a Bishop. However preferment at last found him out, when he was consecrated B. of Salisbury, Decemb. 3. 1615. Herein he equaled the felicity of Suffridus B. of Chichester, that being him∣self a Bishop he saw his brother George at the same time Archbishop of Canterbury. Of these two, George was the more plausible Preacher, Robert the greater Scholar; George the abler States-man; Robert the deeper Divine; Gravity did frown in George and smile in Robert. But alas! he was hardly warm in his Se, before cold in his Coffin, being one of the ive Bishops, which Salisbury saw in six years. His death happened Anno 1617.
GEORGE ABBOT was born at Guilford in this County, being one of that happy Ternion of Brothers, whereof two eminent Prelats, the third, Lord Mayor of London. He was bred in Oxford, wherein he became Head of University-Colledge; a pious man, and most excellent Preacher as his Lectures on Jonah do declare. He did first creep, then run, then fly into preferment, or rather preferment did fly upon him without his expectation. He was never incumbent on any Living with cure of soules, but was mounted from a Lecturer to a Dignitary, so that he knew well what belong'd to the stipend and benevolence of the one, and the dividend of the other, but was utterly un∣acquainted with the taking of Tithes, with the many troubles attending it, together with the causeless molestations which Persons Presented meet with in their respective Pa∣rishes. And because it is hard for one to have a Fellow-suffering of that, whereof he never had a suffering, this (say some) was the cause that he was so harsh to Ministers when brought before him. Being Chaplain to the Earl of Dunbar then Omni-prevalent with King James, he was un∣expectedly preferred Archbishop of Canterbury, being of a more fatherly presence than those who might almost have been his Fathers for age in the Church of England. I find two things much charg'd on his memory: First, that in his house he respected his Se∣cretary above his Chaplains, and out of it alwayes honoured Cloaks above Cassocks, Lay above Clergie-men. Secondly, that he connived at the spreading of non-conformity, in so much that I read in a modern Author, Had Bishop The Obser∣vator rescued, pag. 272. Laud succeeded Bancroft and the project of Conformity been followed with∣out interruption, there is little question to be made, but that our Jerusalem (by this time) might have been a City at unity in it self. Yet are there some of Archbishop Abbot his relations, who (as I am informed) will undertake to defend him, that he was in no degree guilty of these crimes laid to his charge. This Archbishop was much humbled with a casual homicide of a keeper of the Lord Zouch's in Bramzel-Park, though soon after he was solemnly quitted from any irregularity thereby. In the reign of King Charles he was sequestred from his Jurisdiction; say some, on the old account of that homicide, though others say, for refusing to Licence a Sermon of Dr. Sibthorps. Yet there is not an Express of either in the Instrument of Sequestration, the Commission only saying in the general, That the said Archbishop could not at that pre∣sent in his own person, attend those services, which were otherwise proper for his cognizance and Jurisdiction. For my own part I have cause to believe that as Vulnus semel sanatum novo vulnere re∣crudescit, so his former obnoxiousness for that casualty was renewed on the occasion of his refusal to Licence that Sermon with some other of his Court-un-compliances. This Archbishop died Anno Dom. 1633. having erected a large Hospital with liberal main∣tenance at Guildford the place of his nativity. RICHARD CORBET D. D. was born at Ewel in this County, and from a Student in, became Dean of, Christ-Church, then Bishop of Oxford. An high VVit, and most ex∣cellent Poet, of a courteous carriage and no destructive nature to any who offended him, counting himself plentifully repaired with a jest upon him. He afterwards was advan∣ced Bishop of Norwich, where he died Anno Dom. 1635. States-men. THOMAS CROMWEL was born at Putney in this County, of whom I have given measure pressed down and running over in my Church-History. WILLIAM HOWARD, son to Thomas Howard, second of that Surname, Duke of Norhfolk, was by Queen Mary created Baron of Effingham in this County, and by her made Lord Admiral of England, which place he discharged with credit. I find, he was one of the first Hackluyt in his Sea-voya∣ges, in his E∣pistle Dedica∣tory. Favourers and Furtherers with his purse and countenance of the strange and wonderful discovery of Russia. He died Anno Domini. 154.. CHARLES HOWARD, son to the Lord William aforesaid, succeeded him (though not immediately) in the Admiralty. An hearty Gentleman, and cordial to his Sove∣reign, of a most proper person, one reason why Queen Elizabeth (who though she did not value a Jewel by, valued it the more for, a fair Case) reflected so much upon him. The
first evidence he gave of his prowes was,Idm ut prius. when the Emperors sister the Spouse of Spain with a Fleer of 130 Sailes, stoutly and proudly passed the narrow Seas, his Lordship ac∣companied with ten ships onely of Her Majesties Navy Royal environed their Fleet in a most strange and warlike sort, enforced them to stoop gallant, and to vail their Bonnets for the Queen of England. His service in the eighty eighth is notoriously known, when at the first news of the Spaniards approach, he towed at a cable with hisCamd. Eliz. in 88. own hands to draw out the harbour∣bound-ships into the Sea. I dare boldly say, he drew more though not by his person by his presence and example, than any ten in the place. True it is, he was no deep Sea-man (not to be expected from one of his Extraction) but had skill enough to know those who had more skill than himself, and to follow their instructions, and would not sterve the Queens service by feeding his own sturdy wilfulness, but was ruled by the experien∣ced in Sea-matters, the Queen having a Navy of Oak, and an Admiral of Osier. His last eminent service was, when he was Commander of the Sea-(as Essex of the Land-) forces at the taking of Cadiz, for which he was made Earl of Nottingham the last of the Queens creation. His place was of great profit (Prizes being so frequent in that age) though great his necessary, and vast his voluntary expences, keeping (as I have read) seven standing Houses at the same time, at London, Rigate, Effingham, Blechenley, &c. so that the wonder is not great if he died not very wealthy. He lived to be very aged, who wrote Man (if not married) in the first of Q. Elizabeth, being an invited guest at the solemn Consecration of Matthew Parker at Lambeth, and many years after by his testimonyMason de Ministrio An∣glicano. confuted those lewd and loud lies, which the Papists tell of the Naggs-head in Cheap-side. He resigned his Admiralty in the reign of King James, to the Duke of Buckingham, and died towards the later end of the reign of the King afore-said. Sea-men. Sir ROBERT DUDLEY Knight, son to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester by Douglas Shefeld (whether his Mistris or Wife, God knoweth, many men being inclinable charitably to believe the later) was born atMr▪ Dugdale in his Illustra∣tions of War∣wick-shire, title Kenel∣worth-Castle▪ Shene in this County, and bred by his mo∣ther (out of his Fathers reach) at Offington in Sussex. He afterwards became a most com∣pleat Gentleman in all suteable accomplishments, endeavoring in the reign of King James to prove his legitimacy, and meeting with much opposition from the Court in distast he left his Land, and went over into Italy. But Worth is ever at home and carrieth its own welcome along with it. He became a Favorite to the Duke of Florence, who highly reflected on his Abilities, and used his directions in all his Buildings. At this time Ligorn from a Child started a Man without ever being a Youth, and of a small Town grew a great City on a sudden, and is much beholding to this Sir Robert for its fairness and firmness as chief contriver of both. But by this time his Adversaries in England had procured him to be call'd home by a special Privy Seal which he refused to obey, and thereupon all his Lands in England was seised on by the King, by the Statute of Fugitives. These his losses doubled the love of the Duke of Florence unto him. And indeed Sir Robert was a much meriting person on many accounts, being an Excellent 1 Mathematician, especially for the practical part thereof in Archite∣cture. 2 Phisician, his Catholicon at this day finding good esteem amongst those of that Faculty. 3 Navigator, especially in the Western Seas. Indeed long before his leaving of England whilst as yet he was Rectus in Curia, well esteemed in Queen Elizabeths Court, he sailed with three small Ships to the Isle of Trine∣dad, in which Voyage he sunk and tookHackyl's voyages, se∣cond Part, pag. 574. nine Spanish ships, whereof one an Armada of 600 Tunn. It must not be forgotten how he was so acceptable to Ferdinand the Second Emperor of Germany, that by his Letters Patents bearing date at Vienna, March the 9, 1620, he con∣ferred
on him and his Heirs the Title of a Duke of the Sacred Empire. Understand it a Title at large (as that of Count Arundels) without the Assignation of any proper place unto him. How long he survived this Honour it is to me unknown. Writers. NICHOLAS OCKHAM was bred a Franciscan in Oxford, and became the eighteenh publick Lecturer of his Convent in that University. He is highly praised by the Writers of his own Order for his Learning, whom I do believe, notwithstanding BaleDe scipt. Brit. ceur. 5. num. 17. writeth so btterly against him. He flourished Anno 1320. WILLIAM OCKHAM was born in thisCamd. Brit. in this County. County, in a Village so called of Oakes; and indeed our William was all Heart of Oake, as soon will appear. He was first bred under John Scotus, and afterwards served him as Aristotle did his Ma∣ster Plato, disproving his Principles, and first setting on foot a new sort of Sophistry. Then it was hard to hear any thing in the Schooles for the high railing betwixt the REALS, headed by John Duns Scotus. NOMINALS fighting under their General Ockham. Neither of them conducing much to the advance of Religion. Our Ockham flushed with success against John Scotus, undertook another John of higher Power and Place, even Pope John the three-and-twentieth, and gave a mortal wound to his Temporal Power over Princes. He got a good Gardian, viz. Lewis of Bavaria the Em∣peror, whose Court was his Sanctuary, so that we may call him a School-man-Courtier. But he was excommunicated by the Pope, and the Masters of Paris condemned him for a Heretick, and burnt his Books. This I conceive was the cause, why Luther was so vers'd in his Works, which he had at his fingers ends, being the sole Schoolman in his Library, whom he esteemed. However, at last the Pope took Wit in his Anger finding it no policy to enrage so sharp a Pen, and though I find no Recantation or publick Submission of Ockam, yet he was restored to his state, and the repute of an Acute School-man. Now because he is generally complained of, for his Soul of opposition, (gain-saying what ever Scotus said) it will serve to close his Epitaph, what was made on a great Paradox-monger, possessed with the like contradicting spirit. Sed jam est mortuus, ut apparet, Quod si Viveret id negaret. But now he's dead, as plainly doth appear, Yet would denie it, were he living here. He flourished under King Edward the Third, and dying 1330 was buried atBale de scrip. Brit. centur. 5. num. 18▪ Monchen in Bavaria. JOHN HOLBROOK was (as Leland relates) a profound Philosopher and Mathe∣matician much esteemed with the English Nobility, for his rare accomplishments, and yet is his short Character blemished inDe script. Brit. cent. 7. num. 9. Bale with a double Ut fertur One relating to the Place of his Birth, yet so, as Surrey is assigned most probable. The other to the time wherein he flourished. The last is a wonder to me, that so exact a Critick, who had with great pains reduced the Tables of Alphonsus most artificially to Months,Idem Ibid. Dayes, and Hours, should have his own memory left at such a loss, as to the Timeing thereof; that Authors, (hopeless to hit the mark of the year) aim only at the Butt of the Age, and conjecture him to have been eminent in the fourteenth Century. GEORGE RIPLY was born, saith myCamd. Brit. in this County. Author, at Riply in this County. But on the serious debate thereof, he clearly appeareth a Native of York-shire, and therefore we remit the Reader to that County, where he shall find his large Character. Since the Reformation. HENRY HAMMOND D. D. was born at Chertsey in this County, his Father being Doctor of Physick, and Physician to King James. He was bred in Eaton-School, where
Mr. Bust (so skilful in reading other Boyes) could not spell his Nature, but being posed with the Riddle of his portentous Wit at last even left him to himself, which proved the best. Hence he became Fellow of Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford till preferred Canon of Christ-Church and Oratour of the niversity. He may be called an Angelical Doctor, as justly as he, who is generally so stiled. First, For his Countenance and Complexion, White and Ruddy; resembling the common portrai∣ctures of Cherubins. Secondly, His Sanctity, spending his life in Devotion. His eating and drinking were next to nothing, so exemplary his Abstinence; And he alwayes embraced a single life. Thirdly, Meekness. MichaelIude 9. durst not (the valour of an Arch-Angel is fright∣ed at a sin) bring a railing accusation against Saton: Herein only our Doctor was a Coward; he feared to revile any of an opposite Judgement. Fourthly, his Charity; He was the Tutelar Angel to keep many a poor Royalist from famishing, it being verily beleeved, that he yearly gave away more than two hundred pounds. Lastly, for his Knowledge; Such the Latitude of his Learning and Languages. As Di∣stillers extract Aqua Vitae, or Living Water, from the dregs of Dead Beer: So he from the rotten writings of the Rabbins drew many Observations to the advance of Christianity. He could turn his Plow-Shares and Pruning-Hooks into Swords and Spears in his Controver∣sial Treatises, and could again at pleasure convert his Swords and Spears into Plow-share and Pruning-Hooks in his Comments and Practical Cathechisme. He was well vers'd in all Modern Pamphlets touching Church-Discipline. When some of the Royal Disputants (in the Treaty at Uxbridge) in some sort did over-shoot their Adversa∣ries, this Doctor could lay his Arguments level against them, and discourse with the Par∣liament-Divines in their own Dialect. But alas! he was an Angelical man, no Angel; Witness his death of the Students disease, the Stone. He died at Westwood in Worcester-shire at the house of the Lady Packington; his PELLA, where he peaceably reposed himself whilst all our English Jerusalem was in Com∣bustion. One thousand pounds well nigh were due unto him at his death, yet there appeared neither specialty, nor any mans hnd amongst his Writings; so confident he was that his consciencious debtors would faithfully pay, what was freely lent them. By his Will he impowered Dr. Humphre Henchman (since Bishop of Sarum) his sole Executor to expend according to his discretion in the relief of poor people, not exceeding two hundred pounds. Let this his short Character be pitch'd up like a Tent for a time, to be taken down when a firmer Fabrick (which, as I am informed, a more able Pen is about) shall be erected to his memory. He died Anno Domini 1659. Romish Exile Writers. NICHOLAS SANDERS was born atRegister of New-Colledge, anno 1548. Charlewood in this County (where his Family still continueth worshipful) bred Bachelour of the Laws in New-Colledge. Going over beyond the seas, he was made D. D. at Rome, and afterwards Kings-Professor thereof at Lovain. Pity it was, he had not more honesty or less Learning, being Master of Art in malice, not hoping the whole body of his lies should be believed, but, being confident the least finger thereof finding credit could prove heavy enough to crush any innocence with posterity; presuming the rather to write passages without truth, because on a subject beyond memory. He thought it would much advantage his Cause, to call the Church of England Schis∣matick first in that his libellous Treatise. But what said St. Augustine in a Dispute with one of theCotra lite∣ras , lib. 2. cap. 8 tom. . Donatists? Urum schismatici nos simus an vos, non ego nec tu, sed Christus in∣terrogelur ut judicet Ecclesiam suam. Indeed the controversie consisting much in matter of fact, let Records and Histories be perused, and it will appear that our English Kings, after many intolerable provoca∣tions, and intrenchments on their Crown from the Church of Rome, at last (without the least invading of others) conserv'd their own right. Partly, as Supreme Princes calling together their Clergy, by their advice to reform the errours therein; partly to protect their subjects from being ruined, by the Canons and Constitutions of a foreign power. But this subject hath lately been so handled by that Learned Baronet Sir Roger Twysden,
that, as he hath exceeded former, he hath saved all future pains therein. To return to Sanders, it is observeable, that he who urfeited with falshoods, was famished for lack of food in Ireland. We must be sensible, but may not be censorious on such actions; such deserving to forfeit the eyes of their souls, who will not mark so remarkable a judge∣ment, which happened Anno Domini 1580. Benefactors to the Publick. I mee with none besides Bishop Meron (of whom I have spoken) eminent before the Reformation. Since it we find HENRY SMITH, who was born atSo testifieth his monument in the upper end of the Chancel of . Wandsworth in this County. Now, Reader, before I go any further, give me leave to premise and apply a passage in my apprehension not im∣proper in this place. Luther Commenting on those words Gen. 1. 21. And God created great Whales, rendereth this reason why the creation of Whale is specified by name; Ne territi magnitudine cre∣ ea spectra esse, Lest affrighted with their greatness we should believe them to be nly Visions or Fancies. Indeed many simple people who lived (where Luther did) in an In-land Country three hundred miles from the sea, might suspect that Whales (as reported with such vast dimentions) were rather  than Realities. In like manner being now to relate the Bounty of this Worthy Person, I am affraied that our Inidel Age will not give credit thereunto, as conceiving it rather a Romanza or Fiction than a thing really perform∣ed, because of the prodigious greatness thereof. The best is, there are thousands in this County can attest the truth herein. And such good deeds publickly done are a preg∣nant proof to convince all Denyers and Doubters thereof. This Henry Smith Esq. and Alderman of London gave to buy Lands for a perpetuity for the relief and setting the Poor to work. Croidon one thousand pounds. In Kingston one thousand pounds. Guilford one thousand pounds. Darking one thousand pounds In Farnham one thousand pounds Rigate one thousand pounds In Wandsworth to the Poor five hundred. Besides many other great and liberal legacies bequeathed to pious uses, which I hope by his Executors are as conscionably imployed, as by him they were charitably intended. He departed this life the 13th. of January 1627. in the seventy-ninth year of his Age, and lieth buried in the Chancel to Wandsworth. Memorable Persons. ELIZABETH WESTON. We must gain by degrees what knowledge we canR E M. get of this eminent Woman who no doubt was 1 Of Gentile Extraction because her Parents bestowed on her so liberal and costly Education. 2 A Virgin, because she wrote a book of Poetry called Parthnicon. 3 A great Scholar, because commended by two grand Criticks. 4 She must flourish by proportion of time about 1600. Hear what Janus Dousa saith of her, Angla vel Angelica es, vel prorsus es Angelus Si sexus vetat hoc▪ Angelus est animus. Joseph Scaliger praiseth her no less in prose, Parthenicon Elizabethae Westoniae, Virginis nobilissimae, Poetriae florentissimae, linguarum plurimarum peritissimae. And again speaking to her, Penè priùs mihi contigit admirari ingenium tuum quàm nosse. It seems her fame was more known in foreign parts than at home. And I am  that for the honour of her Sex and our Nation I can give no better account of her. However, that her memory may not be harbourless, I have lodged her in this County (where I find an Ancient and Worshipful Family of the Westons flourishing at Sutton) ready to remove her at the first information of the certain place of her Nativity.
Here we may see how capable the weaker Sex is of Learning if instructed therein. Indeed when a Learned Maid was presented to King James for an English rarity, because she could speak and write pure Latine, Greek and Hebrew, the King returned, But can she spin? However in persons of Birth and quality, Learning hath ever been beheld as a rare and commendable accomplishment. The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the 12 year of King Henry the Sixth, Anno Dom. 1433. Commissioners to take the Oaths. H. Bishop of Winchester Cardinal of England. Robert de Ponyges Chivaler. Joh. Fereby, one of the Knights of the Shire. Regin. Cobham, de Lingfeld, mil. Joh. Kigele de Walketon, mil. Hen. Norbury de Stokedeberō, m. Joh. Leboys de Farnham, mil. Joh. Weston de Papeworth, arm. Th. Winter shul de Wintershul, ar. Tho. Husele de Southwark, arm. Johan. Corue de Mercham Rob. Skirnde Kingeston Rob. Fitz-Robert de Bernas Joh. Gainsford de Crowherst, ar. Will. Uvedale de Tichsay arm. Nich. Carewe de Bedington. Joh. Ardern de Lye, armigeri. Rog. Elingbrig de Croydon, ar. Th. Codeington de Codington, a. Joh. Yerd de Chayham, arm. Will. Kygle de Waweton, arm. Joh. Burg de Waleton, armiger. Joh. Merston de Cobbesham, arm. Will. Otteworth de Parochia Sce∣mortle, armiger. Arth. Ormesby de Southwark, ar. Will. Weston de Okeham, arm. Thomae Stoughton Ade Lene Lord de Southwark, ar. Will. Godyng de eadem armig. Nich. Hogh, de eadem. Joh. Malton, de eadem. Joh. Godrick de Bermondsey, ar. Tho. Kenle de Southwark, arm. Rob. Stricklond de Walworth. Rich. Tyler de Southwark. Joh. Hanksmode, de eadem. Joh. Newedgate, de eadem, ar. Will Sidney de Cranle. Will. Newgate de eadem, arm. Hen. Snokeshul de eadem, ar. Joh. Burceste de Southwark, ar. Joh. Burdeux de West-Bench∣worth, armiger. David. Swan de Dorking, arm. Wil. Ashurst de East-Benchworth Tho. Ashurst de Dorking Rob. Atte Sonde de Dorking. Joh. Walleys, de eadem. Joh. Fontaines de Clopham, ar. Joh. Bitterlé de Wandesworth, ar. Radul. Wymbledon de Asshestede Ric. Parker de Byflete, armigeri. Tho. Neweton de Crockfeld, arm. Will. Norman de Lambehithe, ar. Joh Henham de Southwark, ar. Will. Arberton de Chamberwel. Nich. Randolf de Leddrede, ar. Tho. Grosham, de eadem. Joh. Exham de Ewel. Petri Swiftede Lambhith, Gent. Joh. Thorp de Thorp, armiger. Joh. Milton de Egham. Joh. Bowet de Bokham magna, ar. Laurent. Donne de Effingham. Tho. Slifeld de Bokham magna, a. Tho. Donne de Coneham. Joh. Donne de eadem. Will. Craulede Duntesfeld. Rob. Marche de eadem. Joh. Atte Lee de Adington. Johannis Leicestre de Kersalton. Johannis Drux de Ditton. Roberti Mildnale de Kingeston. Johannis Chinnore, de eadem Tho. Overton de Merton, arm. Will. Lovelase, de eadem. Tho. Hereward de Morwe. Walteri Broke, de eadem. Thomae Palshud, de eadem. Richardi Combe, de eadem. Richardi Eton, de eadem. Huzonis Ashbury, de eadem. Nich. Fitz-John, de eadem, ar. Thomae Bule de Wonersham, ar. Roberti Ntimber de VVatton Rob. Bronnesbury de Bermondesey Roberti Charingworth de Lam∣hihe Thomae Hering de Croydon. Richardi Ludlow de Hendle in Leheth. Henr. Coleman, de Farnham. VVillielmi Hayward, de eadem. Johannis Lilborn, de eadem. Johannis Redingher she de Craule VVillielmi Brigges de Sanderstede Richardi Lynde, de eadem. Thomae Best de Caterham. Thomae Basset de Cullesdon. Roberti Rokenham, de eadem. Richardi Colcoh, de eadem. Richardi Herteswode, de Ly. VVillielmi Rode de Guldeford. Richardi Atte Lee de Godeston. Roberti Dogge de Croyden. Jacobi Janyn, de eadem. Rich. Laurence de Chiding fold. Willielmi Hichecock de Alfold. Johannis Raynold de Dontesfold, Johannis Wadebroke de Wybryg. Richardi Tymme de Coneham. VValteri Atte Denne de Sutton. Johannis Charlewode. Henrici Aleyn de Merscham. Johannis Campton de Chayham. Johannis Asher de Godaming. VVill. Inningfeld de Lingefeld. Thomae Sandre de Cherlewode. Richardi Baker de Pekeham. Richardi Ode de Camerwel. Johannis Skinner de Reygate. Richardi Knight, de eadem. Stephani Balhorn de Dorking. Johannis Vincent de Maldon. Thomae Vincent de Coneham. Johannis Lake de Kingston. Thomae Broker de eadem. VVillielmi Stoley, de eadem. Johannis Lake, de eadem. VValteri VVoderove, de eadem. Thomae Settonde Ewel. Thomae Chetema de Ebbesham. Johannis Kighle de VVaweton, junior.
Rogeri Longland de Croyden. Richardi Hayward de Foting. Thomae Ingram de Shire. Johannis Frolbury, de eadem. Rberti Tome de VValton. Richardi Osteler de Coneham. Sheriffs of Surrey. Of both. Of Sussex. HENRI. II.     Anno     1 Robertus Belet   1 Hugo Wareluilla 2 Paganus   2 Magerus Maleuvenant 3 Paganus     4   4 Radulphus Picot 5 Paganus   5 Radulphus Picot 6   6 7 Paganus   7 Episc. Chichester. Hilarius 8 Paganus   8 Hilarius Episc. Chichester. 9 Paganus   9 Hen. Archi-diaconus 10 Gervasius Cornhil     10 Rogerus Hai   10 Rogerus Hai 11 Gervasius de Cornhil   11 Rogerus Hai   12 Roger. Hay   13 Gervasius de Cornhil   13 Rogerus Hai 14 Hugoni de Dour   14 Idem 15 Gerva. de Cornhil, for 14 years.   15 Idem     16 Reginaldus de Warrenn, for 7 years. 29 Idem &     29 Hen. de Cornhil, filius ejus   23 Rogerus filius Renfridi, for 11 years. 30 Henr. de Cornhil, for 4 years.       RICHARD. I.     Anno   1 Henricus de Cornhil   1 Philippus Ruffus 2 Idem   2 Philippus de Tresgar 3 Idem   3 Idem 4 Radul. de Cornhil   4 Johannes Marescal 5 Idem   5 Idem 6 Will. de St. Mar. Ecclesia.   6 Willielmus Mareshal 7 Idem   7 Willielmus Marescal 7 Willielmus Panus     7 Galfre. Peverel   7 Stephanus de Pountfold 8 Robertus de Turnham   8 Willielmus Marescal 8 Alanus de Withton   8 Stephanus de Poudfold 9 Robertus   9 Willielmus 9 Alanus   9 Stephanus 10 Willielmus Marescal   10 Mich. de Apletricham.   JOHAN. Rex.     Anno   1 Robertus de Turnham   1 Willielm. Marescal 1 Alanus de Wichenton   1 Mich. de Appeltricham 2 Johannes Chaper   2 Robertus de Turnham   3 Johannes Chaper     4 Williel. Marescal   5 Robertus Turnham   5 Mich. de Apletricham     5 Johannes Ferles.   6 Willielmus de Chaignes     6 Richardus de Maisi     6 Willielmus de St. Laudo     7 Idem     8 Willielmus de Cahaignes.  
Anno Anno Anno   9 Idem   10 Robertus de Beregefeld   10 Johannes filius Hugonis 11 Robertus de Milborn   11 Willielm. Briewre 12 Robertus de Beregefeld   12 Johannis filius Hugonis 13 Johanna filius Hugonis   13 Matth. filius Herbert 13 Robertus Beregefeld   13 Gilbertus de Barier 14 Gilbert. de Barrier   14 Matth. filius Herbert 15 Johannes filius Hugonis   15 Matth. filius Herbert 15 Robertus de Beregefeld   15 Gilbert. le Barrier 16 Gilbert. de Baryer   16 Matth. filius Herbert     17 Matth. filius Herbert 17 Reginald. de Cornhil   17 Gilbert. Barrier   HENR. III.     Anno   1   1 2 Gilbertus Barrarius   2 Matth. filius Herberti 3 Wil. de Warren C. Surr.   3 Gilbertus Barrarius 3 Willielmus de Mara     4 Wil. de Warrena C. Sur.   4 Matth. filius Herberti 4 Willielmus de Maram, for 6 years.   4 Gilbertus Barrarius, for 6 years. 10   10 Matth. filius Herberti 10   10 Herbert filius Walteri for 4 years. 11 Johannes Oracesdon     12 Johannes de Gatesden, for 4 years.   14     15 Robertus de Laudelawe 16   15 Henricus de Wintershul 17 Williemus Brunus   16 Idem 18 Idem   17 Petrus de Rival     18 Id. & Hen. de Cancel   19 Simon de Echingham     19 Joelus de Germano     20 Simon de Echingham     20 Henry de Bada     20 Johannes de Gatesden     20 Joel de Sancto German   21 Johannis de Gatesdon   21 Johann. de Gatesdon 21 Joel de Sancto Germano   21 Philip. de Crofts 22 Johannes de Gatesden   22 Idem 22 Nicholaus de Wancy   22 23   23 Johannes de Gatesden 24 Johannes de Gatesden   24 Johannes de Gatesden 24 Nicholaus de Wancy   24 Philippus de Crofts 25 Gregorius de Arsted   25 26 Idem   26 Philippus de Crofts   27 Radul. de Kaymes for 3 ye.     30 Rob. de Savage. for 4 years.     34 Nic. de Wancy, for 3 years     37     38 Will. & Mich. de Vere     39     40 Galfr. de Grues     41 Idem     42 Gerard. de Cuncton     43 David. de Jarpennil  
Anno Anno Anno   44 Johannes de Wanton     45 Idem   46 Rogerus de VVikes, for 6 years 46 VVillielmus de Lazouch, for 3 years. 46 Robertus Agwilon for 6 years.   52 Rogerus de Loges, for 3 years.   55 Matth. de Hasting   55 Bartholomeus de Hasting 56 Idem   56 Idem   EDW. I.     Anno     1 Matth. de Hastings     2 Idem     3 VVillielmus de Herne     4 Johannes VVanton, for 3 years.     7 Emerindus de Cancellis     8 Idem     9 Nicholaus de Gras, for 5 years.     14 Richardus de Pevensey     15 Idem     16 VVill. de Pageham, for 5 years.   17 Rogerus de Lukenor, for 4 years.       21 Robertus de Gla morgan for 6 years.     27 Joh. Albel, for 4 years.     31 VValter de Gedding     32 Idem     33 Robertus de le Knole' for 3 years.   Sheriffs of Surrey, and Sussex. EDW. II. Anno 1 Walter de Gedding Anno 2 VVillielmus de Henle & Robertus de Stangrave Anno 3 VVillielmus de Henle, & Robertus de Stangrave Anno 4 Idem Anno 5 VVillielmus de Henle Anno 6 VVillielmus de Henle & VVillielmus de Mere Anno 7 Petrus de Vienne Anno 8 Idem Anno 9 VVillielmus Merre Anno 10 VValterus le Gras Anno 11 VValterus le Gras, & Petrus de VVorldham Anno 12 Petrus de VVorldham, & Henricus Husey Anno 13 Idem Anno 14 Henricus Husey Anno 15 Nicholaus Gentil Anno 16 Anno 17 Petrus de VVorldham, & Andream Medested, for 3 years. EDW. III. Anno 1 Nicholaus Gentil Anno 2 Nicholaus Gentil, & Robertus de Stangrave, for 3 years. Anno 5 Johannes Dabnam Anno 6 VVillielmus Vaughan Anno 7 Idem Anno 8 Willielmus Vaughan, & & Joh. Dabnam, for 3 years. Anno 11 VVillielmus Vaughan Anno 12 Idem Anno 13 Godfridus de Hunston Anno 14 Wilielmus de Northo, & Godfridus de Henston Anno 15 Hugo. de Bowcy, & Willielmus de Northo Anno 16 Andreas Peverel, & Hugo. de Bowcy Anno 17 Idem Anno 18 VVilliemus de Northo Anno 19 Regind. de Forester for 3 years. Anno 22 Rogerus Daber Anno 23 Tho. Hoo, for 3 years Anno 26 Richardus de St. Oweyn Anno 27 Idem Anno 28 Simon de Codington Anno 29 Rogerus de Lukenor Anno 30 VVill. Northo Anno 31 Tho. de Hoo, for 3 years. Anno 34 Richardus de Hurst, for 3 years.
37 Simon de Codington 38 Ranul. Thurnburn 39. Johannes Wateys 40 Johannes Weyvile 41 Andreas Sackvile 42 dem 43 Ranul. Thurnburn 44 Idem 45 VVillielmus Neidegate 46 Roger. Dalingrugg 47 Nicholaus Wilcomb 48 Robertus de Loxele 49 Robertus Atte Hele 50 Johannes St. Clere 51 Johannes de Melburn. The Sheriffs of these two Counties, before King Edward the Second are in the Re∣cords so involved, complicated, perplexed, that it is a hard taske to untangle them, and assign, with the Sheriffs did severally, which joyntly belong unto them. Had the like difficulty presented it self in other united Shires, I suspect it would have deterred me from ever meddling with their Catalogue. Nor will we warrant, that we have done all right in so dare a subject, but submit our best endeavours to the censure and correction of the more Judicious. HENRY the II. 7 Sussex, HILARIUS Episcopus Chichester.] The King had just cause to confide in his loyalty and commit the Shire to his care. For, although I behold him as a French-man by birth▪ yet great alwayes was his loyalty to the King, whereof afterwards he gave a signal testimony. For, whereas all other Bishops assembled at the Council of Cla∣rendon, only assented to the Kings propositions with this limitation, Salvo ordine suo, this Hilarie absolutely and simply subscribed the same. The time of his Consecration, as also of his death is very uncertain. EDWARD the Third. 1 ANDREAS SACKVIL.] The Family of the Sackvils is as Ancient as any in England, taking their Name from Sackvil (some will have it Sicca Villa) a Town, and their Possession in Normandy. Before this time, we meet with many Eminent Persons of their Name and Ancestry. 1 Sir Robert Sackvil Knight, younger son ofOdeus Vi∣talis in his Norman Stor. Herbrann de Sackvil, was fixed in Eng∣land, and gave the Mannor of Wickham in Suffolk, to the Abbey of St. John de Ba∣ptist in Colchester, about the reign of William Rufus 2 Sir John de Sackvil his son, is by Matthew Page 262. Anno 1260. Paris, ranked amongst those Persons of Prime Quality, who in the reign of King John, were Assistants to the five and twenty Peers, appointed to see the Liberties of Charta Magna performed. 3 Richard de Sackvil, (as I have cause to beleive his son) was one of such Quality, that I find Hubertus de Anesty to hold two Fields in Anesty, and Little Both in Hartfordsh. Hormeed of the Honor of Richard Sackvil. Now the word Honor, (since appropriated to Princes Palaces) was in that Age attributed to none but Sr. H. Spel∣mans Glossa verbo Honor. the Patrimony of principal Ba∣rons. 4 Sir Jordan Sackvil, Grand-child to the former, was taken prisoner at the Battle of Emesham, in the Age of King Henry the Third, for siding with the Barons against him. 5 Andrew, his son and heir, being under Age, at his Fathers death, and the Kings Ward, was imprisoned in the Castle of Dover, Anno the third of Edward the First, and afterwards, by the special command of the said King, did marry Ermyntude an (I conceive a Spanish) Honourable Lady of the Houshold of Queen Elianor, Whereby he gained the Kings favour, and the greater part of his (formerly forfeited) Inheritance. I behold this Andrew Sackvil the Sheriff, as his son, Ancestor to the Truly Honourable Richard now Earl of Dorset.
Sheriffs. Name Place Armes. RICH. II.     Anno     1 Will. Percy   Or, a Lion Rampant, Azure. 2 Edw. Fitz-Herbert   Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Or. 3 Ioh. de Hadresham     4 Nich. Sleyfeld     5 Will. Percy ut prius   6 Will. Weston   Ermin, on a Chief Azu. 5 Bezants▪ 7 Will. Waleys     8 Robertus Nutborne     9 Richardus Hurst     10 Thomae Hardin     11 Idem     12 Edw. de t. Johan.   Argent, on a Chief Gules, 2 Mul∣lets, Or. 13 Rob. Atte-Mulle     14 Rob. de Echingham     15 Nicholaus Carew Beddingt Surrey. Or, 3 Lions Passant-gardant Sable armed and langued, Gules. 16 Thomae Jardin     17 Nicholaus Slyfeld     18 Edw. St. John ut prius   19 Ioh. Ashburnham Ashburn∣ham. Suss. Gules, a Fess betw. 6 Mullets, Ar. 20 Willielmus Fienes   Azure, 3 Lions Rampant, Or. 21 Iohannes Slerne     22 Willielmus Fienes ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Radu. Codington     2 Nicholaus Carew & ut prius   Iohannes Pelham Laughton. Azure, 3 Pelicans, Argent. 3 Ioh. Ashburnham ut prius   4 Robert. Atte-Mulle     5 Idem     6 Phil. St. Olee   Quarterly Or and Gules, a Bene Vayree. 7 Thomae Sackvile     8 Thomae Clipsham     9 VVillielmus Verd     10 Tho▪ Ashburnham ut prius   11 Ioh. Warne Campie     12 Ioh. VVaterton     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Iohan. Haysham     2 Ioh. Wintershul     3 Ioh. Clipsham     4 Ioh. Uvedale     5 Iohannes Weston ut prius   6 Iames Knotesford   Arg. 4 Fusile in Fesse Sable. 7 Iohannes Clipsham     8 Iohannes Hace     9 Ioh. Bolvey, & Iames Knotesford ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Rog. Fiennes, miles ut prius   2 Ioh. Wintershul     3 Ioan. Clipsham     4 Thomae Lewkenor   Azure, 3 Cheverons, Argent. 5 Iohan. Ferriby     6 Will. Warbleton     7 Ioh. Wintershul     8 Willielmus Uvedale ut prius   9 Willielmus Finch   Argent, a Cheveron between Griffins passant, Sable. 10 Th. Lewkenor, m. ut prius   11 Iohan. Andrne     12 Richardus Walle   , 3 Walnut-leaves Or, betwixt 2 Bendlets, Argent. 13 Rog Fiennes, mil. ut prius   14 Rich. Dalingrugg     15 Iohan. Fereby     16 homae Uvedal ut prius   17 Iames Fiennes ut prius   18 Rog. Lewkenor ut prius   19 Nicholaus Carew ut prius   20 VValt. Strickland     21 Ioh. Stanley   Arg. on a Bend Az. 3 Bucksheads cabossed, Or. 22 Ioh. Baskett, arm.   Azure, a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3 Leopards-heads, Or. 23 Nich. Carew ut prius   24 Nich. Husey     25 VVill. Belknpe     26 Robertus Radmill     27 Nich. Carew ut prius   28 Ioh. Pennycoke     29 Johan. Lewkenor ut prius   30 Thomae Yard     31 Rich. Fienes, mil. ut prius   32     33 Ioh. Knotesford ut prius   34 Tho Cobham, mil.   Gules, on a Cheveron Or, 3 Estoiles, Sable. 35 Nicholaus Husee ut prius   36 Tho. Basset     37 Thomae Tresham   Per Saltire Sable and Or, 6 tre∣foiles of the last. 38 Rob. Fienes, arm▪ ut prius   EDVV. IV.     Anno     1 Nich. Gainsford Crohurst Arg. a Chever. G. betwixt 3 Grey∣hounds Currant, Sable. 2 VValt. Denis     3 Idem     4 Tho. Goring, arm   Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Annulets, Gules. 5 Tho▪ Vvedale, m. ut prius   6 VVill. Cheney, ar.     7 Tho. Vaugham     8 Rog. Lewkenor, m. ut prius   9 Nich. Gainsford, a. ut prius   10 Rich. Lewkenor, a. ut prius   11 Th. t. Leger, arm. KENT Azure, Fretty Arg. a Chief, Or, 12 Ioh. Gainsford. ut prius   13 Nich. Gainsford ut prius   14 ho. Lewkenor, ar. ut prius   15 Tho. Echingham     6 Ioh. Wode. Ser, ar     17 Henr. Roos, mil.     18 VVill. VVeston ut priús   19 Tho. Combs, arm.     20 Ioh. Elringhton     21 Tho. Fienes ut prius   22 Ioh. Apseley, ar,   Barry of 6 Arg. and Gules, a Can∣ton, Ermin. RICH. III.     Anno     1 Hen. Roos, miles     2 Ioh. Dudley     3 Ioh▪ Norbury, mil.     Nich. Gainsford. ut prius   HEN. VII:     Anno     1 Nich. Gainsford ut priur   2 Tho. Combes, arm.     3 VVill. Merston     4 Rob. Morley   Sable, 3 Leopads Or, Flowry, Ar. 5 Ioh. Apseley, am ut prius   6 Rich. Lewkenor, ar. ut prius   7 Edw. Dawtree, arm   Az. 5 Fusiles in Fesse, Arg. 8 Ioh. Leigh, arm. Stockwel. G. a Crosse engrailed within a Bor∣der, Arg. 9 Ioh. Coke, armig.     10 Ioh. Apseley, arm. ut prius   11 Ric. Lewkenor, a. ut prius Sable, 3 Lions passant gardant inter 2 Bends Geweros, Arg. 12 Matth. Brown, ar. Beachworth   13 Rich. Sackvile, a. ut prius   14 Ioh. Coke, arm.     15 Tho. Ashburnhan ut prius   16 Ioh. Gainsford, ar. ut prius   17     18 Ioh. Apseley, arm ut prius   19 Rad. Shirley, ar.   Paly of 8 Or & Az a Canton Erm. 20 Rich. Sackvile, a ▪ut prius † G. A Lion ramp. Queve forhee, 21 Godr. †Oxenbrig,   Arg. within a Border V. charged an Entoire of 8 Escalops Or.
22 Will. Ashburnham ut prius   23 Tho. Morton, ar.   Quarterly, Gules and Erm. in the first and fourth, a Goats-head erased, Arg. 24 Tho. Ficnis. mil. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Leigh, armig. ut prius   2 Edw. Lewknor, ar. ut prius   3 Rog. Lewknor. mil. ut prius   4 God. Oxenbrigg, mi. ut prius   5 Rich. Shirley, ar. ut prius   6 Roger. Copley, ar.     7 Ioh. Leigh, mil. ut prius   8 VVill. Ashbuham ut prius   9 Ioh. Gainsford, m. ut pris   10 Rich. Carewe, ar. ut prius   11 God. Oxenbrigg, m. ut prius   12 Ioh. Scott, armig.   Arg. 3 Katharine wheels S. with in a Border engrailed, Gules. 13 Edw. Bray. miles.   rg. a Cheveron between 3 Eagles legs erazed, Sable. 14 Rich. Covert, ar. Slaugham Suff. Gules, a Fesse Erm. betwixt 3. Leopards, Or. 15 Will. Ashburnham ut prius   16 Tho. VVest, mil.   Arg. a Fesse Dancette, Sable. 17 Rich. Shirley, ar. ut prius   18 Ioh. Dawtree, mil. ut prius   19 Ioh. Sackvill, ar. ut prius   20 Rich. Belingham.   Arg▪ 3 Munters-horns stinged, Sable. 21 Rog. Copley, mil.     22 VVill. Goring, mil. ut prius   23 Rog. Lewkenor, m. ut prius   24 Christop. Moore, Looseley Az on a Cross Arg. 5 Martlets, S. 25 Ioh. Palmer, arm. Angmain. Or, 2 Barrs Gules, on each 3 tre∣foils Ar. in Chief a Grey-hound Currant Sable, collared of the first. 26 Rich. Belengham. ut prius   27 VVill. Goring, m. ut prius   28 Rich. Page, miles.     29 Nich. Gainsford. a. ut prius   30 Edw. Bray, miles. ut prius   31 Christop. Moor, m. ut prius   32 Ioh. Sackvile, arm. ut prius   33 Tho. Darell, arm.   Az. a Lion Rap. Or, Crowned Argent. 34 Rich. Belingham, a ut prius   35 Ioh. Palmer, arm, ut prius   36 Ioh. Thetcher, arm.     37 Ioh. Dawtree, mil. ut prius   38 Ioh. Sackvile, arm ut prius   EDVV. VI.     Anno     1 Thom Carden, mil.     2 Ioh. Scott, armig. ut prius   3 Nich. Pelham, mil. ut prius   4 VVill. Goring, m. ut prius   5 Rob. Oxenbrigg, . ut prius   6 Anthon. Brown, m. ut prius   Rex PHIL. & MAR. Reg     Anno     1 Tho. Saunders, mil. chartwood Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Bulls heads, Ag. 2 Ioh. Covert, arm. ut prius   3 VVill. Saunders, ar. ut prius   4 Edw. Gage, mil.   Gyronne of four, Az. and Arg a Saltire, Gules. 5 Ioh. Ashburnham. ut prius   6 VVill. Moore, arm. ut prius   Regin. ELIZ.     Anno     1 Tho. Palmer, mil. ut prius   2 Ioh. Colepeper, ar.   rg. a Bend engraild, Gules. 3 Joh. Stidolf, arm.   Arg. Or a Chief Sable, 2 Wolves heads Erased, Or. 4 Hen. Goring, arm. ut prius   5 Will. Gresham.     6 Rich. Covert, arm. ut prius   7 Antho. Pelham, ar▪ ut prius   8 Will. Dawtree, arm. ut prius   This year the 2 Counties were divided. Sheriffs of Surrey. alone. Name Place Amre. 9 Franc. Carew, ar. ut prius   10 Hen. Weon, mil. ut prius   11 Thom. Lifeld, ar. ut prius   12 Tho. Brown, arm. ut prius   This year the two Counties were again united under one Sheriff. Name Place Amre. 13 Ioh. Pelham, arm. ut prius   14 Tho▪ Palmer, mil. ut prius   15 Fran. Shirley, arm. ut prius   16 Ioh. Rede, arm. & Rich. Polsted.     17 Hen▪ Pelham. arm. ut prius   18 Will. Gresham, ar. ut prius   19 Tho. Shirley, mil▪ ut prius   20 Georg. Goring, ar. ut prius   21 Will. Moore, mil. ut prius   22 Will. Morley, arm. ut prius   23 Edw. Slifeld, arm.     24 Tho. Brown, mil. ut prius   25 Walt. Covert, arm. ut prius   26 Tho. Bishop, arm. Parham Argent, on a Bend cottised Gules (3 Bezauts. 27 Rich. Bostock, ar.   Sable a Fesse Humet Ag. 28 Nich. Parker, ar.     29 Rich. Brown, arm. ut prius   30 Ioh. Carrell, arm. Harting Argent, 3 Bars and as many Mart∣lets in Chief, Sable. 31 Thom. Pelham, a. ut prius   32 Hen. Pelham, arm. ut prius   33 Rob. Linsey, arm.   Or, an Eagle displayed Sable bea∣ked and membred Az. a Chief Varry. 34 Walt. Covert, mil. ut prius   35 Nich. Parker, mil.     36 Will. Gardeux, a.     37 Rich. Leech, arm.     38 Edm. Culpeper, a. ut prius   39 Georg. Moore, arm. ut prius   40 Jam. Colebrand, a. Botham Az. 3 Levels with Plummets, O. 41 Tho. Eversfeld, a. Den Erm. on a Bend S. 3 Mullets, O. 42 Edm. Boier, arm. Camber∣wel. Sur. O. a Bend varry betwixt 2 Cottises Gules- 43 Thom. Bishop, arm. ut prius   44 Ioh. Ashburnham. ut prius   45 Rob. Lynsey. ut prius   JAC. Rex.     Anno     1 Rob. Linsey, arm. ut prius   2 Hen. Goring, mil. ut prius   3 Edw. Culpeper, mil ut prius   4 Tho. Hoskings, mil.     5 Hen. Morley, arm. ut prius   6 Georg. Gunter, mil.   Sable, 3 Gantlets, within a Bor∣der, Or. 7 Thom. Hunt, miles     8 Ioh. Lountesford   Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Boares Or, Coupe Gules. 9 Edw. Bellingham prins   10 Wil. Wignall a▪ Tandrigde Sur. Azure, on a Cheveron Or, betwixt 3 Ostriges 3 Mullets, Gules.
11 Edw. Goring, arm. ut prius   12 Ioh. Willdigos, m.     13 Rola. Tropps, Mor & Ioh. Morgan, m.     14 Ioh. Shirley, mile▪ ut prius   15 Ioh. Middleton, a.     16 Ioh. Howland, mil. Shatham Arg. 2 Bars and 3 Lions Ramp. in Chief, Sable. 17 Nich. Eversfeld, a. ut prius   18 Rich. Michelborne     19 Franc. Leigh, mil. ut prius   20 Tho. Springet, m.     21 Ben. Pelham, mil. ut prius   22 Amb. Browne, arm. ut prius   CAROLUS Rex.     Anno     1 Edr. Alford, arm.   G. 6 Pears 3, 2, & 1, & a chief, O. 2 Tho. Bowyer, arm. Leghthorn Suss. Or, a Bend Vary betw. 2 Cotises, G 3 Edw. Jourden, arm. Gatwik S. an Eagle displaied betw. 2 Bend∣lets Ar. a Canton, sister Or. 4 Steph. Boord, mil.     5 Anth. May, armger.   G. a Fesse between 8 Billets, Or. 6 Will. Walter, mil. Wimbl Az. a Fesse indented Or, between 3 Eagles, Argent. 7     8 Ioh▪ Chapman, m.     9 Rich. Evelyn, arm. Wotton Az. a Gyphon passant & Chief, O. 10 Will▪ Culpeper, ar. ut prius   11 Will. Morley, mil. ut prius   When I look upon these two Counties, it puts me in mind of the Epigram in the Poet. Nec cum te possum vivere, nec sine te. Neither with thee can I well, Nor without thee can I dwell. For these two Shires of Surrey and Sussex generally had distinct Sheriffs until the Reign of King Edward the Second, when they were united under One. Then again divided in the ninth of Queen Elizabeth; united in the thirteenth, divided again in the twelfth of King Charles, and so remain at this day, but how long this condition will continue is to me unknown, seeing neither conjunctim, nor divisim, they seem very well satisfied. Sheriffs of this Connty alone. Name Place Amre. King CHARLES     Anno     12 Antho. Vincent, mil. Stock'd Azure, 3 Quarterfoils, Argent. 13 Abernn   14 Iohan Gresham, mil     15 Ioh. Howland, mil. ut prius   16 Tho. Smith, armig.     17 Georg. Price, arm.     18     19 Edru. Jorden, arm. ut prius   20 Mathe. Brand, mi▪     21     22 Will. VVymond∣sal, mil. Putnie.   RICHARD the Second. 19 JOHN ASHBURNHAM.] My poor and plain Pen is willing, though unable, to add any lustre to this Family of stupendious Antiquity. The Chief of this name was High Sheriffe of Sussex and Surrey, Anno 1066. when WILLIAM Duke of Normandy invaded England, to whom King Harauld wrote, to assemble the Posse Comitatunm, to make effectuall resistance against that Foreigner. The Original hereof, an Honourable Heir-Loome (worth as much as the Owners thereof would value it at) was lately in the Possession of this Family. A Family wherein the Eminency hath equalled the Antiquity thereof, having been Barons of England in the Reign of King Henry the Third. The Last, Sr. John Ashburnham, of Ashburnham, married Elizabeth Beaumont, Daughter of Sr. Tho. Beaumont (afterwards by especiall Grace created Viscountess Crawmount in Scotland) and bare unto him two Sons, John of the Bed-chamber to King CHARLES the first and second, and William Cofferer to his Majestie, who will build their Name a Story Higher to Posterity. HENRY the Sixth. 29. JOHN LEWKENOR.] He was afterwards knighted by this King, and was a Cordial Zealote for the Lancastrian Title, at last paying dear for his Affections thereunto. For in the Raign of King Edward the Fourth, Anno 1471. He, with three Thousand others was slain in the Battle at Teuksbury, valiantly fighting under Prince Edward, Son to King Henry the sixth. HENRY the Seventh. 12 MATTHEW BROWN, Armiger.] I would be highly thankfull to him (Gratitude is the Gold wherewith Schollars honestly discharge their Debts in this kinde) who would inform me how Sr. Anthony Brown (a younger Branch of this Family) stood related to this Sheriffe. I mean, that Sr. Anthony, Standard-bearer of England, second Husband to Lucy, fourth Daughter to John Nevell, Marquess Montacute, and Grandfather to Sr. Anthony Brown, whom Queen Mary created Viscount Montacute. He was a zealous Romanist, for which Queen Mary loved him much the more, and Queen Elizabeth no whit the less, trusting and employing him in Embassies of High Consequence, as knowing, he embraced his Religion, not out of politick Designe, but pure Devotion. He was
direct Ancestour to the Right Honourable the present Viscount Mountacute. This Viscount, is eminently but not formally a Baron of the Land, having a Place and Vote in Parliament, by an express clause in his Patent, but otherwise no particular Title of a Baron: This I observe, for the unparallel'd rarity thereof, and also to confute the peremptory Position of such, who maintain, that only actual Barons sit as Peers in Parliament. HENRY the Eighth. 10 NICHOLAS CAREW, Miles.] He was a jolly Gentleman, fit for the favour of King Henry the Eighth, who loved active Spirits, as could keep pace with him in all Atchievements, and made him Knight of the Garter, and Master of his Horse. This Sr. Nicholas built the fair House (or Palae rather) at Beddington in this County, which, by the advantage of the Water, is a Paradice of Pleasure. Tradition in this Family reporteth, how King HENRY, then at Bowles, gave this Knight opprobrious Language, betwixt jest and earnest, to which the other returned an Answer rather True than Discreet, as more consulting therein his own Animosity than Allegiance. The King, who in this kind would give and not take, being no Good Fellow in tart Repartees, was so highly offended thereat, that Sr. Nicholas fell from the top of his Favour, to the bottome of his Displeasure, and was bruised to Death thereby. This was the true Cause of his Execution, though in our Chronicles all is scored on his complying in a Plot with HENRY, Marquess of Exeter, and HENRY Lord Mountague. We must not forget, how in the Memory of our Fathers, the last of this Surname adopted his near Kinsman a Throck-morton to be his Heir, on condition to assume the Name and Armes of Crew. From him is lineally descended Sr. Nicholas Carew, Knight. who, I confidently hope, will continue and encrease the Honour of his Ancient Family. EDWARD the Sixth. 1 THOMAS CARDEN, Miles] Some five Years before, this Knight was improbable to be Sheriffe of this or any other County, when cunning Gardiner got him into his clutches within the compass of the six Articles, being with a Lady (and some others of the Kings Privy Chamber) indited for Heresie, and for aiding and abetting Anthony Persons, burnt at WINSOR, as is above Berksh. Title Martyr. mentioned. But King HENRY coming to the notice hereof, of his special Goodness, without the Fox Maryr. pag. 1221. suit of any man, defeated their Foes, preserved their Lives, and confirmed their Pardon. ELIZABETHA Regina. 20 GEORGE GORING.] He would do me an High Favour, who would satisfie me how Sr. George Goring, Knight (bred in Sydney Colledge in Cambridge, to which he was a Benefactor) referred in kindred to this present Sheriffe. This our Sr. George was by King Charles the first created Baron of Hurst Per-point in Sussex, and (after the death of his Mothers Brother, Edward Lord Denny) Earle of Norwich. He is a Phaenix, sole and single by himself, [vestigia sola retrorsum] the onely Instance in a Person of Honour, who found Pardon for no Offence, his Loyalty to his Soveraign. Afterwards going beyond the Seas, He was happily instrumental in advancing the Peace betwixt Spain and Holland. I remember how the Nobility of Bohemia, who fided with Frederick, Prince Palatine, gave for their Motto, COMPASSI CONREGNAIMUS, meaning, that such who had suffered with him in his Adversity, should share with him in his Prosperity, when settled in his Kingdome. But alas▪ their hopes failed them. But blessed be God, this Worthy Lord, as he patiently bare his part in his Majesties Afflictions, so he now partaketh in his Restitution, being Captain of his Guard. To the Reader. May e be pleased to behold this my bief Description of , as a Running Collation to stay his Stomack, no set meal to Satifie his hunger. But to tell him good News, I hear, that a Plentifull Feast in this kinde is providing for his Entertainment, by Edward See more of him in the Life of Nich. upton, in Devon-shire. Bish, Esq. a Native of SVRREY, intending a particular Survey thereof. Now, as when the Sun aiseth the Moon  down obscurely, without any observation: so when the pains of this worthy Gentleman shall be publick, I am not only contented, but desirous that my weak Endeavours (without further Noise or Notice) should sink in Silence. The Farewell. I have been credibly , that one Mr. CLARKE, some seven score Years since built at his Charges the Market∣House of Fanham in this County. Once repoving his Workmen for going on so slowly, they excused themselves, that they were hindred with much people pressing upon them, some liking, some disliking the Model of the Fabrik. Hereupon Mr. Clarke caused this Distich (hardly extant at this day) to be written in that House. You who do like me give  to end me. You who dislike me give mony to mend me. I wish this Advice practised all over this County, by those, who vent their various Verdicts in praising or reproving  erected gratis, for the General Good.
SUSSEX. SUSSEX hath Surrey on the North, Kent on the East, the Sea on the South, and Hant-shire on the West. It is extended along the Sea-side threescore miles in length, but is contented with a third of those miles in the breadth thereof. A fruitfull County, though very durty for the travellers therein, so that it may be better measured to its advantage, by days-journeys then by miles. Hence it is, that in the late Order for regulating the wages of Coach-men, at such a price a day and distance from London, Sussex alone was excepted, as wherein shorter way or better pay was allowed. Yet, the Gentry of this County well content themselves  the very badness of passage therein, as which se∣cureth their provisions at  prices; which, if mended, Higglers would mount, as Hence Ba∣gers. bajulating them to London. It is peculiar to this County, that all the rivers, (and those I assure you are very many,) have their fountains and falls in this Shire, (though one may seem somewhat sus∣picious) as being bred, living, (though not to their full strength and stature of being navigable,) and dying therein, swallowed up by the sea. It is sufficient evidence of the plenty of this County, that the Tolle of the Wheat, Corn and Malt, growing or made about, and sold in the City of Chichester, doth amount yearly at a half penny a Quarter, to sixty So was I in∣formed by M. Peckham the Recorder of . pounds and upwards, (as the Gatherers there∣of will attest) and the numbers of the Bushels we leave to be Audited by better Arith∣meticians. It hath been said that the first Lord Aberga∣venny, Vis∣count , and he Earl of . Baron, Viscount, and Earl in England, all three have, and have had, for some term of time their chief residence in this County; and it is more civility to believe all then to deny any part of the repot, though, sure I am, this observation was discomposed at the death of the Earl of Essex, since which time Viscount Hereford is the first Person in England of that Dignity. Naturall Commodities. Iron. Great the necessity hereof, some Nations having lived in the ignorance of Gold and Silver, scarce any without the use of Iron. Indeed we read not of it in making the Ta∣bernacle (though from no mention no use thereof, therein cannot infallibly be inferred) which being but a Slight and Portable Building, Brass might supply the want thereof▪ But in the Temple which was a firmer fabrick 1 Cron. . 2. we find Iron for the things of Iron, and a hundred 1 Cron. 29.  thousand Talents of that Metal imployed therein. Great the quantity of Iron made in this County, whereof much used therein, and more exported thence into other parts of the Land, and beyond the Seas. But whe∣ther or no the private profit thereby will at long-running countervail the publick loss in the destruction of wood, I am as unwilling to discuss as unable to decide. Onely let me adde the ensuing complaint, wherein the Timber-trees of this County deplore their condition, in my opinion richly worth the Readers perusall; Joves Oake, the warlike Ash, veyn'd Elm, the softer Beech, Short Hazell, Maple plain, light Aspe, the bending Wych, Tough Holly, and soomth Birch, must altogether burn: What should the Builders serve, supplies the Forgers turn; When under publick good, base private gain takes hold, And we poor wofull woods, to ruin lastly sold. But it is to be hoped, that a way may be found out, to harke Seacole in such man∣ner, as to render it usefull for the making of Iron. All things are not found out in one age, as reserved for future discovery, and that perchance may be easy for the next which seems impossible to this generation.
Talk. Talk (in Latine Talchum) is a cheap kind of Mineral, which this County plentifully affords, though not so fine as what is fetch'd from Venice. It is white and transparent like Chrystall, full of strekes or veins, which prettily scatter themselves. Being calci∣ned and variously prepared, it maketh a curious White wash, which some justiy law∣full, because Cleaing not Changing Complexion. It is a great Astringent, yet used but little in Physick. Surely, Nature would not have made it such an Hypocrit to hang out so fair a sign, except some guest of Quality were lodged therein, I mean, it would not appear so beautifull to the eye except some conealed worth were couched therein; Inclining me to believe that the vertue  is not yet fully discovered. Wheat ears. Wheat-ears is a bird peculiar to this County, hardly found out of it. It is so called, because fattest when Wheat is rpe, whereon it feeds; being no bigger then a Lark, which it equalleth in the fineness of the flesh▪ far exceedeth in the fatness thereof. The worst is, that being onely seasonable in the heat of summer, and naturally larded with lumps of fat, it is soon subject to corrupt, so that (though abounding within fourty miles) London-Poulterers have no mind to meddle with them, which no care in carriage can keep from Putrefaction. That Palate-men shall pass in silence, who being seriously demanded his judgment concerning the abilities of a great Lord, concluded him a man of very weak parts, because once he saw him at a great Feast feed on CHIC∣KENS when there were WHEAT-EARS on the Table. I will adde no more in praise of this Bird for fear some female Reader may fall in longing for it, and unhappily be dis∣appointed of her desire. Carpes. It is a stately fish but not long See Memor∣ble Persons in this County. Naturalized in England, and of all Fresh-water fishes (the Ele only excepted) lives longest out of his Proper Element. They breed (which most other fishes doe not) severall Months in one year, though in cold Ponds they take no comfort to increase. A learned Sir Francis Bacon in his History of life and death. Writer observeth they live but ten years, though others assign them a far longer life. They are the better for their age and bigness, (a rule which holds not in other Fishes)*  and Janus Dbra∣nius. and their Tongues by ancient Roman▪ Palate-men were counted most delicious meat▪ though to speak Properly, they have either no Tongues in their Mouths, or all their Mouths are Tongues, as filled with a Carneous substance, whilst their Teeth are found in their throats. There is a kind of Frog which is a Profest Foe unto them, insomuch that of a Hundred Carpes put into a Pond, not five of them have been found therein a year after▪ And though some may say perchance, two-leged Frogs stole them away, yet the strict care of their Owners in watching them, disproved all suspition thereof. Now as this County is eminent for both Sea and River-, namely an Arundel Mul∣let, a Chichester Lobster, a  Cockle, and an Amely Trout. So Sussex Mr. Isack  in his Compleat Angler pag. . aboundeth with more Carpes then any other of this Nation. And though not so great as Jovius reporteth to be found in the Lurian Lake in Italy, weighing more then fifty pounds, yet those generally of great and goodly▪ proportion. I need not adde, that Physicians account the galls of Carps, as also a stone in their heads to be , only I will observe that because Jews will not eat Caviare made of , (because coming from a fish wanting Scals, and therefore forbidden in the LeviticalLevit. 11. 12. Law.) Therefore the Italians make greater profit of the Spaun of Carps, whereof they make a Red Caviare well pleasing the Jews both in Palate and Conscience. All I will adde of Carps is this, that Ramu himself doth not so much redound in Dichotomies as they do. Seeing no one bone is to be found in their body which is not forked or divided into two parts at the end thereof.
Manufactures. Great Guns. It is almost incredible, how many are made of the iron in this County. Count Gondomer well knew their goodness, when of K. James he so often begg'd the boon to transport them. A Monke of Mentz (some three hundred years since) is generally reputed the first Founder of them. Surely ingenuity may seem transposed, and to have cross'd her hands, when about the same time a Suldier found out Printing; and it is questiona∣ble, which of the two Inventions hath done more good, or more harm. As for Guns, it cannot be denied, that though most behold them as Instruments of cruelty; partly, because subjecting valour to chance; partly, because Guns give no quarter; (which the sword sometimes doth,) yet it will appear, that since their invention, victory hath not stood so long a Neuter, and hath been determined with the loss of fewer lives. Yet do I not believe what Souldiers commonly say, that he was curs'd in his Mothers belly, who is kill'd with a Cannon, seeing many prime persons have been slain thereby. Such as desire to know the pedigree, and progress of great Guns in England, may be pleas'd to take notice, 1. Anno 1535. John Oaven was the first Stows Annals pag. 572. English-man, who in England cast brass Ordnance, Cannons, Culverings, &c. 2. Peter Idem pag. 584. Baud a French-man, in the first of King Edward the sixth, was the first who in England cast Iron-Ordnance, Falcons, Falconers, Minions, &c. 3. Thomas Johnson covenant-servant to Peter aforesaid, succeeded and ex∣ceeded his Master, casting them clearer and better. He died about 1600. Some observe, that God hath so equally divided the advantage of weapons, be∣tween us and Spain, that their steel makes the best swords, our iron the most usefull Ordnance. Glass. Plenty hereof is made in this County, though not so fine as what Tyre afforded, fetch'd from the river Belus, and the Cendevian Lake; nor so pure as is wrought at Chiosa nigh Venice, whereof the most refined falls but one degree short of Chrystall, but the course glasses here serve well enough for the common sort, for vessels to drink in. The work-men in this mystery are much encreased since 1557. as may appear by what I read in an Tho. Charnock in his Brevia∣ry of Philosphy, cap. 1. Author writing that very year. As for Glass-makers they be scant in this land, Yet one there is as I doe understand, And in Sussex is now his habitation, At Chiddingsfold e works of his occupation. These brittle commodities are subject to breaking upon any casualty, and hereupon I must transmit a passage to posterity, which I received from an Author beyond ex∣ceptions. A noble man, who shall be nameless, living not many miles from Cambridge, (and highly in favour with the Earl of Leicester,) begg'd of Queen Elizabeth all the plate of that University, as useless for Scholars, and more for State then Service, for Su∣perfluity then Necessity. The Queen granted his suit, upon condition to find glasses for the Scholars. The Lord considering this might amount to more then his Baronry, would maintain (except he could compass the Venetian Artist, who, as they say, could make Vitra sine vitio fragilitatis pellucida; yea, could consolidate glass to make it malleable,) let his petition, which was as charitable as discreet, sink in silence. By the way be it observed, that though course▪ glass-making was in this County of great antiquity, yet, The firstStows  pg. 1040. making of Venice-glasses in England, began at the Crochet
Friers in London, about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by ne Jacob Ve∣naline, an Italian. The Buildings. Chichester Cathedral is a fine fabrick, built (after it had been twice consumed with fire) by Bishop  (the second of the Name) about the year 1193. Country folk are confident in their tradition, that the Master-workman built Sarisbury, and his Man the Church of Chichester, and if so, squitur Dominum non Passibus aequis. But Poportion of Time,—confuteth the conceit, seeing Sffride flourished un∣der King John,—and Bishop Poor (the Founder of Sarisbury) lived much later unde King Heny the third. Now though  bestowed the Cloth and Making on the Church, Bishop Sherborn gave the Trimming and best Lace thereto, in the reign of King Henry the seventh. I am sorry I can follow the Allegory so far, being  that now it is not only Seam ript, but Torn in the whole-cloth, having lately a great part thereof fallen down to the ground. Arundel Castle is of great esteem, the rather because a Local-Earldome is cemented to the wall thereof. Some will have it so nmed from Arundel the Horse of Beavoice the great Champion. I confess it is not withont precedence in Antiquity, for Places to take names from Horses, meeting with the PromentoryMela, ∣nias, , . Bucephalus in Peleponesus, where some report the Horse of Alxander buried, and Bllonius will have it for the same cause called Cavalla at this day. But this Castle was so called long before that Imaginary Horse was foled, who cannot be fancied elder then his Master Beavoice, flourishing after the Conquest, long before which Arundel was so called from the river Arund unning hard by it. etworth, the house of the Earls of Northumberland is most famous for a stately Stable, the best of any Subjects in Christendome. Comparisons must move in ther own pheres, and Princes only are meet to measure with Princes: tell me nt herefore of the Duke of Saxony his Stable at Dresden, wherein are n   and eight horses of service, (with a Magazene out of which he can Arme thirty thousand Horse and Foot at a days warning,) that Elector being the most Potent Prince in the Empire. But is not the proportion fair, that etworth Stable affordeth standing in state for threescore horse, with all necessary accommodations? Wonders. Expect not here, I should insert, what William of Newbury writeth, (to be recounted rather amongst the Untruhs then Wonders) viz. That in this County not far from Bttail-Abby, in the Place where so great a slaughter of the English-men was made, after any shower, presently sweateth forth very frsh blood out of the Earth, as if the Evidence thereof did plainly declare the voice of Bloud there shed, and crieth still from the Earth unto the Lord. This is as true, as that in white chalky Countries (about Baldock in Hartford shire) after rain run rivolets of Milk; Neither being any thing else then the water disco∣loured, according to the Complexion of the Earth thereabouts. Proverbs. He is none of the Hastings] This Proverb though extended all over England, is properly reduceable to this County as Originated there, for there is a Haven Town named Hastings therein, which some erroneously conceive so called from hast or speed, because William the [after∣wards] Conqueror Landing there, did as Mathew Paris saith with Hast or Speedily erect some small Fortification. But sure it is that there is a Noble and Antient family of the Hastings in this Land, (I will not say first taking their Name from this Town) who formerly were Earls of Pembroke, and still are of Huntington. Now men commonly say they are none of the Hastings, who being slow and slack go about business with no agility. Such they also call [dull Dromedaries] by a foul
mistake, meerly because of the affinity of that name to our English word Dreaming, applied to such who go slowly and sleepily about their Employment. Whereas indeed Domedaries are Creatures of a Constant and Continuing Swiftness, so called from the Greek word Dremo to Run, and are the  for travell for the Eastern Country. Martyrs. Grievous the persecution in this County, under John Christopherson the Bishop thereof. Such his Havock in burning poor Procestants in one year, that had he sat long in that See, and continued after that rate, there needed no Iron-mills to rarify the Woods of this County, which this BONNER junior would have done of himself. I confess the Papists admire him as a most able and profound Divine, which mind∣eth me of an Epigran made by one, who, being a Suitor to a surly and scornull. Mistris, after he had largely praised her rare parts and Divine perfections, concluded, She hath too much Divinity for me; Oh! that she had some more Humanity! The same may this Diocess say of Christopherson, who, though carrying much of Christ in his Surname, did bear nothing of him in his Nature, no meekness, mild∣ness or mercy, being addicted wholly to cruelty and destruction, burning no fewer then ten in one fire in Lewes, and seventeen others at several Times in sundry Places. Cardinals. HERBERT de BOSHAM was born at  in his  of . pag. 165 Bosham a goodly mannor in this County, (which Earl Godwin craftily . in . kissed out of the Arch-bishop of Canterbary,) and being a good Scholar he was a Manubus (I mean to write, not to fight for him) unto Thomas Becket Arch-bishop of Canterbury. He was present at his Murder-martyring, and hd the dis∣cretion to make no resistance, lest he had been sent the same way with his Master. However amongst many other books, he wrote the story of his Msters death. Going over into Italy he was by Pope Alexander the third mde Arch bishop of Beneventum, and in the Month of December 1178. created Cardinal, but by what title, it is unknown, as also is the exact date of his death. Prelates. JOHN PECKHAM born of obscureThe substance of his life is taken out of Bishop  in  Ca∣talogue of Arch-bshops of . Parents in this County, bred when a boy in Lewes, When a Youth, a Franciscan in Oxford, when a Young man, in Paris, when a Man, he lived in Lyons, (where he became Canon) when a Grave-man in Rome, there made Auditor of causes in that Court, when an Old man in Canterbury, preferred against his will (except out of cunning he would seem Courted into what he Coveted) by the Popes plenary power, to be Arch bishop thereof. Peckham believed the Pope invited him freely to that place, when soon after he was called upon to pay a sad reckoning, no less then four thousand marks. A worthy man he was in his place, who neither feared the Laytie nor flattered the Clergy, unpartially imposing on both (if appearing Pecant) most severe penance: he was a great punisher of Pluralists, and injoyner of Residence. His Canons place at Lyons, he not only kept during his life, but left it to his succes∣sours, who held it in Commendam some hundred years afterwards. Loth they were to part with it as a safe retreating place, in case our English Kings should banish them the Realme. Besides it was a Convenient Inn for them to Lodge at, as almost in the Mid∣way of their journey betwixt Canterbury and Rome. He sate Arch-bishop almost fourteen years, built and endowed a Colledge at Wing ham, yet left a great estate to his Kindred. I believe his wealth well gotten, because the land purchased therewith hath lasted so long in the Linage of his Allies, in this and the next County, even to our age, he died Anno Dom. 1294. ROBERT WINCHELSEY. Although Bishop GodwinOut of whom the  is  of what follow∣eth. saith, ubi natus traditur, opinor, à nemine, yet considering the custome of the Clergy in that age, none can doubt his birth in this County, except any should deny Winchelsey to be therein. He was bred
in the neighbouring Shire of Kent, where he was such a proficient in Grammer Learn∣ing, all did foretell, that he, [then the Arch-Scholar in the School] in due time would be Arch-bishop of the See of Canterbury. He was afterwards admitted in Merton-colledge in Oxford, went thence to Paris, where he took the degree of Master of Arts, and became Rector (perchance no more then a Regent amongst Us,) of that University; returning to Oxford he there proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and became Chancellour thereof, successively Canon of Pauls, Arch∣Deacon of Essex and Arch bishop of Canterbury. He went to Rome, to procure his Pall of Pope Celestine. This is that Celestine, formerly an Eremite, whom a Cardinal (afterward his Succes∣sor by the Name of Boniface the eighth) perswaded, by a voice through a hollow-trunk to resign his Popedome, and return into the wilderness, which he did accordingly. Herein his Holiness did trust the Spirit before he didJoh. 4. 1. try it, contrary to the counsel of the Apostle. But this Pope appearing Fallible in his Chamber, if in his Chair and consuling his Conclave of Cardinalls, no doubt would not have been deceived. He easily obtained his Pall, and refused a Cardinals Cap offer'd unto him, returning to Canterbury, he was there solemnly inthroned, and on the same day Consecrated one Bishop, bestowed 12. rich Benefices on 12. Doctors, and 12. meaner Livings on as many Bachelors in Divinity. Confiding in the Canon of the Councel of Lions, which forbad the Clergy to pay any taxes to Princes, without the consent of the Pope, he created much molestation to himself, King Edward the first useing him very harshly, till at last he overcame all with his patience. For the main he was a worthy Prelate, excellent Preacher, being Learned himself, he loved and preferred Learned men. Prodigious his Hospitality, Godwin in Car: of Bishops of Canter, pag. 147. being re∣ported that Sundays and Fridays he fed no fewer, then four Thousand men when corn was cheap, and five Thousand when it was dear, and because it shall not be said, but my Belief can be as Large as his Bounty, I give credit thereunto. Otherwise it seemeth suspicious, as a mock-imitation of those self same Numbers of Persons, which Christ at Ma 15. 38. two Mat. 14. 21. severall times miraculously fed with Loafes and Fishes. His Charity went home to them, which could not come to it, sending to such, who were Absented by their Impotencies. After his Death, happening Anno Domini 1313. he was accounted (though not the Popes) the Poor-mans Saint, (Bountifull men will always be Canonized in the Calender of Beggers,) Poor-people repairing in Flocks, to the place of his buriall, and supersti∣tiously praying unto him, and they could best tell, whether they found as much Benefit from his Tomb when dead, as at his Table when living. THOMAS I Bale, Mr. Parker in Ant. Brit. I Pits, Bi∣shop Godwin, and Sir Henry Savile in his life prefac'd to his book de causá Di. BRADWARDINE was descended of an ancient family at Bradwardine in Hereford-shire, who removing thence, had setled themselves for three generations in this County, where this Thomas was born, in or near the City of Chichester. He was bred Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford, where he became a most exquisite Mathema∣tician, and deep Divine, being commonly called Doctor Profundus. He was Confessor to King Edward the third, and some impute our great Conquest in France, not so much to the Prowesse of that King as to the Prayers of this his Chaplain. He constantly preach'd in the Camp, Industry to Officers, Obedience to Common-souldiers, Humility to all in good, Patience in bad success. He exhorted them to be Pious to God, Dutifull to their King, Pifull to all Captives, to be Carefull in making, Faithfull in keeping articles with their enemies. After the death of Strafford, he was made Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and at Avenion (where the Pope then resided) received his Consecra∣tion. Here he was accounted , somewhat Clownish by the Romish Court, partly, because he could not mode it with the Italians, but chiefly, because money be∣ing the generall Turn-key to Preferment in that place, he was meely advanced for his merit. But that which most recommended his memory to posterity, is that worthy book he made de Causâ Dei, wherein speaking of Pelagius, he complaineth in his second Book, that, Totus paenè mundus, ut timeo & doleo, post hunc abiit, & erroribus ejus fave. I fear and lament that almost the whole world runs after him, and favours his errors. Brad∣wardine
therefore undertook to be Champion for Grace and Gods cause, against such who were not defensores, sed deceptores, sed inflatores, sed praecipitatores liberi arbitr, asAugust, de Grat. & lib. a bit. cap. 14. Augustine calleth them, and as the same Father saith of Cicero Idem de civ. D i lib. 5. cap. 9 dum liberos homines esse volunt, faciunt sacrilegos. He died at Lambth in October Anno Dom. 1349. THOMAS ARUNDELL was the fourth Arch-bishop of Canterbury who was born in this County, Son he was to Robert, Brother to Richard Fitz-Alen both Earls of Arundll. Herein he standeth alone by himself, that the Name Arundell speaks him both Noble∣man and Clergy-man, the Title of his fathers honor, and place of his own birth, meet∣ing both in the Castle of Arell. It was ither his Nobility, or Ability, or Both, which in him did supplere aetatem, qua∣lifying him to be Bishop of Ely at Godwin in the Arch. bi∣shops of Ct. twenty two years of age. He was afterwards Arch∣bishop of York, and at last of Canterbury 1396. and three severall times Lord Chancellor of England, viz. In the Tenth of Richard the second, 1386. in the Fifteenth of Ri∣chard the second, 1391. the Eleventh of Henry the fourth, 1410. By King Richard the second, when his Brother the Earl of Arundell was beheaded, this Thomas was banished the land. Let him thank his Orders for saving his Life, the Tonsure of his hair for the keeping of his Head, who otherwise had been sent the same path a pase with his Brother. Returning in the First of K. Henry the fourth, he was restored to his Arch-bishoprick.* Reader, for the greater credi of this Couy, I put there four Arch-bishp ogether, o∣therwife Bi∣shop Burwos (olloing hereafter) in time preced∣ed the two latter. Such who commend his Courage for being the Churches Champion, when a powerfull Party in Parliament pushed at the Revenues thereof, condemn his Cruelty to the Wick∣levites, being the first, who persecuted them with Fire and Fagot. As for the manner of his death, we will neither carelesly wink at it, nor curiously stare on it; but may with a serious look solemnly behold it. He who had stop'd the mouths of so many servants of God from preaching his Word, was himself famished to Death by a swelling in his Throat. But seeing we bear in our Bodies the seeds of all Sicknesses, (as of all sins in our souls) it is not good to be over-bold and buisie in our censures on such Casualties. He died February 20. 1413. and lieth buried in his Cathedral at Canterbury. HENRY BURWASH so named saith my Weavers fun. monument pag. 213. Author (which is enough for my dis∣charge) from Burwash a Town in this County. He was one of Noble Alliance. And when this is said, all is said to his Commendation, being otherwise neither good for Church nor State, Soveraign nor Subjects, Covetous, Ambitious, Rebellious, Inju∣rious. Say not, what makes he here then amongst the worthies; for though neither Ethically nor Theologically, yet Historically he was remarkable, affording something for our Infor∣mation, though not Imitation. He was recommended by his kinsman Brtholomew de Badilismer (Baron of Leeds in Kent) to K. Edward the second, who preferred him Bishop of Lincoln. It was not long be fore falling into the Kings displeasure his Temporalities were seized on, and afterwards on his submission restored. Here, in stead of new Gratitude, retayning his old Grudge, he was most forward to assist the Queen in the deposing Godwin on the Bishops of Lncoln. of her husband. He was twice L. Treasurer, once Chncellor, and once sent over Ambassador to the Duke . Philipot in his Catalogue of Chancel∣lors. of Bavaria. He died Anno Domini 1340. Such as mind to be merry may read the pleasant Story of his apparition, being condemned after Death to be viridis Godwin ut prius. viridarius, a green rester, because in his life time he had violently inclosed other mens Grounds into his Park. Surely such Fictions keep up the best Park of Popery, [Purgatory] whereby▪ their fairest Game and greatest Gaine is preserved. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM BARLOW D. D. My industry hath not been wanting in Qaest of the place of his Nativity; but all in vain. Seeing therefore I cannot fix his character on his Cradle, I am resolved (rather then omit him) to fasten it on his Coffin, this County where in he had his last preferment. A man he was of much Motion and Promotion; First, I find him Canon Regular of S.  in Essex, and then Prior of Bisham in Barkshire.
Then preferred by K. Henry the eighth Bishop of St. Asaph, and consecrated Febr. 22. 1535. Translated thence the April following to St. Davids remaining 13. years in that See. In the Third of King Edward the sixth, he was removed to the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells. Flying the Land in the Reign of Queen Mary, he became Superintendent of the English Congregation at Embden. Coming back into England, by Q. Elizabeth he was advanced Bishop of Chichester. It is a Riddle, why he chose rather to enter into new First-fruits, and begin at Chi∣chester, then return to Bath a better Bishoprick. Some suggest, that he was loth to go back to Bath, having formerly consented to the Expilation of that Bishoprick, whilst others make his consent to signify nothing, seeing impowred Sacriledge is not so mannerly as to ask any, By your leave. He had a numerous and prosperous female-Issue, as appeareth by the Epitaph on his Wifes Monument in a Church in Hant-shire, though one shall get no credit in transla∣ting them. Hic Agathae tumulus Barloi, Praesulis inde, Exulis inde, iterum Praesulis, Uxor erat. Prole beata fuit, plena annis, quin{que} suarum, Praesulibus vidit, Praesulis ipsa, datas. Barlows Wife Agathe doth here remain, Bishop, then Exile, Bishop then again▪ So long she lived, so well his Children sped, She saw five Bishops her five daughters wed. Having sate about ten years in his See, he peaceably ended his Life, Dec. 10. 1569. WILLIAM JUXTON was born at Chichester in this County, bred Fellow in Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelour of Law; very young, but very able for that degree, and afterwards became Doctor in the same Faculty, and President of the Colledge. One in whom Nature hath not Omitted, but Grace hath Ordered, the Tetrarch Humour of Choler, being Admirably Master of his Pen and his Passion, for his Abilities he was successively preferred by King Charles the first Bishop of Hereford and London, and for some years Lord Treasurer of England. A troublesome place in those times, it being expected that he should make much Brick, (though not altogether without, yet) with very little Straw allowed unto him. Large then the Expences, Low the Revenues of the Exchequer. Yet those Coffers which he found Empty, he left Filling, and had left Full, had Peace been preserved in the Land, and he continued in his Place. Such the mildness of his temper, that Petitioners for Money, (when it was not to be had) departed well pleased with his denialls, they were so civilly Languaged. It may justly seem a wonder, that, whereas few spake well of Bishops at that time, and Lord Trea∣surers at all times are liable to the Complaints of discontented people, though both Offices met in this man, yet with 3 Joh. 12. Demetrius, he was well reported of all men, and of the truth it self. He lived to see much shame and contempt undeservedly poured on his Function, and all the while possessed his own soul in patience. He beheld those of his Order to lose their votes in Parliament, and their insulting enemies hence concluded, (Loss of speech being a sad Symptom of approching Death,) that their Final extirpation would follow, whose own experience at this day giveth the Lie to their malicious Collection. Nor was it the least part of this Prelates Honour, that amongst the many worthy Bishops of our Land, King Charles the first, selected him for his Confessor at his Martyrdome. He formerly had had experience [in the case of the Earl of Strafford] that this Bishops Conscience was bottom'd on Piety not Policy, the reason that from him he received the Sacrament, good Comfort and Counsell, just before he was Murdered. I say just before that Royal Martyr was Murdered; a Fact so foul, that it alone may confute the errour of the Pelagians, maintaining, that all Sin cometh by imitaion, the Universe not for∣merly affording such a Precedent, as if those Regicides had purposely designed to dis∣prove the Observation of Solomon, that there is No new thing under the Sun. King Charles the second, Anno Domini 1660. preferred him Arch-bishop of Canterbury, which place he worthily graceth at the writing hereof, Feb. 1. 1660. ACCEPTUS FRUIN D. D. was born at—in this County, bred Fellow of Magda∣len-colledge
in Oxford, and afterwards became President thereof, and after some mediate preferments, was by King Charles the first, advanced Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, and since by King Charles the second, made Arch-bishop of York. But the matter whereof Porcellane or China dishes are made, must be ripened many years in the earth, before it comes to full perfection. The Living are not the proper objects of the Historians Pen, who may be misinterpreted to flatter, even when he falls short of their due Commendation, the Reason why I adde no more in the praise of this worthy Prelate. As to the Nativities of Arch-bishops, one may say of this County, many Shires have done worthily, but SUSSEX surmounteth them all, having bred Five Arch∣bishops of Canterbury, and at this instant, claiming for her Natives the two Metropoli∣tans of our Nation. States-men. THOMAS SACKVILL, son and heir to Sir Richard Sackvill (Chancellour, and Sub∣Treasurer of the Exchequer, and Privy-Counsellour to Queen Elizabeth) by Winifred his wife, daughter to Sir John Bruges, was bred in the University of Oxford, where he became an excellent Mills his Ca∣talogue of ho∣nour pag. 412. Poet, leaving both Latine and English Poems of his composing to posterity. Then studied he law in the Temple, and took the degree of Idem ibidem. Barrister; afterward he travelled into forraign parts, detained for a time a prisoner in Rome, whence his liberty was procured for his return into England, to possess the vast Inheri∣tance left him by his father, whereof in short time by his magnificent prodigality, he spent the greatest part, till he seasonably began to spare, growing neer to the bottom of his Estate. The story goes, that this young Gentleman coming to an Alderman of London, who had gained great Pennyworths by his former purchases of him, was made (being now in the Wane of his Wealth,) to wait the coming down of the Alderman so long, that his generous humour being sensible of the incivility of such attendance, resolved to be no more beholding to Wealthy pride, and presently turned a thrifty improver of the remainder of his Estate. If this be true, I could wish that all Aldermen would State it on the like occasion, on condition their noble debtors would but make so good use thereof. But others make him the Convert of Queen Elizabeth, (his Cosin german once re∣moved) who by her frequent admonitions, diverted the torrent of his profusion. In∣deed she would not know him, till he began to know himself, and then heaped places of honour and trust upon him, creating him 1. Baron of Buckhurst in this County, (the reason why we have placed him therein,) Anno Dom. 1566. 2. Sending him Ambassadour into France, Anno 1571. into the Low-countries; Anno 1586. 3. Making him Knight of the Order of the Garter, Anno 1589. 4. Appointing him Treasurer of England, 1599. He was Chancellour of the University of Oxford, where he entertained Camdens' Eli∣zabeth in pag. 1592. Q. Elizabeth with a most sumptuous feast. His elocution was good, but inditing better, and therefore no wonder if his See fragmen∣ta Regalia, in his Character written by Sir Robert Naun∣ton. Secretaries could not please him, being a person of so quick dispatch, (faculties, which yet run in the bloud.) He took a Roll of the names of all Suitors, with the date of their first addresses, and these in order had their hearing, so that a fresh-man could not leap over the head of his senior, except in urgent affairs of State. Thus having made amends to his house for his mis-spent time, both in increase of Estate and Honour, being created Earl of Dorset by King James, he died on the 19. of April, 1608. Capitall Judges. Sir JOHN JEFFRY Knight, was born in this County, as I have been informed. It confirmeth me herein, because, he left a fair Estate in this Shire; (Judges, gene∣building their Nest, neer the place where they were Hatched,) which descended to his Daughter. He so profited in the study of our Municipall-Law, that he was
preferred Secondary Judge of the Common-pleas, and thence advanced by Queen Eli∣zabeth, in Michaelmas Terme, the nineteenth of her Reign, to be Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, which place he discharged for the Terme of two years, to his great com∣mendation. He left one only Daughter and Heir, married to Sir Edward Mountague, (since Baron of Boughton) by whom he had but one Daughter, Elizabeth, married to Robert Barty, Earl of Linsey, Mother to the truly Honorable Mountague, Earl of Linsey and Lord Great Chamberlain of England. This worthy Judge died in the 21. of Queen Elizabh. Souldiers. The ABBOT of BATTLE. He is a pregnant Proof, that one may leave no Name, and yet a good Memory behind him. His Christian or Surname cannot be recovered out of ourHolished, Stow, Speed, &c. Chronicles, which hitherto I have seen; But take his worth as followeth: King Richard the second in the beginning of his Reign was in Nonage, and his Coun∣cil, some will say, in Dotage, leaving the Land and Sea to defend themselves, whilst they indulged thir private Factions. This invited the French to invade this County, where they did much mischief, Plun∣dering (the Thing was known in England before the Name) the people thereof, and carrying away captive the Prior of Lewes; And no wonder, if our Abbot was startled therewith, seeing it may pass for a Proverb in these parts. Ware the Abbot of Battle, When the Prior of Lewes is taken Prisoner. Wherefore (though no Sheriff) he got together (as well as he might) the Posse Co∣mitatus, and puting it in as good a posture of defence as the time would permit, march∣ed to Winchelsey and fortified it. Some condemned him herein, it being incongruous for a Clergy-man to turn Soul∣dier. They objected also, that he ought to have expected Orders from Above, doing Rectum but not Rectè, for want of a Commission. Others commended him, to save and preserve, being the most proper Performance of a Spirituall Person. That, in Hostes Publicos omnis Homo Miles. That though it be high Treason for any to Fight a Foe in a Set field without Command from the Su∣preme power, yet one may (if he can) repell a Rout of Armed Thieves invading a Land, the first being the fittest Time for such a Purpose, the Occasion it self giving (though no express) an Implicite Commission for the same. This Abbot used rather the Shield then the Sword, being only on the Defensive side. Well, the French followed the Abbot, and besieged him in the Town of Winchelsey. In Bravado they dared him to send out one, two, three, four or more, to try the Mastery in fight, to be encountred with an equal number; But the Abbot refused to retail his men out in such Parcels, alledging, that he was a spiritual person, not to challenge but only defend. Then the French let fly their great Guns, and I take it to be the first and last time, they were ever planted by a Forreign Enemy on the English Continent, and then roared so ud, that they lost their voice, and have been (blessed be God) silent ever since. The Enemy perceiving that the Country came in fast upon them, and suspecting they should be surrounded on all sides, were fain to make for France as fast as they could, leaving the Town of Winchelsey behind them, in the same form and fashion wherein they found it. I behold this Abbot as the Saver not onely of Suffex, but England. For as Dogs, who have once gotten an Haunt to worry sheep, do not leave it off till they meet with their reward: So, had not these French felt the smart as well as the sweet of the English Plunder, our Land, (and this County especially,) had never been free from their incursions. All this happened in the raign of King Richard the second, Anno Domini 13... Sir WILLAM PELHAM Knight, was a Native of this County, whose ancient and wealthy Family hath long flourished at Laughton therein. His Prudence in Peace,
and Valour in War, caused Queen Elizabeth to imploy him in Ireland, where he was by the Privy Council, appointed Lord Chief Justice to govern that Land, in the in∣terim betwixt the death of Sir William Drury, and the coming in of Arthur Gray Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. Say not that he did but stop a Gap for a twelve-month at the most; seeing it was such a GAP, Destruction had entred in thereat to the final ruine of that Kingdome, had not his Providence prevented it. For in this juncture of time, Desmund began his Rebellion 1579. inviting Sir William toCamdens Eliz. anno citato. side with him, who wisely gave him the Hear∣ing with a Smile into the Bargain. And although our Knight (for want of force) could not cure the wound, yet he may be said to have washed and kept it clean, resigning it in a recovering condition to the Lord Gray, who succeeded him. Afterwards he was sent over into the Low-Countries 1586▪ being Commander of the English Horse therein: and myIdem anno 1586. Author saith of him, Brabantiam persultabat, He leaped-through Brabant; Importing Celerity and Success, yea as much Conquest, as so sudden an expedition was capable of. I suspect he survived not long after, meeting no more mention of his Mar∣tial Activity. The Shirleys. Their ancient extraction in this County is sufficientlyCmdens Brit. in Sussex. known. The last age saw a leash of brethren of this family, severally eminent. This mindeth me of the Ro∣man Horatii, though these expressed themselves in a different kind for the honour of their Country, pardon me if reckoning them up not according to their age. Sir ANTHONY SHIRLEY second Son to Sir Thomas, set forth fromHluits Voyages part 3. pag 598. Plimouth May the 21. 1596. in a ship called the Bevis of Southampton, attended with six lesser vessels. His designe for Saint Thome, was violently diverted by the contagion they found on the South coast of Africa, where the rain did stink as it fell down from the heavens, and within six hours did turn into magots. This made him turn his course to America, where he took and kept the City of Saint Jago two days and nights, with two hundred and eighty men, (whereof eighty were wounded in the service) against three thousand Portugalls. Hence he made for the Isle of Fuego, in the midst whereof a Mountaine Aetna-like always burning, and the wind did drive such a shower of ashes upon them, that one might have wrote his name with his finger on the upper deck. However in this fiery Island, they furnished themselves with good water, which they much wanted. Hence he sailed to the Island of Margarita, which to him did not answer its name, not finding here the Perl-Dredgers which he expected. Nor was his gaine considera∣ble in taking the town of Saint Martha, the Isle and chief town of Jamaica, whence he sailed more then thirty leagues up the river Rio-dolci, where he met with great extre∣mity. At last, being diseased in person, distressed for victuals, and deserted by all his other ships, he made by New-found-Land to England, where he arrived June 15. 1597. Now although some behold his voyage, begun with more courage then counsel, carried on with more valour then advice, and coming off with more honour then profit, to him∣self or the nation, (the Spaniard being rather frighted then harmed, rather braved then frighted therewith,) yet unpartial judgments, who measure not worth by success, justly allow it a prime place amongst the probable (though not prosperous) English Adven∣tures. Sir ROBERT SHIRLEY youngest Son to Sir Thomas, was by his Brother Anthony entred in the Persian Court. Here he performed great Service against the Turkes, and shewed the difference betwixt Persian and English valour, the latter having therein as much Courage, and more Mercy, giving Quarter to Captives who craved it, and per∣forming Life to those to whom he promised it. These his Actions drew the Envie of the Persian Lords, and Love of the Ladies, amongst whom one (reputed a kins-man to the great Sophy) after some Opposition, was married unto him. She had more of Eb∣ny, then Ivory, in her Complexion, yet amiable enough, and very valiant, a quality considerable in that Sex, in those Countries. With her he came over into England,
and lived many years therein. He much affected to appear in forreign Vestes, and as if his Clothes were his limbes, accounted himself never ready till he had something of the Persian Habit about him. At last a Contest happening betwixt him and the Persian Ambassadour, (to whom some reported Sir Robert gave a Box on the Ear,) the King sent them both into Persia, there mutually to impeach one another, and joyned Doctor Gogh, (a Senior Fellow of Trinity-colledge in Cambridge,) in Commission with Sir Robert. In this oyage, (as I am informed) both died on the Seas, before the controverted difference was ever heard in the Court of Persia, about the beginning of the reign of K. Charles. Sir THOMAS SHIRLEY. I name him the last, (though the eldest Son of his Fa∣ther) because last appearing in the world, mens Activity not always observing the me∣thod of their Register. As the Trophies of Miltiades would not suffer Plutarch in his life. Themistocles to sleep, so the Atchivements of his two younger brethren, gave an Alam unto his spirit. He was ashamed to see them Worne, like flowers in the Breasts and Bosomes of forreign Princes, whilst he himself withered upon the stalk he grew on. This made him leave his aged Father and fair Inheritance in this County, and to undertake Sea Voyages into forreign parts, to the great honour of his Nation, but small inriching of him∣self, so that he might say to his Son as Aeneas to Aescanius, Disce puer Virtutē ex me verum{que} Laborem, Fortunam ex aliis. Virtue and Labour, Learn from me thy Father, As for success, Child Learn from others rather. As to the generall performances of these three brethren, I know the Affidavit of a Poet, carieth but a small creit in the court of History, and the Comedy made of them, is but a friendly foe to their Memory, as suspected more accommodated to please the present spectators, then inform posterity. However as the belief of Miti (when an Inventory of his adopted Sons misdenours, was brought unto him) embraced a middle and moderate way, nec omnia credere nec nihil, neither to believe all things nor nothing, of what was told him: so in the list of their Atchivements we may safely pitch on the same proportion, and when abatement is made for poeticall embelishments, the remainder will speak them Worthies in their generations. The certain dates of their respective deaths I cannot attain. Physicians. NICHOLAS HOSTRESHAM. Know, Reader, I have placed him in this County,REM. only on presumption, that Horsham in this Shire (no such place otherwise in England,) is contracted for Hostresham. He was a learned man, a most famous Physician, and esteemed highly of all the Nobility of the Land, who coveted his company on any con∣ditions. It seemeth that he was none of those so pleasing and conformable to the Hu∣mor of their Patients, as that they press not the true Cure of the Disease, and yet none of those, who are so Regular in proceeding according to Art for the Disease, as that they respect not sufficiently the condition of their Patients, but that he was of a Middle Temper, and so in effect was two Physicians in one Man. Many were the Books he wrote, reckoned upbyDe Script. Brit. Cent. 8, Num. 8▪ Bale andIn Anno 1443. Pitz, amongst which I take especial notice of one, contra dolorem renum, thus beginning, Lapis quandoque generatur in renibus. I observe this the rather, because his Practise was wholly at home, (it not appearing that he ever went beyond the Sea,) and this is contrary unto the confidence of such, who have vehement∣ly affirmed, that the Stone was never heard of in England, untill Hopps and Beer made therewith, (about the year 1516.) began to be commonly used. He flourished, Anno Domini 1443. Writers. LAURENCE SOMERCOTE was born saithDe Script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 2. Bale in the South-part of the Kingdome.S. N. But had, I am sure his best English preferment in Sussex, being Canon of Chichester. After his breeding here under his Carefull Parents, and Skilfull Masters, who taught him Logick and Rhetorick, he applied himself to the Study of the Law, and attained to great
Learning therein. Then leaving the Land, he went to Rome, and repaited to (his Bro∣ther or Kinsman) Robert Somercote Cardinall, who it seems procured him to be Sub∣Deacon under the Pop. He wrote some Books both in Latine and French, and flourish∣ed in the year of our Lord 1240. JOHN DRITON so is his Surname Englished by Bale,—And why not as well John Driby, (a Vllage in Lincoln-shire) seeing no Driton in all England. The truth is this, in Latine he wrote himself, de Arida Vill, equivalent with Sicoa villa or Sack-wil, a Surname most renowned in this County: and because it is added to his Character, ex Illustri quadam Angliae familia procres, it suiteth well with our conjecturing him this Country-man. He was bred according to the Mode of that Age in France, and there became at Paris, Summus Gymnasii Moderator, which (howsoever rendred in English) soundeth a high place Conferred on a Forreigner. In his time was much busling in the University, about an Apocrypha Book, (patched together out of the Dreams of Joachime and Cyril two Monkes,) which was publickly read and commented on by many Ad∣mirers thereof, by the name of the Eternall Gospell. The Pope, who often Curseth where God Blesseth, here Blessed where God Cursed, and notwithstanding the solemn Commination against such Additions to Scripture, favoured them, and (what a Charitable Christian can scarcely believe,) damned their Opposers for Hereticks, this our Sackwill bestirred himself, and with William de Sancto Amore and other pious Men, opposed this piece of Imposture. Pitz, in the Character of this our de Arida Villa, treads like a foundred Horse on stones, mentioning only that he met with much disturbance—without any particu∣lars thereof. At last this Eternall Gospell had a Temporal End, and (with the Serpents of the Aegyptian Inchanters which vanished away,) this pretended Quint Essence Go∣spell sunk with shame into silence, whilst the other four Gospells (with the Serpent of Moses) doe last and continue. This our Writer flourished 1260. JOHN WINCHELSEY was bred in Oxford, and became a great Scholar therein. I am not bound to believe Bale in full latitude, that he made a De Script. Brit. Cnt. 5. Num. 11. Centaur-Divinity out of Poets and Philosophers; but this I believe, that in his old Age he turned a Franciscan, and when Gray, became a Green Novice of the Order at Sarisbury. Many condemned him, that he would enter into such a life when ready to goe out of the world, and others of his own Covent commended him, who being old, was concerned to find out the most compendious way to Heaven. The year of his Probation was not ended, when he died and was buried in that Covent Anno 1326. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM PEMBLE was born in this County, where his Parents had no plentifullAMP. Estate, but their wants were supplied (as to this their Sons education in Learning,) by the bounty of John Barker of Mayfield in this Shire, Esq. as by the following passage may appear, written by Mr. Capel his worthy Tutor. In the Epist. Dedicatory be∣fore his Le∣ctures on the Sacramnt. You are the man, who supported the Vine, that bore this and many other excellent grapes. His studies had shrunk and withered, even then, when they were about to knit, had it not been for you and your Exhibitions; who have raised up an able Scholar, a learned Divine, a well studied Artist, a skilfull Linguist, and (which is the soul of all) a very godly Minister. So then, if I have miss'd Master Pembles native County, yet I shall be excused by the known Proverb, Non ubi nascor, sed ubi pascor, Sussex affording him his most effectul maintenance. He was bred in, (or if you will, he bred) Magdalen-hall in Oxford, that house owing its late lustre to his Learned Lectures, the gravest in the University not dis∣daining their presence thereat. He was an excellent Orator indeed, as who spake non∣ex ore sed ex pectore, many excellencies being in him; but above all, this was his Crown, that he unfainedly sought Gods Glory, and the good of Mens Souls. He died in the flower of his Age, as he was making his Lectures on the Prophesie of Zachary, (finish∣ing but nine chapters of fourteen) Anno Dom.—of a burning feaver. THOMAS CHUNE Esquire, living at Alfriston in this County, set forth a small Ma∣nuall, intituled Collectiones Theologicarum Conclusionum. Indeed many have much op∣posed
it (as what book meeteth not with opposition?) though such as dislike, must commend the brevity and clearness of his Positions. For mine own part, I am glad to see a Lay-Gentleman so able and industrious. His book was set forth 1635. THOMAS MAY was born in this County, of a worshipfull but decayed Family, bred Fellow-commoner in Cambridge in Sidney colledge, where he seriously applyed himself to his studies. He afterwards lived in Westminster, & about the Court. He was an Elegant Poet, and translated Lucan into English. Now though Scaliger be pleased to say Hypocritically of Lucan, Non canit sed latrat, yet others (under the Rose) as judicious, allow him an ex∣cellent Poet, and loseing no lustre by Mr. Mays translation. Some disgust at Court was given to, or taken by him, (as some will have it) because his Bays were not gilded richly enough, and his Verses rewarded by King Charles accord∣ing to his expectation. He afterwards wrote an History of this State, in the beginning of our Civill Wars, and being my self (for my many writings) one under the Authority of the Tongues and Pens of others, it ill becometh me to pass any censure on his perfor∣mance therein. Sure I am, if he were a Biassed and Partiall writer, he lieth buried near a good and true Historian indeed, (I mean Mr. Camden) in the West-side of the North Isle of Westminster Abby, dying suddenly in the night Anno Dom. 1652. in the 55. year of his Age. JOHN SELDEN, son of Thomas Selden, was born at Salvington within the parish of East Terring in this County, and the ensuing inscriptions being built three stories high, will acquaint us with his age and parentage. The lowest is written on the top stone of his sepulcher, being five foot deep in the ground. Hic inhumatur corpus Johannis Seldeni. The second is inscribed on a blew marble stone, lying flat on the  in the Tem∣ple Church. J. Seldenus, J. C. Hic situs est. The third is graven on the wall, in a monument of white and black marble. Johannis Seldenus Heic juxta situs, natus est decimo sexto Decembris MDLXXXIV. Salvintoniae qui viculus est Terring occidentalis in Sussexiae maritimis, parentibus honestis, Jo∣annae Seldeno Thomae filio, è Quinis secundo, Anno MDXLI. nato. Et Margareta filia & haerede unica Thomae Bakeri de Rushington, ex Equestri Bakerorum in Cantîo familia, filius  cunis su∣perstitum unicus, Aetatis fere LXX. annorum. Denatus est ultimo die Novembris, Anno salutis reparatae MDCLIV. per quam expectat heic Resurrectionem faelicem. He was first bred in Mr. Leigh of religious and learned men pag. 100. Hart-hall in Oxford, then in the Inner Temple in London, where he attained great skill in the Law, and all Antiquity. His learning did not live in a Lan,
but traced all the Latitude of Arts and Languages, as appears by the many and various works he hath written, which people affect, as they stand affected either by their Fancy or Function. Lay-gentlemen, preser his Titles of honour, Lawyers, his Mare Clausum, Antiquaries his Spicelegium ad Edmearum, Clergy-men like best his book de Dis Syris, and worst his History of Tythes. Indeed the body of that History did not more offend them in point of profit, then the preface thereof in matter of credit. Such his insolent reflections therein. Nor will it be impertinent here to insert a passage of consequence which I find in a Modern Author of good Intelligence. Master Extraneus Va∣pulans made by an Alter idem to Doctor Heylin pag. 167. Selden was no friend to Bishops, as constituted and established in the Church of England. For, being called before the High Commission, and forced to make a publique acknowledgment of his error and offence gived unto the Church, in publishing a book entituled, The History of Tithes, it sunk so deep into his stomack, that he did never after affected the men, or cordially approved the calling, though many ways were tryed to gain him to the Churches interest. To this his publique acknowledgment I can say nothing, this I know, that a Mr. Spencer keeper of the Library at Jesus-colledge. friend of mine imployed on a fair and honest account, to peruse the Library of Arch-bishop Laud, found therein a large letter written to him, and subscribed with Master Seldens own hand, wherein he used many expressions of his Contrition, much Condemning himself for setting forth a book of that nature; which Letter my aforesaid friend gave back again to Master Selden, to whom (I assure you) it was no unacceptable present. But that which afterwards entituled him to a generall popularity, was his pleading with Master Noy for a Habeas Corpus of such Gentlemen, which were imprisoned for the refusall of the Loane. Hence was it that most men beheld Master Selden as their Com∣mon Councell, and them selves as his Clients, conceiving that the Liberty of all English Subjects was concerned in that Suit. He had very many Ancient Coynes of the Roman Emperours, and more modern ones of our English Kings; dying exceeding wealthy. Insomuch, that naked charity, both wish'd and hoped for a good new Coat at his hands, but mist of its Expectation. The Arch-bishop of Armagh (to whom he was always most civill and respectfull,) preached his Funerall Sermon. The Large Library which he left is a Jewell indeed, and this Jewell long looked to be put into a New Cabinet, when one of the Inns of Court (on which it was bestowed) should be pleased to provide a fair and firm Fabrick to receive it, but now is reposited (Bodly within a ) in the matchless Libra∣ry of Oxford. Romish Exil'd Writers. GREGORY MARTINE was born at Macfield in this County, bred (contemporaryPits de Ang. script. Anno 1582. with Campian,) Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford. He was chosen by Thomas Duke of Northfolk, to be Tutor to his Son Philip Earl of Arundell, and well discharged his trust therein. Going afterwards beyond the Seas, and living some time in Doway and Rome, he fixed at last in the English-colledge at Rhemes, where he was Professor of Divinity. As he was Papall both in his Christian and Surname, so was he deeply dyed with that Reli∣gion, writing many Books in the defence thereof, and one most remarkable, intituled, A Detection of the corruptions in the English Bible. Athaliah 2 Kings 11. 14. did craftily to cry out first, Treason, Treason, when she was the greatest Traitor her self; and this Martine, con∣scious of the many and foul corruptions in his own Rhemish translation, politickly com∣plained of the Faults in our English Bible. He ded the 28. of October 1582. and lyeth buried in the Parish Church of St. Stephens in Rhemes. THOMAS STAPLETON was born at Henfield in this County, as Pitts Pag. 796. his fami∣liar friend doth informe us. Object not that it is written on his Tomb at Saint Peters at Lovaine. Thomas Stapletonus qui Cicestriae in Anglia Nobili loco Natus. Chichester there not being taken restrictively for the City, but extensively for the Diocess. His bare Sirname is sufficient proof of his Gentile Birth.
Those of his own perswasion please themselves much to observe, that this Thomas was born in the same year and month, wherein Sir Thomas Moor was beheaded, as if Di∣vinè Providence had purposely dropped from Heaven, an Acorn in place of the Oake that was ell'd. He was bred in New colledge in Oxford, and then by the Bishop (Christopherson as I take it) made Cannon of Chichester, which he quickly quitted in the First of Queen Elizabeth. Flying beyond the Seas, he first fixed at Doway, and there commendably performed the Office ofSee his Epi∣taph in . Catechist, which he discharged to his commendation. Reader, pardon an Excursion caused by just Grief and Anger. Many counting them∣selfs Protestants in England, do slight and neglect that Ordinance of God, by which their Religion was set up, and gave Credit to it in the first Reformation, I mean CATE∣CHISING. Did not nor Saviour say even to Saint Peter himself? feed my Lambs, feed my heep; And why Lambs first? 1. Because they were Lambs before they were Sheep; 2. Because, if they be not fed whilst Lambs, they could never be Sheep; 3. Because Shep can in some sort feed themselves, but Lambs (such their tenderness) must either be fed, or famished. Our Stapleton was excellent at this Lamb-feeding, from which Office he was afterwards preferred Kings Professor of Divinity in Lovain, and was for fourty years together, Dominus ad Oppositum, the Undertaker-General against all Protestants. Dr. Whitacre Professor in Cambridge, experimentally profest, that Bellarmine was the fairer, and Stapleton the shrewder adversary. His preferment (in mine Eye) was not proportionable to his Merit, being no more then Cannon and Master of a Colledge in Lovain. Many more admired that Stapleton mist, then that Allen got a Cardinals Cap, equalling him in Strictness of Life, exceeding him in Gentility of Birth and Painfulness of Writing for the Romish Cause. Such consider not that Stapletons Ability was drowned with Allens Activity, and one Grain of the Statesman is too heavy for a pound of the Student; Practical Policy in all Ages, beat∣ing Pen-pains out of distance in the Race of Preferment. Stapleton died, and was buried in St. Peters in Lovain, Anno 1598. Benefactors to the Publick. Reader, let not the want of Intelligence in me, be mis-interpreted want of munifi∣cence in the natives of this County, finding but one most eminent, and him since the Reformation. RICHARD SACKVILL Eldest son of Thomas Earl of Dorcet, by Cecilly his Wife, had his Barony (if not his Birth) at Buckhurst in this County. A Gentleman of Singu∣lar learning in many Sciences and Languages; so that the Greek and Latine, were asMills in Ca∣talogue of hon. pag. 418. familiar unto him, as his own native Tongue. Succeeding his father in that Earldom, he enjoyed his dignity not a full year, as lacking seven Weeks thereof. Yet is there no fear that the shortness of his Earlship will make his Name forgotten, having erected a Monument which will perpetuate his Memory to all Posterity, viz. A Col∣ledge at East-greensted in this County, for one and Thirty poor people to serve Almighty God therein. Endowing the same with three hundred and thirty pounds a Year out of all his Land in England. By Margaret sole daughter to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, he left two surviving sons, Richard and Edward, both Persons of admirable parts, (succes∣sively Earls after him,) and dying 1608. was buried at Withiham in this County. Memorable Persons. JOHN PALMER, HENRY PALMER, THOMAS PALMER, Sons unto Edward Palmer, Esq. of Angmarine in this County. A Town so called as I am informed from Aqua Marina, or the water of the sea, being within two Miles thereof, and probably in former Ages neerer thereunto. Their Mother was daughter to one Clement of Wales, who for his effectuall assisting of King Henry the seventh, from his landing at Milford-haven, untill the Battle of Bosworth, was brought by him into England, and rewarded with good Lands, in this and the next County. It happened that their Mother being a full fortnight inclusively in Labour, was on
Whitsunday delivered of John her eldest son, on the sunday following of Henry her se∣cond son, and the sunday next after of Thomas her third son. This is that which is com∣monly called Superfoetation, (usuall in other Creatures, but rare in Women,) the cause whereof we leave to the disquisition of . These Three were knighted  their  by King  the eighth, (who never laid his sword on his Shoulders who was not a Man) so that they appear as re∣markable in their sucesse as their Nativities. The truth hereof needeth no other At∣restation then the generall and uncontrolled Tradition of their no lesse worshipfull then Numerous posterity in Sussex and Kent. Amongst whom I instance in Sir Roger Palmer aged 80. years, lately deceased and  to our late King, averring to me the faith hereof on his Reputation. The exact date of these Knights deaths I cannot attain. LEONARD  of  in this County, being much delighted in gardening, mans Original vocation, was the  who brought over into England from beyond the seas Carps and Pippins, the one well cook'd delicious, the other cordial and restorative. For the proof hereof, we have his ownIn his book of fishing,  and planting. word and witness, and did it, it seems, about the Fifth year of the reign of King Henry the eighth, Anno Dom. 1514. The time of his death is to me unknown. WILLIAM WITHERS born at Walsham in this County, being a Child of Eleven years old, did Anno 1581. lye in a Trance Ten days without any sustenance, and at last coming to himself, uttered to the Standers by, many strange speeches, Inveighing against Pride, , and other Outragious sins. But let the Credit thereof be Charged on myHolinshed in  Chronicle pag. . Authors account. The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the twelsth year of King Henry the sixth. Commissioners. S. Bishop of Chichester, John Earl of Huntington. Knights for the shire. William St. John, William Sidney. Abbatis de Bello Tho. de Echingham, mil. Hugon. Halsham, mil. Rog. Ferrys, mil. Tho. Leukenore, mil. . , mil. Hen. Husee, mil. Rich. Dalyngrigge, ar. Edw. Sakevyle, ar. Will. Ryman, ar. Rog. Gunter, ar. Rob. Lyle Iohan. Bartelet Will. Ernele Walt. Urry Iohan. Lylye Ioh. Knottesford, ar. Rich. Profyt Iohan. Bolne Walt. Fust. Iohan. Wilteshire Ade Iwode Will. Halle de Or Ioh. Tho. Rob. Arnold . Peres Rich. Danmere Tho. Stanton Tho. Cotes Ioh. Wyghtrynge Will. Hore Iohan. Sherar Iohan. Hilly Will. Warnecamp Will. Merwe Toh. Grantford Rad. Vest . Vest Iohan. Hammes de Padyngho Iohan. Parker de Lewes Iacob. Honwode Prior de Lewes Abbatis de Ponte Rober Rober. Abbatis de Begeham Prioris de Mechil∣ham Prioris de Hasting Rich. Waller, ar. Iohan. Ledes, ar. Iohan. Bramshel, ar. Rich. Cook, ar. Rich. Farnfold Ioh. Burdevyle, ar. Rad. Rademeld, ar. Iohan. Apsle Rich. Grene Tho. Grene Will. Blast Rober. Tank Iohan. Bradebrugge Will. Delve Will. Shreswell Iohan. Luniford Iohan. Penhurst Iohan. Goringe Sim. Cheyne Tho. Ashburnham Rich. Clothule Rob. Hyberden Iohan. Dragon Tho. Surflet Henrici Exton Io. Symond Will. Scardevyle Will. Yevan Ioh. Rombrigg Hen. Wendon Rich. Danel Rich. Roper Tho. Fustyngden Rad. Shreswell
Sheriffs. This County had the same Sheriffs with Surry, till the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth, and then for the four years following, had these Sheriffs peculiar to it self. Name Place Armes REG. ELIZA.         9 Ed. Bellinghā, ar.   Arg. 3. Hunters-horns stringed S. 10 Ioh. Apseley, ar.   Barry of 6. Ar. & G. a Cant. Er. 11 Hen. Goring, ar.   Arg. a Chev. twixt 3  G 12 Edw. Carrell, ar. Harting Arg. 3. Bars, & as many Marlets in Chief S. Then were the two Counties re-united under one Sheriff, untill the twelfth year of K. Charles, when, being divided, these following were proper to Sussex alone. Sheriffs. Name Place Armes REX. GARO.     Anno     12 Edw. Bishop, mi. Parham Ar. on a Bend coticed G. 3 . 13 Anth. Fowlc, ar. Gu. a Lion Pass. Gard betwixt 3 Roses Or. 14 Anth. Forster, ar. Tronton S. on a Cheveron A 3 Scallop∣shels of the field betwixt as many Pheons Or. 15 Edw. Apsley, ar. ut prius   16 Geo. Churchar, ar.     17 Egid. Garton▪ ar.     18     19 Ioh. Baker, ar.     20 Edw. Payne, ar▪   Ar. on a fess Engrailed G. 3 Roses Erm. 21     22 Tho. Eversfield, ar.   Erm. on a Bend S. 3  Or. betwixt as many  S. The Farewell. For my Vale to this County, I desire to be their Remembrancer of the counsell which their country-man, William Earl of Arundle, gave to his Son Henry Fitzallen, last Earl of that Surname, viz. Never to trust their Camdes Eliz. Anno 1580. Neighbours the French. Indeed for the present they are at amity with us, but forreign friendship is ticklish, temporary, and lasteth no longer then it is advantaged with mutuall interest. May never French land on this shore, to the Losse of the English. But if so sad an Accident should happen, send then our Sussxians no worse success, then their Ancesters of Rye and Winchelsey had 1378. in the reign Stow his Cro∣nicle in this year. of Richard the second, when they embarked for Normandy. For in the night they entred a Town, called Peters port, took all such Prisoners who were able to pay ransome, and safely returned home without loss, and with much rich Spoil, and amongst the rest they took down out of the Steeple the Bells, and brought them into England. Bells, which the French had taken formely from these Towns, and which did afterwards Ring the more merrily, restored to their proper place, with ad∣dition of much wealth to pay or the cost of their Recovery.
VVARWICK-SHIRE. WARWICK-SHIRE hath Leicester and Northampton-shires on the East, Oxford, & Gloucester-shires on the South, Worcester on the West, and Stafford-shire on the North thereof. In forme at the first view in a Map it doth pretend to some Circularness, but attaineth no exactness therein, as ex∣tending Thirty three miles, from North to South, though from East to West not distanced above twenty six. One said no less truly then merrily, It is the Heart but not the Core of England, ha∣ving nothing Course or Choaky therein. The Wood-land part thereof may want what the Fieldon affords. So that Warwick-shire is defective in neither. As for the Pleasure thereof, an  Speed in his descript. of Warwick-shire. Author is bold to say, that from Edg-hill one may behold it another Eden, as Gen. 13. 10. Lot did the Plain of Jordan, but he might have put in, It is not altogether so well watered. Naturall Commodities. Sheep. Most large for bone, flesh and wooll in this County, especially about Worm-Leighton. In this Shire the complaint of J. Rous continueth and increaseth, that sheep turn Canibals, eating up men, houses, and towns, their pastures make such depopulation. But on the other side, it is pleaded for these Inclosures, that they make houses the fewer in this County, and the more in the Kingdome. How come buildings in great towns every day to encrease? (so that commonly Tenants are in before Tenements are ended,) but that the poor are generally maintain'd by Clothing, the Staple-trade of the Nation. Indeed Corn doth visibly employ the poor in the place where it groweth, by Ploughing, Sowing, Mowing, Inning, Threshing: but Wooll invisibly maintaineth people at many miles distance, by Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Dressing, Dying it. However an expedient might be so used betwixt Tillage and Pastureage, that Abel should not kill Cain, the Shepherd undoe the Husbandman, but both subsist comfortably together. Ash. It is the Prince (Oke being allowed the King) of Eglish Timber, growing plenti∣fully in the Wood-land Part of this County. I confess it far short in Sovereigness against Serpents of the Italian Ash, if true what Pliny reporteth, (making Affidavit thereof on his own Experience, Nat. Hist. . 16. cap. 13. Experti prodimus) that a Serpent incircled with Fire and Boughes of Ash, will in this Dilemma, put himself rather on the hazard of fire, then adventure on the fence of Ashen Boughes. It is also far infeiour in toughness to the Spanish Ash, and yet a Stand of Pikes made of English Ash, and managed with English-mens Arms, will doe very well. But to wave the Warlike, and praise the Peaceable use of the Ash, it is excellent for Plow-timber, besides many Utensils within a Family. Being cut down Green it burneth (a Peculiar Priviledge of this Wood) clear and bright, as if the Sappe thereof, had a fire-feeding Unctiousness therein. The fruit thereof is good in Phy∣sick, whose Keys are opening of obstructions arising from the Spleen. Cole. Much hereof is digged up at Bedworth, which (in my Measuring) of all Cole-mines, North of Thames, is the most Southward, adding much to their Price, and Owners Pro∣fit. The making such Mines destroyeth much, but when made preserveth more Tim∣er. I am sorry to hear, that those black Indies, both in Quantity and Quality, fall short of their former fruitfulness, and I wish they may recover their lost Credit, being confi∣dent, the Earth there will bleed Profit as plentifully as any, had the Miners but the good Hap, to hit the right vein thereof. As for Manufactures in this County, some Broad cloths are made in Coventry, and ten might be made for one, if the mistery thereof were vigorously pursued.
The Buildings. Coventry much beholding to the Lady Godiva, (who took Order that her Charity should not prejudice her Modesty, when she purchased the Priviledges of this Place) sheweth two fair Churches close together: How clearly would they have shined, if set at competent Distance? whereas now, such their Vicinity, that the Arch-angel eclyp∣seth the Trinity. Saint Maies in Warwick a Beautifull Structure, owes its life to the Monuments of the dead therein, most being Earls of Warwick. Of these, that in the Body of the Church is the Oldest, that in the Chancell is the largest, that in the Chapell (of Guilt Brass) the Richest, that in the Chapter-House (of Fulke Lord Brook) the latest. Greatness may seem in some fort to be buried in the Tomb of the Earl of Leicester, and Goodness in that of the Earl of Warwick. Women are most delighted with the Statue of the Infant Baron of Denby, and Scholars most affected with the learned Epitaph of Sir Thomas Puckering. In a word, so numerous is the Church with its Appendences, as I am enformed by my Worthy Friend, the Mr. Venour. Minister, that he can accommodate One Clergy∣man, of all Dignities and Degrees, to repose them, in severall Chapells or Veries by themselves. Kenelworth, alias Kenilworth. It had the Strength of a Castle, and Beauty of a Princes Court; Though most fair the Porch, no danger of the Castles running out thereat, (like that of Mindus at the Gate) as most Proportionable to the rest of the Fabrick. I confess Handsome is an unproper Epithete of a Gyant, yet Neatness agreeth with the Vastness of this structure. Some Castles have been Demolished for security, which I behold destroyed, se de∣fendendo, without offence. Others Demolished in the heat of the Wars, which I look upon as Castle-slaughter. But I cannot excuse the Destruction of this Catle, from Wilfull-murder, being done in cold blood, since the end of the Wars. I am not stock'd enough with Charity to pitty the Ruiners thereof, if the materialls of this Castle answered not their Expectation, who destroyed it. Pass we now from the Preterperfect to the Present Tense, I mean from what was once, to what now is most magnificent, the Castle of Warwick. It over-looketh the Town which is washed and swept by Nature, so sweet on a Rising Hill, is the situation thereof. The Prospect of this Castle is Pleasant in its self, and far more to the Present Owner thereof, the Right Honourable Robert Lord Brooke, seeing the Windows look into Lands mostly of his Possession. We will conclude the Buildings of this County, with the beautifull Cross of Coven∣try. A Reformed Cross, (or Standard rather) without any Cross thereon, being a Master∣piece, all for Ornament, nothing for Superstition, so that the most curious, hath just cause to commend, the most conscientious to allow, none to condemn it. It was begun 1541. the 33. and finished 1544. the 36. of King Henry the eighth, at the sole cost of Sir William Hollis Lord Mayor of London, Great-grand-father to the Right Honorable the Earl of Clare. The Wonders. At Lemington, within two Miles of Warwick, there issue out (within a stride) of the womb of the Earth, two Twin-springs, as different in Tast and Operation, as Esa and Jacob in disposition, the one Salt, the other Fresh. Thus the meanest Country-man doth plainly see the Effects, whilst it would pose a Consultaion of Philosophers to assign the true cause thereof. To this Permanent let me joyne a transent Wonder which some was fifty years since. The Situation of Coventry is well known, on a rising Hill, having no River near it, save a small Brook, over which generally one may make a Bridge with a Stride. Now here happened such an Inundation, on friday April the seventeenth 1607. (attested under the Seal of the City, in the Majoralty of Henry Swel) as was equally admirable;
In 1. Coming about eight a clock in the morning, no considerable rain pre∣ceding, which might suggest the least suspicion thereof. In 2. Continuance, for the Space of three Hours, wherein it overflowed more then two hundred and fifty dwelling Houses, to the great damage of the Inhabitants. In 3. Departure, or vanishing rather, sinking as suddenly as it did rise. Thus what the Scripture saith of John 3. 5. wind, was then true of the water, One cannot tell, whence it came, nor whither it went. Leaving others to enquire into the second and sub∣ordinate, I will content my self with admiring the Supreme Cause, observed by the Psalm. 107. 35. Psalmist, He turneth a wilderness into a standing water, and dry-ground into water∣Springs. Medicinal waters. At Newenham Regis there is a Spring, the water whereof drunk with Salt loosneth, with Sugar bindeth the Body. It is also very Sovereigne against Ulcers, Impostumes, & the Stone. This last I commend to the Readers choise observation, the same Spd in his Description of Warwick-shire. Author affirm∣ing that it turneth Sticks into Stone, and that he himself was an Eye-witness thereof. Now, how it should dissolve the Stone in the Body of a Man, and yet turn Wood into Stone, I leave to such who are naturae à Sanctioribus Consiliis, at their next meeting at their Counsel-table, to discuss and decide. Proverbs. He is the black Bear of Arden.] Arden, is a Forrest, anciently occupying all the Wood-land part of this County. By the Black Bear, is meant Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, who (besides the allusion to his Crest) was Grim of Person and Surly of resolution, for when this Bear had gotten Pierce Gavistone, (that Munkey and Minion of King Edward the second) into his Cham∣bers, he caused his Death at a Hill within two miles of Warwick, notwithstanding all opposition to the contrary. The Proverb is appliable to those who are not Terricula menta, bnt Terrores, no fancy-formed Bug-bears, but such as carry fear and fright to others about them. As bold as Beauchamp.] Some will say the concurrence of these two B. B. did much help the Proverbe, and I think (as in others of the same kind) they did nothing hinder it. However this qua∣lity could not be fixed on any name with more truth. If it be demanded, what Beau∣champ is chiefly meant, amongst the many of that Surname, Earls of Warwick? The answer of mutinous people is true in this case, One and all. 1. William. 2. Guy. 3. Thomas. 4. Thomas. 5. Richard. 6. Henry. Such a series there was of successive undauntedness in that noble Family. But, if a better may be allowed amongst the best, and a bolder amongst the boldest; I conceive that Thomas the first of that name, gave the chief occasion to this Proverbe, of whom we read it thus reported in our Out of which it is observed by Mr. M lls in his Catal. of Honour pag. 804. and Mr. Dugale in his Earls of War∣wick. Chronicles: At Hogges in Normandy, in the year of our Lord 1346. being there in safety arrived with Edward the third, this Thomas leaping over ship-board, was the first man who went on land, seconded by one Esquire, and six Archers, being mounted on a silly Palfray, which the suddain accident of the busi∣ness first offered to hand; with this company, he did fight against one hundred armed men, and in hostile manner overthrew every one which with∣stood him: and so at one shock, with his seven assistants, he slew sixty Nor∣mans, removed all resistance, and gave means to the whole fleet to land the Army in safety. The Heirs-male off this name, are long since extinct, though some deriving them∣selves from the Heirs-generall, are extant at this day. The Bear wants a Tail, and cannot be a Lion.] Nature hath cut off the Tail of the Bear close at the Rump, which is very strong, and long in a Lion; for a great part of the Lions strength consists in his Tail, wherewith
(when Angry) he useth to Flap and Beat himself, to raise his Rage therewith to the Height, so to render himself more Fierce and Furious. If any ask why this Proverbe is placed in Warwick-shire? Let them take the Ensuing Story for their satisfaction. Robert Dudley Earl of Leiceer, derived his Pedegree from the ancient Earls of War∣wick, on which Title he gave their Crest, the Bear and Ragged Staffe, and when he was Governour of the Low Countries, with the high Title of his Excellency, disusing his Own Coat of the Green-Lion with Two Tails, he signed all Instruments with the Crest of the Bear and Ragged Staffe. He was then suspected by many of his jealous adversaries, to hatch an Ambitious design to make himself absolute Commander (as the Lion is King of Beasts) over the Low-Countries. Whereupon some (Foes to his faction, and Friends to the Dutch-freedome) wrote unde his Crest, set up in Publick places, Ursa caret cauda, non queat esse Leo. The Bear he never can prevail To Lion it, for lack of Tail. Nor is Usa in the feminine meerly placed to make the Verse; But because Natura∣lists observe in Bears, that the Female is always the strongest. This Proverb is applyed to such who not content with their Condition, aspire to what is above their worth to deserve, or Power to atchive. He is true Coventry-blew.] It seems the best blews, so well fixed as not to fade, are died in Coventry. It is ap∣plied to such an one who is fidus Achates, a fast and faithfull friend to those that employ him. Opposite hereunto is the Greek Proverb,  in Probl. Cur po∣lypus mutat co∣pus. , Ignavi vertitur color, A Coward will change colour, either for fear or falsehood, when deserting those who placed confidence in him. As for those who apply this Proverb to persons so habited in wickedness, as past hope of amendment, under favour I conceive it a se∣condary, and but abusive sense thereof. Princes. ANNE NEVILL Daughter and Co▪heir to Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick, was most probbly born in Warwick-castle. She was afterward married with a great portion and inheritance, to Edward Prince of Wales, sole Son to King Henry the sixth. A Prince, neither dying of Disease, nor slain in Battle, nor executed by Justice, but bar∣barously butchered by Richard Duke of Gloucester. Was it not then a daring piece of Court-ship in him, who had murthered her hus∣band, to make love unto her in way of marriage; and was not his success strange in obtaining her, having no  to commend his person to her affection? O the Im∣potency of the weaker sex, to resist the battery of a Princely Suitor, who afterward became King by his own ambition! however her life with him proved neither long nor fortunate. It happened that there was the muttering of a marriage between Henry Earl of Rich∣mond, and Elizabeth eldest Daughter to Edward the fourth, so to unite the houses of Lancaster and York. To prevent this, King Richard the third intended to marry the Lady himself, so methodicall he was in breaking the Commandements of the second Table. First Honour thy Father and Mother, when he procured his Mother to be pro∣claimed a harlot, by a Preacher at Pauls Cross. Secondly, Thou shalt not kill, when he murthered his Nephews. Thirdly, Thou shalt not Commit adultery, being now in pur∣suit of an incestuous Copulation. Say not that this match would nothing confirme his title, seeing formerly he had pronunced all the Issue of King Edward the fourth as Illegitimate; for first, that de∣signe was rather indevoured then effected, most men remaining (notwithstanding this bastardizing attempt) well satisfied in the rightfulness of their extraction. Secondly, they should or should not be Bastards, as it made for his present advantage. Tyrants always driving that nail which will goe, though it go cross to those which they have driven before. Lastly, if it did not help him, it would hinder the Earl of Richmond, which made that Usurper half wild till he was wedded.
But one thing withstood his desires, this Anne his Queen was still alive, though daily quarrelled at, and complained of (her son being lately dead) for barren, and O what a loss would it be to nature it self, should her husband dye without an heir unto his ver∣tues! Well, this Lady understanding that she was a burthen to her husband, for grief soon became a burthen to herself, and wasted away on a suddain. Some think she went her own pace to the grave, while others suspect a grain was given her to quicken her in her journy to her long home. Which happened Anno Dom. 1484. EDWARD PLANTAGNET Son to George Duke of Clarence, may passe for a Prince, because the last Male-heir of that Royal Family. Yea, some of his Foes fear∣ed, and more of his Friends desired, that he might be King of England. His Mother was Isabel, Eldest Daughter to Richard▪Nevill Earl of Warwick. And he was born in Mr. Dugdale in his Illustra∣tions of War∣wick , in the Catalogue of the  thereof. Warwick-castle. As his Age increased, so the Jealousie of the Kings of England on him did increase, being kept Close Prisoner by King Edward the fourth, Closer by King Richard the third, and Closest by King Henry the seventh. This last, being of a New Linage and Sirname, knew full well how this Nation hankered after the Name of Plantagenet, which as it did out-syllable Tuthar in the Mouths, so did it out-vie it in the Affections of the Eng∣lish. Hence was it, that the Earl was kept in so strict Restraint, which made him very weak in his Intellectuals, and no wonder, being so sequestred from human converse. It happened, a marriage was now in debate, betwixt Prince Arthur, and Katherine Daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain, and the latter would not consent thereunto, untill to clear all Titles, this Edward Plantagenet were taken out of the way. There∣upon he was Charged for intending an Escape out of the Tower, (was he not a very fool indeed, if not desiring his own liberty?) which far fetch'd deduction was  into High Treason. The simple Earl was perswaded by his friend pretending Foes, to confess the fact as the only way to find favour, and so freely acknowledging more against himself, then others could prove, yea, or himself did intend, soon after found the Proverb true, Confess and be Beheaded. However the bloud of this Innocent (so may he truely be termed take the word in what sence you please) did not pass unpunished, and the Lady Katherine Dowager was wont to acknowledge the death of her two Sons an ill success of her match, as Hea∣vens Judgement on her family, for the Murdering of this Earl, which happened Anno Domini 1499. Saints. Saint WOLSTAN. There is some difference, but what is easily reconcileable, about the place of his Nativity, J. Pitz, de illust. Angliae Script. aetate undecima num. 174. Sanctus Wolstanus natione Anglus Wi∣gorniensis. Hierom. Porter, in the Flowers of the lives of English Saints, p. 84. Saint Wolstan was born in Warwick-shire, of worthy and religious Parents. The accommodation is easy, seeing a Warwick-shire man by his County, may be a Worcester-man by his Diocess, to which See the western moity of that County doth be∣long. Since I have learned from my worthy M. Dugdale in  illustra∣tions of this County. friend, that Long Irtington in this Shire, may boast of the birth of Saint Wolstan. He afterwards began Bishop of Worcester, and for his piety and holiness was generally reverenced. Indeed he was like Jacob, a plain man, with Nathaniel an Israelite without guile, welt or gard. He could not Mode it, or comport, either with French ficleness, or Italian pride, which rendred him at once hated by two Grandees, K. Wil. the Conqueror, and Lank∣fank the lordly Lombard Arch-bishop of Canterbury. These resolved on his removall, quarrelling with him that he could not speake French, (a quality which much commended the Clergy in that Age to preferment,) and command him to give up his Episcopal staffe and ring into the hands of the King. But old Wolstan trudged to the Tomb of King Edward the Confessor in Westminster, who
had been his Patron, and there offered up his Episcopal Habilliments, These (said he) from you I received, and to you I resign them. This his plain dealing so wrought on his adversaries, (Honesty at long running is the best Policy,) that he was not only continued, but countenanced in his Bishoprick, yea, ac∣quired the reputation of a Saint. The greatest fault which I find charged on his Me∣mory, is his Activity in making W. Rufus King to the apparent injury of Roert his Elder Brother. But it is no wonder, if Clergy men betray their weakness, who being bred in a Covent, quit Church business, to intermedle with Secular matters. He died January 19. 1095. Martyrs. Name Place Vocation Martyred Time Laurence Sanders   Priest Coventry Feb. 8. 1555. Robert Glover Mancetor Gentleman Coventry Sept. 20. 1555. Cornelius Bongey Coventry Capper Coventry Sept. 20. 1555. John Careles Coventry Wever Kings-bench, London   To these let me add JULIUS PALMER a hopefull scholar, bred in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, aud though burnt in Newbury, born at Coventry. Ralph Bains Bishop of this Diocess, was the cause of much persecution therein. Confessors. JOHN GLOVER. David saith, He shall deliver the from the snare of the Hunter.Psalm. 91. 3. Now Hunters often change their Hare, losing that which they first followed, and starting another which they hunt and take: So it happened here. For this John was the person by his persecutors designed to Death, who (after many temporall and spi∣rituall troubles) Miraculously escaped those Nimrods. Whilst Robert Glover his young∣er Brother (of whom before) without their intention, fell into their hands, and lost his life. Yet was there no mistake in Divine Providence, making the Swervings and Aberrations of men, tend in a straight line, to the accomplishing of his hidden Will and Pleasure. Cardinals. WILLIAM MAKLESFIELD was born saith myBishop God∣wi in hi Ca∣tal. of Cardin. pg. 170. Author (but with an abatement of a hic fertur) in the City of Coventry. He was made Batchelour of Divinity at Paris, Doctor at Oxford and being a Dominican was made Generall of their Order. Pope Bnedict the eleventh, (who was of the same fraternity,) formerly his familiar acquaintance, made him Cardinal, with the title of Saint Sabine. But such his mis∣fortune, that he was dead and buried at London, before his Cardinals cap was brought to him. What said David, He shall carry nothing away with him when he dyes, Neither shall hisPsalm. 49. 17. Pomp follow him. Yet this mans State endeavoured to follow him as far as it could. For his Cardinals cap being sent to London with great Solemnity, was with much Mag∣nificence set on theBishop Gd∣win ut supra. Monument where he was buried. And perchance this cap did him as much good when he was dead, as it would have done, if he had been living. Sure I am, that Fithfull Linnen did him far more service, which adventured to go down with him into the grave, for the winding of his body therein. Bishop Go∣win in his Ca∣al of Cardin. PETER PETOW by Master Camden called William Petow, (and had I been at his Christening, I could have decided he controversy,) wasCamens Bri.  Warwick-sh. descended from an Ancient fa∣mily, which for a long time have flourished at Chesterton in this County. Being by Or∣der a Franciscan, he was by Pope Paulus the third created Cardinal, (his title unknown) June 13. 1557. The same Pope also made him Legat à Latere, and Bishop of Salisbury, to the appa∣rent wronging of John Capon Bishop thereof, then alive, and no more Obnoxious then others of his Order. But I forget what the Cannon-law saith, None may say to the Pope,
why dost thou so? as if what were unjust in it self, were made just by his doing it. Ptow thus Armed, with a Legatine Power advances towards England, with full Intent and Resolution, either to force his Admittance into the English Court, or else to depart as he came. But Queen Mary though Drenched, not Drown'd in Popish Principles, would not Un∣prince herself to Obey his Holiness, and understanding it a Splenatick design against Car∣dinal Poole, whom she intirely affected, (wonder not at such differences betwixt Anti∣Cardinals, whereas worse between Anti-Popes,) Prohibited his enterance into the Realme, which Petow took so tenderly, that the April after he dyed in France 1558. Prelates. JOHN STRATFORD son of Robert and Isabell Stratford, is notoriously known to be born at Stratford, an Eminent Market in this County. This makes me much ad∣mire, and almost suspect my own Eyes, in what I read, both in Arch-bishop Parker, and Bishop Godwin, In  life of Stratford. De cujus Gente atque Patria nihil accepimus. Idem Ibidm. De cujus viri Natalibus traditum non reperi quicquam. Being by Papall provisions preferred Bishop of Winchester, without the Royall Con∣sent, he fell into the Dis-favour of King Edward the second, regaining his Good will, (by the intercession of Arch-bishop Mepham) and being a Subject, not to the Prospe∣rity, but person of his Prince, he forsooke him not in his greatest Extremity. This cost him the Displeasure of the Queen Mother, and King Edward the third, till at last Converted by his Constancy, they turned their frowns into smiles upon him. When Arch-bishop of Canterbury, he perswaded King Edward the third to invade France, promising to supply him with competent provisions for the purpose. A pro∣mise not so proportionable to his Archiepiscopal Capacity, as to him, as he had been twice Treasurer of England, and skilfull in the collecting and advancing of money, so that he furnished the King with great sums, at his first setting forth for France. These being spent before the year ended, the King sends over for a supply. Strat∣ford instead of Coin, returns Counsell, advising him to alter his Officers, otherwise, if so much was spent at a Breakfast, the whole wealth of the land, would not suffice him for Dinner. Over comes the angry King, from whose fury Stratford was forc'd to conceal him∣self, untill publickly passing his purgation in Parliament, he was restored to the repu∣tation of his Innocence, and rectified in the Kings esteem. He built, and bountifully endowed, a Beautifull Colledge, in the Town of his Nativity, and having set Arch∣bishop fifteen years, dyed Anno 1348. leaving a perfumed memory behind him, for his Bounty to his Servants, Charity to the Poor, Meekness and Moderation to all persons. RALPH STRATFORD (kinsman to the foresaid Arch-bishop,) was bornGodwin n the Bihops of London. in the Town of Stratford on Avon, where he built a Chappel to the honour of Saint Thomas. He was first Cannon of Saint Pauls, and afterwards May 12. 1339. was consecrated at Canterbury Bishop of London. During his sitting in that See, there happened so grievous a Pestilence in London, that hardly the Tenth Person in some places did escape. Then each Church-yard was in∣deed a Polyandrum, so that the Dead might seem to Justle one another for room there∣in. Yea, the Dead did kill the Living, so shallowly were their heaped Corps in∣terred. Whereupon this Bishop Charitably bought a Piece of Ground nigh Smithfield. It was called No▪Mans-Land, not à parte Ante, as formerly without an Owner, (seeing it had a Proprictary of whom it was legally purchased,) but de futuro, none having a parti∣cular interest therein, though indeed it was All-Mens-Land, as designed and consecrated for the Generall Sepulture of the Deceased. This Bishop having continued about 14. years in his See, he died at Stepney 1355. ROBERT STRATFORD (brother to the Arch-bishop aforesaid) was in the reign
of King Edward the third made Bishop of Chichester. He was at the same time Chan∣cellour of Oxford, (wherein he was bred) and of all England. Honorable Offices, which sometimes have met in the same Person, though never more deservedly then in the Present Enjoyer of them both. In his time there was a tough contest betwixt the South and Northern-men in that University. They fell from their Pens to their Hands, using the contracted fist of Marial, Logick, bloody blows passing betwixt them. Th s Bishop did Brian Twin. wisely and fortunately bestirre himself an Arbitrator in this Controversy, being a proper Person for such a performance, born in this County, (in the very Navil of England) so that his Nativity was a Naturall Expedient betwixt them, and his Judgement was unpartiall in compremising the difference. He was accused to the King for favouring the French, with his Brother Arch∣bishop, contented patiently to attend till Pregnant Time was delivered of Truth her Daughter, and then this Brace of Prelates appeared Brethren in Integrity. He died at Allingbourn April 9. 1362. JOHN VESTY alias HARMAN, Doctor of Law, was born at Sutton Colefield in this County, bred in Oxford; A most vivacious person, if the Date of these Remarks be seriously considered. 1. In the twentieth year of King Henry the sixth, he was appointed to cele∣brate the Divine-service in the Free-Chappell of Saint Blase of Sutton aforesaid. 2. In the twentie third year of Henry the seventh, he was made Vicar of Saint Michaells Church in Coventry. 3. Under K. Henry the eighth, he was made Dean of the Chappell Royall, Tutor to the Lady Mary, and President of Wales. 4. In the Eleventh of K. Henry the eighth, 1519. he was advanced to be Bi∣shop of Exeter. Which Bishoprick he destroyed, not onely shaving the Hairs, (with long leases) but cutting away the limbs with sales outright, in so much that Bishop Hall his successor in that See, complaineth in print, that the following Bishops were Barons, but Bare-ones indeed. Some have Confidently affirmed, in my hearing, that the word to Veize (that is in the West, to drive away with a Witness) had its Originall from his Profligating of the lands of his Bishoprick, but I yet demurre to the truth thereof. He robbed his own Cathedrall to pay a Parish Church, Sutton in this County, where he was born, wheron he bestowed many Benefactions, and built fifty one houses. To inrich this his Native Town, he brought out of Devonshire many Clothiers, with De∣sire and Hope to fix the Manufacture of Cloathing there. All in vaine, for as Bishop Godwin observeth, Non omnis fert omnia tellus. Which though true conjunctively, that all Countrys put together bring forth all things, to be Mutually bartered by a Reciprocation of Trade, is false disjunctively, no one place affording all Commodities, so that the Cloath-workers here, had their pains for their labour, and sold for their lost. It seems though he brought out of Devon-shire the Fiddle and Fiddlestick, he brought not the Rosen, therewith to make Good Musick, and every Country is in∣nated with a Peculiar Genius, and is left handed to those trades, which are against their Inclinations. He quitted his Bishoprick (not worth keeping) in the reign of King Edward the sixth, and no wonder he resumed it not in the reign of Queen Mary, the Bone not being worth the taking, the Marrow being knocked out before. He died (being 103. years old,) in the reign of Q. Mary, and was buried in his Native Town, with his Statue Mi∣tred and Vested. Since the Reformation. JOHN BIRD was born in the City of Ble de Script. Brit. Coventry, bred a Carmelite at Oxford, and
became afterwards the 31. (the head-game) and last Provinciall of his Order. He Preached some smart Sermons before King Henry the eighth, against the Primacy of the Pope, for which he was preferred (saith Bishop Godwin) to be successively Bishop of Ossery in Ireland, Bangor in Wales, and Chester in England. To the two last we concur, but dissent to the former, because John Bale contem∣porary with this John Bird, and also Bishop of Ossery, (who therefore must be presumed skilfull in his Predecessors in that See) nameth him not Bishop of Ossery, but Episco∣pum Pennecensem in Hiberniâ, the same Bale saith of him, Audivi eum ad Papismi vo∣mitum reversum. I have heard that (in the reign of Queen Mry) he returned to the vo∣mit of Popery: which my charity will not believe. Indeed in the first of Queen Mary he was outed of his Bishoprick for being married, and all that we can recover of his carriage aterwards, is this passage at the examination of Master Thomas Hauke, Martyr. When John Bird (then very old) brought Boner a bottle of Wine, and a dish of Apples, probably a present unto him for a Ne noceat, and therefore not enough to speak him a Papist in his perswasion. Bishop Boner desired him to take Haukes into his Chamber, and to try if he could convert him, whereupon after Boners departure out of the room, the quondam Bishop accosted Haukes as followeth, Fox Acts and Monum. pag. 1588. & anno 1555. I would to God I could do you some good, you are a young man, and I would not wish you to go to far, but learn of the elders to bear somewhat. He enforced him no further, but being a thorough old man even fell fast asleep. All this in my computation amounts but to a passive compliance, and is not evidence enough to make him a thorough paced Papist, the rather because John Pitts omitteth him in the Catalogue of English-writers, which no doubt he would not have done, had he any as∣surance, that he had been a radicated Romanist. Nothing else have I to observe of him, but onely that he was a little man, and had a pearl in his eyes, and dying 1556. was buried in Chester. States men. Sir NICHOLAS THROCKMORTON Knight, fourth Son of Sir George Throckmorton of Coughton in this County, was bred beyond the Seas, where he attain∣ed to great experience. Under Queen Mary he was in Guild-Hall arraigned for Trea∣son (compliance with Wyat) and by his own warie pleading, and the Jurie's upright verdict hardly escaped. Queen Elizabeth employed him Her Leiger a long time, first in France, then in Scotland, finding him a most able Minister of State, yet got he no great wealth, and no wonder, being ever of the opposite party to Camdens Eliz. Anno 159. Burleigh Lord Treasurer; Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and Chief Butler of England, were his high∣est preferments. I say Chief Butler, which office like an empty covered cup, pretend∣eth to some state, but affordeth no considerable profit. He died at supper with eating of salates, not without suspicion of poison, the rather because hapning in the house of one no mean artist in that faculty, R. Earl of Leicester. His death as it was sudden, was seasonable for him and his, whose active (others will call it turbulent) spirit had brought him into such trouble as might have cost him, at least, the loss of his Idem Anno 1570. personal estate. He died in the fifty seventh year of his age, February the 12. 1570. and lyeth Stows Survay of London p. 149. bury∣ed in the South-side of the Chancel of St. Katharine Cree-Church London. EDWARD CONWAY Knight, Son to Sir John Conway Knight, Lord and Owner of Ragleigh in this County. This Sir John being a Person of Great skill in Military affaires, was made by Robert Earl of Leicester (Generall of the English Auxiliaries in the united Provinces) Governour of Ostend. His Son Sir Edward succeeded to his Fathers Martial skill and valour, and twisted therewith peaceable policy in State-affaires▪ so that the Gown and the Sword met in him in most Eminent Proportion, and thereupon King James made Him one of the Principal Secretaries of State. For these his good services, he was by him created Lord Conway of Ragleigh in this County, and afterwards by King Charles, Viscount Killultagh in the County of Antrim. And lastly in the third of King Charles, Viscount Conway of Conway in Carnarvanshire, England, Ireland and Wales, mutually embracing themselves in His Honours. He dy∣ed January the third, Anno 1630.
JOHN DIGBY Baron of Sherborn, and Earl of Bristol, was born in this County, a younger Son of an ancient family, long flourishng at Coleshull therein. To pass by his Infancy, (all Children being alike in their long Coats) his Youth gave pregnant hopes of that Eminency, which his mature age did produce. He didken the Emhassador-Craft, as well as any in his age, employed by King James, in several services to frreign Princes, recited in his Patent (which I have peru∣sed) as the main motives of the Honors conferr'd upon him. But his managing the Matchless Match with Spain, was his Master-piece, wherein a Good (I mean a Great) num∣ber of State-Traverses were used on both sides. His contest with the Duke of Buckingham, is fresh in many mens Memories, charges of High Treason mutually flying about. But this Lord fearing the Dukes Power (as the Duke this Lors policy) it at last became a Drawn Battail betwixt them; yet so, that this Earl lost the love of King Charles, living many years in his Dis-favour: But such as are in a Court-Cloud, have commonly the Countries Sun-shine, and this Peer during his Eclyps was very Popular with most of the Nation. It is seldom seen, that a favorite once Broken at Court, sets up again for himself, the hap (rather then happiness) of this Lord, the King graciously reflecting on him, at the beginning of the Long-Parliament, as one Best able to give him the safest Counsell in those dangerous Times. But how he incensed the Parliament so far as to be excep∣ted Pardon, I neither do know nor dare enquire. Sure I am after the surrender of Exe∣ter, he went over into France, where he met with that due respect in forraign, which he missed in his Native Country. The worst I wish such, who causelesly suspect him of Popish inclinations, is, that I may hear from them but half so many strong Arguments for the Protestant Religion, as I have heard from him, who was to his commendation a Cordial Champion for the Church of England. He dyed in France about the year 1650. Writers. WALTER of COVENTRIE was born  cent. 3. num. 74. and bred a Benedictine therein. Bale saith he was, Immortali vir dignus Memoria, and much commended by Leland (though not of set purpose, but) sparsim as occasion is offered. He excelled in the two Essential Qua∣lities of an Historian, Faith and Method, writing truly and orderly, onely guilty of Cours∣ness of style. This may better be dispenced with in him, because Historia est res veritatis non Eloquentiae, because bad Latin was a catching disease in that age. From the be∣ginning of the Britons he wrote a Chronicle (extant in Bennet Colledge Library) to his own time. He flourished Anno 1217. VINCENT of COVENTRIE was born in the chief City in this shire, and bred a Thomas Ec∣cl stone in Chronile of Franciscans. Franciscan (though Learned Leland mistakes him a Carmelite) in the University of Cambridg. His order at their first entrance into England, looked upon learning as a thing be∣neath them; so totally were they taken up with their Devotion. This Vincent was the first who brake the Ice (and then others of his order drank of the same water) first ap∣plyed himself to Academicall studies, and became a publick Bale de Script. cent. 4. num. 12. Professor in Cambridge, he set a Coppy for the Carmelites therein to imitate, who not long after began their publick Lectures in the same place, he left some books to posterity, and flourished An∣no Dom. 1250. JOHN of KILLINGWORTH born in that Castelled-village in this County, bred in Oxford, an excellent Philosopher, Astronomer and Physitian. He studyed the Stars so long, that at last he became A STAR himself in his own Sphere, and out-shined all others of that Faculty. He was Father and Founder to all the Astronomers in that Age. I never did spring such a Covye of Mathematicians all at once, as I met with at this time, Cervinus or Hart, Cure, John Stacy and Blach, Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 6. num. 10. all bred in Merton Colledge. Which Society in the former Century applyed themselves to School-Divinity, in this to Mathematicks, and attained to Eminency in both, so good a Genius acted within the walls of that worthy foundation. He flourished about the year 1360. WILLIAM of COVENTRY was born and bred a Carmelite in that City.
He in his Youth was afflicted with an unhealable Sprain in his Hip, and was commonly called Claudus Conversus, which I adventure to English, the lame Converted. Conversus pits de Scrip  . properly is one, who for lack of Learning or Deformity of Body, is con∣demned to the servile work in the Monastery, under a Despair ever to be made Priest, termed it seems Conversus, because not of voluntary choice, Turning, to that course of Life, but Turned (as Passively necessitated) thereunto. But hear how J. Pits clincheth in his Praise. Claudicavit corporis gressu, non virtutis progressu, vitiatus corpore non viciosus animo, being in his writings full of Sntences. Amongst which Bale takes especial notice of his Prodesset Hierosolymam petere & alia in∣visere loca sacra, sed multum praestaret eo precio pauperes alere domi, wherein though I perceive no more sententiousness then common sense, yet because it containeth a Bold Truth in those Blind Dayes, it may be mentioned. He never set his name to his Books, but it may (according to the Frierly-Fancy) be collected out of the Capital Letters of his severall works. Who flourished Anno 1360. JOHN ROUSE Son of Jeffery Rouse, was born at Warwick, but descended from the Rouses of Brinkloe in this County, he was bred in Oxford, where he attained to great Eminencie of Learning, he afterwards retired himself to Guiscliffe within a Mile of Warwick. A most delicious place, so that a Man in many Miles Riding cannot meet so much variety, as there one forlong doth afford. A steep Rock full of Caves in the Bowels thereof, wash'd at the Bottome with a Christall River, besides many clear Springs on the side thereof, all overshadowed with a stately grove, so that an ordinary Fancy may here find to it self Helicon, Parnassus, and what not? Many Hermites (and Guy Earl of Warwick himself) being sequestred from the world, retreated hither. Some will say it is too Gaudy a place for that purpose, as having more of a Paradice then Wilder∣ness therein, so that mens thoughts would rather be Scattered then Collected with such various objects. But seeing Hermits deny themselves the Company of Men, let them be allowed to Converse with the Rarities of Nature, and such are the fittest texts for a solitary devotion to comment upon. To this place came our John Rouse, and by leave obtained from King Edward the fourth, immured himself therein, that he might apply his Studies without distraction. Here he wrote of the Antiquities of Warwick, with a Catalogue of the Earls there∣of, a Chronicle of our English Kings, and a History of our Universities. He was as good with the Pensill as the Pen, and could Draw Persons as well as Describe them, as appears by lively Pictures Limmed with his own hand. He died a very aged man, Anno Domini 1491. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM PERKINS was born at Marston in this County, bred Fellow of Christ∣colledge, and then became Preacher of Saint Andrews in Cambridge. The Athenians did nothing else but Acts 17. 24. tell or hear some new thing. Why tell before hear? Because probably, they themselves were the first Finders, Founders, and Fa∣thers of many reports. I should turn such an Athenian to fain and invent, should I adde any thing concerning this worthy Person, whose life I have formerly written at large in my Holy-State. He died Anno Dom. 1602. THOMAS DRAX D. D. was born at Stonely in this County, his Father being a Younger Brother of a Worshipfull family, which for many years had lived at Wood-hall in York-shire, he was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge. He was a Pious man, and an excellent Preacher, as by some of his Printed Sermons doth appear. He translated all the Works of Master Perkin his Countryman and Collegiat) into Latine, which were Printed at Geneva. Doctor King Bishop of London, removed him from his Na∣tive Country, and bestowed a Benefice on him nigh Harwich in Essex, where the change of the Aire was conceived to hasten his Great change, which happened about the year 1616. I cannot forget how this worthy name of Drax may be resembled to the river Anas in Spain, which having run many miles under ground, surgeth a greater channell then before. They have flourished at Wood hall aoresaid, in the Parish of Darfield,
ever since a Co-heir of the Noble Family of Fitz-williams brought that good Man∣nour, (with the alternate gift of the Mediety of the rich Parsonage therein,) in marri∣age into this Family, as since by an Heir-general it hath been alienated. But after many various changes, this Name hath recovered and encreased its lustre in Sir James Drax, a direct descendant from the Heirs-male, who by Gods blessing on his Industry and Ingenuity, hath merited much of the English nation, in bringing the Sugars and o∣ther Commodities of the Barbadoes to their present perfection. WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE was born at Stratford on Avon in this County, in whom three eminent Poets may seem in some sort to be compounded, 1. Martial in the Warlike sound of his Sur-name, (whence some may conjecture him of a Military extraction,) Hasti-vibrans or Shake-speare. 2. Ovid, the most naturall and witty of all Poets, and hence it was that Queen Elizabeth coming into a Grammar-School made this extemporary verse, Persius a Crab-staffe, Bawdy Martial, Ovid a fine Wag. 3. Plautus, who was an exact Comaedian, yet never any Scholar, as our Shake-speare (if alive) would confess himself. Adde to all these, that though his Genius generally was jocular, and inclining him to feivity, yet he could (when so disposed) be solemn and serious, as appears by his Tragedies, so that Heraclitus himself (I mean if secret and unseen) might afford to smile at his Comedies, they were so merry, and Democri∣tus scarce forear to sigh at his Tragedies they were so mournfull. He was an eminent instance of the truth of that Rule, Poeta non fit, sed nascitur, one is not made but born a Poet. Indeed his Learning was very little, so that as Cornish diamonds are not polished by any Lapidary, but are pointed and smoothed even as they are taken out of the Earth, so nature it self was all the art which was used upon him. Many were the wit combates betwixt him and Ben Johnson, which two I behold like a Spanish great Gallion, and an English man of War; Master Johnson (like the former) was built far higher in Learning; Solid, but Slow in his performances. Shake-spear with the English-man of War, lesser in bulk, but lighter in sailing, could turn with all tides, tack about and take advantage of all winds, by the quickness of his Wit and Inven∣tion. He died Anno Domini 16... and was buried at Stratford upon Avon, the Town of his Nativity. MICHAEL DRAYTON born in this County at Athelston, as appeareth in his poe∣ticall address thereunto. Song 13. p. 13. My native Country, If there be vertue yet remaining in thy earth, Or any good of thine thou breath'st into my birth, Accept it as thine own whilst now I sing of thee; Of all thy later Brood th' unworthiest though I be. He was a pious Poet, his conscience having always the command of his fancy, very temperate in his life, slow of speech, and inoffensive in company. He changed his laurel for a crown of glory, Anno 1631. and is buried in Westminster-Abby near the South-door with this Epitaph, Doe pious Marble, let thy Readers know, What they, and what their children owe To Draitons name, whose sacred dust We recommend unto thy trust. Protect his memory, and preserve his story, Remain a lasting Monument of his glory: And when thy ruins shall daime To be the Treasurer of his name: His name that cannot fade, shall be An everlasting Monument to thee. He was born within few miles of William Shake-speare, his Countryman and fellow∣Poet, and buried within fewer paces of Jeffry Chaucer, and Edmund Spencer.
Sir FULKE GREVIL Knight, Son to Sir Fulke Grevil the Elder, of Becham-Court in this County, he was bred first in the University of Cambridge. He came to the Court, back'd with a full and fair Estate; and Queen Elizabeth loved such substantiall Courtiers, as could plentifully subsist of themselves. He was a good Scholar, loving much to employ (and sometimes to advance) learned men, to whm worthy Bishop Overal chiefly owed his preferment, and Mr. Cambden (by his own Confession,)In  . in War-Shire. tasted largely of his liberality. His Studies were most in Poetry and History, as his works doe witness. His Stile conceived by some to be swelling, is allowed for lofty and full by others, King James created him Baron Brook of Beachamp-Court, as descended from the sole daughter and heir of Edward Willowby the last Lord Brook, in the reign of King Henry the se∣venth. His sad Death or Murther rather, happened on this occasion. His discontented servant conceiving his deserts not soon or well enough rewarded, wounded him Mor∣tally, and then (to save the law the labour) killed himself, verifying the observation that he may when he pleaseth be master of an other mans life, who contemneth his own. He lieth buried in Warwick Church under a Monument of black and white Marble, whereon he is styled Servant to Q. Elizabeth, Counsellor to K. James, and friend to Sir Phillip Sidney. Dying Anno 16... without Issue, and unmarried, his Barony by vertue of Entail in the patent descended on his kinsman Robert Grevill Lord Brook, father to the Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook. NICHOLAS BYFIELD was born in this County, (as his sonMr. Adonim , who  to leave larger instuctions of his  life, but I received them no. hath informed me,) bred (as I remember,) in Queens-colledge in Oxford. After he had entred into the Mini∣stry, he was invited into Ireland, to a place of good profit and eminency, in pssage whereunto, staying wind-bound at Chester, his Inn proved his home for a long time unto him, preaching a Sermon there with such approbation, that he was chosed Mini∣ster in the City. Not without an especiall Providence, seeing the place promised in Ireland, would have failed him, & his going over had been a labour in vain. The Cestrians can give the best account of his profitable preaching and pious life, most strict in keeping the Lords day, on which occasion pens were brandished betwixt him and Mr. Breerwood. In his declining age he was presented to the Benefice of Isleworth in Middlesex, where for fifteen years together he preached twice every Lords-day, and expounded Scrip∣ture every Wednesday and Friday, till five weeks before his death, notwithstanding there was Mors in oll, A stone in his bladder, which being taken out, weighed, and measured after his death, was found of these prodigious proportions. In 1. Dr. Goge Peface to Posthume works of Mr. Byfils. Weight, thirty three ounces and more. In 2. Measure about the edge, fifteen inches, and an half. In 3. Measure about the length, thirteen inches and above. In 4. Measure about the breadth, almost thirteen inches. It was of a solid substance to look upon, like a flint. Lo, here is the patience of the Saints. All I will adde is this, the Pharisee said proudly, I thank thee Lord, I am not as this Publican. Let Writer and Reader say humbly, and thankfully to God, We are not as this truly painfull Preacher, and let us labour, that as our bodies are more health∣full, our souls may be as holy as his, who died and was buried at Ileworth. PHILEMON HOLLAND, where born, is to me unknown, was bred in Trinity-col∣ledgeS.N. in Cambridge, a Doctor in Physick, and fixed himself in Coventry. He was the Translator Generall in his Age, so that those Books alone of his Turning into English, will make a Country Gentleman a competent library for Historians, in so much that one saith, Holland with his Translations doth so fill us, He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus. Indeed some decry all Translators as Interlopers, spoiling the Trade of Learning, which
should be driven amongst Scholars alone. Such also alledge, that the best Translations are works, rather of Industry then Judgement, and (in easy Authors) of Faithfulness, rather then Industry; That many be but Bunglers, forcing the meaning of the Authors, they translate, picking the lock, when they cannot open it. But their Opinion resents too much of Envy, that such Gentlemen, who cannot re∣pair to the Fountain, should be ebard access to the Streame. Besides, it is unjust to charge All, with the faults of some, and a Distinction must be made amongst Transla∣tors, betwixt Coblers and Workmen, and our Holland had the true knack of Translating. Many of these his Books he wrote with One Pen, whereon he himself thus plea∣santly versified. With one sole pen I writ this Book, Made of a Grey Goose Quill. A Pen it was, when it I took, And a Pen I leave it still. This Monumental Pen, he solemnly kept and showed to my reverend Tutor Doctor Samuel ard. It seems he leaned very lightly on the Neb thereof, though weightily enough, in an other sense, performing not slightly, but solidly, what he undertook. But what commendeth him most to the Praise of Posterity, is his Translating Cam∣dens Britannia, a Translation more then a Translation, with many excellent Additions, not found in the Latine, done fifty years since in Master Camdens life time, not onely with his knowledge and consent, but also, no doubt, by his desire and help. Yet such additions (discoverable in the former part with Asterisks in the Margent) with some Antiquaries obtain not equal Authenticalness with the rest. This eminent Translator was Translated to a better life, Anno Dom. 16... FRANCIS HOLYOAKE (latining himself de sacra Qurcu) and Minister of Southam, born at Witacre in this County. He set forth that staple Book which School-boys called Riders Dictionary. This Rider did Borrow (to say no worse) both his Sddle and Bridle from Thomas Thomatius, who being bred Fellow of Kings-colledge in Cambridge, set forth that Dictionary known by his Name, then which, Men, have not a Better and Truer; Children, no Plainer and Briefer. But Rider after Thomas his death, set forth his Dictioary, the same in effect, under his own Name, the property thereof, being but little disguised with any Additions. Such Plageary ship ill becometh Authors or Printers, and the Dove being the Crest of the Stationers Armes, should mind them, not like Rooks, to filch copies one from an other. The Executors of Thomas Thomaus entring an Action against Rider, occasioned him in his own defence to make those Numerous Additions, to his Dictionary, that it seems to differ rather in Kind then Degree, from his first Edition. I am forced to place this Child, ather with his Guardian then Father, I mean, to men∣tion this Dictionary rather under the name of Master Holyoake then Rider, both because the residence of the latter is wholly unknown unto me, and because Mr. Holyoak added many (as his learned Son hath since more) wonders thereunto. This Master Holyoake died Anno Dom. 16... JAMES CRANFORD was born at Coventry in this County, (where his father was a Divine and School-Master of great note) bred in Oxford, beneficed in Northampton shire, and afterwards removed to London, to Saint Chistophers. A painfull Preacher, an exact Linguist, subtill Disputant, Orthodox in his Judgement, sound against Sectaries, well acquainted with the Fathers, not unknown to the School-men, and familiar with the Modern Divines. Much his Humility, being James the less in his own esteeme, and therefore ought to be the Greater in Ours. He had as I may say, a Broad-chested Soul, favourable to such who differed from him. His Moderation increased with his Age, Charity with his Moderation, and had a kindness for all such who had any good∣ness in themselves. He had many choise books, and (not like to those, who may lose themselves in their own libraries, being Owners, not Masters of their books therein,) had his books at such command, as the Captain has his Souldiers, so that he could make them at pleasure goe or come, and do what he desired. This lame and loyall Mephibosheth,
(as I may terme him) sadly sympathizing with the sufferings of Church and State. He died rather infirme then old, Anno 1657. Romish Exile Witers. WILLIAM BISHOP was born in this County, saith my Pits de . Ang. Script.  Anno 1612. Auther, ex Nobili Fa∣milia. Enquiring after his Surname in this Shire, I find one John Bishop, Gentleman, Patron of Brails in this County, who died Anno 1601. Aged 92. Mr Dugdale in his Illust. of Warwick-shire pag 4. 7. Being a Protestant, as appeareth by his Epitaph, who according to Proportion of time, might in all Pro∣bability be his father, the rather, because he is said Parentes & ampli Patrimonii spem reliquisse, to have left his Parents, and the hope of a fair Inheritance. Reader, a word by the way of the word Nobilis, which soundeth high in English ears, where Barons youngest children are the lowest step of Nobility, whilst Nobilis from the Pen of a Our Country∣man Pits did foranize with long living be∣yond the Seas. foraigner, generally importeth no more then an ordinary Gentle∣man. It is not long since my weakness was imployed to draw up in Latin a Testimoniall for a high German, who indeed was of honourable extraction, and according to dire∣ction, I was advised to style him Generosissimum ac Nobilissimum. For Generosus (which runneth so low in England) in Saxony doth carry it clear as the more honourable Epithet. Thus Words like Counters stand for more or less according to Custome. Yea, Latine words are bowed in their Modern senses, according to the acception of severall Places. This Bishop leaving the Land, went first to Rhemes, then to Rome, where he was made Priest, and being sent back into England, met with variety of success, 1. Being seized on, He was brought before Secretary Walsingham, and by him committed to the Marshalsey. 2. After three years, being bnished the Realm, he became a Doctor of Sor∣b. 3. He returned into England, and for nine years laboured in the Popish Har∣vest. 4. By their Clergy, he was imployed a Messenger to Rome, about some affairs of importance. 5. His business dispatch'd, he returned the third time into England, and after eight years industry therein to advance his own Cause, was caught and cast into Prison at London, where he remained about the year 1612. 6. Soon after he procured his Enlargement, and Anno 1615. lived at Paris in Collegio Atrebatensi. Men of his Perswasion, cry him up for a most Glorious Confessor of the Popish faith, who, (if any goodness in him) should also be a Thankfull Confessor of the Protestant Charity, permitting him twice to depart Prison, (on hope of his amendment,) though so Active an Instrument against our Religion. No such courtesy of Papists to Pro∣testants, Vestigia nulla retrorsum. No return (especially the second time) out of durance. The first disease being dangerous, but deadly their Relaps into a Prison, but perchance this William Bishop found the more favour, because our Church▪ men accounting it to much severity, to take away both his Credit and his Life, both to Conquer and Kill him, seeing this Priest, whilst in Prison, was often worsted, (though his Party bragged of victory,) both by Tongues and Pens, in Disputings, and Writings, of severall Prote∣stants, amongst whom Robert Abbot (afterwards Bishop of Salisbury) gave him the most fatall Defeat. The certain date of his death is to me unknown. Benefactors to the Publick. HUGH CLOPTON was born at Stratford, a fair Market Town in this County▪ bred a Mercer in London, and at last Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1491. Rememg  his Native Town stood on Avon (a River in Summer, and little Sea in Winter,) ouble∣some for Travellers to pass over, he in liew of the former inconventent , built a stately and long Stone-bridge, of many Arches, over the Channel and Overflow∣ings thereof. I behold this Bridge, more usefull, though less costly, then what Caligula made, termed
by    . 19. Suetonius novum & inauditum spectaculi genus, reaching from Putzol to Bauly, three miles and a quarter. This was only a Pageant-bridge for Pompe, set up, to be soon taken down, whereof Lipsius said well, Laudem immenso operi vanitas detrait. But our Cloptons Bridge remaineth at this day, even when the Colledge in the same Town built by Arch-bishop Stratford, is (as to the intended use thereof) quite vanished away. Indeed Bridges are the most lasting Benefactions, all Men being concerned in their continuance, lest by destoying of them, they destroy themselves, not knowing how soon, for their own safety they may have need to make use thereof. Many other Charities he bestow∣ed, and deceased Anno 1496. Since the Reformation. ............. HALES Esquire, He purchased a prime part of the Priory of Coventry. Now, either out of his own inclination, or as a Condition of his Composition with King Henry the eighth, or a mixture of both; he founded and endowed a fair Gram∣mer-school▪ in Coventry. Herein I have seen more▪ (abate the Three English▪schools of the first Magnitude) and as well learned Scholars, (be it spoken that the Master, User, and Scholars, may according to their Proportions divide the praise betwixt them) as in any School in England. Here is also an Infant, which may be an Adult Library, when it meeteth with more Benefactors. JOHN Lord HARRINGTON son to James Lord Harrington, was born at Combe Abby in this County, (accruing unto him by his Mother Heiress of elway,) as by a pro∣perty of that Family, lately (or still) surviving, I have on very strict enquiry been cer∣tainly enformed. He did not count himself priviledged from being Good, by being Great, and his timely Piety rising early, did not soon after go to Bed, (as some young Saints, beheld under an other Notion) but contiuned watchfull, during his life. He was one of the first, who began the pious fashion (since followed by few of his Quality,) of a Diary, wherein he registred, not the Injuries of others done unto him, (a work of Revenge not Devotion,) but of his Falings and Infirmities toward his Master. Thus making even with the God of Heaven, by Repentance in Christ at the end of every day, he had (to use the Expression and Counsell of the Reverend Arch∣Bishop of Armagh) but one day to repent of before his death. He lived out all  days in the appointment of Divine Providence, not half of them according to the course and possibility of Nature, not Half a Quarter of them according to the hopes and desires of the Lovers and Honourers of Virtue in this Nation, especially of the society in Sidney-colledge in Cambridge, whereto he was a most  Béne∣factour. He was the last Male of that Honourable Family, as one justly complains. JOHANES DOMINUS HARRINGTONIUS. H. Holland. Herologia 139. Anagramma INSIGNIS ERAT (AH) UNUS HONOR DOMI. The Reader is referred for the rest, unto his Funerall Sermon, preached by Master Stock of London, who though he would not (to use his own Phrase) Gild a Posheard, understand him, Flatter unworthyness; yet giveth him his large and due Commenda∣tion. He died unmarried Anno 161.. leaving his two Sisters his Heirs, Lucy married to Edward Earl of Bedford, and Anne, who by Sir Robert Chichester had a daughter Anne, married to Thomas Earl of Elgin, and Mother to Robert L. Bruce, who is at this day, Heir Apparent to no small part of the Lands, but Actually possessed of a larger of the Ver∣tues of his Honourable Great-uncle. Memorable Persons. THOMAS UNDERHILL Esquire, was born at Neaher-Eatendon in this County. It is pity to part him from Elizabeth his wife, seeing the Poetical fiction of Philemon and Baucis, found in them an Historical performance with improvement.
*Sed pia Baucis anus parili{que} aetate Philemon Illâ sunt annis juncti juvenilibus, illâ Consenuere casâ: paupertatémque ferendo Effecere levem, nec iniqua mente ferendam. But good old Baucis with Philemon matchd, In▪ youthfull years, now struck with equal age, Made poorness pleasant in their cottage Thatch'd, And weight of want with patience di aswage. Whereas this our Warwick-shire-Pair, living in a worshipfull equipage, and exem∣plary for their hospitality, did teach others, not how Poverty might be born, but Wealth well used (by their Example) for the owners and others good. The Ovidian-couple appear issueless, whereas twenty children, viz. tteen sons and seven daughters were begotten and born, by this Thomas and Elizabeth, living sixty five years together in marriage. Indeed the poeticall-pair, somewhat outstrip'd them in the happiness of their death, their request being granted them, —Et quoniam concordes egimus annos, Auferàthora duos eadem: nec conjugis unquam Busta meae videam: nec sim tumulandus ab illa. Because we liv'd and lov'd so long together, Let's not behold the funeralls of either; May one hour end us both: may I not see This my wife buried, nor wife bury me. However these See their Monument in the Church of Nther-Ea∣tendon. Underhills deceased in one year, she in July, he in October follow∣ing 1603. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 John I suspect this Catalogue (though taken out of Mr. Stow) imper∣fect, and that Sir William Hollis Lord Mayor (and builder of ) was this Coun∣y-man▪ Coventry William Coventry Coventry Mercer 1425 2 John Olney John Olney Coventry Mercer 1446 3 Robert Tate Thomas Tate Coventry Mercer 1488 4 Hugh Clopton John Clopton Stratford upon Avon Mercer 1491 5 John Tate Thomas Tate Coventry — 1496 6 William Cockain William Cockain Baddesley Skinner 1619 7 John Warner John Warner Rowington Grocer   The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the  year of King Henry the sixth. 1433. William Bishop of Lincoln, Commissioners to take the Oaths. Richard Earl of Warwick. John Cotes, Knights for the shire. Nicholas Metley. Knights for the shire. Radul. Nevill, mil. Ioh. Colepeper, mil. Will. Mounford, mil. Edw. Oddingsselles, m. Tho. Brdet, mil. Rich. Otherston Abba∣tis de Camba Will. Pole Abbatis de Alyncestre Joh. Buggeley Abba∣tis de Miravalle Edw. Bronete de Farnburgh, ar. Bald. Mountford de Hampton, ar. Rd. Brasebrugg de Kinnesbury, ar. Will. Lucy de Charle∣cote, ar. Tho. Hugford de Emescote, ar. Tho. Erdington de Erdington, ar. Rob. Arden de Brom∣wich, ar. Will. Pucfrey de Shi∣ford, ar. Rog. Harewell de Morehall, ar. Rich. Hyband de Ippesley, armig. Will. Botoner de Wy∣thybroke Ioh. Midlemore de Eg∣gebaston, ar. Thome Porter de Es∣cote, ar. Tho.  de Tonworth, ar. Tho. Waryng de ea∣dem, ar. Rich. Verney, ar. de Wolverton Tho. Gene de Soly∣hull, ar. Joh. Chelwyn de Als∣path, ar. Ioh. Waldiene de ea∣dem, ar. Nich. Ruggeley de Donton, ar. Will. Holt de Aston, ar. Rich. Merbroke de Codbarow, ar. Galf. Allefley d epar∣va Lalleford Tho. Greswold de So∣lyhull Tho. Haynton de Napton
Will. Parker de Ton∣worth Edm. Starkey de Stretton Ranul. Starky de eadem Will. Derset de Thur∣laston Rich. Hall de Stret∣ford Ioh. Mayell de eadem Simon. Forster de Althercton Clemen. Draper de adem Iohan. Darant de Berston Rog. Mullward de Nuneton Iohan. Omfrey de eadem Iohan. Waryn de eadem Hum. Iacob de Tam∣worth Tho. Neuton de eadem Math. Smalwode de Sutton Rich. Dalby de Brok∣hampton Rich. Eton de War∣wick Hum. Corbet Iohan. Aleyn de Ber∣ford Tho. Iakes de Woner Rog. Clerk de Tatch∣brook Rich. Briches de Lon∣gedon Will. Reynold de At∣tilburgh Ioh. Michell majoris civitatis Coventrae Will. Donington unius Ballivorum civitatis Predictae. Rob. Southam alterius Ballivorum civita∣tis Predicte. Egidii Alles sley Magi∣stri Gildae Sanctae Trinitatis de Coven∣trae. Lauren. Cook de Co∣ventrae Merchant Rich. Sharp de eadem Merchant Rich. Boton de eadem Fishmonger Ioh. Lychefeld de eadem Grasier Ioh. Walle de eadem Fishmonger Ioh. Leder de Coven∣trae Merchant Tho. Estop Magiri Gildae Sanctae Trini∣tatis Warwick Nich. Rdy de eadem Ioh. Mayell de eadem sentor Will. Hopkyns de eadem Ioh. Broune de eadem junior. Iohan. Stokes de Hen∣len in Ardeon Gildae Villae Magistri pre∣dictae Iohan. Thorp de Kolle. Sheriffs. This Shire was in Conjunction, under the same Sheriffs with Leicester-shire, untill the year of Q. Elizabeth. Since which time Warwick-shire hath these appropriat to it self. Nme Plce Armes EG. ELIZA.     Anno     9 Rob. Midlemore Egbaston Par Chev. Arg. & S. in chief 2 martlets of the second. 10 Bas. Feelding, ar. Neliā Pa. Aron a Fss Az 3 Fusils Or. Sim. Ardern, ar.   Gul. 3 Cross Cosselets Fitiche a chif O. 12 Fr. Willoughby, a. Midleton O, on 2 Bars Gul 3 Waterbud∣gets Arg. 13 He. Cumpō, m. Du. Cumpton Cumpton Sab. a Lyon passant Or, inter 3 Helmets Arg. 14 Ful. Grevile, mil. Beuchamp∣Court. Sa. a Borr & Coss engrailed Or, thereon 5 pellets. 15 Sam. Marow, ar. Berkswell Az. a Fess engrailed betwixt 3 womens-heads cooped Or. 16 Edw. Ardon, ar.     17 Wil. Boughton, . Lauford S. 3 Crescents, Or. 18 Hum. Ferrers, ar.   A M P. 9 Will. Catesby, m.   Ar. 2 Lions ass. S. 0 Tho. Lucy, mil. Charlcott Gal. Crusulee Or, 3 Picks [ Lucies] Huriant Ar. 1 Ed. Boughton, ar▪ ut pris   22 Geo. Digby, ar. Coleshull Az. a Flower delue Ar. 3 Tho. Leigh, ar. Stonleigh G. a Cross engrailed Arg. on the first quarter, a Izen of the se∣cond. 24 Io. Harington, m. Comb. Abbey S. a Fret Ar. 5 Edw. Holt, ar. Aston Ar. 3 Flower deluces Az. 26 Ful. Grevill, mil. ut prius   7 An. Shuckburgh, a. Shugbury S. a Chev. betwixt 3 Mullets Ar. 8 Th. Daubrigcourt Soliul Ermin, 3 Brs Humet G. 9 Hum. Ferrers, ar. ut priu   30 Will. Feelding, ar. ut prius   31 Will. Boughton, a. ut prius   32 Rich. Verney, ar. Compton Az. on a Cross Arg. 3 Mullets G▪ 33 Will. Leigh, mil. Murdak.   34 Rad. Hubaud, ar.     35 Ge. Devereux, ar. Cost. wich A▪ g. a Fess Gn chiefe 3 Torte∣auxes. 6 Edw. Grevill, ar. ut prius   37 Tho. Legh, mil. ut prius   38 Rob. Burgoyn, ar.   on chief embatteled, Ar. as many Martlets S. 39 Cle. Fisher, ar. Packng Ar. a Chev. varry between 3 Li∣ons Rampent G. 40 Sam. Marowe, ar. ut prius   41 Tho. Hoult, ar. ut prius   42 Tho. Lucy, mil. ut pris   43 Rob. Burdet Bramcot Az. 2 Barrs Or. on each 3 Mart∣lets G. 44 Will. Peyto, ar. Chesterton Barry of 6 Peeces Arg. & G, per ale indnted & coun chang'd. 45 Barth. Hales   G. 3 Arrows Or, feared and Headed A. REG. IAC.     Anno     1 Barth. Hale, r. ut prius   2 Rich. Verney, mi. ut prius   3 Tho. Beaufoe, mil. Guise Clif. Erm. n a  3 Cinue foiles Or. 4 Ed. Boughton, ar. ut prius   5 Will. Combe, ar.     6 And, Arch a▪ Tanwoth Azure Arows Or. 7 Wil. Somervile, m.   Ar. on a sess beteen 3 Anu∣leis G. as many Lopard-heeds of the firs. 8 as. Feelding, ar. ut prius   9 Tho. Luc▪ mil. ut priu   10 Ce. Thogmortō Hasley G o a Ch Aug. 3  Ge∣melles S. 11 Ioh. Reppingtō, a.     12 Ioh. Ferts, mil.     13 Will. Combe, ar. ut prus   14 Wal. Devereux, m. ut prius   15 Io. Shckburgh, a. ut pris   16 Fran. Leigh, mil. ▪ Ut prius, w du difference. 17 Rob. Lee, mil. Regis▪   18 h. Temple, m. & b. Dasset Arg. on 2 Ba S. 6 Martles Or. 19 Will. Noell, ar.   Or, Fret G.  Cann Ermine. 20 Ioh. Hebaud, ar.     21 Tho. Puckering, m. Warwick▪ S. a Bnd fuslly cised Ar. 22 Her. Undehill, m. Eatendon Arg. a Cheveron G. between 3 Tres Ver.
CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Ioh. Newdigate, a. Erdbury G. 3 Lions Gambes [or Pawes] erazed Ag. 2 Sm. Archer, mil. ut prius   3 Rob. Fisher, mil. ut prus   4 Geo. Deverx, a. ut prius   5 Rog▪ Burgon, ar. ut prius   6 Will. Purefoy, ar.   S. 3 Pair of Cantlets arming [or clipping] Arg. 7 Wil. Boughton, ar. ut prius   8 Tho. Lucy, mil. ut prius erect proper. 9 Sim. Clerke, mil. Slford G. 3 Sword in fess, the Points 10 Rich, Murdon, ar. Morton Em. on a Cif S. a Talbot pass Argent. 11 Gre. Verney, mil. ut prius   12 Tho. Leigh, mil. ut prius   13 Ed. Underhill, mi. ut prius   14 Ioh. Lisle, ar.     15 Geo. Warner, ar. Wolston Arg. a Cheveron w x 3 Boars∣eads S. cooped G. 16 Edw. Ferrars Badesly G. 7 Maklees conjunct. viz. 3 17 SPATTA   3 and 1 Or, a Canton Erm. 18 HAeCMIHI     19 BELLA     20 DEDE-     21 RUNT.     22 Rich. Lucy, at. ut prius   Queen Elizabeth. 27 AN. SHUGBURG, Ar.] Though the Records belonging to this family have been embezeled, so that the Links of their Successions cannot be chained in a continued Pedegree from their Original, yet is their Surname right ancient in the place of their Name and Habitation, giving for their Armes the Stones Astroites [in Heraldry reduced to Mullets, which they most re∣semble) found within their Mannor. King James. 2 RICHARD Verney Mil.] In his Sheriffalty the Powder-Traitors met at Dunchurch, at their appointed hunting∣match; when suspecting their plot discovered, they entred on such designs as despair dictated unto them, scattering of scandals, breaking of houses, stealing of horses, &c▪ But such the care of this Sir Richard to keep the peace of this County, that he hunted the Hunters out of this into the next Shire of Worcester. 16 FRANCIS LEIGH, Mil.] He was ceated Baron of Dunsmore, and afterwards Earl of Chichester by K. Gharles the first. His Eldest daughter and Heir, was married to Thomas Earl of Southampton, his younger to George Villiers Viscount Grandison. King Charles. 2 SIMON ARCHFR, Mil.] This worthy Knight is a lover of Antiquity, and of the Lovers thereof. I should be much disheared at his great Age, which promiseth to us no hope of his long conti∣nuance here, were I ot comfortd with the consideration of his worthy Son, the Heir as well of his Sudiousness, as Estate. 12 THOMAS IGH, Mil▪] King Charles the first, at Oxford created him for his fidelity in dangerous times Baron of Stoneleigh in this County, and he is happy in his son Sir Thomas Leigh, who undouted∣ly will dignify the honour which descendeth unto him. The Battle on October 3. 1642. As for the fatall Fight at Edge-Hill, (called Keinton-field from the next Market-town thereunto) the actings therein are variously related, and  confess my self not to have received any particular intelligence thereof, I will therefore crave leave to transcribe what followeth out of a short, but Dr. Heylyn i he Hist. and Raign of K, Charles. worthy work, of my honoured friend, confident of the Authenticall truth thereof. The Fight was very terrible for the time, no fewer then five thousand men slain upon the place▪ the Prologue to a greater slaughter, if the dark night had not put an end unto that dispute. Each part pretended to the victory, but it went clearly on the Kings side, who though e lost his Generall, yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of the dead bodies; and not so oely, but he made his way open unto London, and in his way forced Banbury Castle, in the very sight as it were of the Earl of Essex, who with his flying Army made all the hast he could towards the City, (that he might be there before the King) to secure the Parliament. More certain signs there could not be of an abslute victory.
In the Battel of Taro, between the Confederates of Italy, and Charles the eight of France, it happened so that the Confederates kept the Field, possest themselves of the Camp, Baggage and Artillery, which the French in their breaking through had left behind them. Hereupon a dispute was raised, to whom the Honour of that day did of right belong; which all knowing an impartiall men gave unto the French▪ For though they lost the Field, their Camp, Artillery and Baggage, yet they obtained what they fought for, which was the opening of their way to France, and which the Confederates did intend to deprive them of. Which resolution in that case may be a ruling case to this; the King having not onely kept the Field, possest himself of the dead bodies, pillaged the carriages of the enemy, but forcibly opened his way towards London, which the enemy endeavoured to hinder, and fi∣nally entred triumphantly into Oxford, with no fewer then an hundred and twenty Coours taken in the Fight. Thus far my friend. Let me adde, that what Salust observeth of the Conspirators with Cateline, that where they stood in the Fight, whilst living, they covered the same place with their Corpes when dead, was as true of the Loyal Gentry of Lincoln-shire with the Earl of Linsey, their Country▪ man. Know also that the over-soon, and over-far pursuit of a flying Party with Pillaging of the Carriages, (by some who prefer the snatching of wealth, before the Securing of Victory,) hath often been the Cause why the Conquest hath slipped out of their fingers, who had it in their hands, and had not some such miscarriage happened here, the Royalists had totally (in all probability) routed their Enemies. The Farewell. I cannot but congratulate the happiness of this County, in having Master William Dugdale [now Norrey] my wrothy Friend, a Native thereof. Whose Illustrations are so great a work no Young Man could be so bold to begin, or Old Man hope to finish it, whilst one of Middle-Age fitted the Performance. A well chosen County for such a Subject, because lying in the Center of the Land, whose Lustre diffuseth the Light, and darteth Beames to the Circumference of the Kingdome. It were a wild wish▪ that all the Shires in England where described to an equall degree of perection, as which will be accomplished, when each Star is as big and bright as the Sun. However one may de∣sire them done, quoad speciem, though not quoad gradum, in imitation of Warwick∣shire. Yet is this hopeless to come to pass, till mens Pains may meet with Proporti∣onable Incouragement, and then the Poets Prediction will be true, Sint Maecenates non desint Flacce Marones, Virgiliumque tibi vel tua Rura dabunt. Let not Maeceasses be Scant, And Maroes we shall newer Wan▪ For. Flaccus then thy Country-field, Shall unto thee a Virgil yield▪ And then would our Little [divided World] be better described, then the Great World, by all the Geographers, who have written thereof.
VVESTMERLAND. WESTMERLAND hath Cumberland on the West and North, Lancashire on the South, Bishoprick and Yorkshire on the East thereof. From North to South it extendeth thirty miles in length, but is contented in the breadth with twenty four. As for the soil thereof, to prevent exceptions, take its description from the pen of a credibleJ. Speed in the descripti∣on of this County. Author. It is not commended either for plenty of Corn or Cattle, being neither stored with arable grounds to bring forth the one, nor pasturage to breed up the other; the principal profit that the people of this Province raise unto themselves, is by clothing. Here is cold comfort from nature, but somewhat of warmth from industry; that the land is barren is Gods pleasure, the people painfull their praise; that thereby they grow wealthy, shews Gods goodnss, and calls for their gratefulness. However, though this County be sterile by general Rule, it is fruitfull by some few exceptions, having some pleasant vales, though such ware be too fine, to have much measure thereof. In so much, that some Back-friends to this County, will say, that though Westmerland hath much of Eden, (running clean through it) yet hath little of Delight therein. I behold the barrenness of this County as the cause why so few Frieries and Convents therein, Master Speed (so curious in his Catalogue in this kind) mentioning but one Re∣ligious house therein. Such lazy-folk did hate labour as a house of Correction, and knew there was nothing to be had here, but what Art with Industry wrested from Nature. The Reader perchance will smile at my curiosity, in observing, that this small County, having but four Market Towns, three of them are, Kirkby-Stephens, Kirkby∣Lonsdale, Kirkby-Kendale, so that so much of Kirk or Church, argueth not a little De∣votion of the Ancestors in these parts, judiciously expressing it self, not in building Convents for the ease of Monks, but Churches for the worship of God. The Manufacture. Kendall Cottons are famous all over England, and Master Camden termeth that Town Lanificii gloria, & industria praecellens. I hope the Townmen thereof (a word is enough to the wise) will make their commodities so substantiall, that no Southern Town shall take an advantage, to gain that Trading away from them: I speak not this out of the least distrust of their honesty, but the great desire of their happiness, who being a Cambridge-man out of Sympathy wish well to the Clothiers of Kendall▪ as the first foun∣der of our Sturbridge-fair. Proverbs. Let Uter-Pendragon do what he can,] The River Eden will run as it ran.] Tradition reporteth, that this Uter-Pendragon had a design, to fortifie the Castle of Pen-Dragon in this County. In order whereunto, with much art and industry, he in∣vited and tempted the River of Eden, to forsake his old chanell, and all to no purpose. The Proverb is appliable to such, who offer a rape to Nature, indeavouring what is cross and contrary thereunto. Naturam expellas Furcâ licet, usque recurret. Beat Nature back, 'tis all in vain, With Tines of Fork, 'twill come again. However, Christians have not onely some hope, but comfortable assurance, that they may conquer the corruptions of their Nature. If Frca (in no unusuall sence) be taken for the Cross, by the vertue of Christs sufferings thereon, a man may so repell Nature, that it shall not recoile to his destruction.
Princes. KATHARINE PAR daughter of Sir Thomas Par, was born at Kendall-castle in this County, then the prime seat of that (though no parliamentary) Barony, devolved to her father by inheritance from the Bruses and Rosses of Werk. She was first married un∣to John Nevile Lord Latimer, and afterwards to K. Henry the eighth. This King first married half a maid, (no less can be allowed to the Lady Katharine, the Relict of Prince Arthur,) and then he married four maids successively; of the two last he complained, charging the one with impotency, the other with inconstancy, and being a free man again, resolved to wed a Widow, who had given testimony of her fidelity to a former husband. This Lady was a great favourer of the Gospell, and would earnestly argue for it, sometimes speaking more then her husband would willingly hear of: Once po∣litick Gardiner (who spar'd all the Weeds, spoil'd the good Flowers and Herbs) had almost got her into his clutches, had not divine Providence delivered her. Yet a Jesuite tells us that the King intended, if longer surviving, to behead her for an Heretick; to whom all that I will return is this, that he was neither Confessour, nor Privy-Counellour to King Henry the eighth. This Queen was afterward married to Thomas Seymer, Baron of Sudeley and Lord Admiral, and died in child-bed of a daughter Anno Domini 1548. her second husband surviving Godwins An∣ls of K. Ed∣ward the sixth in  anno. her. This makes me the more admire at the great mistake of In his Catal. of honour pag. 229. Thomas Mills (otherwise most industrious and judicious in genealogies) making this Lady married the third time, unto Edward Burgh eldest son unto Thomas Lord Burgh, without any shew of probability. Cardinals. CHRISTOPHER BAMBRIDGE born near Godwin▪ in his Arch-bi∣shop of York. Apleby in this County, was bred Doctor of Law in Queens-colledge in Oxford. He was afterwards Dean of York, Bishop of Durham, and at last Arch-bishop of York. Being imployed an Embasadour to Rome; he was an active instrument to procure our King Henry the eight, to take part with the Pope against Lewis King of France, for which good service he was created Cardinal of Saint Praxis. A title some say he long desired, let me adde, and little injoyed. For fal∣ling out with his Steward Rivaldus de Modena an Italian, and fustigating him for his faults, the angry Italian Idem ibidem. Poysoned him. Herein something may be pleaded for this Cardinal out of the Old, sure I am more must be pleaded against him out of the New Testament, if the places be Parallell'd. Proverbs 29. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 3. A servant will not be corrected by words, &c. A Bishop must be no striker, &c. But grant him greatly faulty, it were uncharitable in us, to beat his Memory with more stripes, who did then suffer so much for his own Indiscretion; His death happen∣ed July 14. 1511▪ and was buried at Rome (not in the Church of Saint Praxis, which en∣titled him, but) in the Hospitall of the English. Prelats. THOMAS VIPONT was descended of those Ancient Barons, who were Heredi∣tary Lords of this County. Surely either his Merit was very great, or Might very prevalent, (advantaged by his near and potent Relations.) That the Canons of Car∣lile stuck so stiffly to their electing their Bishop, when King Henry the third, with so much importunity commended John Prior of Newbury unto them. This Thomas in∣joyed his place but one year, the onely reason as I conceive that no more is reported of him. He died Anno Dom. 1256. JOHN de KIRKBY born at one of the two Kirkbies (Landsdale or Stephens) in this County, was first Canon, and afterwards Bishop of Carlile Anno 1332. This is that Stout Prelate who when the Scots invaded. England Anno 1345. with an Army
of thirty thousand, under the conduct of William Douglas, and had taken and burnt Car∣lile with the Country thereabouts, I say this John Kirkby was he who with the assistance of Thomas Lucy, Robert Ogle, (persons of prime power in those Parts) fighting in an advantagious place, utterly routed and ruined them. Such as behold this Act with en∣vious eyes, cavelling that he was non-resident from his Calling, when he turned his Mi∣ter into an Helmet, Crosier-staffe into a Sword, consider not that true Maxim, In▪ Publicos hostes omnis home miles, and the most consciencious Casuists, who forbid Clergy-men to be Military Plaintiffs, allow them to be defendants. He died Anno Dom. 1353. THOMAS de APPLEBY born in that Eminent Town in this County, where the Assises commonly are kept, was legally chosen Bishop of Carlile by all that had right in that Election. Yet he was either so Timerous, or the Pope so Tyrannicall, or both, that he durst not own the choice with his publique consent, untill he had first obtained his Confirmation from the Court of Rome. He was Consecrated Anno Dom. 1363. and having set 33. years in that See, deceased Decemb▪ 5. 1395. ROGER de APPLEBY went over into Ireland, and there became Prior of Saint Peters near Trimme (formerly founded by Simon de rupe forti Bishop of Meath) hence by the Pope he was preferred Bishop of Ossory in the same Kingdome. He died Anno Dom. 1404. WILLIAM of STRICKLAND descended of a Right Worshishful Family in this Coun∣ty, Anno 1396. by joynt consent of the Cannons chosen Bishop of Carlile. However by the concurrence of the Pope and K. Richard the second, one Robert Read was prefer∣red to the Place, which injury and affront, Strickland bare with much moderation. Now it happened that Read was removed to Chichester, and Thomas Mx his successor trans∣lated to a Grecian Bishoprick, that Strickland was Elected Bishop God∣win in the . of the Bishops of Carlile. again, (Patience gains the Goal with Long-running,) and Consecrated Bishop of Carlile Anno 1400. For the Town of Perith in Cumberland, he cut a pssage with great Art, Industry, and Cam ens Brit. in Cumberland. Expence, from the Town into the river Petterill for the conveiance of Boatage into the Irish sea. He sate Bishop 19. years, and died Anno Dom. 1419. NICHOLAS CLOSE was born at Bibreke in this County, & was One of the Six Origi∣nal Fellows whom K. Henry the sixth placed in his new erected Colledge of Kings-colledge in Cambridge. Yea he made him in a manner Master of the Fabrick, committing the building of that house to his Fidelity, who right honestly discharged his trust therein. He was first Bishop of Carlile, then of Leichfield, where he died within a year after his Con∣secration, viz. Anno Dom. 1453. Since the Reformation. HUGH COREN or CURWEN was born in this anuscript Additions to Sir James Ware. County, and made by Queen Mary Archbishop of Dublin. Brown his immediate Predecessor being deprived, for that he was married. Here it is worthy of our observation, that though many of the Prote∣stant Clergy in that Land were imprisoned, and otherwise much molested, yet no one Person, of what quality soever, in all Ireland did suffer Martyrdome, and hereon a remarkable Story doth depend. A Story which hath been solemnly avouched, by the late reverend Archbishop of Armagh, in the presence of several persons, and a∣mongst others unto Sir James Ware Knight, (that most excellent Antiquary,) and di∣vers in the University of Oxford, who wrot it from his mouth, as he received the same from ancient persons of unquestionable credit. About the third of the raign of Queen Mary, a Pursevant was sent with a Commissi∣on into Ireland, to impower some eminent persons, to proceed with fire and fagot a∣gainst poor Protestants. It happened by Divine Providence, this Pursevant at Chester lodged in the house of a Protestant Inn-keeper, who having gotten some inkling of the matter, secretly stole his Commission out of his Cloke-bag, and put the Knave of Clubs in the room thereof. Some weeks after he appeared before the Lords of the Privy∣Councel at Dublin, (of whom Bishop Coren a principall) and produced a Card for his pretended Commission. They caused him to be committed to prison for such an affront, as done on designe to deride them. Here he lay for some months, till with much adoe at last he got his enlargement. Then over he returned for England, and quickly get∣ting
his Commission renewed, makes with all speed for Ireland again. But before his arrival there, he was prevented with the news of Queen Maries death, and so the lives of many, and the liberties of more, poor Servants of God were pre∣served. To return to our Coren, though a moderate Papist in Queen Maries days, yet he con∣formed with the first to the reformation of Queen Elizabeth, being ever sound in his Heart. He was for some short time cheif Justice and Chancellor of Ireland, till he quit∣ted all his Dignities in exchange for the Bishoprick of Oxford. It may seem a wonder, that he should leave one of the best Arch-bishopricks in Ireland, for one of the worst Bishopricks in England. But oh, no Preferment to Quiet, and this Politick Prelate very decrepit, broken with old age, and many State-affairs, desired a private repose in his Na∣tive Land, before his death, which happened Anno Dom. 1567. BARNABY POTTER was born in this County 1578. within the Barony ofMr. S. Clarke in his live of Modene Di∣vin. 39. Ken∣dall, in which Town he was brought up untill he was sent to Queens-colledge in Oxford, becoming successively Scholar, Fellow, and Provost thereof. He was chosen the last with the unanimous consent of the Fellows, when being at great distance, he never dreamed thereof. Then resigning his Provosts Place, he betook himself to his Pastorall charge in the Country. He was Chaplain in Ordinary to Prince Charles, being accounted at Court the Penitentiall Preacher, and by King Charles was preferred Bishop of Carlile, when others sued for the Place, and he little thought thereof. He was commonly called the Puritanicall Bishop, and they would say of him in the time of King James, that Organs would blow him out of the Church, which I do not believe, the rather because he was loving of, and skilfull in Vocall Musick, and could bear his own part therein. He was a constant Preacher and performer of family-duties, of a Weak Constitution, Melancholy, Lean, and an Hard Student. He dyed in honour, being the last Bishop that dyed a Member of Parliament, in the year of our Lord 1642. States-men. Sir EDWARD BELLINGHAM Knight, was born of an ancient and warlike family, in this Though Sus∣sex (where his Sirname is of good esteem) may pretend unto him. I am confident of his right Location. County, servant of the Privy-Chamber to King Edward the sixth, who sent him over Anno 1547. to be Lord Deputy of Ireland, whose Learning, Wisdome, and Va∣lour, made him fit to discharge that place. Hitherto the English-pale had been hide-bound in the growth thereof, having not gain∣ed one foot of ground in more then two hundred years, since the time of King Edward the third. This Sir Edward first Sir Jo Davis in discourse of Ireland, pag. 69. extended it, proceeding against the Irishry in a mar∣tial course, by beating and breaking the Moors and Connors, two rebellious Septs. And, because the Poet saith true, It proves a man as brave and wise To keep, as for to get the prize. He built the forts of Leix and Offaly, to secure his new acquisition. Surely, had he not been suddenly revok▪d into England, he would have perfected the project in the same sort, as it was performed by his successour the Earl of Sussex, by setling English plantations therein. Such his secresie (the soul of great designs) that his Souldiers never knew whither they went, till they were come whither they should go. Thus he surprised the Earl of Desmond, being rude and unnurtured, brought him up to Dublin, where he informed and reformed him in manners and civility, sometimes making R. Holinshed Irish Cron. pag. 109. him to kneel on his knees an hour together, before he knew dis duty) till he became a new man in his be∣haviour. This Earl all his life after highly honoured him▪ and at every dinner, and Idem ibidem. supper would pray to God for good Sir Edward Bellingham, who had so much impro∣ved him. This Deputy had no fault, in his Deputiship but one, that it was so short, he being called home before two years were expired. Surely, this hath much retarded the reducing of the Irishry, the often shifting of their Deputies, (too often change of the kinds of
plaisters, hinders the healing of the sore,) so that as soon as they had learn'd their trade, they must resigne their shop to another, which made King James continue the Lord Chichester so long in the place, for the more effectual performance therein. Coming into England he was accused of many faults, but cleared himself as fast as his adversaries charged him, recovering the Kings favour in so high a degree, that he had been sent over Deputy again, save that he excused himself by indisposition of bo∣dy, and died not long after. Writers. RICHARD KENDAL. I place him here with confidence, because no See Vllare Anglica. Kendal in England, save what is the chief Town of this County. He was an excellent Gram∣marian, and the greatest instructer (Shreud and Sharp enough) of youth in his age. He had a vast collection of all Latine Grammars, and thence extracted a Quintessence, whereof he was so highly conceited, that he Bale & Pitz de Script. Brit. publickly boasted, that Latine onely to be Elegant, which was made according to his Rules, and all other to be Base and Barbarous; Which, Reader, I conceive, (being out of his, though) under thy Correction, a Proud and Pedantick expression. He flourished in the raign of K. Henry the sixth. Since the Reformation. BERNARD Son of EDWIN GILPIN Esquire, was born at Kentmire in this Coun∣ty, Anno 1517. At sixteen years old, (very young in that Age from those Parts,) his Parents sent him to Queens-colledge in Oxford; whence his merit advanced him one of the first Students in the new foundation of Christs church. Hitherto the Heat of Gilpin was more then his Light, and he hated Vice more then Error, which made him so heartily dispute against Master Hooper, (who afterwards was Martyred) when indeed he did follow his Argument with his Affections. How afterwards he became a zealous Protestant, I referre the Reader to his Life, written at large by Bishop Carlton, he was Rector of Houghton in the North, consisting of fourteen Villages. In his own house he boarded and kept full four and twenty scholars. The grea∣ter number of his boarders were▪ poor mens sons, upon whom he bestowed meat, drink, and cloth, and education in learning. He was wont to entertain his Parishioners and strangers at his table, not onely at the Christmas time, as the custome is, but be∣cause he had a large and wide Parish, a great multitude of people, he kept a table for them every Sunday from Michelmas to Easter. He had the Gentlemen, the Hus∣bandmen, and the Poorer sort set every degree by themselves, and as it were ordered in ranks. He was wont to commend the married estate in the Clergy, howbeit him∣self lived and dyed a single man. He bestowed in the building, ordering and esta∣blishing of his School, and in providing yearly stipends for a School-master and an Usher, the full summe of five hundred pounds: out of which School he supplied the Church of England with great store of learned men. He was carefull to avoid not only all evil doing, but even the lightest suspicions thereof. And he was accounted a Saint in the judgements of his very enemies, if he had any such. Being full of faith unfained, and of good works, he was at the last put into his grave as a heap of wheat in due time swept into the garner. He dyed the 4. of March 1583. and in the 66. year of his age. RICHARD MULCASTER was born of an ancient extract in the North, but whetherA. M. P. in this County or Cumberland, I find not decided. From Eaton-school he went to Cam∣bridge, where he was admitted into M.S. Hatcher of the Scho∣lars there. Kings-colledge 1548. but before he was gradua∣ted, removed to Oxford. Here such his proficiency in learning, that by general con∣sent he was chosen the first Master of Merchant-Tailors-School in London, which pro∣spered well under his care, as by the flourishing of Saint Johns in Oxford doth plainly appear. The Merchant-Tailors finding his Scholars so to profit, intended to fix Mr. Mulca∣ster, as his Desk to their School, till death should remove him. This he perceiv'd, and therefore gave for his Motto, Fidelis servus, perpetuus asinus.
But after twenty five years he procured his freedome, or rather exchanged his service, being made Master of Pauls-school. His method in teaching was this. In a morning he would exactly and  , and  the lessons to his Scholars, which done he slept his hour (custome made him critical to proportion it) in his desk in the School▪ but wo be to the   slept the while. Awaking he heard them  and   be  to pity, as soon as he to pardon, where he found just fault. The  of  Mothers prevailed with him as much as the requests of indulgent Fathers, rather increasing then mitigating his severity on their offending child. In a word, he was Plagosus Orbilius, though it may be truly said (and safely for one out of his School) that others have taught as much learning with fewer lashes. Yet his sharpness was the better endured, because unpartiall, and many excellent Scholars were bred under him, whereof Bishop Andrews was most remarkable. Then quitting that place, he was presented to the rich Parsoge of Stanfórd-rivers in Essex. I have heard from those, who have heard him preach, that his Sermons were not excellent, which to me seems no wonder; partly, because there is a diffe∣rent discipline in teaching children and men; partly, because such who make Divi∣nity (not the choice of their youth, but) the refuge of their age, seldome attain to eminency therein. He died  the  of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. CHRISTOPHER POTTER D. D. kinsman to Bishop Potter, (of▪ whom before) was born in this County,  Fellow of Queens-colledge in Oxford, and at last was chosen Provost thereof, Chapin in Ordinary to King Charles, and Dean of . One of a sweet nature, mely preence, courteous carriage, devout life, and deep learning; he wrot an excellent book entituled Charity mistaken, containing impregna∣ble truth, so that malice may sarl at, but not bite it, without breaking its own teeth. Yet a railing Jesuit wrote a pretended  thereof, to which the Doctor mde no return; partly, because the industrious Bee would not meddle with a  or Hor∣net rather, partly, because Mr. Chillingworth a great Master of defence in School-di∣vinity, took up the Cudgells against him. This worthy Doctor died in the beginning of our civill distempers. Benefactors to the Publique. ROBERT LANGTON Doctors of Law. MILES SPENCER Doctors of Law. Though dis∣putable, I con∣ceive them rightly placed since the Re∣formation. It is pity to part them, being Natives of this County, (as I am credibly informed) Doctors in the same faculy, and Co-partners in the same Charity, the building of a fair School at Appleby, The Pregnant Mother of so many Eminent Scholars. As for Robert Langton he was bred in, and a Benefactor to Queens-edge in Oxford, owing the Glaseing of many Windows therein to his Beneficence. Witness his Conceit to Communicate his Name to Posterity, viz. a Ton (the  or Fancy Generall, for all Sirnames in that Termination) extended very long beyond an ordinary proportion, [Lang the Northern man pronounceth it] whereby he conceived his Surname comple∣ted. I shall be thankfull to him, who shall enform me of the Dates of their severall deaths. ANNE CLYFFORD, sole Daughter & heir to George Earl of Cumberland, Wife first to Richard Earl of Dorset, then to Phillip Earl of Pembrok and Montgomery, (though born and nursed in Hartfordshire, yet) because having her greatest Residence and Estate in the North, is properly referrable to this County. The Proverb is, Homo non est ubi animat, sed amat, One is not to be reputed there where he lives, but where he loves, on which account this Lady is placed, not where she first took life, but where she hath left a most lasting Monument of her Love to the Publique. This is that most beautifull Hospital, Stately Built, and Richly Endowed, at her sole Cost, at Appleby in this County. It was conceived (a bold and daring part of Thomas Cecill (son to Treasurer Burghleigh) to enjoyn his Masons and Carpenters, not to omit a days Work, at the building of Wim∣bleton house in Surry, though the Spanish Armado, Anno 1588. all that while shot off their
Guns, whereof some might be heard to the Place. But Christianly Valiant is the Cha∣rity of this Lady, who in this Age, wherein there is an Earthquake of Antient Hospitals, and as for new ones, they are hardly to be seen for New lights, (I say) Couragious this Worthy  , who dare found in this Confounding Age, wherein so much was demolished and aened, which was given to God and his Church. Long may she live in Wealth and , exactly to Compleat, whatoever her  In∣tentions have . Mmorable Persons. RICHARD GILPIN, a Valiant Man in this County, was  offed in the Raign of K. John about the year 1208. in the Lordship of Kent-mire-all by the Baron of Ken∣dal,  his singular deserts oth in Peace and War. ThisLife of Ber∣nard  wrote by Bi∣shop  pag. 2. was that Richard , who sw the wild Bore, that raging in the Moun∣tains  (as sometimes that of Erimanthus) much indamaged the Coun∣try people▪ whence it is, that the Gilpins in their Coat- Armes give the Bore. I confess the story of this Westmerland-Hercules soundeth something Romanza like. However, I believe it, partly, because so reverend a pen hath recorded it, and because the people in these parts need not feigne foes in the fancy, Bears, Bores and Wild beasts, who in that age had real enemies, the neighbouring Scots to encounter. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Cuthbert Buckle Christopher Buckle Bourgh Vintner 1593 Sheriffs. I find two or three Links, but no continued chain os Sheriffs in this County, untill the 10. of K. John, who bestowed the Baily-week and Revenues of this County, upon Robert Lord Vipont. ROBERT de VIPONT the last of that Family, about the raign of K. Edward the first left two daughters. 1. Sibel married to Roger Lord Clifford. 2. Camdens . in . Idonea (the first and last I meet with of that Christian-name, though proper enough for women, who are to be Gen. 2. 18. meet helps to their husbands,) mar∣ried to Roger de Leburn. Now because honor nescit dividi, Honour cannot be divided betwixt Co-heirs, and be∣cause in such cases it is in the Power and Pleasure of the King, to assign it entire to which he pleased, the King Conferred the Hereditary Sheriffalty of this County, on the Lord Clifford, who had Married the Eldest Sister. I hath ever since continued in that honorable family. I find Elizabeth the Widdow of Thomas Lord Clifford, (probably in the Minority of her son) Sheriffess, (as I may say) in the sixteenth of Richard the second, till the last of K. Henry the fourth. Yet was it fashionable for these Lords to depute and present the most Principal Gen∣try of this Shire, their Sub-Vicecomites, Under-sheriffs, in their Right to order the affairs of that County. I find Sir Thomas Parr, Sir William Parr, (Ancestors to Q. Katherin Parr,) as also Knights of the Families of the Bellingams, Musgraves, &c. discharging that office, so high ran the Credit and Reputation thereof. Henry Lord Clifford was by K. Henry the eight Anno 1525. Created Earl of Cum∣berland, and when Henry the fift Earl of that family, died lately without Issue male, the Honour of this Hereditary Sheriffalty, with large Revenues, Reverted unto Anne the sole daughter of George Clifford third Earl of Cumberland, the Relict of Richard Earl of Dorset, (and since of Phillip Earl of Pembroke and Mountgomery,) by whom she had two daughters the Elder married to the Earl of Thanet, and the younger married to James Earl of Northampton.
The Farewell. Reader, I must confess my self sorry and ashamed, that I cannot do more right to the Natives of this County, so far distanced North, that I never had yet the opportu∣nity to behold it. O that I had but received some intelligence from my worthy friend Doctor Thomas Barlow Provost of Queens-colledge in Oxford! who for his Religion and Learning, is an especiall ornament of Westmerland. But Time, Tide, and a Printers∣Press, are three unmannerly things, that will stay for no man, and therefore I request, that my defective indeavours may be well accepted. I learn out of Master Camden, that in the River Cann in this County, there be two Catadupae or Waterfalls, whereof, the Northern sounding Clear and Loud, foretokeneth Fair Weather, the Southern on the same Terms presageth Rain▪ Now I wish that the former of thesemay be Vocall in Hay-time and Harvest, the latter after Great Drought, that so both of them may make welcome Musick to the Inhabitants.
VVILT-SHIRE. WILT-SHIRE hath Gloucester-shire on the North, Berk-shire and Hamp∣shire on the East, Dorset-shire on the South, and Summerset-shire on the West. From North to South it extendeth 39. Miles, but abateth ten of that Number in the breadth thereof. A pleasant County and of great Variety. I have heard a Wise man say, that an Oxe left to himself would of all England, choose to live in the North, a Sheep in the South part hereof, and a Man in the Middle betwixt both, as partaking of the plea∣sure of the plain, and the wealth of the deep Country. Nor is it unworthy the observing that of all Inland Shires, (no ways bordered on Salt-water) thisCompare the Tables of Mr. Speed. gathereth the most in the Circumference thereof, (as may appear by comparing them,) being in compass one Hundred Thirty and Nine Miles. It is plen∣tifull in all English, especially in the ensuing Commodities. Naturall Commodities. Wooll. The often repetition hereof (though I confess against our rules premised) may justly be excused. Well might the French Embassadour return, France, France, France, rei∣terated to every petty title of the King of Spain. And our English Wooll, Wooll, &c. may counterpoize the numerous but inconsiderable Commodities of other Countries. I confess a Lock thereof is most contemptible. Non flocci te facio, passing for an ex∣pression of the highest neglect, but a quantity thereof quickly amounteth to a good valuation. The Manufactures. Clothing. This Mystery is vigorously pursued in this County, and I am informed that as MED∣LEYS are most made in other Shires, as good WHITES as any are woven in this County. This mentioning of Whites to be vended beyond the Seas, minds me of a memora∣ble contest in the raign of King James, betwixt the Merchants of London, and Sir Wil∣liam Cockain, once Lord Mayor of that City, and as Prudent a Person as any in that Corporation. He ably moved, and vigorously prosecuted the design, that all the Cloth which was made might be died in England, alledging, that the wealth of a Coun∣try consisteth in driving on the Naturall Commodities thereof, through all Manufactures, to the utmost, as far as it can go, or will be drawn. And by the Dying of all English cloth in England, Thousands of poor People would be imployed, and thereby get a com∣fortable subsistence. The Merchants returned, that such home-dying of our cloth, would prove prejudi∣ciall to the sale thereof, Forreigners being more expert then we are in the mysterie of fixing of Colours. Besides, they can afford them far cheaper then we can, much of dying∣stuff growing in their Countries, and Forraigners bear a great affction to White or Virgin cloth, unwilling to have their Fancies prevented by the Dying thereof, inso∣much that they would like it better, (though done worse) if done by themselves. That Sir William Cockain had got a vast deal of Dying-stuff into his own possession, and did drive on his own interest, under the pretence of the Publick good. These their Argu∣ments were seconded, with good store of good Gold, on both sides, till the Merchants prevailed at last, (A Shole of Herrings is able to beat the Whale it self,) and Clothing left in the same condition it was before. Tobacco pipes. The best for shape and colour (as curiously sized) are made at Amesbury in this Coun∣ty. They may be called Chimneys portable in pockets, the one end being the Harth, the other the Tunnell thereof. Indeed at the first bringing over of Tobacco, Pipes
were made of silver and other metalls; which, though free from breaking, were found inconvenient, as soon fouled, and hardly clensed. These Clay-pipes are burnt in a furnace, for some fifteen hours, on the self-same token, that if taken out half an hour before that time, they are found little altered from the condition wherein they were when first put in. It seems all that time the fire is a working it self to the height, and doth its work very soon, when attain'd to perfection. Gauntlet-pipes, which have that mark on their heel, are the best; and here∣on a Story doth depend. One of that trade observing such Pipes most salable, set the Gauntlet on those of his own making, though inferior in goodness to the other. Now the workman, who first gave the Gauntlet, sued the other upon the Statute, which makes it penal for any to set anothers Mark on any Merchantable Commodities. The Defendant being like∣ly to be cast, (as whose Counsell could plead little in his behalf,) craved leave to speak a word for himself, which was granted. He denied that he ever set another man's mark: for the Thumb of his Gauntlet stands one way, mine another, and the same hand given dexter or sinister in Heraldry, is a sufficient difference. Hereby he escaped, though surely such, who bought his Pipes, never took notice of that Criticisme, or consulted which way the Thumb of his Gauntlet respected. The Buildings. The Cathedrall of Salisbury (dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) is paramount in this kind, wherein the Doors and Chappells equall the Months, the Windows the Days, the Pillars and Pillarets of Fusill Marble (an ancient Art now shrewdly suspected to be lost) the Hours of the Year, so that all Europe affords not such an Almanack of Archi∣tecture. Once walking in this Church, (whereof then I was Prebendary) I met a Country∣man wondring at the Structure thereof. I once (said he to me) admired that there could be a Church that should have so mamy Pillars, as there be Hours in the Year; And now, I admire more, that there should be so many Hours in the Yèar, as I see Pillars in this Church. The Cross Isle of this Church is the most beautifull and lightsome of any I have yet beheld. The Spire Steeple (not founded on the ground, but for the main supported by Four Pillars,) is of great heighth and greater workman-ship. I have been credibly informed that some Forraign Artists beholding this building, brake forth into Tears, which some imputed to their Admiration, (though I see not how wondring can cause weeping,) others to their Envy, grieving that they had not the like in their own Land. Nor can the most Curious (not to fay Cavilling) Eye, desire any thing which is want∣ing in this Edifice, except possibly an Ascent, seeing such who address themselves hither for their devotions, can hardly say with David, I will go up into the house of the Lord. Amongst the many Monuments therein, that of Edward Earl of Hartford, is most magnificent, that of Helen Suaenburgh a Swede, (the Relict of William Marquess of Northampton, and afterwards married to Sir Thomas Gorges,) is most commended for its artificiall plainness. But the curiosity of Criticks is best entertained with the Tomb, in the North of the Nave of the Church, where lieth a Monument in stone, of a little boy habited all in Episcopal Robes, a Miter upon his ead, a Crosier in his hand, and the rest accor∣dingly. At the discovery thereof (formerly covered over with Pews) many justly ad∣mired, that either a Bishop could be so small in Person, or a Child so great in Clothes; though since all is unriddled. For it wasMr. Gregori's Opera Posthu∣m, pag. 95. &c. fashionable in that Church (a thing rather deserving to be remembred, then fit to be done,) in the depth of Popery, that the Choristers chose a boy of their society, to be a Bishop among them, from Saint Nicho∣las till Innocents day at night, who did officiate in all things Bishop-like, saying of Mass alone excepted, and held the state of a Bishop, answerably habited, amongst his fellows the counterfeit Prebends: one of these, chancing to die in the time of his mock-Episco∣pacy, was buried with Crosier and Miter as is aforesaid. Thus superstition can dispence with that, which Religion cannot, making Piety Pageantry, and subjecting what is sa∣cred, to lusory representations.
As for Civil-buildings in this County, none are such Giants as to exceed the Stan∣dard of Structures in other Counties. Long-leat the house of Sir James Thynne was the biggest, and Wilton is the stateliest and pleasantest for Gardens, Fountains, and other ac∣commodations. Nor must the industry of the Citizens of Salisbury be forgotten, who have derived the River into every Street therein, so that Salisbury is a heap of Islets thrown together. This mindeth me of an Epitaph made on Mr. Francis Hide a Native of this City, who dyed Secretary unto the English Leiger in Venice, Born in the English Venice, thou didst die Dear friend in the Italian Salisbury. The truth is that the strength of this City consisted in the weakness thereof, unca∣pable of being Garrison'd, which made it in our Modern Wars to scape better then many other places of the same proportion. The VVonders. Stone-henge. After so many wild and wide conjectures of the Cause, Time, and Authors hereof, why, when and by whom this monument was erected, a Posthume-book comes lagging at last, calledWritten by Inigo Jones, Esq. Stone-henge restored, and yet goeth before all the rest. It is questionable, whe∣ther it more modestly propoundeth, or more substantially proveth this to be a Roman work, or Temple dedicated to Coelus or Coelum, (son to Aether and Dies) who was senior to all the Gods of the Heathen. That it is a Roman design he proveth by the Order, as also by the Scheame thereof, consisting of four equilateral Triangles, inscribed within the Circumference of a Cir∣cle, anVitru lib. 5. Architectonicall Scheam used by the Romans; Besides the Portico or entrance thereof, is made double, as in the Roman ancient Structures of great Magnificence. Not to say, that the Architraves therein are all set without Morter, according to the Roman Architecture, wherein it was ordinary to have Saxa nullo fulta glutino. No less perswasive are his Arguments to prove a Temple dedicated to Coelum; First, from the Situation thereof, standing in a plain, in a free and open Ayre, remote from any village, without woods about it▪ Secondly, from it's Aspect, being sub dio, and built without a roof; Thirdly, from the Circular form thereof, being the proper Figure of the Temple of Coelus; Not to mention his other arguments, in which the Reader may better satisfy himself from the originall Author, then my second-hand relation thereof. Knot Grasse. This is called in Latine Gramen caninum supinum longissimum, and groweth nine miles from Salisbury, at Master Tuckers at Maddington. It is a peculiar kind, and of the ninety species of Grasses in England is the most marvellous. It groweth ordinarily fif∣teen foot in length, yea, I read of one four and twenty foot long, which may be true, because, as there are Giants amongst men, so there are Giants amongst Giants, which even exceed them in proportion. The place whereon it groweth is low, (lying some Winters under water) having hills round about it, and a spacious sheep common adjoyning. The soyl whereof, by every hasty showre is brought down into this little medow, which makes it so incredibly fruitfull. This Grasse being built so many stories high, from knot to knot, lyeth mat∣ted on the ground, whence it is cut up with sickles, and bound into sheaves: It is both Hay and Provender, the joint-like knots whereof will fat swine. Some conceive that the seed thereof transplanted, would prosper plentifully (though not to the same degree of Length) in other places, from whose judgement other hus∣band-men dissent, conceiving it so peculiar to this place, that Ground and Grass must
be removed both together. Or else it mrst be set in a Parellel'd position, for all the particuler advantages aforesaid, which England will hardly afford. So that nature may seem mutually to have made this Plant and this Place one for another. Proverbs. It is done secundum usum Sarum.] This Proverb coming out of the Church, hath since inlarged it self into a civil use. It began on this occasion; Many Offices or forms of service were used in severall Chur∣ches in England, as the Office of York, Hereford, Bangor, &c. which caused a deal of Confusion in Gods Worship, untill Osmond Bishop of Sarum, about the year of our Lord 1090. made that Ordinall or Office which was generally received all over Eng∣land, so that Churches thence forward easily understood one another, all speaking the same words in their Liturgy. It is now applyed to those persons which do, and Actions which are formally and so∣lemnly done, in so Regular a way by Authentick Precedents, and Paterns of unquestionable Authority, that no just exception can be taken thereat. Princes. MARGARET PLANTAGENET Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, and Isa∣bel Nevile Eldest Daughter and Co-heir of Richard Nevile Earl of Warwick, was born August 14. 1473. Mr. Dugdale in hi Allustra∣tion of War∣wickshire pag. 335. at Farrley-Castle in this County. Reader, I pray thee, let her pass for a Princesse, because Daughter to a Duke, Neece to two Kings, (Edward the fourth, and Richard the third,) Mother to Cardinal Reginale Poole. But chiefly, because she was the last liver of all that Royall Race, which from their birth wore the names of Plantagenets. By Sir Richard Poole a Knight of Wales, and Cozen-Jerman to King Henry the seventh, she had divers children, whereof Henry Lord Mountague was the eldest, he was Accused of Treason, and this Lady his Mother Charged to be Privy thereunto, by King Henry the eighth, who (as his father was something too slow) was somewhat too quick in discovering Treasons, as soon as (if not before) they were. On the Scaffold as she stood, she would not gratify the Executioner with a Prostrate Posture of her body. Some beheld this her action as an argument of an erected soul, disdaining pulingly to submit to an infamous death, showing her mind free, though her body might be forc'd, and that also it was a demonstration of her innocence. But others condemn'd it as a needless and unseasonable animosity in her, who, though suppos'd innocent be∣fore man for this fact, must grant her self guilty before God, whose Justice was the supreme Judge condemning her. Besides it was indiscreet to contend, where it was impossible to prevail, there being no guard against the edge of such an axe, but pati∣ence; and it is ill for a soul to goe recking with anger out of this world. Here happened an unequall contest betwixt Weakness and Strength, Age and Youth, Nakedness and Weapons, Nobility and Baseness, a Princess and an Executioner, who at last draging her by the hair (gray with age) may truly be said to have took off her head, seeing she would neither give it him, nor forgive him the doing thereof. Thus dyed this Lady Margaret, Heir to the name and stout nature of Margaret Dutchess of Bur∣gundy, her Aunt and God-mother, whose spirits were better proportioned to her Ex∣traction then Estate, for though by special Patent she was created Countess of Saris∣bury, she was restored but to a small part of the inheritance she was born unto. She suffered in 23. year of the raign of K. Henry the eighth. JANE SEYMORE, Daughter to Sir John Seymoure Knight, (honourably descended from the Lords Beauchamps) was (as by all concurring probabilities is collected) born at Wulfall in this County, and after was married to King Henry the eight. It is currantly traditioned, that at her first coming to Court, Queen Anne Bollen espy∣ing a Jewell pendant about her neck, snatched thereat, (desirous to see the other un∣willing to show it,) and causually hurt her hand with her own violence; but it greived
her heart more, when she perceived it the Kings Picture by himself bestowed upon her, who from this day forward dated her own declining and the others ascending in her hus∣bands affection. It appeareth plainly by a passage in the Act of Parliament, that the King was not onely invited to his marriage, by his own affections, but by the Humble Peti∣tion and intercession of most of the Nobles of his Realme, moved thereunto, as well by the conveniency of her years, as in respect that by her Excellent Beauty and Pureness of Flesh and Bloud, (I speak the very words of the Act it self,) she was apt (God willing) to Con∣ceive Issue. And so it proved accordingly. This Queen dyed some days after the birth of Prince Edward her son, on whom this Epitaph. Phoenix Jana jacet, nato Phoenice dolendum, Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas. Soon as her Phoenix Bud was blown, Root-Phoenix Jane did wither. Sad, that no age a brace had shown Of Phoenixes together. Of all the Wives of King Henry she only had the happiness to dye in his full favour, the 14. of Octob. 1337. and is buried in the quire of Windsor Chappel, the King con∣tinuing in real mourning for her even all the Festival of Christmas. Saints. ADELME Son to Bale de script. Brit. . 1. Num. 83. Kenred, Nephew to Ina King of the West-Saxons, was bred in Forraign parts, and returning home was Abbot of Malmesbury Thirty years, a Person Me∣morable on severall Accounts. 1. He was the first Cambd. Brit.  . Englishman who ever wrote in Latine. 2. He was the first that ever brought Poetry into England. 3. The first Bishop of the See of Sherburn. Bede giveth him a large commendation for his Learning, the rather, because he wrot a book for the reducing the Britons to observe Easter according to the Church of Rome. Impudent Monkes have much abused his Memory with Shameless lyes, and amongst the rest with a Wooden Miracle, that a Flowers of English Saints pag. 491. Carpenter having cut a Beam for his Church too short, he by his Prayers stretched it out to the full proportion. To this, I may add ano∣ther lye as clear as the Sun it self, on whose Idem p. 492. Rayes (they report) he hung his Ve∣ment, which miraculously supported it to the great admiration of the beholders. Coming to Rome to be Consecrated Bishop of Sherburn, he reproved Pope Sergius his fatherhood, for being a father indeed to a Base Child, then newly born. And return∣ing home he lived in great Esteem untill the day of his death, which happened Anno Dom. 709. His Corps being brought to Malmesbury, were there Inshrined, and had in great Ve∣neration, who having his longest abode whilst living, and last when dead in this Coun∣ty, is probably presumed a Native thereof. EDITH Naturall daughter of King Edger, by the Lady Wolfhild, was Abbess of Wilton, wherein she demeaned her self with such Devotion, that her Memory obtained the reputation of Saint-ship. And yet an Polyc. lib. 6. cap. 9. Author telleth us, that being more curious in her attire, then beseemed her profession, Bishop Ethelwold sharply reproved her, who answered him roundly, That God regarded the Heart more then the Garment, and that Sins might be covered as well under Rags as Robes. One John Capgrove in vit  Edith. reporteth that after the slaughter of her brother Edward, holy Dunstan had a design to make her Queen of England, (the Vail of her head it seems would not hin∣der
the Crown,) so to defeat Ethelred the lawfull Heir, had she not declined the proffer, partly, on Pious, partly, Politick diswasions. She died Anno Dom. 984. and is buried in the Church of Dioness at Wilton of her own building, she is commonly called Saint Edith the younger, to distinguish her from Saint Edith her Aunt, of whom before. Martyrs. It plainly appeareth that about the year of our Lord 1503. there was a persecution of Protestants (give me leave so to Antedate their name) in this County, under Ed∣mund Audley, Bishop of Salisbury, as by computation of time will appear. Yet I find but one man, Richard Smart by name, (the more remarkable, because but once, and that scentingly Acts & Mon. pag. 815. mentioned by Mr. Fox) burnt at Salisbury, for reading a book called Wicliffs Wicket, to one Thomas Stillman, afterwards burnt in Smithfield. But under cruel Bishop Capon Wiltshire afforded these Marian Martyrs. Name Vocation Residence Martyred in Anno John Fox Act. and Mon. p. 1894. Spicer Free-Mason       William Coberly Taylor Kevel Salisbury 1556 Apr. John Maundrell Husbandman       Confessors. Name Vocation Residence Persecuted in Anno John Fox Act. and Mon. p. 2054. Hunt Husbandman Marleborough Salisbury 1558 Richard White Husbandman       These both being condemned to die, were little less then miraculously preserved, as will See  in Mem. Per. in this Shire. appear hereafter. ALICE COBERLY must not be omitted, wife to William Coberly forenamed, (cha∣ritably presuming on her repentance,) though she failed in her Constancy on this occa∣sion. The Jaylors wife of Salisbury, heating a key Fox Act. and Mon. p. . fire hot, and laying it in the grasse, spake to this Alice to bring it in to her, in doing whereof, she pitiously burnt her hand, and cryed out thereat. O (said the other) if thou canst not abide the burning of a key, how wilt thou indure thy whole body to be burnt at the stake. Whereat the said Alice revo∣ked her opinion. I can neither excuse the Cruelty of the one (though surely doing it not out of a Per∣secuting, but Carnall preserving intention) nor the Cowardliness of the other. For she might have hoped that her whole body encountering the flame with a Christian resolu∣tion, and confidence of Divine support in the Testimony of the truth, would have found lesse pain, then her hand felt from the suddain surprize of the fire, wherein the unexpectedness added (if not to the pain,) to the fright thereof. This sure I am, that some condemn her shrinking for a burnt hand, who would have done so themselves for a scratched finger. Cardinals. WALTER WINTERBURN was born at Bishop God∣win in his . of Cardin. p. 171. Sarisbury in this County, and bred a Do∣minican-fryer. He was an excellent Scholar in all Studies suitable to his Pitz de Ang. script. in Anno 1305. age, when a Youth, a good Poet and Orator, when a Man, an acute Philosopher, (Aristotelicarum do∣ctrinarum heluo, saith he Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4.  85. who otherwise scarce giveth him a good word,) when an Old∣man, a deep Controvertial Divine, and Skilfull Casuist, a quality which commended him to be Confessor to King Edward the first. Now news being brought to Pope Benedict the eleventh, that William Maklesfield Provincial of the Dominicans, and designed Cardinall of Saint Sabin, was dead and bu∣ried at London, before his Cap could be brought to him, he appointed this Walter to be heir to his Honour. The worst is, as Medlers are never ripe till they are rotten, so few are thought fit to be Cardinals, but such as are extreamly in years. Maklesfield had all
his body buried, and our Winterburn had one foot in the grave, being seventy nine years of age, before he was summoned to that dignity. However, over he went with all hast into Italy, and though coming thither too late, to have a sight of Pope Benedict the eleventh, came soon enough to give a suffrage at the choice of Clement the fift. This Walter his Cardinals Cap was never a whit the worse for wearing, enjoying it but a year. In his return home he died, and was buried at Genua, but afterwards his Corps were brought over, and Re-interred most solemnly in London Anno 1305. ROBERT HALAM. was, saith my Pitz de script. Brit. Anno 1410. Author, Regio sanguine Angliae natus, born ofS. N. the bloud Royal of England, though how, or which way, he doth not acquaint us. But we envy not his high Extraction, whilst it seems accompanied with other Eminences. He was bred in Oxford, and afterwards became Chancelour thereof 1403. From being Arch-deacon of Canterbury, he was preferred Bishop of Salisbury. On the sixt of June 1411. he was made Cardinal, though his particular title is not expressed. It argueth his Abilities, that he was one of them, who was sent to represent the English Clergy, both in the Council of Pisa and Constance, in which last service he dyed, Anno Dom. 1417. in Gotleby Castle. Prelates. JOANNES SARISBURIENSIS was born at, and so named from, old Sarum in this County, though I have heard of some of the Salisburies in Denby shire, who Essay to assert him to their Family, as who would not recover so eminent a person? Leland saith, that he seeth in him Omnem  Orbem, all the World (or if you will the whole Circle) of Learning. Centuria 3. Num. 1. Bale saith, that he was one of the first, who since Theodorus Arch-bishop of Canterbury, living five hundred years before him, (oh the  of Barbarisme in England!) indeavoured to restore the learned languages to their Originall Purity, being a good Latinist, Grecian, Musician, Mathematician, Philoso∣pher, Divine, and what not? What learning he could not find at home, he did fetch from abroad, travelling into France and Italy, companion to T. Becket in his Exile, but no partner in his protervity against his Prince, for which he sharply reproved him. He was highly in favour with Pope Eugenius the third, and Adrian the fourth, and yet no author in that age hath so pungent passages against the Pride and Covetousness of the Court of Rome. Take a tast of them. Joannes Sarisburiensis in Polycratico. Sedent in Ecclesia Romana Scribae & Pha∣risaei, ponentes onera importabilia in humeros hominum. Ita debacchantur ejus Legati, ac si ad Ecclesiam flagellandam egressus sit Sa∣tan a facie Domini. Peccata populi comedunt, eis vestiuntur, & in iis multipliciter luxuriantur, dum veri ado∣ratores in Spiritu adorant Patre. Qui ab eo∣rum dissentit Doctrina, aut Haereticus judi∣catur, aut . Manifestet ergo se∣ipsum Christus, & palàm faciat viam, quá nobis est incedendum. Scribes and Pharisees sit in the Church of Rome, putting unbearable burthens on mens backs. His Legates do so swagger, as if Satan were gone forth from the Face of the Lord to scourge the Church. They eat the sins of the people, with them they are clothed, and many ways riot therein, whilst the true worshipers worship the Father in Spirit, who so dissent from their Doctrine, are condemned for Here∣ticks, or Schismaticks. Christ therefore will manifest himself, and make the way plain, wherein we must walk. How doth our Author Luther it (before Luther) against their errors and vices? the more secure for the generall opinion men had of his person, all holding our John to be, though no Prophet, a Pious man, King Henry the second made him Bishop of Chartres in France, where he died 1182. RICHARD POOR Dean of Sarisbury, was first Bishop of Chichester, then of Sa∣risbury,S. N. or Old Sarum rather. He found his Cathedrall most inconveniently seated for
want of water, and other necessaries, and therefore removed it a mile off, to a place called Merry-field, (for the pleasant situation thereof,) since Sarisbury. Where he laid the foundation of that Stately Structure, which he lived not here to finish. Now, as the place whence he came was so dry, that as Malmsbury saith, miserabili commercio, ibi aqua vaeneat, by sad chaffer, they were fain to give money for water, so he removed to one, so low and moist, men sometimes, (upon my own knowledge) would give money to be rid of the water. I observe this for no other end, but to show, that all humane happiness, notwithstanding often exchange of places, will still be an Hete∣roclite, and either have too much or too little for our contentment. This Poor was afterwards removed to the Bishoprick of Durham, and lived there in great esteem, Mat. Paris characterizing him, eximiae sanctitatis, & profundae scientiae virum. His dissolution in a most pious and peaceable manner happened, April 5. Anno Domini 1237. His Corps by his Will were brought and buried at Tarrent in Dorset∣shire, in a Nunnery of his own founding, and some of his Name [and probably Alliance] are still extant in this County. WILLIAM EDENDON was born at Edendon in this County, bred in Oxford, and advanced by King Edward the third, to be Bishop of Winchester and Lord Treasurer of England. During his managing of that Office, he caused new coines (unknown be∣fore) to be made, groats and half-groats, both readier for change and fitter for charity. But the worst was Godwin in the Bishops of Winchester. imminuto nonnihil pondere, the weight was somewhat abated. If any say, this was an un-episcopal act; know, he did it not as Bishop, but as Lord Treasurer, the King, his Master, having all the profit thereby. Yea, succeeding Princes, follow∣ing this patern, have sub-diminished their coin ever since. Hence is it, that our No∣bility, cannot maintain the port of their Ancestors, with the same revenues; because so many pounds are not so many pounds, though the same in noise and number, not the same in intrinsecal valuation. He was afterward made Lord Chancellor, and erected a stately Convent for Bon∣homes at Edendon in this County, the place of his Nativity, valued at the Dissolution per annum at five hundred twenty one pounds, twelve shillings, five pence, half penny. Some condemn him for robbing Saint Peter (to whom with Saint Swithin, Winchester∣Church was dedicated) to pay all Saints collectively, to whom Edendon-Covent was Speed in hs Catal. of Re∣ligious houses in Will-shire. consecrated, suffering his Episcopal Palaces to decay and drop down, whilst he raised up his new foundation. This he dearly payed for after his death, when his Executors were sued for dilapidations, by his successour William Wickham, (an excellent Architect, and therefore well knowing how to proportion his charges for reparations,) who reco∣vered of them Bishop God∣Win in his Bi∣shops of Win∣chester. one thousand six hundred sixty two pounds ten shillings, a vast sum in that Age, though paid in the lighter groats and half-groats. Besides this, his Executors were forced to make good the standing-stock of the Bishoprick, which in his time was em∣paired, viz. Oxen 1556. Weathers 4717. Ewes 3521. Lambes 3521. Swine 127. This Edendon sat in his Bishoprick twenty one years, and dying 1366. lyeth buried on the South-side, in the passage to the Quire, having a fair Monument of Alabaster, but an Epitaph of course stone, I mean so barbarous, that it is not worth the inserting. RICHARD MAYO alias MAYHOWE was born nigh Hungerford in this County, of good parentage, whose Sur-name and Kindred was extinct in the last generation, when the Heirs-general thereof, were married into the Families of Montpesson and Grove. He was first admitted in New-colledge Register in Anno 1459. New-colledge, and thence removed to Magdalens in Oxford, where he became President thereof 27. years. It argueth his abilities to any indifferent ap∣prehension, that so knowing a Prince as Henry the seventh, amongst such plenty of E∣minent Persons, elected and sent him into Godwin in the Bishops of Hereford. Spain, Anno 1501. to bring over the Lady Katharine to be married to Prince Arthur, which he performed with all fidelity, though the heavens might rather seem to Laugh at, then Smile on that unfortunate marrying. After his return he was rewarded with the Bishoprick of Hereford, and having sat 11. years therein dyed 1516 and lyeth buried in his Church on the South-side of the high Altar, under a Magnificent Monument.
Since the Reformation. JOHN THORNEBOROUGH B. D. was born (as I am credibly informed) in the City of Salisbury, bred in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. He did , and his Goodly Presence made him more acceptable to Queen Elizabeth, preferring him Dean of York, and Bishop of Lymbrick in Ireland, where he received a most remarka∣ble deliverance, in manner as follweth. Lying in an Old Sir John Har∣rington in his additionall supply to Bi∣shop Godwin pag. 158. Castle in Ireland, in a large room, partitioned but with Sheets or Curtaines, his Wife, Children and Servants, in effect an whole Family; In the dead time of the night, the floor over head being Earth and Plaister, as in many places is used, over-charged with weight, fell wholly down together, and crushing all to pieces that was above two foot high, as Cupboards, Tables, Formes, Stools, rested at last on certain Chests, as God would have it, and hurt no living Creature. In the first of King James 1603. he was consecrated Bishop of Bristoll, and held his Deanery an Irish Bishoprick in commendam with it, and from thence was translated to Worchester. I have heard his skill in Chimistry much commended, and he presented a precious extraction to King James, reputed a great preserver of health, and prolong∣er of life. He is conceived by such helps to have added to his vigorous vivacity, though I think a merry heart (whereof he had a great measure) was his best Elixar to that purpose. He died exceeding aged, Anno Dom. 164. JOHN BUCKRIDGE was So am I am informed by Mr. Anthony Holmes his Se∣cretary still alive. born at Dracot nigh Marleborough in this County, and bred under Master Mullcaster in Merchant-Taylors school, from whence he was sent to Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford, where from a Fellow, he became Doctor of Divinity, and President thereof. He afterwards succeeded Doctor Lancelot Andrews in the Vica∣ridge of Saint Giles Criplegate, in which Cure they lived one and twenty years a piece, and† Bishop God∣win in his . of the Bishops of Rochester. indeed great was the Intimacy betwixt these two learned Prelates. On the ninth of June 1611. he was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, and afterwards set forth a learned Book in opposition of John Fisher, De potestate papae in Temporalibus, of which my Idem ibidem. Author doth affirm Johannem itaque Roffensem habemus, quem Johanni Roffensi opponamus, Fishero Buckerigium, cujus argumentis (si quid ego video) ne à mille quidem Fisheris unquam respondebitur. He was afterwards preferred Bishop of Ely, and having Preached the Funerall Ser∣mon of Bishop Andrews, (extant in Print at the end of his works) survived him not a full year, dying Anno Dom. 163. He was decently Interred by his own appointment in the Parish-church of Bromly in Kent, the Manner thereof belonged to the Bishoprick of Rotchester. States-men EDWARD SEIMOR and THOMAS SEIMOR, both Sons of Sir John Seimor of Wol∣full Knight in this County. I joyn them together, because whilst they were united in affection they were invinsible, but when devided, easily overthrown by their enemies. Edward Seimor Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector and Treasurer of England, being the Elder Brother, succeeded to a fair Paternal inheritance. He was a valiant Souldier for Land-service, fortunate, and generally beloved by Martiall men. He was of an open nature, free from jealousie and dissembling, affable to all People. He married Anne Daughter of Sir Edward Stanhop knight, a Lady of a high mind and haughty undaunted spirit. Thomas Seimor the Younger Brother, was made Barron of Sudley, by offices and the favours of his Nephew, K. Edward the sixth, obtained a great Estate. He was well experienced in Sea affairs, and made Lord Admirall of England. He lay at a close posture, being of a reserved Nature, and was more cunning in his Carriage. He married Queen Katharine Parr, the Wid∣dow of King Henry the eighth. Very great the Animosities betwixt their Wives, the Dutchess refusing to bear the Queens Train, and in effect justled with her for Precedence, so that what betwixt
the Train of the Queen, and long Gown of the Dutchess, they raised so much dust at the Court, as at last, put out the eyes of both their husbands, and occasioned their Executions, as we have largely declared in our Ecclesiasticall History. The Lord Thomas Anno 154.. The Lord Edward Anno 154. Thus the two best Bullworks of the safety of King Edward the sixth, being de∣molished to the ground, Duke Dudley had the advantage the nearer to approach and assault the Kings Person, and to practice his destruction as is vehemently sus∣pected. Sir OLIVER SAINT JOHN Knight, Lord Grandison, &c. was born of an ancient and honourable family, whose prime seat was at Lediard-Tregoze in this County. He was bred in the warrs from his youth, and at last by King James was appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and vigorously pursued the principles of his Predecessours, for the civilizing thereof. Indeed the Lord Mountjoy reduced that Country to obedience, the Lord Chichester to some civility, and this Lord Grandison first advanced it to considera∣ble profit to his Master. I confess In the life of Richard the se∣cond. T. Walsingham writeth, that Ireland afforded unto Edward the third, thirty thousand pound a year paid into His Exchequer, but it appears by the Sir John Da∣vis in Disc. o Ireland pag. 39. &c. Irish-records (which are rather to be believed) that it was rather a burden, and the constant revenue thereof beneath the third part of that proportion. But now, the Kingdome being peaceably settled, the income thereof turned to good account, so that Ireland (called by my Author the Land of Ire, for the constant broiles therein for 400. years,) was now become the Land of Concord. Being re-called into England, he lived many years in great repute, and dying without issue, left his Honour to his Sisters son by Sir Edward Villiers, but the main of his estate to his Brothers son Sir John Saint John Knight and Baronet. Sir JAMES LEY Knight and Baronet, son of Henry Ley Esquire, (one of great An∣cestry, who on his own cost with his men, valiantly served King Henry the eighth, at the siedge of Bullen) was born at Tafant in this County. Being his fathers sixth son, (and so in probability barred of his inheritance) he indeavoured to make himself an Heir, by his Education, applying his book in Brasen-nose-colledge, and afterwards studying the Laws of the Land in Lincolns-Inn, wherein such his proficiency, King James made him Lord Chief Justice in Ireland. Here he practised the charge King James gave him at his going over, (yea, what his own tender Conscience gave himself,) namely, Not to build his Estate on the ruines of a miserable Nation, but aiming by the unpartial execution of Justice, not to enrich him∣self, but civilize the People, he made a good Progress therein. But the King would no longer lose him out of his own Land, and therefore recalled him home about the time when his fathers inheritance, by the death of his five elder brethren descended upon him. It was not long before Offices and Honour flowed in fast upon him, being made by King James. King Charles. 1. Aturney of the Court of Wards. 2. Chief Justice of the Upper Bench 18. of his raign Jan. 29. 3. Lord Treasurer of England in the 22. of his raign Decemb. 22. 4. Baron Ley of Ley in J. Philipot in his . of Lord Treasu∣rers pag. 84. Devonshire the last of the same Month. 1. Earl of Marleburg in this County, im∣mediately after the Kings Corona∣tion. 2. Lord President of the Councell, in which place he died Anno Domini 1629. He was a person of great gravity, ability and integrity, and as the Caspian Sea is ob∣served neither to ebb nor flow, so his mind did not rise or fall, but continued the same constancy in all conditions. Sir FRANCIS COTTINGTON Knight, was born nigh Meer in this County, and bred, when a youth, under Sir........ Stafford. He lived so long in Spain, till he made the garbe and gravity of that Nation become his, and become him. He raised him∣self by his naturall strength, without any artificial advantage; having his parts above his learning, his experience above his parts, his industry above his experience, and
(some will say) his success above all; so that at the last he became Chancellour of the Exchequer, Baron of Hanworth in Middlesex, and (upon the resignation of Doctor Juxon) Lord Treasurer of England, gaining also a very great estate. But, what he got in few years, he lost in fewer days, since our Civil Warrs, when the Parliament was pleased (for reasons onely known to themselves) to make him one of the examples of their severity, excluding him pardon, but permitting his departure beyond the seas, where he dyed about the year 1650. Capitall Judges. Sir NICHOLAS HYDE Knight, was born at Warder in this County, where his fa∣ther in right of his wife, had a long lease of that Castle, from the family of the Arun∣dels. His father, I say, (descended from an Antient Family in Cheshire,) a fortunate Gentleman in all his Children, (and more in his Grand-children) some of his under∣boughs out-growing the top-branch, and younger children (amongst whom Sir Nicho∣las) in wealth and honour exceeding the heir of the family. He was bred in the Middle-Temple, and was made Sergeant at Law the first of Febru∣ary 1626. and on the eighth day following was sworn Lord Chief Justice of the Kings∣bench, succeeding in that Office, next save one unto his Countryman Sir James Ley, (then alive, and preferred Lord Treasurer, born within two miles one of another) and next of all unto Sir Randal Crew lately displaced. Now, though he entered on his place with some disadvantage (Sir Randal being generally popular) and though in those days, it was hard for the same person, to please Court and Country, yet he discharged his office with laudable integrity, and died 1631. Souldiers▪ First, for this County in general, hear what an antient Author, who wrot about the time of King Henry the second, reporteth of it, whose words are worthy of our trans∣lation and exposition. Johannes Sarisburiensis de Nugis Curialium 6. cap. 18. Provincia Severiana, quae moderno usu ac nomine ab incolis Wiltesira vocatur, eodem jure sibi vendicat Cohortem Subsidiariam, adjecta sibi Devonia & Cornubia. The Severian Province, which by moderne use & name is by the inhabitants called Wilt∣shire, by the same right chalengeth to it self to have the Rere, Devonshire and Cornwall being joyned unto it. The Severian Province.] We thank our Author for expounding it Wiltshire, other∣wise we should have sought for it in the North, near the Wall of Severus. By the same right] Viz. by which Kent claimeth to lead the Vanguard, whereof See Kent in title . for∣merly. To have the Rere] So translated by Mr. In his Notes on  pag. 303. Selden (from whom it is a sin to dissent in a Criticisme of Antiquity) otherwise some would cavill it to be the Reserve. Indeed the Rere is the basis and foundation of an Army, and it is one of the chief of Divine promises, Isa. 58. 8. The glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward. We read how the Romans placed their Triarii, (which were Veteran souldiers) be∣hind, and the service was very sharp indeed cum res rediit ad Triarios. We may say that these three Counties, Wiltshire, Devonshire and Cornwall, are the Triarii of England, yet so that in our Author Wiltshire appears as principal, the others being added for its assi∣stance. Here I dare interpose nothing, why the two interjected Counties betwixt Wilts and Devon, viz. Dorset and Summerset are not mentioned, which giveth me cause to con∣jecture them included in Devonia, in the large acception thereof. Now amongst the many worthy Souldiers which this County hath produced, give me leave to take spe∣ciall notice of HENRY D'ANVERS. His ensuing Epitaph on his Monument in the Church of Dantsey in this Shire, will better acquaint the Reader with his deserts, then any chara∣cter which my Pen can give of him.
Hre lyeth the body of Henry Danvers second son to Sir John Danvers Knight, and Dame Elizabeth Daughter and Co-heir to Nevill Lord Latimer. He was born at Dantsey in the County of Wilts, Jan. Anno Dom. 1573. being bred up partly in the Low-Country∣Wars under Maurice Earl of Nassaw, afterward Prince of Orenge; and in many other military Actions of those times, both by Sea and by Land. He was made a Captain in the Wars of France, and there Knighted for his good Service under Henry the fourth the then French King. He was imployed as Leiutenant of the Horse, and Serjeant Major of the whole Army in Ireland, under Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Baron of Mountjoy, in the Raign of Queen Elizabeth. By King James the first, he was made Baron of Dan∣sey, and Peer of this Realm, as also Lord President of Munster, and Governour of Guern∣sey. By King Charles the first, he was Created Earl of Danby, made of his Privy Coun∣cell, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. In his latter time by reason of im∣perfect health considerately declining more active Imployments, full of Honours, Wounds and Days, he died Anno Domini 1643. Laus Deo. For many years before St. George had not been more magnificently Mounted I mean the solemnity of his feast more sumptuously observed,) then when this Earl with the Earl of Morton were installed Knights of the Garter. One might have there beheld the abridgment of English and Scotish in their Attendance. The Scotish Earl (like Zeuxis his Picture) adorned with all Art and Costliness, whilst our English Earl (like the plain sheet of Apelles) by the Gravity of his habit, got the advantage of the Gallantry of his Cor∣rival with judicious beholders. He died without Issue in the beginning of our Civil Wars, and by his Will made 1639. setled his large Estate on his hopefull Nephew Henry D'Anvers, snatch'd away (before fully of age) to the great grief of all good men. Writers. OLIVER of MALMESBURY was (saith my Pits de Illus. 1. Angl. scrip. Anno 1060. Author) i ipsius Monasterii terra∣torio natus, so that there being but few paces betwixt his cradle, and that Convent, he quickly came thither, and became a Benedictine therein. He was much addicted to Mathematicks, and to judicial Astrology. A great Comet happened in his age, which he entertained with these expressions; Venisti? Venisti? multis matribus lu∣gendum malum? Dudum te vidi, sed mul∣tò jam terribilius, Angliae minans prorsus excidium. Art thou come? Art thou come? thou evil to be lamented by many mothers? I saw thee long since, but now thou art much more terri∣ble, threatning the English with utter destru∣ction. Nor did he much miss his mark herein, for soon after, the coming in of the Norman Conqueror deprived many English of their lives, more of their laws and liberties, till after many years by Gods goodness they were restored. This Oliver having a mind to try the truth of Poeticall reports, an facta vel ficta, is said to have tied Wings to his hands and feet, and taking his rise from a Tower in Mal∣mesbury, flew as they say Idem ibidem. a rlong, till something failing him, down he fell, and brake both his Thighs. Pity is it but that Icarus-like he had not fallen into the water, and then OLIVER OL'VARIS nomina fecit aquis. I find the like Recorded in the Abdia . Apost. hist. lib. 1. Egesip. . 3. cap. 2. Epiph. lib. Tom. 2. haeres. 21. An∣to. chro. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 4. Ecclesiastical History of Simon Magus, flying from the Capitol in Rome high in the Ayre, till at last (by the Prayers of Saint Peter,) he fell down and bruised himself to death. But that Simon did it by the Black, our Oliver by the White Art, he being supported by ill spirits, this by meer ingenuity, which made him the more to be pitied. He wrot some books of Astrology, and died Anno Dom. 1060. Bale de script. Bit. Cent. 2. Num. 51. five years before the Norman Invasion, and so saw not his own prediction (prevented by death) performed. It being the fate of such Folk, Ut sint Oculati foras & caecutiant Domi. That when they are quick sighted to know what shall betide to others, they are blind to behold what will befall to themselves. WILLIAM quitting his own name of SUMMERSET, assumed that of MALMES∣BURY, because there he had (if not born) his best Preferment. Indeed he was a Dual∣list in that Convent, (and if a Pluralist no ingenious person would have envied him,)
being Canter of that Church, and Library-Keeper therein. Let me adde and Library∣Maker too, for so may we call his History of the Saxon Kings and Bishops, before the Conquest and after it untill his own time. An History to be honoured, both for the Truth and Method thereof, if any fustiness be found in his Writings, it comes not from the Grape, but from the Cask, the smack of Superstition in his books, is not to be impu∣ted to his person, but to the Age wherein he lived and dyed, viz. Anno Dom. 1142. and was buried in Malmesbury. ROBERT CANUTUS. His Surname might justly perswade us to suspect him a Dane, but that In vit Ro∣berti Canuti Cent. 3. Num. 4. Bale doth assure him born at Cricklade in this County, and further pro∣ceedeth thus in the desciption of the place. Leland in the life of great King Alfred informs us, that during the flourishing of the glory of the Britains, before the University of Oxford was founded, two Scholars were famous both for Eloquence and Learning, the one called Greek∣lade, where the Greek, the other Latinlade, where the Latine tongue was professed, since corruptly colled Cricklade and Lechlade, at this day. Having so good security, I presumed to Print the same in my Church-History, and am not as yet ashamed thereof. But since my Worthy Friend Doctor Heylyn, (whose Relations living thereabouts, gave him the opportunity of more exactness,) thus re∣porteth it, that Cricklade was the place for the Profession of Greek, Lechlade, for Phy∣sick and Latine, a small village, (small indeed, for I never saw it in any Map) hard by the place where Latin was professed. But to proceed, our Canute went hence to Oxford, and there became Chief of the Canons of Saint Fridswith. He gathered the best flowers out of Plinie his Naturall History, and composing it into a Garland, (as he calleth it) dedicated the book to King Henry the second. He wrot so his Comments on the greater part of the Old and New Testament, and flourished Anno 1170. RICHARD of the DIVISES. A word of the place of his nativity. The Vies or Devises, is the best and biggest Town for trading (Salisbury being a City) in this Shire, so called, because antiently divided betwixt the King and the Bishop of Salisbury, as Mine-Thine (corruptly called Minden) a City in Westphalia had its Name from such a partition. Now because the Devises carrieth much of strange conceipts in the com∣mon sound thereof, and because Stone-henge is generally reputed a wonder, Country∣People who live far off in our Land misapprehend them (distanced more then 12. miles) to be near together. Our Richard born in this Town, was bred a Benedictine in Winch∣ster, where his Learning and Industry rendred him to the respect of all in that Age. He wrot a History of the raign of King Richard the first, under whom he flourished, and an Epitome of the Bale de script. Brit. Cnt. 3. Num. 28. British affaires, dedicating them both to Robert Prior of Winche∣ster. His History  could never see but at the second hand, as cited by others, the rarity thereof making it no piece for the Shop of a Stationer, but a Property for a publick Li∣brary. His death was about the year 1200. GODWIN of SALISBURY Chanter of that Church, and (what ever was his skill in Musick) following the precepts of Saint Paul, he made Ephes. 5. 19. melody in his heart, having his mind given much to Meditation, which is the Chewing of the Cud of the food of the soul, turning it into Clean and Wholsome Nourishment. He wrot (beside other works) a book of Meditations, dedicating the same to one Ramulia, or rather Ranilda, an Anchoress and most Bale de script. Cent. 4. Num. 20. incomparable woman, (saith my Author) the more remarkable to me, because this is the first and last mention I find of her memory. This Godwin flourished about the year of our Lord, 1256. JOHN of WILTON Senior, was bred an Augustinian Friar, and after he had stored himself with home-bred Learning, went over into France, and studied at Pa∣ris. Here he became a subtile Disputant, insomuch that John Baconthorp (that Staple School-man) not onely highly praiseth him, but also useth his authority in his JOHN of WILTON Junior, was bred a Benedictine Monke in Westminster. He was Elegant in the Latine tongue  Cent. 6. Num. 17. praeter ejus aetatis sortem. He wrot Metricall Me∣ditations, in imitation of Saint Bernard, and one Book highly prized by many, in∣tituled Horologium sapientiae, english it as you please, the Clock or Diall of Wisdome.
Arguments. I meet not with any man in that age better stock'd with Sermons on all occasions, having written his Summer,  de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 94. his Winter, his Lent, his Holy-day Sermons. He flourished under King Edward the se∣cond, Anno 1310. He was a great Allegory-Monke, and great his dexterity in such Figurative con∣ceits. He flourished some fifty years after his Namesake under King Edward the third. Reader, I confess there be See Villare Anglicanum. eleven Wiltons in England, and therefore will not abso∣lutely avouch the Nativities of these two Johns in this County. However because Wil∣ton which denominateth this Shire, is the best and biggest amongst the Towns so called, I presume them placed here with the most Probability. JOHM CHYLMARK was born at that Village, well know in Daworth Hundred, and bred Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford. He was a diligent searcher into the myste∣ries of Nature, an acute Phylosopher and Disputant, but most remarkable was his skill in Mathematicks, being accounted the Archemedes of that age, having written many  de script. Brit. Cent. 6. Num. 99. Tractates in that Faculty, which carry with them a very good regard at this day. He flourished under King Richard the second, Anno 1390. THOMAS of WILTON D. D. was for his Learning and Abilities made first Chan∣cellour, and then Dean of Saint Pauls in London, in his time (in the raign of King Edward the fourth,) happened a tough contest betwixt the Prelats and the Friars; the latter pretending to poverty, and taxing the Bishops for their pompe and plenty. Our Wil∣ton politickly opposed the Friars. Now as the onely way for to withdraw Hanniball from his invasive war in Italy, was by recalling him to defend his own Country near Carthage, so Wilton wisely wrought a diversion, putting the Friars from accusing the Bishops, to excuse themselves. For although an Old Gown, a Tattered Cowle, a Shirt of Hair, a Girdle of Hempe, a Pair of Beads, a Plain Crucifix, and Picture of some Saint, passed for all the wealth and Wardrobe of a Friar, yet by hearing Feminine Confessions, (wherewith Wilton twitteth them) and abusing the Key of Absolution, they opened the Coffers of all the Treasure in the Land. He wrot also a smart Book on this subject, Idem Cent. 8. Num. 32. An validi Mendicantes sint in  Perfectionis? Whether Friars in health and Begging, be in the state of perfection? The Anti-Friarists maintaining, that such were Rogues by the Laws of God and Man, and fitter for the House of Correction, then State of Perfection. This Dean Wilton flourished Anno Dom. 1460. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM HOREMAN was (saith my Idem Cent. 8. Num. 70. Author) Patria Sarisburiensis, which in the Strictest sence, may be rendred born in the City, in the Largest born in the Diocess of Salisbury, and in the Middle-sence, (which I most embrace) born in Wiltshire, the County wherein Salisbury is situated. He was bred (saith Bale) first in Eaton, then in Kings∣colledge in Cambridge, both which I doe not deny, though propably, not of the Foun∣dation, his name not appearing in the exact Collected in  by Mr. Hatcher. Catalogue thereof. Returning to Eaton, he was made Vice-Provost thereof, where he spent the remainder of his . He was one of the most Generall Scholars of his age, as may appear by the Diffusiveness of his Learning and Books written in all Faculties. Grammar.   Of Orthography. Poetry.   Of the Quantities of penultime syllables. History.   A Chronicle, with a Comment on some, & Index of most Chronicles. Controversial Divinity. A Comment on Gabriel Biel. Case   On the divorce of King Henry the eighth. Hnsbandry.   A Comment on Cato, Varro, Columella, Palladius, de Re Rusticâ. Other books he left unfinished, for which Bale sends forth a sorrowfull sigh, with a Proh Dolor: which his passion, is proof enough for me to place this Horeman on this side of the line of Reformation. He dyed April 12. 1535. and lieth buried in the Chappel of Eaton.
Masters of Musick. WILLAM LAWES son of Thomas Lawes a Viar Choral of the Church of Salisbury, was bred in the Close of that City, being from his Childhood inclined to Musick. Ed∣ward Earl of Hertford obtained him from his Father, and bred him of his own cost in that Faculty, under his Master Giovanni Coperario an Italian, and most Exquisite Musi∣cian. Yet may it be said that the Schollar in time did Equal, yea Exceed his Master. He afterwards was of the Private Musick to King Charles, and was respected and be∣loved of all such Persons, who cast any looks towards Vertue and Honour. Besides his Fancies of the three, four, five and six parts to Vyol and Organ, he made above thirty severall sorts of Musick, for Voyces and Instruments, neither was there any Instrument then in use, but he composed to it so aptly, as if he had only studied that. In these distracted times his Loyalty ingaged him in the War for his Lord and Master, and though he was by Generall Gerrard made a Commissary on designe to secure him (such Officers being commonly shot-free by their place, as not Exposed to danger,) yet such the activity of his Spirit, he disclaimed the Covert of his Office, and betrayed thereunto by his own adventurousness was casually shot at the Siege of Chester, the same time when the Lord Bernard Stuart lost his life. Nor was the Kings soul so ingrossed with gref for the death of so near a Kinsman, and Noble a Lord, but that hearing of the death of his dear servant William Laws, he had a particular Mourning for him when dead, whom he loved when living, and commonly called the Father of Musick. I leave the rest of his worth to be expressed by his own Works of Composures of Psalms done joyntly by him and his brother Master Henry Laws, betwixt which two no difference, either in Eminency, Affection, or otherwise con∣siderable, save that the one is deceased, and the other still surviving. Master William Laws dyed in September 164.. Benefactours to the Publique. I durst ven∣ture no far∣ther, finding no more of his name in Mr. Cambden. T. STUMPS of the Town of Malmesbury in this County, was in his Age one of the most eminent Clothiers in England, of whom there passeth a story told with some variation of circumstances, but generally to this purpose. King Henry the eighth, Hunting near Malmesbury in Bredon Forrest, came with all his Court Train unexpected, to Dine with this Clothier. But great House-keepers are as seldome surprised with Guests as vigilant Captains with Enemies. Stumps commands his little Army of Workmen which he fed daily in his house, to fast one Meal untill night, (which they might easily doe without indangering their health,) and with the same Provision gave the King, and his Court-train (though not so delicious and various) most wholesome and plentifull entertainment. But more Authentick is what I read in the great Camdens Brit: in . Antiquary, speaking of the pluck∣ing down of Malmesbury Monastery. The very Minster it self, should have sped no better then the rest, but being Demo∣lished, had not T. Stumps a wealthy Clothier, by much suit but with a greater summe of Money, redeemed and bought it for the Iowns-men his Neighbours, by whom it was converted to a Parish-church, and for a great part is yet standing at this day. I find one William Stumps Gentleman, who in the one and thirtieth I perused the Original in the Remem∣brancers (or Sir Thomas ) Of∣fice, C. 7.  rot. 147. year of King Henry the eight, bought of him the demeans of Malmesbury Abby, for fifteen hundred pound two shillings and a half penny. Now how he was related to this T. Stumps, whe∣ther son or father is to me unknown. It will not be a sin for me to wish more branches from such Stumps, who by their bounty may preserve the Monuments of Antiquity from destruction. Memorable Persons. —SUTTON of . Tradition and an old Pamphlet (newly vamped with Additions) make him a great Clothier, Entertaining King Henry the first, and be∣queathing at his death one hundred pounds to the Weavers of Salisbury, with many
other benefactions. I dare not utterly deny such a person, and his bountifull Gifts, but am ured that he is notoriously mis-timed, seeing Salisbury had scarce a stone laid therein, one hundred years after King Henry the first; and as for old Sarum, that age knew nothing of Clothing, as we have proved before. Thus these Mungrell Pam∣phlets (part true, part false,) doe most mischief. Snakes are less dangerous then Lam∣pries, seeing none will feed on what is known to be poison. But these books are most pernicious where truth and falshoods are blended together, and such a Medly Cloth, is the Tale-story of this Clothier. MICHEL born at........... in this County, was Under-sheriffe to Sir Anthony Hun∣garford, (a worthy Knight) Anno 1558. in the last year of Queen Mary. Of this Ma∣ster Michel I find this Character, A right and a perfectFox hs Acts and Mon. pag. 2655. godly man. Under sheriffs generally are complained of as over-crafty, (to say no worse of them,) but it seems hereby the place doth not spoil the person, but the person the place. When the Writ de comburendis haereticis, for the Execution of Richard White and John Hunt (of whom formerly) was brought to Mr. Michel, instead of burning them. He burnt the Writ, and before the same could be renewed, Doctor Geffray (the bloody Chancel∣lour of Salisbury who procured it) and Queen Mary, were both dead, to the Miraculous preservation of Gods poor Servants. Sir JAMES—Vicar Choral (as I conceive) of the Church of Sarisbury, in the raign of King Edward the sixth, was wholy addicted to the Study of Chemistry. Now as Socrates himself wrot nothing, whilst Plato his Scholar praised him to purpose, so whilst the Pen of Sir James was silent of his own worth, Thomas Charnock his Scholar (whom he made Inheritour of his Art) thus chants in his Commendation. I In his ∣ma . could find never Man but one, Which could teach Me, the secrets of our Stone. And that was a Priest in the Close of Salisbury, God rest his Soul in Heaven full merry. This Sir James pretented that he had all his skill not by Learning, but Inspiration, which I list not to disprove. He was alive Anno 1555. but died about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth. Lord Mayor. Name Father Place Company Time Sir Nicholas Lambert Edward Lambert Wilton Grocer 1531 The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the twelsth year of King Henry the sixth. R. Bishop of Salisbury, Commissioners to receive the Oaths. Walt. Hungarford, Knight. Robert Andrew, Knights for the Shire. Robert Long. Knights for the Shire. Rob. Hungarford, mil. Edm. Hungarford, m. Ioh. Stourton, mil. Will. Becham, mil. Ioh. Beynton, mil. Will. Westbery Justi∣ciarii. Ioh. Seymour Will. Darell Rich. Milbourn Edm. Dantesey Ioh. Westbery, sen. David. Cerington Randul. Thorp Lau. Gowayn Rog. Peryton Will. Gore, sen. Roh. Ernly Rob. Blake Tho. Drewe Will. Daungers Rob. Paniffote Ioh. Westbery, junior. Will. Rouse Tho. Boneham Iohan. Rous Will. Besyle Rob. Baynard Rog. Trewbody Will. Caynelt. Will. Botreauxe Will. Widecombe Ioh. Atte Berwe Ioh. Northfolk Ioh. Sturmy Tho. Cryklade Rob. Bodenham Iohan. Bride Rob. Beast Cob. Colyngborn Hen. Chancy Ioh. Combe Ioh. West Rob. Onewyn Tho. Ierderd Ioh. Whitehorn Ioh. Gergrave Nich. Wotton Tho. Hall Ioh. Hall Rich. Hall Will. ore, .
Rob. Crikkelade Ioh. Lambard Tho. Beweshyn Rich. Mayn Ioh. Mayn Ioh. Benger Rob. Mayhow Hen. Bardley Rob. Confold Ioh. Mumfort Tho. Hancock Ioh. Osburn Ioh. Gillberd Ioh. Attuene Ioh. Escote Gul. Orum Rich. Sowel Reg. Croke Ingel. Walrond Ioh. Waldrine Rich. Warrin Will. Stanter Rob. Solman Tho. Temse Will. Temse Tho. Ryngwode Will. Watkins Rob. Backeham Walt. Backeham Will. Dantesey Rich. Caynell Rich. Hardone Ioh. Tudworth Ioh. Coventre Tho. Gore nuper de Lynshyll Rob. Wayte Will. Coventre Ioh. Ingeham Ioh. Martyn Walt. Evererd Will. Polelchirch Ioh. Iustice Walt. Stodely Will. Wychamton Rob. Eyre Ioh. Voxanger Sim. Eyre Ioh. Ford Will. Russell Ioh. Scot Tho. Vellard Pet. Duke Ioh. Quinton Tho. Quinton Ioh. Bourne Rich. Warneford Ioh. Stere Tho. Hasard Rob. Lyvenden Will. Lyng Ioh. Davy Rob. Davy Rob. Floure Will. Leder Ioh. Edward Ioh. Cutting Tho. Blanchard Will. Moun Edm. Penston Rich. Lye Ioh. Bellingdon Ioh. Pope Ioh. Lye Ioh. Spender Walt. Clerk Ioh. Quarly Will. Bacon Ioh. Everard Nich. Spondell Will. Walrond Tho. Stake Rich. Cordra Rich. de Bowys. Will Renger Thom. Bower de Devise. R. is here Robert Nevil then Bishop of Salisbury. Walter Hungerford was the Lord Hungerford Treasurer of England. WILL. WESTBRY Justiciarii.] Surely this Justice must be more then an Ordinary one of the Peace and Quorum, be∣cause preposed to John Seimour a signall Esquire, late High-sheriffe of the Shire. Yet was he none of the two Chief-Justices of Westminster, as not mentioned in their Cata∣logue. Probably he was one of the Puny Judges in those Courts, but because no certainty thereof, we leave him as we found him. DAVID CERINGTON.] The self same name with Sherington for all the literall variation, and they, I assure you, were men of great Anchestry and Estate in this County. Sir Henry Sherington was the last Heir-male of this Family, dwelling at Lacock in this County, a Right Godly Knight, and great friend to Bishop Jewell, who died in his house at Lacock. He dis∣swaded the Bishop from Preaching that Lords-day, by reason of his great Weakness, Affirming it better for a Private Congregation to want a Sermon one day, then for the Church ofSee he life of Bishop Je∣well pefixed to his Apolo∣gy. England to lose such a Light for ever. But he could not prevail, the Bi∣shop being resolved to expire in his calling. This Sir Henry left two Daughters which had Issue, one married into the Honourable family of Talbot, the other unto Sir Anthony Mildmay, who enriched their Husbands with great Estates. Sheriffs of Wilt-shire. HEN. II. Anno 1 Will. qui fuit Vic. Anno 2 Com. Patricius Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Rich. Clericus Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Mil. de Dantesaia Anno 10 Rich. de Wilton Anno 11 Rich. de Wilteser Anno 12 Rich. de Wilton for 15 years. Anno 27 Mich. Belet, Rob. Malde Anno 28 Mich. Belet & Rob. Malde Rog. filius Reuf. Anno 29 Rob. Malduit Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Rob. Malduit. Anno 33 Idem. RICH. I. Anno 1 Hug. Bardulfe Anno 2 Will. Comes Saresb. Anno 3 Rob. de Tresgoze Anno 4 Will. Comes Saresb.
Anno 5 Will. Comes Saresb. & Tho. filius Will. for 4 years. Anno 9 Steph. de Turnham & Alex. de Ros Anno 10 Idem. JOHAN. REX. Anno 1 Steph. de Turnham & Wand. filius Corcelles Anno 2 Comes Will. de Saresb. & Hen. de Bermere Anno 3 dem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Comes Will. de Saresb. & Iohan. Bonet for 6 years. Anno 11 Will. Briewere & Rob. filius Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Nich. Briewere de Vetri ponte & Will. de Chanto Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Will Comes Saresb. & Hen. filius Alchi Anno 17 Idem. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. Comes Saresb. & Rob. de Crevequeor for 6 years. Anno 8 Will. Comes Saresb. Adam de Alta Ripa Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Sim. de Halei Anno 12 Eliz. Comit. Saresb. & Ioh. Dacus Anno 13 Ioh. de Monemue & Walt. de Bumesey Anno 14 Ioh. de Monemue Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Eliz. Com. Saresb. & Ioh. Dacus for 4 years. Anno 20 Eliz. Comit. Sarum & Rob. de Hugen. Anno 21 Eliz. Comit. Sarum Anno 22 Rob. de Hogesham Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Nich. de Haversham for 6 years. Anno 31 Nich de Lusceshall Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Will. de Tynehiden for 4 years. Anno 38 Will. de Tenhide Io. de Tenhide fil. & Heres Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Ioh. de Verurd Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Ioh. de Verund & Galf. de Scudemor Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Ioh. de Verund Anno 46 Rad. Cussell Anno 47 Idem. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Rad. de Aungers, Ioh. de Aungers Anno 50 Rad. de Aungers Anno 51 Will. de Duy & Steph. de Edwarth for 5 years. 56 Steph. de Edwarth & Walt. de Strichesley EDW. I. Anno 1 Walt. de Strichesle Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Hildebrandus de London for 6 years. Anno 10 Ioh. de Wotton for 8 years. Anno 18 Rich. de Combe Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Tho. de Sto Omero for 5 years. Anno 25 Walt. de Pevely Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Ioh. de Novo Burgo Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Ioh. de Hertingerr Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Hen. de Cobham Anno 34 Ioh. de Gerberge Anno 35 Idem. EDW. II. Anno 1 Andreas de Grimsted Anno 2 Alex. Cheverell & Ioh. de Sto Laudo Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Will. de Hardene Anno 5 Adam. Walrand Anno 6 Adam. Walrand & Iohan. Kingston Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Iohan de Holt & Phus. de la Beach Anno 9 Phus. de la Beach Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Walt. de Risum Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Ioh. de Tichbourn & Adam. Walrand. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno 17 Adam, Walrand Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Adam. Walrand Anno 2 Phus. la Beach Anno 3 Ioh. Manduit Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Ioh. Manduit & Will. Ran∣dolph Anno 8 Iohan. Tichbourn & Iohan. Manduit Anno 9 Gilb. de Berewice & Reg. de Pauley Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Petr. Doygnel & Gil. de Berewice Anno 12 Iohan. Manduit Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Tho. de Sto. Mauro & Rob. Lokes. Anno 16 Iohan. Manduit Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Iohan. Roches Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Ioh. de Roches & Tho. Semor Anno 22 Rob. Russell Anno 23 Idem.
Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Nullus Titulus in hoc Ro∣tulo Anno 26 Tho. de la River Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Ioh. Everard Anno 30 Tho. de Hungerford for 5 years. Anno 35 Hen. Sturmy for 6 years. Anno 41 Walt. de Haywood for 5 years. Anno 46 Will. de Worston Anno 47 Hen. Sturmy Anno 48 Ioh. Dauntesey, mil. Anno 49 Ioh. de la Mare, mil. Anno 50 Hugo Cheyne Anno 51 Idem. Edward III. 35 HENRY STURMY.] They were Lords of Woolfhall in this County, and from the Time of King Henry the second, were by right of Inheritance, the Bayliffs and Guardians of the Forrest of Sa∣vernake, lying hard by, which is of great note for plenty of good game, and for a kind of Ferne there, that yeildeth a most Pleasant Savour: In remembrance whereof, their Hunters-horn, of a mighty bigness, and tipt with silver, is kept by the Seymours Dukes of Somerset unto this day, as a Monument of their Descent, from such Noble Ancestors. Sheriffs. Name Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Pe. de Cushaunce, m & Will de Worston.     2 Rad. de Norton   Virt, a Lion rampant Or, alibi Argent. 3 Idem.     4 Lau. de Sco. Marti∣no & Hug. Cheyne     5 Nich. Woodhull     6 Bern. Brokers, mil.     7 Ioh. Lancaster     8 Idem.     9 Ioh. Salesbury     10 Idem.     11 Hug. Cheyne     12 Idm.     13 Rich. Mawardin     14 Ioh. Roches     15 Rob. Dyneley     16 Ioh. Goweyn     17 Rich Mawardin     18 Ioh. Moigne     9 Tho. Bonham     20 Rich. Mawardin     1 Idem.     22 Idem.     HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Ioh. Dautesey Dantesey Az. a Dagon & Lyon Rampant comhatant Arg. 2 Will. Worston & Ioh. Gawayne     3 Will. Cheyne     4 Walt. Beauchamp   Varry. 5 Walt. Beauchamp ut prius   6 Wal. Hungerford, m.   Sable 2 Barrs Arg. 2 Plates in Chief. 7 Rd. Grene     8 Walt. Beauchamp ut pris   9 Rob. Corbet   Or, a Raven Proper. 10 Will. Cheyne, mil.     11 Ioh. Berkley, mil,   Gules a Cheveron betwixt 10 Crosses Formee Arg. 12 Tho. Bonham     HEN. V.     Anno     1 Elias de la Mare   Gules, 2 Lions assant Gardant Argent. 2 Hen. Thorpe     3 Tho. Calsten     4 Rb. Andrewe     5 Will Findern     6 Will. Stury, mil. Woolf-hll Argent 3 Deme-Lions Gules. 7 Tho. Ringwood     8 Will. Darell   Az. a lion Rampant O Crowned Argent. 9 Idem.     HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Will. Darell ut prius   2 Rob Shotesbook, .     3 Wil. Findern     4 Walt Pauncefott   Gules, 3 Lions rampant Arg. 5 Ioh. Stourton, ar. Stourton Sa. a Bend Or, betwixt 3 foun∣tains proper. 6 Will. Darell, ar. ut prius   7 Ioh. Pawlett, ar.   Sable 3 swords in Point Argent 8 Ioh. Bainton Brumham Sable, a Bend lozenges Argent. 9 Davi. Sherrington     10 Ioh. Seymor Woolf-hall Gul. 2 Agels-wings paleways, inverted Or. 11 Walt. Strickland     12 Ioh. Stourton, mil. ut prius   13 Steph. Popham, mil.   Arg. on a Cheif Gul. 2 Bucks∣heads Caboshed Or. 14 Edw. Hungerford ut prius   15 Wil. Beauchamp, m. ut prius   16 Ioh. Stourton, mil. ut prius   17 Ioh. Lisle, mil.   Or a Fess betwixt 2 Chev. Sa. 18 Ioh. Saintlo, mil.     19 Ioh. Norris   Quarterly Az. and Gul. a Fret Or, with Fess Az. 20 Rich. Restwold   Argent, 3 Bends able. 21 Will. Beauchamp ut prius   22 Ioh. Bainton ut prius   23 Ioh. Basket   Az. a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3 Leopards-heads Or. 24 Rich. Restwold ut prius   25 Will. Stafford   Or a Cheveron Gul. on a Canton Ermine. 26 Will. Beauchamp, m. ut prius   27 Ioh. Norris ut prius   28 Phil. Barnard     29 Ioh. Seymor, mil. ut prius   30 Ioh. Nanson     31 Edw. Stradling Dantesey Paly of 6 Arg. & Az. on a Bend G. 3 Cinquefoyls Or. 32 Ioh. Willoughby     33 Geo. Darell     34 Reg. Stourton, mil.     35 Hen. Long, ar.   Sab. a Lion ramnt betwixt 8 Crosses crossed Arg. 36 Ioh. Seymor, ar. ut prius   37 Hug. Pilkenham     38 Ioh. Feiris, ar.     EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Geor. Darell ut prius   2 Reg. Stourton, mil. ut prius   3 Idem.     4 Rog. Tocotes, mil.     5 Geor. Darell, mil. ut prius  
6 Tho. de la Mare ut prius   7 Chi. Wey     8 Rich. Drell, mil. ut prius   9 Geo. Darell, mil. ut prius   10 Lau. Rynford, mil.     11 Rog. es, mil.     12 Maur. Beikley, mil. ut prius   1 Ioh Willoughby, m.   AMP. 14 Will. Collingborne     5 Hen. Long, ar. ut prius   16 Wlt. Bonham, ar.     17 Edw. Hargill, r.     8 Ih   Ar. a Lion Ramp. S. a Martlet on his Shoulder Or. 9 Walt. Hungerford ut prius   20 C Bulkley   S. a Chev. twixt 3 Bulls-heads Cabashed Argent. 1  Collingborn a     12 Ioh. Mompesson, ar. ut prius   RICH III.     Anno     1 Hen Long, ar. ut prius   2 Edw. Hargill, ar. ut prius   3 Ioh. Musgrave & Rog. Tocotes, mil. WESTME. Azure 6 Annulets Or. HEN. VII.     Aano     1 Rog Tocotes, mil.     2 Ioh. Wroughton ut infra   3 Ioh. Turbervile   Ermine, a Lion Rampant Gules Crowned Or. 4 Tho. Uniom     5 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius   6 Constan. Darell ut prius   7 Io. Lye de Flamston     8 Ioh. York   Arg on a Salter Az. an Escal∣lop Or. 9 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius   0 Rich. Puddesey, ar.     11 Constan. Darell ut prius   12 Geo. Chaderton     13 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius   14 Geo. Seymor, mil. ut prius   15 Ioh. Hudleston, mil. CUMBER. Gules, Frettee Argent. 6 Tho. Long, ar. ut prius   17 Ioh York, ar. ut prins   18 Wi l. Caleway     19 Ioh. Danvers, mil. Dauntesey G. a chev. inter 3 Mullets Or▪ 20 Ioh Ernley, ar. Wiham Arg. on a bend . 3 Eaglets dis∣played Or. 2 Ioh. Gayne, ar.     22 Tho. Long, mil. ut prius   23 Ih. Seymor, mil. ut prius   24 Ioh. Mompesson, ar. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Aano     1 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius   2 W Hungerford, m. ut prius   3 Hen. Long, a. ut prius   4 Chr Wroughon, ut prius   5 Ioh Danvers, mil. ut prius   6 Wll Bham, ar.     7 Ioh. Scrpe, mil. Castle-com Azu. a bend Or, a Mullet diffe∣rence. 8 Nich. Wadhm, mi     9 Edw Huord, m. ut prius   0 Ioh. Seymo, mil. ut prius   11 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius   12 Ioh. Skilling, ar.     13 Edw. on. on, mil u prius   14 Ioh Erley, ar. ut prius   5 Th. York, ar. u prius   Ioh Semor, mil. ut prius   7 H. ong, mil. ut prius   18 Ioh. , mil.   Arg. a Cross Engrailed Gul. be∣twixt 4 Wate Bougets S. 19 Ant. Hug ford, m. ut prius   20 Ioh. Eley, ar. ut ius   21 Ioh. Hsey, ar. DORSE. Azu. 3 Horse-heads Cooped Or, bridled Argent. 2 Tho. York, ar. ut prius   23 Tho. Bonham, ar.     24 Ioh. Ernley, ar. ut prius   25 Wal. Hungerford, m. ut prius   26 Rob. Baynard, ar. Leckham Sab. a Fess btwixt 2 Cheverons Or. 27 Tho. York, ar. ut prius   28 Hen. Long, mil. ut prius   29 Ioh. Bruges, mil.   Arg. On a Cross Sa. a Leopards∣head Or. 30 Ant. Hungerford, m. ut prius   31 Ioh. Ernely, ar. ut prius   32 Edw. Mompesson, ar. ut prius   33 Hen. Long, mil. ut prius   34 Ioh. Marvin, ar. Funt-hill Arg. a Demi-lion Ramp. Cooped S. charged on the shoulder with a flower de luce. 35 Ioh. Erneley, ar. ut prius   36 Anth. Hungerford ut prius   37 Caro. Bulkley, ar. ut prius   38 Rich. Scroope, ar. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Silv. Danvers, ar. ut prius   2 Amb. Dauntsey, ar. Lavington G. a Lion Ramp. Arg. chasing a wyvern Vert, Alias, Azure a Dragon proper and a Lion Arg. Gombatant. 3 Ioh. Bonhm, ar.     4 Ioh. Mervyn, ar. ut prius   5 Iac. Scumpe, mil.     6 Wll. Sherington, m. & Edw. Baynard, ar. ut prius     ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Anno     Ma. 1 Ioh. Erneley, ar. ut prius   1, Hen. Hungerford, a. ut prius   2, 3 Ioh. St. Iohn, ar. Lediard Argent on a Chief, G. 2 Mullets pierced Or. 3, 4 Ant Hungerford, m. ut prius   4, 5 Wa. Hungerford, m. ut prius   5, 6 Hen. Brunker, ar. Melsam Argent 6 Ogresses 2, 2, 2. on a Cheif imbattled Sa. a Lozng of the first, thereon a CrossPatee of the second. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Ioh Zouch, mil.   G. 10 Besants 4, 3, 2, and . on a Canton Or a Lozeng vert thereon a flower de luce Arg. 2 Iac. Stumpe, mil.     3 Ioh. Mevine, mil. ut prius   4 Geo. Penruddock, ar. Cumpton Gul, a Limb of a Tree Raguled and Trunked in Bend Arg. 5 Ioh. Erneley, ar. ut prius   6 Tho. Button, ar. Alcon Ermine a Fess Gules. 7 Ioh. Eyre, ar. ut infra Reader, arriving somewhat too late at some of these Armes I am fain to referre thee to what followeth. 8 Nich. Snell, ar. ut infra   9 Hen. Sherington, a.     10 Geo. Ludlowe, ar. ut infra   11 Tho. Thynne, mil. Longleate Barry of Ten pieces Or and S. 12 Will. Button, ar. ut prius   13 Edr. Baynton, ar. ut prius   14 Ioh. St. Iohn, ar. ut prius   15 Wol. Hungerford, m. ut prius   16 Ioh. Danvers, mil. ut prius   17 Rob. Long▪ ar. ut prius   18 Tho. Wroughton, m. ut infra   19 Ioh. Hungerford, m. ut prius   20 Hen. Knivet, mil.   Argent a Bend within a Border engrailed Sable. 21 Nch. St. Iohn, ar. ut prius   22 Mich. Erneley, ar. ut prius   23 Will. Brounker, ar▪ ut prius   24 Wal. Hungerford, a. ut prius   25 Iasper. Moore, a. ut infra   26 Ioh. Snell, ar. ut infra   7 Ioh. Danvers, mil. ut prius   28 Edm. Ludlow, ar. ut infra   29 Rich Mody, ar. ut infra   30 Wal. Hungerord, m. ut prius   3 Hen. Willoughby, a. ut prius   32 Ioh. Wanford, ar.   Party per fess imbatteled Arg. & Sab. 6 Crosses patee Counter∣changed. 33 Will. Eyre, ar. ut infra   34 Ioh Hungerford, m. ut prius   35 Ioh. Thynne, ar. ut prius   36 Edw. Hungerfod, a. ut prius   37 Hen. Sadler, ar. Everley Or a Lion Ramp. parte per Fess Azure and Gules 38 Ioh. Dauntsey, ar. ut prius   39 Iac. Marvyn, mil. ut prius  
40 Edw. Penruddock, a. ut prius   41 Walt. Vaughan   See the Notes on this years. 42 Tho. Snell, ar.   Quarterly Gul. and Az. a Cross flowry Or. 43 Hen. Baynton, mil. ut prius   44 Walt. Long, mil. ut prius   45 Iasper. Moore, mil. & prim. Iacob.   Ermin on a Cheveron between  Mores-heads proper. 2 Swords Argent. JAC. REX.   a Quarterly Ar. & G. a Cressant in the first quar. of the second. Anno     1 Iasper. Moore, mil. ut prius b Sabl. a Cross between 4 Nails Gules. 2 Alex. Tutt, mil. a     3 Ioh. Hungerford, ar. ut prius c G a Cheveron Vairy, twixt 3 Crescants ermine. 4 Gabriel. Pile, ar. b     5 Tho. Thynn, mil.   d Arg. a Chev. G. twixt 3 Bo rs∣heads Cooped S. Tusked Or. 6 Rich. Goddard, ar. c Stondō Hu.   7 Ioh. Ayliffe, ar.   e Argent on a Chief Gu. 2 Buck∣heads Or. 8 Eg. Wroughton, m. d Brodhenton   9 Will. Bon, mil. ut prius f A. a Dimselyon ramp. Cooped S. charged on the Shouldiers with a flower de luce Or. 10 Fran. Popham, m. e Litlecott   11 Will. Pawlet, mil. ut prius   12 Hen. Marvyn, ar. f Pertwood g G a Lyon passant Er. wounded in the Shoulder. 13 Tho. Moore, ar. g ut prius   14 Rich. Grubham, mil.   h G. a Fess ingrailed between 3 Harpies Arg. Crined Or. 15 Ioh Horton, mil.     16 Hen. Moody, mil. h Garesdon i Az. Semee de fleur de Lzes O, a Lion Rampant Arg. 17 Hen. Poole, mil. i   k Arg. a Bend Gu. Guttee d'eau twixt 2 Cornish Choughs pro∣per a cheif countercomponce Or and Sable. 18 Carol Pleadall, m. k Colshill   19 Will. Pawlet, ar. ut prins   20 Ioh. Lambe, mil. ut prius   21 Gifford. Long, ar. ut prius   22 Edw. Read, ar.   Gules a Saltire betwixt 4 Garbs Or. CAR. REG.     Anno     1 Fran. Seymour, mil. ut prius   2 Egid. Estcourt, mil. Newton Ermen on a Cheif Indented G. 3 Stars. 3 Walt. Long, ar. ut pus   4 Ioh. Ducket, ar.   Sa. a Saltyr Arg. a Mullet diffe∣rence. 5 Rob. Baynard, mil. ut prius   6 Ioh. Topp, ar. Stoon Arg. a Canton Gu. a Gantlet of Mail clenched proper. 7 Edw. Hungerford, m. Balnei. ut prius   8 Ioh. St. Iohn, mil. ut prius   9 Hen. Ludlow, mil. Hildenrel Ar. a Chev. twixt 3 Bears-heads erazed S. 10 Fran. Goddard, ar. ut prius   11 Geor. Ayliffe, mil. ut prius   12 Nevil. Poole, mil. ut prius   13 Edw. Baynon, mil. ut prius   14 Ioh. Grubb▪ ar. Pottern * Per Fess, Arg. & Az. 3 Chap∣lets counterchanged. 15 Ioh Duke, ar.* Lakes   16 Egid. Eyre, ar.   Ar. on a Chev. S. 3 Cater-foiles O. 17 Rob. Chivers, ar.   Arg. a Cheveron Engrailed G. 18 INGRATUM     19 BELLO DE-     20 BEMUS IN-     21 ANE.     22 Ant. Ashly Cooper, Bar.   G. a Bend engrailed betwixt 6 Lions rampant. King Henry VI. 23 JOHN BASKET, Esq.] High-sheriffe of this County in the twenty third of King Henry the sixth. He is memo∣rable on this account, that a solemn dispensation granted unto him from the Court of Rome, acquainteth us with the form of those Instruments in that Age, not unworthy our perusall. Nicholaus miseratione divinâ, &c. Sanctae Crucis in Jerusalem Presbyter Cardinalis; Dilectis in Christo nobilibus Johanni Basket Scutifero, & Aliciae ejus Uxori, Sarisburiensis Diocesis, Salutem in Domino. Solet annuere Sedes Apostoli∣ca piis votis, & honestis petentium preci∣bus, maximè ubi salus requiritur anima∣rum, favorem benevolum impartiri. Cum igitur ex parte vestra nobis fuerit humili∣ter supplicatum, ut in animarum vestra∣rum solatium, eligendi Confessorem ideo∣neum vobis licentiam concedere dignare∣mur. Nos vestris supplicationibus favo∣rabiliter annuentes, Authoritate Domini Papae, cujus Thus it is written in the Original which we have englished, & request the learned Rea∣ders bette  struction. primariae curam gerimus, & de ejus speciali mandato super hoc vivae vocis oraculo nobis facto, devotioni vestrae concedimus quatenus liceat vobis idoneum & discretum Presbyterum in Confessorem eligere, qui super peccatis quae sibi confite∣bimini (nisi talia sint propter quae sit dicta Sedes consulenda) authoritate praedicta vobis provideat de absolutionis debitae beneficio, & paenitia salutari quam∣diu vixeritis, quotiens fuerit opportu∣num.
Vota ver peregrinationis & absti∣nentiae si qua emisistis, quae commodè ser∣vare non potestis, ultra marina (beatorum Petri, & Pauli, atque Jacobi, Apostolo∣rum votis duntaxat exceptis) commutet vo∣bis idem Confessor in alia opera pietatis. Dat. Florentiae, sub sigillo officii Pria∣riae, 3. Non. Aprilis Pontificatus Domini Eugenii Papae 4. Anno Decimo. Nicholas by divine mercy, &c. Priest Car∣dinal of St. Crosses in Jerusalem; To the be∣loved in Christ the worshipfull John Basket Esq. and Alice his Wife, of the Diocess of Sa∣lisbury, Greeting in the Lord. The See Aposto∣lick useth to grant the pious desires, and ho∣nest requests of petitioners, chiefly where the health of souls requireth courteous favour to be bestowed upon them. Seeing therefore on your behalf you have supplicated humbly un∣to us, that for the comfort of your souls we would vouchsafe to grant you license tochuse for your selves a Confessor, we favourably yeilding to your request by the authority of our Lord the Pope, the Charge of whose Pri∣mary we bear, & from his Special Command in this case made unto us by the Oracle of his mouth, doe grant to your devotion, so far forth as it may be lawfull for you, to chuse a fit & discreet Priest for your Confessor, who as touching the sins which ye shall confess unto him (except they be such for which the said See is to be consulted with) may by au∣thority aforesaid provide for you concerning the benefit of due absolution, & wholesome Penance, so long as ye live, so often as there shall be occasion. But if ye have made any forraign vows of pilgrimage and fasting, which ye cannot conveniently keep (vows to blessed Peter, Paul, and James, Apostles onely excepted,) the same Confessor may commute them for you into other works of piety. Given at Florence, under the seal of the office of the Primary, 3. Non. of April the 13. year of the Popedome of Pope Euge∣nius the fourth. The tenth of Pope Eugenius falleth on the twentieth of King Henry the sixth, Anno Domini 1440. Why it should be higher and harder to dispence with vows made to Saint James, then to Saint John, (his brother, and Christs beloved disciple,) some Courtier of Rome must render the reason. The posterity of this Master Basket in the next generation remov'd in Dorset-shire, where they continue at this day in a worshipfull condition, at Divenish. Queen Elizabeth. 11 THOMAS THIN, Mil.] The great and suddain wealth of this Knight, being envied by a great Earl, and Privy∣Councellour neighbouring on his Estate, caused his summons before the Counsel Ta∣ble, to answer how in so short a time he had gotten so large Possessions, some suggested as if he had met with Treasure Trove, or used some indirect means to inrich himself. The Knight calmly gave in the unquestionable particulars of the Bottom he began on, the accrewment by his Marriage, and with what was advanced by his industry and frugality, so bringing all up within the view (though not the Touch) of his present Estate. For the rest, my Lords (said he) you have a good Mistris our Gracious Queen, and I had a good Master the Duke of Sommerset, which being freely spoken, and fairly taken, he was dismissed without further trouble. Nor were his means too big for his Birth, if de∣scended (as Camden saith) from the Antient Family of the Bottevils. 41 WALTER VAUGHAM, Ar.] His Armes (too large to be inserted in that short space) were, Sable, a Chevern betwixt three Childrens-heads Cooped at the Shoulders Argent, their Peruques Or, Inwrapped about their Necks, with as many Snakes Proper, whereof this (they say) the Occasion, because one of the Ancestors Guillam's dis∣play of Heral∣dry pag. 174. of this Family, was born with a Snake about his Neck. Such a Neck-Lace, as Nature, I believe never saw. But grant it. How came the Peruques, about the Infants Heads? So that Fancy, surely, was the sole Mother and Midwife of this Device. The Lands of this Walter Vaugham, (afterwards Knighted) descended to his Son Sir George, a Worthy Gentleman, and after his Issueless decease to a Brother of his, who was born blind, bred in Oxford, brought up in Orders, and Prebendary of Sarum. King Charles. 1 FRANCIS SEYMOUR, Mil. This wise and religious Knight, (grand-child to Edward Earl of Hartford, and brother to William Duke of Sommerset,) was by King Charles the first Created Baron of Trou∣bridge in this County, since for his Loyalty, made Privy-councellour to K. Charles the second, and Chancellour of the Dutchy of Lancaster. Battles. Lansdoune Fight. This was fought in the Confines of this County and Somerset the 13. of July 1643. It was disputed by parcells and peece-meals, as the Place and narrow Passages would give leave; and it seemed not so much one intire Battle, as a Heap of Skirmishes hud∣led together. It may be said in some sort of both des, Victus uterque fuit, Victor uterque fuit.
For the Parliament Forces five times (by the confession of the Royalists) beat them back with much Disorder, Sir Bevill Greenfield being slain in the Head of his Pikes, (Major Lowre in the Head of his Party of Horse.) Yet the Kings Forces al∣leadge Demonstration of Conquest, that Prince Maurice and Sir Ralph Hopton, remain∣ed in the Heads of their Troops all Night, and next Morning found themselves pos∣sessed of the Field and of the Dead, as also of three hundred Armes, and nine  of Powder, the Enemy had left behind them. Round way Fight. Five days after Prince Maurice with the Earl of Carnarvan returning, and the Lord Wilmot coming from Oxford, with a gallant supply of Select Horse, charged the Parliament Forces under the Conduct of Sir William Waller. With him were the Horse of Sir Arthur Haslerigg so well Armed, that (if of Proof as well within as with∣out) each Souldier seemed an Impregnable Fortification. But these were so smartly Charged by the Prince, that they fairly forfook the Field, leaving their Foot (which in English Battles bear the heat of the day) to shift for themselves. In the mean time Sir Ralph Hopton hurt lately (with the blowing up of Powder) lay sick and sore in the Town of the Devizes. His Men wanted Match, whom Sir Ralph di∣rected to beat and to boyl their Bed-cords, (necessity is the best Mother of Ingenuity,) which so ordered did them good service; when Marching forth into the Field, they effectu∣ally contributed to the totall routing and ruining of the Parliament oot which re∣mained. The Farewell. This County consisting so much of sheep, must honour the Memory of King Edgar, who first free'd the Land from all Wolves therein. For the future I wish their flocks secured From 1. Two-legg'd Wolves, very destructive unto them. 2. Spanish Ewes, whereof one being brought over into England, Anno .......... brought with it the first generall contagion of sheep. 3. Hunger-Rot, the effect of an over-dry summer. I desire also, that seeing these seem to be of the same breed with Gen. 29. 8. Laban and Exod. 3. 1. Je∣thros sheep, which had their solemn times and places of drinking, (which in other Shires I have not observed) that they may never have any want of wholesome water.
WORCESTER-SHIRE hath Stafford-shire on the North, Warwick∣shire on the East, Gloucester-shire on the South, Hereford and Shorp-shires on the West. It is of a Triangular, but not equilaterall form, in pro∣portion stretching from North to South Twenty two Miles. South to North-west, Twenty eight Miles. Thence to her North-east point, Twenty eight Miles. Be this understood of the continued part of this Shire, which otherwise hath Snips and Shreds cut off from the whole cloth, and surrounded with the circumjacent Countries, even some in Oxford-shire distanced, by Gloucester-shire interposed. What may be the cause hereof, it were presumption for me to guess after the con∣jectures of so many Learned men. Cambdens Brit. in Worce∣ster-shire. Some conceive that such who had the Command of this County, (probably before the Conquest,) and had parcells of their own Land scattered in the Vicinage, desired to Unite them to this County, so to make their own authority the more entire. Or else as aCarew in his survey of Corn∣wall fol. 98. Worthy Writer will have it (rendering a rea∣son why part of Devon-shire straggleth into Cornwall,) it was done that there might rest some cause of Intercourse, betwixt this and the Neighbouring Counties, adding moreover, that a late great man ensued and expressed the like consideration, in the division of his Lands betwixt two of his Sons. All I will say is this, that God in the partage of Palestine (Rea∣der if you forget, I must remember my own profession) betwixt the twelve Tribes, on the same account, (as the learned conceive) made some Tribes to have In-lots with∣in another, And Manasseh had in Issachar,Josh. 17. 11. and in Asher, Bethshean and her Towns, and Ibleam and her Towns, &c. This County hath a childs portion (and that I assure you a large one) in all English, and especially in these Naturall Commodities. Lampreys. In Latine Lampetrae, à lambendo petras, from licking the rocks, are plentifull in this and the neighbouring Counties in the river of Severn. A deformed fish, which for the many holes therein, one would conceive, nature intended it rather for an Instru∣ment of Musick, then for mans food. The best manner of dressing whereof, says myCambdens Brit. in Worce∣ster-shire. Author, is, To kill it in Malmesey, close the mouth thereof with a nutmegg, the holes with so many cloves, and when it is rolled up round, putting in thereto filbard-nut-kernells stamped, crums of bread, oyle, spices, &c. Others, (but those Mso-lampreys) doe adde, that after all this cost, even cast them away, seeing money is better lost then health; and the meat will rather be delicious then wholesome, the eating whereof cost KingStows Chron. ag 142. Henry the first his life. But, by their favour, that King did not dye of Lampreys, but of ex∣cess in eating them; and I am confident the Jews might surfet of Manna it self, if eat∣ing thereof above due proportion. Perry. This is a Drink or a Counterfeit Wine, made of Pears, whereof plenty in this Coun∣ty; though such which are least delicious for tast, are most proper for this purpose. Such the Providence of Nature to design all things for mans service. Peter Martyr when Professor in Oxford, and sick of a Feaver, would drink no otherDr. Humphred in the large latine life of Bishop Jewel pag. 31. liquor, though it be ge∣nerally believed both cold and windy, except, corrected with spice, or some other ad∣dition. Salt. I haveIn Cheshire and Northum∣berland. twice formerly insisted hereon, and doe confess this Repetition to be flatly against my own Rules, laid down for the regulating of this work, save that the neces∣sity of this Commodity, will excuse it from any offence. I beheld England as a long
well-furnish'd Table, and account three principal Salt-cellars set at distance thereon. Worcester shire, I fancy the Trencher Salt, both because it is not so much in quantity, (though very considerable,) and because it is whiter, finer and heavier, then any other. Chshire, I conceive deserveth to be reputed the Grand-salt-cellar, placed somewhat be∣neah the middle, whilst the third is the Salt of New-castle, set far North, at the lower end of the Table, for the use of those, who otherwise cannot conveniently reach to the former. The usefulness of this not-duely-valued-blessing, may be concluded from the Latine word Salarium, so usuall in antient and modern Authors, which importeth the entertainment or wages of Souldiers, antiently paid chiefly (if not only) in Victuals, and taketh its name by a Synecdoche, fr om Sal or Salt, as of all things most absolutely needfull, without which condiment, nothing can be wholesome nutriment. I read in a modern Author, describing his own County of Che-shire, and measuring all things to the advantage thereof, that, William Smith in the Vale∣Royal pag. 18. There is no Shire in England, or in any other Country beyond the seas, where they have more then one salt-well therein, neither at Droitwich in Worcester-shire is there more then one, whereas in Che-shire there be four, all within ten wiles toge∣ther. Here let me enter this Caveat in preservation of the right of Worcester-shire, that Camdens Brit. in ∣shire. many salt-fountains are found therein, but stopped up again for the preservation of woods, so that the making of salt at one place alone, proceeds not from any Natural, but a Politick restriction. Nor must I forget, how our German-Ancestors (as Tacitus reports) conceited such places where salt was found, to be nearest to the heavens, and to ingratiate mens payers to the gods; I will not say, founding their superstition on the mis-apprehension of the Jewish-worship, Levt 2. 13. Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt. The Buildings. I am sorry I have never seen the Cathedrall of Worcester, so that I cannot knowingly give it a due commendation, and more sorry to hear that our late Civil Wars, have made so sad an Impression thereon. The Market-towns are generally handsomely built, and no Shire in England can shew a brace of them, so neat and near together, as Beaudley and Kiddermister in this Coun∣ty, being scarcely two miles asunder. Saints. Saint RICHARD born at Wich, [alias Droitwich] from which he took his name, was bred in Oxford, afterwards at Paris, & lastly at Bononia in Italy, where for seven years to∣gether he heard and read the Canon-law. Having thus, first plentifully laid in, he then began to lay out, in his Lectures in that University, and returning Home, became Chan∣cellor of Oxford, then of Canterbury, till at last chosen Bishop of Chichester. He was a great Becketist, viz. a stout opposer of Regal Power over Spiritual Persons, on which, and other accounts, he wrot a Book to Pope Innocent the fourth, against King Henry the third. These his qualities with the reputation of his holy life, so commended his memory to the notice of Pope Urban the fourth, that seven years after his death, viz. Anno 1260 he canonized him for a Saint. It seems men then arrived sooner at the ma∣turity o [Popish] Saintship then now a days, more distance being now required be∣twixt their death and canonization. As for their report, that the Wiches or Salt-pits in this County were miraculously procured by his prayers, their unsavory lye hath not a graine of probability to season it, it appearing by antient Camden in -shire plainly proves it out of ∣vase of . Authors, that salt-wter flowed there time out of mind, beore any sweet-milk was given by Mother or Nurse to this Saint Richard. This County affording no Martyrs (such the moderation of Bshop Pates) let us proceed to Cardinals JOHN COMIN, or Cumin. It must cost us some pains (but the merit of the man will quit cost) to clear him to be of English extraction. For the proof whereof we produce the testimony of Giraldus Cambrensis, his contemporary and acquaintance, who saith,Lb. 2. . Hiber. cap. 23. he was Vi Anglicus natione. Hereby the impudent falsehood of John Demster the Scotish Historian, doth plainly appear, thus expressing himself.
Johannes Cuminus ex nobilissimo Comitum Buchaniae stemmate ortus, Banfiae natus, falsissimè inter Anglos reponitur, cum ipse viderim quaedam ipsius nuper Parisiis scripta, quibus suorum Popularium causam, Ponti∣fici Lucio commendavit in bibliotheca Pauli Petavii, Senatoris Parisiensis. John Cumin descended from the most noble stock of the Earls of Buchan, born at Banfe, is most falsely set down amongst the English, seeing I my self lately saw some of his wri∣tings at Paris, in the Library of Paulus Pe∣tavius, Senator of Paris, in which he recom∣mended the cause of his Countrimen to Pope Lucius. In plain English, this Scotish Demster is an arrant rook, depluming England, Ireland and Wales, of famous Writers, meerly to feather his own Country therewith; so that should he, according to the Jewish Law, be forced to make four-fold restitution for his felony, he would be left poor enough indeed. Besides Alexander Comin was Created first Earl of Buchan, by King Camdens Brit. in Scotia pag., 48. Alexander the second, who began to raign Anno Dom. 1214. whereas Comin (by the testimony of Demster himself) died 1212. and therefore could not properly descend of their stock, who were not then in being. I cannot certainly avouch him a Worcester-shire man, but know that he was bred a Monke at Giraldus Cambr. lib. 2 expugn. Hiber. cap. 23. Evesham therein; whence he was chosen (the King procuring it) à clero Dublinensi consonè satis & concorditer, Arch-bishop of Dublin. He endowed Trinity∣Church in Dublin with two and twenty Prebends, and was made by Pope Lucius Cardinal of Saint Vellit in Italy. HUGH of EVESHAM so called from the place of his Nativity in this County, ap∣plyed himself to the Study of Physick, with so good success that he is called the Bae de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 50. Phoe∣nix in that Faculty; Great also was his skill in the Mathematicks, and especially in Astrology. Some questions arising at Rome about Physick (which consequencially were of Church government) Pope Martin the fourth sent for our Hugh, to consult with him, who gave such satisfaction to his Demands, that in requitall, he Created him Car∣dinal of Saint Laurence, 1280. But so great the envy of his Adversaries at his prefer∣ment, that seven years after he was put to death by Idem ibidem. Poyson, and let none say, he might have foreseen his Fate in the Stars, seeing Hell, and not the Heavens brooded that de∣sign. Neither say Physician cure thy self, seeing English Antidotes are too weak for Italian Poysons. But Cicaonius to Palliate the business, saith he died of the Plague, and thus I be∣lieve him of the Plague of Hatred in the hearts of such who contrived his death. Which happened Anno Domini, 1287. Prelates. WULSTAN of BRAUNDSFOED was born at Brandsford in this County, and after∣wards became Prior (equivalent to Dean in other foundations) of Worcester. He de∣served well of his Covent, building a most beautifull Hall therein. Hence was he pre∣ferred Bishop of Worcester 1338. the first and last Prelate who was born in that Coun∣ty, and dyed in that See. He was Verus Pontifex in the gramaticall notation thereof, building a fair bridge at Braundsford (within three miles of Worcester) over the river Teme, on the same token, that it is misprinted Tweed in Bishop His Cata∣logue of the Bishops of Wor∣cester set forth 1616. Godwin, which made me in vain to look for Braundsford in Northumberland. He dyed August 28. 1349. JOHN LOWE was born in this Godwin in the Bishops of Rochester. County, bred an Augustinian Frier at Wich therein; afterwards he went to the Universities, and then setled himself in London. Hence he was preferred by King Henry the sixth to Saint Asaph, and thence was removed (desi∣ring his own quietness) from one of the best Bishopricks in Wales, to Rochester the meanest in England. He was a great Book-monger, and on that score, Bale (no friend to Friers) giveth him a large Testimonial, that Bishop ut prius. Godwin borroweth from him (the first and last in that kind) the whole character of his commendation, and this a∣mongst the rest; Opuscula quaedam scripsit purgatis auribus digna. He deserved well of posterity in preserving many excellent manuscripts, and bestow∣ing them on the Magnificent Library, which he furnished at Saint Augustines in London. But alas! that Library at the Dissolution vanished away with the Stows survey of London n Broadstreet∣ward. fine Spire-steeple of
the same Church, (oh, the wide swallow of sacriledge!) one person, who shall be nameless, imbezelling both books and buildings to his private profit. He dyed Anno Dom. 1467. and lieth buried in his own Cathedral (over against Bishop Merton) under a Marble monument. EDMUND BONNER alias SAVAGE. He had to his Father John Savage a Priest, richly beneficed and landed in Cheshire, son to Sir John Savage, Knight of the Garter and Privy Councellor to King Henry the seventh. His Mother Concubine to this Priest, (a dainty dame in her youth, & a jolly woman in her age,) was sent out of Cheshire to cover her shame, and lay down her burthen at Elmeley in this County, where this bouncing babe Bonner was Manuscript collections of the industrious Antiquary Mr. Dodsworth ex∣tant in the Library of the Lord Fairfax. born. The history of his life may be methodized according to the five Princes under whom he lived. He was born under King Henry the seventh, and bred a Batchelor in the Laws in Broadgates-hall in Oxford. Under King Henry the eight, he was made Doctor of Laws, Arch-deacon of Leice∣ster, Master of the faculties under Arch-bishop Cranmer, and employed in severall Em∣bassies beyond Seas. All this time Bonner was not Bonner, being as yet meek, mer∣cifull, and a great Cromwellite, as appeared by some tart printed Repartees betwixt him and Bishop Gardiner. Indeed he had sesqui corpus, a Body and Halfe, (but I hope that Corpulency without Cruelty is no sin) & towards his old age he was over-grown with fat, as Master Fox (who is charged to have persecuted Persecutors with ugly pictures,) doth re∣present him. Not long after he was consecrated Bishop of London. Under King Edward the sixth, being deputed to preach publickly concerning the Reformation, his faint and frigid expressions thereof, manifested his mind rather to be∣tray then defend it, which cost him a deprivation and imprisonment. Then it was when one jeeringly saluted him, Good morrow Bishop quondam, to whom Bonner as tartly returned, Good morrow Knave semper. Being restored under Queen Mary to his Bishoprick, he caused the death of twice as many Martyrs as all the Bishops in England besides, justly occasioning the verses made upon him. Si fas caedendo caelestia scandere cuiquam, Bonnero coeli maxima porta patet. NEMO ad BONNERUM. Omnes Episcopum esse te dicunt malum, Ego tamen Bonnere te dico bonum. If one by shedding blood, for bliss may hope, Heavens widest gate for Bonner doth stand op'e. NO BODY speaking to BONNER. All call thee cruell and the spunge of blood, But Bonner, I say, thou art mild and good. Under Queen Elizabeth he was deprived and secured in his Castle, I mean the Mar∣shallsea in Southwark, for as that prison kept him from doing hurt to others, it kept others from doing hurt to him, being so universally odious he had been stoned in the streets if at liberty. One great good he did, though not intentionally, accidentally to the Protestant Bishops of England. For lying in the Marshalsea, and refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy tendred to him by Horn, then Bishop of Winchester; he pleaded for himself, that Horn was no lawfull Bishop, which occasioned the ensuing Parliament to confirme him and the rest of his order to all purposes and intents. After ten years soft durance in all plenty, (his face would be deposed for his whole body that he was not famished), enjoying a great temporall Estate left him by his Father. He* Bishop God∣win his Cata∣logue of the Bishops of London. dyed 1569. and was buried saith Bishop Godwin in Barking Church-yard, amongst the theeves and murderers, being surely a mistake in the Printer, Allhallows Barking being on the other side the Thames, nothing relating to the Marshalsea. And I have been credi∣bly informed that he was buried in the Church-yard of S. Georges in Southwark. But so long as Bonner is dead let him chuse his own grave where he will be buried. But enough, if not too much of this Herostratus, who burnt so many living temples of the Holy Ghost, and who, had he not been remembred by other writers, had found no place in my history.
Since the Reformation. JOHN WATSON was born at So was I in∣formed by Mr. Venners, the Minister of St. Maries in W∣wick, whose father. was Nephew and Steward to this Bishop. Bengeworth in this County, where some of his name and relations remain at this day, bred (I believe) in Oxford, and afterwards became Prebendary, then Dean of Winchester. Hence he was advanced Bishop of that See, and the ensuing passage (which, I expect, will meet with many infidels, though to me credibly attested) will acquaint us with the occasion thereof, and suspecting the Bi∣shoprick of Winchester when vacant would be offered unto him. Dean Watson aged sixty years, and desirous to lead a private life, in the sickness of Bishop Horn, privately promised the Earl of Leicester (in that Age the Dominus fac multum (if not totum) in the disposall of Church Dignities,) two hundred pounds that he might not be made Bishop of Winchester, but remain in his present condition. The Bishoprick falling void, and the Queen expressing her intention to confer it on Watson, the foresaid Earl requested the contrary, acquainting the Queen with the pas∣sage betwixt them, how otherwise it would be two hundred pounds out of his way. Nay then (said the Queen) Watson shall have it, he being more worthy thereof who will give two hundred to decline, then he who will give two thousand pounds to attain it. I confess, such who have read so much of the Corruption of the Earl of Leicester, and heard so little of the Integrity of Watson, will hardly credit this story, which I am ready to believe, and the rather, because of this his Epitaph written on his Marble Mo∣nument in the Church of Saint Mary Overies. D. Johannes Watson, hujus Ecclesi Winton. Praebendarius, Decanus,  deinde Episcopus, prudentissimus pater, vir optimus, praecipuè erga inopes misericors, obiit in Domino January 23. anno tatis 63. Episcopatus quarto, 1583. Nothing else have I to observe, save that there were three Watsons Bishops in the raign of Queen Elizabeth, Thomas of Lincoln, our John of Winchester, and Anthony of Chichester, though I believe little allied together. States-men. Sir THOMAS COVENTRY Knight, was born at Croone in this County, Eldest Son to Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. He was bred in the Inner Temple a student of the Laws, and in the year 1618. was Treasurer of the said Temple, and Atturney Generall to King James. He was afterwards made Lord keeper of the Great Seal of England, the first day of November, in the first year of King Charles. He was by the same King, Created in the fourth of his raign April 10. Baron Coven∣try of Alesborough in this County. An ingenious H. L. Esq. pag. 172. Gentleman in his History giveth him this Character, in relation to his Keeper-ship, that he injoyed that dignity fifteen years, if it was not more proper to say, that dignity enjoyed him. This latter age affording none better qualified for the place. Adding, that he knew enough, and acted conformable to his knowledge, so that Captious Malie nds mute to blemish his fame. To which we will only adde some few operative words taken out of his Patent when he was Created Baron. Nos igitur in personâ Prdilecti, & per quam fidelis  stri Thomae Coventry Militis, custodis magni sigilli nostri Angliae, gratissima & dignissima serviti, quae idem consiliarius noster tam Prcharissimo Patri  Jacobo Regi  Memoriae per mul∣tos ans, quam nobis ab ipsis Rgni nostri primis auspiciis fidelissimè & prudentissimè praestitit & impendit, indiesque impendere non desistit; nec non , pruden∣tiam, strenuitatem, dexteritatem, integritem, industriam,  nos & nostram coro∣nam animo benigno & regali intime recolentes constantiam & fidelitatem ipsi Thomae Coventry Militis, &c. In cujus rei, &c. T. R. apud Westm. decimo di Aprilis Anno regni Regis Caroli 4.
He died about the beginning of January 1639. before our Civill distempers began, so that it is hard to say whether his Honourable Life, or Seasonable Death, was the greater favour which God bestow'd upon him. I must not forget, that it hath been observed, that never Lord Keeper made fewer Orders, which afterwards were Reversed, then this Lord Coventry, which some ascribe to his Discretion, grounding most of his Orders on the Consent, and Comprimise of the parties themselves interested therein, whose hands so tyed up by their own Act, were the more willing to be quiet for the future. Writers on the Law. Sir THOMAS LITLETON, Knight. Reader, the Nimiety of my Cautiousness (loath to prejudice the seeming right of any) made me to bestow part of his. Character on Staffordshire, who since am convinced, that he wholly and solely belongeth to this Shire, as born at Frankley therein, and I request the Reader to rectify some mistakes I for∣merly In Stafford∣shire. wrot by that which followeth. He was a man remarkable in many respects. First, for his Extraction, he was Son to Thomas Wescot, Esquire, and Elizabeth Litle∣ton his wife, who being a Double Inheritrix, by her Father to the Litletons, Mother to the Quatremains, indented with Husband, that her Heritable Issue, should assume her Surname. Say not her Husband might say, Accepi dotem, cognomen perdidi, seeing it was done before his marriage by his free consent. Besides we find even in Scripture it self, Joab being constantly named the son of his Mother2 Sam. 2. 13. Zeruiah. Secondly for his happiness, that two great Kings had a great Sympathy to him, who had an Antipathy each to other, Henry the sixth, whose Serjeant he was, and rod Judge of the Northern circuit, and Edward the fourth, who made him a Judge, and in his raign he rod the Northamptonshire Circuit. Thirdly, for his Exquisite skill in the Laws, witness his Book of Tenures, which though writ about two hundred years since, yet at this day, retaineth an Authentical re∣putation. Insomuch that when in the raign of King James, it came in question upon a Demurer in Law, whether the release to one Trespasser, should be available or no to his Com∣panion, Sir Henry Hubbard, and Judges Warberton, Winch, and Nicols his Companions, gave Judgement according to the opinion of our Litleton, and openly said, that They would not have HIS CASE disputed or questioned. Lastly, for his happy posterity, having left three families, signally fixed and flourish∣ing in this and the neighboring Counties of Stafford and Salop. And Lord Coke in his Preface to Liletons Tenures. one saith very truely, that these Quarter the Armes of many Matches, after the best manner of quar∣tering them, (other are scarce half-half-quartering them) viz. they possess at this day, good land on the same account. Indeed the LordIdem ibidem. Coke observeth that our Lawyers seldome dye either without Wills or Heirs. For the first I believe it, for our Common Lawyers will not have their Estates come under the Arbitrary dispose of a Civilian Judge of the Prerogative, and therefore wisely prevent it. For the second, the Observation as qualified which Sel∣dome may pass, otherwise our Grand-fathers can remember Sir James Dier Lord Chief Justice, and Periam Lord Chief Baron, both dying without Issue. His Book of Tenures hath since been Commented on by Sir Edward Coke, his most Judicious Pen. Dic mihi, num Textus vel Commentatio prestat? Dicam ego, tam Textus, quam Commentatio prestat. He died in the 21. year of King Edward the fourth, and lyeth buried in the Cathe∣drall of Worcester, having formerly constituted Doctor Alcock his faithfull friend, (and then Bishop of Worcestor,) Supervisor of his Will, who saw it performed to all criticall particulars. Souldiers. RICHARD BEAUCHAMP Earl of Warwick, was born at the Maor-house of Mr. William Dgdale in his survey of War∣wick-shire  the Earls of Warwick. Salwape in this County, January the 28. 1381. King Richard the second, and Ri∣chard Scroope then Bishop of Coventry, (afterwards Arch-bishop of York,) were his God∣fathers.
A person so redoubted for Marshall Atchievements, that the poeticall ficti∣ons of Hercules his labours found in him a reall performance. 1. Being hardly 22. years old in the fift of King Henry the fourth, at the Queens Coronation he Justed and Challenged all commers. 2. He bid battle to Owen Glendour the Welch Rebell, put him to flight and took his Bannor with his own hands. 3. He fought a pitch'd field, against the two Piercies at Shrewsbury, and overcame them. 4. In his passage to the Holy land (whi∣ther he went on Pilgrimage) he was chal∣lenged at Verona by an Italian Sir Pan∣dulph Malacet, to fight with him at three weapons, viz. with Axes, Arming Swords, and Sharp Daggers, whom he had slain at the second weapon, had not some seasonably interceded. 5. Fighting at Justs in France with Sir Collard Fines, at every stroke he bare him back-ward to his horse, and when the French suspected that he was tyed to his Saddle, to confute their jealousies, our Earl lighted, and presently remounted. 6. He was eminently active in the Kings victorious battles in France, and might truely say, Quorum pars ego magna fui. 7. He was one of those whom King Henry the fifth sent to the Counsell of Con∣stance, whose whole retinue amounted unto eight hundred horse. 8. Here he killed a Dutch Duke who challenged him, Sigismond the Emperour and his Empress beholding it. 9. The Empresse affected with his va∣lour, took the Badge from one of the Earls men, (being a plain Bear of Silver) an wore it on her shoulder. But the next day our Earl presented her with a Bear (which was his Crest) made of Pearls and Precious Stones. 10. Being sent by King Henry the fifth, with a thousand men in armes to fetch Q. Katherine, sole daughter to the King of France, he fought with the Earls of Ven∣dosm and Linosin, killed one of them with his own hand, routed the forces of five thousand men, and brought the Lady, whom he saw safely married to the King. 11. He was by the said Kings Will, ap∣pointed Governour to his son in his mno rity, and made Lieutenant o al France. 12. During his life our uccess in France was progressive, and retrograde ater his death. It must not be forgotten, how Sigismond the Emperour coming into England, told King Henry the fifth, that no Christian King had such another Knight, fo , Nurture, and Manhood. He obtained leave of the King, (because in his Dominions) that he might by Imperial Authority fix a Title of Honour upon him, and caused him to be named the Father of Courtesie, as indeed true courage and courtesie, are undividuall Companions. The last time he went over into Normandy, he was tossed with a hideous Tempest, so that despairing of life, he caused himself to be bound (for who could bind him a∣gainst his will?) with his Lady and infant Son, to the Main Mast, on this design, that ha∣ving his Armour and Coat of Armes upon him, he might thereby be known, that such who should light on his corps, if either noble or charitable, might afford him a Christian buriall. Yet he escaping the Tempest, and landing safely in France, dyed in his bed (no usu∣all repose for so restless and active a spirit,) at Roan of a lingring disease April 30. 1439. and lieth buried in a most stately Tombe, in a Chappel of the Collegiat Church of Warwick, where his Epitaph graven in brasse is pointed with Bears, serving for Commas, Colons, Periods, and all distinctions thereof. HisMr Dugdale in his Survey of Warwick∣shire, in the Earls of War∣wick where the preceding particulars are proved out of Authentick Records. deeds of Charity (according to the devotion of those days) were little inferior to the Atchievements of his valour. Physitians and Chemists. Sir EDWARD KELLEY [alias TALBOT,] was born at Worcester, (as I have it from the Scheame of his Nativity, graved from the original calculation of Doctor Dee) Anno Domini 1555. August the first, at four a clock in the afternoon, the Pole being there elevated, gr. 52.. 10. Thus Reader, I hope, that my exactness herein, will
make some reparation for my uncertainties, and looser intelligence in the births of othr persons. He was well studied in the mysteries of nature, being intimae wih Doctor Dee, who was beneath him in Chemistry, but above him in Mathematicks. These two are said to have found a very large quantity of Elixir, in the ruins of Glassnbury- Abby. In∣deed I have read, how William Bird, the Prior of the Bath, left and lost the Elixir in the walls of his Priory; and, it may seem strange, that what was lost at Bath, was found at Glassenbury, in the same County indeed, but sixteen miles asunder. But so long as Kelley had this treasure, none need trouble themselves how or where he came by it. Afterwards (being here in some trouble) he went over beyond the seas, with Alber∣tus Alasco a Polonian Baron, who gave for hisGuillam's dis play of Heral∣dry pag. 216. Armes the Hull of a ship, having onely a Main-mast and a top, without any tackling, and gave for his Motto, Deus dabit Vela, God will send Sails. But it seems, this Lord had formeny carried too high a sail, of whom a goodCmdens Eliz. Anno 1583. Author reporteth, that Aere alieno oppressu clam recessit▪ and now, it seems, sought to repair his fortunes, by associating himself with these two Arch-chemists of England. How long they continued together, is to me unknown. Sir Edward (though I know not how he came by his Knight-hood) with the Doctor, fixed at Trebona in Bohemia, where he is said to have transmuted a brassTheatrum Che∣micum p. 481. warming-pan (without touching or melt∣ing, onely warming it by the fire, and putting the Elixir thereon,) into pure silver, a piece whereof was sent to Queen Elizabeth. He had great converse with Rodulphus the second Emperour. I have seen a voluminous Manuscript, in Sir Thomas Cotton his Library, of the par∣ticulars of their mysterious proceedings; where amongst many strange passages, I find this ensuing monstrosity. They kept constant intelligence with a Messenger or Spirit, giving them advice how to proceed in their mysticall discoveries, and injoyning them, that by way of preparatory qualification for the same, they should enjoy their Wives in common. Though boggling hereat at first, they resolved to submit thereunto, be∣cause the Law-giver might dispence with his Laws, in matters of so high a nature. Hereby may the Reader guess the rest of their proceedings. This probably might be the cause, why Doctor Dee left Kelley, and return'd into England. Kelley continuing still in Germany, ranted it in his expences (say the Brethren of his own art) above the sobriety befitting so mysterious a Philosopher. He gave away in gold-wyer-rings, at the marriage of one of his Maid-servants, to the value of four thousand pounds. As for the high conceit he had of his own skill in Chemistry, it appeareth sufficiently in the beginning of his own works, though I confess my self not to understand the Geberish of his language. All you that fain Philosophers would be, And night and day in Geber's kitchin broyle, Wasting the chips of ancient Hermes Tree; Weening to turn them to a precious Oyle, The more you work, the more you loose and spoil. To you I say, how learn'd so e're you be, Go burn your Books, and come and learn of me. Come we now to his sad Catastrophe. Indeed the curious had observed, that in the Scheme of his Nativity, not onely the Dragons-tail was ready to promote abusive aspersions against him, (to which living and dead he hath been subject,) but also some∣thing malignant appears posited in Aquarius, which hath influence on the leggs, which accordingly came to pass. For being twice imprisoned (for what misdemeanor I know not) by Radulphus the Emperor, he endeavoured his escape out of an high window, and tying his sheets together to let him down, fell (being a weighty man) and brake his legg, whereof he died 1595. I believe him neither so bad asWdvers Fun▪ on pag. 45. some, nor so good as others do character him, all know, how Separation is of great use amongst men of his profession; and indeed, if his
pride and prodigality were severed from him, he would remain a person, on other ac∣counts, for his industry and experience in practical Philosophy, worthy recommendati∣on to posterity. Writers. FLORENCE of WORCESTER was probably born near, certainly bred in that City, one eminent in learning as any of his age, and no less industrious. Many books are extant of his making, and one most usefull, beginning at the Creation, and con∣tinued till his death. This he calleth Chronicum Chronicorum, which some esteem an Arrogant Title, and an Insolent defiance of all Authors before and after him, as if (as the Rose is flos florum, so) his were the Superlative Chronicle of all that are Extant. But others meet with much modesty in the Title Chronicum Chronicrum, as none of his own making, but onely gathered both for Matter and Language out of others, he being rather the Collector then the Originall Composer thereof. He died Anno Domini 1119. JOHN WALLIS or WELSH, is confessed natione Pitz. de illus. Ag. Scrip. pa. 342. Anglus, which I observe, to se∣cure his nativity against Welch-claimes thereunto, onely grounded on his Sur-name. Yet I confess, he might be mediatly of Welch-extraction, but born in this County, (where the family of the Walshes are extant at this day in a worshipfull equipage,) where he be∣came a Franciscan in Worcester. Leaving Oxford he lived in Paris, where he was common ly called, Arbor vitae, The tree of life, Non absque insigni Servatoris blasphemia, With no small blasphemy to our Saviour, saith our Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. pag. 317. Author. But, to qualifie the matter, we take the expression in the same sense, wherein Prov. 15. 4. Solomon calls a wholesome tongue a Tree of Life. Yet might he better be termed, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, whose books (amounting to no fewer then twenty volumes,) are not so practicall for their use, as cu∣rious in their speculations. In the ancient Libraries of Balil and Oriel-Colledge, most of his Manuscripts are reported extant at this day. He died and was buried at Paris, Anno Dom. 1216. ELIAS de J. Bale de crip. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 33. EVESHAM was born in this County, of good Parentage, from whom (as it seemeth by J. Bale) he had expectancy of a fair estate. This did not hinder him, from being a Benedictine in the Abby of Evesham, where he became a great Scholar,* J. Pi. de script. Ang. pa. 351. Anno 1270. and wrote an Excellent Chronicle. Bale knoweth not, where to place him with any certainty. But Pitz not more knowing, but more daring, assigneth him to have flourish∣ed in the year 1270. WILLIAM PACKINGTON. I confess two Villages (the less and greater) of thisAMP. name in Warwick-shire, and yet place this Packington here, with no discredit to my self, and greater grace to him. For, first I behold him as no Clergy-man, (commonly cal∣led from their Native Places) but have reasons to believe him rather a Layman, and find an Antient Family of his Name (not to say Alliance) still flourishing in this Coun∣ty. He was Secretary and Treasurer to Edward the Black Prince, and his long living in France, had made the language of his Nurse more naturall to him, then the tongue of his Mother. Hence it was that he wrot in French the story of five English Kings, [King John, Henry the third, Edwards first, second and third,] and a book of the Atchieve∣ments of the Black Prince. He flourished Anno Dom. 1380. Since the Reformation. Sir EDWIN SANDYS, Son to Edwin Sandys, D. D. was (in all probability) born in this County, whilst his father was Bishop of Worcester. He was bred in Cambridge, and attained to be a most accomplished person. I have known some pitifull in Affection, but poor in Condition, willing but unable to relieve one in greater want then themselves, who have only gotten an empty Purse, and given it to others to put their charity therein for the purpose aforesaid. Such my case, I can only present the Reader with a Place in this my Book for the Character of this
worthy Knight, but can not contribute any Coine of MEMOIRES or Remarkables to the furnishing thereof. Only let me adde, he was , right-handed to any great imployment; and was as constant in all Parliaments, as the Speaker himself, being be∣held by all as an Excellent Patriot (faithfull to his Country, without being false to his King,) in all transactions. He was the Treasurer to the undertakers for the Western Plantations, which he effectually advanced, the Bermudaes (the firmest (though not the fairest) Footing the English have in the West-Indies,) owing their happiness to his Care, and Sandys Tribe is no contemptible Proportion therein. He had a commanding Pen, wit∣ness his work of the Religion of the Western World, (many in one Book,) so much mat∣ter is Stowed therein. I have been informed, that he bequeathed by his Will, a Consi∣derable Summe to the Building of a Colledge in Cambridge, but Debts not coming in according to Expectation, his good Intention failed in the performance thereof. He died much lamented of all good Men, about the year, 1631. Romish Exile Writers. RICHARD SMITH D. D. was born in this Pitz. de Ang Scrip. in Anno 1563. County, bred in the University of Oxford, where he became Kings Professor and was fit for that place in all things, if (as one of his own perswasion avoweth) Non obstitisset Laterum debilitas, & Vocis exilitas, The weaknes of his Sides, and lowness of his Voice had no hindred him. King Edward the sixth, afterwards sent for Peter Martyr over to be his Professor in this University, betwixt whom and Doctor Smith, so great the Contest, that waving all ingagements it is best to State it to the eye of the Reader, as it is represented by Authors of both sides. Pitz. de Script. in Anno 1563. Petrum Martyrem apostatam Monachum, & Haeresis Zuvinglicanae sectatorem, a Rege Edwardo sexto Oxonii in Cathedram Theo∣logicam intrusum, in publicis disputationibus haeresis convicit, & Cathedrm suam victor repetiit, sed Rege obstante non impetravit. In publick disputations he convicted Peter Martyr the Apostate Monke, and a follower of the Zwinglian Heresie, thrust in by King Ed∣ward the sixth, into the Divinity Chair in Ox∣ford, and being Conquerer did require his own Chair to be restored him; which he obtained not, because the King did withstand him. L. Humphredus in vita Juelli pag. 44. Sed animosus iste Achilles, die ad disputan∣dum constituto, cum non Compaeret, sed ad Divum Andream in Scotiam profu∣geret, ratus eum qui in hoc Articulo bene lateret, bene vivere. But this valiant Achilles, when he did not appear on the day appointed for him to dispute, fled to Saint Andrews in Scot∣land, conceiving it that in a case of this kind, he lived best who lay hid the closest. From St. Andrews he afterwards con∣veyed himself over into the Low-coun∣tries. But this Smith returned afterwards in the raign of Queen Mary, when Peter Martyr was glad to get leave to fly from that University. Thus we see (as to speak unbiassed without reflexion on the Cause) that in such controversies it mattereth little who are the Disputants on either side, whilst the Prevalent power is the Moderator. Doctor Smith flying again over into the Low-Countries, was made Dean of Saint Pe∣ters in Dorway, and the first Professor in the University founded therein. He died Anno Domini 1563. JOHN MARSHALL was born at Dalisford in this County, as * New-colledge Register doth attest, which is to be credited before J. Pits making him to be born in * Dorset∣shire. He was bred at New-colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Batchelor of Laws, and for his gravity and learning was chosen second Master of Winchester school. But in the first of Queen Elizabeth he left the land with Thomas Hide, chief School-master thereof; so that now their Scholars had a fat Otium, and in both their absence might play with Security, till a uccessor received their Scepter. He became afterwards Canon of Lisle in Flanders, though a long time disturbed in his quiet Possession thereof. He wrot a book much prised by Men of his Perswasions, against John Calld an English Protestant. At his death he bequeathed a Ring with a rich Stone to adorne a piece of the
Crosse in his Cathedrall (which by Doctor Gifford was solemnly applied thereunto) and died Anno Domini 1597. ROBERT BRISTOW was born in thisPitz. de script. Ag. pag. 779. Connty, bred first in Oxford in Exeter-col∣ledge, whence he conveyed himself over beyond the seas, living first at Lovaine, then in the English Colledge at Doway. He was the first of that foundation that was made Priest, being the right-hand of Cardinall Allen, who departing to Rhemes, left Bristow Prefect of Doway-colledge. Afterwards he was sent for to Rhemes, where he wrot his bookIdem ibidem. say the Papists, Contra futilem Fulkum, Against foolishThat worthy Confuter of the Rhemish Testament. Fulk, (railing is easier then reasoning with such mouthes) who indeed was a grave and godly Divine. Being very sickly, he was advised for his health to return into his native Country, where having the good hap to miss that which cureth all diseases, he dièd in his bed near London 1582. HENRY HOLLAND born in thisIdem pa. 804. County, was bred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford. Leaving the land he fled over to Doway, where he took the degree of Ba∣chelour in Divinity, and Order of Priest-hood. Hence he removed to Rhemes, where, saith myIdem ibidem. Author, Traductioni Bibliorum crorum astitit, He assisted (I might say truly to the Traducing, but let it be) the Translating of the Bible. Returning to Doway, he read Divinity in a Monastery hard by, wherein he was living 1611. Masters of Musick. WALTER of EVESHAM was born thereabouts, and bred therein a Benedictine∣Monke. His harmonious mind expressed it self in its love of Musick, wherein he at∣tained to great eminency, and wrote a Learned book in that faculty. But here BiliousCent. 18. Num. 100. Bale lets fly without fear, (though not without some wit,) in∣veighing against all Musick in Churches, pretending to produce a Pair-Royal of Fa∣thers for his own opinion, viz. Saint Jerome calling such chanting, Theatrales modulos, Gregory terming it consuetudinem reprehensibilem, and Athanatius flatly forbidding it the Church, for the vanity thereof. But by Bales leave, such speak not against the decent ornaments of wives, who reprove theProv. 7. 10. garish attire of harlots, the abuse, not use of Mu∣sick, being taxed by the Fathers aforesaid. Our Walter flourished under King Henry the third, Anno 1240. Benefactors to the Publick. Reader, it may be disputed in me, whether I am more ashamed of or grieved for my mean intelligence of Benefactions in this County, before and since the Reformation. But I comfort my self, that the Dugdales in this County, I mean the worthy future Il∣lustrators thereof, will supply my defect. Onely I will adde RICHARD DUGARD B. D. was born at Grafton-Fliford in this County, bred un∣der Master Henry Bright in the Kings-school at Worcester. I name him the rather, be∣cause never did Master Calvin mention his Master Corderius with more honor, then Master Dugard gratefully remembred Master Bright. He was chosen Fellow of Sidney∣Colledge, where in my time (for I had the honor of his intimate acquaintance) he had a moiety of the most considerable Pupills, whom he bred in learning and piety, in the golden mean betwixt superstition and faction. He held a gentle-strict-hand over them, so that none presumed on his lenity to offend, or were discouraged by his seve∣rity to amend. He was an excellent Grecian, and generall Scholar; old, when young, such his gravity in behaviour; and young, when old, such the quickness of his endow∣ments. He bestowed on the Colledge an hundred and twenty pounds for some perpe∣tuall use for the Master and Fellows: and ten pounds for books for the Library. At last he was surprised with a presentation of the Rectory of Fulleby in Lincoln-shire, where by his constant preaching and pious living, he procured his own security; a rare happiness in those troublesome times. He died January 28. Anno Dom. 1653. and lies buried under a Marble-stone in his Chancell.
Mmorable Persons. JOHN FECKENHAM was born of de . . in . Tract. 1. . 3. pag. 233. poor parents in Feckenham Forest in this Shire. He was the last Clergy man I find (and therefore Memorable) who Locally was Surnamed, and was bred a Benedictine in Evosham, and at the dissolution thereof eceived an Annual Pension of an hundred florens, which (in my accounting,) make up some twenty pounds. This maintained him when afterwards he went and studied in Oxford, attaining to emi∣nent learning therein. In the raign of King Edward the sixth, he was imprisoned in the Tower, untill Sir Phillip Hobby, (to use Feckenhams own words) quasi Mutuatum accepit, Borrowed him of the Tower. Being at Liberty, he had frequent Disputations in the Earnest, yet Modest defence of his Religion. By Queen Mary he was made Abbot of Westminster, being the last Mitred Abbot (and therefore more Memorable) who sat in Parliament. He was very gracious with the Queen, and effectually laid out all his interest with her, (sometime even to offend, but never o injure Her,) to procure Pardon of the Faults, or Mitigation of the Punish∣ments, for poor Protestants. By Queen Elizabeth, he was highly honourd, and profered (as is currantly tra∣ditioned) the See of Canterbury which he refused, and was kept in easy restraint. For although he found not the same favour with Joseph, to whom the Gaoler committed the care of all his family, making him Super-intendent of all other Prisoners, yet had he always Respective Usage, and oftimes Liberty on his Parol. By his Bounty to the Poor, he gained the good-will (saith Master Camden) of all Persons, whilst I behold his Bounty to Others as the Queens Bounty to him, enabling (because not disenabling) him for the same, and permitting him peaceably to possess his Estate. He died a very aged man in Wisbich-castle, (as I collect) Anno 1585. and the Character which Pitzeus giveth him, may suffice for his Epitaph. Pitz. de script. Ang. pag. 786. Erat in eo insignis pietas in Deum, mira charitas in proximos, singularis observantia in majores, mitis affabilitas in inferiores, dulcis humani∣tas in omnes, mulplex doctrina, redundans facundia, incredibilis religionis catholicae zelus. HENRY BRIGHT was born in the City of Worcester. No good man will grudge him under this Title, who shall seriously peruse this his Epitaph, composed by Doctor Joseph Hall then Dean in the Cathedrall in Worcester. Mane Hospes & lege, Magister Henricus Bright, Celeberrimus Gymnasiarcha, Qui Scholae Regiae istic fundatae, per totos Quadraginta Annos Summa cum Laude praefuit. Quononalter magis sedulus fuit Scitusve aut dexter in Latinis, Graecis, Hebraius Literis feliciter edocendis: Teste utraque Academia, quam Instruxit affatim numerosa pube literaria. Sed & totidem annis eoque amplius Theo∣logiam professus, & hujus  per Septennium Canonicus major, saepissime Hic & Alibi Sacrum Dei praeconem magno cum Zelo & Fructu egit: Vir Pius, Doctus, Integer, frugi, de Re∣publica, deque Ecclesia optime meritus, A laboribus perdiu, per noctuque ab anno 1562. ad 1626. strenue usque extant latis 4to. Martii suaviter requievit in Domino. For my own part, I behold this Master Bright, placed by Divine Providence in this City, in the Marches, that he might equally communicate the Lustre of Grammer∣learning, to youth both of England and Wales. Lord Mayors. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Richard Lee Simon Lee Worcester Grocer 1460 2 Richard a Lee John a Lee Worcester — 1468 3 Alexander Avenon Robert Avenon Kings Norton Iron-monger 1569
This is one of the twelve pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose Gentry were not returned into the Tower, by the Commissioners, in the raign of King Henry the sixth. Sheriffs. HEN. II. Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. de Bello Campo, for 14 years. Anno 16 Will. de Bello Campo & Hugo de Puckier Anno 17 Ranul. de Launch, for 4 years. Anno 21 Rob. de Lucy Anno 22 Mich. Belet, for 7 years. Anno 29 Rad. de Glanvill Anno 30 Mich. Belet Anno 31 Rob. Marivion for 3 years. RICH. I. Anno 1 Rob. Marmion Anno 2 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 3 Will. de Bello Campo, & Rich. de Piplinton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Hen. de Longo Campo, for 3 years. Anno 10 Rad. de Grafton JOH. Rex. Anno 1 Rad. de Grafton Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. de Cantela & Adam. de Worcester, for 3 years. Anno 6 Rob. de Cantelu, Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Will. de Cantelu, & Adam. Clicus Anno 9 Will. de Cantelu, & Walt. le Puchier, for 3 years. Anno 12 Will. de Cantelupo, & Adam. Ruffus Anno 13 Will. de Cantelupo, & Adam. Delwich Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Will. de Cantelupo, & Phus. Kutton, for 3 years. HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Walt. de Bello Campo, & Hen. Lunett, for 3 years. Anno 5 Walt. de Bello Campo, for 3 years. Anno 8 Walt. de Bello Campo, & Hug. le Pohier Anno 9 Walt. de Bello Campo, & Tho. Wigorne for 3 years. Anno 12 Walt. de Bello Campo, for 3 years. Anno 15 Walt. de Bello Campo, & Hug. le Poer▪ Anno 16 Walt. de Bello Campo, & Will. de Malvern, for 3 years. Anno 19 Walt. de Bello Campo, & Hug. le Pohier Anno 20 Idem (sive Will.) Anno 21 Will. de Bello Campo, & Will. de Blandhall Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Will. de Bello Campo, & Laur. de Wandlesworth, for 3 years. Anno 26 Will de Bello Campo, & Simon de London Anno 27 Will. de Bello Campo, for 24 years. Anno 51 Will. de Bello Campo, & Ioh. de Hull Anno 52 Idem. Anno 53 Will. de Bello Campo, for 3 years. EDW. I. Anno 1 Will. de Bello Campo Comes Warwic. for 26 years. Anno 27 Guido. de Bello Campo, for 9 years. EDW. II. Anno 1 Guido. de Bello Campo Comes. Warr, & Rob. de Berkenhall Anno 2 Guido. de Bello Campo Comes Warr, & Walt. de Perthrope, for 4 years. Anno 6 Guido. de Bello Campo, & Rob. de Warwick Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Guido. de Bello Campo Anno 9 Iohan. de Heingwoll Anno 10 Walt. de Bello Campo Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. Stracy Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 16 Anno 17 Nich. Russell Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Walt. de Kokesey EDW. III. Anno 1 Walt. de Kokesey Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rich▪ de Hdeslowe, for 3 years. Anno 6 Tho. de Bello Campo Comes Warr, for 46 years. RICH. II. Anno 1 Tho. de Bello Campo Comes Warr, for 4 years. Anno 5 Tho. de Bello Campo, for 13 years. Anno 18 Tho. de Bello Campo Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Ioh. Washburne Anno 21 Hen. Haggeley Anno 22 Rob. Russell
HEN. IV. Anno 1 Tho. de Bello Campo Anno 2 Tho. de Bello Campo, & Will. Beaucham Anno 3 Tho. Hodington Anno 4 Rich. de Bello Campo Comes Warr, fr 9 years. HEN. V. Anno 1 Rich. de Bello Campo, for 9 years. HEN. VI. Anno 1 Rich. de Bello Campo, for 16 years. Anno 16 Norm. Washburne Sub∣vic. In the 17. year of King Henry the sixth, this worthy Richard Beauchamp deceased. And here the records are at a loss, (such as ever since came to my hand) presenting no Sheriff for 21 years, till the end of the raign of King Hen∣ry the sixth. And yet I am confident that Henry Beau∣champ Son and Heir to Ri∣chard aforesaid, Earl of War∣wick and Albemarle (for Duke of ALBEMARLE I meet with none, before that IL∣LUSTRIOUS PERSON who now deservedly possesseth that Honour,) injoyed the Shrevalty of this County. EDW. IV. Anno 1 Walt. Scull Subvic. for 19 years. Here we have an Under-sheriff, but no High sheriff could my industry hitherto recover, though my confidence is grounded on good cause, that Richard Nevill (the Make∣King) Duke of Warwick, was Honorary Sheriff, though too great to officiate in his Per∣son. Anno 0 Iacob. Radcliffe, mil. for 3 years. RICH. III. Anno 1 Iacob. Radcliffe, miles Anno 2 Will. Houghton, miles Anno 3 Hum. Stafford & Rich. Nanfan. HEN. VII. Anno 1 Rich. Nanfan Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Ioh. Savage, mil. for 5 years. Anno 8 Ioh. Savage, arm. for 5 years. Anno 13 Ioh. Savage, mil. for 12 years. HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh. Savage, mil. for 7 years. Anno 8 Will. Compton, mil. for years. Henry VII. 3. JOHANNES SAVACE, Mil.] I behold him (and am sure my Eyes are not deceived) as the same with that Person, who was made Knight of the Garter, and Privy-Councellour to this King. Yet will I not be Positive, whether 'twas he, or his Son, who removing into Cheshire, and mar∣rying the Heir-generall of the antient Family of Bostocks, attained thereby a great In∣heritance, and was Ancestor to the present Earl of Rivers. Henry VIII. 8. WILL. COMPTON, Mil.] He was highly and deservedly a Favorite to this King, so that, in the Court, no lay Man abating onely Charles Brandon (in whom Affection and Affinity met,) was equall unto him. He might have been, for Wealth or Honour, what he pleasd, but contented him∣self with what he was. His Son Peter married into the Right Honorable Family of Shrews∣bury, and his Grand son Sir Henry Compton, was one of the three, H. C ▪ [Henry Cary, Henry Compton, and Henry Cheny,] who were made Barons by Queen Elizabeth, An∣cester to James Earl of Northampton. For the happiness of whom, and His, when I can∣not orally pray, I will make signes of my affection to heaven.
Sheriffs. Nams Place Armes HEN. VIII.     Ano     27 Walt. Walsh. ar.   Aa Fess betwixt 6 Martlets S. 28 Idem ut prius   29 Ioh. Russell, jun. Strenshā Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Crosses Crosets Fitche S. 30 Rob. Acton, ar. Sutton Gul. a Fess within a Border En∣grailed Erm. 31 Gilbt. Talbott, mil. Grafcon G. a Lion rampant and a Border engrailed Or. 32 Ioh. Pakington, ar.   Per Chveron S. and Ar. in Chief 33 Ioh. Russell, mil. ut prius 3 Mullets Or. In Base as many 34 Go. Thgmortō, *m. Throgmortō Gbes Gules. 35 Tho. Hunkes, † ar. Radbroke * G. on a Cheveron Arg. 3 barrs 36 Ioh. Talbtt, mil. ut pri gemelle Sable. 37 Rob. Actn, mil. ut prius † Ar 3 Mullets S. within a Bor∣der Platee. 38 Ioh. Russell, mil. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Will. Sheldon, mil. Beely S. a Fess Arg. betwixt 3 Swans proper. 2 Rich. Ligon, mil.   Argen, 2 Lions passant Gules. 3 Will. Gower, arm.   Azure a Cheveron between 3 4 Will. Ligon, am. ut prius olves-heads erased Or. 5 Tho. Russell, mil. ut prius   6 Ioh. Talbott, mil. ut prius   PHIL & MAR.     Anno     1 Hen. Dingley, ar. Charlton Arg. a Fess S. a  etwixt 2 Ioh. Talbott, ar. ut prius 2 Ogresses in Chief. 3 Tho. Baskervile, m.   Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt 3 4 Will. Sheldon, ar. ut prius Hurts proper. 5 Ioh. Littleton, ar. Frankley Arg. a Cheveron between 3 Es∣calops Shels S. 6 Ioh. Knottesford, a.*         * Arg. 4 fucils in fess Sable. ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Russell, ar. ut prius   2 Will. Ligon, ar. ut prius   3 Tho. Packington, m. ut prius   4 Galfr. Markham, ar:   Azu. in Chief Or, a Lion Issu∣ant G. and order Arg. 5 Tho. Baskervile, mil. ut prius   6 Will. Iefferyes, & Will. Hunkes, ar. Holm. af. Sable a Lion Rampant betwixt 3   ut prius Scaling Ladders Or. 7 Anth. Daston, ar.     8 Ioh. Littledon, mil. ut prius   9 Will. Sheldon, ar. ut prius   10 Hen. Dingley, ar. ut prius   11 Tho. Russell, mil. ut prius   12 Fran. Walsh, arm. ut pius   13 Ioh. Rowse, ar. Rouslench Sable, 2 Barrs Engrailed Arg. 14 Ioh. Littleton, mil. ut prius   15 Rich. Ligon, ar. ut prius   16 Edw. Colles, ar.     17 Edw. Harewell, ar. Bifford Argent on a Fess Nebule Sab. 3 18 Rad. Sheldon, ar. ut prius Hares-eads cooped of the first. 19 Ioh. Russell, ar. t prius   20 Hen. Berkley, ar.   G. a`Cheveron txixt 10 Crosses Argent. 21 Wal. Blunt, ar. Kidmister Barry Nebnle of 6 Or and 22 Fran. Walsh, ar. ut prius Sable. 23 Tho. Folliat, ar. Purton Arg. a Lion Ramp. queve forchee 24 Ioh. Walshburne, ar. ut infra Purple, Armed G. crowned Or. 25 Rich. Ligon. ar. ut prius   26 Gilb. Littleton, ar. ut prius   27 Tho. Lucy mil. WARWI. Gules, Crusuly Or, 3 Lucies or Pikes, Hauriant Arg. 28 Will. Child, ar. Northwick Gul. a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3 Eagles Closs, Or. 29 Egid. Read, ar.     30 Geor. Winter Huddington Sable, a Fess Ermine. 31 Will. Savage, ar.   Argent, 6 Lions Rampant Sable. 32 Edw. Colles, ar. ut prius   33 Hen. Bromeley, mil.   Quarterly per fess indented G. 34 Will. Ligon, ar. ut prius and Or. 35 Tho. Biggs, ar. Lenchwick Arg. on a Fess bewixt 3 Revens 36 Ioh. Pakington, mil. ut prius proper, as many Annulets of 37 Tho. Folliat, ar. ut prius the Field. 38 Edw. Harewell, ar. ut prius   39 Fran. Dingley, ar. ut prius   40 Will. Walsh, ar. ut prius   41 Will. Child, ar. ut prius   42 Ioh. Washborn, ar.   Arg. on a Fess betwixt 6 Mart∣lets Gules 3 Cater-foiles of the first. 43 Will. Savage, ar. ut prius   44 Geor. Blunt, ar. ut prius   45 Th. Russel, m. & 1 Ia. ut prius   JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Tho. Russell, mil. ut prius   2 Rich. Walsh, ar. ut prius   3 Will. Barnaby, ar. Acton Arg. a Lion Pass. Gard. betwi 4 Walt Snage, ar.   3 Escalops S. 5 Ioh. Pakington, mil. ut prius   6 Arno. Ligon, mil. ut prius   7 Rich. Greves, mil.     8 Ioh. Rowse, mil. ut prius   9 Edr. Pitt, mil. Churwiard   10 Ioh. Savage, ar. ut prius Azu. 3 Bars, and as many Stars in Chief Or. 11 Rob. Berkeley, ar. ut prius   12 Sher. Talbott, ar. ut prius   13 Fran. Moore, ar.     14 Will. Iefferies, ar. ut prius   15 Will. Berkeley, ar. ut prius   16 Sam. Sandys, mil.   Or, a Fess indented bewixt 3 17 Walt. Blunt, ar. ut prius Crosses Croslets Fitchee G. 18 Will. Kite, ar.     19 Edr. Seabright, ar. Besford Argent, 3 Cinque Foyles Sable. 20 Ioh. Woodward, m.     21 Ioh. Culpepper, ar. KENT Argent, a bend engrailed Gules. 22 Egid. Savage, mil. ut prius   CAR. REX.     Anno     1 Walt Devereux, m.   Argent, a Fess Gules, in Cheif 3 2 Edw. Cookes, ar.   Tortuxs. 3 Rich. Skynner, ar.     4 Hen. Bromley, ar. ut prius   5 Will. Ieffreys, ar. ut prius   6 Arth. Smithes, mil.     7 Iacob. Pitt, mil. ut prius   8 Tho. Good, ar.     9 Ioh. Keyt, ar.     10 Ioh. Savage, ar. ut prius   11 Will. Russell, bar. ut prius   12 Ioh. Rows, mil: ut prius   13 Edw. Dingley, ar. ut prius   14 Tho. Greaves, ar.     15 Ioh. Winford, ar.     16     18     19     1     20     21     22    
Queen Elizabeth. 19. JOHN RUSSELL, Ar.] The same Gentleman (no doubt) who was afterwards Knighted, and betwixt whom and Sir Henry Berkeley, was so deadly a quarrell, as that great blood-shed was likely to have ensued, at the Sessions in Worcester, by reason of their many friends and followers ingaged therein. But Doctor Whitgift, then Bishop of Worcester, and Vice-President of Wales, (in the absence of Sir Henry Sidney, then in Ireland,) wisely prevented it, by providing a strong watch at the gates, and about the City; and requiring them to bring both parties, with their attendance well guarded, to his Palace. Here he caused them all (to the number of fourSir Geo. Paul in the life of Arch-bishop Whitgist pa. 23. or five hundred) to deliver their weapons into his own Servants custody, and after two hours pains taken, sometimes in perswading, and otherwhiles in threatning them, he made them so good friends, that they both attend∣ed him hand in hand to the Town-hall, where in amitie and love, they performed the service of their Country. 36. JOHN PACKINGTON, Mil.] It is now good manners for me to hold my peace, and listen to aSir Rob Nau∣ton in Fragm. Rgal. Privy-Councellor, thus describing his character, He was a Gentleman of no mean family, of form and fea∣ture no ways disabled a very fine Courtier, and for the time which he stayed there (which was not lasting) very high in the Queens grace. But he came in and went out, and though disassiduity, drew the curtain between himself and the light of her favour, and then death overwhelmed the remnant and utterly deprived him of recovery. And they say of him, that had he brought less to the Court then he did, he might have carried away more then he brought, for he had a time of it, but was no good husband of opportunity. King James. 2. RICHARD WALSH, Ar.] I find him called in our Chronicles, (perchance by a Prolepsis) Sir Richard Walsh. Yea, I find him stiled so, by him who best might, because heK. James in discourse of Powder-Trea∣son pag. 244. made him so, Knighting him for his good service. In his Sheriffalty, the Powder-Traitors, sereted out of Warwick-shire by Sir Richard Verney, were as fiercely followed by Sir Richard Walsh, out of the bounds of this Coun∣ty, till they took covert in the house of Stephen Littleton, at Hallbach inStows Chron. pag. 880. and Speeds pa. 910. Stafford-shire. This discreet Sheriff, not standing on the punctilio of exceeding his Commission, in a case wherein the peace of the Kingdome was so highly concern'd, prosecuted his ad∣vantage, and beset the house round about, till both the Wrights were kill'd in the place, Catesby and Percy slain with one bullet, Rookwood and Winter wounded, all the rest ap∣prehended. The Battles. Worcester Fight. Many smart Skirmishes have happened in this County, and near this City. We onely insist on that Fatall Fight, September the third, 1651. Know then (as Introductory thereunto) that His Majesty on the first of August fore∣going, began his March from Edenbrough into England, not meeting with any consi∣derable Opposition, (those at Warrington being soon put to flight by his Presence,) untill he came to Worcester: His Army consisted of twelve thousand effectuall Fighting men, (whereof two thousand English, the rest of the Scottish Nation) but neither excel∣lently Armed, nor plentifully stored with Ammunition, whilst the Parliament Forces under Cromwell, more then doubled that Number, wanting nothing [but a Good Cause] that an Army could wish or desire. The Royalists Cheifest strength consisted in two Passes they possessed over the River of Severn, which proved not advantagious according to expectation: For the Enemy found the River Fordable elsewhere; and the Bridge and Pass at Uptrn, though valiantly defended by Major Generall Massey, (who received a shot in his hand) was for∣ced by Lambert powring in unequall Numbers on the Kings Forces. Besides Cromwell
finished a Bridge of Boards and Plancks over the main River, with more Celerity and less Resistance, then could have been expected in a matter of such importance. Then began the Battle, wherein His Majesty to remember his subjects Good, forgot his own Safety, and gave an incomparable example of Valour to the rest, by Charging in his Own Person. This was followed by few to the same degree of danger, but imi∣tated in the greatest measure by the Highlanders, fighting with the But-ends of their Muskets, when their Ammunition was spent. But new supplies constantly Charging them, and the Main Body of the Scotch Horse not coming up in due time from the Ci∣ty to His Majesties relief, his Army was forced to retreat in at Sudbury-gate, in much disorder. If there were (which some more then whisper) false and foul Play in some Persons of Principall Trust; as they have had a great space seasonably, God grant them his Grace sincerely to repent, for their Treacherous retarding the happiness, prolonging and increasing the Miseries of a Gracious King and three great Nations. Sure it is, here were slain the Flower of the Scottish Loyal Gentry, with the most Illustrious, William (formerly Earl of Lanerick) Duke of Hamilton. As for Common Souldiers, some few who escaped had a longer life, to have a sadder death, wandring in the Country till other mens Charity and their own Strength failed them. Since, how God hath conducted His Majesty miraculously through Laberynths of many Difficulties, to the Peaceable Possession of his Throne, is notoriously known to the wonder of the world. Here my Muse heartily craveth leave to make an Humble ad∣dress to His Majesty, depositing at his feet the ensuing▪ PANEGYRICK. 1. AT Wor'ster great Gods goodness to our Nation, It was a Conquest Your bare Preservation. When 'midst Your fiercest foes on every side For Your escape God did a LANE provide; They saw You gonc, but whether could not tell, Star-staring, though they ask'd both Heaven and Hell. 2. Of forraign States You since have studied store, And read whole Libraries of Princes o're. To You all Forts, Towns, Towers and Ships are known, (But none like those which now become Your OWN.) And though Your Eyes were with all Objects fill'd, Onely the Good into Your Heart distill'd. 3. Garbling mens manners You did well divide, To take the Spaniards wisdome, not their pride. With French activity You stor'd Your Mind, Leaving to them their Ficklenesse behind; And soon did learn, Your Temperance was such, A sober Industry even from the Dutch. 4. But tell us, Gracious Soveraign from whence Took You the pattern of Your Patience? Learn't in Afflictions School, under the Rod, Which was both us'd and sanctifi'd by God; From Him alone that Lesson did proceed, Best Tutor with best Pupil best agreed. 5. We, Your dull Subjects, must confess our crime, Who learnt so little in as long a time, And the same School. Thus Dunces poring looks Men not themselves, but onely marre their Bnoks. How vast the difference 'twixt wise and fool? The Master makes the Scholar, not the School. 6. With rich conditions ROME did You invite, To purchase You their ROYALL PROSELYTE, (An emptysoul's soon tempted with full Coffers) Whilst You with sacred scorn refus'd their proffers. And for the FAITH did earnestly CONTEND Abroad, which now You do at Home DEFEND. 7. Amidst all Storms, Calm to Your Self the while, Saddest Afflictions You did teach to smile. Some faces best become a Mourning Dress, And such Your Patience, which did grace Distress, Whose Soul despising want of worldly pelf, At lowest ebbe went not beneath it Self. 8. GOds JUSTICE now no longer could dispence With the Abusing of His PROVIDENCE, To hear SUCCESSE his APPROBATION styl'd, And see the Bastard brought against the Child. [SCRIPTURE] by such, who in their own excuse Their Actings 'gainst His Writings did produce. 9. The Pillar, which Gods people did attend, To them in night a constant Light did lend,
Though Dark unto th' Egyptians behind; Such was brave MONCK in his reserved mind, A Riddle to his Foes e did appear, But to YOU and Himselfe, Sense plain and clear. 10. By Means unlikely God atchives his End, And crooked ways straight to his Honour tend; The great and antient Gates of LONDON Town, (No Gates, no City) now are voted down, And down were cast, O happy day! for all Do date our hopefull rising from their fall. 11. Mens loyal Thoughts conceiv'd their Time was good, But Gods was best; Without one drop of Bloud, By a dry Conquest, without forraign hand, (Self-hurt, and now) Self-healed, is Our Land. This silent Turn did make no noise, O strange! Few saw the changing, all behold the Change. 12. So Solomon most wisely did conceive, His Temple should be STIL BORN though ALIVE. That stately Structure started from the ground Unto the Roof, not guilty of the sound Of Iron Tool, all noise therein debarr'd; This Virgin-Temple thus was sen, not heard. 13. TH' impatient Land did for Your presence long, England in swarms did into Holland throng, To bring Your Highness home, by th' Parliament Lords, Commons, Citizens, Divines were ent: Such honour Subjects never had before, Such honour Subjects never shall have more. 14. Th' officious Wind to serve You did not fail, But scour'd from West to East to fill Your Sail, And fearing that his Breath might be too rough, Prov'd over-civil, and was scarce enough; Almost You were becalm'd amidst the Main, Prognostick of Your perfect peacefull Raign. 15. Your Narrow Seas, for Forraigners do wrong To claim them, (surely doth the Ditch belong Not to the common Continent, but Isle Inclosed) did on You their Owner smile, Not the least loss, onely the NASEBY mar'ls To see her-self now drowned in the CHARLES. 16. You land at Dover, shoals of People come, And KENT alone now eems all CHRISTEN DOM. The Cornish Rebels (eight score Summers since) At BLACK-HEATH fought against their lawful Prince Which dolefull place with hatefull Treason stain'd Its Credit now by Loyalty regain'd. 17. Great LONDON the last station You did make, You took not it, but LONDON You did take: And now no wonder Men did silence break, When Conduits did both French and Spanish speak. Now at WHITE-HALL the Guard, which You attends, Keeps out Your Foes, God keep You from Your Friends. 18. THe Bells aloud did ring, for joy they felt Hereafter Sacriledge shall not them melt. And round about the Streets the Bonfires blaz'd, With which NEW LIGHTS Fanatiques were amaz'd. The brandisht Swords this Boon begg'd before Death, Once to be , then buried in the Sheath. 19. The Spaniard looking with a serious Eye, Was forc'd to trespass on his Gravity, Close to conceal his wondring he desir'd, But all in vain, who openly admir'd. The French, who thought the English mad in mind, Now fear too soon they may them Sober find. 20. The Germans seeing this Your sudden Power, Freely confess'd another Emperour. The joyful Dane to Heav'ns cast up his Eyes, Presuming suffering Kings will ympathize. The Hollanders (first in a sad suspence) Hop'd, that Your Merty was their Innocence. 21. LOng live Our Gracious CHARLES, Second to none In Honour, who ere sate upon the Throne: Be You above Your Ancestors renown'd, Whose Goodness wisely doth Your Greatness bound; And knowing that You may be What You would, Are pleased to be onely What You should. 22. EUROP's Great ARBITRATOR, in Your choice Is plac'd of Christendom the CASTING VOICE; Hold You the Scales in Your Judicious Hand, And when the equal Beam shall doubtfull stand, As You are pleased to dispose one Grain, So falls or riseth either France or Spain. 23. As Sheba's Queen defective Fame accs'd, Whose niggardly Relations had abus'd Th' abundant worth of Solomon, and told Not half of what she after did behold: The same Your case, Fame hath not done You right, Our Ears are far out-acted by our Sight.
24. Your SELF's the Ship return'd from forreign Trading, England's Your Port, Experience the Lading, God is the `Pilot; and now richly fraught, Unto the Port the Ship is safely brought: What's dear to You, is to Your Subjects cheap, You sow'd with pain, what we with pleasure reap. 25. The Good-made Laws by You are now made Good, The Prince and Peoples right both understood, Both being Bank'd in their respective Station, No fear hereafter of an Inundation. Oppression, the KINGS-EVIL, long indur'd, By others caus'd, by YOU alone is cur'd. And here my Muse craves her own nunc dimittis, never to make Verses more; and because she cannot write on a better, will not write on another Occasion, but heartily pray in Prose, for the happiness of her Lord and Master. And now having taken our Vale of verses, let us therewith take also our Farewell of Worcester-shire. The Farewell. I read in a good Fines Mori∣son his Tra∣vails pag. 3. Author, how the State of Lunenburg in Germany, (whose chief re∣venues arise from the sale of salt,) prohibited poor people the benefit thereof. Where∣upon Divine Providence (offended, that a Monopoly was made of his mercy) stopped the flowing of those Salt-springs. for a time, till the Poor were restored to their paxtage therein. I am not particularly instructed, what share the Poor have in the Salt of this Shire, not knowing how their interest is stated therein: But I presume the concern∣ments of the Poor are well cared for, and all things equally ordered betwixt them and Rich-people, grounding my confidence on the long and large continuance of the Salt∣pits amongst them. All I will adde, is this; I shall pray that they may indeavour forColl. 4. 6. spirituall-soul-savoriness, that their speech may be always with grace seasoned. As for the Loyal City of Worcester, (which deserves a particular Farewell by it self:) I heartily desire, that God would be pleased to restore unto it the years, which the Locust, Caterpillar, and Palmer-worm have devoured. And how quickly can he doe it (as by infinite other ways, so) by blessing the Clothing, the Staple Commodity in this County? not or∣merly omitted by me, but pretermited till this Occasion. Sure it is, that the finest (though this may seem a word of Challenge) Cloth of England, is made at Worcester, and such I believe, was that which In his Col∣louy intituled UXOR . Erasmus, that great Critick (who knew fine Cloth as well as pure Latine) is calleth Pannus Britannicus; Lempster Wool (in the neighboring Coun∣ty of Hereford) being here made into (Pardon the Prolepsis till it be died) the purest Scarlet.
YORK-SHIRE. YORK-SHIRE hath the Bishoprick of Durham and Westmer land on the North; Lancashire and a snip of Cheshire on the West; Derby, Notin∣gham and Lincolnshire, (divided by Humber) on the South; and the Ger∣man Ocean on the East thereof. It extendeth (without any Angular advantages) unto a square of fourscore and ten miles, adequate in all Di∣mensions unto the Dukedome of Wirtenberg in Germany. Yea, on due consideration, I am confident, that all the seven United Provinces, cannot present such a square of solid Continent, without any Sea interposed. One may call and justify this to be the best Shire of England, and that not by the help of the generall Katachresis of Good for Great, (a good blow, good piece, &c.) but in the proper acception thereof. If in Tullies Orations, (all being excellent) that is ad∣judged optima quae longissima, the best which is the longest, then by the same proportion, this Shire (partaking in goodness alike with others) must be allowed the best. Seeing Devonshire it self the next in largeness, wisely sensible of the visible inequality betwixt them, quits all claimes of corrivality, (as a case desperate) and acknowledgeth this as Paramont in greatness. Indeed, though other Counties have more of the Warm Sun, this hath as much as any of God's [temporall] blessings. So that let a Survayer set his Center at Ponfract or thereabouts, and take thence the Circumference of twenty miles, he there will meet with a tract of ground not exceeded for any, nor equalled for the goodness and plenty of some Commodities. I would term it the Garden of England, save, because it is so far from the Mansion House, I mean, the City of London. Insomuch that such sullen dispositions, who do not desire to go thither, only because of the great distance, the same if settled there, would not desire to come thence, such the delight and pleasure therein. Most true it is, that when King Henry the eight, Anno 1548. made his Progress to York, Doctor Tonstall Bishop of Durham, then attending on him, shewed the King a Valley, (being then some few miles North of Doncaster,) which the Bishop Out of a Ma∣nuscript of Willam Vavasor of Hassellwood Etquire. avowed to be the richest that ever he found in all his travails thorough Europe. For within 10. miles of Hasselwood the seat of the Vavasors there were, 165. Mannor houses of Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of the best quality. 275. Severall Woods, whereof some of them contain five hundred Acres. 32. Parks and two Chases of Dear. 120. Rivers and Brooks, whereof Five be Navigable, well stored with Salmon and other Fish. 76. Water-mills, for the Grinding of Corn on the aforesaid Rivers. 25. Cole-mines, which yield abundance of Fuell for the whole County. 3. Forges for the making of Iron, and Stone enough for the same. And within the same limits as much sport and pleasure for Hunting, Hawking, Fish∣ing and Fowling, as in any place of England besides. Naturall Commodities. Geat. A word of the name, colour, vertues and usefulness thereof. In Latine it is called Gagates, (as different in nature, as alike in name to the precious stone called Gagites, onely found in an Eagles nest) whence our English word Geat is deduced. But be it re∣membred, that the Agate, vastly distinct from Geat, is also named Gagates. It is found in this County towards the sea side, in the Camdens Brit. in this Coun∣ty. clefts of the rocks, whose gaping chaps are filled up therewith. It is naturally of a reddish and rusty colour, till it becomes black and bright by polishing. Indeed the lustre consists in the blackness
thereof, (Negroes have their beauties as well as fair folk,) and vulgar eyes confound the inlayings made of black Marble (polished to the height) with Touch, Geat and Ebony, though the three former be stones, the last a kind of wood. The vertues of Geat are hitherto conceal'd. It is the lightest of all solid (not po∣rous) stones, and may pass for the Embleme of our memories, attracting trifles there∣to, and letting slip matters of more moment. Rings are made thereof, (fine foyles to fair fingers;) and bracelets with beads, here used for Ornament, beyond sea for Devo∣tion; also small utensills as Salt-cellars, and the like. But hear how a Marbodaeus in suo de Gemmis Libell. Poet describes it. Nascitur in Lycia lapis, a prope gemma Gagates, Sed geus eximium faecunda Britania mittit, Lucidus & niger est, levis & laevicssimusi idem: Vicinas paleas trahit attritu calefactus, Ardet aquâ lotus, restinguitur unctus olivo. Geat a stone, and kind of gemm, In Lycia grows, but best of them Most fruitfull Britain sends, 'tis bright And black, and smooth and very light▪ If rubb'd to heat, it easily draws, Unto it self both chaffe and straws. Water makes it fiercely flame, Oyle doth quickly quench the same. The two last qualities, some conceive, to agree better to our sea-coal, then Geat, whence it is, that some stiffly maintain, that those are the Brittish Gagates meant by forraign Authors; and indeed, if preciousness of stones be measured, not from their price and rarity, but usefulness, they may be accounted precious. But hereof former∣ly in the Bishoprick of Durham. Alume. This was first found out nigh Geburgh in this County, some sixty years since, by that worthy and learned Knight Sir Thomas Chaloner (Tutor to Prince Henry) on this occasion. He observed the leaves of trees there abouts more deeply green then else∣where, the Oakes broad-spreading, but not deep-rooted; with much strength, but little sap; the earth clayish, variously coloured, here White, there Yellowish, there Blew, and the ways therein in a clear night glistering like glass; symptoms which first suggested unto him the presumption of Minerals, and of Alum most properly. Yet some years interceded betwixt the discovery and perfecting thereof; some of the Gentry of the Vicinage, burying their estates here under earth, before the Alum could be brought to its true consistency. Yea, all things could not fadge with them, untill they had brought (not to say stolń) over three prime workmen in Hogsheads from Rochel in France; whereof one, Lambert Russell by name, and a Walloon by birth, not long since deceased. But when the work was ended, it was adjudged a Mine Royal, and came at last to be rented by Sir Paul Pindar, who paid yearly, To The King 12500. The Earl of Moulgrave. 01640. Sir William Penniman 00600. Besides large salaries to numerous Clarks, and daily wages to Rubbish-men, Rock∣men, Pit-men, and House-men or Fire-men; so that at one time (when the Mines were in their Majesty) I am credibly informed he had in pay no fewer then eight hun∣dred, by sea and land. Yet did not the Knight complain of his bargain, who having the sole sale of the commodity to himself, kept up the reputation thereof, and the price of Alum at six and twenty pound the Tun. This he did the easier, because no better, and scarce other (save what from Rome and Rochel) Alum in all Europe. But the late long-lasting-Parliament, voted it a Monopoly, and restored the be∣nefit thereof to the former Proprietaries, who now pursue the work at five severall places.
1. Sands-end, belonging to the E. of Moulgrave. 2. Ash-holme, belonging to the E. of Moulgrave. 3. Slapy-wath, Sir William (formerly Penniman's) Darcey's. 4. Dunsley, Mr. Tho. Fairfax's 5. Whitbay Sir Hugh Cholmley's. Such now the emulation betwixt these Owners, to under-sell one another, that the Commodity is fallen to thirteen pound the Tun. Great the use hereof in Physick and Surgery, as a grand Astringent; besides, much thereof is daily employed by Clothiers, Glovers, Dyers, &c. so that some will maintain, that another thing in Eng∣land as white and far sweeter then Alum, may of the two be better spared, with less loss to the Common-wealth. Lime. I am credibly informed that within few miles of Pontfract, no less then twenty thou∣sand Pounds worth of this Coarse Commodity is yearly made, and vended in the Vicinage. It is a great Fertilizer of Ground if judiciously disposed of. Indeed the laying of Lime on light and sandy ground (like the giving hot cordials to persons in high feavours, enough to drive them into a Frenzy,) will soon burn out the heart thereof, which bestowed on cold and chill ground, brings it to a fruitfull consistency, and prudently ordered, it will for a long time retain the same. Horses. These are Mens wings, where with they make such speed. A Generous creature an Horse is, sensible in some sort of honour, made most handsome, by (that, which de∣formes man most,) Pride. The Kings of Israel, were not forbidden (as some may mistake) the having, but the Deu. 17. 19. multiplying of them; cheifly, because they were a For∣raign, yea, an Egyptian Commodity, and God would cut off from his children all oc∣casion of commerce with that Country, which was the Staple-place of Idolatry. Our English Horses have a mediocrity of all necessary good properties in them, as neither so slight as the Barbe, nor so slovenly as the Flemish, nor so fiery as the Hun∣garian, nor so aery as the Spanish Gennets, (especially if, as reported, they be conceived of the wind,) nor so earthly as those in the Low-countries, and generally all the German Horse. For stature and strength, they are of a middle size, and are both seemly and serviceable in a good proportion. And whilst the Seller praiseth them too much, the Buyer too little, the indifferent Stander by, will give them this due commendation. It is confessed, that our English Horse, never performed any eminent and signall Service beyond the Seas, in comparison of the Atchivements of their Infantry. Partly, because our Horses sent over many together in Ships, beat and heat themselves, and are not for suddain use in the field, after their Transportation, so that some time of rest must be allowed them, for their recovery. Partly, because the Genius of the English hath always more inclined them to foot-service, as pure and proper Man-hood indeed without any mixture, whilst in a Victory on horse-back, the credit thereof, ought in equi∣ty to be divided betwixt the Man and his Horse. Yorkshire doth breed the best race of English Horses, whose keeping commonly in steep and stony ground, bringeth them to firmness of footing and hardness of hoof. Whereas a Stud of Horses bred in foggy fenny ground, and soft rotten morasses (deli∣cacy marrs both Man and beast,) have often a Fen in their feet, being soft and soon sub∣ject to be foundred. Well may Philip be so common a name amongst the Gentry of this County, who are generally so delighted in Horsemanship. I have done with this subject, when I have mentioned the monition of David, An Horse is Psal. 33. 17. but a vain thing to save a man, though it is no vain thing, to slay a man, by many casualties, such need we have whether waking or sleeping, whether walking or riding, to put our selves by Prayer into Divine Protection.
Manufactures, As for CLOATHING, so vigorously followed in this County, we refer it to our FARWELL in this our description, and here insist on, Knives. These are the teeth of old men, and usefull to those of all ages. For, though some think themselves scarce Gentlemen with Knives, as good as they, conceive themselves scarce men without them, so necessary they are on all occasions. The most of these for com∣mon use of Country-people, are made in this County; whereof the bluntest, with a sharp stomack, will serve to cut meat, if before them. Sheffeild, a remarkable Market, is the Staple Town for this Commodity, and so hath been these three hundred years, witness Chaucer speaking of the accoutrements of the Folio 15. Miller. A Sheffeld whitel bare He in his hose. One may justly wonder how a Knife may be sold for one penny, three trades anciently distinct concurring thereunto, Bladers, Haft-makers, and Sheath-makers, all since united into the Corporation of Cutlers. Nor must we forget, that though plain-knife-make∣ing was very antient in this County, yet Stow▪ Chro. pag. 1038. Thomas Mathews on Fleet-bridge London, was the first Englishman, who Quinto Elizabethae made fine Knives, and procured a Prohi∣bition, that no more ships-lading of Hafts should be brought from beyond the seas. Pins. A Pin passeth for that which is next nothing, or (if you will) is the terminus a quo, from which something doth begin, and proceed from a Pin to a pound, &c. However it is considerable both as hurtfull and usefull; Hurtfull, if advantagiously placed it may prove as mortall, as a Poneyard; the life of the greatest man lying at the mercy of the meanest thing; Usefull, not onely to fasten our ornaments, but fill up the cks be∣twixt our cloathes, lest wind and weather should shoot thorough them. Many and very good of these are made in this County, a Commodity not to be slighted, since the very dust that falls from them is found profitable. We commonly say that it is not beneath a proper person to stoop to take up a Pin, untill he be worth Ten thousand pounds, according to the thrifty rule in Latine: Qui negligit minima nun∣quam ditescet. Such who admire, that so many millions of Pins, made, sold, used, and lost in England, should vanish away invisible, may rather wonder how so many that wear them, (being no more then Pins in the hand of their Maker,) doe decay, die, and slip-down in the dust, in silence and obscurity. I will adde, that the world is well altered with England, as to this Commodity, now exporting so much of them into forraign parts, whereas formerly Idem ibide. Strangers have sould Pins in this land to the value of threescore thousand pound a year. Medicinall Waters. About a mile and a half from Knares-borough Westward, in a morish boggy ground ariseth a spring of a Vitrioline tast and Odour. It was discovered by one Master Slingsby, about the year 1620. and is conceived to run paralell with the Spaw waters in Germany. Not far off, is a sulphur-well, which hath also the qualities of saltness and bitterness; The stench whereof though offensive, (Patients may hold their nose and take whole∣some physick) is recompenced by the vertues thereof. Insomuch, (as my Jo. French Doctor of Phy∣sick in his Yorkshire Spaw pag. 113. Author saith) It heateth and quickneth the stomack, bowels, liver, spleen, blood, veynes, nerves, and indeed the whole body, insomuch that it consumes crudities, rectifieth all cold distempers in all parts of the body, causeth a good digestion, cureth the dropsy, spleen, scurvy, green-sick∣ness, gout. And here it is high time to hold still, for if this last be true, let that disease which formerly was called dedecus medicinae, be hereafter termed decus fontis Knares∣burgensis. In the same parish over against the Castle (the river Nid running betwixt) ariseth a spring which runneth a little way in an entire streame, till dammed at the brow of the discent with ragged rocks, it is divided into severall trickling branches, whereof some
drop, some streame down, partly over, partly through a jetting rock, this is called the Petrifying well, (how grammatically I will not engage) because it converteth spungy substances into Vide what I have formly write of won∣ders in North∣amptonshire. stone, or crusteth them over round about. We must not forget Saint Mungus his Well which some have slighted as an ineffe∣ctuall superstitious relique of Popery, whilst others maintain it hath regained its repu∣tation, and is of Soveraign vertue. Some will have the name thereof mistaken, for Saint Magnus, which in my opinion was rather so called from Saint Mungo (Kentigernus in Latine) a Scotish Saint, and much honoured in these Northern parts. I believe no place in England can shew four springs so near in scituation, so distant in operation. Such as desire to know more of the nature and use of these springs, of the time, manner and quantity, wherein the Waters are to be taken, and how the Patient is to be dieted for his greater advantage, may inform themselves by perusing two small Trea∣tise, one set forth, Anno 1626. by Edmund Dean Doctor of Physick, living in York, called Spadsacrena Anglica. The other written some six years since by John French Doctor of Physick, and is very satisfactory on that subject. The Buildings. The Church of Beverly is much commended for a fine Fabrick, and I shall have a more proper occasion to speak hereafter of the Collegiate Church in Rippon, but amongst antient Civil Structures we mu not forget, Wrese Castle. It is sealed in the Confluence of Derwent and Owse. In what plight it is now I know not, but hear how Leland commendeth it in his Itinerary through this County. It is built of square stone, which some say was brought out of France, it hath four fair Towers, one at each corner, and a Gatehouse (wherein are Chambers five stories high,) which maketh the fifth. In Lelands time it looked as new built, though then 100. years old, as being erected by the Lord Percy Earl of Winchester, in the raign of King Richard the second. Without the Walls (but within the Mote,) gardens done Opere Topiario. In a word, he termeth it one of the properest buildings North of Trent. But that which most affected him, was a study, in an eight square Tower, called Pa∣radise, furnished with curious and convenient Deskes, loaden with variety of choice books; but as Noahs floud is generally believed of learned men, to have discomposed the Paradise in Eden, so I shrewdly suspect that the Deluge of time hath much impair∣ed, if not wholly defaced, so beautifull a building, then belonging to the Earl of Nor∣thumberland. Amongst many fine and fair Houses now extant in this County, we hear the highest commendation of Maulton late the house of the Lord Euers. Proverbs. From Hell, Hull, and Halifax,—deliver us.] This is part of the Beggars and Vagrants Letany. Of these three frightfull things unto them, it is to be feared, that they least fear the first, conceiting it the furthest from them. Others con∣ceive it onely to relate to the dangerous Ha∣ven thereof. Hull, is terrible unto them, as a Town of good government, where Va∣grants meet with Punitive Charity, and 'tis to be feared are oftner Corrected then Amend∣ed. Halifax, is formidable unto them for the Law thereof, whereby Theeves taken  in the very Act of stealing of cloath, are instantly beheaded with an Engine, without any further Legal Proceedings. A Scarborough warning.] That is none at all, but a sdain surprize, when a mischief is felt before it be sus∣pected. This Proverbe is but of 104. years standing, taking its Originall from Godwin in his Annals of Q Mary. Thomas Stafford, who in the raign of Queen Mary, Anno 1557. with a small company seized on Scarborough-castle, (utterly distitute of provision for resistance) before the Towns-men had the least notice of his approach. However, within six days, by the industry of the Earl of Westmerland, he was taken▪ brought to London, and Beheaded. So that since the Proverb accepteth a secondary (but no genuine) sense; and a Scarborough-warning may be a Caveat to any, how he undertaketh a treacherous design. But if any conceive this Proverbe of more antient original, fetching it from the custome of Scarborough∣castle in former times, with which, it was not a word and a blow, but a blow before and
without a word; as using to shoot ships which passed by and strook not sail, and so warn∣ing and harming them both together; I can retain mine own, without opposing their opinion. As true Steel as Rippon Rowels.] It is said of trusty Persons, men of metall, faithfull in their imployments. Spurs are a principal part of Knightly Hatchments, yea, aMr. Daiton in his Poly-ol∣, Song 2. pag. 71. Poet observes, The Lands that over Ouze to Barwick forth doe bear, Have for their Blazon had the Snaffle, Spur, and Spear. Indeed, the best Spurs of England, are made at Rippon a famous Town in this County, whose rowels may be inforced to strike through a Shilling, and will break sooner then bow. However the horses in this County are generally so good, they prevent the Spurs, or answer unto them, a good sign of thrifty metall for continuance. An Yorkshire * way-Bit.] That is an Over-plus not accounted in the reckoning, which sometime, proveth as much as all the rest. Ask a Country-man here on the high-way, how far it is to such a Town, and they commonly return, So many miles and a way-bit, which way-bit, is enough to make the wearied Travailer surfet of the length thereof. If such over-mea∣sure be allowed to all Yards, Bushels, &c. in  Shire, the Poor therein have no cause to complain of their penny-worths, in buying any Commodities. But hitherto we have run along with common report, and false spelling, (the way not to win the race) and now return to the starting place again. It is not Way-bit, though generally so pronounced, but Wee-bit a pure Yorkshirisme, which is a small bit in the Northern Language. Merry Wakefield.] What peculiar cause of mirth this Town hath above others, I doe not know, and dare not too curiously inquire, left I turn their mirth among themselves, into anger against me. Sure it is seated in a fruitful soyl, and cheap Country, and where good chear and company are the Premisses, mirth (in common consequence) will be the Con∣clusion. Which, if it doth not trespass in time, cause and measure, Heraclitus the sad Philosopher, may perchance condemn, but Saint Hilary, the good Father will surely allow. Princes. HENRY, youngest son to William Duke of Normandy, but eldest to King William the Conquerour, (by whom he was begotten after he was Crowned King,) on which politick , he claim'd and gain'd the Crown, from Duke Robert his eldest bro∣ther, was Anno Dom. 1070. born at Selbey in this County. If any ask, what made his Mother travail so far North from London? know it was to enjoy Her Husbands com∣pany; who, to prevent insurrections, and settle peace, resided many months in these parts; besides, his peculiar affection to Selby, where after he founded a Mitred∣Abby. This Henry was bred (say some) in Paris, sayTho▪ Rudburn Leland, Fabian, Bae, and Pitz. pag. 203. others in Cambridge, and I may safely say in both, wherein he so profited, that he attained the Surname of Beauclerke. His learning may be presumed a great advantage to his long and prosperous raign for thirty five years and upwards, wherein he remitted the Norman rigour, and restored to His subjects a great part of the English Laws and Liberties. Indeed his princely vertues, being profitable to all, did with their lustre so dazle the eyes of his subjects, that they did not see his personall vices, as chiefly prejudicial to himself. For, he was very wanton, as appeareth by his numerous natural issue, no fewer thenSpeeds Chro. pag. 453. fourteen, all by him publickly owned; the males highly advanced, the females richly married, which is justly reported to his praise, it being lust to beget, but love to bestow them. His sobriery otherwise was admirable, whose temperance was of proof against any meat objected to his appetite, Lampreys alone excepted, on a surfeit whereof he died, Anno Domini 1135. He had onely two children, William dying before, and
Maud surviving him; both born in Normandy, and therefore omitted in our Catalogue. THOMAS Fifth son of King Edward the first, and the first that he had by Margaret his second Wife, was born at (and surnamed from) Brotherton, a small Village in this County, June 1. Anno Dom. 1300. He was created Earl of Norfolke, and Earl Mar∣shall of England. He left no male-issue, but from his females, the Mowbrays Dukes of Norfolke, and from them the Earls of Arundel and Lords Berkeley are descended. RICHARD PLANTAGENET Duke of York, commonly is called Richard of Co∣nisborrow, from theNear to Ro∣theram. Castle in this Shire of his nativity. The Reader will not grudge him a place amongst our Princes, if considering him fixed in his Generation betwixt an Antiperistasis of Royal extraction, being, Son, to a Son of a King. Father, to the Father of a King. Edmund of Langley, Duke of York. Richard Duke of York. Fifth son to K. Edward 3. Father to King Edward 4. Besides he had married Anne, Daughter and sole Heir to Edward Mortimer, the true Inheritrix of the Crown. But tampering too soon and too openly, to derive the Crown in his Wives right to himself, by practising the death of the present King, he was taken and beheaded for treason, in the raign of K. Henry the fifth. EDWARD sole son to King Richard the third, and Anne his Queen, wasSpeeds Cron∣pag. 738. born in the Castle of Midleham, near Richmond in this County; and was by his father crea∣ted Prince of Wales. A Prince, who himself was a child of as much hopes, as his Father a man of hatred. But he consumed away of a suddain, dying within a month of his Mo∣ther; King Richard little lamenting the loss of either, and presently projecting to re∣pair himself by a new Marriage. The untimely death of this Prince, (in respect of the terme to which by Naturall possibility he might have attained) in his innocent age, is generally beheld as a pu∣nishment on him, for the faults of his Father. The Tongue foreswears, the Ears are cut off; the Hand steals, the Feet are stocked, and that justly, because both consisting of the same body. And because Proles est pars parentis it is agreeable with divine justice to inflict on Children temporal judgements for defaults of their Parents. Yet this judgment was a mercy to this Prince, that he might not behold the misera∣ble end of his Father. Let me adde, and a mercy also to all England. For had he sur∣vived to a mans estate, he might possibly have proved a wall of partition, to hinder the happy union of the two houses of York and Lancaster. Saints. HILDA was daughter unto Prince Hererick, nephew to Edwin King of Northum∣berland, and may justly be counted our English Huldah, not so much for sameness of sex, and name-sounding similitude, as more concerning conformities. Huldah lived in a2 Chron. 34. . Colledge, Hilda in a Convent at Strenshalt in this County; Huldah was the Oracle of those times, as Hilda of her age, being a kind of aSir Henry Spelmans Councils. Moderatresse in a Saxon Synod, (or conference rather) called to compromise the controversie about the celebration of Easter. I behold her as the most learned English Female before the Conquest, and may call her the She-Gamaliel, at whose feet many Learned men had their education. She ended her holy life with an happy death, about the year of our Lord 680. BENEDICT BISCOP was born saith Pitz amongst the East Saxons; saithIn his flowers of the Lives of the Saints pa, 47. Hiero∣me Porter in Yorkshire, whom I rather believe. First, because writing his life ex professo, he was more concerned to be curious therein. Secondly, because this Benedict had much familiarity with, and favour from Oswy King of Northumberland, in whose Domi∣nions he fixed himself, building two Monasteries, the one at the influx of the river Were, the other at the river Tine into the sea, and stocking them in his life time with 600 Benedictine Moncks. He made five Voyages to Rome, and always returned full fraught with Reliques, Pi∣ctures and Ceremonies. In the former is driven on as great a Trade of Cheating, as in any earthly Commo∣dity, in so much that I admire to meet with this passage in a Jesuite, and admire more
that he Met not with the Inquisition for writing it. Addam, * nonnunquam in Tem plis, re∣liquias dubias, profana corpora pro Sanctorum, (qui cum Christo in Coelo regnant) exuviis sacris fuisse proposita. He left Religion in England, Braver, but not better then he found it. Indeed, what Tully said of the Roman Lady, That she danced better then became a modest woman, was true of Gods Service as by him adorned, the Gaudiness prejudicing the Gravity there∣of. He made all things according (not to the Patern in the Mount with Mose's, but) the Precedent of Rome; and his Convent, being but the Romish Transcript, became the Eng∣lish Original, to which all Monasteries in the Land were suddenly conformed. In a word, I reverence his Memory, not so much for his first bringing over Painted Glass into England, as for his bringing up Pious Bead in his Monastery. Being struck beneath the Girdle with the dead Palsey, his soul retired into the Upper Rooms of his Clay Cottage, much employed in meditation, untill the day of his death, which hap∣pened Anno 703. Saint JOHN of Beverley, may be challenged by this County, on a threefold title, because therein he had his 1. Birth, at Harpham in this County, in the East-Riding. 2. Life, being three and thirty years and upwards, Archbishop of York. 3. Death, at Beverley in this County, in a Colledge of his own foundation. I remember his Picture in a Window in the Library at Salisbury, with an inscription under it (whose character may challenge to it self three hundred years antiquity) affirm∣ing him the first Master of Arts in Oxford, and Alfredus Beverlacensis reporteth as much. Arts indeed were, and Oxford was (though hardly an University) in that age; but see∣ing the solemnity of graduating was then unknown, a judiciousBishop God∣win in the Arch-bishops of York. Oxonian rejecteth it as a fiction. More true it is, that he was bred at Strenshalt under Hilda aforesaid, which soundeth something to her honour, and nothing to his disgrace, seeing eloquent Apollos himself learned the Primer of his Christianity, partly, fromActs 11. 26. Priscilla. He was after∣wards educated under Theodorus the Grecian and Arch-bishop of Canterbury. Yet was he not so famous for his Teacher, as for his Scholar, Venerable Bede, who wrote this JohnsHist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 2, 3. &c. life, which he hath so spiced with Miracles, that it is of the hottest for a discreet man to digest into his belief. Being very aged, he resigned his Arch-bishoprick, that he might the more effectu∣ally apply his private devotions in his Colledge at Beverley, for which he procured the Freedstool from King Athelston. Yet such Sanctuaries (though carrying something of holiness in their name) had a profane abuse for their very use, making Malefactours with their promise of impunity, and then protecting them from justice. Saint John died May 7. 722. and was buried in the Porch of his Collegiate Church. A Synod held at London 1416. assigned the day of his death an Anniversary Solemnity to his Memory. THOMAS PLANTAGENET. Before I proceed, I must confess my self formerly at a great loss, to understand a passage in an Honourable Author, speaking of the counter∣feit Reliques detected and destroyed at the Reformation. Lord Herbert in the life of King Henry the eighth, pag. 431. The Bell of Saint Guthlac, and the Felt of Saint Thomas of Lancaster, both remedies for the Head ach. But I could recover no Saint Thomas (saving him of Canterbury) in any English Martyrology, till since on inquiry I find him to be this Thomas Plantagenet. He was Earl of Derby, Lancaster, Leicester, and (in the right of Alice his Wife) of Lincoln. A popular person, and great enemy to the two Spencers, Minions to King Ed∣ward the second, who being hated as Devils for their pride, no wonder if this Thomas was honoured, as a Saint and Martyr, by theIn Sanctorum numerum retu∣lit vulgus. Cam. Brit. in York∣shire. common sort. Indeed he must be a good Chymist, who can extract Martyr out of Malefactour, and our Chronicles gene∣rally
behold him put to death for Treason against K. Edward the 2d. But let him pass for a Saint in this Shire, though never solemnly canonized; it being true of such locall Saints, what Servius Honoratus observeth of Topicall Gods, Ad alias Regiones nun∣quam transibant, They travailed not so far as to be honoured in other Countries. His behead∣ing, alias his Martyrome, happened at Pontfret, Anno Dom. 1322. RICHARDBale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 80. ROLE alias HAMPOLE had his first Name from his Father, the other from the Place (three Miles from Doncaster) where living he was Honoured, and dead was Buried, and Sainted. He was a Heremite, led a strict life, and wrot many Books of Piety, which I prefer before his Propheticall Predictions, as but a degree above Almanack Prognostications. He threatned the Sins of the Nation, with suture Famine, Plague, In∣undations, War, and such generall Calamities, from which, no Land is long free, but subject to them in some proportion. Besides his Predictions if Hitting, were Heeded; if Missing, not Marked. However, because it becomes me not , let him pass for a Saint. I will adde, that Our SavioursMat. 21. 25. Dilemma to the Jews, may partly be pressed on the Papists his Contemporaries. If Hampoles Doctrine was of Men, why was he generally reputed a Saint; if from God, why did they not Obey him, seeing he spake much against the viti∣ousness and covetousness of the Clergy of that Age? He died Anno Domini 1349. JOHN of BIRLINGTON or BRIDLINGTOM was born hard by that Town, bred two years in Oxford, where he profited in piety and learning above his age and equals. Returning home, for a short time he was teacher to a Gentlemans Sons, untill the twentieth year of his age he entred himself a Canon-Regular in the Covent of Brid∣lington, where he grew eminent for his exemplary holiness. It was his happiness that such offices always fell to his share, as did not retard but quicken his devotion, as Chaunter, Almoner, &c. At last he was choen Prior, but re∣fus'd the place, alledging his own unworthiness, professing he had rather be beaten in pieces with blows, then accept thereof, so that another was put into the place. This new elect dying soon after, our John was chosen again in the vacancy, and then took it, fearing there might be as much peevishness in rejecting, as pride in effecting it, and hoping that Providence which fairly called him to, would freely fit him for the discharge of that office. He used to treat strangers at his table with good chear, and seemingly kept pace with them in eating, morsell for morsell, whilst he had a secret contrivance, wherein he conveyed his exceedings above his Monasticall pittance. Being demanded of one why he did not enter into more strict and austere Order, Surely, said he, A man may lead a sincere and acceptable life in any order, and it were arrogancy in me to pretend to a severer discipline, when I cannot observe as I ought, this easier course of life. MyHarpfields Eccl. Hist. p. 577. out of whom his life is extracted. Author saith, that Martha and Mary were both compounded in him, being as pious, so provident to hus∣band the revenues of their house to their best advantage. Going to view their lands in Richmond-shire, he gave a visit to a woman lately turn'd an Ancorist, and renowned for her holiness; she told him, that now her vision was out, who the night before dreamed, that an Eagle flew about her house with a label in his bill, wherein was written Jesus is my love, and you, saith she, are the person who so honour him in your heart, that no earthly thing can distract you. To whom our John returned, I came hither to hear from you some saving and savoury discourse, but seeing you begin with such idle talk, farewell; and so waved any farther converse. However, I must not dissemble, that the prophesies fathered on this our John are as fabulous and frivolous as her dreams, witness that deadly passage in an excellentCamden  in York shire. Author, In Johannis de Bridlington vatis monastici vaticinales rythmos omnino ridiculos incidi∣mus: yet no doubt he was a holy man, and could one light on his life unleavened, be∣fore heaved up with the ferment of Monkish fiction, it would afford many remarkables. He died in the sixtieth year of his age, 1379. and was reputed (though I believe not solemnly canonized) a Saint, amongst his own Countrimen. WILLIAM SLEIGHTHOLME. It is pity to part him from his last named dear friend, such the sympathy of amity and sanctity betwixt them. Once this William de∣manded
of his friend John, what might be the reason, that the Devil in their days afrighted few, if any, with his terrible appearance, who in former ages was very fre∣quent with formidable apparitions? reflecting in this his question, perchance on Saint Pauls messenger of Satan sent to2 Cor. 12. 7. buffet him, but chiefly on those usuall [reported] per∣sonall combates of the Devil with Saint Dunstan, Guthlake, &c. To whom his friend return'd, We are grown so remiss in goodness, that the Devil needs not put himself to such pains, seeing less and lighter temptations will doe the deed. It is recordedHarpfield Eccl. Hist. p. 577. of this Wil∣liam, that he was one of singular piety, and after his death wrought many miracles at his Tombe in the Monastery of Bridlington, where he was buried about the year 1380. I will adde no more, but that I have a learned friend William Sleight holme Doctor of Physick living at Buntingford in Hartfordshire, but born in this County, whom I believe remotely related to this Saint. Expect not here, that I should adde to this Catalogue that Maiden, who to secure her virginity from his unchast embraces that assaulted it, was by him barbarously mur∣dered, whereby she got the reputation of a Saint, and the Place, the Scene of his Cruelty, (formerly called Horton) the Name of Hali-fax or Holy-hair. For the cre∣dulous People conceited that the Veins which in form of little threds spred themselves between the Bark and Body of thatCamdens Brit. in York-shire. Yew-tree, (whereon the head of this Maid was hung up) were the very hairs indeed of this Virgin head, to whom they flock in Pil∣grimage. Oh! how sharp sighted, and yet how blind is Superstition? Yet these Country-folks fancies had the advantage ofOvid Metam. lib. . fol. 9. Daphnes being turned into a Laurell-tree. In frondem cries, in ramos brachia crescunt. Into a bough her hair did spred, And from her Armes two branches bred. But here she is wholly omitted, not so much because her Name and Time are un∣known, but because the judicious behold the whole Contrivance devoid of Historicall truth. Martyrs. The County (and generally the Province of York) escaped very well from Popish per∣secution, which, under Gods goodness, may be justly imputed to the tempers of their four succeeding Arch-bishops. 1. Thomas Wolsey, whom all behold as a person more proud, then cruell; not so busying himself to maintain Popery, as to gain the Popedome. 2. Edward Lee, more furious then the former, persecuting many to imprison∣ment, none to death, save two, of whomSee Martyrs in the City of York. hereafter. 3. Robert Hollgate, who was, as they say, a parcell-Protestant, imprisoned and deprived for being married. 4. Nicholas Heath, a meek and moderate man, carrying a Court of Consci∣ence in his bosome, long before Queen Mary made him Chancellor of Eng∣land. Hereupon it came to pass, that the Diocess of York was dry with Gedeon's fliece, whilst others lying near unto it, were wet in their own tears and blood. Confessors. Where no fish, there no fry, and seeing here no Martyrs, which are Confessors full blown, no wonder if here no Confessors, which are Martyrs in the bud. Cardinalls. JOHN FISHER was born in the Town of Beverly in this County, his father Robert Fisher was by condition a Merchant, and lived in good reputation. He was afterwards bred in Michaell-house in Cambridge, whereof he was the first Chancellor pro termino
vitae, and Bishop of Rochester. How this Fisher was caught afterwards in the net of Elizabeth Barton, (commonly called the holy Maid of Kent,) thereby made accessary to her dissembling; How stiffe he was against King Henrys Divorce and Title of Supream head of the Church; How the Pope sent him a Cardinalls Cap, and the King Cut off his head, hath been so largely related in my Ecclesiastical History; and being I hope pardoned by the Reader for my former tediousness, I will not now contract a new guilt by offen∣ding in Prolixity on the same person. The rather because his Manuscript life written 80. years since by Richard Hall of Christs-colledge in Cambridge, is lately set forth in Print under the name of Thomas Bily D. D. in which book as I doe not repine at any passages, (though Hyperbolicall) to the praise of this Prelate; so I cannot but be both angry and grieved at the many false and scandalous reflections therein, on the worthy Instru∣ments of our Reformation. This learned Bishop was beheaded in the year 1535. the Threescore and seventeenth year of his age. Let me adde he was tryed by an Ordinary Jury, and not by his Peers, whereof seve∣rall reasons are rendred. Some thought he forgot to demand his Priviledge herein, (disturb'd with grief and fear) as Edward Duke of Somerset forgot to crave the Be∣nfit of the Clergy, or, that he neglected it as surfetting of long life, and  of his Dissolution. Others, because he preferred death in a Direct Line before a Cir∣cumferential Passage thereunto, (as Certain though not so Compendious) being assured that the Lords durst not displease the King in acquitting him. But most imput it to his suspicion that if desiring to be tryed by his Peers, it would have been denyed him, as not due to a Bishop. And yet that worthy Lawyer, Judge Stamford in his Pleas of the Crownibro tertio Fol. 153. leaveth it doubtfull, and seemeth inclined to the Affirmative. Besides Sir Robert Brook in his Novell Cases30. M. 10. p. 465. affirmeth in Express Terms, that a Bishop is Peer of the Realm, and ought to be tryed by his Peers. The best is, our Charity may be Con∣fident, that our Bishops will so inoffensively behave themselves, and God we hope so secure their innocence, that there will not hereafter be need to decide this Question. Prelates. EUSTATHIUS de FAUCONBRIDGE was born in this County, where his Surname appeareth among the Antient Sheriffs thereof. He was chosen Bishop of London, in the sixth of King Henry the third, Anno 1222. carrying it clearly from a Company of able Competitors, occasioning this Distick,▪ Godwin in the Bishops of London. Omnes his Digni, tu Dignior omnibus, omnes Hic plene sapiunt, plenius ipse sapis. All here are Worthy, thou the Worth: est, All fully Wise, thou Wiser then the rest. Idem ibidem. Others played on his Name Eustatius [One that stood well] both in Respect of his spirituall Estate (yet let him that standeth take heed lest he fall) and Temporall Conditi∣on, well fixed in the Favour of Prince and People, being Chief Justice, then Chancellour of the Chequer, and afterwards Treasurer of England, and twice Embassadour to the King of France. He deserved right well of his own Cathedrall, and dying October 31. 1228. was buried under a Marble Tombe, on the South-side of the Presbytery. WILLIAM de MELTON, was born in this County, (wherein areSee Villare Anglicanum. four villages so named) and preferred therein Provost of Beverly, and Canon, then Arch-bishop of York. He went to Avinion, there to procure his Consecration. I say to Avinion, whither then the Court was removed from Rome, and continued about threescore and ten years, on the same token, that those remaining at Rome (almost starved for want of employ∣ment) called this the seventy years captivity of Babilon. Consecrated after two years tedious Attendance, he returned into England, and fell to fi∣nish the fair fabrick of his Cathedrall, which John Roman had began, expending seven hundred MarksGodwin in the Arch bi∣shops of York. therein. His life was free from Scandall, signall for his Chastity, Charity, Fasting and Praying. He strained up his Tenants so as to make good Musick therewith, but not break the string, and surely Church-lands were intended, (though not equally,
yet) mutually for the comfortable support both of Landlord and Tenants. Being unwilling that the Infamy of Infidell should be fixed upon him, (according to the Apostles Doctrine) for not providing for his family, heGodwin in his Arch bi∣shops of York. bought three Mannors in this County, from the Arch-bishop of Roan, with the Popes Confirmation, and set∣led them on his Brothers Son, whose Descendant William Melton,See our Ca∣talogue of Sheriffs in this County. was High-sheriff of this County, in the Fiftieth of King Edward the third. There is a Place in York as well as in London called the Old-baly, herein more remark∣able then that in London, that Arch-bishop Melton compassed it about with aGodwin ut prius. great Wall. He bestowed also much cost in adorning Feretrum [English it the Bear or the Cof∣fin) of Saint William, a Person purposely omitted by my Pen, because no assurance of his English Extraction. Arch-bishop Melton dyed, (after he had sate two and twenty years in his See) Anno Domini 1340. Entombed in the Body of his Church nigh the Font, whereby I collect him buried below in the Bottom of the Church, that Instru∣ment of Christian Initiation, antiently advancing but a little above the Entrance into the Church. HENRY WAKEFEILD is here placed with Assurance, there being three Towns of that name in (and none out of) this County. Indeed his is an Episcopall Name, which might mind him of his Office, the Diocess of Worcester, (to which he was preferred Anno 1375. by King Edward the third,) being his Field, and he by his place to Wake or watch over it: Nor hear I of any complaints to the contrary, but that he was very vi∣gilant in his Place. He was also for one year Lord Treasurer of England. Dying March 11. 1394. he lyeth covered in his own Church,Godwin in his Bishops of Worcester. Ingenti marmore, and let none grudge him the greatness of his Grave-stone, if two foot larger then ordinary, who made the Body of this his Church, two Arches longer Westward then he found it, besides a fair Porch added thereunto. RICHARD SCROOPE son to the Lord Scroope of Bolton in this County, brother to William Earl of Wilt-shire, was bred a Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, attaining to be a man of great learning and unblamable life. Nor was it so much his high extra∣ction as his own Abilities causing him to be preferred Bishop first of Coventry and Lichfield, then Arch-bishop of York. Being netled with the news of his Earl-brothers Beheading, he conjoyned with the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl Marshall, Lord Bardolph and others, against King Henry the fourth as an Usurper, and Invader of the Liberties of Church and State. The Earl of Westmerland, in outward deportment complied with him, and seemed to approve a Writing wherein his main intentions were comprised, so to Trepan him into his destruction: Toling him on, till it was too late for him either to advance or retreat, the King with his Army being at Pont∣fract. Bishop Godwin saith, it doth not appear that he desired to be tried by his Peers, and I believe it will appear, that nothing was then Calmly or Judiciously transacted, but all being done in an hurry of heat, and by Martiall Authority. The Executioner had five strokes at his Neck, before he could sunder it from his Body, Imputa∣ble not to his Cruelty but Ignorance, it not being to be expected, that one nigh York, should be so dextrous in that trade as those at London. His beheading happened Anno 1405. STEPHEN PATRINGTON was born in the Village so called in the East-riding of this County. He was bred a Carmelite and Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and the three and twentieth Provinciall of his Order through out EnglandPitz. de script. Ang. Num. 766. for fifteen years. It is incredible (saith Leland) what Multitudes of People crowded to his Sermons, till his Fame preferred him Chaplain and Confessour to King Henry the fifth. He was depu∣ted of the King, Commissioner at Oxford, to enquire after and make Process against the Poor Wicklevites, and as he was busyed in that employment, he was advanced to the Bishoprick of Saint Davids. Hence he was sent over to the Councill of Constance, and therein (saith Walsingham) gave great Testimony of his ability. Returning into England, he was made Bishop of Chichester, but dying before his Translation was finish∣ed 1417. was buried in White-fryars in Fleetstreet. WILLIAM PEIRCY was Son to Henry Peircy (second Earl of Northumberland of that
Name) and Eleanour Nevill his Wife. Indeed the Son of a Publique Woman, con∣versing with many men, cannot have his Father certainly assigned, and therefore is commonly called Filius Populi. As a base child, in the Point of his Father is subject to a shamfull, so is the Nativity of this Prelate as to the Place thereof, attended with an Honorable Uncertainty, whose Noble Father had so many houses in the Northern Parts, that his Son may be termed a Native of North-England▪ but placed in this County because Topliffe is the Principall, and most Antient seat of this Family. He was bred a Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, whereof he was Chancellour, and had a younger Brother George Peircy a Clerk also, though attaining no higher preferment then a Prebend in Be∣verly. Our William was made Bishop of Carlile, 1452. Master MillsCatal. of ho∣nour p. 721. erroneously maketh him afterwards Bishop of Wells, and it is enough to detect the mistake without disgracing the Mistaker. He died in his See of Carlile 1462. CUTHBERT TONSTALL was born at Hatchforth in Richmond-shire in this Coun∣ty, of a most Worshipfull Family, (whose chief seat at Tonstall Thurland not far off,) and bred in the University of Cambridge, to which he was in books a great Benefactor. He was afterwards Bishop of London, and at last of Durham. A great Grecian, Orator, Mathematician, Civilian, Divine, (and to wrap up all in a word) a fast friend to Erasmus. In the raign of King Henry the eight, he publiquely confuted the papall supremacy in a learned Sermon, with various and solid arguments, preached on Palmes-sunday before his Majesty Anno Domini 1539. And yet (man is but man) he returned to his errour in the raign of King Edward the sixth, continuing therein in the first of Queen Elizabeth, for which he was deprived of his Bishoprick. He shewed mercy when in Power, and found it in his Adversity, having nothing but the Name of a prisoner, in which condition he died, and was buried at Lambeth 1560. RALPH BAINES was born in thisBae. Pitz. Bi∣shop Godwin. County, bred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge. An Excellent Linguist in Latine, Greek and Hebrew, I say Hebrew then in its Nonage, whereof Baines was a good Guardian, first in learning, then in teaching the Rules thereof. Hence he went over into France, and became Hebrew Professor at Paris. He wrot a Comment on the Proverbs in three Volumes, and dedicated it to King Franc is the first of France, that Grand Patron of good Men and great Scholars. Pitz telleth us,De Ang. script. Anno 1559. ferunt, it is reported, that the Ministers of Geneva, have much de∣praved many of his writings in severall places, which I doe not believe. Such passages (doubtlesly according to the Authors own writing) being reducible to two Heads. First, his fair mentioning of some learned Linguists though Protestants, with whom he kept an Epistolary Correspondency. Secondly, some expressions in preferring the Original of Scripture, to the Diminution of the Vulgar Translation. Returning into England, he was by Queen Mary 1555, made Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield. Hitherto no ill could be spoken of his Intellectualls, and hereafter no good of his Moralls in point of his Cruelty, he caused such persecution in his Diocess. His greatest Commendation is, that though as bad a Bishop as Christopher son, he was bet∣ter then Bonner. In the first of Queen Elizabeth he was deprived of his Bishoprick, and dying not long after of the Stone, was buried in Saint Dunstans 1560. Since the Reformation. THOMAS BENTHAM was born in thisBale de script. sui temporis p. 113. County, bred Fellow of Magdalen-col∣ledge in Oxford. Under King Henry the eight, he was a Complier with, no Promoter of Popery. In the first of Queen Mary, repenting of his former, he resolved not to accumu∣late sin, refusing not onely to say Mass, but also to correct a scholar in the Colledge (though urged thereto byDoctor Hum∣phred in the life of Bishop Jewell pag. 72. and 73. Sir Robert Reed the Prime Visitor,) for his absence from Popish Prayers, conceiving it injurious to punish in another, that omission for a fault, which was also according to his own Conscience. He also then assisted Henry Bull (one of the same Foundation) to wrest out, and throw down out of the hands of the Cho∣risters the Censer, when about to offer their superstitious Incense.
No wonder then if he was fain to fly into Forraign parts, and glad to get over into Germany, where he lived at Basil, Preacher to the English Exiles, to whom he expounded the intire book of the Acts of the Apostles. Now seeing the Apostles suffering was above all their Doing, it was a proper portion of Scripture, for him hence, to press patience to his banished Country-men. Towards the end of Queen Mary, he was secretly sent for over, to be superintendent of the London Conventicle, (the onely true Church in time of Persecution,) where with all his Care and Caution, he hardly escaped. In the second of Queen Elizabeth, he was Consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, succeeding Ralph Baines therein, (one of the same County with him, but a different Judgement,) and died on the 21. of Fe∣bruary 1578. EDMUND GUEST was born atMr.  in hs Manu∣script Catal. of the Fellows of Kings-colledge. Afferton in this County; bred Fellow of Kings∣colledge in Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity. He was afterwards Almoner to Queen Elizabeth, and he must be both a wise and a good man whom she would trust with her Purse. She preferred him Bishop first of Rochester, then of Salis∣bury, John Bale (saith myBishop Go∣win in be Bi∣shops of Sarum. Author) reckoneth up many books made by him of consi∣derable value. He died February 28. 1578. the same year and month with his Country∣man Thomas Bentham aforesaid. MILES COVERDALE was born in thisBale de script. Brit. Cent. 9. Num. 61. County, bred in the University of Cam∣bridge, and afterwards became an Augustine Frier, till his eyes being opened he quitted that Superstitious Profession. Going into Germany, he laboured greatly in Translating of the Bible, and in writing many books reckoned up by John Bale. He was made Doctor of Divinity in the University of Tubing, and returning into England, being in∣corporated in Cambridge, was soon after made Bishop of Exeter, by King Edward the sixth 1551. But alas, he was not comfortably warme in his place, before his place by persecu∣tion grew too hot for him, and in the first of Queen Mary he was cast into prison, a cer∣tain forerunner of his Martyrdome, had not Frederick King of Denmark seasonably inter∣posed. This good King with great Importunity hardly obtained this small Courtesie, viz. that Coverdale should be enlarged, though on this condition, to be banished out of hs Country. In obedience whereunto, he went over into Germany. In the first of Qeen Elizabeth he returned to England, but not to Exeter; Never resuming that, or accepting any other Bishoprick. Severall men assigned severall causes hereof, but Co∣verdale onely knew the true reason himself. Some will say, that for the Books he made, he had better been placed under the title of Learned Writers, or for the Exile and Imprisonment he suffered ranked under Confessors, then under the title of Prelats, manifesting an aversness of his own judgement there∣unto, by not returning to his Bishoprick. But be it known that Coverdale in his judge∣ment approved thereof; Being one of those Bishops, who solemnly Consecrated Ma∣thew Parker Arch-bishop of Canterbury at Lambeth. Now, quod efficit tale, magis est tale, I understand it thus, He that makes another Arch-bishop, is abundantly satisfyed in his Judgement and Conscience of the lawfullness thereof, Otherwise such dissembling had been inconsistent with the sincerity of so grave and godly a person. He died Anno Dom. 1588. and lyes buried in Saint Bartholomews behind the Exchange, under a fair Stone in the Chancell. ADAM LOFTUS was born in thisSir Jams Ware de Praesu∣libus Lageme pag. 38. County, and bred in Trinity-colledge in Cam∣bridge, where he Commenced Doctor of Divinity the same year with John Whitgift afterwards Arch-bishop of Canterbury. He was Chaplain to Robert Earl of Sussex, De∣puty of Ireland, and was first made Arch-bishop of Armagh, Anno 1562. and after∣wards Arch-bishop of Dublin, Anno 1567. Wonder not that he should desire his own degradation, to be removed from Armagh (then Primate of Ireland) to Dublin a Subordinate Arch bishoprick, seeing herein he con∣sulted his safety (and perchance his profit) more then his Honour, Armagh being then infested with Rebells, whilst Dublin was a secure City. After the death of Sir William Gerrard, he was made Chancellour of Ireland, which place he discharged with singular Ability and Integrity, untill the day of his death.
And that which in my judgement commendeth him most to the notice of Posterity, and most ingageth Posterity in thankfullness to his memory, is, that he was a profitable Agent in, yea, a principall procurer of the Foundation of the University and Colledge of Dublin, (where Dermitius son of Mercard King of Lemster had formerly found a Con∣vent for Canons Regular,) and the first Honorary Master thereof, being then Arch-bishop (if not Chancellour of Ireland,) to give the more credit and countenance to tha Foun∣dation. He died Aprill 5. Anno 1605. and was buried in the Church of Saint Patrick, having been Arch-bishop from his Consecration eight Months above two and forty years. Reader, I must confess, I admired hereat, untill I read that Miller Magragh (who dyed Anno Domini 1622.) was Arch-bishop of Cassell in Ireland ten months above Sir James Ware de Arch∣epis. Cassell p. 31. one and fifty years. GEORGE MOUNTAINE was born in this County, at......... and bred in Quéens∣colledge in Cambridge, where he became Fellow and Proctor of the University. He was Chaplain to the Earl of Essex, whom he attended in his Voyage to Cales, being in∣deed one of such personall valour, that out of his gown, he would turn his back to no man; he was afterwards made Dean of Westminster, then successively Bishop of Lincoln, and London: whilst residing in the latter, he would often pleasantly say, that of him the Proverb would be verified, Lincoln was, and London is, and York shall be, which came to pass accordingly, when he was removed to the Arch-bishoprick of York, wherein he died; thorough which Sees, never any Prelate so methodically passed but himself alone. He was a good Benefactour to the Colledge wherein he was bred, whereon he bestowed a fair piece of plate, (called Poculum Charitatis, with this Inscrip tion Incipio, I begin to thee,) and founded two Scollerships therein. Capitall Judges. Sir WILLIAM GASCOINGE was born at So am I in∣form'd by Mr. Richard Gas∣soinge one de∣scended from him, an ac∣complished Antiquary in Record-He∣raldrie. Gauthorp in Harwood parish, (in the mid∣way betwixt Leeds and Knaresburgh,) and afterwards was Student of the Law in the Inner Temple in London. Wherein he so profited, that being Knighted, the sixth of King Henry the fourth, he was made Chief Justice of the Kings-bench, November 15. and therein demeaned himself with much integrity, but most eminent for the following passage. It happened that a Tho Eliot in his Chron. out of whom our modern Hi∣storians have transcribed it. servant of Prince Henry (afterwards the fifth English King of that Christian name) was arraigned before this Judge for fellony, whom the Prince then present endeavoured to take away, coming up in such fury, that the beholders be∣lieved he would have stricken the Judge. But he sitting withou moving, according to the Majesty he represented, committed the Prince prisoner to the Kings-bench, there to remain untill the pleasure of the King his Father were farther known. Who, when he heard thereof by some pickthank Courtier, (who probably expected a con∣trary return) gave God thanks for his infinite goodness, who at the same instant had given Him a Judge who could minister, and a Son who could obey justice. I meet in J. Stows Annals pag. 342. Stow with this Marginall note, William Gascoinge was Chief Justice of the Kings-bench, from the sixth of Henry the fourth, till the third of Henry the fifth: and another J. Trussell in the continua∣tion of Daniel pag, 92. Historian maketh King Henry the fifth, in the first of his raign, thus ex∣pressing himself in relation to that Lord Chief Justice, For which act of Justice I shall ever hold him worthy of the place, and my favour, and wish all my Judges to have the like undaunted courage, to punish offenders of what rank soever. Hence our W. Shkespear in his second part of the life of King Henry the fourth. Comedian (fancy will quickly blow up a drop in History into a bubble in Poetry,) hath founded a long scene on the same subject. Give me leave for my love to truth to rectifie these mistakes out of authentick re∣cords. First, Gascoinge was made Judge not in the sixth, but first of King Henry the fourth, Original de ipso anno Bun∣dello 2. rot. 52. on the first of November. Secondly, he died December 17. in the fourteenth of King Henry the fourth, so that in a manner, his sitting on the bench ran parallel to the Kings sitting on the throne; This date of his death is fairly written in his stately Monument in Harwood Church. GUDO de FAIRFAX. A word of his Surname and Family. Fax and Vex are the same, signifying Hair. Hence Mathew Flores Histo∣riarum Anno Gratiae 891. Westminster calleth a Comet (which is stella
rinita) a Vexed Star, and this Family had their Name from Beautifull Bushy Hair. I confess I find inFloes Histo∣rum Ano Gatiae 099. Florilegus, writing of the Holy War, Primum Bellum Christianorum fuit apud Pontem Pharfax fluminis, The first Battle of the Christians was at the Bridge of the River Pharfax, but cannot concur with them who hence derive the Name of this Family. But where ever it began it hath continued at Walton in this County, more then four hundred and fifty years, forFaithfully collected out of evdences, by that Indu∣strious Anti∣quary Roert Dodsworth. Nineteen Generations, Charles a Viscount now living being the Twentieth. But to return to Sir Guiao Fairfax Knight, he was bred in the study of the Common Law, made Serjeant thereof, and ever highly favoured the house of York in those Civil distempers. Hence it was that he assumed a White-rose, bearing it in his Coat of Armes on the shoulder of his Black Lyon, (no difference as some may suppose, but) an evidence of his affection to that Family. Yet was he by King Henry the seventh advanced Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-bench, supplying theSpelmans Glos∣sary verbo Ju∣stitiarius. Intervall betwixt Sir William Hussey and Sir John Fineaux. The certain date of his death is to me unknown. ROGER CHOLMLEY Knight. He is placed in this County with moderate assu∣rance. For his Father (as I am instructed by those of his Family) lived in this Coun∣ty, though branched from Cheshire, and much conversant in London, being Lieutenant of the Tower under King Henry the seventh. By his Will he bequeathed a Legacy to Ro∣ger his Naturall Son, then Student of the Laws, the self same with our Roger, as Pro∣portion of time doth evince. He applyed his studies so effectually, that in the 37. of King Henry the eight in Michaelmas terme, he was made ChiefIdm ibdem. Baron of the Exchequer, and in the sixth of Ed∣ward the sixth Chief Justice of the Kings-bench. In the first of Queen Mary July 27. he, with Sir Edward Mountague, Lord Chief Ju∣stice of the Common Pleas, was committed to theStows Cron. pag. 613. Tower, for drawing up the Testa∣ment of King Edward the sixth, wherein his Sisters were dis-inherited. Yet Sir Ro∣gers activity amounted no higher then to a Complyance and a subscription of the same. He afterwards was enlarged but lost his Judges Place, living some years in a private condition. When William Flower was burnt in Westminster, Sir Hugh being present, (though called byActs & Mon. p. 1577. Master Fox but plaine Master Cholmley,) willed him to recant his Heresy, which I impute rather to his Carnall Pity, then Great Affection to Popery. He built a Free-school of brick at High-gateNordens spe∣culum Brit. pag. 22. about the year 1564. the Pension of the Master being uncertain, and the School in the disposition of six Governours, and I believe he survived not long after, and have some ground for my suspicion that he dyed without Issue. Sir CRISTOPHER WRAY Knight, was born in the spatious Parish of Bedall, the main motive which made his Daughter Frances Countess of Warwick, scatter her Be∣nesactions the thicker in that place. But I have been informed, that his Ancestor by some accident, came out of Cornwell where his Name is right Antient. He was bred in the study of our Municipall Law, and such his proficiency therein, that in the six∣teenth of Queen Elizabeth in Michaelmas Term, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings-bench. He was not like that Judge who feared neither God nor man, but onely one Widow (lest her importunity should weary him,) but he heartily feared God in his Religious Con∣versation. Each man he respected in his due distance off of the Bench, and no man on it to biass his judgement. He was pro tempore, Lord Privy Seal, and sate Chief in the Court, when Secretary Davison was sentenced in the Star Chamber. Sir Christopher collecting the censures of all the Commissioners, concurred to Fine him, but with this Comfortable conclusion, that, as it was in the Queens power to have him punished; so, Her Highness might be prevailed with for mitigating, or remitting of the Fine, and this our Judge may be presumed no ill instrument in the procuring thereof. He bountifully reflected on Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge, which infant Founda∣tion had otherwise been starved at nurse for want of maintenance. We know who saith, * the righteous man leaveth an inheritance to his Childrens Children, and the well thriving of his third Generation, may be an evidence of his well-gotten goods.
This worthy Judge died May the eighth, in the thirty fourth of Queen Elizabeth. States▪ Men. Pardon Reader my post poning, this Topick of States-Men, being necessitated to stay a while for further information. Sir JOHN PUCKERING, Kt. was born at Flamborough head in this County, as I have learned out of the Extant in York-house in the Library of the Lord Fai∣fax. Notes of that industrious and judicious Antiquary Mr. Dod∣worth. He was second Son to his Father, a Gentleman who left him neither plentiful nor penurious estate: his breeding was more beneficial to him than his portion, gaining thereby such skill in the Common Law, that he became Queens-Serjeant, Speaker in the House of Commons, and at last Lord Chancellor of England. How he stood in his judgement in the point of Church-Discipline, plainly appeareth by his following Speech, delivered in the House of Lords, 1588. the Original whereof was courteously communicated unto me. And especially you are commanded by Her Majesty to take heed, that no eare be given, nor time▪ afforded to the wearisome solicitations of those, that commonly be called Puritans, wherewithal the late Parliaments have been exceedingly impor∣tuned; which sort of men, whilest that (in the giddiness of their Spirits) they labour and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do nothing else but disturb the good re∣pose of the Church and Commonwealth: which is as well grounded for the body of Religion it self, and as well guided for the Discipline, as any Realm that prosesseth the Truth: and the same thing is already made good to the world, by many the wri∣tings of Godly and Learned men, neither answered nor answerable by any of these new fangled Refiners. And, as the present case standeth, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits do offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For, albeit the Jesuites do empoison the hearts of her Majesties Subjects, under a pretext of Conscience, to withdraw them from their obedience due to Her Majesty: Yet, do they the same, but closely, and only in privy corners: But these men, do both teach and publish in their printed Books, nd teach in all their Conventicles, sundry o∣pinions, not only dangerous to the well-setled Estate and Policy of the Realm, by putting a Pique between the Clergy and the Laty; But also much derogatory to Her Sared Majesty, and Her Crown, as well by the diminution of her anci∣ent and lawfull Revenues, and by denying her Highness Prerogative and Suprema∣cy, as by offng peril to her Majesties safety in her own Kingdom. In all which things (however in other points they pretend to be at war with the Popish Jesuites) yet by this separation of themselves from the unity of their Fellow-Subjects, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their Prince, they do both joyn and concur with the Jesuites, in opening the door, and preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatned against the Realm. And thus having according to the weaknesse of my best understanding, delivered Her Majesties Royal pleasure and wise direction, I rest there, with humble suit for Her Majesties most gracious pardon in supply of my defects, and recommend you to the Author of all good counsel. He died Anno Domini 1596. caractered by In his Eli∣zabeth, Anno 1596. Mr. Cambden, VIR INTEGER. His e∣state is since descended, (according to the solemn settlement thereof) the male∣issue failing, on Sir Henry Newton, who according to the condition, hath assumed the Surname of Puckering, and I can never be sufficiently thankful to him and his Relations. Sir GEORGE CALVERT, Kt. was born at Kiplin near Richmond in this County, had his education first in Trinity Colledge in Oxford; then beyond the Seas. His abilities commended him first to be Secretary to Robert Cecil, Earl of Sarisbury, Lord Treasurer of England. Afterwards he was made Clerk of the Councel, and at last principal Secretary of State to King James, succeeding Sir Thomas Lakes in that office, Anno 1619.
Conceiving the Duke of Buckingham highly instrumental in his preferment, he pre∣sented him with a Jewel of great value, which the Duke returned him again, not own∣ing any activity in his advancement; whom King James, ex mero motu, reflecting on his ability designed for the place. This place he discharged above five years, until he willingly resigned the same 1624. on this occasion; He freely confessed himself to the King, That he was then become a Roman Catholick, so that he must either be wanting to his Trust, on violate his Con∣solence in discharging his office. This his ingenuity so highly affected King James, that he continued him Privy Councellor all his raign (as appeareth in the Councel-Book) and soon after created him Lord Baltemore of Baltemore in Ireland. During his being Secretary, he had a Patent to him and his Heirs to be Absolutus Do∣minus, & Proprietarius, with the Royalties of a Count Palatine of the Province of Ava∣lon in New-found-Land. A place so named by him in imitation of old Avalon in Somer∣set shire, wherein Glassenbury stands; the first fruits of Christianity in Britain, as the other was in that part of America. Here he built a fair House in Ferry Land, and spent five and twenty thousand pounds in advancing the Plantation thereof. Indeed his publick spirit consulted not his private profit, but the enlargement of Christianity and the Kings Do∣minions. After the death of King James he went twice in person to New found-Land. Here when Mounsier de l'Arade with three Men of War sent from the King of France, had reduced our English Fishermen to great extremity; This Lord with two Ships man∣ned at his own charge, chased away the French-man, relieved the English, and took sixy of the French Prisoners. He removed afterwards to Virginia, to view those parts, and afterwards came into England, and obtained from King Charles (who had as great an esteem of, and affection for him, as King James) a Patent to him and his Heirs for Mary-land on the North of Virginia, with the same Title and Royalties conferred on him, as in Avalon aforesaid, now a hopeful Plantation peopled with eight thousand English souls, which in processe of time may prove more advantagious to our Nation. Being returned into England, he died in London, April 15. 1632. in the 53. year of his age, lying buried in the Chancel of S. Dunstans in the West, leaving his Son the Right Honourable Cecil Calvert, now Lord Baltemore, heir to his Honour, Estate, and Noble Disposition. THOMAS WENTWORTH, Earl of Strafford, Deputy, though Son to WilliamSee the Re∣gister of that St. Dunstan. Wentworth of Wentworth-Woodhouse in this County, Esq (at his Sons birth) afterward Baronet) yet because born in Chancery-Lane, and Christned April 22. Anno 1593. in Saint Dunstans in the West, hath his Character in London. Seamen. ARMIGELL WAAD, born of an ancient Family in York-shire, as I am informed from his Epitaph on his monument at Hampstead in Midlesex: wherein he is termed Hen. 8. & Edw. 6. Regum Secretiori consilio ab epistolis, which I took the boldnesse to interpret (not Secretary, but) Clerk of the Councel. Take the rest as it followeth in his Funeral Inscription. Qui in maximarum Artium disciplinis prudentiaque civili instructissimus, plurima∣rum linguarum callentissimus, legationibus honoratissimis perfunctus, & inter Bri∣tannos Indicarum Americarum explorator primus. Indeed he was the first Englishman that discovered America, and his several voy∣ages are largely described in Mr. Hackluite his Travels. This English COLUMBUS had by two Wives twenty Children, whereof Sir William Waad was the eldest, a very able Gentleman, and Clerk of the Councel to Queen Eli∣zabeth. This Armigel died June 20. 1568. and was buried as is aforesaid. MARTIN FROBISHER, Kt. was born nighStows Chron. pag. 809. Doncaster in this County. I note this the rather, because learned Mr. Carpenter in his Geography recounts him amongst the famous men of Devonshire, (But why should Devon-shire, which hath a flock of Worthies of her own, take a Lamb from another County?) because much conversing therein.
He was from his youth bred up in Navigation, and was the first Englishman that dis∣covered the North way to China and Cathai, whence he brought great store of black soft Stone, supposing it Silver or Gold Ore, but which, upon trial with great expence, prov'd uselesse; yet will no wise man laugh at his mistake, because in such experiments, they shall never hit the mark, who are not content to  it. He was very valiant, but withal harsh and violent (faults which may be dispensed with in one of his profèssion) and our Chronicles loudly resoud his signal service in Eighty Eight, for which he was Knighted. His last service was the defending of Brest∣Haven in Britain, with ten ships, against a far greater power of Spaniards. Here he was shot into the side, the wound not being mortal in it self; But Swords and Gus have not made more mortal wounds, than Probes in the hands of carelesse and skillesse Chi∣rurgeons, as here it came to passe: The Chirurgeon took out only the Bullet, and left the bumbast about it behind, wherewith the sore festered, and the worthy Knight died at Plimoth, Anno 1594. GEORGE CLIFFORD, Lord Clifford, Vescye, &c. Earl of Cumberland, was son to Henry second Earl of that Family, by his second Lady, a person wholly composed of true Honour and Valour, whereof he gave the world a clear and large demonstration. It was resolved by the judicious in that age, the way to humble the Spanish great∣nesse, was not by pinching and pricking him in the Low-Countries, which only empti∣ed his veins of such blood as was quickly re-filled: But the way to make it a Cripple for ever, was by cutting off the Spanish sinews of War, his Money from the West Indies. In order whereunto, this Earl set forth a small Fleet at his own cost, and adventured his own person therein, being the best born Englishman that ever hazarded himselfe in that kind. His Fleet may be said to be bound for no other Harbour but the Port of Honour though touching at the Port of Profit in passage thereunto; I say, touching; whose de∣sign was not to enrich himself, but impoverish the enemy. He was as merciful as vali∣ant, (the best metal bows best) and left impressions of both in all places where he came. Queen Elizabeth Anno 1592. honoured him with the dignity of the Garter. When King James came first out of Scotland to York, he attended him with such an equipage of Followers, for number and habit, that he seemed rather a King than Earl of Cum∣berland. Here happened aStow Chro∣nicle 1 Ja. contest between the Earl and the Lord President of the North, about carrying the Sword before the King in York; which office, upon due search and enquiry, was adjudged to the Earl, as belonging unto him: and whilest Cliffords Tower is standing in York, that Family will never be therein forgotten. His Anagram was as really as litterally true. Georgius Cliffordius Cumberlandius. Doridis regno clarus cum vi flgebis. He died 1605. leaving one Daughter and Heir, the Lady Anne, married to the Earl of Dorset, of whomIn the Be∣nefactors to the publick in . hereafter. Physicians. Sir GEORGE RIPLEY, (whether Knight or Priest, not so soon decided) was un∣doubtedly born at Ripley in this County, though some have wrongfully entituled Surry to his Navity. That York-shire was the place of his birth, will be evidenced by his re∣lation of Kindred, reckoned up byIn his Me∣dulla, towards the end there∣of, to G. Nevil Archbishop of York. himself, viz. 1. . 2. Riple. 3. Madlay. 4. VVilloughby. 5. Burham. 6. VVaterton. 7. Flem∣ming. 8. Talboyes, Families found in York-shire and Lincoln-shire; but, if sought for in Surrey, to be met with at Nonesuch. Secondly, it appeareth by his preferment, being Canon of Bridlington in this County; and to clear all,Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. . 19. In patria Eboracensi, saith my Author.
But Philemon Holland hath not only erroniously misplaced, but (which is worse) op∣probriously miscalled him, in his description of Surrey; In the next Village of Ripley was born G. de Ripley, a ringleader of our Alchimists, and a mystical Impostor; Words not appearing in the Latine Britannia, and therefore Holland herein no Trans∣lator of Cambden, but traducer of Ripley. Leaving this Land, he went over into Italy, and there studied twenty years together in pursuance of the Philosophers Stone, and ound it in the year 1470. as some collect from those his words then written in his Book; Juveni quem diligit anima mea, (spoken by the Spouse. Cant. 3. 4.) so bold is he with Scripture in that kind. An English Gentleman of good credit reported, that in his travels abroad, he saw a Record in the Isle of Malta, which declares, that Sir George Ripley gave yearly to those Knights of Rhodes▪ Theatrum Chem. Brit. pag. 458. One hundred thousand pounds, towards maintaining the war (then on foot) against the Turks. This vast donation makes some suspect this Sir George for a Knight (who by this might have been Eques Auratus) though indeed never more than Sir Priest▪ and Canon of Bridlington. Returning into his native Country, and desiring to repose his old age (no Philosophers Stone to quiet retirement) he was dispensed with by the Pope to leave his Canons place, (as too full of employment) and became a Carmelite-Anchorite at Boston in Lincoln∣shire, where he wrote no fewer than 25. Books, though his Compound of Alchimy car∣rieth away the credit of all the rest. It presenteth the Reader with the twelve gates, leading to the making of the Philosophers Stone, which are thus reckoned up in order, 1. Calcination. 2. Solution. 3. Separation. 4. Conjunction. 5. Putrefaction. 6. Congelation. 7. ibation. 8. Sublimation. 9. Fermentation. 10. Exaltation. 11. Multiplication. 12. Projection. Oh for a Key (saith the Common Reader) to open these Gates, and expound the meaning of these words, which are familiar to the knowing in this mystery. But such who are disaffected thereunto, (what Art hath not enemies?) demand whether these gates be to let in, or let out the Philosophers Stone, seeing Projection the last of all, proves but a Project, producing nothing in effect. We must not forget, how the said Sir George beseecheth all men, wheresoever they shall meet with any of his Experiments written by him, or that go under his name (from the year 1450. to the year 1470.) either to burn them, or afford them no cre∣dit, being written according to his esteem not proofe; and which (upon trial) he after∣wards found false and vaine. For mine own part, I believe his Philosophy truer than his Chimical Divinity; for so may I call his Work, wherein he endeavours to equal in merit for mankind, the com∣passion of the Virgin Mary, with the passion of Christ. He died about the year of our Lord 1492. and some of his Works are since exactly set forth, by my worthy and accomplished Friend Elias Ashmole, Esqire, in his Theatrum Chimicum Britanni∣cum. THOMAS JOHNSON was born in this County, not far from * Hull, bred anSo his near Kinsman and Apothecary living on Snow-hill in∣formed me. Apothecary in London, where he attained to be the best Herbalist of his age in England, making Additions to the Edition of Gerard. A man of such modesty, that knowing so Much, he would own the knowledge of Nothing. The University of Oxford bestowed on him the Honourary degree of Doctor in Physick; and his loyalty engaged him on the Kings side, in our late Civil Warre. When in Basing House a dangerous piece of service was to be done, this Doctor (who publickly pretended not to Valour) undertook and performed it. Yet afterwards he lost his life in the siege of the same House, and was (to my knowledge) generally lamented of those, who were of an opposite judgement. But let us bestow this Epitaph upon him,
Hic Johnsone jaces, sed si mors cederet herbis Arte fugata tua, cederet illa tuis. Here Iohnson lies: could Physick fence deaths dart, Sure death had bin declined by his art. His Death happened Anno Dom. 1644. Witers. ALPHRED of Beverley, born therein (a Town termed Urbs or City by De script. Brit. sect. 2. pag. 187. Bale) or thereabouts, and bred in the University of Cambridge. Hence he returned to his na∣tive place, where he was made Treasurer of the Convent, ence (as some will have it) commonly called Alphredus Thesaurarius: others conceig this his Topical relation too narrow to give him so general a Name, will have him s stiled from being so care∣full a storer up (God send more to succeed him in that Office) of memorable Antiquities. Indeed, with the good Housholder, he brought out of his Treasury things new and old, writing a Chronicle from Brutus to the time of his own death, which happened Anno 1136. GULIELMUS REHIEVAILENSIS, or WILLIAM of RIEVAULX was so named from the place of his Nativity in this County, being otherwise a Monk of Rushford. His Learning was great according to that age, and his genius enclined him most to Hi∣story; whereof he wrote a fair Bale de script Bit. Cent. 2. num. 9. Volumne of the things done in his own age, himself be∣ing an eye witnesse of a great part thereof. For though generally Monks were con∣fined to their Cloisters, more liberty was allowed to such persons whose Pens were publickly employed. And when Monks could not go out to the news, news came home to them: such was their intelligence from Clergy men, who then alone were employed in State Offices. It was no wonder, that the writings of this William did, but had been a miracle if they did not savour of the superstition of the times. He dedicated his Book to Ealread Abbot of Rievaulx, and died Anno Dom. 1146. EALREAD Abbot of Rievaulx lately named, was one eminent in his generati∣on for Piety and Learning. He was most intimate with David King of Scotland, and had the rare felicity to adventure on desperate Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 99. differences betwixt great persons; and yet above humane hope to compleat their agreement. He had Saint Augustines Con∣fessions both by heart, and in his heart; yet generally he is accounted the English Saint Bernard, and wrote very many Books, whereof one, De Virginitate Mariae, and another, De Abusionibus Claustri, shewing twelve abuses generally committed in that kind of life. Yet as Saint 1 Tim 5. 3. Paul honoured widows, that were widows indeed; he had a high esteem for Monks, who were Monks indeed; so addicted to a solitary life, that he refused all Ho∣nours and several Bishopricks proffered unto him. He died in the 57. year of his age, 1166. and after his death attained with many the reputation of a Saint. WALTER DANIEL was Deacon to Ealread aforesaid, and it is pity to part them. Leland saith, that he followed his Abbot Sanctâ Invidiâ, Give me leave to english it, with holy emulation, and they who run in that race of Vertue, neither supplant such who are before them, nor justle those that are even with them, nor hinder those who come behind them. He trod in his Masters foot▪ steps; yet so, that my Author saith, Non modo aequavit sed superavit, writing a Book on the same sub∣ject, De Virginitate Mariae. He flourished Anno 1170. under King Henry the second, and was buried in his own Abby. ROBERT the SCRIBE (but no Pharisee, such his Humility; not Hypocrite, such his Sincerity,) was the fourth Prefect of Canon Regulars at Bridlington in this County. He had his surname from his dexterity in writing, not a little beneficial in that age; In his Life written by himself. Eras∣mus ingeniously confessing, that his Father Gerard got a handsome livelihood thereby. But our Robert in fair and fast writing did reach a Note above others, it being true of him what was said, Nondum lingua suum dextra peregit opus. The Tongue her task hath not yet done, When that the Hand her race hath run. And he may be said to have had the long Hand of short Hand (such the swiftness of his
Pen) though I confesse Brachyography was not then, nor many years after invented. But he, though a quick Scribe, is but a dull one; who is good only at fac simile, to transcribe out of an original, whereas our Robert left many Books of his own making to posterity. He flourished Anno Dom. 1180. and lleth buried before the Doors of the Cloyster of his Convent. PETER of Rippon, was Canon of that Colledge, built antiently therein by Saint Wilfred, purposely omitted by us in our Catalogue of Saints, to expiate our former tediousnesse concerning him in our Church History. Jeoffry Archbishop of York, not on∣ly delighted in, but doted on our Peter. He wrote a Book of the life and miracles of Saint Wilfred. How many suspected persons did prick their credits, who could not thread his Needle. This was a narrow place in his Church, and kind of Purgatory (save that no fire therein) through which chaste Persons might easily passe, whilest the Incontinent did stick therein, beheld generally as a piece of Monkish Legerdemain. I am sorry to hear, that this Collegiate Church (one of the most ancient and famous Churches in the North of England) hath the means and allowance appointed for the repair thereof deteined, and more orry that on the eighth of December, 1660. a vio∣lent wind blew down the great Steeple thereof, which with its fall, bea down the Chancel (the onely place where the people could assemble for Divine Worship) and much shattered and weakened the rest of the Fabrick, and I hope, that His Majesties Letters Patents will meet with such bountiful contributions, as will make convenient Reparation. Our Peter flourished Anno 1190. under King Richard the first. WILLIAM of NEWBOROUGH, was born at Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. numro 53. Bridlington in this County, but na∣med of Newborough, not far off, in which Monastery he became a Canon Regular. He also was called Petit or Little, from his low stature; in him the observation was verifi∣ed, that little men (in whom their heat is most contracted) are soon angry, flying so fiercely on the memory of Geffrey of Monmouth, taxing his British Chronicle, as a conti∣nud fiction, translated by him indeed; but whence? from his own Brain, to his own Pen, by his own Invention. Yea, he denieth that there was ever a King Arthur, and in effect overthroweth all the Welsh History. But learned Leland conceives this Wil∣liam Little greatly guilty in his ill language, which to any Author was uncivil, to a Bi∣shop unreverent, to a dead Bishop uncharitable. Some resolve all his passion on a point of meer revenge, heartily offended, because David Prince of Wales Godwin in the Bishops of St. Asaph. denied him to succeed G. Monmouth in the See of St. Asaph, and therefore fell he so soul on the whose Welsh Nation. Sure I am, that this angry William so censorious of G. Monmouth his false∣hoods, hath most foul slips of his own Pen, as when he affirmeth, That in the place of the slaughter of the English, nigh Battaile in Sussex, if peradventure it be wet with any small showre, presently the ground thereabouts sweateth forth Cited and confuted by Cambden in Sussex. very blood, though in∣deed it be no more, than what is daily seen in Rutland after any sudden rain, where the ground floweth with a reddish moisture. He flourished Anno 1200. under King John. ROGER HOVEDEN was born in this County, of the Illustrious Family of the Hove∣dens, saith my Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. Num. 55. Author, bred first in the study of the Civil, then of the Canon-Law, and at last, being servant to King Henry the second, he became a most accomplished Courtier. He is the chiefest (if not sole) Lay-Historian of his age, who being neither Priest nor Monk wrote a Chronicle of England, beginning where Bede ended, and con∣tinuing the same until the fourth of King John. When King Edward the first layed claim to the Crown of Scotland, he caused the Chronicles of ths Roger to be diligently searched, and carefully kept, many Authentical passages therein tending to his present advantage. This Roger flourished in the year of our Lord, 1204. JOHN of HALIFAX commonly called De SACRO BOSCO, was born in that Town so famous for Cloathing, bred first in Oxford, then in Paris, being the prime Mathematician of his age. All Students of Astronomy enter into that Art through the Door of his Book, De phaerâ. He lived much beloved, died more lamented, and was buried with a solemn Funeral, on the publick Bale out of Leland. Cent. 6. Num. 93. cost of the University of Paris, Anno 1256. ROBERTUS PERSCRUTATOR, or ROBERT the SEARCHER, was born Pits de Ang. script. pag. 419. in
this County, bred a Dominican, great Mathematician and Philosopher. He got the sirname of Searcher, because he was in the constant quest and pursuit of the Mysteries of Nature. A thing very commendable, if the matters we seek for, and means we seek with be warrantable. Yea Solomon himself on the same account might be entituled Searcher, who by his own confession, Eccles. 7. 25. Applyed his heart to know, and to Search, and to seek out wisdome, and the reason of things. But curiosity is a kernel of the forbidden fruit, which still sticketh in the throat of a natural man, sometimes to the danger of his choaking: it is heavily laid to the charge of our Robert, that he did light his Candle from the Devils Torch to seek after such se∣crets as he did desire, witnesse his Work of Ceremonial Magick, which a conscientious Christian would send the same way with the Ephesian conjuring Books, and make them fuel for the fire. However in that age he obtained the reputation of a great Scholar, flourishing under King Edward the second, 1326. THOMAS CASTLEFORD, born in this Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Num. 100. County, was bred a Benedictine in Pm∣fraict, whereof he wrote a History, from ASK a Saxon first owner thereof, to the Lacies from whom that large Lordship descended to the Earls of Lancaster. I could wish some able Pen in Pomfraict would continue this Chronicle to our time, and give us the particulars of the late memorable siege, that though the Castle be demo∣lished, the Fame thereof may remain. Leland freely confesseth that he learnt more then he looked for by reading Castlefords History, promising to give a larger account thereof, in a Book he intended to write of Civil History, and which I suspect he never set forth, prevented by death. Our Castleford flourished about the year of our Lord, 1326. JOHN GOWER was born (saith Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 7. Num. 23. Leland) at Stitenham (in the North Riding in Bul∣more▪ Wapentake) of a Knightly Family. He was bred in London a Student of the Laws, till prizing his pleasure above his profit, he quitted Pleading to follow Poetry. He was the first refiner of our English Tongue, effecting much, but endeavouring more there∣in. Thus he who sees the Whelp of a Bear but half lickt, will commend it for a come∣ly Creature, in comparison of what it was when first brought forth. Indeed Gower left our English Tongue very bad, but ound it very very bad. Bale makes him Equitem auratm & Poetam Laureatum, proving both from his Or∣naments on his monumental Statue in Saint Mary Overies, Southwark. Yet he appear∣eth there neither laureated nor hederated Poet (except the leaves of the Bayes and y be withered to nothing, since the erection of the Tomb) but only rosated, having a Chaplet of four Roses about his head. Another Stow in his Survey of Lon∣don in Bride VVard with∣out. Author unknighteth him, allow∣ing him only a plain Esquire, though in my apprehension the Colar of S.S.S. about his neck speak him to be more. Besides (with submission to better judgements) that Colar hath rather a Civil than Military relation, proper to persons in places of Judi∣cature, which makes me guess this Gower some Judge in his old age, well consisting with his original education. He was before Chaucer, as born and flourishing before him (yea by some accoun∣ted his Master;) yet was he after Chaucer, as surviving him two years, living to be stark blind, and so more properly termed our English Homer. Many the Books he wrote, whereof three most remarkable, viz. Speculum Meditantis, in French, Confes∣sio Amantis, in English, Vox Clamantis, in Latine. His death happened, 1402. JOHN MARRE, (by Bale called MARREY, and by Trithemius MARRO) was born at Pits de Ang. script in An. 1407. Marre, a village in this County, three miles West from Doncaster, where he was brought up in Learning. Hence he went to Oxford, where (saith Leland) the Univer∣sity bestowed much honour upon him for his excellent Learning. He was by Order a Carmelite, and in one respect it was well for his Memory that he was so, which maketh De script. Brit. Cent. 7. Num. 32▪ John Bal (who generally falleth foul on all Fryers) to have some civility for him, as being once himself of the same Order, allowing him subtilly learned in all secular Philosophy. But what do I instance in home-bred Testimonies? Know Reader, that in the Character of our own Country Writers, I prize an Inch of Forraign above an Ell of English Commendation, and Outlandish Writers, Trithe∣mius,
Sixtus Senensis, Petrus Lucius, &c. give great Encomiums of his Ability; though I confesse it is chiefly on this account, because he wrote against the Opinions of J. Wick∣liffe. He died on the eighteenth of Màrch. 1407. and was buried in the Convent of Carmelites in Doncaster. THOMAS GASCOIGNE eldest son to Richard (the younger brother unto Sir Willi∣am Gascoigne Lord Chief Justice) was born at Huntfleet in this County, bred in Baliol Colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor in Divinity, and wasBian Twin Aniq. Oxon. in hoc Anno. Commissioner of that University Anno Dom. 1434. He was well acquainted with the Maids of Ho∣nour, I mean Humane Arts and Sciences, which conducted him first to the presence, then to the favour of Divinity, the Queen. He was a great Hieronymist, perfectly acquain∣ted with all the Writings of that Learned Father, and in expression of his gratitude for the good he had gotten by reading his Woks, he collected out of many Authors, and wrote the life of Saint Hierom. He made also a Book called Dictionarium Theolo∣gicum, very useful to, and therefore much esteemed by the Divines in that age. He was seven and fifty years oldBle de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 12. Anno 1460. and how long he survived afterwards is un∣known. JOHN HARDING was born (saith myBile de script. Bit. Cent. 8. Num. 30. Author) in the Northern parts, and I have some cause to believe him this Countrey-man. He was an Esquire of anci∣ent Parentage, and bred from his Youth in Military Employment. First under Robert Umfrevil, Governour of Roxborough Castle, and did good service against the Scots. Then he followed the Standard of King Edward the fourth, adhering faithfully unto him in his deepest distresse. But the Master-piece of his service was his adventuring into Scotland, not with∣out the manifest hazard of his Life; where he so cunningly demeaned himselfe, that he found there, and fetched thence out of their Records, many Original Let∣ters, which he presented to King Edward the fourth. Out of these he colle∣cted an History of the several Solemn Submissions publickly made, and Sacred Oaths of Fealty, openly taken from the time of King Athelstane, by the Kings of SCOTLAND, to the Kings of ENGLAND for the Crown of SCOTLAND, although the Scotch Historians stickle with might and maine, that such Homage was performed onely for the County of Cumberland, and some parcels of Land their Kings had in ENGLAND south of TWEED. He wrote also a Chronicle of our English Kings, from BRUTUS to King EDWARD the fourth, and that in English Verse; and in my Judgement he had drank as hearty a draught of Helicon as any in his age. He was living 1461. then very aged, and I believe died soon after. HENRY PARKER was bred from his infancy in the Carmelite Convent at Don∣caster, afterwards Doctor of Divinity inPits de script. Aug. Anno. 1470. Cambridge. Thence he returned to Donca∣ster, and well it had been with him, if he had staid there still, and not gone up to Lon∣don to preach at Pauls-Crosse, where the subject of his Sermon was to prove, That Christs poverty was the pattern of humane perfection; and that men professing eminent sanctity, should conform to his precedent, Going on foot, feeding on Barley-bread, wea∣ring seamless-woven-coats, having no houses of their own, &c. He drove this nail so far, that he touched the quick, and the wealthy Clergy winched thereat. His Sermon of∣fended much as preached, more as published, granting the Copy thereof to any that would transcribe it. For this the Bishop of London put him in prison, which Parker patiently endured (in hope, perchance, of a rescue from his Order) till being informed, that the Pope effectually appeared on the party of the Prelates, to procure his liberty, he was content at Pauls-Cross toBle de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 29. recant. Not as some have took the word, to say o∣ver the same again (in which sense the Cuckow, of all Birds, is properly called the Re∣canter) but he unsaid, with (at least seeming) sorrow, what he had said before. How∣ever fom this time we may date the decay of the Carmelites credit in England: who discountenanced by the Pope, never afterwards recruited themselves to their former number and honour, but moulted their feathers till King Henry the eight cut off their very wings, and body too, at the Dissolution. This Parker flourished under King Edward the fourth, Anno 1470.
Since the Reformation. Sir FRANCIS BIGOT Knight, was born aud well landed in thisBale in his Book called Scriptores no∣stri temporis. County. Bale giveth him this testimony, that he was Evangelicae veritatis amator. Otherwise I must confess my self posed with his intricate disposition. For he wrote a book against the Clergy Of IMPROPRIATIONS Had it been against the Clergy of Appropriations, I could have guessed it to have pro∣ved Tithes due to the Pastors of their respective Parishes. Whereas now having not seen (nor seen any that have seen) his book, I cannot conjecture his judgment. As his book, so the manner of his death seems a riddle unto me, being (though a Pro∣testant) slain amongst the Northern Rebells, 1537. But here Bale helpeth us not a little, affirming him found amongst them against his will. And indeed those Rebells, to countenancé their Treason, violently detained some Loyall Persons in their Camp; and the Blind sword, having Aciem not Oculum, kill'd friend and foe in fury without distin∣ction. WILFRID HOLME was born in this County, of Gentile parentage,Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 9. Num. 2. Veritati Dei tunc revelatae Auscultans, and Pitz taxeth him, that his Pen was too compliant to plea∣sure K. Henry the eight. The truth is this, he lived in these parts in that juncture of time when the two Northern Rebellions happened, the one in Lincoln, the other in Yorkshire; and when the Popish party gave it out, that the Reformation would ruine Church and State, levell all dignities and degrees; Wilfrid to Confute the Priests truthless Reports, and the Peoples causless Jealousies, stated the Controversie, Truely, Clearly and Wittily, in the manner of a Dialogue. He survived not many months after the setting forth of this book Anno 1536. THOMAS ROBERSON was born in thisPitz. de Ang. script. in Anno 1544. County, and being Doctor of Divinity in Oxford was one of the best Grammarians for Greek and Latine in that age. He had an admirable faculty in teaching of youth; for every Boy can teach a Man, whereas he must be a Man who can teach a Boy. It is easie to inform them who are able to under∣stand, but it must be a Master piece of industry and discretion, to descend to the capacity of Children. He wrote notes upon the Grammar of Lilly, and besides others, one book, De NominibusIdem ibidem. Hetoroclitis, and another De verbis Defectivis, so that by his pains the hardest parts of Grammar are made the easiest, and the most anomalous, redu∣ced to the greatest regularity by his endeavours. What Robert Robinson, (under whose name Quae genus in the Grammar is Printed) was to this Thomas Roberson, I have no leisure to enquire, and leave it to those to whom it is more proper, suspecting they may be the same person; and tht Pitzaeus our Author, living mostly beyond the seas, might be mistaken in the name: However, he flourished Anno Domini 1544. WILLIAM HUGH wasBale de script. B it. Cent. 9. Num. 72. born in this County, and bred in Corpus Christi Colledge in Oxford, where he attained to great Eminency in Learning. In his time the Consciences of many tender Parents were troubled about the Finall Estate of Infants dying unbaptized, as posting from the Wombe to the Winding sheet, in such speed, that the Sacrament could not be fastened upon them. To pacify persons herein concerned, this William wrote and Dedicated a book to Q. Katherine Parr, entituled, The troubled mans Medicine. He died of the breaking of a Vain, Anno Dom. 1549. ROGER ASCHAM was born at Kirby-weik in this County, and bred in Saint Johns∣Colledge in Cambridge, under Doctor Medcalfe, that good Governour, who whet-stone∣like, though dull in himself, by his encouragement, set an edge on most excellent wits in that foundation. Indeed Ascham came to Cambridge just at the dawning of learning, and staid therein till the bright-day thereof, his own endeavours contributing much light thereunto. He was Oratour and Greek-Professour in the University, (places of some sympathy, which have often met in the same person,) and in the beginning of the raign of Queen Mary, within three days, wrote letters toEdw. Grant in the life of Ascham. fourty seven severall Princes, whereof the meanest was a Cardinal. He travailed into Germany, and there contracted familiarity with John Sturmius and other learned men, and after his return was a kind
of teacher to the Lady Elizabeth, to whom (after she was Queen) he became her Se∣cretary for her Latine letters. In a word, he was an Honest man and a good Shooter; Archery (whereof he wrote a book called ) being his onely exercise in his youth, which in his old age he ex∣changed for a worse pastime, neither so healthfull for his body, nor profitable for his purse, I mean Cock-fighting, and thereby (being neither greedy to get, nor carefull to keep money) he muchCamdens Eliz. Anno 1568. impaired his estate. He had a facile and fluent Latine-style, (not like those, who, counting obscurity to be elegancy, weed out all the hard words they meet in Authors,) witness his Epistles, which some say are the only Latine-ones extant of any English-man, and if so, the more the pity. What loads have we of letters from forraign Pens, as if no Author were com∣pleat without those necessary appurtenances? whilst surely our English-men write, (though not so many,) as good as any other Nation. In a word, his  is accounted a good book for Young-men, his School-master for Old-men, his Epistles for all men, set out after his death, which happened Anno Dom. 1568. December 30. in the 53. year of his Age, and he was buried in Saint Sepulchers in London. Sir HENRY SAVILL Knight, was born at Bradley, in the Parish of Hallifax in this County, of antient and worshipfull extraction. He was bred in Oxford, and at last be∣came Warden of Merton-colledge and also Provost of Eaton. Thus this skilfull Gardiner had at the same time a Nurcery of young Plants, and an Orchard of grown Trees, both flourishing under his carefull inspection. This worthy Knight carefully collected the best Copies of Saint Chrysostome, and imployed Learned men to transcribe and make Annotations on them, which done, he fairly set it forth, on his own cost, in a most beautifull Edition; a burden which he under∣went without stooping under it, though the weight thereof would have broken the back of an ordinary person. But the Papists at Paris had their Emissaries in England, who surreptitiously procured this Knights learned Labours, and sent them over weekly by the Post into France, Schedatim sheet by sheet, as here they passed the Press. Then Fronto Duceus (a French Cardinall as I take it) caused them to be Printed there with implicite faith and blind obedience, letter for letter as he received them out of Eng∣land, onely joyning thereunto a Latine translation and some other inconsiderable Ad∣ditions. Thus two Editions of Saint Chrysostome did together run a race in the world, which should get the speed of the other in publique sale and acceptance. Sir Henry his Edition started first by the advantage of some Months. But the Parisian Edition came up close to it, and advantaged with the Latine Translation (though dearer of pice) out-stript it in quickness of Sale, but of late the Savilian Chrysostome hath much mend∣ed its pace, so that very few are left of the whole Impression. Sir Henry left one onely Daughter richly married to Sir William Sidley of Kent Baro∣net. He dyed at Eaton, where he lyeth buried under a Monument with this Inscription Hic jacent Ossa & Cineres Henrici Savill sub spe certa resurrectionis, natus apud Bradley juxta Halifax in Comitatu Ebor, Anno Domini 1549. ultimo die mensis Novembris, Obiit in Collegio Etonensi Anno Domini 1621. xix die mensis Februarii. It must not be forgotten, that he was a most excellent Mathematician, witness his learned Lectures on Euclid. Yet once casually happening into the Company of Master Briggs of Cambridge, upon a learned encounter betwixt them, Master Briggs demon∣strated a truth, besides (if not against) the judgment of Sir Henry, wherewith that worthy Knight was so highly affected, that he chose him one of his Mathematick Pro∣fessors in Oxford, wherein he founded two, allowing a liberall salary unto them. THOMAS TAYLOR was born at Richmond in this County, where his father (a bountifull entertainer of people in distress) was Recorder of the Town. He was after∣wards bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, and chose a Fellow thereof. This Timothy, grave when green, entred very young but not raw, into the Ministry at 21. years of age, and continued in the same at Reading and London for the space of thirty five years. His Sermons were generally well studied, and he was wont to say, That oftimes he satisfied himself the least, when he best pleased his people, not taking such pains in his preaching. His flock was firmly founded and well bottomed on Catechi∣stacall
Divinity. It being observed that his Auditors stuck close to their principles in this Age▪ wherein so many have reeled into damnable Errors. He was a great giver of Alms, but without a Trumpet, and most strict in his Conversation. Zeal for the House of God may be said in some sort to have Consumed him; Dying in the fifty six year of his age, Anno Domini 1632. comfortably avowing at his death that we serve such a Master, Who covereth many imperfctions, and giveth much wages for a little work. NATHANIELL SHUTE was born atSo I am in∣formed by Mr. Christopher Shute, minister of Saint Ve∣ in Lon∣don, heir to his fathers ver∣tu. Gigleswick in this County, Christopher Shute his father being the painfull Vicar thereof. He was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge. A most excellent schollar and solid preacher: Though, nothing of his is extant in Print, save a Sermon call'd Carona Charitatis, preached at the funerall of Master Fshbourn. But the goodness of the Land of Canaan may as well be guessed from one great bunch of grapes, as if the spies had brought whole vineyards along with them. Indeed he was a pro∣foud and profitable preacher for many years together at St. Mildred Poultrey in London. One in the University being demanded his judgement of an excellent sermon in Saint Maries, returned, that It was an uncomfortable sermon, leaving no hope of imitation for such as should succeed him. In this sense alone, I must allow Master Nathaniel Shute an uncomfortable preacher (though otherwise a true Barnabas and Son of consolation) pos∣sessing such as shall follow him in time, with a dispair to equall him in eminency. He died Anno Domini 1638. when our English ske was clouded all over, and set to rain, but before any drops of war fell down amongst us. Doctor Holdesworth, most excel∣lently preached his Funerall Sermon, taking for his text, We have this our treasure in earthly vessels. JOSIAH SHUTE brother to Nathaniel aforesaid, was bred in Trinity colledge in Cambridge, and became afterwards Minister of Saint Mary Woolnoh in London, and was, (Reader I doe say and will maintain it,) the most Pretious Jewell that was ever shewn or seen in Lumbardstreet; All Ministers are Gods Husband mn, but some of them can onely plough in soft ground, whose Shares and Coultures will turn Edge in a hard point of Divinity. No ground came amiss to Master Shute, whether his Text did lead him to controversiall or positive Divinity; having a strain, without straining for it, of na∣tive Eloquence: he spake that which others studied for. He was for many years, and that most justly, highly, esteem'd of his Parish; till the beginning of our late Civil Warrs som began to neglect him, distasting wholesome meat well dressed by him merely because their mouths were out of tast, by that generall distemper, which in his time was but an Ague, afterwards turn'd to a feaver, and since is turn'd to a Frensy in our Nation. I insist hereon the rather for the comfort of such godly Ministers, who now suffer in the same nature wherein Mr. Shute did before; indeed, no servant of God can simply and directly comfort himself in the sufferings of others, (as which hath something of envy therein,) yet may he do it consequentially in this respect, because, thereby he appre∣hends his own condition herein consistent with Gods love and his own salvation, see∣ing other precious Saints tast with him of the same affliction, as many godly Ministers doe now a days, whose sickles are now hung up as useless, and neglected, though before these Civil Warrs they reaped the most in Gods harvest. Master Shute dyed Anno Do∣mini 1640. and was buried with great solemnity in his own Church, Master Udall preaching his Funerall Sermon: since his death his excellent Sermons are set forth on some part of Genesis, and pity it is there is no more extant of his worthy indeavours. It must not be forgotten, how retiring a little before his death into the Country, some of his Parishioners came to visit him, whom he chearfully entertained with this expression. I have taught you, my dear flock, for above thirty years, how to live, and now I will shew you in a very short time how to dye. He was as good as his word herein, for within an Hour he in the presence of some of them was peaceably dissolved. Be it also known, that besides these two brothers Nathaniel and Josiah, fixed in the City of London, there were three more, bred and brought up in the Ministry, viz. Ro∣bert preacher at Lyn, Thomas Minister for a good time in Chester, and Timothy lately (if not still alive) a preacher in Exeter.
All great (though not equall) Lights, are set up in fair Candlesticks, I mean, places of eminency, and conveniently distanced one from another, for the better dispersing of their Light; and good Housewives tell me, Old Candles are the best for spending. Happy their Father who had his Quiver full with five such Sons, he need not be ashamed to see his Enemies in the Gate. It is hard to say, whether he was more happy in his sons, or they in so good a Father, and a wary man will crave time to decide the doubt, untill the like instance doth return in England. GEORGE SANDYS youngest son of Edwin Sandys Arch-bishop of York, was born at Bishops-Thorp in this County, he proved a most accomplished gentleman, and an obser∣vant Travailer, who went as far as the Sepulchre at Jerusalem, and hath spared other mens pains in going thither, by bringing the Holy Land home to them; so lively is his description thereof, with his passage thither, and return thence. He most elegantly translated Ovid his Metamorphosis into English verse, so that as the soul of Aristotle was said to have transmigrated into Thomas Aquinas, (because ren∣dring his sence so naturally,) Ovid's genius may seem to have passed into Master Sandys. He was a servant, but no slave to his subject, well knowing that a Translatour is a person in free Custody; Custody, being bound to give the true sense of the Author he translated; Free, left at liberty to cloath it in his own expression. Nor can that in any degree be applyed to Master Sandys, which one rather bitterly then falsly chargeth on an Author, whose name I leave to the Readers conjecture. We know thou dost well as a Translatour, But where things require, a genius and a fire, Not kindled before by others pains, as often thou hast wanted brains. Indeed some men are better Nurses, then Mothers of a Poem, good onely to feed and foster the Fancies of others, whereas Master Sandys was altogether as dexterous at Inventing as Translating, and his own Poems as spritefull, vigorous, and masculine. He lived to be a very aged man, whom I saw in the Savoy Anno 1641. having a youthfull soul in a decayed body, and I believe he dyed soon after. JOHN SALTMARSH was extracted from a right antient (but decayed) family in this County, and I am informed that Sir Thomas Metham his kinsman, bountifully con∣tributed to his education, he was bred in Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge. Returning into this his Native Country, was very great with Sir John Hotham the Elder. He was one of a fine and active fancy, no contemptible Poet, and a good Preacher, as by some of his profitable Printed Sermons doth appear. Be it charitably imputed to the infor∣mation of his Judgment and Conscience, that of a zealous observer he became a vio∣lent oppresser of Bishops and Ceremonies. He wrote a book against my Sermon of Reformation, taxing me for many points of Popery therein. I defended my self in a book called Truth maintained, and challenged him to an answer, who appeared in the field no more, rendring In the begin∣ning of his book against Mr. Gattacre. this reason thereof, that he would not shoot his arrows against a dead mark, being informed that I was dead at Exeter. I have no cause to be angry with fame (but rather to thank her) for so good a Lye. May I make this true use of that false report, to dye daily. See how Providence hath crossed it, the dead [reported] man is May 20. 1661. at the writing hereof. still living, the then living man dead; and seeing I survive to goe over his grave, I will tread the more gently on the mold thereof, using that civility on him which I received from him. He died in or about Windsor (as he was Riding to and fro in the Parliament Army) of a Burning Feaver, venting on his death-bed strange expressions, apprehended (by some of his party) as extaticall, yea, propheticall raptures, whilst others accounted them (no wonder if outrages in the City, when the enemy hath possessed the Castle commanding it) to the acuteness of his disease which had seized his intellectualls. His death happened about the year 1650.
JEREMIAH WHITACRE was born at Wakefield in this County, bred Master of Arts in Sidney-colledge, and after became School-master of Okeham, then Minister of Stretton in Rand. He was chosen to be one of the Members of the late Assembly, wherein he behaved himself with great moderation; at last he was Preacher at St. Mary Magdalens Bermonsey, well discharging his duty, being a solid Divine, and a man made up of Piety to God, pity to poor men, and Patience in himself. He had much use of the last, being visited with many, and most acute diseases. I see Gods love or hatred cannot be conjectured, much less concluded, from outward accidents, this mercifull man meeting with merciless afflictions. I have sometimes wondered with my self, why Satan the Magazeen of Malice, (who needeth no man to teach him mischief,) having Job in his power, did not put him on the rack of the Stone, Gout, Collick or Strangury, as in the height, most exquisite tor∣ments, but onely be-ulcered him on his Skin, and outside of his body. And (under correction to better judgments,) I conceive this might be some cause thereof. Being to spare his life, the Devill durst not inflict on him these mortall mala∣dyes, for fear to exceed his commission, who possibly, for all his cunning, might mistake in the exact proportioning of the pain to Jobs ability to bear it, and therefore was forced to confine his malice to externall pain, dolefull but not deadly in its own nature. Sure I am, this good Jeremiah was tormented with Gout, Stone, and one ulcer in his bladder, another in his kidneys, all which he endured with admirable and exem∣plary patience, though God of his goodness grant that (if it may stand with his will) no cause be given that so sad a Copy be transcribed. Thus God, for reasons best known unto himself, sent many and the most cruell Bayliffes to arrest him to pay his debt to nature, though he always was ready willingly to tender the same, at their single summons. His liberality knew no bottome but an empty purse, so bountifull he was to all in want. He was buried on the 6. of June, Anno 1654. in his own Parish in Southwarke, much lamented: Master Simon Ash preaching his Funerall Sermon, to which the Reader is referred for his further satisfaction. I understand some sermons are extant of his preaching, Let me but adde this Distick and I have done. Whites ambo, Whitehead, Whitgift, Whitakerus uterque Vulnera Romano quanta dedere papae? Romish Exile Writers. JOHN YOUNG was born in this County. His life appeareth to me, patched up of unsuiting peices, as delivered by severall Authors. A Judicious Par. Her. Skelet. Cap. 2. lib. M &c. Antiquary, seldome mistaken, will have him a Monke of Ramsey, therein confounding him with his Name∣sake many years more antient. J. Pi de Ang. Script. pag. 770. An other will have him bred Doctor of Divinity in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, though that Foundation (suppose him admitted the first day thereof,) affordeth not Seniority enough to write Doctor, before the raign of Queen Mary, except we understand him bred in some of the Hostles, afterwards united there∣unto. So that I rather concurre herein with the forenamed Antiquary, that he was Fel∣low of Saint Johns-colledge in that University. It is agreed, that at the first, he was at the least a Parcell-Protestant, translating into English the Book of Arch bishop Cranmer, of the Sacrament. But afterwards, he came off with a witness, being a Zealous Papist, and great Antagonist of Mart. Bucer, and indeed as able a Disputant as any of his Party. He was Vice-Chancellour of Cambridge, Anno 1554. Master of Pembroke hall, Kings∣Professor of Divinity, and Rector of Land-beach nigh Cambridge, but lost all his prefer∣ment in the first of Queen Elizabeth. Surely more then Ordinary Obstinacy appeared in him, because not onely deprived but imprisoned. And in my judgment, more probably surprised before he went, then after his return from forraign parts. He died under re∣straint in England, 1579. JOHN MUSH was born in this Ut prius pag. 810. County, bred first in the English-colledge at Doway, and then ran his course of Philosophy in their Colledge at Rome. Afterwards being made Priest, he was sent over into England, to gaine People to his own perswasion, which
he did without and within the Prison for 20. years together, but at last he got his li∣berty. In his time the Romish Ship in England did spring a dangerous Leak, almost to the sinking thereof, in the Schisme betwixt the Priests and the Jesuits. Mush appeared very active and happy in the stopping thereof, and was by the English Popish Clergy sent to Rome to compose the controversie, behaving himself very wisely in that service. Re∣turning into his own Country he was for fourteen years together assistant to the English Arch▪ Priest, demeaning himself commendably therein; he wrote many books, and one whose title made me the more to mind it, Vitam & Martyrium D. Margaretae Clithoroae. Now whether this D. be for Domina or Diva, for Lady or Saint, or both, I know not. I take her for some Gentlewoman in the North, which for some practises in the maintenance of her own Religion, was obnoxious to, and felt the severity of our Laws. This Mush was living in these parts, Anno 1612. Benefactors to the Publick. THOMAS SCOT was born at Roheram, no obscure market in this County; wa∣ving his paternall name, he took that of Roheram, from the place of his Nativity. This I observe the rather, because he was (according to my exactest enquiry) the last Clergy∣man of note with such an assumed Surname, which Custome began now to grow out of fashion, and Clergy-men (like other men) to be called by the name of their fathers. He was first Fellow of Kings-colledge, afterwards Master of Pembroke-hall in Cam∣bridge, and Chancellour of that University; here he built on his proper cost (saving something help'd by the Scholars) the fair gate of the School, with fair walks on each side, and a Library on the East thereof. Many have mistaken this, for the perfor∣mance of King Richard the third, meerly, because his Crest the Boar is set up therein. Whereas the truth is that Rotheram having felt the sharp Tuskes of that Boar, (when imprisoned by the aforesaid King, for resigning the Great Seal of England to Queen Elizabeth, the relict of King Edward the fourth,) advanced his Armes thereon, meerly to engratiate himself. He went thorough many Church preferments, being successive∣ly Provost of Beverly, Bishop of Rochester, Lincoln, and lastly Arch-bishop of York; nor less was was his share in Civil honour, first, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and last, Lord Chancellour of England. Many were his Benefactions to the Publique, of which none more remarkable then his founding five Fellowships in Lincoln colledge in Oxford. He deceased in the 76. year of his age at Cawood of the plague Anno Domini 1500. JOHN ALCOCKE was born at Beverly in this County, where he built a Chappell, and founded a Chantry for his parents. He was bred a Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, and at last became Bishop of Ely, his prudence appeared in that he was preferred Lord Chancellour of England by King Henry the seventh, a Prince of an excellent palate to tast mens Abilities, and a Dunce was no dish for his diet. His piety is praised by the pen of J. Bale, which (though generally bitter) drops nothing but honey on Alcocks Memo∣ry, commending him for a most mortified man; Given to Learning and Piety from his Child-hood, growing from grace to grace, so that in his age none in England was higher for holiness. He turned the old Nunnery of Saint Radigund, into a new Colledge called Jesus in Cambridge: surely had Malcolm King of Scots, first founder of that Nun∣nery, survived to see this alteration, it would have rejoyced his heart to behold Leud∣ness and Laziness turned out, for Industry and Piety to be put in their place. This Alcock died October 1. 1500. And had Saintship gone as much by merit as favour, he deserved one as well as his name-sake Saint John his predecessor in that See. Since the Reformation. The extent of this large Province and the distance of my Habitation from it have disabled me to express my desires suitable to the merit thereof in this Topick of Mo∣dern Benefactors, which I must leave to the Topographers thereof hereafter to uspply
my defaults with their diligence. But let me forget my self when I doe not remember the worthy & charitable Master....... Harrison inhabitant of the Populous Town of Leeds, so famous for the Cloath made therein. Methinks, I hear that great Town accosting him in the Language of the Children of the Prophets to 2 King. 6. 1▪ Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us. The Church could scarce hold half the inhabi∣tants, till this worthy gentleman provided them another. So that now the men of Leeds may say with Gen. 26. 22. Isaack, Rehoboth, God hath made room for us. He accepted of no assistance in the building of that fair Fabrick, but what he fully paid for, so that he may be owned the sole Founder thereof. But all his Charity could not secure him from sequestration in our Troublesome Times. All I will adde is this, as he hath built a House for God, may (God in Scripture Exod. 1. 21. Phrase) build a House for him, I mean, make him fruit∣full and fortunate in his posterity. Memorable Persons. PAULINUS DE LEEDS born in this County where there be three Towns of that name in one Wapentake. It is uncertain in which of these he was born, and the matter is of no great concernment. One so free from Simony and far from buying a Bishoprick that when a Bishoprick bought him, he refused to accept it. For when King Henry the second chose him Bishop of Carlisle and promised to increase the Revenue of that Church with three hundred mark yearly rent, besides the grant Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops out of R. Hoe len. of two Church livings and two Mannors near to Carlisle, on the condition that this Paulinus would accept the place, all this would not work him to imbrace so wealthy an offer. The reasons of his refusall are rendred by no Author, but must be presumed very weighty to over∣poise such rich proffers, on which account let none envy his name a Room in this my Catalogue. He flourished about the year of our Lord 1186. WILLIAM DE LA POLE born at Ravensrode in this County, was for wealth and skill in Merchandize inferiour to none in England, he made his abode at KingstonCam. Brit. in Yorkshire. upon Hull, and was the first Mayor of that Town. When K. Edward the third was at Antwrp, and much necessitated for money (no shame for a Prince always in War, to be sometimes in want) this William lent him many thousand pounds of gold. In recompence whereof the King made him his Valect (equivalent to what afterward was called Gentleman of the Bed-chamber,) and Lord Sed Quaere, because he ap∣pears not in Sir H. Spel∣mans Cata∣logue. Chief-Baron of his Exchequer, with many other honours. Amongst which this was one, that he should be reputed a Banneret, not that he was really made one, seeing the flourishing of a Banner over his head, in the field, before or after a fight, was a ceremony essentiall thereunto; but he had the same precedency conferred upon him. I find not the exact date of his death, but conjecture it to be about the year 1350. Lord Mayor. Name Father Place Company Time 1 William Eastfield William Eastfield Tickell Mercer 1429 2 John Ward Richard Ward Howdon Grocer 1484 3 William White William White Tickhill Draper 1489 4 John Rudstone Robert Rudstone Hatton Draper 1528 5 Ralph Dodmer Henry Dodmer Pickering leigh Mercer 1529 6 William Roch John Roch Wixley Draper 1540 7 Richard Dobbes Robert Dobbes Baitby Skinner 1551 8 William Hewet Edmund Hewet Wales Cloth-worker 1559 9 John Hart Ralph Hart Sproston Court Grocer 1589 10 Richard Saltonstall Gilbert Saltonstall Hallyfax Skinner 1597 11 William Cravon William Cravon Apletreewick Merchant-Tayler 1610
The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the twelfth year of King Henry the sixth. John Arch-bishop of York, Commissioners. Richard Earl of Salisbury.   Edmund Darel, Knight, Knights for the Shire. Robert Hopton, Knight. Knights for the Shire. Tho. Sayvell, chiv. Rob. Umbtred, chiv. Hen. Bonnflete, chiv. Radul. Graystock, chi. Edm. Hastings, chiv. Radul. Bulmer, chiv. Will. Plumton, chiv. Ioh. Sempest, chiv. Ioh. Melton, chiv. Edm. Talbot, chiv. Ioh. Saltvain, chiv. Will. Gascoigne, chiv. Ant. de Sancto Quin∣tino, arm. Ioh. Constable de Hal∣sham, arm. Will. Inhidby de Ri∣play Hen. Vavasor de He∣siwood, arm. Tho. Metham de Grymston, arm. Ioh. Perchay de Rit∣ton, arm. Radul. Pudsay de Cra∣ven arm. Tho. Saltmarsh de Saltmarsh Tho. Nuthill de Ri∣ston, ar. Tho. Constable de Cotfosse, ar. Tho. Darcy de Newsted ar. Nich. Ashton de He∣ton, ar. Alex. Lonnde de Southcave, ar. Will. Ardern de Bel∣thorp, ar. Rich. Redmain de Harwod, ar. Will. Moncheux de Barnstone, ar. Ioh. Routh de Routh, arm. Tho. Gray de Barton, arm. Radul. Stanfeld, ar. Rog. Tempest de Broughton, ar. Tho. Clarell de Ste∣ton senioris, ar. Will. Birton de Snape∣thorp, ar. Ioh. Manston de Man∣ston, ar. Tho. Trollop de Care∣thorp, ar. Will. Hastings de Roncheby, ar. Ioh. Conyers de Cleve∣land, ar. Rob. Lambton de Nunthorp, ar. Ioh. Banaster de Wake∣feld, ar. Rob. Pylkinton de Ayrenden, ar. Ioh. Midleton de Lonesdale, ar. Tho. Radecliffe de Bradley, ar. Tho. Redneyne de Lonesdale, ar. Will. Thorton de Lo∣nesdale, ar. Tho. Manncell de Bur∣ford, ar. Iac. Metcalfe de Wor∣sleydale, ar. Rob. Hynkersell de Pa∣rochia de Roderham Gent. Ioh. Hutton de Thrysk, Yeom. Will. de Stokdale de Richmondshire, Yeo. Rob. Saty de Rich. mondshire, Yeom. Bayn. Tennand de Craven, Yeom. Tho. Goll. de Grysthe∣wayt, Yeom. Rog. Tenand. de Long∣strath, Yeom. Tho. Swelting d Newhall in parochia de Spoford, Yeom. See the Wor∣thyes General of England cap. 14. Here is a very slender return of Gentry, (hardly worth the inserting and) bearing no proportion to the extent and Populousness of the Province. The Reader may remem∣ber, how the main design driven on in this Enquiry, was, (whatever was pretended) to detect such as favoured the Title of the House of York. Now the Gentry of this County were generally addicted to that Party, which made them so remiss in this mat∣ter, slightly slubbering it over, doing something for shew, and nothing to purpose. And this being the last Catalogue which occurreth in this kind, we will here take Our farewell of the English Gentry. The worst I wish our English Gentry is, that by Gods blessing on their thrift they may seasonably out-grow the sad impressions which our Civil Wars have left in their estates, in some to the shaking of their Contenument. I could wish also that for the future, they would be more carefull in the Education of their children, to bring them up in Learning and Religion; for I suspect, that the observation of forraigners, hath some smart truth therein, that English-men, by making their children Gentlemen, before they are men, cause they are so seldome Wise-men. Indeed Learning (whatever is fondly fancied to the contrary) is no more a burden to the bearer thereof, then it is cumbersome for one to carry his head on his own shoulders. And seeing Gentry alone is no Patrimony (which as the plain Proverb saith, sent to Market will not buy a Bushell of Wheat,) it is good even for those of the best birth to acquire some Liberall quality, which in case of casualty, may serve them for a safe second, and
besteed them toward the attaining of a Livelyhood. I could name the Scotch Nobleman, who having lost his Land and Honour, through the default of his father, in the raign of King James, maintained himself compleatly by the practice of Physick and Chimistry, much in my mind to his commendation. And it is reported to the praise of the Scotch Nobility, that antiently they all were very dextrous at Surgery, and particularly it is re∣corded of Buchanan re∣rum Scotiarum lib. 13. sol. 131. James the fourth King of Scotland, quod vulnera scientissimè tractavit, that he was most skilfull in handling of wounds. It is good also for those of great Descent to acquaint themselves with Labour, not knowing what evil may be on the Earth, and the Romans (all know) did chuse their wise men, not by their white but hard hands, whence the name of Callidi took it's denomination. But above all Religion is the greatest ornament, without which all Emblemes of An∣cestry are but Putamina Nobilitatis, The husks and empty shells of Nobility. Yea, when a fair Coat of Armes belong to one of foul manners, it is so far from being a Credit un∣to him, that such Armes give the Lye to the bearer thereof, as Tacitly upbraiding him for being unworthy of his own extraction. Sheriffs. HEN. II. Anno 1 Bartraneus de Bullemer for 9 years. Anno 10 RECOR∣DA MANCA to the end of this Kings raign. RICH. I. Anno 1 Randul. de Glanvil Anno 2 Osbert. de Longo Campo, & Ioh. Marest Anno 3 Osbert. de Longo Campo Anno 4 Hugo. Burdulf, & Hugo de Bobi Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Galfr. Episc. Ebor. & Roger. de Batwent, for 7 years. JOH. REX. Anno 1 Galfr. filius Petri & Ia. de Petem Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. de Stutevill, & Will. Breto Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Galfr. filius Will. de Percy & Rad. de Normanvite Anno 6 Rob. de Lasei Constabular. Cestr. & Rob. Walusis, for 6 years. Anno 12 Gilb. filius Remfr. & Hen. de Rademan (sive Radanor) for 4 years. Anno 16 Rob. de Percy & Hen. de Middleton Anno 17 Petr. filius Herberti & Rich. de Hussebene HEN. III. Anno 1 Anno 2 Galfr. de Heonel, & Simon. de Hales Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Galf. de Nevill Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Galfr. de Nevill, & Simon. de Hall Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Simon. de Hall Anno 9 Eustacius de Ludham Anno 10 dem. Anno 11 Rob. de Rokefeld Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 dem. Anno 14 Will. de Stutevill, & Phil. de Assell Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Petr. de Rixall Anno 18 Brianus de Insula Anno 19 Ioh. filius Galfridi Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Brianus filius Alani, & Roger. de Stapleton Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Briand. filius Alani, & Nich. de Molis, & Will. de Middleton Anno 24 Nich. de Molis Anno 25 Iem. Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Hen. de Bada, for 4 years. Anno 31 Hen. Batthen Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Will. Daker Anno 34 Rob. de Creping Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Will. Daker Anno 37 Rob. de Creping Anno 38 Will. de Horsenden Anno 39 Will. de Latyme Anno 40 Will. de Latymer, for 4 years. Anno 44 Will. de Latymer, & Ioh. de Oketon Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Pet. de Percy Anno 47 Idem. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Will. de Baszall Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Idem. Anno 52 Will. de Latymer Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Rog. Estanneus, & Hen. de Kirby Anno 56 Idem.
EDW. I. Anno 1 Rog. Estraneus Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Alex. de Kirkton, for 4 years. Anno 7 Ranul. de Dacre Anno 8 Idem & Iohan▪ de la De∣girmes Anno 9 Ioh. de Lichgremes, for 5 years. Anno 14 ervasius de Clifton, for 6 years. Anno 20 Iohan. de Meates Anno 21 Iohan. Byrun for 7 years. Anno 28 Rob. Ougle Anno 29 Simon. de Kimne, for 4 years. Anno 33 Will. de Honks Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Idem. EDW. II. Anno 1 Ioh. de Crepping Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Iohan. de Gaas & Iohan. de Eure Anno 4 Gerar. Salvein & Iohan. Eure Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gera. Salvein Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Ioh. Malebis & Nich. de Meyrill Anno 9 Simon. Ward Anno 10 Nich. Grey & Simon. Ward Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Nullus titulus Comit. in hoc Rotulo Anno 14 Anno 15 Simon. Ward Anno 16 Anno 17 Roger. de Somervile Anno 18 Idem. EDW. III. Anno 1 Roger. de Somervile Anno 2 Iohan. Darcy Anno 3 Hen. Fawcomberge Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rad. de Bulmer Anno 6 Anno 7 Pet. de salso Maresco Anno 8 Pet. de Middleton Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Petr. de salso Maresco Anno 11 Rad. de Hastingly & Tho. de Rokeby Anno 12 Rad. de Hastinges Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Ioh. de Elauds Anno 16 Ioh. Fawcombergh Anno 17 Tho. de Rokeby, for 7. years. Anno 24 Gerar. Salvaine Anno 25 Will. de Plumpton Anno 26 Pet. de Nuttelle Anno 27 Milo. de Stapleton Anno 28 Pet. Nuttelle Anno 29 Milo. Stapleton, for 5 years. Anno 34 Tho. de Musgrave Anno 35 Marmad. Constable Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Tho. de Musgrave Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Marmad Constable Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Iohan. Chamon & Will. Acton Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Ioh. Bigod Anno 46 Rob. de Roos Anno 47 Will. Acton Anno 48 Ioh. Bygod Anno 49 Will. Percehay Anno 50 Will. de Melton Anno 51 Rad. de Hastinges Edward II. 9. SIMON WARD.] The Male-line of his Antient family expired in Sir Christopher Ward, Standard-bearer to K. Henry the eighth, at Bolloign. He lived at Grindal, (though Mulwish he lived at) leaving three daughters, married into the respected families of Strickland, Musgrave, and Osborn. Edward III. 17 THOMAS DE ROKEBY.] Nothing can be written too much, in the praise of this worthy Knight, who was twice 1351. and 1355. Lord Justice of Ireland. He came over thether, when the damna∣ble custome (so is it called in the old Statut. 12. Hen. 4. cap. 6. Statutes of Ireland) of Coigne and Livory, was pub∣liquely practised. This was a custome begun in the time of King Edward the second, by Maurice Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond, whereby the Commander in Chief (and others pretending his power) extorted from people, Horse-meat, Mans-meat, and money at pleasure, without any ticket, or other satisfaction. A thing so destructive to that Country, that it is thus described in an antient discourse of the decay of Ireland, (the Authors zeal against it transporting him into the marches of prophaneness,) that it was The words are cited by Sir John Davis in his discove∣ry of Ireland, pag. 30. invented in hell, where if it had been used and practised, it had long since destroyed the Kingdome of Beel-zebub, as tending to the making of division. Sir Thomas endeavoured to the utmost of his power to extirpate this practice, and effected it in some measure, famous for this saying, which he left in Ireland behind him, Annales Hi∣bern. at the end of Camdens Brit. Anno 1356. That he would eat in wooden dishes, but would pay for his meat gold and silver.
Sheriffs. Names Place Armes RICH. II.     Anno     1 Io. Constable de Huilsham   Quarterly, Gules, and Vairee a Bnd Or. 2 Rob. de Nevill de Horby   Gules, a Saltire Argent. 3 Ioh. Savill   Arg. on a Bend Sab. 3 Owles of the first. 4 Rad. Hastings, mil.   Argent, a Maunch Sable. 5 Will. de Erghom     6 Ioh. Savill ut prius   7 Gerard. fleet     8 Rob. Constable ut prius   9 Idem. ut prius   10 Rob. de Hilton   Arg. 2 Brs Azure, over all a Flowre de Luce Or. 11 Io Savill ut prius   12 Ioh. Goddard     13 Ia. Pickerings   Ermin, a Lion Rampant Azure, Crowned Or. 14 Will. Melton   Aza Cross pattonce voided Ar. 15 Rad. de Eure   Quarterly, Or and G. on a Bend Sab. 3 Escalops Arg. 16 Ioh. Upeden, mil.   Ermin, on a Cheif Azure, 3 Lions Or. 17 Ia. de Pikering, m. ut prius   18 Rob. Constable ut prius   19 Rad de Eure ut prius   20 Rob. de Nevill ut prius   21 lac. Pickering ut prius   22 Ioh. Upeden ut prius   HEN. IV.     Anno     1 Ioh. Constable, mil. ut prius   2 Tho. Bromflet, mil. Will. Dronsfield, m.   Sab. a Bend issuant 6 flowre de Luces, viz. 3 on each side Or. 3 Ioh. Savill ut prius   4 Rich. Redman   Gul. 3 Cussions Erm. Buttoned and Tasselled Or. 5 Idem. ut prius   6 Will. Dronsfield, m.     7 Ioh. Ebton, mil.     8 Tho. Rokeby, mil.   Arg. a Chever. tw'xt 3 Rooks S. [Bea k't & Legd Az. 9 Wil. de Harringtō m.   Argent, a Fret Sable. 10 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius   11 Edw. Sandesord, m.   Per Chev. Sab. and Ermine, 2 Boars-heads in Cheif Cooped Or. 12 Tho. Rokeby, mil. ut prius   HEN. V.     Anno     1 Will. Harrington, m. ut prius   2 Tho. Bromsset, mil. ut prius   3 Rich. Redman, mil. ut prius   4 Edw. Hastinges, mil. ut prius   5 Rob. Hilton, mil. ut prius   6 Ioh. Bigod, mil.     7 Tho, Bromflet, mil. ut prius   8 Halv. Maulever, m. Allerton Sable, 3 Hounds Cursant in Pale Ag. 9 Will. Harrington, m. ut prius   HEN. VI.     Anno     1 Will. Harrington, m. ut prius   2 Rob. Hilton, mil. ut prius   3 Ioh. Langton, mil.     4 Rih. Hastinges, m. ut prius   5 Will, Ryther, mil.   Azure, 3 Cressents Or. 6 Rob. Hilton, mil. ut prius   7 Will. Harrington, m. ut prius   8 Ioh. Clorevaux, m.     9 Will. Rither, m. ut prius   10 Rich. Pickering, m. ut prius   11 Hen. Bromfleet, mil. ut prius   12 Rich Hastinges, m. ut prius   13 Will. Ryther, mil. ut prius   14 Will. Tyriwhit, mil.   Gules, 3 Pewets Or. 15 Ioh. Constable, mi. ut prius   16 Rob. Constable, m. ut prius   17 Will. Ryther, mil. ut prius   18 Ioh. Tempest, mil.   Arg. a Bend betwixt 6 Martlets Sable. 19 Rob. Wateton, mil   Barrie of 6 Ermine and Gul. 3 Cressents Sable. 20 Will Gascoign, mil. Gauthorp Arg. on a Pale S. a Lucies-head Erected Or. 21 Tho. Metham, mil.   Quarterly, Az. and Arg. on the first a flower de luce Or. 2 Edw, Talbott, mil. Bashall Argent, 3 Lions Rampant Pur∣pure Or. 23 Will. Eure, mil. ut prius   24 Ia. Strangways, mil. Ormsby Sab. 2 Lions Passant Arg. Paly, Gules. 25 Rob. Oughtrede, m.   Or, on a Crosse Flurt G. 4 Mart∣lets of the field. 26 Will. Plumpton, m. Plumpton Azure, on 5 Fufils in fess Or,  many Scallops G 27 Io. Conyers, mil. *     28 Iac. Pickering, mil. ut prius * Azure a Maunch Or. 9 Rob. Oughtrede, m. ut prius   30 Rad. Bygod, mil. ut prius   31 Iac. Strangways, m. ut prius   32 Ioh. Milton, jun. m. ut prius   33 Ioh. Savill, mil. ut prius   34 Tho. Harrington, m. ut prius   35 Ioh. Hotham, mil.   Or, on a Bend Sable, 3 Muets Argent. 36 Rad. Bygod, mil. ut prius   37 Ioh. Tempest, mil. ut prius   38 Tho. Metham, mil. ut prius   EDW. IV.     Anno     1 Ioh. Savill, mil. ut prius   2 Rob. Constable, m. ut prius   3 Idem. ut prius   4 Ioh. Constable, mi. ut prius   5 Edw. Hastings, mil. ut prius   6 Ric. Fitzwilliams, m.   Agent and Gules. 7 Iac. Harrington, m. ut prius   8 Ioh. Conyers, mil. ut prius   9 Iac. Strangways, m. ut prius   10 Hen. Vaulvasor, mil.   O, a Fess Dancettee Sable. 11 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius   12 Rad. Ashton, mil.     13 Idm. ut prius   14 Walt. Grffith, mil.     15 Ioh Conyers, mil. ut prius   16 Ia. Harrington, mil. ut prius   17 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius   18 Will. Ryther, mil. ut prius   19 Rob. Constable, m. ut prius   20 Hugo. Hastinges, m ut prius   21 Marm. Constable, m. ut prius   22 Rad. Bygod, mil. ut prius   RICH. III.     Anno     1 Will. Eure, mil. ut prius   2 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius   3 Tho. Markindale     HEN. VII.     Anno     1 Ioh. Savyll, mil. ut prius   2 Rob. Ryther, mil. ut prius   3 Ioh. Nevill, mill. ut prius   4 Marm. Constable, m. ut prius   5 Hen. Wentworth, m Woodhouse . a . twixt 3 Leopards∣heads Or. 6 Tho. Wortley, mil.   Argent, a Bend with 3 Bazants betwixt 6 Martlets Gules. 7 Hen. Wentworth, m. ut prius   8 Ia. Strangways, mil. ut prius   9 Marm. Constable, m. ut prius  
10 Ioh. Nvil, mil. ut prius   1 Will. Gscoign, mil. ut prius   12 Ioh. , mil. ut prius   13 Will. Conyers, mil. ut prius   14 Ioh. Hotham, mil. ut prius   15 Idem. ut prius   16 Walt. Griffith, mil. ut prius   17 Tho. Worthley ut prius   18 Will. Conyers, mil. ut prius   19 Rad. Ryther, mil. ut prius   20 Io Cutts, m. (sive Carr)   Let the name first be agreed on. 21 Rad. Eure, mil. ut prius   22 Io Norton, mil. ut prius   23 Idem. ut prius   24 Io. Strangwaies, mi. ut prius   HEN. VIII.     Anno     1 Mar. Constable, m. ut prius   2 Rad. Evers, ml. ut prius   3 Io. Constable, mil. ut prius   4 Io. Everingham, m. Wadsley G. a Lion Ramp. Varry, a label with 3 points Or. 5 Will. Percy, mil.     6 Io. Norton, mil. ut prius See our Notes. 7 Io. Carre, mil.   Gules, on a Cheveron Argent, 3 Mullets L. 8 Rich. Tempest. mil. ut prius   9 Will. Bulmer, mil.   G. a Lion Ramp. Or, billittee S 10 Io. Nevill, mil. ut prius   11 Pe. Vavasor, mil. ut prius   12 Th. , m. ut prius   13 Will. Maleverer, m. ut prius   14 Hen. Clifford, mil.   Checky Or, and Az. a Fess G. 15 Io. Nevill, mil. ut prius   16 Io. Constable de Holdernes, mil. ut prius   17 Iac. , ar.   Argent. 3 Calves Sable. 18 Will. Middleton, m.     19 Io. Nevill, mil. ut prius   20 Io. Constable, mil. ut prius   21 Rad. Ellerker, sen. m. Elleker Or a Fess betwixt three water∣bougets Or. 22 Io. Strangwaies, m. ut prius   23 Nich. Fairfax, mil.   Arg. 3 Bars Gemelles G. over all a Lion Ramp. S. 24 Mar. Constable, m. ut prius   25 Io. Constable, mil. ut prius   6 Will. Fairfax, mil. ut prius   27 Geo. Darcy, mil.   Azu. 3 Cinque-foles betwixt 9  croslets Arg. 8 Br. Hastings, mil. ut prius   29 Hen. Savill, mil. ut prius   30 Ia. Strangwaies, m. ut prius   1 Will. Fairfax, mil. ut prius   32 Rob. Nevill, mil. ut prius   33 Hen. Savill, mil, ut prius   34 Tho. Tempest, mil. ut prius   35 Ioh. Dawney, mil. Cowicke Arg. on a Bend couised Sab. 3 Annulets of the First. 36 N ch. Fairfax, mil. ut prius   37 Chri. Danby, mil.   Arg. 3 Cheverons Bracy S. on a Cheif of the second, 3 Mullets of the first. 38 Io. Tempest, mil. ut prius   EDW. VI.     Ano     1 Rih. Cholmeley, m. Whitby Gul. 2 Helmets in Chief Arg. in Base a Garbe Or. 2 Will. Vavasor, mil. ut prius   3 Will. Calverley, m. Calverley   4 Leon. , m. Aketon   5 Tho. , mil.     6 Th. , m. ut prius   PHIL. & MAR.     Ano     M. 1 Tho. Waterton, m. ut prius   1, 2 Ing Clifford, mil. ut prius   2, 3 Chri. Metcalf, mil. t prius   3, 4 Rich. Cholmlev, m. ut prius   4, 5 Rob. Constable, m. ut prius   5, 6 Rad. Ellerker, mil. ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Ioh. Vaughan, ar. Sutton Az. on a mullet Arg. a Cressent Sable. 2 Ioh. Nevill, mil. ut prius   3 Nich. Fairfax, mil. ut prius   4 Geo. Bowes, mil. Stretham Erm. 3 Bows Bent G. 5 Will. Vavasor, mil ut prius   6 Will. Ingleby, mil. Ripley Sable, an Estoile Argent. 7 Tho. Gargrave, mil. Nosthall Lozengie Arg. and Sable, on a Bend of the first, 3 Cressents of the second. 8 Ioh. Constable, mil. ut prius   9 Hen. Savyll, ar. ut prius   10 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius   11 Tho. Gargrave, mil. ut prius   12 Chri. Hilliard, ar.   Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 mul∣lets Or. 13 Tho. Fairfax, ar. ut prius   14 Ioh. Dawney, ar. ut prius   15 Marm. Constable, m. ut prius   16 Will. Bellasis, mil. Newborogh Arg. a Cheveron Gu. betwixt 3 flower de luces Az. 17 Tho. Danby, mil. ut prius   18 Tho. Boynton, ar. Barmstone Or. a Fess between 3 Cressents Gules. 19 Will. Fairfax, ar. ut prius   20 Cl. Wondsworth, ar. Kirklington   21 Rich. Goodrich, ar. Ribton Arg. on a Fess G. twixt 2 Lions pas. Gard. S. a flour de luce of the first, between 2 Cressents O. Arg. a Lion Rampant Sable. 22 Rad. Burcher, ar.     23 Rob. Stapleton, mi.     24 Tho. Wentworth, m. ut prius   25 Got. Gargrave, mil. ut prius   26 Ioh. Hotham, mil. ut prius   27 Bri. Stapleton, ar. ut prius   28 Hen. Constable, m. ut prius   29 Rob. Aske   Or, 3 Barralets Azure. 30 Rich. Maleverer ut prius   31 Io. Dawney, mil. ut prius   32 Phil. Constable, ar. ut prius   33 Rich. Goodrick, ar. ut prius   34 Will. Mallery Ripley Or, a Lion Ramp. queve forchee G. collard Ar. 35 Rad. Eure, ar. pri∣mogen. Domini Eure ut prius   36 Fran. Vaughan, ar. ut prius   37 Chri. Hilliard, ar. ut prius   38 Fran. Boynton, ar. ut prius   39 Tho. Lassells, ar.   Sable, a Cross Flurt Or. 40 Marm. Gimston, ar.   Arg. on a Fess Sable, 3 mullets of 6 points Or. 41 Rob. Swift, ar.* Doncaster   42 Fran. Clifford, ar. ut prius *Or, a Cheveron Varry twixt 3 Roebucks coursant proper. 43 Will Wentworth, ar. ut prius   44 Tho. Strickland, ar.     45 Hen. Bellasis, mil. ut pri   JAC. REX.     Anno     1 Hen. Bellasis, mil. ut prius   2 Rich. Gargrave, m. ut prius   3 Will Banburgh, m▪ Howson Arg. a Pheon, on a Cheife Sab. a Lion Passant of the first. 4 Hen. Griffeth, mil. ut prius   5 Tim. Hutton, mil. Mask   6 Hug. Bethell, mil. Alne Ar. a Cheveron between 3 Boars∣heads  S. 7 Fran. Hildsley, mil.     8 Tho. Dawney, mil. ut prius   9 Hen. Slingby, mil.   See our Notes. 10 Chri. Hilliard, mil. ut prius   11 Geo. Savill, m. & bar. ut prius   12 Io. Armitage, ar. Kerkles Az. a Lions-head Erased between 3 Croslets Or. 13 Edw. Stanhop, mil.   Quarterly Ermine and Gules. 14 Mith. Warton, m. Beverly Or, on a Cheveron Az a Malet betwixt 2 Pheons of the first. 15 Rob. Swift, m. ut prius   16 Will. Alford, mil. Bilton Gules, 6 Pears and a Cheif Or. 17 Arth. Ingram, m.   Erm. on a Fess Gu. 3 Escallops Or. 18 Tho. Odwer, m. & b.     19 Rich. Tempest, mil. ut prius   20 Guid. Palmes, mil. Lindley G. 3 flour de luces Arg. a Cheif Varry. 21 Hen. Ienkins, mil.     22 Rich. Cholmeley, m. ut prius  
CAR. REX.     Anno     1 Tho. Wentworth,  & . ut prius   2 Tho. Norcliff, mil. Manythorp Azure 5 Mascles in Cross Or, a Cheif Erm. 3 Tho. Fairfax, mil. ut prius   4 Math. Boynton, mil. & bar. ut prius   5 Art. Ingram, jun. m. ut prius   6 Io. Gibson, mil.     7 Tho. Laton, mil. Lat n A. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cross. Crosles Fetchee Sable. 8 Arth. Robinson, m. Newby   9 Mar. Wyvell, mil. & bar. Custable Burton G 3 Cheverons braced, Varry a Cheif Or. 10 Ioh Hotham, m & b. ut prius   11 Will. Pennyman, b. Maske G. a▪ Cheveron Ermin bewixt 3 Spear-heads Ag. 12 Ioh. Ramsden, mil Byram Ar. on a Cheu. betwixt 3 flower de luces S. asmany Rames▪ heads cooped of the first. Henry IV. 8 THOMAS ROKEBY, Mil.] I may call him Sir Thomas junior, in distinction from an Elder (probably his Ancestor) of his Name, of whom in the 17. of King Edward the third. This Sir Thomas in this year of his Sherivalty, acquitted himself Loyall and Valiant, against Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolfe, who returning out of Scotland with considera∣ble Forces, began a War against the King, both which, Sir Thomas at Bareham-more in this County overcame and took Prisoners. A service the more remarkable, because performed by the sole assistance of this Shire, and quenching the fire in the first spark, he presented the King with a Cheap, Suddain, and Seasonable Victory. Henry V. 8 HALVATHEUS MAULEVER, Mil.] Or Mal levorer, in Latine Malus Leporarius, or the Bad Hare-unter. A Gentleman of this County, being to let slip a brace of Grey-hounds, to run for a great wager, (Tra∣dition is the Author) so held them in the Swinge, that they were more likely to strangle themselves then kill the Hare; whereupon this Surname was fixed on his family. I doubt not but many of this extraction are since as Dexterous in the Criticismes of hunting as any Nmrod whatsoever. Henry VI. 11 HENRY BROMFLEET, Miles.] In the next year, he was sent with other Embassadors both of the Clergy and Layety, to the Councill of Basill, and after his return, was by the King Created Lord Vescy in the right of his Mother Anastatia, Daughter and Heir to William Atton Lord Vescy. Mr.Brit.  Trk∣sh re. Camden observeth. this Passage inserted in his Pattent, unusual in that age. Volumus & vos, & Haerdes vestros Masculos, de corpore vestro legitimè Exeuntes, Barones de Vescy . Now though hereby the Barony of Vescy was intailed onely on his Heirs Male, yet was the Kings Favour more extensive then his Patent in this Particular. For this Hen∣ry leaving no Male-iss, but Margaret his Sole Daughter and Heir, married to John Lord Clifford, (father to Henry first Earl of Cumberland of that Sur-name;) She notwith∣standing the Premises, derived the Barony of Vescy into that Family, which at this day they enjoy. 22 EDMOND TALBOT, Mil.] This family of Talbots is (though unrelated to the house of Shrewbury,) of right an∣tient extraction, seated in this Country ever since the time of King Henry the second. As for this Edmond Talbot our present Sheriff, (who dyed in the first of . Edward the fourth,) he was father to Sir Thomas Talbot, one very zealous for the house of York, and a servant to King Richard the third, who bestowed an Ańnuity of 40▪ pounds by the year, on him and his heirs for his good service, as by the following Patent will appear. Richardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae & Franciae & Dom. Hiberniae. Omnibus ad quos prae∣sentes literae pervenerint salutem: sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali ac pro bono & gra∣tuito servitio quod dilectus serviens noster Thomas Talbot Miles in aptur a magni ad∣versarii
nostri Henrici nuper (de facto sed non de jure) Regis Angliae nobis ac bon Memo∣riae Regi Edwardi quarto (fratri nostro) defuncto impendit, & in futurum fideliter impen∣det; dedimus & Concedimus eidem Thomae, & heredibus suis Masculis quandam Annuita∣tem, sive annualem reditum quadraginta libraram, Habendum, & percipiendum annuatim eidem Thomae & heredibus suis de-exitibus perficuis & reventionibus Comitatus Palatini nostri Lancastriae in Com. Lanc. per manus Receptoris ibidem pro tempore existente ad Fe∣stum Sancti Michaelis Arch-angeli, aliquo statuto actu sive Ordinatione in contrarium edi∣tis sive provisis in aliquo non Obstante. In cujus rei testimonium has literas fieri fecimus Pa∣tentes Dat. apud Ebor. 2do. Aug. Anno regni 2do. A branch of these Talbots are removed into Lancashire, and from those in Yorkshire Colonel Thomas Talbot is descended. Edward IV. 10 HEN. VAVASOR, Mil.] It is observed of this family, that they never married an Heir, or buried their Wives. The place of their habitation is called Hassell-wood, from wood, which there is not wanting, though stone be far more plentifull, there being a quarry within that Mannor, out of which the stones were taken which built the Cathedrall and Saint Maries Abby in York, the Monasteries of Holden-selby and Beverly, with Thornton-colledge in Lincoln∣shire, and many others. So pleasant also the prospect of the said Hassel-wood, that the Cathedralls of York and Lincoln, being more then 60. miles asunder may thence be discovered. Hnry VIII. 2 RADULPHUS EURE, Alias EVERS, Mil.] He was afterwards by the above named King, Created a Baron and Lord Warden of the Marshes towards Scotland. He gave frequent demonstration (as our Chronicles do testify) both of his Fidelity and Valour, in receiving many smart Incursions from, and return∣ing as many deep Impressions on the Scots. There is a Lord Evers at this day, doubtless a Remoter Descendant from him, but in what distance and degree it is to me unknown. 5 WILLIAM PERCY, Mil.] I recommend the following Passage to the Readers choicest observation, which I find in Camdens Brit. in Yorkshire, More beneath, hard by the River [Rhidals] side standeth Riton, an antient Possession of the antient family of the Percy-hays, commonly called Percys. I will not be over confident, but have just cause to believe this our Sheriffe was of that Family. And if so, he gave for his Armes, Partie per fess, Argent and Gules, a Lion Rampant, having Will. Percy-hay (Sheriff in the last of Edw. the third) for his Ancestor. 23 NICHOLAS FAIRFAX, Mil.] They took their name of Fairfax, à Pulchro Capillitio, from the fair hair, either bright in colour or comely for the plenty thereof, their Motto in alusion to their Name is Fare, fac, say doe, such the sympathy (it seems) betwixt their tongues and hearts. This Sir Nicholas Fairfax mindeth me of his Name-sake and Kins-man Sir Nicholas Fairfax of Bulling∣brooke Knight of the Rhodes, in the raign of Edward the fourth. Jacomo Bosio in hisfol. 578. Italian History of Saint John of Jerusalem, saith, that Sir Nicho∣las Fairfax was sent out of Rhodes, when it was in great distress, to Candia, for relief of Men and Provisions, which he did so well perform, as the Town held out for some time longer, and he gives him this Character in his own Language, Cavilero Nicholo Fairfax Inglich homo multo spiritoso è prudento. Queen Mary. 3 CHRISTOPHER METCALFE, Mil.] He attended on the Judges at York, attended on with three hundred Horsemen, all of his own name and kindred, well mounted and suitably attired. The Roman Fabii, the
most populous tribe in that City, could hardly have made so fair an appearance, in so much that Master Camden gives the Metcalfes this character, Camdens Brit. in Yorkshire. Quae numerosissima totius Angliae familia his temporibus censetur. Which at this time, viz. Anno 1607. is counted the most numerous family of England. Here I forbear the mentioning of another, which perchance might vie numbers with them, lest casually I minister matter of contest. But this Sir Christopher is also memorable for stocking the river Yower in this Coun∣ty, hard by his house, withIdem ibidem. Crevishes, (which he brought out of the South) where they thrive both in plenty and bigness. For although Omnia non omnis terra, nec unda feret. All lands doe not bring, Nor all waters every thing. Yet most places are like trees which bear no fruit, not because they are barren, but are not grafted, so that dumbe nature seemeth in some sort to make signes to Art for her assistance. If some Gentleman in our parts, will by way of ingenuous retaliation, make proof to plant a Colonie of such Northern Fishes, as we want in our Southern Rivers, no doubt he would meet with suitable success. Queen Elizabeth. 4 GEORGE BOWES, Mil.] He had a great Estate in this County, and greater in the Bishoprick of Durham. A Man of Metall, indeed, and it had been never a whit the worse, if the quickness thereof, had been a little more allayed in him. This was he who some seven years after, viz. Anno 1569. was besieged by the Northern Rebells in Bernards Castle, and streightned for Pro∣vision,Camdens Eliz Anno 1569. yielded the same on Condition they might depart with their Armour. After the suppression of the Rebells, their Execution was committed to his Care, wherein he was severe unto Cruelty. For many Well-meaning people were ingaged (and others drawn in) into that Rising, who may truely be termed Loyall Traytors, with those two hundred2 Sam. 15. 11. men, who went after Absolon in their simplicity, and knew not any thing, solicited for the Queens service. These Sir George hung up by scoars, (by the Office of his Marshallship,) and had hung more, if Mr. Bernard Gilpin, had not begged their lives by his importunate intercession. 23 ROBERT STAPLETON, Mil.] He was descended from Sir Miles Stapleton, one of the first founders of the Garter, and Sheri in the 29. of Edward the third. He met the Judges with sevenscore men in suit∣able liveries, and was (saith mySir Jo. Har∣rington in the Arch-bishops of York. Author) in those days for a man well spoken, properly seen in languages, a comely and goodly personage, had scant an equall, (except Sir Philip Sidney) no superior in England. He married one of the Co- heirs of Sir Henry She∣rington, by whom he had a numerous posterity. 42 FRANCIS CLIFFORD, Ar.] He afterwards succeeded his Brother George in his Honours and Earldome of Cumber∣land, a worthy Gentleman, made up of all Honorable accomplishments. He was Fa∣ther to Henry the fifth and last Earl of that Family, whose sole Daughter and Heir was married to the right Honourable, and well worthy of his Honour, the then Lord Dun∣garvon, since Earl of Cork. 45 HENRY BELLASIS, Mil.] He was afterwards by King Charles Created Baron Fauconbridge of Yarum, as since his Grandchild by his Eldest Son is made Vicount Fauconbridge. John Bellasis Esquire, his second Son, who in the Garrison of Newarke and elsewhere, hath given ample Testimony of his Valour, and all Noble Qualities accomplishing a Per∣son of Honour, since is advanced to the dignity of a Baron. King James. 9 HENRY SLINGSBY, Mil.] The Armes of this Antient and Numerous Family (to large too be inserted in our List)
are as followeth; Quarterly the First and Fourth Gules, a Cheveron between two Leopards∣heads, and a Hutchet or Bugle Argent. The Second and Third Argent, a Griffon Surgeant Sable, supprest by a Fess Gules. 11 GEORGE SAVILL, Mil. & Bar.] This is the last mention of this Numerous, Wealthy, and Antient Family, which I find in this Catalogue; and here, Reader, to confess my self unto thee, my expectati∣on is defeated, hoping to find that vigorous Knight Sir John Savill in this Catalogue of Sheriffs. But it seems, that his constant Court-attendance, (being Privy-Councel∣lour to King Charles) priviledged him from that imployment, untill, by the same King he was Created Baron Savill of Pomfraict, as his Son since was made Earl of Sussex. I hear so high commendation of his house at Houley, that it disdaineth to yield prece∣dency to any in this Shire. King Charles. 12 JOHN RAMSDEN, Mil.] The Reader will pardon my Untimely and Abrupt breaking of this Catalogue, for a rea∣son formerly rendred. Onely let me adde that the Renowned Knight Sir Marmaduke Langdale was Sheriff, 1641. He without the least Self-attribution may say, as to the Kings side of Northern Actions, Pars Ego magna fui. But as for his Raising the Siege of Pomfraict, (felt before seen by the Enemy) it will sound Romanza-like to Posterity, with whom it will find Plus famae quam fidei. No wonder therefore if K. Charles the second Created him a Baron, the Temple of Honour being of due open to him, who hath passed through the Temple of Vertue. The Battles. Many Ingagements (as much above Skirmshes as beneath Battles) happened in this Shire. But that at Marston-moor, July 2. 1644. was our English Pharsalian Fight, or ra∣ther the Fatall Battle of Cannae to the Loyal Cavaliers. Indeed it is Difficult and Dangerous to present the Particulars thereof. For one may easier doe right to the Memories of the Dead, then save the Credits of some Living. However things past may better be found fault with, then amended; and when God will have an Army Defeated, Mistakes tending thereto will be multiplied in despite of the greatest care and diligence. Know then that Prince Rupert having fortunately raised the Siege at York, drew out his Men into the Moor, with full intention to fight the Enemy. Discreet Persons, be∣holding the Countenance of the present affairs with an unpartiall Eye, found out many Disswasives for the Prince to hazard a Battle. 1. He had done his Work by relieving York, let him Digest the Honour thereof, and grasp at no more. 2. His wearied Soul∣diers wanted refreshing. 3. Considerable Recruits were daily expected out of the North, under Colonel Clavering. Adde to all these, that such were the present Animosities in the Parliament Army, and so great their Mutuall Disatisfactions when they drew off from York, that (as a prime Person since freely confest,) if let alone, they would have fallen foul amongst themselves, had not the Prince preparing to fight them, Cemented their Differences to agree against a Generall Enemy. But a Blot; is no Blot if not hit; and an Advantage, no Advantage, if unknown: though this was true, the Prince was not informed of the differences aforesaid. However he did not so much run out of his own Ambition of Honour, as answer the Spur of the Kings Command, from whom he had lately received a Letter, (still safe in his Custody) speedily to fight the Enemy if he had any Advantage, that so he might spare and send back some Supplies to his Majesties perplexed occasions at Oxford. Besides the Prince had received certain Intelligence, that the Enemy had the Day before, sent away seven thousand Men, now so far distanced, that they were past pos∣sibility of returning that day. The former part hereof was true, the latter false, con∣futed by the great Shout given this day in the Parliaments Army, at the return of such forces unto them.
But now it was too late to draw off, the Parliament forces necessitating them to fight. A Summers Evening is a Winters Day, and about 4. a Clock the Battle began. Some causelesly complain on the Marquess of New-castle, that he drew not his men soon enough (according to his Orders) out of York, to the Prince his seasonable suc∣cour. Such consider not that Souldiers newly relieved from a Nine weeks Siege, will a little Indulge themselves. Nor is it in the power of a General, to make them at such times to March at a Minutes warning, but that such a Minute will be more then an Hour in the length thereof. The Lord Generall Gorng so valiantly charged the left Wing of the Enemy, that they fairly forsooke the Field. Generall Lslie with his Scottish ran away more then an York-shire mile, and a Wee-bit. Fame with her Trumpet sounded their flight as far as Oxford, the Royalists rejoycing with Bonfires for the Victory. But within few days, their Bays by a mournfull Metamorphosis were turned into Willow, and they sunk the lower in true sorrow, for being mounted so high in Causeless Gladness. For Cromwell with his Curassires did the work of that Day. Some suspected Colonel Hurry (lately converted to the Kings party) for foul play herein, for he divided the Kings Old Horse (so valiant and victorious in former fights) into small Bodies, al∣ledging this was the best way to break the Scottish Lanciers. But those Horse, always used to charge together in whole Regiments or greater Bodies, were much discomposed with this new Mode, so that they could not find themselves in themselves. Besides a right valiant Lord, severed (and in some sort secured) with a Ditch from the Enemy, did not attend till the foe forced their way unto him, but gave his men the trouble to pass over that Ditch: the occasion of much disorder. The Van of the Kings foot being led up by the truely honorable Colonel John Russell, impressed with unequall numbers, and distanced from seasonable succour, be∣came a Prey to their Enemy. The Marquess of New-castles White-coats (who were said to bring their Winding sheet about them into the field) after thrice firing, ell to it with the But ends of their Muskets, and were invincible; till mowed down by Cromwells Ca∣rassires, with Jobs Servants, they were all almost slain, few escaping to bring the Tidings of their overthrow. Great was the Execution on that Day, Cromwell commanding his Men to give no quarter. Various the numbering of the slain of both sides, yet I meet with none mounting them above six, or sinking them beneath three thousand. I remember no Person of honour slain on the Kings side, save the hopefull Lord Cary, eldest Son to the E. of Monmouth. But on the Parliaments side, the Lord Didup [a lately created Baron] was slain, on the same Token, that when King Charles said, that he hardly remembred, that he had such a Lord in Scotland; one returned, that the Lord had wholly forgotten that he had such a King in England. Soon after more then 60. Royalists of prime quality removed themselves beyond the Seas, so that hencefor ward the Kings affairs in the North, were in a languishing condition. The Farewell. As I am glad to hear the plenty of a courser kind of Cloth is made in this County, at Halifax, Leeds, and elsewhere, whereby the meaner sort are much imployed, and the middle sort inriched; So I am sorry for the generall complaints made there∣of. Insomuch that it is become a generall by word, to shrink as Northern Cloth, (a Giant to the eye, and Dwarf in the use thereof,) to signify such, who fail their Friends in deepest distress, depending on their assistance. Sad that the Sheep the Em∣bleme of Innocence, should unwillingly cover so much craft under the woo thereof; and sadder, that Fullers commended in Mark 9. 3. Scripture for making cloth white, should justly be condemned for making their own Consciences black, by such fraudulent practices. I hope this fault for the future, will be amended in this County and elsewhere. For sure it is, that the transporting of wooll and Fullers-earth (both against Law) beyond the Seas, are not more prejudiciall to our English cloathing abroad, then the deceit in making cloth at home, debasing the Forraign estimation of our Cloth to the unvalua∣ble damage of our Nation.
YORK is an Antient City built on both sides of the River Ouse, con∣joyned with a Bridge, wherein there is one Arch, the highest and largest in England. Here the Roman Emperors had their residence, (Severus and Valerius Constantius their death) preferring this place before Lon∣don, as more approaching the Center of this Island: and he who will hold the Ox-hide from rising up on either side, must fix his Foot in the middle thereof. What it lacketh of London in Bigness and Beauty of Buildings, it hath in Cheapness and Plenty of Provisions. The Ordinary in York will make a Feast in London, and such Persons who in their Eating consult both their Purse and Palate, would chuse this City as the Staple place of good chear. Manufactures. It challengeth none peculiar to it self, and the Forraign Trade is like their River, (compared with the Thames) low and little. Yet send they course Cloth to Haorough, and have Iron, Flax and other Dutch Commodities in return. But the Trade which indeed is but driven on at York, runneth of it self at Hull, which of a Fishers Town, is become a Cities fellow, within three hundred years, being the Key of the North. I presume this Key (though not new made) is well mended, and the Wards of the Lock much altered, since it shut out our Soveraign from entering therein. The Buildings. The Cathedrall in this City answereth the Character which a forraignThe Writer of the life of Aeneas Sylius or Pope Pius secundus. Author giveth it, Templum opere & magnitudine toto orbe memorandum, the work of John Romaine, Willam Melton, and John Thoresbury. Successive Arch-bishops thereof. The Family of the Percyes contributing Timber, of the Valvasors, Stone thereunto. Appending to this Cathedrall is the Chapter-house, such a Master piece of Art that this Golden verse (understand it written in Golden Letters) is ingraved therein. Ut Rosa Flos Florum sic est Domus ista Domorū. Of Flowers that grow the Flower's the Rose, All Houses so this House out-goes. Now as it follows not that the Usurping Tulip is better then the Rose, because prefer∣red by some Forraign Fancies before it; so is it as inconsequent that Modh Italian Churches are better then this Reverent Magnificent Structure, because some humorous Travailors are so pleased to esteem them. One may justly wonder, how this Church, whose Edifice Woods (designed by the Devotion of former ages, for the repair thereof) were lately sold, should consist in so good a condition. But as we read,Psal. 106. 46. that, God made all those to pity his Children, who carried them captive; so I am informed, that some who had this Cathdrall in their command, favourably reflected hereon, and not onely permitted but procured the re∣pair thereof; and no doubt he doth sleep the more comfortably, and will die the more quietly for the same. Proverbs. Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be,] Though this be rather a Prophesie then a Proverb, yet because something Proverbiall therein, it must not be omitted. It might as well be placed in Lincoln shire, or Middle∣sex, yet (if there be any truth therein) because Men generally worship the Rising Sun, blame me not if here I onely take notice thereof, That LincolnSee the life of Arch-bishop Mountain in the Befa∣ctors of this County. was, namely a far Fairer, Greater, Richer City, then now it is, doth plainly appear by the ruins thereof, being without controversie the greatest City in the Kingdome of Mercia. That London is, we know; that York shall be, God knows. If no more be meant, but that York hereafter shall be in a better condition then now it is, some may believe, and
mre doe dsire it. Indeed this Place was in a Fair way of Preferment, (because of the convenient Scituation thereof,) when England and Scotland were first United into Great∣Bitain▪ But as for those who hope it shall be the English Metropolis, they must wait untill the River of Thames run under the great Arch of Ouse-bridge. However York shall be, that is, shall be York still, as it was before. Saints. FLACCUS ALBINUS more commonly called Alcuinus, was born, say some, nigh London; say others, in York,B. de scrip. Brit. Num. 17. Cent. 2. the later being more Probable, because befriended with his Northern Education, under Venerable Bede, and his advancement in York. Here he so pld the well furnished Library therein, (muchIn  suâ ad Carolum Magum. praised by him) that he distilled it into himself, so great and generall his knowledge. Bale ranketh him the third English∣man for Learning, placing Bede and Adelme before him; and our Alcuinus his Humi∣lty is contented with the place, though he be called up higher by the judgements of others. Hence he travailed beyond the Seas, and what Aristotle was to Alexander, he was to Charles the first Emperour. Yea, Charles owed unto him the best part of his Title The Great, being made Great, in Arts and Learning by his Instructions. This Alcuinus was the Founder of the University in Paris, so that whatsoever the French brag to the contrary, and slight our Nation, their Learning was Lumen de Lu∣mine nostro, and a Tapor lighted at our Torch. When I seriously peruse the Orthography of his Name, I call to mind an Anagram which the Papists made of Reverend Calvin, bragging like boys for finding of a Bees, when it proves but a Hornets Nest; I mean Tri∣umphing in the sweetness of their conceit, though there be nothing but a malitious sting therein. CALVINUS LUCIANUS And now they think they have Nicked the Good man to Purpose, because, Lucianus ws notoriously known for an Atheist, and Grand Scoffer at the Christian Religion. A silly and spirefull Fancy, seeing there were many Lucians worthy Persons in the Primitive imes, amongst whom the chief, one Presbyter of Antioch andEusebius. lib. 8 cap. 13. Martyr under Dio∣sian, so Famous to Posterity for his Translation of the Bible. Besides the same literall allusion is found in the name of ALCUINUS LUCIANUS Thus these Nominall Curiosities, whether they hit or miss the Mark, equally import no∣thing to Judicious Beholders. He was made first Abbot of Saint Augustines in Canterbury, and afterward of Saint Martins in the City of Towers in France, and dying Anno 780, he was buried in a small Convent appendant to his Monastery. He is here entred under the Topick of Saints, because though never solemnly cano∣nized, he well deserved the Honor: His Subjects said to David, Thou art worth ten Thou∣sand of us; and though I will not▪ ascend to so high a Proportion, many of the Modern* a Sam. 18. . Saints in the Church of Rome must modestly confess, that on a Due and True estimate our Alcuinus was worth many Scores of them at least; so great his Learning and holy his Conversation. SEWALL had his Nativity probably in these Parts. But he was bred in Oxford, andS. N. was a Scholar to St. Edmund, who was wont to say to him, Sewald, Sewald, thou wilt have many Afflictions, and dye a Martyr. Nor did he miss much of his mark therein, though he met with Peace and Plenty at first, when Arch-bishop of York. The oc∣casion of his Trouble was, when the Pope plenitudine potestatis, intruded one Jordan an Italian to be Dean of York, whoseGodwin in the Arch bi∣shops o York. Surprised Installing Sewald stoutly opposed. Yea at this time there were in England, no fewer then three Hundred Benefices possessed by Italians, where the People might say to them, as the Eunuch to Philip, How can we
understand without an nterpreter? Yea which was far worse, they did not onely not teach in the Church, but mis-teach by their lascivious and debauched behaviour. Asfor our Sewald Mathew Paris saith plainly, that he would not bow his Knee to Baal, so that for this his contempt, he was excommunicated and cursed by Bell, Book, and Candle, though it was not the Bell of Aarons Garment, nor Book of Scripture, nor the Candle of an Unpartiall Judgement. This brak his heart, and his Memory lyeth in an Intricate po∣sture, (peculiar almost to himself) betwixt Martyr and no Martyr, a Saint and no Saint. Sure it is, ewall though dying excommunicated in the Romish, is reputed Saint in Vul∣gar estimation, and some will maintain that the Popes solemn Canonization is no more re∣quisite to the making of a Saint, then the Opening of a Man Windows is necessary to the lustre of the Sun. Sewald died Anno Dom. 1258. Script. Brit. Cen. 4. Num. 23. Bale, who assumeth liberty to himself to surname Old-writers at his pleasure, is pleased to Addition this worthy man, Sewaldus Magnanimus. Martyrs. VALENTINE FREESE and his Wife were both of them born in this City, and both gave their lives therein at oneFox Acts and Mon. p. 107. Stake, for the testimony of Jesus Christ, Anno Domini 1531. Probably by order from Edward Lee the cruell Arch-bishop. I cannot readily call to mind a man and his wife thus Marryed together in Martyrdome: And begin to grow confident that this Couple was the first and la in this kind. Confessors. EDWARD FREESE brother to the aforesaid Valentine, was born inIdem ibidem pag. 1026. York, and there a Prentice to a Painter. He was afterwards a Novice-Monke, and leaving his Convent, came to Colchester in Essex. Here his hereticall Inclination (as then accounted) disco∣vered it self in some sentences of Scripture, which he Painted in the Borders of Cloths, for which, he was brought before John Stoaksley Bishop of London, from whom he found such cruell usage as is above belief. MasterIdem ibidem. Fox saith, that he was fed with Manchet made of Saw-dust, or at the least a great part thereof, and kept so long in Pri∣son, Manicled by the wrests, till the Flesh had overgrown his Irons; and he not able to kembe his own head became so distracted, that being brought before the Bishop, he could say nothing, but my Lord is a good man. A sad sight to his Friends, and a sinfull one to his Foes, who first made him mad, and then made mirth at his madness. I confess distraction is not mentioned in that list of losses, reckoned up by ourMark. 10. 29. Sa∣viour, He that left his House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my sake, &c. But seeing his wits is nearer and dearer to any man then his wealth, and seeing what is so lost may be said to be left; no doubt this poor mans distraction was by God gratiously accepted, on his enemies severely punished, and to him mercifully rewarded. We must not forget how the wife of this Edward Freese, being big with child, and pressing in to see her husband, the Porter at Fulham gave her such a kick on the belly, that the child was destroyed with that stroke immediately, and she died afterwards of the same. Prelates. JOHN ROMAN so called because hisGodwin in the Catalogue of the Arch∣bishops of York. Father was born in Rome, though living a long time in this City, being Treasurer of the Cathedrall therein, and I conjecture this John his Son born in York, because so Indulgent thereunto. For generally Pure Pute Italians preferred in England, transmitted the gain they got by Bills of Exchange or otherwise into their own Country, and those outlandis Mules though lying down in English Pasture, left no Hairs behind them: Whereas this Roman had such Affection for York, that being advanced Arch-bishop, he began to build the Body of the Church, and finished the North Part of the Cross-Isle therein. Polydore Virgil praised him, (no wonder that an Italia commended a Roman) for a Man of great Learning and Sincerity. He fell into the disfavour of King Edward the first, for Excommunicating An∣thony Beck Bishop of Durham, and it cost him four thousand marks to regain his Princes Good Will. He died Anno Domini 1295. And let none grudge his Buria
in the best Place of the Church, who was so Bountifull a Builder thereof. ROBERT WALBEY born in this City,Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops. was therein bred an Augstinian Friar, he afterwards went over into France, where he so applied his studies, that at last he was chosen Divinity Professor in the City of Tholouse: he was Chaplain to the black Prince, & after his death to his Father K. Edward the third. Now as his Mr. injoyed three Crowns, so under him in his three Kingdoms this his Chaplain did partake successively of three Mi∣ters, being first a Bishop in Gascoine, then Arch-bishop of Dublin in Ireland, & afterwards Bishop of Chichester in England, not grudging to be degraded in Dignity, to be pre∣ferred in profit. At last he was consecrated Arch-bishop of York, and was the first and last Native which that City saw the least of Infants, and (in his Time) when Man, the greatest therein. Yet he enjoyed his place but a short time, dying May 29. Anno Domi∣ni, 1397. Since the Reformation. THOMAS MORTON was born Anno 1564. in the City of York, whose father Ri∣chard Morton, (allyed to Cardinall Morton Arch▪ bishop of Canterbury,) was a Mercer (I have been informed the first of that calling in that City sure,) of such repute, that no Mercers for many years by past, were of any Eminency, but either immediately or mediately were Apprentices unto him. He was bred in York school, where he was School∣fellow with Guy Faux, which I note, partly, to shew that Loyalty and Treason, may be educated under the same Roof, partly, to give a check to the received opinion, that Faux was a Fleming, no Native English-man. He was bred in Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, and chosen Fellow thereof to a Fellowship to which he had no more Propriety, then his own Merit, before Eight Comp∣titors for the place, equally capable with himself, and better befriended. Commencing Doctor in Divinity, he made his Position, (which though unusuall was Arbitrary and in his own power,) on his second Question, which much defeated the ex∣pectatio of Doctor Playfere, replying upon him with some passion, Commosi mihi stomachum. To whom Morton return'd, Gratulor tibi Reverende professor de bono tuo stomacho caenabis apud me hac nocte. He was successively preferr'd Dean of Gloucester, Winchester, Bishop of Chester, Co∣ventry and Lichfield and Durham. The Foundation which he laid of Forraign corre spondency with eminent persons of different perswasions, when he attended as Chap∣lain to the Lord Evers, (sent by King James Embassadour to the King of Denmark and many Princes of Germany,) he built upon unto the Day of his Death. In the late Long Parliament, the displeasure of the House of Commons fell heavy upon him, partly, for subscribing the Bishops Protestation for their Votes in Parlia∣ment; partly, for refusing to resign the seal of his Bishoprick, and baptizing a Daugh∣ter of John Earl of Rutland with the sign of the Cross; two faults, which compounded together in the judgement of honest and wise-men amounted to a High Innocence. Yet the Parliament allowed him eight hundred pounds a year (a proportion above any of his Brethren) for his maintenance. But alass the Trumpet of their Charity gave an uncertain sound, not assigning by whom or whence this summe should be paid. In∣deed the severe Votes of the Parliament ever took full effect, according to his observa∣tion, who did Anagram it VOTED OUTED But their mercifull Votes found not so free performance. However this good Bi∣shop got a thousand pounds out of Goldsmiths-hall, which afforded him his support in his old Age. The Neb of his Pen was unpartially divided into two equall Moyeties, the one writ∣ing against Faction, in defence of three Innocent Ceremonies; the other against Supersti∣tion, witness the Grand Impostor, and other worthy works. He solemnly proffered unto me (pardon me Reader, if I desire politiquely to twist my own with his Memory; that they may both survive together,) in these sad times to
maintain me to live with him; which Courteous Offer as I could not conveniently ac∣cept, I did thankfully . Many of the Nobility deservedly honoured him, though none more then John Earl of Rutland, to whose Kinsman Roger Earl of Rutland he formerly  been Chaplain. But let not two worthy Baronets be forgotten, Sir George Savill, who so civilly paid him his purchased Annuity of two hundred pounds, withall Proffered advantages; and Sir Henry Yelveton, at whose house he dyed, aged 95. at Easton-Manduit in Northampton shire, 1659. For the rest the Reader is remitted to his life, written largely and learnedly, by Doctor John Barwick Dean of Durham. States-men. Sir ROBERT CAR was born in this City on this occasion, Thomas Car his father Laird of Furnihurst, a man of great lands and power in the South of Scotland, was very active for Mary Queen of Scots; and on that accompt forced to fly his land, came to York. Now although he had been a great inroder of England, yet for some secret reason of State, here he was permitted safe shelter, duing which time Robert his son was born; this was the reason why the said Robert refused to be Naturalized by Act of our Parlia∣ment, as needless for him born in the English Dominions. I have read how his first making at Court was by breaking of his leg at a Tilting in London whereby he came first to the Cognizance of King James; Thus a fair start∣ing with advantage in the notice of a Prince, is more then half the way in the race to his favour: King James reflected on him whose Father was a kind of Confssor for the cause of the Queen his Mother; besides the Young Gentleman had a handsome per∣son and a conveniency of desert; Honors were crowded upon him, made Baron, Viscount, Earl of Sommerset, Knight of the Garter, Warden of the Cinque∣Ports, &c. He was a well natured man, not mischievous with his might, doing himself more hurt then any man else. For abate one foul fact with the appendance and consequences thereof notoriously known, and he will appear deserving no foul Character to posteri∣ty; but for the same he was banished the Court, lived and dyed very privately, about the year of our Lord, 1638. Writers. JOHN WALBYE was born in this City, of honest Parentage. He was bred an Augustinian (Provinciall of his Order,) and Doctor of Divinity in Oxford. A Placen∣tious Person, gaining the good-will of all, with whom he conversed, being also Inge∣nious, Industrious, Learned, Eloquent, Pious, and Prudent.. Pitz writeth, that (after Alexander Nevell) he was Chosen but never Confirmed, Arch bishop of York, (an Honour reserved for Robert his Younger Brother, of whomIn the Pre∣  in  City. before.) But Bishop Godwin maketh no mention hereof, which rendreth it suspicious. The said Pitz maketh him actuall Arch-bishop of Dublin, whilst Bale (who being an Irish Bishop, had the advantage of exacter Intelligence,) hath no such thing, whence we may con∣clude it a Mistake. The rather because this John is allowed by all to have died in this place of his Nativity, 1393. Also I will adde this, that though sharp at first against the Wickliffites, he soon abated his own Edge; and though present at a Council kept at Stanford, by the King against them, was not well pleased with all things transacted therein. JOHN ERGHOM was born in this  Script.  Num. 50.  . City, an Augustinian by his profession. Lea∣ving York he went to Oxford, where passing thorough the Arts, he fixed at last in Divi∣nity, proving an admirable Preacher. MyIdem. .  Author tells me, that sometimes he would utter nova & inaudita, whereat one may well wonder, seeing Solomon hath said, There is no nw thing under the Sun. The truth is, he renewed the custome of expound∣ing Scripture in a typicall way, which crouded his Church with Auditors, seeing such  preaching break's no bones, much pleased their fancy, and little cross'd or curb'd their corruptions. Indeed some (but not all) Scripture is capable of such comments, and because metalls are found in Mountains, it is madness to Mine for them in every
rich Meadow. But in expounding of Scripture, when mens inventions out-run the Spirits intentions, their swiftness is not to be praised, but sawcyness to be punished. This Erghom wrote many books, and dedicated them to the Earl of Hereford, (theSee Camdens Brit. in Here∣ford-shire. same with Edward Duke of Buckingham,) and flourished under K. Henry the seventh, Anno 1490. Since the Reformation. RICHARD STOCK was born in this City, bred Scholar of the house in Saint Johns∣Colledge in Cambridge, and designed Fellow of sidney, though not accepting thereof. He was afterwards Minister of All hallows Bredstreet in London, by the space of thirty two years, till the day of his death. Where (if in health) he omitted not to Preach twice every Lords day, with the approbation of all that were Judicious and Religious. No Minister in England had his Pulpit supplyed by fewer Strangers. Doctor Davenant afterwards Bishop of Sarum, (whose father was his parishioner) was his constant Auditor, while lying in London. His Preaching was most profitable, Converting many, and Confirm∣ing more in Religion, so that appearing with Comfort at the Day of Judgement, he might say, behold I and the Children that God hath given me. He was zealous in his life, a great Reformer of prophanations on the Sabbath, prevailing with some com∣panies to put off their wonted Festivalls from Mundays to Tuesdays, that the Lords∣day might not be abused by the preparation for such entertainments. Though he preached oft in neighbouring Churches, he never neglected his own, being wont to protest, That it was more Comfortable to him to win one of his own Parish then twenty others. Preaching at Saint Pauls Cross when young, it was ill taken at his mouth, that he reproved the inequality of Rates in the City, (burdening the Poor to ease the Rich,) and he was called a Green head for his pains. But being put up in his latter days to preach on the Lord Mayors Election, and falling on the same subject, He told them, That a Gray head spake now what a Green-head had said before. He dyed Aprill 20. Anno Domini 1626. with a great lamentation of all, but especially of his Parishio∣ners. Memorable Persons. JOHN LEPTON of York Esquire, servant to King James, undertook for a wager to ride six days together betwixt York and London, being sevenscore and ten miles, stylo vetere, as I may say, and performed it accordingly, to the greater praise of his strength in acting, then his discretion in undertaking it. He first set forth from Al∣dersgate May 20. being Munday, Anno Domini 1606.Mr. Sander∣son his History of King James hoc anno. and accomplished his journey every day before it was dark. A thing rather memorable then commendable, many maintaining, that able and active bodies, are not to vent themselves in such vain (though gainfull) ostentation; and that it is no better then tempting Divine Provi∣dence, to lavish their strength, and venture their lives, except solemnly summoned thereunto by just necessity. Lord Mayors. Expect not Reader, that under this Title I should present thee with a list of the Lord Mayors of this City born therein. Onely to make this part conformable to the rest of my book, know, that I find one Native of this City Lord Mayor of London, viz. Name Father Place Company Time 1 Martin Bowes Thomas Bowes York Goldsmith 1545
The Farewell. To take our leaveof this Loyall City: I desire that some Lucrative Trade may be set up therein, to repair her former losses with advantage. Mean time I rejoyce, that the Archiepiscopat See is restored thereunto, not despairing, but that in due time, (if the Su∣pream Authority adjudge it fit) the Court of the Presidency of the North, may be re-erected therein, presuming the Country will be Eased, and City Inriched thereby, as the Load∣stone which will atract much Company, and by consequence Commodity thereunto. Let me adde, I am informed, that Sir Thomas Widdrington, a person accomplished in all Arts, (as well as in his own Profession of the Laws,) hath made great Progress in his Exact Description of this City. Nor doe I more congratulate the happiness of York coming under so Able a Pen, then Condole my own Infelicity, whose unsuccessfull atten∣dance hitherto could not compass speech with this worthy Knight. Sure I am when this his work is set forth, then indeed YORK SHALL BE, what? a City most compleatly Illustrated in all the Antiquities and Remarkables thereof. FINIS.
THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES. PSAL. 95. 4, 5.In his hand are the deep places of the Earth: the strength of the Hills is his also. The Sea is his, and he made it. PROV. 27. 25, 26.The herbs of the Mountains are gathered. The Lambs are for thy clothing, and the Goats are the price of thy fields.
A NECESSARY PREFACE TO THE READER. IT bare a debate in my serious consideration, whe∣ther a Totall Omission or Defective Descrip∣tion of this Principality were to be preferred, finding my self as Unable to do it Exactly, as Unwilling to Pretermit it. For First, I never was in VVales, and all know how necessary  is to accurate∣ness herein. Secondly, I understand not their Language, and can∣not go to the Cost, nor dare take the State of having an Inter∣preter. King James was wont pleasantly to say, that he cared not though he was poor himself, so long as his Subjects were Rich, as confident he could command their wealth, on good condi∣tions and a just occasion. But indeed it matters not how meanly skil'd a Writer is, so long as he hath Knowing and Communi∣cative Friends; my happiness in England, who here am quite de∣stitute of such assistance. However on the other side, a Totall Omission seemed very unhandsome, to make a Cypher of this Large Principality. Besides, England cannot be well described without VVales, such the Intimacy of Relation betwixt them, three of our English Kings Edward 2. Hnry 5. Henry 7. being born, and many of Our Prime Atchievments being acted in VVales. Wherefore, I resolved to endeavour my utmost in the description thereof, though sadly sen∣sible in my self, that my desires were as high as a Mountain, but my performances would fall as low, (would they were half so fruitfull) as the Vallies. And here I humbly desire, that the many faults by me committed, may be like a Ball cast down and deaded on a soft Floor, even to be buried in my own weakness to my own shame, without the
least Ripling or Rebounding to the disgrace of the VVelsh Country or Nation. And my hope and desire is that these my weak pains will provoke others of more Ability, to substitute a more Exact Description in the room thereof. I had rather the Reader should take the name of that worthy Knight from MasterIn his Brit. in Shropshire. Camden, then from me, who designing to build according to the Italian Mode of Architecture, plucked down a good and convenient English-house, preposterously destroy∣ing the one, and never finished the other: I hope the Reader, will not be so uncharitable, (I will not say undiscreet) but will allow our grains a subsistence, till they will willingly vanish at the sub∣stitution of another. In Doubtfull Nativities of Worthy Persons betwixt England and Wales, I have not call'd for a sword to divide the contro∣verted Child betwixt the two Mothers, but have wholy resigned it to VVales, partly, out of desire of quietness, (not engage in a con∣test,) partly, because I conceived England might better spare then VVales want them. To conclude some will wonder, how Perfect [coming from Per∣ficere, to do throughly,] and Perfunctorie [derived from Per∣fungi, throughly to discharge,] should have so Opposite Senses. My Motto in the description of this Principality is betwixt them both, Nec Perfectè, Nec Perfunctorie. For as I will not pretend to the Credit of the former, so may I defend my self from the shame of the latter, having done the ut∣most, which the Strength of my Weakness could perform.
WALES. THIS PRINCIPALITY hath the Severn Sea on the South, Irish-Ocean on the West and North, England on the East, antiently divided from it by the River Severn, since by a Ditch drawn with much Art and Industry, from the Mouth of Dee to the Mouth of Wie. From East to West, [Wie to Saint Davids] is an hundred, from North to South, [Carion to Hollihead] is an hundred and twenty miles. The Ditch or Trench lately mentioned, is called Clauhd-Offa, because made by King Offa; who cruelly enacted, that what Welch-man soever was found on the East-side of this Ditch should forfeit his Right-hand. A Law long since Cancelled, and for many ages past, the Welch have come peaceably over that Place, and good reason, bringing with them both their Right-hands and Right-hearts; no less Loyally then Va∣liantly to defend England against al enemies, being themselves under the same Sove∣raign United thereunto. It consisteth of three parts, the partition being made by oderick the great, about the year 877. dividing it betwixt his three sons. 1. North-Wales, Whose Princes chiefly Resided at 1. Aberfrow, 2. Mathravall, 3. Dynefar. 2. Powis, 3. South-Wales. This division in fine proved the Confusion of Wales, whose Princes were always at War, not onely against the English, their Common Foe, but mutually with themselves to enlarge or defend their Dominions. Of these three North-wales was the chief, as doth plainly appear, first, because Ro∣derick left it Mervin his Eldest Son. Secondly, because the Princes thereof were by way of Eminency stiled the Princes of Wales, and sometimes Kings of Aberfrow. Thirdly, because as the King of Aberfrow paid to the King of London, yearly ThreescoreT. Mills in his Catal. of Hon. pag. 292. and three pounds by way of Tribute, so the same summe was paid to him by the Princes of Powis and South-wales. However South-wales was of the three the Larger, Richer, Fruitfuller, therefore cal∣led by the Welsh Deheubarth, that is, The Right-side, because nearer the Sun. But that Country being constantly infested with the Invasions of the English and Flemings, had North-wales preferred before it, as more intire and better secured from such annoy∣ances. Hence it was, that whilst the Welsh-tongue in the South is so much mingled and corrupted, in North-wales it still retaineth the purity thereof. The Soil. It is not so Champion and Levell, and by consequence not so fruitfull as England, mostly rising up into Hills and Mountains of a lean and hungry nature, yet so that the ill quality of the ground is recompenced by the good quantity thereof. A right worshipfull Knight in Wales, who had a fair Estate therein, his rents resulting from much Barren-ground, heard an English Gentleman (perchance out of intended op∣position) to brag, that he had in England, so much ground worth forty shillings an Acre; you (said he) have ten yards of Velvet, and I have te score of Frize, I will not exchange with you. This is generally true of all Wales, that much ground doth make up the Rent, and yet in proportion they may lose nothing thereby, compared to Estates in other Countries. However there are in Wales most pleasant Meadows along the sides of Rivers, and
as the sweetest flesh is said to be nearest the bones, so most delicious vallies ae inter∣posed betwixt these Mountains. But now how much these very Mountains advantage the Natives thereof, in their Health, Strength, Swiftness, Wit, and other naturall Perfections, Give me leave to stand by silent▪ whilst a great Master of Language and Reason entertaineth the Reader with this most excellent and pertinent discourse, Carpenters Geography second Book, chap. 15. pag. 258. This conceit of Mounsieur Bodin, I admit without any great contradiction, were he not over-peremptory in over-much censuring all Mountainous people of Blockishness and Bar∣barisme, against the opinion of Averroes a great Writer; who finding these People nearer Heaven, suspected in them a more Heavenly Nature. Neither want there many reasons drawn from Nature and Experiment to prove Mountainous People more pregnant in Wit, and Gifts of understanding then others inhabiting in low and plain Countries. For however Wit and Valour are many times divided, as we have shewn in the Northern and Southern people, yet were they never so much at variance, but they would sometimes meet. First therefore, what can speak more for the witty temper of the Mountain People, then their clear and subtile Aire, being far more purged and rarified, then that in Lower countries. For holding the Vital spirits to be the chiefest Instruments in the Souls Operation, no man can deny but that they sympathize with the Aire, especially their chiefest foment. Every man may by experience, find his Intellectuall Operations more Vigorous in a Clear day, and on the contrary most Dull and Heavy, when the Aire is any way affected with foggy vapours. What we find in our selves in the same place at divers seasons, may we much more expect of places diversly affected in Constitution. A second reason, for the proof of our assertion, may be drawn from the Thin and spare Diet, in respect of those others. For people living of Plains have commonly all Commodities in such plenty, that they are subject to surfeiting and luxury, the greatest Enemy and Underminer of all Intellectuall Opera∣tions. For a fat Belly commonly begets a gross Head, and a lean Brain: But want and scarcity the Mother of Frugality invites the Mountain-dwellers to a more sparing and whole∣some Diet. Neither grows this conveniency only out of the scarcity of Viands; but also out of the Dyet. Birds, Fowls, Beasts, which are bred upon higher places are esteemed of a more Cleanly and wholsome feeding, then others living in Fens and Foggy Places. And how far the Quality of our Dyet prevails in the Alteration of our Organs and Dispositi∣ons, every Naturalist will easily resolve us. A third reason may be drawn from the cold Aire of these Mountainous Regions, which by an Antiperistasis keeps in and strengthens the Internall heat, the chief instrument in Natural and Vital Operations. For who per∣ceives not his Vital and by consequence his Intellectuall Parts, in cold frosty weather to be more strong, and vigorous, then in hot and soultry seasons, wherein the spirits be dfaced and weakned? This disparity in the same region, at divers times, in regard of the disposition of the Aire, may easily declare the disparity of divers Regions, being in this sort diversly af∣fected. A fourth reason, may be taken from the Custome and Hardness, whereunto such people inure themselves from their infancy; which (as Huartus proves) begets a better tem∣per of the Brain, in regard of the Wit and Understanding; which we happen to find clean otherwise with them, who have accustomed themselves to deliciousness. These reasons per∣haps would seem onely probable, and of no great moment, were they not strengthened with Forraign and Domestick Observations. Thus much I thought fit to transcribe out of our Author, un paralleld in his kind, confident that our ensuing work will be a Comment on his Text, or rather, will, by the Induction of severall instances, Natives of Wales, be the Proof of the Truth of this his most Judicious assertion.
Naturall Commodities, Silver. Tully (a better Orator then Historian, yet better Historian then Metallist, affirm∣eth that Britain affordeth, ne micam auri vel argeni, not a grain of gold or silver: under∣stand him what in his age was discovered. Otherwise Wales, and especially Cardigan∣shire yields ROYAL MINES, where the silver holds standard, and pays with profit for the separation from Lead, and the refining thereof, as by the ensuing particulars will appear. 1. Six Mountains there are in Cardigan shire, (pardon British Reader, if I spell them rather after our English Pronunciation, then the Welch Orthography,) viz. Comsomelock, Tallabant, Gadarren, Bromefloid, Geginnon and Cummer∣rum. 2. The Romans first began to mine here, (as appears by their coines found therein,) working in trenches, not above twenty or four and twenty fathom deep, and found plenty of Lead. 3. The Danes and Saxons wrought by Sheafts, so they call what is long and nar∣row; whether mounting into the aire, (as Spires of Steeples,) or sinking in∣to the earth, as their Pits here, an hunded fathom deep. 4 They found great plenty of Lead, but at last deserted their works, either because the vein of metall failed, or they drowned with the irruption of water. 5. Customer Smith, about the latter end of the raign of Queen Elizabeth, dis∣covered Silver in Comsomelock, and sent it up to the Tower of London with great expence, to be coined. 6. After his death, the design was prosecuted, and more perfected by Sir Hugh Middleton Knight, coining the Silver to his great charge, as his Predecessour, at the Tower. 7. After the death of Sir Hugh, Sir Francis Godolphin of Cornwall Knight, and Thomas Bushell Esquire, undertook the work. 8. King Charles, for their greater encouragement, and sparing their expence, granted them power of coinage at Aberrusky in that County. 9. Thomas Bushell (Sir Francis dying soon after, and Comsomlock being deser∣ted) adventured on the other five Mountains. 10. Not disheartned, that the first year and half afforded no effectuall discove∣ry, at last these Mines yielded one hundred pounds a week, (besides Lead amounting to half as much) coined at Aberrusky aforesaid. 11. The pence, groats, shillings, half-crowns, &c. of this Silver, had the Ostrich feathers (the Armes of Wales) for distinction stamped on them. Then came our Civil Wars, and discomposed all the work, when Mattocks must be turned into Spear, and Shovells into Shields, or else probably before this time the project had arrived at a greater perfection. Here by the way, it is richly worth the observing, how the modern manner of Min∣ing exceedeth what was formerly used. For thirty years since they began at the top of a Mountain, digging directly downwards with their Shafts, which was subject to a double mischief, of damps, and drowning. Besides, vast was the expense before they could come to the bowels of the Mountain, wherein the Oar (if any) was most pro∣bably expected. Since they have gone a more compendious way by Adyts, making their entrance (some five foot and a half high, and perchance as broad,) into the Mountain, at the low∣est levell therereof, so that all the water they meet with, conveyeth it self away as in a channel, by the declivity of the place. And thus they penetrate the most expeditious way athwart the middle thereof, which bringeth them to the speediest discovery of the metal therein.
But the rarest invention is the supplying of the Miners with fresh aire, which is perform∣ed by two mens blowing wind by a pair of bellows on the outside of the Adit, into a pipe of lead, daily lengthened as the Mine is made longer, whereby the Candle in the Mine is daily kept burning, and the Diggers recruted constantly with a sufficiency of breath. This invention was the master-piece of Sir Franci▪ Bacon, Lord Verlam, and not onely so acknowledged by Thomas Bushell his gratefull servant, but also effectually prosecuted by him; a person innated with a publike spirit, if he migh meet with pro∣portionable encouragement. And here methinks it were tting (Pardon, (reader) a short digression) that rewards should be given to such undertakers, who are the discoverers of profitable projects; and not onely to such who exactly hit the mark, but even to those who ingeniously miss it, because their aberrations may be directions to others. And though many tympanies and false conceptions would happen, yet amongst many miscarriages some pregnant▪ wits would happily be delivered of rare inventions▪ especially if the State would be plea∣sed to be their Mid-wife favourably to encourage them. Lead. This is found in many places in Wales, but in Carnarvan-shire the best, in many re∣spects. First, because so near the sea, so that they may cast the Oare into the Ship. Metalls elsewhere are digged as out of the Bowells of the Earth, so out of the Bowells of the Land, I mean, so far from any Conveyance by Water, that the expence of the portage swallows much of the profits thereof: which charge is here avoyded. Second∣ly, for the plenty. Lastly, for the purity thereof. Insomuch that there was great pro∣bability for a long time that it would have proved a Mine Royal. Which hope was fru∣strated at last to the great gain of the owners thereof. For a Leaden Mine is a Silver∣mine to such Subjects as possess it, whilst a Silver-mine is but a Leaden one unto them, from whom the property is taken, as then accrewing to the Crown or State, by vertue of its Prerogative. Goats. In Latine Capri, à Carpendo, from cropping, (therefore forbidden to be kept in some places, because destructive to young Woods,) are when young, most nimble and frisk∣ing, (whence our English to Caper,) but afterwards put on so great gravity, that an He∣Goat is recounted by wise Prov. 30. 31. Agur, amongst the four creatures which are comely in going. Yea, if that ornamentall excrement which groweth beneath the chin, be the standard of wisdome, they carry it from Aristotle himself. They are strong above their pro∣portion, and an He-Goat will beat a Ram of equall bigness. Hence it is that in Dan. 8. 4, 7. Daniel, the Persian Monarchy is compared to a Ram, and the Macedonian, which subdued the Persian, resembled to a Goat. They can clamber the highest hills, with∣out help of a ladder, delighting in steep and craggy places, seeming rather to Dumsa pen∣dere procul de rupe capellae. Egl. 1. hang then stand, as they are feeding. Their flesh, disguised with good cookery, may deceive a judicious palate, as it did Gen. 27. 25. Isaac's, for venison. Of their skins excellent gloves are made, which may be called our English-Cordovant, soft, supple and stretching, whence the expression of Cheverel∣consciences, which will stretch any way for advantage. Course Coverings are made of their shag, God himself not despising the present of Exod. 25. 4. Goats-hair, which made the outward case of the Exod. 26. 7. Tabernacle. Their milk is accounted cordiall against consump∣tions; yea, their very stench is used for a perfume in Arabia the Happy, where they might surfeit of the sweetness of spices, if not hereby allayed. In a word, Goats are be for food, where Sheep cannot be had. Plenty of these are bred in Wales, especially in Montgomery-shire, which mindeth me of a pleasant passage, during the restraint of the Lady Elizabeth. When she was so strictly watched by Sir Henry Benefield, that none were admitted access unto Her, a Goat was espied by a merry Fellow, (one of the Warders) walking along with her. Whereupon, taking the Goat on his Shoulders, he in all hast hurried him to Sir Henry, I pray Sir (said he) Fox Acts and Mon. pa. 2095. examine this fellow, whom I found walking with her Grace, but what
talk they had I know not, not understanding his Language. He seems to me a stranger, and I believe a Welsh-man by his frieze Coat. To return to our subject, I am not so knowing in Goats, as either to confirme or con∣fute what Plinie Nat. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 50. reports, that Adhuc lactantes generant; They  young ones, whilst they themselves as yet suck their Dams. He addeth, that they are great enemies to the Olive-trees, (which they embarren with licking it) and therefore are never sacrificed to Minerva. Sure I am a true Deity accepted them for his service; as many kids well nigh, as lambs, being offered in the Old Testament. The Manufactures. The Brittish generally bearing themselves high on the account of their gentile ex∣traction, have spiri which can better comport with designes of suddain danger then long difficulty, and are better pleased in the imploying of their valour then their labour. Indeed some souls are over-lovers of liberty, so that they mistake all industry to be degrees of slavery. I doubt not but posterity may see the Welsh Commodities im∣proved by art far more then the present Age doth behold, the English as yet as far ex∣celling the Welsh, as the Dutch exceed the English in Manufactures. But let us instance in such as this Country doth afford, Frieze. This is a course kind of Cloath, then which none warmer to be worn in Winter, and the finest sort thereof very fashionable and gentile. Prince Henry had a frieze sute, by which he was known many weeks together, and when a bold Courtier checkt him for appearing so often in one Suit, Would (said he) that the Cloath of my Country (being Prince of Wales) would last always. Indeed it will daily grow more into use, especially since the Gentry of the Land being generally much impoverisht, abate much of their gallantry, and lately resigned rich cloaths to be worn by those (not whose persons may best become them, but) whose purses can best pay for the price thereof. Cheese. This is milk by Art so consolidated, that it will keep uncorrupted for some years. It was antiently (and is still) the Staple food for Armies in their marching, witness when David was sent with 1 Sam. 17. 18. Ten Cheeses to recruit the provisions of his Brethren, and when 2 S. 17. 29. Barzillai with Cheeses (amongst other food) victualled the Army of K. David. Such as are made in this Country are very tender and palatable, and once one merrily (with∣out offence I hope) thus derived the Pedigree thereof; Adams nawn Cusson, was her by her birth, Ap Curds, ap Milk, ap Cow, ap Grasse, ap Earth. Foxes are said to be the best Tasters of the fineness of Flesh, Flies of the sweetest Grapes, and Mice of the tenderest Cheese, and the last, (when they could Compass  in that kind) have given their Verdict for the goodness of the Welch. What should be the reason, that so many people should have such an Antipathie▪ against Cheese (more then any one manner of meat) I leave to the skilfull in the Mysteries of Nature to decide. Metheglen. Some will have this word of Greek extraction, from , contracted . But the British will not so let go their none Countriman MATHEW GLIN, but will have it purum potum Cambricum, wholly of Welsh originall: Whencesoever the word is made, the liquor is compounded of water, honey, and other ingredients, being most whole∣some for mans body. Pollio Romulus, who was an hundred years old, being asked of Augustus Cesar, by what means especially he had so long preserved his vigour both of mind and body; made answer, Plin. Nat. Hist. lib. . cap. 24. Intus mulso, foris oleo, by taking Metheglen inward, and oyle outward. It differeth from Mede, ut vinum à Varo de lin∣gua Lat. lora, as wine from that weak stuffe which is the last
running from the grapes pressed before. It is a most generous liquor, as it is made in this Country, in so much that had Atlas  Bo∣hemia. Mercator, who so highly praised the Mede of Egra, for the best in the world; I say, had he tasted of this Welch Hydromel, he would have confined his commendation to Germany alone, and allowed ours the precedency. Queen Elizabeth, who by the Tudors was of Welch-descent, much loved this Her native liquor, recruiting an annual stock thereof for Her own use, and here take if you please, The Receit thereof, First gather a Bushell of Sweet-briar leaves, and a Bushell of Time, half a Bushell of Rosemary, and a Peck of Bay-leaves. Seeth all these (being well washed) in a Furnace of fair water, let them boil the space of half an Hour, or better, and then pour out all the water and herbs into a Vat, and let it stand till it be but milk-warme, then strain the water from the herbs, and take to every six Gallons of water one Gallon of the finest Honey, and put it into the That is the Wort or boiled liquor. Boorn, and labour it together half an hour, then let it stand two days, stir∣ring it well twice or thrice each day. Then take the Liquor, and boil it anew, and when it doth seeth, skim it as long as there remaineth any dross. When it is clear, put it into the Vat as before, and there let it be cooled. You must then have in readiness a kind of new Ale or Beer, which, as soon as you have emptied, suddenly whelme it upside down, and set it up again, and presently put in the Metheglen, and let it stand three days a working. And then tun it up in Barrells, tying at every Tap-hole, (by a Pack-thred) a little bag of beaten Cloves and Mace, to the value of an Ounce. It must stand half a year before it be drunk. The Buildings. The Holy Job 3. 4. Spirit complaineth, that great men build Desolate places for themselves; therein taxing their Avarice, Ambition, or both. Avarice, they joyn House to Esai. 5. 8. House, [by Match, Purchase, or Oppression,] that they may be alone in the Land, that their Covetous∣ness may have Elbow-room to lye down at full length, and wallow it self round about. These love not, because they need not Neighbours, whose numerous Families can subsist of themselves. Or else their Ambition is therein reproved, singling out Desolate Places for them∣selves, because scorning to take that Fruitfulness which Nature doth tender, and desire∣ing as it were to be Petty-Creators, enforcing Artificiall Fertility on a place where they found none before. I* well knew, that wealthy Man, who being a great improves of ground, was wont to say, that he would never come into that place which might not be made better: On the same token, that one tartly returned, that then he would never go to Heaven, for that place was at the best. But the truth is, Fertilizing of barren ground may be termed a Charitable Curiosity, employing many poor people therein. It is confessed that Wales affordeth plenty of barren places, (yielding the benefit of the best Aire,) but the Italian humor of building hath not affected (not to say infected) the British Nation. I say the Italian-humor, who have a merry Proverb, Let him that would be happy for a Day, go to the Barber; for a Week, marry a Wife; for a Month, buy him a New-horse; for a Year, build him a New-house; for all his Life-time, be an Honest-man. But it seems that the Welsh are not tempted to enjoy such short happiness for a years continuance. For their Buildings, generally they are like those of the old Britains, neither big nor beautifull, but such as their Ancestors in this Isle formerly lived in, For when Cataracus that valiant British Generall, (who for nine years resisted here the Tacitus Romans puissance) after his Captivity and Imprisonment, was inlarged, and carried about to see the Magni∣ficence of Rome, Zonaras and out of hm Camden in his Remains pag. 245. Why do you (said he) fo greedily desire our poor Cottages, whereas you have such stately and magnificent Palaces of your own? The simplicity of their common building for private persons may be conjectured by the Palaces of their Princes. For Hoelldha Prince of Wales, about the year 800. built a house for his own residence of White-hurdells or Watling, therefore called Ty Gwin, that is, the White-house or Whitehall if you please.
However there are brave buildings in Wales, though not Welsh buildings, many stately Castles, which the English erected therein. And though such of them as survive at this day, may now be beheld as Beauties, they were first intended as bridles to their Country. Otherwise their private houses, are very mean indeed. Probably they have read what Master Camden writes, that the building of great houses was the bane of good house-keeping in England, and therefore they are contented with the worse habitations, as loath to lose their beloved hospitality. The rather, because it hath been observed that such Welsh buildings as conforme to the English mode, have their Chimneys though more Convenient, less Charitable, seeing as fewer eyes are offended, fewer bellies are fed, with the smoaking thereof. But though the Lone-houses in Wales, be worse then those in England; their Market∣towns generally are built better then ours, the Gentry (it seems) having many of their habitations therein. The Proverbs. These are twofold. 1. Such as the English pass on the Welsh. 2. Such as the Welsh make on the English. The latter come not under my cognizance, as being in the Bri∣tish Tongue, to me altogether unknown Besides my friend Master James Howel in a Treatise on that Subject, hath so feasted his Reader, that he hath starved such as shall come after him, for want of New Provisions. As for the former sort of Proverbs, we insist on one or two of them. His Welsh Blood is up.] A double reason may be rendred, why the Welsh are subject to anger. 1. Moral; Give losers leave to speak, and that passionately too. They have lost their land, and we English∣men have driven their Ancestors out of a fruitfull Country, and pend them up in Barren Mountains. 2. Naturall; Choler having a Predominancy in their Constitution, which soundeth nothing to their disgrace. Impiger Horace de Arte Poetica. Iracundus, is the beginning of the Cha∣racter of Achilles himself. Yea, Valour would want an Edge, if Anger were not a Whet∣stone unto it. And as it is an Increaser of Courage, it is an Attendant n Wit, Ingeniosi sunt Cholerici. The best is, the anger of the Welsh doth soon arise, and soon abate, as if it were an Embleme of their Country, up & down, chequered with Elevations and Depressions. As long as a Welsh pedigree.] Men (who are made Heralds in other Countries) are born Heralds in Wales, so na∣turally are all there inclined to know and keep their descents, which they derive from great antiquity: so, that any Welsh-gentleman (if this be not a Tautology) can presently clime up, by the stairs of his pedigree, into princely extraction. I con∣fess some English-men make a mock of their long pedigree, (whose own perchance are short enough if well examined,) I cannot but commend their care in preserving the memory of their Ancestors, conformable herein to the custome of the Hebrews. The worst I wish their long pedigree, is broad possessions, that so there may be the better symmetry betwixt their extractions and estates. Give your horse a Welch-bait.] It seems it is the custome of the Welsh travailers, when they have climed up a hill (whereof plenty in these parts) to rain their horses backward, and stand still a while, taking a prospect (or respect rather) of the Country they have passed. This they call a bait, and (though a Peck of Oates would doe the palfrey more good) such a stop doth (though not feed) refresh. Others call this a Scotish-bait, and I believe the horses of both mountainous Countries, eat the same provender, out of the same manger, on the same occasion. Proceed we now to our Description, and must make use in the first place of a generall Catalogue, of such who were undoubtedly Welsh yet we cannot with any certainty refer them to their respective Counties, and no wonder, 1. Because they carry not in their Sur names any directions to their nativities, as the antient English generally (and especially the Clergy) did, till lately, when conquered by the English, some conformed themselves to the English custome.
2. Because Wales was antiently divided but into three great Provinces North∣wales, Powis, and South-wales, and was not modelled into Shires, according to the modern division, till the raign of K. Henry the eighth. Of such therefore who succeed herein, though no County of Wales (perchance) can say this man is mine, Wales may avouch all these are ours. Yet I doe not despair, but that in due time this my Common may God willing be inclosed, (and fair Inclosures I assure you is an inriching to a Country,) I mean, that having gained better intelligence from some Welsh Antiquaries (whereof that Principality affordeth many) these per∣sons may be Un-general'd, and impaled in their particular Counties. Princes. I confess there were many in this Principality, but I crave leave to be excused from giving a list of their nativities. They are so antient, I know not where to begin, and so many, I know not where to end. Besides, having in the fundamentalls of this Book con∣fined Princes to the children of Soveraigns, it is safest for me, not to sally forth, but to intrench my self within the aforesaid restrictions. Onely I cannot but insert the following note found in so Authentick an Author, for the rarity thereof in my apprehension, Camdens Remains, pag. 181. As for the Britains or Welsh, whatsoever Jura Majestatis their Princes had, I cannot understand that they ever had any Coin of their own, for no Learned of that Na∣tion have at any time seen any found in Wales or elsewhere. Strange that having so much Silver digged out, they should have none Coined in their Country, so that Trading was driven on either by the bartery or change of Wares and Commodities, or else by money Imported out of England and other Countries. Confessors. WALTER BRUTE was born in Wales, and if any doubt thereof, let them peruse the ensuing protestation, drawn up with his own hand, Fox Acts and Mon. pag. 477. I Walter Brute, Sinner, Layman, Husbandman, and a Christian, (having mine of-spring of the Britains, both by Fathers and Mothers side,) have been accused to the Bishop of Hereford, that I did err in many matters concerning the Catholick Christian faith: by whom I am required, that I should write an answer in Latine to all those matters, whose desire I will satisfie to my power, &c. Observe herein a double instance of his Humility, that being a Welch-man, (with which Gentleman is reciprocall) and a ScholarIdem p. 475. graduated in Oxford, contented him∣self with the plain addition of husbandman. He was often examined by the aforesaid Bishop, by whom he was much molested and imprisoned, the particulars whereof are in Master Fox most largely related. At last he escaped, not creeping out of the window by any cowardly compliance, but go∣ing forth at the door fairly set open for him by Divine Providence. For, he onely made such a generall subscription, which no Christian man need to decline, in form fol∣lowing: Idem p. 50. I Walter Brute, submit my self principally to the Evangely of Jesus Christ, and to the determination of holy Kirk, and to the General Councels of Holy Kirk. And to the sentence and determination of the four Doctors of holy writ, that is, Austin, Ambrose, Jerome, and Gregory. And I meekly submit me to your correction, as a Subject ought to his Bishop. It seems the Popish Prelates were not as yet perfect in their art of persecution, (Brute being one of the first who was vexed for Wickliffisme) so that as yet, they were loose and favourable in their language of Subscription. But soon after they grew so
punctuall in their expressions, and so particular in penning abjurations and recantations; that the persons to whom they were tendered, must either strangle their consciences with acceptance, or lose their lives for refusall thereof. NICHOLAS HEREFORD. I have presumptions to perswade my self (though pos∣siblyA M P. not to prevail with the Reader) to believe him of British extraction. He was bred Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and a Secular Priest, betwixt whose Profession and Fryery, there was an ancient Antipathy. But our Hereford went higher, to defie most Popish Principles, and maintain That 1. In the Eucharist, after the Consecration of the Elements, Bread and Wine still re∣mained. 2. That Bishops and all Clergy-men, ought to be subject to their Respective Princes. 3. That Monks and Fryers, ought to maintain themselves by their own la∣bour. 4. All ought to regle their lives, not by the Popes Decrees, but Word of God. From these his four Cardinall Positions, many Hereticall Opinions were by his Ad∣versaries deduced, (or rather detracted,) and no wonder they did Wrack his Words, who did desire to torture his Person. From Oxford he was brought to London, and there with Philip Repington was made toSee the story at large in Mr. Foxes Acts and Mon. Recant his Opinions publiquely at Saint Pauls Cross, 1382. See their severall success; REPINTON like a violent Renegado proved a Persecutor of his Party, for which he was rewarded, first with the Bishoprick of Lincoln, then with a Cardinals Cap. HEREFORD did too much to displease his Conscience, and yet not enough to please his enemies. For the jealousie of Arch∣bishop Arundel persecuted and continued him always a Prisoner. The same with the later was the success of John Purvey his partner in opinions, whom T. Walden termeth the Lollards Library. But they lock'd up this Library, that none might have access unto it, keeping him and Hereford in constant durance. I will say nothing in excuse of their Recantation, nor will I revile them for the same: know∣ing there is more requisite to make one valiant under a Temptation, then only to call him coward who is foiled therewith. Yet I must observe, that such as consult Carnall Councills, to avoid afflictions (getting out by the window of their own plotting, not the door of Divine Providence) seldome injoy their own deliverance. In such Cases our Sa∣viours words are always (without the parties Repentance) spiritually and often literally true,Mar▪ 16. 25. He that findeth his life shall lose it. And although we read not that this Here∣ford was put to death, he lost the life of his life, his liberty and lustre, dwindling away in obscurity as to the time and place of his death. REGINALD PEACOCK was born in Wales,Relicta Cam∣bria sold natali. Bale Cent. 8. Num. 19. bred in Kings (commonly saith Bale called Orial) College in Oxford, where for his learning and eloquence, he proceeded Doctor in Divinity; Bishop first of Saint Asaph, then of Chichester. For twenty years together he favoured he opinions of Wicliffe, and wrot many books in defence there∣of, untill in a Synod held at Lambeth by T. Bourcher Arch-bishop of Canterbury 1457. he was made to recant at Pauls Cross (his books being burnt before his eyes) confuted with seven solid arguments, thusBle ut prius. reckoned up, Authoritate, Vi, Arte, Fraude, Metu, Terrore & Tyrannide. Charitable men behold this his Recantation as his suffering, and the act of his ene∣mies: some account it rather a slip then a fall, others a fall, whence afterwards he did arise. It seems, his recanting was little satisfactory to his adversaries, being never re∣stored to his Bishoprick, but confind to a poor pension in a mean Monastery, where he died obscurely, though others say,Fox Acts & Mon. pag. 710. he was privily made away in prison. He is omit∣ted by Pitzeus in his Catalogue of Writers, a presumption, that he apprehended him finally dissenting from the Popish perswasion.
Popes. I find none bred in this Principality, and the wonder is not great; For before the time of Austin the Monk his coming over into England, Wales acknowledged no Pope, but depended meerly on their own Arch-bishop of Carlyon. Yea, afterwards it was some hundreds of years, before they yielded the Pope free and full obedience; besides, the inhabitants of Wales being depressed in their condition, had small accommodations for their travels to Rome, and those at Rome had lesse list to chuse persons of so great di∣stance into the Papasie. Cardinals. SERTOR of WALES was so called from his Native Country. By some he is named Fontanerius Valassus, but why, saith Bishop In Cat. Card. pag. 171. Godwin, Rationem non capio, and I will not hope to understand what he could not. He was bred a Franciscan, and was chosen (very young for that place) their General the nineteenth in succession, Anno Domini 1339. Afterwards he was made Bishop of Massile, then Arch-Bishop of Ravenna, next Patri∣arch of Grado, and by Pope Innocent the sixth, was made Cardinal, Anno Domini 1361. But being extremely aged, he was so unhappy, that before the Cardinals Cap could come to him, he was gone out of this world. Many Books he wrote of his Le∣ctures, Quodlibets, but chiefly, he is eminent for his Comment on Saint Austin, De ci∣vitate Dei. He died at Padua in Italy, and was therein Pitz. de Ang. script. p. 497. buried in the Church of Saint Anthony. Prelates. MARBOD EVANX (I had almost read him Evans a noted name in Wales,) was born in this Country, and bred in the study of all Liberal Sciences. In his time the Danes wofully harassed the Land, which caused him to ship himfelf over into little Bri∣tain in France; the inhabitants whereof may be termed Cosin-Germans to the Welch, as Sons to their younger brethren, much symbolizing with them in manners and language. Here Marbod, though abroad, was at home, (worth is the worlds Countriman) and his deserts preferred him to be Episcopus Redonensis, Bishop of Renes, Praelatus non Ela∣tus, such his humility in his advancement. We may conclude him a general Scholar by the variety of his works, writing of gems and precious stones, and compounding profit and pleasure together in his book called Carmina Sententiosa, much commended (Italian praise of British Poetry is a black swan) by Lilius * Giraldus an Italian in his lifes of Poets. We will conclude all with the Cha∣racterBale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num. 50. given unto him by Speculum Sal. lib. 4. cap. 16. Giraldus Cambrensis, Marbodus bonarum literarum magister eruditus colores rhetoricos, & tam verborum quam sententiarum exornationes versibus egre∣giis declaravit. He flourished 1050. WALTER de CONSTANTIIS. Who would not conclude him from his Surname born at Constance on the Boden Zee in Switserland? But we have a Constat for his Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. Num. 41. Bri∣tish Nativity. He was preferred first Arch-Deacon of Oxford, then Bishop of Lincoln, then Arch-Bishop of Rohan, by King Richard the first. A man of much merit, besides his fidelity to his Soveraign, whom he attended to Palestine, through many perils by Sea and by Land.  somuch, that there want not those, who will have him named, De Constantiis, from the Expressive Plural, relating to his Constancy to his Master in all con∣ditions. No doubt he had waited on him in his return through Austria, and shared with him in the miseries of his Captivity, if not formerly remanded into England, to retrench the Tyranny of William Longcampt Bishop of Ely, which he effectually performed. He had afterwards a double Honour, first to interr King Richard at Font-Everard, then to invest K. John with the Principality of Normandy, as being the Prime Prelate therein. His death may be collected about the year 1206. CADUCANUS a Welsh-man by birth, was a very skilful Divine, and Bishop of Bangor. Leaving his Bishoprick he became a Cistercian Monk in Monasterio Durensi sive Dorensi, (which for the present I am unwilling to English.) Here I find two learn∣ed
Antiquaries, the one the lender, the other the debtor, (I had almost said the one owner the other stealer,) much divided in their judgements, about this his retrograde motion, from a Bishop to a Monke, the one commending, the other condemning him herein; J. Leland cited by Bale. J. De script. Brit. Cent. 3. Num. 85. Bale. Rarum hoc equidem exemplum est, ut quis optimas fortunas macra commu∣tet tenuitate. This indeed was a rare example, that one should willingly exchange the best fortunes for a lean meannesse. Qui Episcopatū appetit (ait Paulus) perfectum opus desiderat. Non sic de monachatu otioso, quum sit plan∣tatio, quam non consolidavit Pater coelestis. Whoso desireth a Bishoprick desireth a good thing, saith 1 Tim. 3. 1. St. Paul. It cannot be said so of Monkery, which is a plant, whh the Heavenly Father hath not planted. It is past my power to comprimise a difference betwixt two so great persons in so great a difference, at so great a distance; onely to hold the ballance even betwixt them, give me leave to whisper a word or two, First for Leland, whereas he calleth the Bishoprick of Bangor, Optimas fortunas, it was never very rich, and at the present very troublesome; (by reason of the Civill Wars) so that Caducanus turning Monk, in most mens apprehension, did but leave what was little for what was less. As for John Bale, he himself under King Edward the sixth, was Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, and flying thence in the days of Queen Mary, did not return in the raign of Queen Elizabeth to his See, but contented himself rather with a See his life in Suffolk. Canons place in the Church of Canterbury; so that by his own practise, a Bishops place may on some considerations be left, and a Private (though not Superstitious) life lawfully embraced. The best is, even Bale himself doth consess of this Caducanus, that after e turned Monk, Studiorum ejus interea non elanguit successus, He was no less happy, then indu∣strious in his endeavours, writing a book of Sermons, and another called speculum Christianoum. He dyed under the raign of King Henry the third, Anno Domini 1225. Since the Reformation. HUGH JOHNES born in Wales, was bred Batchelour of the Laws in the University of Oxford, and made Bishop of Landaff (which See it seems for the poorness thereof, lay Bishopless for three years after the death of Bishop Kitchin,) May 5. 1566. Memorable no doubt on other accounts, as well as for this, that though this  be in Wales, he was the Bishop God∣win in his Car. of Bshops of Lndaffe. first Welch-man, who for the last three hundred years (viz. since John of Mon∣mouth elected 1296.) was the Bishop thereof. He was buried at Matherne, November 15. 1574. Doctor......... PHILIPS was a native of Mr. James Chaloner in his Descr. of the Is of Man pag. 7. Wales, had his education in Oxford, and was afterward preferred to be Episcopus Sodorensis, or Bishop of Man. Out of his zeal for propagating the Gospell, he attained the Manks tongue, and usually preached therein. Know by the way, Reader, that the King of Spain himself (notwithstanding the vastness of his Dominions,) had not in Europe more distinct languages spoken under his command, then had lately the King of great Britain, seven tongues being used in his Territories, viz. 1. English, in England. 2. French, in Gersey & Guernzey. 3. Cornish, in Cornwall. 4. Welch, in Wales. 5. Scotch, in Scotland. 6. Irish, in Ireland. 7. Manks, in the Isle of Man. This Doctor Philips undertook the translating of the Bible into the Manks tongue, taking some of the Islanders to his assistance, and namely Sir Hugh Cavoll, Minister of the Gospell, and lately (if not still)  of Kir-Michael. He perfected the same work in the space of Idem pag. . twenty nine years, but prevented by his death, it was never put to press. I know not whether the doing hereof soundeth more to the honour of the
dead, or the not Printing thereof since his death, to the shame of the living, seeing surely money might be procured for so general and beneficiall a design. Which makes some the less to pity the great pains of the Ministers of the Isle of Man, who by dou∣ble labour read the Scriptures to the peoplé out of the English in the Manks-tongue. This singularly learned, hospitable, painfull and pious Prelate died Anno Dom. 16... Physicians. ROBERT RECORDE was born in thisBale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Num. 3. Country, ex Claris Parentibus, bred in Ox∣ford, where he proceeded Doctor of Physick. His soul did not live in the Lane of a single science, but traversed the Latitude of Learning, witness his Works In Arithmetick, not so absolute in all numbers, before his time, but that by him it was set forth more Compleat. Astrology, he Practicall part whereof hath so great an influence upon Physick. Geometry, whereof the wrot a Book, called the Path of Geometry, and that easier and nearer then any before. Physick, of the Judgements of Urines: and though it be commonly said Urina me∣retrix, yet his judicious rules have reduced that Harlot to Honesty, and in a great measure fixed the uncertainty thereof. Metals, his Sight may seem to have accompanied the Sun-beams into the Bowells of the Earth, piercing into those Penetralls in his discoveries of, and discourses on Gold and Silver, (wherewith I believe him well stored,) Brass, Tin, Lead, and what not? What shall I speak of his skill in Anatomy, Cosmography, Muick, whereof he read publique Lectures in Oxford? As for his Religion (say not this is of no Concernment in a Physician) I conjecture him to be a Protestant. First, because he wrot of Auricular Confession, and de Negotio Eu∣charistiae, each whereof is a Noli me tangere, for a Romish Lay-man to meddle with, accor∣ding to Popish principles. Secondly, because so largely commended by Bale. But I dare conclude nothing herein, having not hitherto seen his Treatises in Divinity. He flourished under K. Edward the sixth about the year, 1550. THOMAS PHAIER was born inPitz. Aetat. decima sexta anno 1550. Wales, and bred (I believe) first in Oxford, then in London, a generall Scholar, and well versed in the Common Law, wherein he wrot a book De natura Brevium, of the Nature of Writs. Strange that he would come after Justice Fitz-herbert, who formerly had written on the same Subject. But probably Phaiers Book (having never seen any who have seen it) treateth of Writs in the Court of Marches, (whereto Wales was then subjected, and) where the Legal Proceedings may be somewhat different from ours in England. But the Study of the Law did not fadge well with him, which caused him to change his Copy, and proceed Doctor in Physick. Now (though he made none) he, out of French did translate many usefull books. 1. Of the Pestilence, and the cure thereof. 2. Of the Grief of children. 3. Of the Nature of Simples. 4. The Regiment of Nuturall Life. He had also his Diversion, some excursion into Poetry, and translated Virgil his Eneads, Magna Gravitate (saith myIdem ibidem. Author) which our Modern Wits, will render, with great Dulness, and avouch, that he instead of a Latine Virgill, hath presented us with an Eng∣lish Ennius, such the rudeness of his verse. But who knoweth not, that English Poetry is improved fifty in the Hundred, in this last Century of years? He died, and was bu∣ried in London about the year of our Lord 1550. ALBANE HILL wasBale de script. Brit. Cent. 9. Num. 38. Britannus by birth. I confess Britannus doth not clearly car∣ry his Nativity for Wales, except it were additioned Cambro-Britannus. But according to our peaceable promiseIn our Pre∣face to the Reader. premised, let him pass for this Country-man. The rather, because so many Hills (and Mountains too) therein. He was bred a Doctor of Physick, professing and practising most beyond the Seas, more famous in Forraign Parts, then in his Native Country. I find two eminent Outlandishmen, viz. Josias Simler, an Helvetian of Zurich; and Bassianus Landus, an Italian of Placentia, charactering him to be, Medi∣cus Nobilissimus ac optimus, & in omni disciplinarum genere optime versatus, and that he wrot much upon Galen, and the Anatomicall part of Physick, so that we may say with theVirgil Ecloga sixta. Poet,
Ut littus Hilum, Hilum omne sonarct. The shoar resounded still, Nothing but Hill and Hill. I find no time affixed wherein he flourished, but according to the received Rule, Nos∣citur è socio, he may from his Contemporaries be collected in full Lustre, Anno 1550. and it is remarkable that Wales had three eminent Physicians Writers all in the same Age. Writers. Be it premised, that as I should be loth by my lasiness to conceal, so with all my In∣dustry I conceive it impossible to compleat their Characters. For as the Venetian Cour∣tezan, after she had put off her lofty attire, and high Chippines, almost pares away her self into nothing; such the slender account given us of these Writers, that after some set forms and Commendations of Course common to all Persons, be first defalked, the re∣mainder will be next to nothing. But it is no fault of me the Cistern if I be empty, whilst my fountain is dry, seeing I spill nothing by the Leakage of my Neglect, but faithfully deliver all the intelligence I find, as followeth: PETROK was a Welch-Irish-Cornish-Man. He had his birth inBale de script. Brit. Cent 1. Num. 60. Wales, but breeding in Ireland, according to the Mode of that Age, wherein all British sailed over into Ire∣land, (as the English in after ages did into France,) there to have their Education in all learned Sciences. Who would have thought to have found Helicon amongst the Bogs, as indeed it was at that Time? Petrok after twenty years reading good Au∣thours there, came over into Cornwall, and fixed himself nigh the Severn Sea, in a small Oratory called Petrok-Stowe, (the station or abiding place of Petrok) now corruptly Pad-Stowe, where many eminent Scholars were brought up under him. He wrot a book of Solitary life, whereto he was much addicted. I confess Petrok is somewhat degraded, as entred under the Topick of Writers, who is reputed a Saint, and I remember a handsome Church in Exeter dedicated to his Me∣mory, who flourished Anno 560. GILDAS the FOURTH, for there were three before him, viz. Gildas Albanius, Gildas Surnam'd Sapiens, (of whomIn the Wri∣ters of Somer∣set-shire. before) Gildas Cambrius, and this our Gildas, who laggeth last in the Teame of his Name-sakes. But the second of these is worth all the rest, (were there four hundred of them) whom I behold as a Sun indeed, shining with the Lustre of his own desert, whilst two of the others are but so many Meteors about him, some suspecting them, no realities in Nature, but meerly created by mens sight-decepti∣on, and the reflection of the Memory of the true Gildas. This our fourth Gildas is made a Welch-Scotch-Irish-Man, Wales sharing in him two parts of three, viz. his Birth and Death, the largest part of his life belonging to Ireland, where he studied. Many the Books imputed to him of the Wonders and first inhabitants of Britain, of King Arthur and hisBale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Num 21. unknown Sepulehre, so that now we can teach Gil∣das what he knew not, namely, that King Arthur was certainly buried atCamdens Bit. in Somerset∣she. Glassenbury. He wrot also of Percevall and Lancelot, who I behold as two Knights Combatants, and presume the former most victorious, from the Notation of his Name, Per seva∣lens, prevailing by himself. Our Author is charged to be full of Fables, which I can easily believe, for in Anci∣ent History if we will have any thing of truth, we must have something of falsehood, and (abating onely Holy-writ) it is as impossible to find Antiquity without Fables, as an old Face without Wrinckles. He flourished Anno Dom. 860. BLEGABRIDE LANGAURIDE. Philip Comineus observeth, that to have a short Name is a great advantage to a Favorite, because a King may readily remember, and quickly call. him. If so, the writer aforesaid is ill qualified for a Favorite. But let him then pronounce his own Name, for others will not trouble themselves therewith. He attained to be a great Scholar, Doctor of both Laws, and Arch-deacon of the Church of Landaft. He to the honour of his Country, and use of Posterity, translated the laws of Howell the most modest King of Wales, and flourishedBale de script. Bit. Cen. . Num. 23. 914. SALEPHILAX the BARDE. This Mungrell name seemeth to have in it an Eye or
Cast of Greek and Latine, but we are assured of his Welch extraction. In inquiring after his works, my success hath been the same with the painfull Thresher of Mill-dew'd wheat, gaining little more then Straw and Chaffe. All the grain I can get is this,Bale de script. Brit Cent. 2. Num. 29. that he set forth a Genealogy of the Britains, and flourished about the year 920. GWALTERUS CALENIUS (may we not English him Walter of Calen?) was a Cam∣brian by hisBale de script. Bit. Cent. 2. Num. 65. Nativity, though preferred to be Arch-deacon of Oxford. He is highly prized for his great learning, by Lealand and others. This was he who took the pains to go over into Britain in France, and thence retrived an Ancient Manuscript of the British Princes, from Brutus to Cadwalader. Nor was his labour more in recovering, then his courtesie in communicating this rarity to Jeffrey of Munmouth, to translate the same into Latine. Nor was this Walter himself idle, continuing the same Chronicle for four hundred years together, untill his own time. He flourished Anno Dom. 1120. under King Henry the first. GUALO BRYTANNUS born in Wales, was from his Infancy a servant to the Muses, and lover of Poetry. That he might injoy himself the better herein, he retired into a privateBale de script. Bt. Cent. 3. Num. 5. place, from the noise of all people, and became an Anchorite for his Fancy not Devotion, according to the Poet, Carmina secessum scribentis & otia quaerunt. Verses justly do request Their writers privacy and rest. Here his pen fell foul on the Monks, whose covetousness in that age was so great, that of that subject Difficile est Satyram non scribere. 'Twas hard for any then to write, And not a Satyre to indite. He wrot also Invectives against their wantonness and impostures, and yet it seems did it with that Cautiousness, that he incurred no danger. Indeed he is commended by John of Sarisbury and others, Quod esset Prudens & Doctus. He flourished Anno Domini 1170. under King Henry the second. WILLIAM BRETON was born (saith Bale and Pitz. the later alledging one Willot for his Author) in Wales, bred a Franciscan at Grimsby in Lincoln-shire. I will not quar∣rell his Cambrian extraction, but may safely mind the Reader, that there was an ancient family of the Bretons at Ketton in Rutland next Lincoln-shire, where this William had his education. But, let this Breton be Brito, (believing the allusion in sound not the worst evidence for his Welch originall) sure it is, he was a great Scholar, and deep Divine; the Wri∣ter of many books both in Verse and Prose; and of all, his Master-pice was, an expo∣sition of all the hard words in the Bible, which thus begins, Difficiles studeo partes, quasA Nominative case singular, according to the barbarisme of that age. Biblia gestat, Pandere; sed nequeo, latebras nisi qui ma festat Auxiliante Deo, qui c vult singula praestat, Dante juvamen eo, nihil insuperabile restat, &c. Hard places which the Bible doth contain, I study to expound; but all in vain, Without Gods help, who darkness doth explain, And with his help nothing doth hard remain, &c. Such the reputation of his book, that in the controversie betwixt Standish Bishop of Saint Aaph and Erasmus, [unequal contest] the former appeals toBale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Nam. 89. Brtons book, about the interpretation of a place of Scripture. This William died at Grimsby, Anno Domini 1356. UTRED BOLTON was born saith Lealand, ex Transabrinâ Gente. Now though parts of Salop, Worcester and Gloucester-shire, with all Hereford shire be beyond Severn, yet in such doubtfull Nativities England giveth up the Cast, rather then to make a Con∣test to measure it. Troublesome times made him leave his Country and travail to Dur∣ham, where he became a Benedictine. He had a rare Naturall Happiness, that the Prompt∣ness and Pleasantness of his Parts,Bale de script. Bit. Cent. 5. Num. 53. commended all things that he did or said. This so far ingratiated him with the Abbot of his Convent, that he obtained leave to go to Ox∣ford, to File his Nature the Brighter by learning. Hither he came in the heat of the difference, betwixt Wickliffe and his Adversaries.
Bolton sided with both and with neither, consenting in some things with Wickliffe, dissenting in others, as his conscience directed him. William Jordan, a Dominican (and Northern Man,) was so madded hereat, that he he fell foul on Bolton, both with his Writing and Preaching. Bolton angry hereat, ex∣pressed himself more openly for Wickliffe, especially in that his smart Book, Pro Veris Monachis, for True Monkes, or Monkes Indeed, (parallel with Saint Pauls Widdows indeed,1 Timo. 5. 3. which were to be honoured) showing what Sanctity and Industry was required of them. Hereat the anger of Jordan did Overflow, endeavouring (and almost effecting) to get Bolton excommunicated for an Heretick. This Learned Man flourished under King Ri∣chard the second 1330. JOHN GWENT was born inBale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Num. 81. Wales, bred a Franciscan in Oxford, till he became Provinciall of his Order throughout all Britain. He wrot a Learned Comment on Lom∣bard his Common Places, and is charactered a Person, qui in Penitiore recognitae Prudentiae Cognitione se vel admirabilem ostenderet. Here endeth Lealand his writing of him, and beginneth Bale his railing on him, pretending himself to the truest Touchstone of Spi∣rits, and trying Men thereby. Yet doth he not charge our Gwent, with any thing peculiar to him alone, but common to the rest of his Order, telling us (what we knew before) that all Mendicants were acted with an ill Genius, being Sophisters. Cavilers, &c. this Bee being no more, guilty then the whole Hive therein. He dyed at Hereford in the Verge of his Native Country 1348. JOHN EDE was (saithCnt. 7. Num. 28. Bale,) genere Wallus, by Extraction a Welch man, immediately adding patria Herefordensis, by his Country a Hereford-shire man. We now for quietness sake, resign him up wholly to the former. Yet was he a Person worth contending for, Lealand saith much in little of him, when praising him to be, Vir illustris Famâ, Eraditione & Religione. He wrot severall Comments on Aristotle, Peter Lumbard, and the Revela∣lion. He was chief of the Franciscans Convent in Hereford, where he was buried in the raign of King Henry the fourth 1406. DAVID BOYS. Let not Kent pretend unto him, wherein his Surname is so Ancient and Numerous, our Author assuring us of hisBale de script. Brit. Cent. 8: Num. 12. British Extraction. He studied in Ox∣ford (saith Lealand) no less to his own Honour, then the Profit of others, reaping much benefit by his Books. Having his Breeding at Oxford, he had a Bounty for Cambridge, and compassing the writings of John Barningham his Fellow-Carmelite, he got them fairly transcribed in four Volumes, and bestowed them on the Library in Cambridge, where Bale beheld them in his Time. He was very familiar (understand it in a good way) with Eleanor Cobham Dutchess of Gloucester, whence we collect him at least a Parcell-Wickliffite. Of the many books he wrot, fain would I see that Intituled of Double Immortality, whether intending thereby the Immortality of Soul and Body, or of the Memory here and Soul hereafter. I would likewise satisfie my self in his Book about the madness of the Hagarens, whether the Mahometans be not ment thereby, pretend∣ing themselves descended from Sarah, when indeed they are the Issue of the Bond∣woman. He was Prefect of the Carmelites in Gloucester, where he dyed 1450. Let me adde, that his Surname is Latined Boethius, and so Wales hath her David Boethius, whom in some respects she may Vie with Hector Boethius of Scotland. Since the Reformation. Sir JOHN RHESE alias Ap Ryse Knight, was born in Wales, Noble by his Linage, but more by his Learning. He was well vers'd in the British Antiquities, and would not leave a Hoof of his Countries Honour behind, which could be brought up, to go along with him. Now so it was, that Polydore Virgil that Proud Italian, bare a Pique to the British, for their Ancient Independency from the Pope. Besides, he could not so easily compass the Welch Records into his clutches, that so he might send them the same way with many English Manuscripts, which he had burnt to ashes. This made him slight the Credit of Welch Authors, whom o Sir John was a Zelot to assert, being also a Champion to vindicate the story of King Arthur. Besides, he wrot a Treatise of the Eucharist, and by the good wordsScript. Brit. Cent. 9. Num. 57. Bale bestoweth on him, we believe him a Favorour of the Reformation, flourishing under King Edward the sixth 1550. JOHN GRIFFIN was born inPitz. de Ang∣script. aeat. 16. an. 1550. Wales, first bred a Cistercian Friar in Hales-Abbey in
Gloucester-shire. After the dissolution of his Convent he became a Painfull and Profitable Preacher. He suited the Pulpit with Sermons for all seasons, having his Conciones Aestivales & Brumales, which he preached in English, and wrot in Latine; flourishing under King Edward the sixth, Anno Domini 1550. HUGH BROUGHTON was born in Wales, but very nigh unto Shrop-shire. He used to speak much of his Gentility, and of his Armes, which were the Owles, presaging, as he said his Addiction to the study of Greek, because those were the birds of Miner∣va, and the Emblme of Athens. I dare not deny his Gentile Extraction, but it was pro∣bable, that his Parents were fallen to great decay, as by the ensuing story will appear. When Mr. Barnard Gilpin that Apostolike man was going his annual journey to Oxford, from his Living at Houghton in the North, he spied by the way-side a Youth, one while walking, another while running; of whom Mr. Gilpin demanded whence he came, he answered out of Bishop Carle∣ton in the life of Mr. Gilpin. Wales, and that he was a going to Oxford with intent to be a Scholar. Mr. Gilpin perceiving him pregnant in the Latine, and having some smattering in the Greek Tongue, carried him home to Houghton, where being much improved in the Languages, he sent him to Christs-colledge in Cambridge. It was not long before his worth preferred him Fellow of the House. This was that Broughton so famous for his skill in the Hebew, a great Ornament of▪ that University, and who had been a greater, had the heat of his Brain, and Peremp∣toriness of his Judgement been tempered with more moderation; being ready to quar∣rell with any who did not presently and perfectly imbrace his Opinions. He wrote many books, whereof one called The consent of times, carrieth the generall commendation. As his Industry was very Commendable, so his Ingratitude must be condemned, if it be true what I read; that when Master Gilpin his Mecaenas (by whose care, and on whose cost he was bred, till he was able to breed himself,) grew old, he procured him to be troubled and Idem ibidem. molested, by Doctor Barnes Bishop of Durham, in expectation of his Parsonage, as some shrewdly suspect. At last he was fixed in the City of London, where he taught many Citizens, and their Apprentices the Hebrew Tongue. He was much flocked after for his Preaching, though his Sermons were generally on Subjects, rather for Curiosity then Edification. I conjecture his death to be about the year of our Lord 1600. HUGH HOLLAND was born in Wales, and bred first a Scholar in Weminster, then Fellow in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. No bad English, but a most excellent Latine Poet. Indeed, he was addicted to the New-old Religion; New, in comparison of Truth it self; yet Old, because confessed of long continuance. He travailed beyond the Seas, and in Italy (conceiving himself without Ear-reach of the English,) let flie freely against the Credit of Queen Elizabeth. Hence he went to Jerusalem, though there he was not made, or he would not own himself Knight of the . In his return he touched at Constantinople, where Sir Thomas Glover Embassador for King James, called him to an account for his Scandalum Reginae at Rome, and the former over freedome of his tongue, cost him the confinement for a time in Prison. Enlarged at last, returning into Eng∣land, with his good parts bettered by learning, and great learning increased with experi∣ence in travail; he expected presently to be chosen Clerk of the Councell at least, but preferment not answering his expectation, he grumbled out the rest of his life in visi∣ble discontentment. He made verses in description of the chief Cities in Europe, wrot the Chronicle of Queen Elizabeths raign, (believe him older and wiser, not railing as formerly,) and a book of the life of Master Camden, all lying hid in private hands, none publikely Printed. This I observe, the rather, to prevent Plagearies, that others may not impe their credit with stollen feathers, and wrongfully with ease pretend to his painfull endeavours. He had a competent estate in good Candle-rents in London, and died about 'the beginning of the raign of King Charles. The Farewell. To take my Vale of the Worthies of Wales General, I refer the Reader for the rest to a Catalogue of their names, set forth at the end of the Welch Dictionary: Which Catalogue, I was once resolved to Print as an Appendix to this Work; till disswaded on this Consideration: It being Printed in Welch, in the re-printing whereof, our Best English Correctors would be but bad Welch Corrupters, and make a Mungrel Language, more than departed from Babel, or e∣ver since was any where used. And now we proceed to the Particular Shires of Wales▪
ANGLESEY. ANGLESEY. Let us in the first place congratulate the Restitution of this Island to its ancient Latine Appellation, eeing it was in a fair way to forget its own Name of MONA, which some filched from this, and fixed on the Isle of Man, pretending, 1. The allusion in sound, betwixt Man and Mona.In hoc medio cursu [inter Iberniam & Bri∣tanniam] est Insula quae appellatur Mona. Caesar de bello Galli∣co. lib. 5. 2. The description thereof in Cesar, placing it in the middle be∣twixt Ireland and Britain, which position better agreeth to Man than Anglesey. 3. The Authorities of many [later] Historians, amongst whom Polydor Virgil, and Hector Booetius. But Dr. Humphrey Lluyd, in his learned Letter to Ortelius, most clearly demonstra∣teth this to be the true Mona; and the Reason of Reasons doth evince the truth there∣of taken from Tacitus, reporting the Roman foot (under Paulinus) to have swum over from the continent of Britain, to the Isle of Mona. Now such swimming over (with the Oars only of Arms and Legs) (ten Leagues at least) to Man is utterly impossible, which from Britain to Anglesey (being hardly an Italian mile) may, (though with much difficulty and danger) half be performed. ANGLESEY, that is, the English Island (so called, since conquered by our Countrymen) is surrounded on all sides with the Irish Sea save on the South; where a small Fret (known by the peculiar name of Menai) sundreth it from the Welsh Conti∣nent, having twenty miles in the length, and seventeen in the breadth thereof. May the Inhabitants be like the land they live in; which appears worse than it is, seemingly bar∣ren and really See Speed his Description thereof. fruitful, affording plenty of good Wheat, and to grind it, Mill-stones. These in the Greek Mat. 18. 6. Luk. 17. 2. Gospel are termed , that is, Asses Mill-stones; either because Asses (as Saint Hillary will have it) used to draw them about (before men taught the wind and water to do that work for them) or because the lower Mill-stone was cal∣led , an See Erasmus in his Chil. in Prov. Anti∣onius Asinus. Asse, from the sluggishnesse thereof as always lying still. Observe an op∣position betwixt Artificial and Natural Mills, I mean our mouths: In the former the lower Mill-stone lieth always immoveable, whilst in our mouths the upper Jaw alwayes standeth still, and the nther applyeth it self in constant motion thereunto. Excellent Mill-stones are made in this Island. When in motion, in default of Grist to grinde, they will fire one another; so necessary is forraign imployment for active spirits, to divert them from home-bred combustions. The Wonders. Before we begin on this plentiful Topick, be it premised, that I conceive the Au∣thor of that Dystick was too strait laced in his belief, thus expressing himself, Mira canā, non̄ visa mihi sed cognita multis, Sed nisi visa mihi non habitura fidem. Wonders here by me are told, To many men well known; But till my eyes shall them behold Their truth I▪le never own. For mine own part I conceive, he that will not believe is unworthy to be believed, and that it is an injury to deny credit to credible persons, attesting as followeth. There are divers Trees * dayly digged out of moist and marish places which areHumphrey Llyid in his learned Letters to Or∣telius. firm and fir for Timber. They are as black within as Ebony, and are used by the Car∣vers of that Country to Inlay Cupboards and other wooden utensils. These Trees are branched into a double difficulty; first, how they came hither; secondly, how preserved here so long from putrefaction. Some make the Pedegree of these Trees very ancient, fetching them from Noahs flood▪ then overturned with the force thereof. Others conceive them out down by the Ro∣mans when conquering this Island, and shaving away their woods, the Covert of Re∣bellion.
Others apprehend them felled (or rather falling) of themselves, their weight meet∣ing with the waterish and failing foundation; and it is more easie for one to confute the conjecture of others, than to substitute a more rational in the room thereof. But grant this first Knot in these Trees smoothed, how they came hither: a worse Knob remains to be plained; how they are preserved sound so many Ages, seeing moisture is the mother of corruption, and such the ground wherein they are found: Except any will say, there is clammy bituminous substance about them (like those inCamb. Brit. in that Coun∣ty. Lancashire) which fenceth them from being corrupted. I could adde to the wonder; how Haste nuts are found under ground with sound kernels in them; save it is fitter, that the former diffi∣culties be first conjured down, before any new ones be raised up. Proverbs. Camb. Brit. in Anglesey. Mon Mam Cymbry.] That is, Anglesey is the Mother of Wales. Not because bigger than Wales (as Mothers alwayes are, whilest their Children are infants) being scarce one twentieth part thereof: nor because (as Parents alwayes) an∣cienter than Wales, which being an Island may be presumed junior to the Continent, as probably made by the interruption of the Sea; but because when other Counties faile, she plentifully feedeth them with provision, and is said to afford Corn enough to sustain all Wales. Nor is she lesse happy in Cattel than Corn, so that this Mother of Wales is in some sort a Nurse to England. I have seen yearly great droves of fair Beasts, brought thence and sold in Essex it self; so that he who considers how much meat Anglesey spends, will wonder that it spares any; how much it spares that it spends any. Crogging, Crogging.] This Historical By-word (for Proverb properly it is none) we will consider; First, in the Original: Secondly, in the Use: Thirdly, in the Abuse thereof. Originall. In the reign of King Henry the second, in his many expeditions against Wales, one proved ve∣ry unsuccessful, wherein divers of his Camp were sent to essay a Passage over Offas ditch at Croggen-Castle. These being prevented by the British, were most of them slain, and their graves hard by are to be discovered at this day. Use. The English afterwards when having the Welsh at advantage, used to say to them, Crogging, Crogging, as a Provokative to revenge, and disswasive to give them quarter: As if the Romans on the like occasion should cry to the Carthaginians, Cannae, Cannae. Abuse. Continuance of time, which assumeth to it self a liberty to pervert words from their primitive sense, in ignorant mouths hath made it a disgraceful Attribute, when the English are pleased to revile the Welsh; though to speak plainly, I conceive not how that word can import a foul disgracing of them, first occasioned by their vali∣ant defeating of us. This By-word (though Croggen-Castle is in Denbigh-shire) being generally used all over Wales, is therefore placed in this, because the first County thereof. Prelates. GUIDO de MONA, was so sir-named from his Birth-place in Anglesey. Some suspect that Filius insulae may be as bad as Filius populi, no place being particularized for his birth: whiles others conceive this sounding to his greater dignity, to be denomi∣nated from a whole Island; the Village of his nativity being probably obscure, long and hard to be pronounced. He was afterwards Bishop of Saint Davids, and Lord Treasurer of England under King Henry the fourth, who highly honoed him; for when the Parliament moved that no Welsh-man should be a State Officer in England, the King excepted the Bishops, as confident of their faithful service. Indeed T. Wal∣lingham makes this Gui the Author of much trouble, but is the lesse to be believed therein, because of the known Antipathy betwixt Fryers and Secular ; the former being as faulty in their lafie speculation, as the other often offending in the pra∣ctical over-activity. This Bishop died nno 1407. ARTHUR BULKLEY, Bishop of Bangor, was born either in Cheshire, or more pro∣bably
in this County: But it matters not much had he never been born, who being bred Doctor of the Laws, had either never read, or wholly forgotten, or wilfully would not remember the Chapter, De sacrilegio; for he spoyled the Bishoprick, and sold the five Bells: being so over-officious, that he would go down to the Sea to see them shipped, which, in my mind, amounted to a second selling of them. We have an English Proverb of him who maketh a detrimental bargain to himself, That he may put all the gains gotten thereby into his eye, and see nothing the worse. But Bi∣shop Bulkley saw much more the worse by what he had gotten, being himselfGodwin in the Bishops of Bangor. suddenly deprived of his sight; who had deprived the Tower of Bangor of the tongue thereof. Thus having ended his credit before his days, and his days before his life, and having sate in that See fourteen years, he died 1555. WILLIAM GLYN▪ D. D. Was bon at . in this County, bred in Queens Colledge in Cambridge whereof he was Master, until in the second of Queen Mary he was preferred Bishop of Bangor. An excellent Scholar, and I have been assured by judicious Persons, who have seriously perused the solemn Disputations (printed in Master Fox) betwixt the Papists and Protestants; that of the former none pressed his Arguments with more strength and lesse passion than Doctor Glyn: though constt to his own, he was not cruel to opposite judgements, as appeareth by the appearing of no persecution in his Diocesse, and his mild Nature must be allowed at least Causa socia, or the fellow-cause thereof. He died in the first of Queen Elizabeth, and I have been informed that Jeoffry Glyn his Brother, Doctor of Laws, built and endowed a Free-Schoole at Bangor. Since the Reformation. ROULAND MERRICK, Doctor of Laws, was born at Boding án in this County, bred in Oxford, where he became Principal of New Inne-Hall, and afterwards a Dignitary in the Church of Saint Davids. Here he with others in the reign of King Edward the sixth, violently prosecuted Robert Farrar his Diocesan, with intention (as they made their boast)Fox his Act and Mon. A. 1555. pag. 144. to pull him from his Bishoprick, and bring him into a premunire, and pre∣vailed so far, that he was imprisned. This Bishop Farrar was afterwards martyred in the raign of Queen Mary. I find not the least appearance, that his former adversaries violented any thing against him under that Queen. But it is suspicious that advantage against him (I say not with their will) was grafted on the stock of his former accusation. However it is my judgement that they ought to have been, & I can be so charitable to believe that Dr. Merrick was peni∣tent for his causelesse vexing so good aSee more in the Martyrs of Carmarthen∣shire. person. Otherwise many more besides my self will proclaim him unworthy to be (who had been a Persecutor of) a Bishop. He was consecrated Bishop of Bangor December 21. in the second of Qeen Elizabeth, 1559. and sate six years in his See. I have nothing to adde, save that he was Father to Sir Gilly Merrick, Knight, who lost his life for engaging with the Earl of Essex, 1600. LANCELOT BULKLEY was born in thisSir James Ware de Praesu∣libus . County, of a then right Worshipful (since Honourable) Family, who have a fair habitation (besides others) near Beumaris. He was bred in Brasen nose Colledg in Oxford, and afterwards became, first Arch-Deacon, then Archbishop in Dublin. He was consecrated the third of October, 1619. by Christo∣pher Archbishop of Armagh. Soon after he was made by King James one of his Privy Councel in Ireland, where he lived in good reputation, till the day of his death, which happened some ten years since. Seamen. MADOC, Son to Owen Gwineth ap Gruffyth ap Conan, and brother to David ap Owen Gwineth, Prince of North Wales, was born probably at Aberfraw in this County (now a mean Town) then the principalCamb. . in Angley. Palace of their royal Residence. He made a Sea∣voyage westward, and by all probability, those names of Cape de Breton in Noruinberg, & Pengwin in part of the northern America, for a white Rock and a white headed bird, accor∣ding to the British, were reliques of this discovery. If so; then let the Genoveses and Spaniards demean themselves as younger Brethren, and get their Portions in Pensions in
those parts paid as well as they may, owning us Britons▪ (so may the Welsh and English as an united Nation style themselves) for the Heirs, to whom the solid inheritance of America doth belong, for the first discovery thereof. The truth is, a good Navy with a strong Land-Army therein, will make these probabilities of Madoc, evident Demon∣strations, and without these, in cases of this kind, the strongest Arguments are of no va∣lidity. This Sea voyage was undertaken by Madoc, about the year 1170. The Sheriffs. Expect not my description should conform this Principality to England, in present∣ing the respective Sheriffs with their Arms. For as to Heraldry, I confesse my self Lus∣cum in Anglia, Caecum in Walliâ. Besides, I question, whether out Rules in Blazonry, calculated for the East, will serve on the West of Severne? and suspect that my venial mistakes may meet with mortal anger. I am also sensible of the prodigious Antiquity of Welsh Pedegrees, so that what Zalma∣na said of the Israelites slain by him at Tabor, Each of them resembleth the children of a Judg. 8. 18. King; all the Gentry here derive themselves from a Prince at least. I quit therefore the Catalogue os Sheriffs to abler Pens, and proceed to. The Farewell. I understand there is in this Island a kind of Allumenous Earth, out of which some (fifty years since) began to make Allum and Copperess, until they (to use my Speed in the Decription of Anglesey. Authors phrase) like unflesht Souldiers gave over their enterprise, without further hope, because at first they saw it not answer their over-hasty expectations. If this Project was sirst founded on rational probability (which I have cause to believe) I desire the seasonable resumption thereof, by Undertakers of as able Brains and Purses, but more patience than the for∣mer, as a hopeful fore-runner of better successe.
BRECKNOCK-SHIRE. BRECKNOCK-SHIRE hath Radnor shire on the North, Cardigan and Carmarthen-shires on the West, -shire on the South, He∣reford and Monmouth-shires on the East the length thereof being ad∣judged twenty eight, the  thereof twenty miles. My Speed in his Description of this Coun∣ty. Author saith that this County is not greatly to be praised, or disliked of, with which his Character, the Natives thereof have no cause to be well pleased, or much offended. The plain truth is, the fruitfulnesse of the Vallies therein maketh plentiful amends for the barrennesse of the Mountains, and it is high time to give a check to the vulgar errour, which falsely repor∣teth this County the worst in Wiles; let it  for me to say, this is not it, and which is it, let others determine. Nor doth it sound a little to the credit of this County, that   the chiefe Town thereof, doth at this present afford the title of an Eartl to James Duke of Or∣mond, the first that ever received that Digniry. Above four hundred years since, a Daughter of Gilbert and Maud Becket, (and Sister to Tho. Becket) was by King Henry the second, bestowed in marriage on one Butler an English Gentleman. Him King Henry sent over into Ireland, and (endeavouring to   blood) rewarded him wth large lands, so that his posterity were created Earls of Ormond. Now therefore we have cause to congratulate the return of this noble Family ito their Native Country of England, and wish unto them the encrease of all  therein. Natural Commoditis Otters. Plenty of these (Lutrae in Latine) in Brecknock-meer. A Creature that can dig and dive, resident in the two clements of Earth and Water. The  where hee bites, maketh his Teeth to met, and the Otter leaves little distance betwixt them▪ He is as destructive to Fish, as the VVoolf to Sheep. See we here, more is requi∣red to make fine Flesh than to have fine Feeding, the Flesh of the Otter (from his innate rankness) being nought, though his Diet be dainty. I have seen a reclai∣med Otter, who in a quarter of an houre would present his Master with a brace of Carps. Otter-VVooll is much used in the making of Beavers. As Physicians have their Succedanea, or Seconds, which well supply the place of such Simples, which the Pa∣tient cannot procure, so the Otter is often in stead of the Bever, since the Beaver∣Trade is much wasted in the West Indies, their remnant retiring high into the Coun∣try, and being harder to be taken. Yea Otter-wooll is likely dayly to grow dearer, if Prime Persons of the weaker Sex (which is probable) resume the wearing of Hais. Brecknock-shire equalling her Neighbours in all General Commodities, exceedeth them in Wonders, In the Air. He that relateth Wonders walketh on the edge of an house, if he be not careful of his footing, down falls his credite: this shall make me exact in using my Au∣thors ut prius. words, informed by credible persons who had experimented it; That their Cloaks, Hats, and Staves cast down from the top of an Hill (called Mounch-denny, or Ca∣dier Arthur) and the North-East Rock thereof, would never fall, but were with the air and wind still returned back, and blown up again; nor would any thing descend save a stone, or some metalline substance. No wonder that these should descend, because (besides the magnetical quality of the Earth) their forcing of their way down is to be imputed to their united and intended gravity. Now though a large cloak is much heavier than a little stone; yet the weight thereof is diffused in several parts, and fluttering above, all of them are suppor∣ted by the Clouds, which are seen to rack much lower than the top of the Hill. But now, if in the like trial, the like repercussion be not found from the toppes
of other Mountains in Wales of equal or greater height, we confesse our selves at an absolute losse, and leave it to others to beat about to find a satisfactory answer. Let me adde that waters in Scripture are divided into waters above, and waters underGen. 1. 7. the Firmament: by the former, men generally understand (since the interpretation thereof relating to Coelum Aqueum, is exploded by the judicious) the water ingendred in the Clouds. If so, time was, when the waters beneath were higher than the waters a∣bove; namely, in Noahs flood, when the waters prevailed fifteen Cubits above the tops ofGen. 7. 20. the Mountains. In the Water. When the Meer Llynsavathan (lying within two miles of Brecknock) hath her frozen Ice first broken, it maketh a monstrous noise, to the Astonishment of the hearers, not unlike to Thunder. But till we can give a good cause of the old Thunder, [and Job 2: 14. the power of his Thunder who can understand?] we will not adventure on the disquisition of this new one. In the Earth. Reader, pardon me a word of Earthquakes in general. Seneca beholds them most terrible, because most Natural quest. cap. 1. unavoidable of all earthly dangers. In other frights [Tem∣pest, Lightning, Thunder, &c.] we shelter our selves in the bowels of the Earth, which here from our safest refuge, become our greatest danger. I have learned from an able * Pen, that the frequency and fearfulnesse of Earthquakes, gave the first occasion toDr. Hackwill in his Apolo∣gy, lib. 2. sect. 4. that passage in the Letany, From sudden death good Lord deliver us. Now to VVales. The Inhabitants of this County have a constant Tradition, that where now the Meer Llynsavathan spreadeth its waters, stood a fair City, till swallowed up by an Earthquake, which is not improbable. First, because all the High-ways of this County do lead thither; and it is not likely that the Loadstone of a bare Lake should attract so much Confluence. Secondly, Ptolomy placeth in this Tract the City Loventrium, which all the care of Master As he con∣fesseth in the Description of this shire. Cambden could not recover by any ruines or report thereof, and therefore likely to be drowned in this Poole. The rather because Levenny is the name of the River rnning through it. Saints. Saint KEYNE. CANOCH. CADOCK. The first of these was a Woman (here put highest by the cur∣tesie of England;) the two later, Men, all three Saints, and children to Braghan, King, builder and namer of Brecknock. This King had four and twenty Daughters, a jolly number; and all of them See Camb∣dens Brit. in Bnock∣shire. Saints: a greater happinesse, though of them all, the name onely of Rob. Buckley M. S. in vilis SS. mulierum Angliae in vita Sanctae Keyn. fol. 90. Saint Keyne surviveth to posterity. Whether the said King was so fruitful in Sons, and they as happy in Saintship, I do not know, onely meeting with these two, Saint Canoch and Saint Cadock, (whereof the later is reported a Martyr) all flourishing about the year of our Lord 492. and had in high veneration amongst the people of South-VVales. I know not whether it be worth the reporting, that there is in Cornwall, near the Parish of St. Neots, a Well arched over with the robes of four kinds of Trees, VVithy, Oak, Elm, and Ash, dedicated to Saint Keyne aforesaid. The reported vertue of the Water is this, That whether Carew his Survey of Cornwal. pag. 130. Husband or VVife come first to drink thereof, they get the mastery thereby. St. CLINTANKE was King of Brecknock, a small Kingdom for an obscure King, though eminent with some for his Sanctity. Now it happened, that a noble Virgin gave it out, that she would never Jo. Capgrave in Cabal. S. S. Brit. marry any man except the said King, who was so zealous a Christian. Such as commend her good choice, dislike her publick profession thereof, which with more Maiden-like modesty, might have been concealed. But, see the sad successe thereof. A Pagan Souldier purposely to defeat her desire, kild this King as he was one day a hunting; who, though he lost his life, got the reputation of a Engl. Martyr. on the 19. August. Saint,
and so we leave him. The rather, because we find no date fixed unto him; so that the Reader may believe him to have lived, even when he thinks best himself. Prelates. GILES de BRUSE, born at Brecknock, was Son to William de Bruse Baron of Breck∣nock, and a prime Peer in his Generation. This Giles became afterwards Bishop of He∣reford, and in the Civil Wars sided with the Nobility against King John; on which ac∣count he was banished, but at length returned, and recovered the Kings favour. His Paternal Inheritance (by death it seems of his elder Brother) Godwin in the Bishops of Hereford. pag. 536. was devolved unto him (being together Bishop and Baron by descent) and from him after his death, transmit∣ted to his Brother Reginald, who married the Daughter of Leoline Prince of Wales. If all this will not recover this Prelate, into our Catalogue of Worthies, then know, that his Effigies on his Tomb in Hereford Church, holdeth a Steeple in his hand, whence it is concluded, that he built the Belfree of that Cathedral, as well he might, having so vast an estate. His death happened Anno 1215. Since the Reformation. THOMAS HOWEL was born at So was I told by his Brother Mr. James Howel. Nangamarch in this County, within few miles of Brecknock, bred Fellow of Jesus Colledge in Oxford, and became afterwards a meek man, and most excellent Preacher. His Sermons, like the waters of Siloah, did run softly, gliding on with a smooth stream: So that his matter by a lawful and laudable felony, did stal secretly into the hearts of his hearers. King Charls made him the last Bishop of Bristol, being consecrated at Oxford. He died Anno Dom. 1646. leaving many Or∣phan children behind him. I have been told, that the honourable City of Bristol hath taken care for their com∣fortable education, and am loath to pry too much into the truth thereof, lest so good a report should be confuted. States-Men. HENRY STAFFORD, Duke of Buckingham. Though Humphrey his Father had a fair Castle at, and large lands about Stafford (whereof he was Earl) yet his Nativity is most probably placed in this County, where he had Brecknock-Castle, and a Princi∣pality about it. This was he, who with both his hands set up Richard the third on the Throne, endeavouring afterwards with his hands and teeth too, to take him down, but in vain. He was an excellent Spoaks-man, though I cannot believe that his long Oration (to perswade the Londoners to side with the Usurper) was ever uttered by him in terminis, as it lieth in Sir Thomas Mores History. Thus the Roman Generals provided themselves of Valour, and Livy (as he represented them) stocked them with Eloquence. Yet we may be well assured that this our Duke either did or would have said the same, and he is the Orator who effects that he aimeth at; this Duke being unhappily happy therein. Soon after not remorse for what he had done, but revenge for what King Richard would not do (denying his desire) put him on the project of unravelling what he had woven be∣fore. But his fingers were entangled in the threads of his former Web; the King com∣passing him into his clutches, betrayed by Humphrey Banister his Servant. The Sheriff seised this Duke in Shropshire, where he was digging a Speeds Chro∣nicle in the raign of King Rich. the third ditch in a Disguise; How well he managed the Mattock and Spade, I know not, this I know, that in a higher sense, He had made a Psal. 7. 1. Pit, [to disinherit his Soveraign] and digged it, and is fallen into the Ditch which he had made, being beheaded at Sarisbury without any legal Tryal, Anno 1484. Memorable Persons. NESTA. Hunger maketh men eat what otherwise they would let alone, not to say, cast away: The cause I confesse (wanting matter to furnish out our Description) inviting me to meddle with this Memorable (not Commendable) Person.
1. She was Daughter to Grffin Prince of Wales. 2. VVife to Bernard de Neumarch, a Noble Norman, and Lord by Conquest of this County. 3. Mother to Mahel, an hopeful Gentleman, and Sibyl his Sister. 4. Harlot to a young man, whose name I neither do, nor desire to know. It happened, Mahel having got this Stallion into his power, used him very hardly, yet not worse than he deserved. Nesta madded hereat, came in open Court, and on her Oath, before King Henry the second, publickly protested, (no Manna like revenge to malicious minds, not caring to wound their Foes, though through themselves) that Mahel was e of Neumarch his Son, but begotten on her in Adultery. This, if true, spake her dishonesty; if false, her perjury; true or false, her peerless im∣pudency. Hereby she disinherited her Son, and setled a vast Territory on Sibyl her sole Daughter, married afterwards to Milo Earl of Hereford. The Farewell. When Mr. Speed in pursuance of his Description of England, passed this County, no fewer than Eight, who had been Bayliffs of Brecknock, gave him courteous enter∣tainment. This doth confirm the Character I have so often heard of the Welsh Hospitality. Thus giving them their due praise on just occasion, I hope, that the British Reader will the better digest it, if he find some passages altogether as true as this, though nothing so pleasing to Him, in our following Farewells.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE. CARDIGAN-SHIRE is washed on the West with the Irish Sea, and parted from the neighbouring Shires by Rivers, and the Reader will be careful that the similitude of their sounds betray him not to a mistake herein. 1. Dovi severing it on the North from Merioneth-shire. 2. Tovy on the East from Brecknock-shire. 3. Tyvy on the South from Carmarthen and Pembroke-shlre. MySpeed in the description of this Couny. Author saith the form thereof is Horn-like (wider towards the North) and I may say it hath a Corn-Copia therein of all things for mans sustenance, especially if in∣dustry be used. This County, though remotest from England, was soonest reduced to the English Dominion, whilest the Countries interposed maintained their liberty. The reason whereof was this; The English being far more potent in shipping than the Welsh, found it more facile to saile over the Mountains of Water (so the Surges of the Sea are termed by theQuti m∣tes volv Aquarum. O∣vidius. Poet) than march over the Mountains of Earth; and by their Fleet invaded and conquered this County in the reign of Rufus; and Henry the first bestowed the same entirely upon Gilbert de Clare. Natural Commodities. Bevers. Plenty of these formerly did breed in the River Tyvy, which (saith Giraldus Cam∣brensis) was the only place afforded them in all Britain. A cunning Creature, yet re∣ported by some men more crafty than he is; who relate, that, being hunted, and in danger to be taken, he biteth off his Stones, as useful in Physick (for which only his life was then sought) and so escapeth. Hence some will have him called Castro, à Ca∣strando seipsum: And others adde, that having formerly bitten off his Stones, he stand∣eth upright, and sheweth the Hunters that he hath none, that so they may surcease their pursuit of an unprofitable Qure. Hence it was, that amongst the Egyptians, the Bever passeth for an Hierogly∣phick of him who hurteth himself, though by Alciate the great Emblematist, he is turned to another purpose, to teach men rather to part with their purses, than their lives, and by their wealth to redeem themselves out of danger. The plain truth is, all those reports of he Bever, are no better than vulgar errours, and are disproved both by sense and experience; For his Stones are so placed in his body, as those of the Boar, that it is impossible for himself with his teeth to touch them. And some maintain they cleave so fast to his back, they cannot be taken away without loss of his life. However, grant the story true, the gelding of himself would not serve his turn, or excuse the Bever from Hunters now adays, except he could also flea off his skin, the wooll whereof is so commonly used for the making of Hats. All that I will add, is this, that what plenty soever there was of Bevers in this County, in the days of Giral∣dus, the breed of them now is quite destroyed, and neither fore-foot of a Bever (which is like a Dogs) nor hind-foot (which is like a Goose) to be seen therein. Proverbs. Being well at leisure in this little County, we will observe (what indeed is generall to all Wales) something Proverbial, and conducing to our necessary information. Talaeth, Talaeth.] In effect the same in English with Fin, Fine; when Mothers and Nurses are disposed to please their little Ones in dressing them: take the original thereof: When Rode∣rick the Great divided Wales betwixt his three Sons, into three Dominions; [North Wales, South VVales, and Powis.] He ordered, that each of them should wear upon his
Bonnet or Helmet a Coronet of Gold, being a broad lace or head-band indented upwards, set and wrought with precious stones called in the British Talaeth, and they from thenceDr Pwell in his Histoy of Wales pag. 36. Ytri twysoc Talaethioc, that is, the three crowned Princes. But now either the number of Princes is well multiplied in Wales, or, which is truer, the Honour of Ta∣laeth is much diminished; that being so called, wherewith a Childs head is bound uppermost upon some other linnen cloaths. Thus the English have that, which they call the Crown of a Cap. Bu Arthur ond tra fu.] That is, Arthur was not, but whilest he was. It is sad to say, Nos fuimus Trojes, the greatest eminency when not extant is extinct. The Fryer never loved what was good. Ne thorres Arthur Nawdd gwraig.] That is, King Arthur did never violate the refuge of a Woman. Arthur is notoriously known for the mirrour of manhood. By the Womans Refuge, many understand her Tongue, and no valiant man will revenge her words with his blows. Nullum memorabile Nomen,—Fminii in Paena. Caleny Sais wrah Gymro.] That is, the heart of a Englishman (whom they call Saxons) towards a Welsh-man. It is either applied to such who are possessed with prejudice, or only carry an outward compliance without cordial affection. We must remember this Proverb was origined, whilest England and wales were at deadly Feude, there being better love betwixt them since the union of the Nations. Ni Chitw Cymbro oni Gollo.] That is, the welshman keeps nothing until he hath lost it. The historical truth thereof is plain in the British Chronicles, that when the British recovered the lost Castles from the English, they doubled their diligence and valour, keeping them more tenaciously than before, A fo Pen, bid Bont.] That is, he that will be a Head, let him be a Bridge. It is founded on a Fictitious tra∣dition thus commonly told. Benigridran a Britain is said to have carried an Army over into Ireland; his men came to a River over which neither was Bridg nor Ferrey, hereupon he was fain to carry all his men over the River on his own back. To lesson men not to affect the empty title of a General, except they can supply their Souldiers with all ne∣cessaries, be their wardrobe in want of Cloaths, Kitching in want of Meat, &c. Thus Ho∣nour hath ever a great burden attending it. We will conclude these General Proverbs of wales with a Custom which was ancient in this Nation, they had a kind of PlayDr. Davis in his Proverbs litera Ch. wherein the stronger who prevailed, put the the weaker into a Sack; and hence we have borrowed our English By-word to express such betwixt whom there is apparent odds of strength, he is able to put him up in a bagge. The Farewell. It is observable what a credibleRoger Houe∣den, and out of him Mr. Camd, in this County. Author reporteth, that there was in this County a City (once an Episcopal See) called Llan-Badern-Vaure, that is, Llan-Baderne the great. Which City is now dwindled to nothing. Reader, by the way, I observe that Cities surnamed the Great, come to Little at last, as if God were offended with so ambitious an Epithete; Sidon theJosh. 11. 8. Great, Ninive theJonah 3. 2. Great, Babylon theRevel. 18. 2. Great, it is fallen, &c. But the cause of the ruine of this City was for their cruel killing of their Bishop, which provoked Divine Justice against them. I hope the welsh warned herewith, will for the future demean themselves with due respect to such persons, and am confirmed in my confidence from their commendable Proverb, Na difanco y Beriglawr, vilifie not thy Parish-Priest, and then much more ought the Bishop to be respected.
CARMARTHEN-SHIRE. CARMARTHEN-SHIRE hath Pembroke shire on the Wst, the Severn-Sea on the South, Cardigan-shire on the North, Brecknock and Glamorgan-shires on the East. The mountains therein are nei∣ther so many nor high as in the neighbouring Counties, affording plenty of Grass, Grain, Wood, Fish, and what not? Besides, nature here giveth the Inhabitants both meat and stomach; the sharpness of the air breeding an appetite in them. There is a place in this County called Golden-grove, which I confess is no Ophir or Land of Havilah, yielding Gold in specie, but plentifully affording those rich Com∣modities, which quickly may be converted thereunto; and the pleasure is no less than the profit thereof. It is the Possession of the right Honourable Richard Vaughan Baron of Emelor in England, and Earl of Carbery in Ireland. He well deserveth to be owner of Golden-grove, who so often hath used a Golden hand, in plentiful relieving many emi∣nent Dvines during the late Sequestration. This county affording no peculiar Com∣modities, let us proceed to Wonders. Giraldus Cambrensis reporteth a Fountain to be in this County (let he himself find it out and justifie it) which conformable to the Sea, ebbeh and floweth twice in four and twenty hours. But seeing this is a maritime Shire, possibly there may be a more then ordinary communication betwixt it and the Ocean, and then the wonder is not so great. More credibly it is related, that there are in this Shire, strange subterranean Vaults, conceived the Castles of routed people in the Civil Wars. And no wonder, seeing Da∣vid first set up in a defensive posture for himself in the Cave of Adullam, so that ha∣ving no place where he could safely set the sole of his foot above ground, all his present help was under the Earth, and future hope was above the heavens. Martyrs. ROBERT FARRAR an English man by bith, but where born unknown, was a prime Martyr of this County. A man not unlearned, but somewhat indiscreet, or ra∣ther uncomplying, which procured him much trouble: so that he may be said with Saint Laurence to be broyled on both sides, being persecuted both by Protestants and Papists. He was preferred to be Bishop of Saint Davids, by the Duke of Sommerset, then Lord Protector, who was put to death not long after. Some conceive, that the Pa∣trons fall was the Chaplains greatest guilt, and encouraged his enemies against him. Of these, two were afterwards Bishops in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, viz. Thomas Young Arch. Bishop of York, and Rowland Merrick Bishop of Bangor. Souldiers. Sir RICE ap THOMAS was never more than a Knight, yet little less than a Prince in this his Native County. If the Author of Praelia Anglornm may not be believed, —Ricius Thomas flos Cambro-Britannum. King Henry the seventh will himself witness his worth. To him lately landed at Mil∣ford Haven with contemptible forces; this Sir Rice repaired with a considerable acces∣sion of choice Souldiers, marching with them to Bosworth field, where he right vali∣antly behaved himself. That thrifty King according to his cheap course of remunera∣tion (rewarding Gown-men in Orders (by him most employed) with Church Livings, and Sword-men with Honour) afterwards made Sir Rice Knight of the Order, and well might he give him a Garter, by whose effectual help he had recovered a Crown. Elmelin in this County was one of his principal seats, whose name and ture he al∣tered, building and calling itCamb.  in this Coun∣ty. New-Castle, and I believe it one of the latest Castles in
Wales, seeing since that time it hath been fashionable to demolish, not to erect fortified Houses. As he appeared early, so he continued long in military action, for I find him in the fourth year of King Henry the eighth, conductor of five hundred light horse, at the pompous and expensive fiege of Therouene, where I meet his last mention in our En∣glish Chronicles. WALTER de DEVEREUX son of—Deverex and Cicely his Wife (sole sister to Thomas Bourchier last Earl of Essx) was born in the town ofMills in his Catalogue of Honour in the Earls of Es∣sex. Carmarthen, and by Queen Elizabeth in his Maternall Right created Earl of Essex. One Martially minded, and naturally hating Idlenesse, the Rust of the Soul. Though time hath silenced the factions, and only sounded the Facts of Queen Eliza∣beths Court, no place had more heart-burnings therein, and it was a great part of Gods goodness and her prudence that no more hurt was done thereby. Many malig∣ned our Earl—Tantae ne Animis Aularibus Irae? desirous to thrust him on dange∣rous designs. Nor need we consult the Oracle of Apollo to discover his chief Adver∣sary, being he was a prime Favourite, who loved the Earls nearest relation better than he loved the Earl himself, whom he put on the project of Ireland. Yet was not our Walter surprised into that service, seeing Injuria non fit volenti, and being sensible that his roome was more welcome to some than his company at Court, he willingly embraced the employment. Articles (the first and last I believe in that kind) are drawn up betwixt the Queen and him, who was to maintain such a200. horse and 400. foot. proportion of Souldiers on his own Cost, and to have part of the fair Territory of—Clande∣Boy in Ulster for the conquering thereof. So much for the Bears skin, now all the craft will be to catch, kill, and fley the Bear himself. Well, to maintain an Army (though a very little one) is a Soveraigns and no Subjects work, too heavy for the support of any private mans estate, which cost this Earl first the Mortgaging, then the selling out-right his fair Inheritance in Essex. Over he goeth into Ireland with a noble company of Kindred and Friends, supernumerary volunteers above the proportion of Souldiers agreed upon. Sir William Fitz-VVilliams Lord Deputy of Ireland hearing of his coming, and su∣specting (Court jealousie riseth very early, or goeth not to bed at all) to be ecclipsed by this great Earl, sollicits the Queen to maintain him in the full power of his place, without any diminution; alledging this, much to conduce to the Honour of her Majesty whom he represented. Hereupon it was Ordered, that the Earl should take his Commission from this Lord Deputy, which with much importunity and long attendance, he hardly obtained, and that with no higher Title than Governour of Ulster. After many impressions (not over successfully) made in Ulster, he was by the De∣puty* Camb. Eliz. Anno 1573. remanded into the South of Ireland, where he spent much time (take much in little in my Authors words as to his general performance) Nullius bono sed magno suo damno. His Friends in the English Court grow few and cold, his Foes many and active; affronts were plentifully powred upon him, on purpose either to drown him in grief, or burn him in his own anger. From Munster he was sent back into Ulster, where he was forbidden to follow his blow, and use a Victory he had gotten: Yea, on a sud∣denCamb. Eliz. Anno 1575. stript out of his Commission, and reduced to be a Governour of three hundred men: yet his stout Stomach (as true tempered Steele) bowed without breaking, in all these afflictions embracing all changes with the same tenour of constcy. Py days in Ireland came very thick, moneys out of England very slow; his noble Asso∣ciates began to withdraw, common men to mutiny, so that the Earl himself was at the last recalled home. Not long after he was sent over the second time into Ireland with a loftier Title, (the length of the Feather makes not the Head the higher) of Earl Marshall of Ireland, where he fell into a strange looseness (not without suspicion of Poyson) and he died, Anno 1576. His Soul he piously resigned to God, his Lands (much impaired) descen∣ded to his Son Robert, but ten years of age. His Body was brought over and buried in Carmarthen the place of his Nativity, and his Widow Lady (to say no more) was soon
re-married to Robert Earl of Leicester. Let me adde, that he died in theCamb. Eliz. Anno 1576. 36▪ year of his age, fatal to his Family, his Father and grand-Father dying in the same, which year Robert Earl of Essex his Son never attained to, and whether it had not been as honou∣rable for his Grand-Child Robert Earl of Essex to have died in the same year of his age, or to have lived longer, let others decide. Writers. AMBROSE MERLIN was born at Carmarthen, a City so denominated from his Nativity therein. This I write in conformity to common Tradition (and he who will not errare cum vulgo, must pugnare cum vulgo) my own judgement remonstrating against the same, finding the City called Mariadunum in Ptolomy, before Merlins Cra∣dle was ever made, if Merlins Cradle was ever made. His extraction is very incredible, reported to have an Incubus to his Father, preten∣ding to a Pedigree older than Adam, even from the Serpent himself. But aDr. Brown in his vulgar Errors, Book 7. Ch. 16. Learned Pen demonstrateth the impossibility of such Conjunctions. And let us not load Satan with groundless sins, whom I believe theIoh. 8. 44. Father of lyes, but [in a litteral sense] no Father of Bastards. Many are the pretended Prophesies of Merlin, whereof the British have a very high esteem, and I dare say nothing against them; only I humbly tender to this Nations consideration a modest Proverb of their own Country, Namyn Dduw nid oes Dewin; that besides God there is no Diviner. Yet I deny not but the Devil can give a shrewd conjecture; but often the deceiver is deceived. Sure I am Merlins Prophesies have done much mischief, seeing such who pretended skill therein, that they could unfold his meaning (though for my part I believe they must have the Devils key who open the Devils lock) putDr. Powell in his History of Wales, pag. 386. Owen Glendower on his Rebellion against King Henry the fourth, perswading him the time was come wherein he should recover the Welsh Principality, which caused the making of those cruel Laws, with Draco's, written in blood against the Welsh, which no tender Englishman can read without regret. There want not those who maintain Merlin to be a great Chymist, and those we know have a Language peculiar to themselves, so that his seeming Prophesies are not to be expounded historically but naturally, disguising the mysteries of that faculty from vulgar intelligence. The best Prophesie I meet with in Merlin which hit the mark indeed, is what I find cited out of him byIn his Histo∣ry of Ireland. Giraldus Cambrensis. Sextus maenia Hiberniae subvertent, & Regiones in Regnum redigentur. The Sixth shall overturn the walls of Ireland, and reduce their Countries into a Kingdom. This was accomplished under King James the sixth, when their Fastnesses (Irish Walls) were dismantled, and Courts of Civil Justice set up in all the Land. But enough of Merlin, who is reported to have died Anno— The Farewell. How this County (with the rest of Wales) hath preserved its woods in our unhappy Civil Wars is to me unknown; yet if they have been much wasted (which I suspect) I wish that the Pit-Coal, which in some measure it affordeth, may daily be increased for the supply of their fewell.
CARNARVON. This County hath the Irish Sea on the West, Angle∣sea (divided by Menaifre) on the North, Denby shire on the East, and Merionith shire on the South. This I have observed peculiar to this County, that all the Market are Sea Towns (being five in number, as noted in the Maps) which no other County in England or Wales doth afford. The Natives hereof count it no small credit unto them, that they made the longest resistance against, and last submitted unto the English: And indeed for natural strength, it exceedeth any part of this Principality; so that the English were never more distres∣sed, than in the Invasion thereof. I am much affected with the ingenuity of an English Nobleman, who following the Camp of King Henry the third, in these parts, wrote home to his friends about the end of September 1245. The naked truth indeed as followeth;  Paris Anno notato, pag. 924. We lie in our Tents watching, fasting, praying, and freezing: we watch for fear of the Welsh-men, who are wont to in∣vade us in the night; we Fast for want of meat, for the half peny loaf is worth five pence; we Pray to God to send us home again speedily; we Freeze for want of winter garments, ha∣ving nothing but thin linnen betwixt us and the wind. Yet is this County in it self sufficiently plentiful (though the Welsh had the wit to keep ood from the English) and Snow-don-Hills therein are commended by my * Au∣thor for fertility of wood, cattel, fish, and fowl. Smile not Reader, to hear of Fish in so high Mountains which have plenty of Pools interposed. Wonders. Giraldus Cambrensis telleth us how there is a Lake in Snowden Hills in this County, which hath a floating Island therein. But it seemeth that it either always swimmeth a∣way from such who endeavour to discover it, or else that this vagrant wearied with long wandring hath at last fixed it self to the Continent. He telleth us also of Monocu∣lous Fishes, though not fully acquainting us how their one eye is disposed. Whe∣ther Polyphemus-like in the midst of their head, or only on one side. The truth is, these One-eyed Fishes, are too nimble for any men with two eyes to behold them. Proverbs. Craig Eriry or Snow don will yield Camb. Brit. in ∣shire. sufficient Pasture for all the Cattell of VVales put together.] Some will say this cannot be literally true, except the Cattel of VVales be few, be∣neath, and Snow-don-hills fruitful above all belief. The best is, the time is not expressed how long these hills will suffice for their pasture. But let us not be so morose, but to understand the meaning of this expression, importing by help of an Hyperbole, the ex∣traordinary fruitfulness of this place. Diange ar Gluyd, a boddi ar Gonway.] That is, to scape Clude and be drown'd in Conway: parallel to the Latine, Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charibdin. However, that Pilot is to be pitied, who to shun Scylla doth run on Charibdis, because those rocks were neer and a narrow passage betwixt them; whereas the two Rivers of Clude and Conway are twenty miles a sunder, affording men scope enough to escape them; but little or much in such cases are the same with indiscreet persons. Princes. EDWARD the Fourth (but first surviving) son of King Edward the First and Queen Eleanor, was born at Carnarvon in this County, April 25. 1284. No Prince ever as∣cended the English Throne with greater, or used it with less advantage to himself.
First, though his Father had in a manner surprised the Wlsh to accept him for their Prince, (pleading his royal extraction, birth in VVales, in ability to speak a word of English, and innocence that none could tax him with actual sin.) Yet I find them not for his Fathers fallacy to think the worse of his Son, sic juvat esse deceptos, and general∣ly they accepted him, as preferring that a Prince should be put with wit, rather than with violence upon them. In England he succeeded to a wise and victorious Father who happily had hit the ex∣pedient to be both beloved and feared by his Subjects, leaving the land in so good a posture for government, that touch the wheele and it would turn in the right tract of its self. But this Edward first estranged himself from his Subjects, and [in effect] subjected himself to a stranger Pierse Gaveston his French Minion, and after his execution to the two Spencers, who though Native English-men, were equally odious to the English for their insolence. Hence it was that he first lost the love of his Subjects, then of his Queen (the va∣cuity of whose bed was quickly filled up) then his Crown, then his Life. Never any English Kings case was so pitiful, and his person less pitied, all counting it good rea∣son that he should give entertainment to that woe, which his wilfulness had invited home to himself. His violent death happened at Berkley Castle, Septemb. 22. 1327. Saints. There is an Island called Berdsey justly reduceable to this County (lying within a mile of the South-West Promontory thereof) wherein the Corps of no fewer than Cambd Brit. in Insulis Brita∣. twenty thousand Saints are said to be interred. Estote vos omnes Sancti; Proud 1 Kin. 20. 10. Benhadad boasted that the dust of Samaria did not suffice for handfuls for all the people that followed him. But where would so many thou∣sand Bodies find Graves in so petty an Islet? But I retrench my self, confessing it more facile to find Graves in Berdsey for so many Saints, than Saints for so many Graves. States=Men. JOHN WILLIAMS was born at Aber-Conwy in this County, bred Fellow of Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, Proctor of the University, Dean of Westminster, Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and lastly Arch-Bishop of York. In my Church History I have offended his Friends, because I wrote so little in his praise, and distasted his Foes because I said so much in his defence. But I had rather to live un∣der the indignation of others, for relating what may offend, than die under the accusation of my own conscience, for reporting what is untrue. He died on the 25. day of March, 1649. Prelates since the Reformation. RICHARD VAUGHAN, born at Nuffrin (or else at Etern) in this County, was bred Fellow in Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, and was afterwards successively Bishop of Bangor, Chester, and lastly of London; a very corpulent man, but spiritually minded; an excellent Preacher, and pious Liver, on whom I Cited in H. Hollnd, but made (as I have been told) by J. Owex. find this Epigram, which I will en∣deavour to English. Praesul es (ô Britonum decus immortale tuorum) Tu Londinensi primus in Urbe Brito. Hi mihi Doctores semper placuere, docenda Qui faciunt, plus quam qui faciendae docent. Pastor es Anglorum doctissimus, optimus ergo, Nam facienda doces ipse, docenda facis. Prelate of London (O immortal grace Of thine own Britons) first who had that place. He's good, who what men ought to do, doth teach He's better, who doth do, wht men shold preach. You best of all, preaching what men should do, And what men ought to preach that doing too. Here to justifie the observation, Praesul must be taken for a plain Bishop, and primus ac∣counted but from the conversions of the Saxons to Christianity. For, orherwise we find no fewer than Reckoned up by Bishop Godwin in his Cataloge. sixteen Arch Bishops of London, before that time, and all of the Bri∣tish Nation. He was a most pleasant man in discourse, especially at his Table, main∣taining
that Truth, At meals be glad, for sin be sad, as indeed he was a mortified man. Let me add, nothing could tempt him to betray the Rights of the Church to sacrilegi∣ous Hands, not sparing sharply to reprove some of his own Order on that account. He died March 30. 1607. being very much lamented. HENRY ROULANDS born in this County, bred in the University of Ox∣ford, was consecrated Bishop of Bangor, Novemb. 12. 1598. We have formerly told how Bishop Bulkley plundered the Tower of Saint Asaph of five fair Bells; now the bounty of this Bishop bought four new ones for the same (the second Edition in Cases of this kind is seldom as large as the first) whereof the biggest cost an Godwin in the Bishops of Bangor. hundred pounds. He also gave to Jesus Colledge in Oxford, means for the maintenance of two Fellows. He died Anno Dom. 1615. The Farewell. The Map of this County (as also of Denby and Flint-shire) in Mr. Speed is not divi∣ded (as other Shires in England and Wales) with Pricks into their several Hundreds, which would have much conduced to the compleating thereof, whereof he rendreth this reason, That he could not procure the same (though promised him) out of the Sheriffs Books; fearing lest the riches of their Shire should be further sought into by revealing such particulars. He addeth moreover, This I have observed in all my Survey, that where least is to be had the greatest fears are possessed. I would advise these Counties hereafter to deny no small Civility to a painful Author, holding a Pen in his hand, for fear a drop of his Ink fall upon them; for though juyce of Lemmon will fetch such spots out of Linnen, when once printed in a Book they are not so easily got out, but remain to posterity.
DENBIGH-SHIRE. DENBIGH-SHIRE hath Flint-shire, Cheshire, and Shrop-shire on the East, Montgomery and Merionith-shires on the South, Carnarvon∣shire (divided by the River Conwey on the West) being from East to West thirty one, from North to South twenty miles. The East part of this County (towards the River Dee) is fruit∣ful, but in the West the industrious Husbandman may be said to fetch his bread out of the fire, paring off their upper Turfs with a Spade, piling them up in heaps, burning them to Ashes, and then throwing them on their barren ground, which is much fertilized thereby. Natural Commodities. Amelcorne. This English Word (which I find in the English In his Brit. in the descri∣ption of this County. Cambden) is Welsh to me. Let us therefore repair to his Latine Original, where he informeth us, that this County pro∣duceth plenty of Arinca. Here the difficulty is a little changed, not wholly cleared. In our Dictionaries Arinca is Englished 1. Rice; but this (though a frequent name of many in this Country) is a grain too choice to grow in Wales, or any part of England. 2. Amelcorn; and now having run round, we have not stirred a step, as to more information of what we desired a kind of. At last with long beating about, we find it to be RYE, in Latine more generally called Serale. Nat. Hist. lib. 28. cap. 16. Plinles Pen casts three dashes on this Grain, being (it seems) no friend to it, or it to him. 1. Est tantum ad arcendam famem utile, Good only to drive away famin, as not pleasant at all. 2. Est, (licet farre mixtum) ventri ingratissimum, as griping the Guts. 3. ascitur quocunqne solo, any base ground being good enough to bear it. However, (whatever his forraign Rye was) that which groweth incredibly plenti∣ful in this County; is very wholsome, and generally in England, Rye maketh moistest bread in the dryest Summer, for which cause some prefer it before Wheat it self. Buildings. The Church of Wrexham is commended for a fair and spacious building, and it is questionable, whether it claimeth more praise for the artificial Tower thereof, or for the Organs. These were formerly most Comb. Bit. in Dnbigshire famous (the more because placed in a Parochial, no Cathedral Church) for beauty, bigness and tunableness: though far short of those in worth which Michael Emperor of Constantinople caused to be made of pure Zonaras Tom. 3. Gold, and beneath those in bigness which George the Salamitan Abbot, made to be set up in the Church of his Convent, whose biggest Pipe was Bschius de Monast. Germ. fol. 107. eight and twenty foot long, and four spans in compass. The first Organ which was ever seen in the West of Europe, was, what was Marian. Scot. in Chron. sub An. 757. sent Anno 757. from Constantine the Grecian Emperor, to Pipin King of France. And their general use in Churches began about the year 828. I read that the form of this instru∣ment was much improved by one Bernard a Venetian (who was absolutely the best Sabllicus Enne. 10. lib. 8. Musician in the World) with addition of many Pipes thereunto. What is become of Wrexham-Organs, I know not, and could heartily wish, they had been removed into some Gentlemans house, seeing such as accuse them for su∣perstitious in Churches must allow them lawful in private places. Otherwise such Mo∣roso's deserve not to be owners of an articulate voice sounding thorough the Organ of a Throat.
But, to return to the buildings in this County, Holt Castle must not be forgotten; How well t is now faced and repaired without, I know not; I know when it was better lined within, than any Subjects Castle (I believe) in Europe at that time, viz. when in the possession of William Lord Stanley. When the ready mony and plate therein (besides Jewels and rich Houshold-stuff) amounted untoLod Bcoas Henry  ∣venth, pag. 133. forty thousand Marks, got by the plunder of Bosworth field. But as the River Dee, running by this Castle, is soon after swallowed up in the Irish Ocean; so it was not long before this vast treasure, upon the Owners attainder, was confiscated into the Coffers of King Henry the seventh. Prelates. LEOLINE being born in the Marches, he had a double name, to notifie him to po∣sterity. One, after the Welsh-mode à Patre,Bshop Good∣ in the Bi∣shops of Saint Asaph. Leoline ap Llewelin ap Yuyr, the other ac∣cording to the custom of the English Clergy, à Patria, Leoline de Bromfield, a mostCamb. Brit. in Deb. . fruit∣ful tract of ground in this County. Under King Edward the first, Anno 1293. he was consecrated Bishop of Saint Asaph, and deserved right well of that See, by his mani∣fold Benefactions, appropriating some Churches to his Chapter. As for a portion of Tithes in the Parish of Corwen, appropriated to the Fabrick of the Church,Bisop God∣win ut prius. he reduced it to its former estate. The first and last instance (for Prece∣dent I dare not call it) which I have met with, of a Church legally appropriated, which reverted to its presentative propriety. Had King Henry the eighth, at the dissolution of Abbies, followed this example, the Church had been richer by many pounds; the Exchequer not poorer by a penny. I find also, that he askedIdem. Ibid. leave of King Edward the first to make a Will, which may seem very strange, whether it was a Court-comple∣ment, or ex gratia cautela, or because Welsh Bishops in that age might not Testamentize without Royal assent. By his Will he bequeathed much of Plate, rich Vests and Books to the Canons of that Church and his Chaplains, dying Anno Dom. 1313. Since the Reformation. GODFREY GOODMAN was born of wealthy Parentage in this County, bred un∣der hisGbriel . Uncle (of whom hereafter) in Westminster School, then in Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, where he commenced Doctor of Divinity, successively preferred Peben∣dary of Windsor, Dean of Rochester, and Bishop or . He is  joyned to the Prelates before (though he lived long ) the Reformaon, because he agreed with them in Judgement, dying a professed Romanist, as appeareth by his Will Yet the Adversaries of our Hierarchy have no cause to triumph thereat, who  charge Popish compliance on all his Order, being able to produce of two hundred Bi∣shops since Queen Elizabeth but this only instance, and him a person of no great emi∣nency; not only disavowed by his fellow Prelates, but imprisoned in the late Convo∣cation for his erronious Opinions. Indeed in this Discourse he would be constantly complaining of our first Reformers; and I heard him once say in some passion, That Bishop Ridley was a very Odde man; to whom one presently returned, he was an Odde man indeed my Lord, for all the Po∣pish party in England could not match him with his equal in Learning and Religion. To give Goodman his due, he was a harmless man, hurtfull to none but himsel, pitiful to the poor, hospitable to his neighbours, against the ruining of any of an opposite judge∣ment, and gave the most he left to pious uses. He was no contemptible Historian, but I confesse an under-match to Doctor Hackwell. But I remember the Ring bequea∣thed to me in his Will with the Posie thereof, Requiem Defunctis; and therefore I will no longer be troublesome to his Memory, who was made Bishop 1624. and some seven years since deceased in Westminster almost 80. years of age. Writers since the Reformation. VVILLIAM SALESBURY was born in this County, where his family flourisheth at
this day. This Gentleman out of a love to his Native language, Amor patriae ratione valentior omni, composed a short English and Welsh, Dictionary, first privately present∣ed to, and approved by King Henry the eighth, (being a Tuthar, by his Fathers side of Welsh extraction) and then publickly printed, Anno Dom. 1547. Some captious spirits will quarrel the usefulness thereof, seeing the Welsh did not want, and the English did not wish a Book of that natnre. But, let them know that it is useful for both Nations; to the English for attaining, to the VVelsh for retaining that Language. Attaining. For being an original Tongue, an Antiquary is lame without it, (which I find by my own defect) to understand the (few of many) remaining Monuments of that Nation. Retaining. That Tongue as well as others by disuse being subject not only to Cor∣rupion, but Oblivion, by the confession of the Natives of that Countrey. Indeed all Dictionaries of Languages are very useful, VVords bringing Matter to the Tongue, and asIn Cratylo. Plato well observed, . A Name or Word is an instrument of Instruction, and ushereh Knowledge into our Understanding. However, seeing nothing can be begun and finisht at once, Salesbury his Book, (as the first in this kind) did rather essay, than effect the work, and since hath been com∣pleted by others. He died about the year, 1560. Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. Sir THOMAS Son of RICHARD EXMEW, was born at Rythin in this County. Be∣ing bred in London a Goldsmith, he thrived therein so well, that Anno 1517. he was Lord Mayor thereof, besides other Benefactions in his own Country: and to Saint Ma∣ry Magdalen in Milk-street, London, (where he lies buried.) He made theStows Sur∣vey of London. pag. 578. Water Con∣duit by London-wall at More-gate. , (so Pindar begins his Poems) Water is a Creature of absolute and common Concernment, without which we should be burnt with the thirst, and buried with the filth of our own bodies. GABRIEL GOODMAN, Son of Edward Goodman, Esq was born at Rythin in ths County, afterwards Doctor of Divinity in Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, and Dean of VVestminster, where he was fixed for full forty years; though by his own parts and his friends power, he might have been what he would have been in the Church of England. Abigail said of her Husband, Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. But it may be said of this worthy Dean, Goodman was his name, and goodness was in his nature, as by the ensuing Testimonies will appear. 1. The Bible was translated into VVelsh on his cost, as by a note in the Preface thereof doth appear. 2. He founded a Schoole-house, with a competent salary in the Town of his Nati∣vity; as also, erected and endowed an Almes-House therein for twelve poore people. 3. He repaired the House for the Minister (there called the Warden) of Rythin, fur∣nishing it with Plate and other Utensils, which were to descend to his Suc∣cessors. 4. He purchased a fair House with Land thereunto at Chiswick in Middlesex, where with his own hands he set a fair Row of Elmes, now grown up to great beauty and height, for a retiring place for the Masters and Scholars at Westminster in the heat of Summer, or any time of Infection. If these Lands at this Day be not so profitably employed, as they were by the Donor piously intended, it is safer to bemoan the sad effect, than accuse the causers thereof. There needs no other Testimony of his Honesty and Ability, than that our English Nestor, the Lord Treasurer Cecil, made him one of the Executors of his Will, to di∣spose of great sums to charitable uses; which Trust he most faithfully discharged. He died in the year 1601. and is buried in the Collegiate Church of Westminster, whereof he so well deserved, as of all England, Mr. Cambden performing his Perambulation about it on his expences.
Sir HUGH MIDDLETON, Son of Richard Middleton was born at Denbigh in this County, and bred in London. This is that worthy Knight, who hath deserved well of London, and in it of all England. If those be recounted amongst Davids worthies, who breaking through the Army of the2 Sam. 23. 16 Philistines, fetcht water from the Well of Bethle∣hem, to satisfie the longing of David (founded more on fancy than necessity,) how meri∣torious a work did this worthy man perform, who to quench the thirst of thousands in the populous City of London, fetcht water on his own cost, more than 24. miles, en∣countering all the way with an Army of oppositions, grapling with Hills, strugling with Rocks, fighting with Forrests, till in defiance of difficulties he had brought his project to perfection? But, Oh wha an injury was it unto him, that a potent Person, and idle Spectator should strike in; (Reader I could heartily wish, it were a falshod what I re∣port) and by his greatness possess a moity of the profit, which the unwearied endea∣vours of the foresaid Knight had purchased to himself! The Farewell. I heartily wish this County may find many like Robert Eari of Leicester (by his boun∣ty much advancing the building of a new Church in Denbigh) who may willingly contri∣bute their Charity for the repairing of all decayed Churches therein. Yea, may it be happy in faithful and able Ministers, that by their pains they may be built up in the Faith of the Lord.
FLINT-SHIRE. FLINT-SHIRE. It taketh the name from Flint, formerly an emi∣nent place therein. But why Flint was so named will deservedly bear an enquiry, the rather because I am informed there is scarce a Flint stone to be found in the whole shire. An eminentMr. John Jones. Antiquary well known in these parts (Reader I must carry my Author at my back, when I write that which otherwise will not be believed) hath informed me, it was first called Flit-Town, because the people Flitted or removed their habitations from a smal Village hard by, to and under a Castle built there by King Edward the first. Afterwards it was called Flint Town, or Flint to make it more sollid in the prononciation. Now although sometimes Liquids are melted out of a word to supple it to turn the better on the tongues end; It will hardly be presidented that ever the sturdy Letter N. was on that or any account interjected into the middle of an original word. But it is infidelity not to believe what is thus tradi∣tioned unto us. It hath the Sea on the North, Shropshire on the South, Cheshire on the East, and Den∣bigh-shire on the west thereof, the smallest County in Wales, whereof the Natives render this reason, That it was not handsomly in the power of King Edward the first (who made it a Shire) to enlarge the Limits thereof; For the English Shires, Shrop∣shire and Cheshire he would not discompose, and on the Welsh side he could not well ex∣tend it without prejudice to the Lord Marchers, who had Potestatem vitae & necis in the adjacent Territories, the King being unwilling to resume, and they more unwilling to resign, their respective Territories. If any ask why so small a parcel of ground was made a Shire, let them know that every foot therein in Content was ten in Concernment, because it was the passage into North Wales. Indeed it may seem strange that Flint, the Shire Town, is no Market Town, no nor Saint Asaph (a City, qua sedes Episcopi) till made so very late. But this is the reason, partly the vicinity of Chester, the Market genera of these parts; partly that every village hath a Market in it self, as affording all necessary Commodities. Nor must we forget that this County was parcel of the Pallatinate of Chester, paying two thousand Marks (called a Mize) at the change of every Earl of Chester, until the year of our Lord, 1568. For then upon the occasion of one Thomas Radford commit∣ted to prison by the Chamberlain of Chester, Flint-shire (saith myW. Smith in his Vale Royal of Englant, pag. 15. Author, revolted, I dare say) disjoyned it self from that County Pallatine, and united it self to the Prin∣cipalities of Wales, as conceiving the same the more advantagious. Proverbs. Mwy nag n bwa yro Ynghaer.] That is, more then one Yugh-Bow in Chester. Modern use applieth this Proverb to such, who seize on other folks goods (not with intent to steal but) mistaken with the simi∣litude thereof to their own goods. But give me leave to conjecture the original here∣of, seeing Cheshire-men have been so famous for Archery. Princes. ELIZABETH the seventh Daughter of King Edward the first, and Queen Elenor, was born at Ruthland Castle in this County; a place which some unwarily confound with Rythin Town in Denbigh shire. This Castle was anciently of such receipt, that the King and his Court were lodged therein; yea, a Parliament, or something equivalent, was kept here, or hereabouts; seeing we have the Statutes of Ruthland (on the same token the year erroneously printed in the Statutes of Ruthland) made in the—year of King Edward the first. This Lady Elizabeth at fourteen years of age was married to John, the first of that name, Earl of Holland, Zealand, &c. And after his death, re∣married to Humfre Bohune Earle of Hereford and Essex, High Constable of England, by whom he had a numerous issue. She died Anno Dom.Speeds Chron. pag. 564. 1316. and was buried in the Abby-Church of Saffron Walden in Essex.
Saints. CONGELLUS or COMGALLUS. I perceive a storm a coming, and must provide a shelter against it. The omitting this Writer will make Wales angry, and the inserting him will make Ireland offended with me, whom a  de scrip. . Cent. 3.  5. good Antiquary makes the first Abbt of Banchor in this County, and a Arch-shop  de . . Primor. better (though living later) first Abbot of Ban∣gor nigh Nockfergus in Ireland. What is to be done herein? When the Controversie was started, whether the Isle of Man belonged to England or Ireland, it was adjudged to the later, because no venomous Creature will live therein. But this controverted na∣tivity is not capable of that discrimination. Indeed if the difference was betwixt Wales and England my Native Country, concerning Congellus, we would (according to our premised principles) freely resign him, not daring to be so bold with an outlandish In∣terest: let him stand here so long till better evidence be brought to remove him. For if those be beheld as the worst of Felons, who steal stragling Children in London streets from their Parents, and spirit them over unto forraign Plantations; high also is their robbery, who deprive Countries of their true Natives (as to their Memories after their deaths) and dispose them elsewhere at their pleasures. As for Congellus, it is agreed on all hands, that he was one of a pious life, who wrote learned Epistles, and being aged eighty five years, died Anno Dom. 600. St. BENO was instructer to Saint Wenefride, committed by her Father to his care∣ful Education; now it happened when the head of the said Wenefride was cut off by Cradocus Son to Alane King of North Wales (for not yielding to his unlawful lust) This Beno miraculously set it on Acta S.  apud Sur. Tom. 6. 3. No∣vemb. & Bre∣viar. sec.  Sarum in lct. S. . & R.B. in her Manuscript life in the En∣glish Colledg in St. Omers. again, she living fifteen years after. But if the tip of his tongue who first told, and the top of his fingers who first wrote this damnable lye, had been cut off, and had they both been sent to attend their cure at the Shrine of Saint Beno, certainly they would have been more wary afterwards, how they reported or recorded such improbable untruths. ASAPH was born in these parts, of right honourable parentage, and bred at Llan∣Elvy in this County, under Kentigernus (or Mongo) the Scotch Bishop in that place. Here the said Kentigerus had a Convent consisting of 663. Monks, whereof Camb. Brit.  Flint-shire. 300. being unlearned (in the nature of Lay-Brethren) were employed abroad in Husban∣dry, as many busied about work at home, the rest attended Divine service in the Con∣vent, so divided, that some were always officiating therein. Amongst these Asaph was eminently conspicuous, for piety and learning, in so much, that Kentigernus (being cal∣led into his own Country) resigned both his Convent and Cathedral unto him. Here this Bishop demeaned himself with such Sanctity, that Llan-Elvy lost its name, and after his death was called from him, St. Asaph. He was an assiduous Preacher, having this Speech in his mouth, Such who are against the preaching of Gods Word, envy mans salvation. Bishop Godwin confesseth himself ignorant of the certain time of his death, though Hierom. Por∣ter  san∣ctorum, May 1. another (not more knowing, but more confident) assigneth the first of May (but with this abatement) about 569. I say not out possibly, a randome date may hap to hit the mark. Here I would be thankful to them, who should expound unto me, that passage in J. Bale, concluding the life of this Saint, with these words, Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 1. Num. 68. Primus hic erat, qui d Romano Pontifice Unctionem accepit. He was the first, who received Unction from the Pope of Rome. This neither Pits owneth (ready enough to steal out of Bale, especially to improve what might sound to Papal advantage) nor any other Romanist writing his Life, whom I have seen, so that it seems to me a Note  scattered. After the death of Saint Asaph, his See stood void above 500. years, until Jeffery of Monmouth was placed therein.
Prelates since the Reformation. RICHARD PARRY D. D. was born at Ruthin in this County; bred in Christ Church in Oxford▪ whence he was preferred Dean of Bangor, and at last Bishop of Saint Asaph, consecrated Decemb. 30. 1604. Bishop Godwin passeth on him this Comple∣ment (take it in the best derivation of the word from Completio mentis) that he desireth being so near unto him in time and his Studies, to be his equal in other Episcopal Qualities. I crave the Readers leave to forbear any further Character of him. Pictures present buildings, presumed at great distance, very small, whilest such things which are▪ sup∣posed near the eye, are made in a greater proportion. Clean contrary I may sasely write largely on mens lives at far distance, whilest (as I may say) I must make Landskips of those near hand, and touch little on them, who lived in later times. Bishop Parry died Anno Dom. 16. . . . Souldiers. OWEN GLENDOWER-WYE was born in his ancient Patrimony of Glendower-Wye in this County, then bred in London a Student in the Common Law, till he became a Courtier, and servant to King Richard the second. After whose death, this Owen being then on the wrong side of preferment, retired to this his Native County, where there arose a difference betwixt him and his neighbour the Lord Gre of Ruthen about a piece of Common, which Owen by force recovered, and killed the Lord Gre. There wanted not many to spur his posting Ambition, by telling him, that he was the true Heir to all North Wales, and now or never the time to regain it. That the in∣juries he had already offered the English were above pardon, and no way left to secure himself, but by committing greater. There needeth no Torch to light Tinder, where a Spark will do the deed, and hereupon Owen brake out into open rebellion. The worst was, being angry with the King, his revenge fell upon God, burning down the fair Cathedrals of Bangor and Saint Asaph. His destructive nature delighted in do∣ing mischief to others, though no good to himself. King Henry the fourth found it more facile by far, to depose King Richard, than subdue this Owen, who had taken Ro∣ger Mortimer Earl of March (and next Heir to the Crown) prisoner. Writers. ELVODUGUS, surnamed Probus (and no doubt it was true of him, what was said of Probus the Emperor, he was Vir sui nominis) was a Cambrian by birth, and this Country∣man by habitation; for he lived most of his days at Bangor Bale & Pits de scrip. . Monachorum, in that age the Cambridge and Oxford of all Britain. He wrote many Books (and particularly a Chronicle of his Nation) which the envy of time hath denied to posterity. He had many eminent men for his Scholars, amongst whom was learned Nenniu, common∣ly called Nennius Elvodugi, assuming his Masters name for his surname, on which ac∣count some mistake him for his Father. This Elvoduge flourished Anno 590. Since the Reformation. MERIDITH HANMER, D. D. was born in this County, where a respective Fa∣mily of his name and alliance flourish at Han-meer at this day; was Treasurer of Tri∣nity Church in Dublin. He translated the Ecclesiasticall Histories of Eusebius, Socrates Euagrius, &c. into English, wrote an Ephemeris of the Irish Saints, and a Chronicle of that Country. He died at J.  de scrip. Hib. pag. 137. Dublin of the Plague, Anno 1604. Benefactors to the Publick since the Reformation. RICHARD CLOUGH was born at Denbigh in this County, whence he went to be a Chorister in the City of Chester. Some were so affected with his singing therein, that
they were loath he should lose himself in empty air (Church-Musick beginning then to be discountenanced) and perswaded, yea, procured his removal to London, where he be∣came an Apprentice to, and afterwards Partner with Sir Thomas Gresham. He lived some years at Antwerp, and afterwards travelled as far as Jerusalem, where he was made a Knight of the Sepulchre, though not owning it after his return under Queen Elizabeth (who disdained her Subjects should accept of such foraign Honour) he af∣terwards by Gods blessing grew very rich; and there want not those, who will avouch that some thousands of pounds were disbursed by him for the building of the Burse or Royal Exchange. Such maintain that it was agreed betwixt him and Sir Thomas Gresham, that the survivor should be chief Heir to both; on which account they say that the Knight carried away the main of the Estate. How much the new Church in Denbigh was beholding to his bounty, I am not as yet certainly inormed. This is true, that he gave the Impropriation of Killken in Flint-shire, worth an hundred pounds per annum to the Free Schoole in Denbigh; and if the same at this day be aliened, I question whether Repentance without Restitution will secure such who are the Causers thereof. He di∣ed Anno Dom, 15— Memorable Persons. THOMAS ap William, ap Thomas, ap Richard, ap Howel, ap Evan Vaghan, &c. Esquire, was born of ancient and worshipful Parentage at Moston in this County. This Gentleman being called at the Pannel of a Jury by the aforesaid names, and many more, was advised by the . Rm. pag 145. Judge in the reign of King Henry the eight, for brevity sake to contract his name, who thereupon denominated himself Moston, from the place of his Nativity and ancient Inheritance. This leading Case was precedential to the practice of other Gentry in Wales, who (leaving their Pedigrees at home) carry one sirname only abroad with them, whereby much time (especially in Winter when the days are short) is gained for other employment. The Farewell. I understand that superstitious pilgrimages do still continue of fond people in this County to the Well of St. Winifred, and will only presume to mind them of a savoury Proverb of their own Nation, Goreu Pererindod Cyrchu offeren Sull, that is, It is the best Pilgrimage to frequent the Divine Duties of the Sabboth. A Pilgrimage it may well be called in Wales, where some Parishes are so large, people go ten miles to Church, and whose pains are employed more acceptable to God, than in longer peregrinations to less porpose.
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE. GLAMORGAN-SHIRE hath the Severn Sea on te South, Carmarthen on the West, Brecknock on the North, Monmouth-shire (severed by the River Remney falling from the Mountains, which in the Britsh Tongue signifieth, to drive) on the East thereof. The North of this County is so full of Mountains, that almost nothing is to be had, the South is so fruitful a Valley, nothing at all is wanting therein. Indeed it is the Garden of Wales, and I am informed, that at Saint Donats in this Shire (an an∣cient house of the right Worshipful Family of the Stradlings) groweth as good fruit, and as soon ripe as in any part of England. Mr. Cambden will have it so called (though others affirm one Morgan a Prince thereof gave his name thereunto) from Mor the British word for the Sea, as agreeing  its sci∣tuation. Wonders. Giraldus Cambrensis reports that in the Island Barrey (termed so from Baruch an Ho∣ly man that was there buried) three miles from the mouth of Taff, there appeareth a chink in a Rock or Cliff, to which if you lay your ear, you may easily discover a noise, not altogether unlike to Smiths at work, one while blowing of the Bellows, another while striking of the Hammer, the grinding of Iron Tools, the hissing of Steel Gads, yea the puffing noise of Fire in a Furnace. I must confess my self at a loss for the reason thereof; for it cannot proceed from the close stealing in of the Sea water (as some have supposed) seeing the same noise continueth even at a low Ebb, when the Sea is de∣parted. There is also at Newton on the bank of Ogmore west-ward, a Well, the water where∣of is so low at the flowing of the Sea in Summer, you can scarce get up a dish full of the same; whereas at the ebb thereof you may easily recover a pail or bucket full. In   in this Coun∣ty. Mr. Cambden doubting of the truth, made his own eyes Witnesses herein, finding it true according to the common relation, adding withall that it is the same (thoughnot so discernable by reason of the accession of much rain water) in Winter. Civilians. Sir EDWARD CARNE is here placed with confidence, because assured to be a Camb. . Anno 1559. Welsh-man, and I find his Family flourishing at Gwillims . Wenny in this County. He was bred (I believe in Oxford) Doctor of the Civil Law, and was Camb. Eliz. Anno 1561. Knighted by Charles the fifth, Emperor. The first publick service he eminently appeared in was, when King Henry the eight having intelligence of the Popes intention, shortly to cite him to appear at Rome, either in Person or Proxie, dspatched him thither for his Lord Herbert in the life of K. Hen. 8. Excusator, to remonstrate that his Grace was not bound by Law so to appear. This he effectually performed, pleading, that the Emperor was so powerful at Rome, that he could not expect Justice; declaring, that unless they desisted, he must appeal thence to the able men in some indifferent Universities; and if this were refused, he protested a nullity in all that they did. A behaviour which spake him of no less Va∣lour than Ability. Queen Mary highly prized him, and no whit the less, for his cordial appearing for King Henry in the matter of her Mothers Divorce, imputing it to the discharge of his Cedit and Calling, in him who otherwise was a thorow paced Romanist, and whom she employed her Embassador to the Pope. After her death he still resided at Rome, and by command from Queen Elizabeth, re∣paired to Pope Paul the fourth, to give him an account, that his Mistress was called to the Crown of England. To whom the Hist. Council of Trent. lib. 5. 1558. Pope returned, That England was a Fee of the Church of Rome, and that she could not succeed as Illegitimate. A strnge reply o a civil Message, and fitting his mouth with whom it was a usual saying, Ibid. Paulo ante eod. That he would have no Prince in his Compagnion, but all Subject under his Foot.
Besides, he commanded Sir Edward Carne, to lay down the Office of an Embassador, and under the pain of the greater Cmb. Eiz. Ano 1559. Excommunication, and confiscation of all his goods, not to go out of the City, but to take on him the Regiment of the English Hospital therein. So that I see not how Queen Elizabeth can be taxed by the Papists for a Schismatick, and wilful breach from the Church of Rome, being thrust away thence by the Pope himself, so barbarously treating her Embassador (whilest as yet she had made no alteration in Religion) against the Law of Nations; though I confess, some conceive, that the crafty old Knight was (such his addiction to Popery) well conten∣ted with his restraint, wherein he died, 1561. The Farewell. I heartily congratulate the return of the Name (and with it of the See) to Landaff in this County. Sure I am, our Civil Wars had deprived it of the better moity of its appellation Land, leaving bare aff, thereunto. I am not Ignorant that Landaff, in Bri∣tish, is the Church by Taff, though that Church I fear will not stand long that hath lost its ground. Happy therefore is it, that now Landaff may be truly termed Landaff, having through Gods goodness, (and long may it possess them) regained its ancient Lands and Revenues.
MERIONITH-SHIRE. MERIONITH-SHIRE, (in Latine Mervinia) hath the Sea on the West side, on the South (for certain miles together) Cardigan∣shire, severed by the River Dony, and on the North bounded upon Carnarvon and Denbigh-shire. It is extream mountainous, yea (if true what Giraldus Cambren∣sis reporteth thereof) so high the Hills therein, that men may dis∣course one with the other on the tops thereof, and yet hardly meet (beneath in the Valley) in a days time. Yet are not the Mountains altogether use∣less, feeding great numbers of Sheep thereon. Mr. Cambden takes especial notice of the beauty and comliness of the Inhabitants of this Shire. Nor must it be forgot that there is a place at this day called Le Herbert upon this account; When the unhappy difference raged betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster, David ap Jenkin ap Enion, a stout and resolute Gentleman (who took part with the House of Lancaster) valiantly defended the Castle Arleck against King Edward the fourth, until Sir William Herbert (afterwards Earl of Pembroke) with great difficulty made his passage unto it, and so furiously stormed it, that immediately it was sur∣rendred. Wonders. There is a Lake in this County called in British Lhin-tegid, in English Pimble-mear, which may be termed our Leman Lake, having the same work of wonder therein, though set forth by nature in a less Letter. For as Rhodanus running through that French Lake, preserveth his stream by it self (discernable by the discolouration thereof) with the Fishes peculiar thereunto. The same is here Camb. Bit. in Merionith∣shire. observed betwixt the River Dee, and the water of the Lake; so that here is (what some cavil at in the Grammar) a Conjunction disjunctive. Let Philosophers dispute, what invisible partition incloseth the one severally from the other. I have heard some, by way of similitude, apply it to such, who being casually cast into bad company, lie at such a cautious posture of de∣fence, that they keep their own innocency entire, not maculated with the mixture of their bad manners, as rather being in, than of, their Society. We must not forget another strange quality of Pimble-mear, viz. It swelleth not with all the Waters, and those very many, which fall therein by the bordering Moun∣tains, whereas Idem. Ibidem. a blast of wind will quickly make it mount above the bounds and banks thereof. Like some strange dispositions, not so much incensed with blows, as provoked by words (accounted but wind) into passion. I know not whether it be worth the relating, what is known for a truth of a Market Town called Dogelthy in this Shire, that 1. The Walls there of are 3. miles high. 1. The Mountains which surround it. 2. Men come into it over the water, but 2. On a fair bridge. 3. Go out of it under the water. 3. Falling from a Rock, and conveyed in a wooden Trough (under which Tra∣vellers must make shift to pass) to drive an Over-shot Mill. 4. The Steeple thereof doth grow therein 4. The Bells (if plural) hang in an Yeugh tree. 5. There are more Ale-houses than houses. 5. Tenements are divided into two or more Tipling-houses, and Chimnyless Barns used to that purpose. This last I had [mediately] from the mouth of a Judge in his Charge condemning the same. Saints. Saint THELIAN was of British extraction, and placed here until with certainty heA M P.
cn be removed to another County. He was bred under Dubritius Bishop of Landaff, by whose Holy care he attained to a competent Learning, and exemplary Sanctity. Great his acquaintance and intimacy with Saint David Bishop of Menevia. In his days the Picts harrassed his Country, he was much envied for his Holiness, by one of their chief Commanders, In the ∣ers of English Saint, pag. 150. who sent two lewd Strumpets, supposing by their tempting tricks to entrap this holy man. These women counterfeiting madness (where∣by they might assume the more liberty to themselves of filthy discourse) returned di∣stracted Idem Ibidem. indeed, not having understanding enough to relate the cause of their sad misfor∣tune, which wrought so much upon the first design of their practises, that he received the Faith and was baptized, and ever after had a great veneration and esteem for this our Saint. He accompanied Saint David to Jerusalem, and returning into his own Country, by his fervent Prayers freed the same from the Plague, wherewith it was then much infe∣sted. His death happened February the ninth, about the year of our Lord, 563. The Farewell. This County (the inhabitants whereof generally betake themselves to the feeding of Sheep) was much beholding to Ludwall their Prince, who (King Edgar imposing on him as a yearly Tribute, the presenting him with three hundred Wolves) did in a man∣ner free it from Wolves. It is my desire, that seeing that ill natured Creature is at this day totally removed out of it, that the people wholly lay aside all strife and ani∣mosities, and give no longer occasion to the Proverb, Homo Homini Lupus.
MONTGOMERY-SHIRE MONTGOMERY-SHIRE is bounded on the South side with Cardigan and Radnor-shire, on the East with Shrop-shire, on the North with Denbigh∣shire, and on the West thereof with Merionith-shire. Nature cannot be accused for being a Step-Mother unto this County; For although she hath mounted many an high Hill (which may probably be presumed not over fruitful) yet hath she also sunck many a delightful Valley therein, (Humility is the common attendant of Greatness, accompanied with true worth) which plentifully yield all necessaries for mans comfortable subsistance. The Chief Town therein stands, and bestoweth its. Name upon the whole County. It never dignified any with the Title of Earl thereof, until the raign of King James, who crea∣ted Philip Herbert, second Son to Henry Earl of Pembroke, Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earl of Montgomery. Natural Commodities. Horses. How good and swift are bred in this County, I may well spare my Commendation, and remit the Reader to the Character I find given of them in a good Draiton in I's Polybion, pag. 95. Author; —From the Gomerian fields, Then which in all our Wales there is no Country yields An excellenter Horse, so full of Natural fire, As one of Phoebus Steeds had been that Stallions Sire Which first their race begun, or of th' Asturian kind, Which some have held to be begotten by the wind. Now after proportionable abatement for his Poetical Hyperbole, the remainder is enough to inform us of the good Strain this Shire doth afford. Proverbs. Y Tair Chiwiorydd.] In English the Three Sisters, being a common By-word to express the three Rivers of , Severn, Rhiddiall, arising all three in this County, out of the South-west side of Plynnillimmon Hill, within few paces one of another, but falling into the Sea more miles asunder; Severn into the Severn Sea, Wye into the Severn, Rhiddiall in∣to the Irish Sea. The Tradition is, that these three sisters were to run a race, which should be first mar∣ried to the Ocean, Severn and Wye having a great journey to go, chose their way through soft Medows, and kept on a Travellers pace; whilest Rhiddiall (presuming on her short Journey) staid before she went out, and then to recover her lost time, runs furiously in a distracted manner, with her mad stream, over all opposition. The Proverb is applyable to Children of the same Parents, issuing out of the same Womb, but of different dispositions, and embracing several courses of lives in this World, so that their Cradles were not so near, but their Coffins are as farre asunder. Pywys Paradwys Cymry.] That is, Powis is the Paradise of Wales. This Proverb referreth to Teliessen the Author thereof, at what time Powis had far larger bounds than at this day, as containing all the land inter-jacent betwixt Wye and Severn; of the pleasantness whereof we have spo∣ken In the Pro∣verbs in Here∣ford-shiré. before.
Gwan dy Bawlyn Hafren, Hafren fyàd hifcl cynt.] That is, Fixt thy Pale [with intent to sence out his water] in Severn, Severn will be as before. Appliable to such who undertake projects above their power to perform, or grapple in vain against Nature, which soon returns to its former condition. Writers. GEORGE HERBERT was born at Montgomery-Castle, younger Brother to Edward Lord Herbert (of whom immediately) bred Fellow of Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, and Orator of the university, where he made a speech no less learned than the occasion was welcome, of the return of Prince Charles out of Spain. He was none of the Nobles of Tkoa, who at the building of JerusalemNehem. 3. 5. put not their necks to the work of the Lord; but waving worldly preferment, chose serving at Gods Altar before State-employment. So pious his life, that as he was a copy of pri∣mitive, he might be a pattern of Sanctity to posterity, to testifie his independency on all others, he never mentioned the name of Jesus Christ, but with this addition, My Master. Next God the Word, he loved the Word of God, being heard often to pro∣test, That he would not part with one leaf thereof for the whole world. Remarkable his conformity to Church-Discipline, whereby he drew the greater part of his Parishioners to accompany him daily in the publick celebration of Divine Service. Yet had he (because not desiring) no higher preferment than the Benefice of Bemmerton nigh Salisbury (where he built a fair house for his Successor) and the Pre∣bend of Leighton (founded in the Cathedral of Lincoln) where he built a fair Church, with the assistance of some few Friends free Offerings. When a Friend on his death bed went about to comfort him with the remembrance thereof, as an especial good work, he returned, It is a good work if sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. But his Church (that unimitable piece of Poetry) may out-last this in structure. His death hapned Anno Dom. 163— EDWARD HERBERT, Son of Richard Herbert, Esquire, and Susan Newport his Wife, was born at Montgomery * Castle in this County, Knighted by King James,So was I in∣formed b Si . Herbert his  , late Mster of the Revels. who sent him over Embassador into France. Afrerwards King Charls the first created him Baron of Castle Island in Ireland, and some years after Baron of Cheirbury in this Couny; he was a most excellent Artist and rare Linguist, studied both in Books and Men, and himself the Author of two Works most remarkable, viz. A Treatise of , written in French, so highly prized beyond the Seas, that (as I am told) it is extant at this day with great Honour in the Popes Vatican. He married the Daughter and sole Heir of Sir VVilliam Herbert of Saint Julians in Monmouth-shire, with whom he had a large Inheritance both in England and Ireland. He died in August, Anno Domini 1648. and was buried in Saint Giles in the fields, London, having designed a fair Monument of his own Invention to be set up for him in the Church of Montgomery, according to theCourteously cmmunicated unto me by Mr. Stone the Stone- at his House in Long Acre. Model following; upon the ground a Hath pace of fourteen foot square, on the midst of which is placed a Dorrick Columne, with its rights of Pedestal Basis, and Capital fifteen foot in height; on the Capital of the Columne is mounted an urn with an Heart Flamboul sup∣ported by two Angels. The foot of this Columne is attended with four Angels placed on Pedestals at each corner of the said Hath pace, two having Torches reverst, extin∣guishing the Motto of Mortality; the other two holding up Palmes, the Emblems of Victory. This Monument hath not hitherto, (by what obstruction I list not to enquire) and I fear will not be finished, which hath invited me the rather to this Description, that it might be erected in Paper when it was intended in Marble.
Memorable Persons. HAWIS GADARN. She was a Lady of remark, sole Daughter and Heir to Owen ap Graffyth, Prince of that part of Powis called Powis Wenwinwin, which taketh up this whole County. She was justly (as will appear) surnamed Gadarn, that is, the Hardy. I confess Hardy sounds better when applyed to men (as Philip the Hardy, a Prince in France) meek and mild, being a more proper Epethite for a woman. Yet some compe∣tent hardiness (to comport with troubles) mis-becometh not the weaker Sex; and in∣deed if she had not been Hawis the Hardy, she had been Hawis the Beggerly. She had four Uncles, her Fathers Brethren, Lhewelyn, Iohn, Griffith Vachan, and David, which uncles became her Cosens, detaining all her inheritance from her. Give (said they) a Girle a little Gold and marry her, God and nature made Land for men to manage. Hereupon Hawis comes to Court, complains to King Edward the second. The mention of her minds me of the Daughter of Zelophehad, who pleaded so pathe∣tically for her patrimony before Moses and Joshua. The King commiserating her case, consigned his Servant John Charleton (born at Apple in Shropshire) a vigorous Knight to marry her, creating him in her right Bron of Powis. Thus was he possessed of his Lady, but get her Land as he can, it was bootless to implead her uncles in a Civil Court, Action was the only Action he could have against them, and he so bestirred himself with the assistance of the Kings Forces, that in short time he possessed himself of three of her uncles prisoners, and forced the fourth to a composition. Yea, he not only recovered every foot of his Wives Land, but also got all the Lnds of her uncles, in default of their issue male to be settled upon her. I wish that all Ladies injured by their potent Relations, may have such Husbands to marry them, and match their adversaries. These things hapned about the yeare of our Lord, 1320. Know Reader, there were four John Charletons successively Lords of Powis, which I observe rather, because their Homonymy may not occasion confusion. JULINES HERRING was born at Flambere-Mayre in this County 1582. His Fa∣ther returned hence to Coventry, to which he was highly related. Coventry, whose Ancestors (for the space of almost two hundred years) had been in their course chiefe Officers of that City. Perceiving a pregnancy in their Son, his parents bred him in Sidney Colledge in Cambridge, he becamê afterwards a profitable and painful Preacher at Calk in Derby-shire, in the Town of Shrewsbury▪ and at Rendbury in Cheshire, being one of a pious life, but in his judgement disaffected to the English Church-Discipline. I could do no less than place him amongst the memorable Persons, otherwise coming under no Topick of mine (as writing no Books to my knowledge)  hi Life writ∣ten at large by Mr. Samuel Clark. I say Mr. Clark whose Books of our modern Divines I have perused, as Travellers by the Levitical Law were permitted to pass thorow other mens Vinyards. For they must eat their fill on conditions they put no Grapes up in theirDeut. 23. 24. Vessels. I have been satisfied with reading his works, and informed my self in Places and Dates of some mens births and deaths. But never did nor will (whatever hath been said of me, or done by others) incorporate any considerable quantity of his Works in my own, de∣testing such Felony, God having given me (be it spoken with thanks to him, and hu∣mility to man) plenty of my own, without being plagiary to any Author what∣soever. To return to Julines Herring, whose Christian name is very usual in the Country amongst people of quality, in memory of Julius Palmer (in the Marian Days martyred, and) a Native of that City; he being prohibited his preaching here, for his non-Confor∣mity, was called over to Amsterdam, where he continued Preacher to the English Con∣gregation, some years well respected in his place, and died in the year of our Lord, 1644.
The Farewell. And now being to take our leave of this County, the worst I wish the Inhabi∣ants thereof, is, that their Horses (excellent in their kind, whereof before) may (to use he Coun-mans expression) Stand well, being secured from all Infectious and pe∣lential Diseses. he rather because when God is pleased to strike this Creature (not unfitly termed mans wings, whereby he so switly flyeth from one place to an∣other, for dispatch of his occasions) it is a sad presage, that he is angry with the Ri∣ders, and will (without their seasonable Repentance) punish their sins with some ex∣emplary judgment.
MONMOUTH-SHIRE. MONMOUTH-SHIRE. I may fily call this an English-Welsh County, for though it lie West of Severn, yea of  it self; and though the Welsh be the common Language thereof, yet it doth wear a double badge of English relation. First, whereas formerly all Welsh Counties sent but one Knight to the Parliament, this had the priviledge of two, Conformable to the Shires of England. Secondly, it is not subject to the VVelsh Jurisdiction, but such Itinerant Judges as go Oxford Circuit have this Coun∣ty within the compass of their Commission. Manufactures. Caps. These were the most ancient, general, warm, and profitable coverings of mens heads in this Island. It is worth our pains to observe the tenderness of our Kings to preserve the trade of Cap-making, and what long and strong strugling our State had to keep up the using thereof, so many. in Londo, Stat. 13. of Q. Eliz. cap. 19. and probably twice as many in the land be∣side. thousands of people being maintained thereby in the land, especially before the invention of Fulling-Mills, all Caps before that time being wrought, beaten, and thickned by the hands and feet of men, till those Mills as they eased many of their labour, outed more of their livelihood. Thus ingenious inventi∣ons conducing to the compendious making of Commodities, though profitable to pri∣vate persons, may not always be gainful to the publick, to which what employes most, is most advantageous, as Capping anciently set fiteen distinct Callings on work, as they are reckoned up in the13. of Q. Eliz. cap. 19. Statute, 1. Carders. 2. Spinners. 3. Knitters. 4. Parters of Wooll. 5. Forsers. 6. Thickers. 7. Dressers. 8. Walkers. 9. Dyrs. 10. Battellers. 11. Shearers. 12. Prers. 13. Edgers. 14. Liners. 15. Band-makers. And other Exercises. No wonder then if so many Statutes were enacted in Parliaments, to encourage this Handicraft, as by the ensuing Catàlogue will appear. 1. Anno 22. of Edward the fourth Cap. 5. That none thicken any Cap or Bonnet in any Fulling-Mill, upon pain to forfeit forty shillings. 2. Anno 3. of Henry the eighth, Cap. 15. That no Caps or Hats ready wrought should be brought from beyond the Seas, upon the forfeiture of fourty shillings. Yet because notwithstanding this Statute, some still presumed to import forraign Wares, it was enacted, 3. Anno 21. of Henry the eighth, Cap. 9. That such outlandish Hats should be sold at such low prices as are specified in the Statute, meerly to deter the Merchant from importing them, because such their cheapness that they would turn to no accompt. 4. Anno 7. of Edward the sixth, Cap. 8. Fulling-Mills beginning now to take footing in England, the Statute made the 22 of Edward the fourth was revi∣ved, to stand and remain in full force, strength and effect. 5. Anno 8. of Queen Elizabeth, Cap. 11. Fulling-Mills still finding many to fa∣vour them, the pains and profit of Cap-making was equally divided betwixt the Mills and the Cap-makers, it being enacted, That no Cap should be thicked or fulled in any Mill, untill the same had first been well scoured and closed upon the Bank, and half footed at least upon the foot-stock. 6. Lastly, to keep up the usage of Caps, it was enacted the 13. of Queen Eliz.
Cap. 19. That they should be worn by all persons (some of worship and quality excepted) on Sabboth and Holy-days, on the pain of forfeiting ten groats for omission thereof. But it seems nothing but Hats would fit the Heads (or humors rather) of the En∣glish, as fancied by them fitter to fence their fair faces, from the injury of wind and weather, so that the 39 of Queen Elizabeth this Statute was repealed. Yea, the Cap accounted by the Romans an emblem of liberty, is esteemed by the English (except Faulconers and Hunters) a badge of servitude, though very useful in themselves, and the Ensign of constancy, because not discomposed, but retaining their fashion, in what form soever they be crouded. The best Caps were formerly made at Monmouth, where the Cappers Chappel doth still remain, being better carved and gilded than any other part of the Church. But on the occasion of a great plague hapning in this Town, the trade was some years since removed hence to Beaudly in Worcester-shire, yet so that they are called Monmouth Caps unto this day. Thus this Town retains, though not the profit, the credit of Cap∣ping, and seeing the Child still keeps the Mothers name, there is some hope in due time she may return unto her. All I will adde is this, if at this day the phrase of wearing a Monmouth Cap be taken in a bad acception, I hope the inhabitants of that Town will endeavour to disprove the occasion thereof. Saints. Saint AMPHIBALUS a Citizen of Carlion. See the Saints in Hereford shire. Saint AARON was a wealthy Citizen of Carlion in this County, who for the te∣stimony of the Christian Faith, was martyred under the Tyrant Emperor Dioclesian. By the way we may observe the names of the three first British Martyrs as to their Language. 1. Alban Of Latine Originall. 2. Amphibalus   Greek   3. Aaron.   Hebrew   It seems that the Christian Britons at the Font quitted their Native names as bar∣barous, and imposed on their Children those of the learned Languages. This Aaron was martyred, Anno Dom. 303. Saint JULIUS. It is pity to part so fast friends, both being Citizens of Carlion. Yea, they were lovely in their lives, and in their deaths they were not divided, both suffering mar∣tyrdom together, and therefore like Philip and Jacob one day is assigned to their Me∣mories in the Kalendar. Nor must I forget how Carlion the place of their aboad, though now a small Town, was once a great City stretching so far o both sides of the River, that Camb. Brit. in Monmouth∣shire. Saint Julians (a house of late of Sir William Herberts) was sometimes within the City, though now about a mile South-West thereof, being a Church dedicated anciently to the Memo∣ry of this Saint Julius. Cardinals. GEFFERY of Monmouth is by Cicaonius some very firmly avouched to have been created a Cardinal, but by what Pope, and with what Title uncertain; but my worthy Bishop God∣win in the Catalogue o the Bishops of S. Asaph. Au∣thor justly suspecteth the truth hereof; alledging that Popes in that age advanced few Forraigners at so great a distance to that Title, except their merits to the See of Rome (which appears not to this Jeffery) were very great. Let me adde, that it is impro∣bable so much honour should be done unto him whilest living, who was so solemnly disgraced after his death; whose Books (extant in his life) were afterwards by the Court of Rome publickly prohibited. See him therefore in this Shire under the Title of Writers. JOHN of Monmouth, so called from the place of his Nativity, D. D. and Canon
of Lincoln, was chosen Anno 1296. Bishop of Landaff. The manner whereof was re∣markable, for when Robert Kilwarby complained to Pope Celestine, how that Cathedral had been for seven years without a Bishop; (caused either by the troublesomness of those Times, or the exility of revenue thereof) his Holiness remitted his Election wholly to the discretion of this Arch-Bishop, to conferre that vacant See on whomsoever he pleased. The Arch-Bishop knowing all eyes intent on his Integrity herein, resolved on a Welsh-man by his birth (as most proper for, and acceptable in the place) and on one of merit for the Function. Both Qualifications met in this John of Monmouth, as British by his birth and alli∣ance, and Charactered to be Doctus & Pius Theologus. One of his Harpf. Hist. Eccl. Ang. pag. 490. Successors in that Bishoprick acknowledgeth that he was Multimodis sedi suae Benefactor, and more parti∣cularly, that he procured the Rectory of Newland in the Forrest of Dean to be appro∣priated thereunto. But one Bishop [Anthony Kitchin by name] more unlanded Lan∣daff* Godw. in his Catalogue of Bishops in Landaff. in one, than all his Predecessors endowed it in four hundred years. This John dying April 8. 1323. was buried in Saint Maries Chappel, whose Epitaph in French is hardly legible at this day on his Marble Monument. WALTER CANTILUPE was Son to William [the elder] Lord Cantilupe, whose prime residence was at Abergavennie in this County. One of high birth, higher pre∣ferment (made by King Henry the third, Bishop of Worcester) and highest spirit. In his time the Popes Legate came into England, and complained of mny Clergy-men, keeping their livings against the Canons, intending either to force such irregular In∣cumbents into avoydance, (so to make room for the Popes Favourites) or else to com∣pound for their continuance at his arbitrary price. But our Walter would not yield to such extortion. Indeed he was one of a keene nature, and his two-edged spirit did cut on both sides, against The Pope. The King. Telling Rusland his Legate, coming hither 1255. that he would preferre to be hang'd on the Antiq. Brit. Anno praedicto. Gallows, rather than ever consent to such expilation of the Church. Siding with the Barons, he encouraged them in their Civil Warres, promising Heaven for their reward, though this do∣ctrine cost him an excommunication from the Pope. Lying on his death-bed he was touched with true Godwin in the Bishops of Worcester. remorse for his disloyalty, and upon his desire obtained absolution. He died February the fifth, 1267. whom I behold as Uncle unto Thomas Cantilupe the Sainted Bishop of Hereford. Souldiers. RICHARD de CLARE was born (as from all concentred probabilities may be con∣jectured) at Strigule-Castle in this County, and had the Title of Earl of Strigule and Pembroke. He was otherwise surnamed Strongbow, from drawing so strong a Bow, and had Brachia projectissima, saith my Camb. Brit. in this Coun∣ty. Author; though I can hardly believe that Reacher, which another writeth of him, thatMills in his Catalogue of Hon. pag. 1082 with the palms of his hands he could touch his knees, though he stood up right. More appliable to him is the expression of Epist. ad A∣ticum, lib. 4. Tully, Nihil egit levi brachio, being a person of effectual performance. It hapned that Mac Murugh Lord of Leinster, in the year of our Lord 1167. being expelled his Territory for several Tyrannies, by the Lords of Meth and Conaght, re∣paired to our King Henry the second, and invited him to invade Ireland. But that po∣litick King, fearing, if failing in success, to forfeit the reputation of his discretion, would not engage in the design, but permitted such Subjects of his, who had a mind Militare propriis stipendiis, to adventure themselves therein. Amongst these Richard Strongbow was the principal, going over into Ireland with twelve hundred men, too great for an Earls Train, yet too little for a Generals Army, to make a National Invasion; yet so great his success, that in a short time he prossessed
himself of the Ports of Leinster and Mounster, with large lands belonging thereunto; insomuch that King Henry grew jealous of his greatness, remanded him home, and commanded him to surrender his acquests into his hands, which done, he received them again by re-grant from the King, save that Henry reserved the City of Dublin for himself. This Strongbow is he who is commonly called Domitor Hiberniae, The Tamer of Ire∣land; though the Natives thereof then, and many hundred years after, paid rather erbal submission, than real obedience to our English Kings. Yea, some of their great Lords had both the power and Title of Kings in their respective Territories, wit∣ness the Preface in the Commission, whereby King Henry the second made William Fitz. Adelme his Lieutenant of Ireland; Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, & omnibus fidelibus suis in Hibernia, Salutem. Where Kings are postposed to Bishops, which speaketh them Royolets by their own ambition, and by no solemn inauguration. This Earl Richard died at Dublin 1177. and lieth buried in Trinity Church therein. Sir ROGER WILLIAMS born of an ancient Family at Penrosse in this County, was first a Souldier of Fortune under Duke D'Alva, and afterwards successfully ser∣ved Queen Elizabeth, having no fault, save somewhat over-free and forward to fight. When a Spanish Captain challenged Sir John Norris to fight a single Combat (which was beneath him to accept, because a General) This Roger undertook the Don. And after they had fought some time (both Camb. Ez. in Anno 1581. Armies beholding them) with∣out any hurt, they pledged each other a deep raught of Wine, and so friendly de∣parted. Another time at midnight he assaulted the Camp of the Prince of Parma, nigh Venloe, slew some of the enemies, and Idem. 1586. pierced to the Tent of the General, as high∣ly blamed by some for rashness, as commended by others for his valour. He bravely defended Slufe, whilest any hope of help. WILLIAM HERBERT, Earl of Pembroke, with Sir Richard Herbert his Brother, were both undoubtedly born in this County; but whether or no at Ragland Castle, is uncertain. Both valiant men, and as fast Friends to King Edward the fourth, as pro∣fessed Foes to Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick. They gave the last and clearest evidence hereof in the Battel of Banbury, where we find it reported, that these two leading the Army of the Welsh, with their Poll-Axes, twice made way through the Battel o the Northern men (which sided with King Henry the sixth) without any mortal wound. There passeth a tradition in the Noble Family of the Herberts of Chierbury, that this Sir Richard their Ancestor slew that day one hundred and forty men with his own hands, which if done in charging, some censure as an act of impossibility; if after a rout in an execution, as a deed of cruelty. But others defend both truth and courage therein, as done in passing and repassing through the Army. Indeed Guns were and were not in fashion in that age, used sometimes in sieges, but never in field service; and next the Gun, the Poll-Ax was the mortal Weapon, especially in such a Dead han as this Knight had, with which Quot icti, tot occisi. He is reported also to be of a Giants stature, the Peg being extant in Mountgomery Castle, whereon he used to hang his Hat at dinner, which no man of an ordinary height can reach with his hand at this day. However both these brave brethren, circumvented with the subtilty of their Foes (Odds at any time may be bet on the side of treachery against valour) were brought to Banbury, beheaded and buried, the Earl at Tinterne and Sir Richard at Abergaveny in this County. Writers. JEFFREY of Monmouth was born in, and named from, Monmouth. He was also cal∣led ap Arthur, from his Father, (as I suppose) though others ale de scrip. Bt. Cnt. 2.  86. say, because he wrote so much of King Arthur; but by the same proporion Homer may be termed Achillides, and Virgil the Son of Aeneas. Yea, this Jeffrey, by an ancienter title might be sirna∣med
ap Bruit, whose story he asserteth. He translated and compiled the various Bri∣tish Authors into one Volume. I am not so much moved at William Newbourough, calling this his book Ridicula sig∣menta, as that Giraldus Cambrensis his Countryman, and (as I may say) Con-sub-tempo∣rary, should term it Fabulosam historiam. Indeed he hath many things from the British. Bards, which though improbable, are not ipso facto untrue. We know Herodotus, nick∣named by some Pater Fabularum, is by others acknowledged to be Pater Histo∣riarum. The truth is, that both Novelants and Antiquaries must be content with many fals∣hoods, the one taking Reports at the first rebound, before come to; the other raking them out of the dust, when past their perfection. Others object, that he is too hyperbolical in praising his own Countrey: A catch∣ing disease, seeing Livy mounts Italy to the skyes, and all other Authors respectively; and why should that be mortal in our Monmouth, what is but venial in others? And if he be guilty in Mis-timing of actions, he is not the onely Historian without company in that particular. However on the occasion of the premisses, his book is prohibited by his Holiness, whilst the lying Legend is permitted to be read without controul: Thus Rome loves questuosa, non inutilia figmenta, Falshoods whereby she may gain. Some conceive it to be his greatest fault, that he so praiseth the ancient Church in Britain, making it Inde∣pendent from the See of Rome, before Austin the Monk came hither. One maketh him a Cardinal, which is improbable, whilest it is more certain that he was Bishop of St. Asaph, and flourished Anno 1152. THOMAS of Bale de script. Brit. cent. 2. num. 94. Monmouth was probably born, certainly bred and brought up in the chief Town of this County. Nor doth it move me to the contrary, because Pits calls him an Englishman, Monmouth in that Age being a Frontier Garrison, peopled with English Inhabitants. It happened at this time many Jews lived in Norwich, where their habitation was called Id. Ibid. Abrahams Hall, though therein not practising the piety of that worthy Patri∣arch. He, out of conformity to Gods command, sacrificed his one and onely son; they, contrary to his will in his Word; crucified the child of another, William by name. His Sepulchre was afterwards famed for many miracles, whereof this Thomas wrote an History, and dedicated it to William de Turbes, Bishop of Norwich, though he lived a∣bove six score miles from the place of those strange performances: But probably the farther the better, Major è longinquo reverencia, and miracles are safest reported, and soonest believed at some competent distance. He flourished Anno 1160. under King Henry the Second. Benefactors to the Publick. HENRY PLANTAGENET, first Duke of Lancaster, was born in Monmouth castle,AMP. the chief seat of his Barony. He is commonly sirnamed Speeds Chro. in the foun∣dation of Ben∣net College. de torto collo, or the wry∣neck, and by others the Mills Catal. of Honour in the Dukes of . good Duke of Lancaster, by which name we entitle him, it being fitter to call men from what was to be praised, than what to be ptied in them; not from their natural defects, but moral perfections. His bounty commends him to our mention in this place, being head of the Guild of Corpus-Christi in Cambridge, and the first Founder of a College so called in that Universiy. Indeed the Land was but little he conferred thereon, but great the countenance of so eminent a person in procuring and setling their Mortmaine. He dyed in the year of our Lord, 1361. and was buried in the Collegiate Church at Leicester, which he founded. Blanch his onely daughter which had issue, was married to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster. Since the Reformation. WILLIAM JOHNES was a Native of the Town of Monmouth, a person whose Estate was very considerable in several respects, viz. in
1. His Emptiness, being forced out of Monmouth, for not being able to pay ten Groats: as the late . , Esq. Recorder of that Corporation hath informed me. How had he been undone, if he had not been undone? 2. His Filling, flying to London, he became first a Porter, and then (his Brains be∣ing better than his Back) a Factour, and going over to Hamborough, by his in∣dustry and ingenuity made such a vent for Welsh Cottons, that what he found Drugs at home, he left Dainties beyond Sea. 3. His Refunding, founding a fair School-house in the place of his Nativity, al∣lowing fifty pounds yearly for the Master, thirty for the Usher, with one hun∣dred Marks salary to a Lecturer. Besides, a stately Almes-house for twenty poor folk, each of them having two Rooms and a Garden, with half a Crown a week, besides other conveniences. All which his Reckoned up in Stow his Survey of London, pag. 103. Benefactions, and many more, he by Will submitted to the over-sight of the honourable Company of Haberdashers in London, who at this day right worthily discharge their trust herein. He dyed Anno Dom. 16—. Memorable Persons. WILLIAM EVANS was born in this County, and may justly be accounted the Giant of our Age for his stature, being full two yards and an half in height: He was Porter to King Charles the First, succeeding Walter Persons in his place, and exceeding him two Inches in height, but far beneath him in an equal proportion of body; for he was not onely what the Latines call Compernis, knocking his Knees together, and going out squalling with his feet, but also haulted a little; yet made he a shift to dance in an Antimask at Court, where he drew little Jeffrey the Dwarf out of his pocket, first to the wonder, then to the laughter, of the beholders. He dyed Anno Dom. 163.. Sheriffs. This was made a Shire by Act of Parliament in the 27. year of King Henry the Eight, but it seems not solemnly setled till five years after. Name. Place. Armes. HEN. VIII.     Anno.     32 Car. Herbert, ar.   Per pale, Azure and Gules, 3 Lions rampant. Arg. 33 Walt. Herbert ar. ut prius   34 Walt. ap Robert, ar     35 Hen. Lewis, ar.     36 Re. ap Howel, ar.   Gules, a Lion rampant gar∣dant, Arg. 37 Io. Hen. Lewis, ar.     38 Anth. Welsh, ar.   Azure, six Mullets, 3, 2, 1. Or. EDW. VI.     Anno     1 Tho. ap Morgan, ar Lanterrā Or, a Griffin segreant, Sab. 2 Car. Herbert, mil. ut prius   3 Will. Morgan, mil. ut prius   4 Will. Herbert, ar. ut prius   5 Walt. Herbert, ar. ut prius   6 Will. Herbert, ar. ut prius   MAR. REG.     Anno     1 Anth. Welsh, ar. ut prius   2 Walt. ap Robert     3 Will. Joh. Thomas     4 Roul. Morgan, ar. ut prius   5 Hen. Lewis, ar.     6 Tho. Morgan, mil. ut prius   ELIZ. REG.     Anno     1 Tho. Herbert, ar. ut prius   2 Geo. Iaes, ar.     3 Rog. Williams     4 Will. Herbert. Colebrok   5 Will. Herbert St. Julian   6 Will. Morgan, ar. Tredeger ut prius. 7 Ioh. Henry Kemis   Vert, on a Cheveron, Or, 3 Pheons, Sable. 8 Wil. Ioh. ap Roger. ut prius   9 Will. Morgan, ar.     10 Christ. Welsh, ar. ut prius   11 Row. Morgan, ar. ut prius   12 Will. Herbert ut prius   13 Tho. Herbert ut prius   14 Will. Morgan, ar. ut prius   15 Milo Morgan ut prius   16 Row. Kemis, ar. ut prius   17 Christ. Welsh, ar. ut prius   18 Rich. Morgan ut prius   19 Wil. Ioh. ap Roger   Per pale, Azure and Gules 3. Lions rampant, Arg. 20 Will. Lewes, ar.     21 Will. Herbert, mil. utprius   22 Tho. Morgan, ar. ut prius   23 Edw. Morgan, ar. ut prius   24 Edw. Morgan, ar. ut prius   25 Mat. Herbert, ar. ut prius   26 Will. Lewes, ar. ut prius   27 Rich. Morgan, ar. ut prius   28 Io. Iones, ar.   Sab. a Stag standing at Gaze, Arg. Attired and unguled, Or. 29 Hen. Morgan ut prius   30 Hen. Herbert, ar. ut prius   31 Nich. Herbert, ar. ut prius  
32 Edw. Lewis, ar, ut prius   33 Wal. Vaughan, ar     34 Row. Morgan, r. ut prius   35 VValt. Iones, ar. ut prius   36 Math. Herbert, ar. ut prius   37 Mat. Prichard, ar.   Sable, a Lyon rampant, Arg. 38 Andr. Morgan, ar. ut prius   39 Hen. Herbert, ar. ut prius   39 VVill. Morgan, ar ut prius   40 Hen. Billing     41 Rich. Kemis, ar. ut prius   42 Edw. Kemis, ar. ut prius   43 Edw. Morgan, ar. ut prius   44 Hen. Morgan, ar. ut prius   45 Ioh. Gainsford, ar.     JACOB.     Anno     1 Ioh. Gainsford, ar.     2 Row. VVilliams, ar     3 Valen. Prichard, ar ut prius   4 VVill. Price, ar.     5 VValt. Mountague   Argent, three Fusils in fess, Gules, a border, Sable. 6 Car. Iones, ar. ut prius   7 Hen. Lewis, ar.     8 VVill. Ramlyns, ar     9 VVil. Morgan. mil. ut prius   10 Rog. Batherne, ar.     11 Egid. Morgan, ar. ut prius   12 VVill. Iones, ar. ut prius   13 Tho. Vanne. ar.     14 Tho. Morgan, ar. ut prius   15 Geo. Milbouru, ar.   Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three escalops, Arg. 16 VVill. Hughes, ar.     17 Tho. ocks, ar.     18 VValt. Aldey, ar.     19 Rob. Iones, ar. ut prius   20 VVill. VValter, ar.     21 David Lewis, ar.     22 Ed. Morgan, ar. ut prius   CARO. I.     Anno     1 Car. Somerset, ar.     2 Car. VVilliams, m.     3 VVill. Keymis, ar. ut prius   4 VVill. Thomas, ar.     5 Ioh. VValter, ar.     6 VVill. Baker, ar.     7 Nich. Keymeis, ar. ut prius   8 Nich. Arnold, ar.     9 Lodo. Vanne, ar.     10 Geo. Milborne, ar. ut prius   11 Hen. Probert, ar.     12 Tho. Morgan, ar. ut prius   13 VVill. Herbert, ar. ut prius   14 Nich. Moor, ar.     The Farewell. I understand that in Cab. Brit. in this Coun∣ty. January 1607. part of this County which they call the Moore, sustained a great loss by the breaking in of the Severn sea, caused by a violent South-west wind, continuing for three dayes together: I heartily desire the Inhabitants thereof may for the future be secured from all such dangerous inundations▪ (water being a good servant but bad master) by his Providence, who bindeth the sea in a girdle of sands, and saith to the waves thereof, Thus far shall ye go and no further.
PEMBROKE-SHIRE is surrounded on all sides with the Sea, save on the North-East, where it boundeth on Cardigan, and East where it butteth on Carmarthen-shire. A County abounding with all things necessary for mans livelihood; and the East part thereof is the pleasantest place in all VVales, which I durst not have said for fear of offence, had not I agro otius VValiiae amoe∣ssimo, Giral. Cambren. Giral∣dus their own Country-man affirmed it. Nor is it less happy in Sea than in Land, affording plenty of Fish, especially about Tenby, therefore commonly called Tenby-y-Piscoid; which I rather observe for the vi∣cinity of the British piscoid, with the Latine piscosus, for fishfull, though never any pretended an affinity between the two Languages. A part of this Country is peopled by Flemmings, placed there by King Henry the first, who was no less politick than charitable therein. For, such Flemmings being dri∣ven out of their own Country, by an irruption of the Ocean, were fixed here to defend the land given them against the Welsh, and their Country is called little England be∣yond Wales. This mindeth me of a passage betwixt a Welsh and English man, the for∣mer boasting Wales in all respects beyond England; to whom the other returned, he had heard of an England beyond Wales, but never of a Wales beyond England. Natural Commodities. Faulcons. Very good are bred in this County of that kind, they call Peregrines, which very name speaks them to be no Indeginae, but Forraigners, at first lighting here by some casualty: King Henry the second passing hence into Ireland, cast off a Norway Gos∣hawk at one of these: but the Gos-hawk taken at the source by the Faulcon, soon fell down at the Kings foot; which performance in this ramage, Giral. Cambr. made him yearly af∣terward, send hither for Eyesses. These Hawkes Aeries (not so called from building in the Air, but from the French word Aire an Egge) are many in the Rocks in this Shire. Buildings. For a sacred structure, the Cathedral of Saint David is most eminent, began by Bishop Peter in the raign of King John, and finished by his Successors; though, having never seen it, I can say little thereof. But in one respect, the roof thereof is higher than any in England, and as high as any in Europe, if the ancient absolute & independent jurisdiction thereof be considered, thus stated by an Authentick Giral. Itin. Cambr. lib. 2. cap. 1. Author, Episcopi Walliae à Menevensi Antistite sunt consecrati, & ipse similiter ab aliis tanquam suffraganeis est consecratus, nulla penitus alii Ecclesiae facta professione vel subjectione. The generality of which words must be construed to have reference, as well to Rome as to Canterbury; Saint Davids acknowledging subjection to neither, till the reign of King Henry the first. Princes. HENRY TUTHAR, Son to Edmund Earl of Richmond, and Margaret his Lady, was born at Sir Francis Baco  in the conclusion of his Character in his life. Pembroke in this County, Anno Dom.—In the reign of King Henry the sixth, he was bred a Child at Court, when a young man, he lived an Exile in France, where he so learned to live of a little, that he contracted a habit of frugality, which he did not depose till the day of his death. Having vanquished King Richard the third, in the battel of Bosorsth, and married Elizabeth eldest Daughter to King Edward the fourth, he reigned King of England by the name of Henry the seventh. He is generally esteemed the wisest of our English Kings, and yet many conceive, that the Lord Bacon writing his life, made him much wiser than he was, picking more prudence out of his actions, than the King himself was privy to therein, and not con∣tent to allow him politick, endeavoured to make him policy it self.
Yet many thik hs judgemen  him, when refusing the   of Colum∣bus, for the discovery of America, who might therein have made a secret advene, without any prejudice to the rputation of his wisdom. But such his wass, he would not tamper with costly Conts, though never o probable to be gainful; nor would he hazard a hook of Silver to catch a fish of Gold. He was the first King, who se∣cretly sought to abae the formidable greatness (the Parent of many former Rebelli∣ons) in the English earage, lessening their Dependencies, countenacing the Commons, and encouraging the Yeomandry, with provisions against Depopulations. However ere∣by he did not free his Successors from fear, but only exchanged their care, making the Commons (who because more numerous, less manageble) more absolute and able in time to conest with Soveraignty. He survived his Queen, by whom he had the true Title to the Crown, about five years. Some will say, that all that time he was King only by the Courtesie of England, which I am sure he was loth to acknowledge. Others say he held the Crown by Con∣quest, which his Subjects were as unwilling to confess. But let none dispute how h hld, seeing he held it, having Pope, Parliament, Power, Purse, Success, and some shadow of Succession on his side. His greatest fault was, grinding his Subjects with grievous exactions, he was most magnificent in those Structures he hath left to posterity. Amongst wich, his evo∣tion to God is most seen in two Chappels, the one at Cambridge, the other at West∣minster; his charity to the poor in the Hospital of the Savoy; his Magnificence to himself in his own Monument of guilded Copper; and his vanity to the World in buil∣ding a Ship called the Great Harry, of equal cost, saith some, with his Chappel, which asterwards In the be∣ginning of the Raign of Queen Mary, Sow. pag. 16. sunk into the Sea, and vanished away in a moment. He much imployed Bishops in his service, finding them honest and able. And here I request the judicious and learned Reader to help me at a dead li, being posed with this passage written in his life, by the Lord Verulam. He did use to raise Bishops by steps, that he might not lose the profits of the First fruits, which by that course of gradation was multiplied. Now, I humbly conceive, that the First fruits (in the common acception of the word) were in that age paid to the Pope, and would fain be informed, what By-First∣Fruits these were, the emolument whereof accrued to the Crown. This politick King at his Palace of Richmond, April 22. 1509. ended his life, and was buried in the Mag∣nificent Chappel aforesaid. On the same token that he ordered by his last VVevers Fun. Mon. pag. 20. Will and Testament, that none save such of the Blood Royal (who should descend from his Loyns) should be buried in that place, straitly forbidding any other of what Degree or Qua∣lity soever, to be interred therein. But only the Will of the King of Heaven doth stand inviolable, whilest those of the most Potent earthly Princes are subject to be infringed. Saints. JUSTINIAN was a Noble Briton by birth, who with his own inheritance built a Mo∣nastery in the Island of Ramsey in this County, where many Monks lived happily un∣der his discipline, until three of them, by the Devils instigation, J. Capgrave in Catal. S. S. Bit. slew this Justinian, in hared of his sanctity, about the year of Christ, 486. His body was brought with great veneration to Menevia, and there interred by Saint David himself, and since much famed with [supposed] Miracles. Writers. GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS, whose Sir-name, say some, was Godwin in the Bishops of St. Davids. Fitz-Girald, say others was J. VVareus de scrip. Hib. pag. 112. Barry, and I believe the latter, because he saith so himself in his Book, Lib. . cap. 2. extant in Sir R. Cottons Li∣brary. De vita sua, and was born at Tenby in this County. His Father. His Mother. William de Barry an Englishman. Angaeth, the daughter of Nesta, daugh∣ter of Rhese Prince of South-Wales.
He was Nephew to David the second Bishop of St. Davids, by whom he was made Arch-Deacon of Brecknock. He was wont to complain, that the English did not love him because his Mother was a Welsh-woman; and the Welsh did hate him because his Father was an English-man; though by his excellent writings he deserved of England well, of Wales better, and of Ireland best of all; making a Topographical description of all three: But acting in the last as a Secretary under King In the life time of King He. his Fa∣ther. John, with great industry and expence. Yea, he was a great Traveller, as far as Jerusalem it self, and wrote De mirabilibus terrae Sanctae, so that he might be styled Geraldus Anglicus, Hibernicus, Hie∣rosolymitanus, though it was his mind and modesty only to be Cambrensis. One may justly wonder that having all Dimensions requisite to preferment, his birth, broad acquaintance, deep learning, long life, (living above seventy years) he never at∣tained to any considerable Dignity. Hear how betwixt grief and anger he expresseth him self concerning his ill success at Court; Irreparabili damno duo ferè lustra consumens, nihil ab illis K. . 2. and his Sons. preter inanes vexationes &  veris promissa suscepi. Indeed for a long timè no Preferment was proffered him, above a beggerly Bishoprick in Ireland, and at last the See of S. Davids was the highest place he attained. Whilest some impute this to His Planet: the malignant influence whereof hath blasted men of the most merit. Pride: some men counting it their due for preferment to court them; and that it is enough for them to recive, too much to reach after it. Profitableness to be employed in meaner places. Some having gotten an use∣ful Servant, love to wear him out in working, and (as Gardiners keep their hedges close cut, that they may spread the broader) maintain them mean, that they may be the more industrious. Giraldus himself tells us the true reason that he was ever beheld oculo novercali, be∣cause being a Welsh-man by the surer side, and then such the Antipathy of the English, they thought no good could come out of Wales. Sad, that so worthy a man should poenas dare Patriae & Matris suae. Being at last (as we have said) made Bishop of Saint Davids, he went to Rome, and there stickled for an exemption of that his See from And to make it an absolute Metropolitan. Canterbury, whereby he highly offended Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury. But Giraldus after long debates, being ra∣ther over-born with Bribes, than over-come in Cause, returned re infecta, died and was buried in his own Cathedral, about the year 1215. The Farewell. I know not what better to wish this County, than that the Marle (a great fertilizer of barren ground) which it affordeth, be daily encreased, (especially since Corn is in all probability likely to grow scarcer and scarcer;) that their land through Gods bles∣sing being put in heart therewith, may plentifully answer the desires of the Husband∣man, and hereafter repair the Penury of this, with the Abundance for many succeeding years.
RADNOR-SHIRE. RADNOR-SHIRE, (in British Sire Maiseveth) in form three square, is bounded on the North-West with Hereford-shire, and on the South side (separated by the River Wye) with Breckneck-shire, and on the North part thereof with Montgomery-shire. Nature may seem to have chequered this County, the East and South parts being fruitful, whilest the North and West thereof (lying rough and uneven with Mountains) can hardly be bettered by the greatest pains and industry of the Husband man. Yet is it indifferently well stored with woods, and conveniently watered with running Rivers, and in some places with standing Meers. In his Bit. in this Shire. Mr. Cambden telleth us, that there is a place therein termed Melienith, (from the Mountains thereof being of a Yellowish colour) which stretcheth from Offa Dike unto the River Wye, which cutteth overthwart the West corner of this Shire, where mee∣ting with some stones which impede its motion on a sudden, for want of ground to glide on, hath a violent downfall, which place is termed Raihader Gowy, that is, the Fall or Flood-gates of Wye. Ibid Ibidem. Hereupon he supposeth it not improbable, that the En∣glish men forged that word for the name of this Shire, terming it Radnor-shire. Princes. HENRY of MONMOUTH, (so called from that well known Town wherein he was born) hath his Character fixed here, because formerly passed over in its proper place, through the posting speed of the Press. He was Son to King Henry the fourth, (by Mary one of the Daughters and Heirs of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Herefod, and) whom he succeeded on the Throne (being the fifth of that name) and began his raign March 20. Anno 1413. He cannot be excused from extravagancies in his Youth, seeing the King his Father expelled him his Council, (substituting his younger Brother the Duke of Clarence President in his steed) for the same. Yet as those bodies prove most healthful, which break out in their youth, so was his soul the sounder for venting it self in its younger days: For, no sooner was his Father dead, but he reclaimed himself, and became a glory to his Country, and a constant terror to his Enemies. Yea, he banished all his idle Companions from Court, allowing them a competency for their subsi∣stence. When the Lord Chiefe Justice (who had secured him when Prince, for striking him for the commitment of some of his lewd Companions) begg'd his Pardon for the same, he not only forgave him, but rewarded his Justice, for distributing it without fear or partiality. In his raign a Supplication was preferred, that the Temporal Lands given to pious uses, but abusively spent, might have been seized to the King. This was wisely awar∣ded by Chichley Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, by putting the King on the design of re∣covering France. Yea, this King by his valour reduced Charles the sixth King of France, to such a condition, that he in a manner resigned his Kingdom into his hand. And here the French men found him as good (or rather worse) as his promise, which he made to the Dolphin (who sent him a Barrel of Paris Tennis-Balls) sending such En∣glish Balls, that they proved to their great loss. He died at Boys S. Vincent in France, the last day of August, Anno 1422. and was brought over with great solemnity, and interred in Westminster Abby. Prelates. ELIAS de RADNOR. GUILIELMUS de RADNOR. Ijoyn them together for three Reasons; First, because Natives of the same Town, understand it Old Radnor, the new town of that name being built probably since their
decease. Secondly, because Bishops of the same See, Landaff. Thirdly, because emi∣nent, being eminent for Nothing, the names and dates of their deaths (the one May 6. 1240. the other June the 30. 1256.) being all that learned Antiquary and their Suc∣cessour,In his Ca∣ of the Bishps of Lndaff. Bishop Godwin, could recover of their memories, which disheareth me from arther enquiry after them. For, let them never look for a crop, who sow that ground, which so skilful an husband-man thought fit to lie fallow. The Farewell. It much affected me (and I believe all others whose hearts are of flesh and blood) what I read in anD. Powel in his▪ History of VVles. pag. 387. Author concerning the rigorous laws imposed on the observation of the Welsh. For when Owen Glyndower-dwy (inveigled by some well-skilled in Merlins Prophesies, that the time was come, wherein the Britains through his assistance should recover their ancient freedom and liberty) raised a Rebellion, making war up∣on the Earl of March (the Heir apparent both to the Crown of England and Principa∣lity of Wales) King Henry the fourth (inraged at his proceedings) enacted these ensuing Laws. First, That no Welshman should purchase Lands, or be chosen Citizen or Burgess of any City, Borough, or Market Town, nor be received into any Office of Mayor, Bayliff, Chamberlaine, &c. or to be of the Councel of any Town, or to bear Armour within any City. Besides that, if any Welsh-man should impeach, or sue an English∣man, It was ordained, he should not be convicted, unless by the judgment of English Justices, verdict of English Burgesses, or by the Inquest of the English Boroughs where the suits lay: Yea, that all English Burgesses who married Welsh Women should be disfranchised of their Liberties. No congregation or Council was permitted to the Welsh-men, but by licence of the chief Officers of the same Seigory, and in the* Ibid. Ibidem. presence of the same Officers. That no Victuals should be brought into Walls, unless by the especial licence of the King and his Council. That no Welshmen shoud have any Castle, Fortress, or House of Defence of his own, or any other mns to keep. That no Welsh-man should be made Justice, Chamberla, Chancellor &c. of a Ca∣stle, Receivor, Eschetor, &c. nor other Officer or Keeper oW Records, &  nor of the Council of any English Lord. That no English man that in time to come should marry a Welsh-woman be put in any Office in Wales, or in the Marches o the same. Now as I am heartily sorry that ever the Welsh were bound to the observance of so rigorous Laws, so am I truly glad, that at this day they are (to the happiness both of England and Wales) freed from the same: Yea, I shall constantly pray, that God would be pleased to grant us of the Loins of our Soveraign, one who may be born Prince of the one, and (after the [though late] decease of his Majesty) King of the other. FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO FULLER'S Worthies of England. A. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. ST. Aaron Monm. 50 Robert Abbot Surr. 82 George Abbot Surr. 83 Sir Roger Achley Shrop. 10 John Acton Middl. 104 Ralph Acton ib. 178 Sir Thomas Adams Shrop. 10 William Adams ib. 10 William Adams Kent 77 Adam de Marisco Somer. 27 St. Adelme Wilt. 147 Pope Adrian IV. Hertf. 20 —Agelnoth Kent 68 William Alabaster Suff. 70 Alan de Morton Berk. 104 Albericus de Veer Bedf. 121 b Alan of Lynne Norf. 256 Flaccus Albinus, alias Alcuinus York. 227 King Alfred Berk. 96 Alphred of Beverly York. 205 Henry de Aldecheleia Staff. 50 John Alcock York. 214 Albricius of Lond. 216 Robert Aldricke Bucks 131 William Alley ib. 131 William Aldersea Ches. 191 St. Alride Cumb. 217 St. Alkmund Derb. 231 James Altham Essex 347 William Alton Hant. 11 St. Alban Hertf. 19 St. Alnulphus Bedf. 115 c William Alan Lanc. 109 Edward Allin Lond. 223 Rose Allin Essex 323 Bertram Fitz-Allin Linc. 166 Thomas Allin Staff. 42 John Amersham Buck. 135 St. Amphibalus Monm. 50 —Anderton Lanc. 119 Sir Edmund Anderson Linc. 161 —Anderson Northumb. 310 Lancelot Andrewes Lond. 206 Thomas Andrewes Northamp. 300 Richardus Anglicus Lond. 215 Laurentius Anglicus ib. 216 Anne, D. to King Charles Westm. 229 Richard Angervile Suff. 29 Henry D'Anvers Wilt. 153 Sir Edmund Appleby Leicest. 136 Thomas de Appleby Westmorl. 137 Roger de Appleby ibid.   Sir Simon Archer Warw. 133 William Armyne Linc. 155 David Archidiaconus Bedf. 122 King Arthur Cornw. 201 Prince Arthue Hant. 4 John Arundle Cornw. 200     202, 209 Thomas Arundell Suss. 103 St. Asaph Flint. 38 Roger Ascham York. 209 John Ashburnham Surrey 95 Thomas Askine Berk. 91 William Ascough Linc. 156 Anne Askewe ib. 155 Thomas Ashbourne Derby 236 Sir Thomas de Ashton Lanc. 122 John de Aston Staff. 48 Sir Walter Aston ib. 50 —Atwell Cornw. 202 Edmund Audley Staff. 42 Sir Thomas Audley Essex 327 James Lord Audley Devon. 258 John Aylmer Norf. 238 B. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Richard Badew Essex 335 John Badby Lond. 204 Sir Francis Bacon Westmin. 241 Robert Bacon Oxf. 337 Sir Nicholas Bacon Suff. 62, 75 Ralph Baines York. 197 John Baconthorpe Norf. 255 William Baitman Norw. 276 Sir Richard Baker Oxf. 338 John Bale Suff. 60 Thomas Bagnols Staff. 44 Christopher Bambridge Westmorl. 136 Bankinus Londin. Lond. 217 Sir John Banks Cumb. 219 John Ball Oxf. 339 John Bancroft ib. 333 Richard Bancroft Lanc. 112 Ralph Baldock Herf. 21 Sir Paul Bannyng Essex 347 Hugo de Balsham Camb. 160 Amias Bamfeild Devon. 272
Richard Barnes Lanc. 110 William Barry Kent 94 Thomas Barrington Essex 340 John Barnston Chesh. 183 John Barkham Devon. 276 Juliana Barnes Lond. 217 Richard de Barking Essex 325 Adam of Barking ib. 332 Thomas Barret ib. 340 a John Barret Norf. 258 John Barnet Hertf. 21 Edward Bash ib. 30 Richard de Baskervill Heref. 44 Sir James Baskervill ib. 46 John Barningham Suff. 69 Herbert de Basham Sussex 101 William Barlow ib. 103 Salephilax the Bard Wales 13 John of Basingsloke Hant. 10 b Valentine Barret Kent 94 John Basket Berk. 108 Thomas Basket Dorces. 28 John Basket Wilt. 163 Abbot of Battle Sussex 106 Walter de Baud Simon & alii Essex 343 James Baynam Glocest. 354 Richard Basset Bedf. 121 John Basset Cornw. 210 Thomas Beckington Somers. 23 Thomas Becket Lond. 203 —Bede Durham 292 Sir Thomas Beigney Devon. 265 Philip de la Beach Berk. 104 Margaret Beaufort Bedf. 115 Anne Beauchamp Ox. 330 Richard Beauchamp Berk. 92   & Worc. 171 Sir Edward Bellingham Westmorl. 138 Thomas Bell Glocest. 362 —Beavois Hant. 9 Sir Robert Bellknap Leicest. 131 Richard Belgrave ib. 132 Sir Henry Bellasis York 223 John Bellasis ibid.   St. Beno Flint. 38 Thomas Benion Somers. 34 Thomas Bendish Essex 340 Thomas Bentham York 197 Robert Bennet Berk. 92 Thomas Berkley Gloc. 363 Gilbert Berkeley Norf. 238 Dame Katherine Berkeley Gloc. 361 Bertram Fitz-Allen Linc. 166 St. Bertelin Staff. 40 Peregrin Berty Linc. 161 Sir Richard de la Bere Heref. 46 Alphred of Beverly York 205 St. John of Beverly ib. 192 William Bischop Warw. 129 Benedict. Biscop York. 192 Thomas Bickely Buck. 131 Sir Richard Bingham Dors. 281 John Bird Warw. 22 Thomas Bilson Hant. 7 Sir Francis Bigot York. 209 John of Birlington, alias Bridlington ib. 193 Sir Thomas de Billing Northamp. 286 Philip Biss Som. 30 John Bloxham Linc. 165 Michael Blaunpayn Corn. 203 Peter Blundell Dev. 265 Cornelius Bongy Warw. 120 Utred Bolton Wales 14 Robert Bolton Lanc. 116 John Boise Suff. 71 David Boyse Wales 15 Dr. John Bois Kent 84 Sir William Boleyn ib. 95 Queen Anne Bollen Lond. 202 Sir Godfrey Bollen Norf 258 Edward Bonner, alias Savage Worc. 169 William Bowyer Staff. 53 William Booth Chesh. 174 Laurence Booth ibid.   John Booth ib. 155 Edward Bone Cornw. 206 Wenfr. Boniface Devon. 249 Sir George Bowes York. 223 Henry Bourchier Essex 338 John Bourchier Hertf. 27 Thomas Bourchier Essex 324 William of Bottlesham Cambr. 152 Andrew Borde Lond. 215 Philip Bottiller Essex 345 —Boso Hertf. 20 John Bray Cornw. 205 Sir John Bramston Essex 329 Robert Braybrook Northamp▪ 284 Henry de Braybrook Bedf. 122 Robert de Braybrook ibid.   Henry Bradshaw Ches. 190 Sir Henry Bradshaw ib. 177 Robert Brassy ib. 182 John de Bradfeild Berk. 92 John of Bridlington, alias Birlington —York. 193 a William Breton Wales 14 Walter Brute ib. 8 Sir Henry Bromfleet York. 221 Gualo Britannus Wales 14 Hugh Broughton ib. 16 Richard Broughton Hunt. 53 b John Briton, alias Breton Heref. 37 Nicholas Breakspear Hertf. 20 William de Brito Kent 91 Sir Richard Brakenburgh ib. 95 Maurice Bryyn Essex 339 Giles de Bruce Breckn. 23 John Bradford Lanc. 108 Sir Thomas Bromley Staff. 43 John Bromley ibid.   Sir Thomas Brumley Shrop. 6 William Briewere Berk. 103 Sir John Brewerton Chesh. 185 Edward Brerewood ib. 190 William Brewer Devon. 252, 268 Fulco de Breantee Berk. 104 Walter Bronscombe Dev. 274 Ralph Browning Suff. 61 Sir Robert Brooke ib. 65 Sir David Brooke Somers. 25 Walter Browne Lond. 228 William Browne Rutl. 348 Christopher Browne ib. 253 John Browne ib. 354 Stephen Browne Northumb. 308 Matthew Browne Surr. 98 Thomas Bradwardine Suss. 102 Wulstan of Braundsford Worc. 168 Robert Bristow ib. 176 Ralph of Bristol Somers. 34 Henry Bright Worc. 177 William Brightman Nottingh. 319 Fulk de Brent Middl. 182 Edmund Brudenell Northamp. 300 Henry Bullock Berk. 95 John Buckingham Buck. 130 Edward Bulstrod ib. 141 William Burgoin Devon. 265 Hubert de Burgo Kent 91 Thomas Lord Burgh, or Borough Linc. 159 Arthur Bulkly Anglesey 18 Lancelot Bulkly ib. 19 Sir Ralph Butler Gloc. 356 Charles Butler Hant. 13 Sir Thomas Burge Linc. 174 Henry Burton Staff. 46 Robert Burton     William Butler Suff. 67 William Burton Leic. 134 Robert Burton ibid.   Sir Thomas Burdet Leic. 140 John of Bury Suff. 69 Boston of Bury Linc. 165
Robert Burnel Shrop. 4 Henry Burwash Suss. 103 John Buckeridge Wilt. 151 Nicholas Byfeild Warw. 122 Hub. de Burozo Kent 91 C. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir Peter Carew Devon. 272 Nicholas Carew Surr. 96 Richard Carew Cornw. 205 Sir John Cary Devon. 253 James Cary ibid.   Valentine Cary Northum. 305 Henry Cary Hertf. 23 Sir Henry Cary ibid.   John Careless Warw. 120 Robert Cantus Wilt. 155 Sir George Calvert York. 201 Sir Robert Calvert ib. 230 Thomas Castleford ib. 207 Caducanus Wales 10 Gualt Calenius ib. 14 St. Canock Breckn. 22 St. Cadock ibid.   Sir Edward Carne Glamor. 41 Waler Cantilupe Monm. 51 Giraldus Cambrensis Pemb. 57 Vinarius Capllanus Norf. 269 Sir John Cavendish Suff. 65 Thomas Cavendish ib. 66 John Cavendish ib. 72 William Caxton Camb. 157 Sir Hugh Calvely Chesh. 178 John Canon Cumb. 220 Robert. Epis. Carliol. ib. 225 Edmund Campian Lond. 222 Sir Robert Catelin Leic. 131 John Caius Norf. 275 Sir Philip Calthrope ib. 270 Sir William Capell Suff. 73 Richard Capell Gloc. 361 Arthur Capell Hertf. 28 Nathaniel Carpenter Devon. 264 John Carpenter Gloc. 355 Sir William Catesby Northamp. 286 George Garleton Northumb. 304 Thomas Cantilupe Heref. 35 Osburn of Canterbury Kent 99 Thomas Carwright Hertf. 27 Thomas Carden Surr. 96 William Cecill Linc. 159 Jane Cecill ib. 168 David Cecill Northamp. 299 Sir Thomas Cecill ib. 300 David Cerington Wilt. 159 Cecily Daugh. to Edw. IV. Westmin. 237 Sir Julius Cesar Middl. 185 King Charles I. Kent 67 King Charles II. Westmin. 237 Witt. Chappel Notting. 317 Humphry Chetham Lanc. 121 Sir Thomas Chaleton Middl. 187 Maurice Chamner Lond. 222 Henry Chichely Northamp. 292, & 283 Richard Chichester Devon. 263 Sir Arthur Chichester ibid. 254 Robert Chichester ibid. 251 Roger of Chester Chesh. 189 Richard Chamond Cornw. 211 William Chadderton Chesh. 175 Sir Hugh Cholmly ibid. 187 Lawrence Chaderton Lane. 117 John de Chesill Essex 325 John Christopherson Lanc. 110 Thomas Cheyney Kent 96 Willam Cheyney ibid. 95 Sir Frncis Chney Buck. 141 Sir John Cheke Camb. 156 Thomas Chase Bedf. 115 Peter Chapman Berk. 97 Thomas Chaucer ibid. 106 Jeffrey Chaucer Oxf. 337 William Chillingworth ibid. 339 —Child Devon. 266 John Christmas Essx 346 John Chedworth Gloc. 355 Thomas Charnock Kent 82 David of Chirbury Shrop. 8 Thomas Church-yard ibid. 9 Sir John Champneys Som. 31 Thomas Chune Suss. 109 John Chylmarke Wlt. 156 Sir Roger Cholmley York. 200 Sir William Chauncey Northamp 301 Sir Dudley Charlton Oxf. 334 Roger the Cistercian Devon. 263 Francis Clearke Bedf. 118 William Clarke Oxf. 345 George Clearke anc. 121 Sir John Clarke Northamp. 299 Richard de Clare Monm. 51 Richard Clough Flint. 39 St. Clintanke Breck. 22 Francis Clfford York. 223 George Clifford ibid. 203 Anne Clifford Wesimor. 140 Richard Clarke Dors. 282 Osbern Claudian Gloc. 357 Katherine Clyvedon ibid. 361 Sir Jervase Clifton Camb. 169 Richard Clifford Kent 70 John Cleaveland Leic. 135 Hugh Clopton Warw. 129 Elizabeth Clare Suff. 71 Nicholas Close Westmorl. 137 Alice Coberly Wilt. 148 Sir Francis Cottington ibid. 152 Hugh Coren, alias Curwen Westmor. 137 John Comin, alias Cumin Worcest. 167 Sir Thomas Coventry ibid. 170 Walter of Coventry Warw. 124 Vincent of Coventry ibid.   William of Coventry     Roger Ep. Covent. & Litch. Berk. 104 Walt. de Constantiis Wales 10 St. Congellus; alias Comgallus Flint. 38 Constantine G. Essex 322 William Coberly Wilt. 148 Sir Edward Conway Warw. 123 Miles Coverdale York. 198 Sir William Compton Worc. 179 —Cocke Devon. 261 Henry Cocke Hertf. 32 Sir Edward Coke Norf. 250   & Buck. 141 Sir John Cooke Derb. 233 George Cooke ibid. 232 Sir Thomas Cooke Suff. 73 Sir Anthony Cooke Essex 327 John Cowell Devon. 262 Roger Comes ibid. 268 Dr. John Cosen Durh. 295 Dr. Richard Cosen ibid. 296 Thomas Cole Berk. 97 Sir John Cokeyn Bedf. 116 Richard Cox Bucks. 131 Samuel Collins ibid. 137 Ralph of Cogshall Essex 332 Henry Cotton Hants. 7 Sir Robert Cotton Hunting. 52 Sir Rowland Cotton Shrop. 16 William Cotton Lond. 206 Tomas Cotton Camb. 167 William Collet ibid. 161 John of Cornwa Cornw. 203 Godfrey of Cornwall ibid.   Sir John Cornwall Shrp. 15 Brian Cornwall Staff. 53 Richard Conwail Heref. 46 Thomas Conisby Hertf 32 Sir Thomas Conisby Heref. 47 John Courcy Somers. 25 John Collington ibid. 30
Thomas Coriat Somers. 31 William Coppinger Suff. 71 Sir William Co dll ibid. 7 Eleanor Cobham Surr. 80 Richard Corbet ibid. 83 John Colon Norf 255 John Coupeland Northumb. 312 Richard Courtney Devon. 252 William Courtney ibid. 250 Peter Courtney ibid. 253 Richard Crackanthorp Cumb. 221 Sir Randall Crew Chesh. 178 Randall Crew ibid. 184 William Crew ibid. ibid Thomas Crofts Suff. 75 James Cranford Warw. 128 Lyonel Canfeild Lond. 211 Sir James Crofts Heref. 41 Thomas Cranley Surr. 81 Thomas Cranmer Nott. 316 Robert Crowley Northamp. 290 Roger of Crowland Linc. 164 Thomas Cromwell Surr. 83 Sir Oliver Cromwell Hunt. 54 Thomas Cromwell Cambr. 168 Sir Henry Cromwell ibid. 169 Sir George Crooke Buck. 133 John Croke ibid. 140 John Crane Camb. 160 William Crowmer Kent 95 Ralph Cudworth Lanc. 117 Henry Cuffe Somers. 28 Bartholomew Culie Leic. 132 Thomas Curson Lond. 223 John Curd Northamp. 283 Sir John Cuts Cambr. 168 Roger Curson Derb. 232 John Cut-cliffe Devon. 263 Hugh Curwen, alias Coren Westmor. 140 John Cumin, alias Comin Worc. 167 D. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Michael Dalton Camb. 159 Sir Robert Dallington Northamp. 288 Sir Thomas Dacres Hertf. 32 Henry Danvers Wilt. 153 Mary Dale Somers. 37 Samuel Daniel ibid. 28 Walter Daniel York. 205 George Day Shrop. 5 William Day     Sir John Darell Berk. 111 James Davenant Lond. 207 Sir Humphrey Davenport Chesh. 178 John Damerell Devon. 271 John of Darlington Durh. 295 Robert Darcy Essex 339 John Davies Heref. 40 Sir Robert Dennis Devon. 272 Baldwin Devonius ibid. 274 Sir Edward Denny Hertf. 32 Robert Devereux Heref. 38 Walter Devereux ibid. 46   & Caermar. 28 John Dee Lanc. 116 John Delves Staff. 53 Simon Dewes Suff. 75 David Archidiaconus Bedf. 122 Francis Dillingham ibid. 117 Sir James Dier Somers. 25 John Digby Warw. 124 Richard of Devises Wilt. 155 John Diggons Hant. 14 Leonard Digges Kent. 82 Daniel Dike Hertf. 28 Jeremiah Dike ibid.   Nicholas Dixon ibid. 29 Sir Wolstan Dixie Hunting. 53 Sir Robert Dimock Line. 174 Sir William Doddington Hants. 14 Robert Dodford Northamp. 290 Sir William Dormer Bedf. 126 Robert Dormer Bucks. 141 Thomas Dorman ibid. 137 John Dod Chesh. 181 Thomas Dove Lond. 207 John Doreward Essex 339 Sir John Doderidge Devon. 257 George Downham Chesh. 189 John Downham ibid. 191 John Donne Lond. 221 John Douland Westminst. 244 Edmund Doubleday ibid. 245 Sir Robert Doyle Oxf. 345 Sir William Druery Suff. 63 Drugo Drury Norf. 272 Thomas Drax Warw. 125 Michael Drayton ibid. 126 John Driton Sussex 109 John Drusius Hants. 12 Sir Francis Drake Devon. 261 St. Dunstan Somers. 21 William Dudley Staff. 42 Edmund Dudley ibid. 43 John Dudley ibid. 44▪ 53 Sir Robert Dudley Surr. 84 Augustin Dudley Northamp. 283 John of Dunstable Bedf. 116 Arthur Ducke Devon. 262 Brian Duppa Kent 73 James Duport Leic. 134 Richard Dugard Worc. 176 E. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Robert Eaglesfield Cumberl. 222 Adam de Easton Heref. 36 St. Ealphage Kent 67 John Easday ibid. 99 Ealread of Rievaulx York. 205 St. Ebba Northumb. 304 Thomas Ecklestone Chesh. 180 King Edward III. Berk. 88 Edward Son to King Edgar Dorset. 278 King Edward I. Westmin. 236 King Edward IV. Caernar. 28 St. Edward the Confessor Oxf. 331 King Edward V. Westmin. 337 King Edward VI. Middl. 178 Edward Son to Edward III. Oxf. 330 Edward Son to King Richard III. York. 191 Edward Son to King Henry VI. Westmin. 236 St. Edmund Berk. 89   & Suff. 56 Edmund, Son to King Henry VII. Kent 66 Edmund, Son to King Edward III. Hertf. 19 Edmund, Son to King Edward I. Oxf. 330 Edmund of Hadham Hertf. 19 Thomas Edwardston Suff. 59 Sir Clement Edmunds Shrop. 6 Sr. Edwold Oxf. 331 St. Edburgh Hant. 4   & Buck. 128 Thomas Eden Essex 336 Richard Edgcomb Devon. 271 Sir Peter Edgeombe Cornw. 210 St. Edith Wilt. 147 William Edendon ibid. 150 John Ede Wales 15 St. Edilburge Essex 322 William Egremont Cumb. 220 Sir Thomas Egerton Chesh. 176 Eleanor, Daughter to King Edward I. Berk. 88   & Hants. 4 Queen Elisabeth Kent 66 Elisabeth, Daughter to King Edward IV. Westmin. 237 Elisabeth, Daughter to King Charles I. ibid. 239 Elisabeth, Daughter to Earl of Clare Suff. 71 Elisabeth, Daughter to King Edward I. Flint. 37 Thomas of Ely Suff. 68 Hugh Elio: Somers. 35 Sir Thomas Eliot Camb. 168 Nicholas of Ely Camb. 152 Humphry Ely Heref. 41 St. Elfred Hunting. 49
John of Eltham Kent 65 Bridget of Eltham ibid.   John Elryngton Middl. 188 Elvodugus Probus Flint. 39 Sir Richard Empson Northamp. 287 Wiliam Englebert Dorces. 284 Samson Erderswick Staff. 45 John Erghom York. 230 William Essex Berk. 108 Henry de Essex Bedf. 121 Alexander of Esseby Somers. 27 Nicholas Estwick Northamp. 291 Ethelbert Heref. 35 St. Ethelburgh Essex 322 Sylvester de Everton Bedf. 116 John Evesden Cambr. 157 Hugh of Evesham Worc. 168 Elias of Evesham   174 Walter of Evesham   176 Walter Eustathius York. 195 Marbod Evan Wales 10 William Evans Monm. 54 Sir Ralph Evars, alias Eure York. 222 Sir Thomas Exmew Denb. 35 William of Exeter . 275 Sir Simon Eyre Suff. 71 F. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Peter Fabell Middl. 186 Anthony Faunt . 142 Robert Fabian Lond. 218 John Fastolfe Norf. 253 Eustathius de Fauconbridge York. 195 Guido de Fairfax ibid. 199 Sir Nicholas Fairfax ibid. 222 Robert Farrar Caermar. 27 Sir Jeffrey Fenton Notting. 319 Edward Fenton ibid. 318 Roger Fenton Lanc. 116 John Fen Somers. 29 Sir Richard Fenys Oxf. 345 Daniel Featly ibid. 340 Nichols of Fernham Surr. 80 John Feckenham Worc. 177 Haimo of Feversham Kent 80 Besil Feriplace Berk. 10 Henry Filmer ibid. 90 Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert Derb. 253 Richard Fishacre, alias Devon. 263 Richard Fishbourn Hunt. 53 Simon Fish Kent 69 John Fisher Leic. 141   & York. 194 Edward Fines Linc. 158 Sir Moile Finch Kent 96 Sir Henry Finch ibid. 76 Sir John Fineux ibid. ibid. Bertram Fitz-Allin Linc. 166 Robert Floyd, alias Fludd Kent. 78 Richard Fletcher Kent 72 Giles Fletcher ibid. 78   & Lond. 221 John Northamp. 288 Fleta, or Fleet Lond. 212 Florence of Worcester Worc. 174 William Flowre Camb. 151 Humphry Foster Berk. 107 Humphry Forster ibid. 109 Humphry Foster Cumb. 218 John de Ford Devon. 263 John Fowler Somers. 36 Gilbert Foot Devon. 251 Robert Foliot ibid. iaeid. Sir Henry Fortescue ibid. 256 Sir John Fortescue     Sir Adrian Fortescue     Edward Fox Gloc. 355 Richard Fox Linc. 157 John Fox ibid. 167 Martin Fotherby ibid. 158 William de Folvil Leic. 133 John Freeman Northamp. 301 Ralph Fresbourn Northumb. 307 St. Frideswide Oxf. 331 Valentine York. 228 Edward Freese ibid. ibid. Sir Martin Frobisher ibid. 202 Acceptus Fruin Suss. 104 Sir Thomas Frowicke . 183 Thomas Frowicke ibid. 188 William Fulke Lond. 219 Fu co de Breanee Berk. 104 Stephen de Fulbune Camb. 152 Nicholas Fuller Hants. 12 G. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. William Gascoigne Bedf. 125 Thomas Gascoigne York. 208 Sir William Gascoigne ibid. 199 Sir John Gates Essex 346 John de Gatesden Hertf. 24 of Gainsbo ough Linc. 155 Simon of Gaunt Lond. 205 Henry of Gaunt Linc. 153 Harvis Gadarn Montg. 4 Thomas Shrop.   Stephen Ga diner Suff. 6 Christopher St. German Lond. 212 Richard George Essex 323 Sir Humphrey Gilbert ibid. 332 William Gilbert ibid. ibid. Gilbert . 5 Gilert of Westminst. 242 John Gibbon Som. 29 Gbert of Sempringham Linc. 154 Thomas Gibson Northumb. 307 William Gisford Staff. 46 Gildas the Wise Somers. 27 Gildas the 4th Wales 13 Bernard Gilpin Westmor. 139 Richard Gilpin ibid. 141 John Giles . 24 Anthony Gilby Linc. 167 Giles de Bruse Breckn. 23 Giraldus Cambrensis Pembr. 57 Robert Glover Kent 82   & Warw. 120 John Glover ibid. ibid. Bartholomew Glanvile Norf. 269 William Glyn Anglesey 19 Owen Glendowerwye Flint. 39 Robert of Glocester Gloc. 358 Richard Duke of Glocester Cumb. 228 Edmund Gourney Norf. 258 John Goslin ibid. 275 Matthew Gournay Somers. 25 Francis Godwin Northam. 284 Thomas Godwin Berk. 92 Gabriel Goodman Denb. 35 Godfrey Goodman ibid. 34 Katherine Gowches Hants. 5 Roger Goad Buck. 136 Thomas Goad Cambr. 159 Godfrey Goldsborough ibid. 153 Sir Francis Godolphin Cornw. John Godard Essex. 333 Nicholas Gorrham Hertf. 26 James Goldwell Kent 72 Thomas Goldwell     Thomas Goodrich Linc. 157 William Gouge Middl. 184 George Goring Surr. 96 John Gower York. 207   & Berk. 107 William Goldingham Essex 339 Sir Thomas Gresham Norf. 259 Henry Greene Northamp. 297 Anne Greene Oxf. 34 Wilm Grocirie Somers. 36 Robert Grosthead Suff. 57 Sir Flke Grevill Warw. 127 William de Grenvil Cornw. 199 Thomas Granvil ibid. 210 Sir Richard Greenvil . 258
Henry Grey Bef. 118 Lord Athur Grey Buck. 134 William Gey Derby 232 Lord Anthony Grey Durh. 299 Jane Grey Leicest. 127 Katharine Grey     Mary Grey     John Griffin Wales 15 John Gregory Euck. 136 Arthur Gregory Doro. 284 Edmund Grindall Cumb. 218 John Grandesson Heref. 37 Richard of Gravesend Kent 71 John Gwent Wales 15 Edmund Guest York. 198 John Gwin Berk. 91 John Gwillim Heref. 40 Gualo Britannus Wales 14 Guido de Mona Anglesey 18 H. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir James Hales Kent 69 Thomas Hale Somers. 34 —Hales Warw. 130 Alexander of Hales Gloe. 358 Thomas of Hales ibid. 359 Richard Hale Hertf. 30 Edward Hall Lond. 219 Joseph Hall Leic. 129 Robert Halam Wilt. 149 John of Halifax, alias Sacro Bosco York. 206 Henry Hammond Surr. 85 John Hanvile Oxf. 336 James Harrington Rutl. 348 Sir John Harrington Somers. 28 Lord John Harrington Warw. 130 Sir Robert Harecourt Berk. 107 Sir William Harper Bedf. 118 Walter Haddon Buck. 135 John Harman, alias Vesty Warw. 122 John Harley Buck. 130 Richard Hampole, alias Role York. 193 John Harding ibid. 208 Richard Hackluit Heref. 39 Haimo of Hithe Kent 71 Haimo of Feversham ibid. 80 Edward Halsall Lanc. 120 William Harvey Kent. 79 Jeffery de Harby Leic. 132 Robert de Harby ibid. 133 Meredith Hanmer Flint. 39 William Hastings Leic. 141 Sir Edward Hastings     Francis Hastings ibid. 142 Sir Edward Harwood Linc. 162 Job Hartop ibid. 163 Thomas Haslewood Kent 81 Sir Christopher Hatton Northamp. 285 Hugh Hatton Chesh. 186 Rawe Hayes Cornw. 202 Andrew de Harcla Cumb. 225 Elisabeth Hardwicke Derb. 237 Sir William Hankford Devon. 255 Edmund of Haddam Hertf. 19 Sir William Hampton Gloc. 361 Thomas Hawkes Essex 323 Sir John Hawkewood ibid. 330 Samuel Harsnet ibid. 326 King Henry I. York. 190 King Henry III. Hants. 4 King Henry IV. Linc. 152 King Henry V. Radn. 59 King Henry VI. Berk. 89 King Henry VII. Pembr. 56 King Henry VIII. Kent 66 Henry, Son to King Henry VIII. Suff. 79 Henry, Son to King Charles I. ibid. ibid. Henry Fitz-roy, Son to K. Henry VIII. Essex. 321 Henry Bishop of Winch. and Card. Angl. Hunt. 15, 16. Henrietta, Daughter to King Charles I. Devon. 274 Charles Herle Cornw. 205 St. Herebert Cumberl. 217 Sir William Herle Devon. 255 George Herbert Montgom. 46 Edward Herbert ibid. ibid. William Herbert Monm. 52 Sir Anthony Fitz Herbert Derb. 233   & Gloc. 356 St. Helen Essex 322 Roger of Hereford Heref. 39 Nicholas Hereford Wales 9 Martin Heton Lanc. 112 John Herdwick Leic. 137   & York. 194 Nicholas Heath Lond. 205 John Heiwood ibid. 221 Sir John Hewet Northam. 301 Thomas Hereningham Essex 340 Julines Herring Montg. 47 Thomas Hides Berk. 96 John of Hide Hants. 10, 11 Sir Nicholas Hide Wilt. 153 Sir Rowland Hill Shrop. 10 Haimo of Hithe Kent. 71 Ralph de Hingham Norf. 249 Sir Oliver Hingham ibid. 253 John Higham Suff. 74 Sir Robert Hicham ibid. 72 Hilarius Bishop of Chichester Surr. 92 St. Hilda York. 191 Alban Hill Wales 12 Sr. Hildetha Essex 322 Arthur Hildersham Cambr. 158 Sir John Howard Berk. 107 Thomas Howard Essex 328 William Howard Surr. 83 Charles Howard     Henry Howard Norf. 263 Queen Katharine Howard Lond. 202 Robert Holcot Northam. 289 Gilbert of Holland Linc. 164 Thomas Holland Shrop. 9 Philem. Holland Warw. 127 Henry Holland Worc. 176 Hugh Holland Wales 16 John Holyman Buck. 130   & Somers. 34 Francis Holyoake Warw. 128 Wilfr. Holme York. 209 Robert Holgate ibid. 194 Lawrence Holebeck Linc. 166 Thomas Hoo Bedf. 124   & Hertf. 32 Sir William Hollis Notting. 323 James Hobart Norf. 258 Richard Holsworth Northumb. 305 John Hooper Somers. 21 Sir William Horne Cambr. 160 Robert Horne Durh. 295 Richard Hooker Devon. 264 Richard Howland Essex 326 George Horsey Hertf. 32 Thomas Howel Breck. 23 John Hornby Linc. 165 Robert Hownslow Middl. 184 John Howson Lond. 207 Robert Hoode Notting. 320 John Horminger Suff. 68 John Holbrook Surr. 85 Nicholas Hortresham Suss. 108 William Horeman Wilt. 156 Roger Hoveden York. 206 William Hugh ibid. 209 St. Hugh Linc. 152 Hugh of Reading Berk. 95 Lawrence Humphred Buck. 136 John Hunt Wilt. 148 Gregory of Huntington Hunt. 50 Henry of Huntington ibid. 51 Matthew Hutton Lanc. 111 Sir Richard Hutton Cumb. 219 Roger Hutchison Hertf. 27 Randal Hugden Chesh. 190 Richard Huloet Camb. 158
Sir John Huddlestone Camb. 168 Hucarius Levita Cornw. 202 Sir William Huser Linc. 160 John Huser ibid. 174 I. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. William James Chesh. 175 Thomas James Hants. 12 Richard Fitz-James Somers. 23 John Fitz-James ibid. 24 James, Son to King Charles I. Westmin. 239 Thomas Jackson Durh. 297 Robert Jermin Suff. 75 John Jewell Devon. 253 John Jegon Essex 326 —Jeffery Rutl. 348 Sir John Jefferey Sussex 105 Thomas Ilam Lond. 233 John Incent Hertf. 29 Sir Francis Inglesfeild Berk. 109 John, Son to King Edward I. ibid. 88 Sir Oliver St. John Wilt. 152 Sir John St. John Bedf. 125 Oliver St. John ibid. ibid Hugh Johnes Wales 11 William Johnes Monm. 53 Thomas Jones Lanc. 112 Benjamin Johnson Westmin. 243 Thomas Johnson York. 204 Robert Johnson Linc. 169 Joan, Daughter to King Edward II. Lond. 201 Thomas Joyce Oxf. 332 George Joy Bedf. 117 Sir Ralph Josceline Hertf. 29 Joceline of Wells Somers. 22 Josephus Iscanus Devon. 274 Barthol. Iscanus ibid. ibid. Roger of St. Ives Hunting. 51 Sir Anthony Jud Kent 84 Robert Ivory Lond. 217 St. Justinian Pembr. 57 William Juxton Sussex 104 K. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Katharine, Daughter to King Henry III. Lond. 201 Katharine, Daughter to King Henry VII. ibid. 202 Katharine, Daughter to King Charles I. Westmin. 240 John Kendricke Berk. 97 St. Kenelme Gloc. 353 John Kemp Kent 69 Thomas Kempe ibid. 71 John of Kent ibid. 80 Henry Keble Lond. 233 Matthew Kellison Northamp. 292 Richard Kendall Westminst. 139 Sir Edward Kelley, alias Talbot Worc. 172 St. Keyne Breckn. 22 St. Kiby Cornw. 198 —Kiltor ibid. 205 John King Buck. 132 Henry King ibid. ibid. Sir William Kingston Gloc. 368 Sir Anthony Kingston     Robert Kinaston Shrop. 16 John Kinyngham Suff. 68 —Kidstone Lanc. 122 John Kite Lond. 205 Hugh Kirkstead Linc. 164 John of Killingworth Warw. 124 John de Kirkby Westmor. 136 William Knight Lond. 205 Henry de Knighton Leicest. 133 Sir Robert Knowles Chesh. 179 Sir Francis Knowles Oxford 334 & 335 Sir Henry Knowles     Sir William Knowles     Sir Robert Knowles     Sir Thomas Knowles     Lettice Knowles     Sir Thomas Kneisworth Cumb. 160 L. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Nicholas Latham Northamp. 293 William Lawd Berk. 93 Roger Layburn Cumb. 218 Gerh. Langbane ibid. 221 Henry Langley Essex 339 Edmund of Langley Hertf. 19 Robert Langland Shrop. 8 Richard Laken ibid. 12 Richard Lanham Suff. 68 Robert Langton Westmor. 140 Stephen Langton Kent 97 Simon Langton ibid. 99 Walter de Langton Leic. 128 Thomas Langton ibid. 133 John Laurence Essex 323 Arthur Lakes Hants. 7 Sir Thomas Lakes ibid. 9 Lamfrid ibid. 10 William Lambe Kent 85 Hugh Latimer Leic. 127 William Laxton Northamp. 293 William Lawes Wilt. 156 Blegabride Langauride Wales 13 Laurentius Anglicus Lond. 216 Thomas Legge Norf. 276 John Lewkenor Surr. 95 Francis Leigh Warw. 133 Thomas Leigh     Sir James Ley Wilt 152 Edward Lee York. 194 Paulin de Leeds ibid. 215 John Lepton ibid. 231 —Leoline Denb. 34 John Leventhorpe Essex 340 Hucarius the Levite Cornw. 202 Hugh Legat Hertf. 26 Thomas Leaver Lanc. 115 William Lempster Heref. 39 Sir Anthony St. Leger Kent 73 William de Leicester Leic. 132 Robert de Leicester ibid.   Thomas Linacer Derb. 235 August. Linsell Essex 326 Thomas de la Lynd Dorc. 284 Simon Lynch Essex 337   & Kent 85 William Lyford Berk. 96 William Lynwood Linc. 156 William Lilly Hants 11 William Lidlington Linc. 164 Nicholas Lyra Lond. 217 Nicholas of Lynne Norf. 254 Alan of Lynne ibid. 256 Thomas Lydyate Oxf. 338 Edward Littleton Staff. 42 Sir Thomas Littleton ibid. ibid.   & Worc. 171 William de Lichfield Staff. 45 John Lydgate Suff. 68 Herbert Losing Oxf. 332   & Suff. 58 Adam Loftus York. 198 William Longchamp Essex 342 John Lowe Worc. 168 Sir Richard Lovelace Berk. 110 Henry Longuile Buck. 141 Maud Lucy Cumb. 222 John Lucas Essex 347 Egid. Lucas ibid. 340 William de Lubbenham Lei. 132 Thomas Lupsett Lond. 218 M. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. John Marbeck Berk. 91 John Mason ibid. 93 Thomas Magnus Notting. 320 Sir Henry Martin Lond. 214 Gregory Martin Suss. 111 Richard Martin Devon. 275 William Martin     Alan de Marton Berk. 104
, Daughter to King Edward I. Berk. 88 Philip Mapas Lond. 232 Queen Mary Kent 66 Mary, Daughter to King Charles I. Westminst. 238 Mary. Daughter to King Edward I. Berk. 88 Mary. Daughter to King Henry VIII. Kent 66 Mary, Daughter to King James ibid. 67 Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond Berk. 115 Maud, Countess of Northumberland Cumb. 222 Simon Firz-Mary Lond. 228 Walter Male-clerk Cumb. 225 John Marre, alias Marrey York. 207 George Marsh Lanc. 108   & Chesh. 188 John Marshal Worc. 175 Stephen Marshal Hunt. 52 Adam of Marsh Somers. 27 Matthew of Weminst. 242 Tobias Matthew Somers. 34 John May Suff. 61 Thomas May Suff. 110 John Matthew Buck. 137 Andrew Marvail Cambr. 159 Roger de Martivall Leic. 129 Hugh of Manchester Lanc. 114 Sir John Markham Notting. 317 William Mansfield ibid. 318 John Maundrell Wilt. 148 Sir Halvatheus Maulever, alias Mallevorer York. 221   & Warw. 120 William Makilsfeild Chesh. 174 Thomas Maldon Essex 333 Henry Marny ibid. 346 Sir Henry Maynard ibid. 347 Perotine Massey Hant. 5 John Mandevile Hertf. 26 Ralph of Maidenstan Kent. 70 Sir Roger Manwood ibid. 76 Robert Mascall Shrop. 5   & Sussex 113 Leonard Maw Suff. 61 Richard Mayo, alias Mayhow Wilt. 150 Richard Mayhowe ibid. ibid. Oliver of Malmesbury ibid. 154 William of Malmesbury Walter de Merton Surr. 81 John de Metingham Suff. 64 St. Meliorus Cornw. 199 Joseph Mede Essex 334 Simon Mepham Kent. 71 William de Melton York. 195 Sir Christopher Metcalfe ibid. 222 Rowland Merrick Angles. 19 Ambrose Merlin Carmar. 29 —Michell Wilt. 158 Sir Hugh Middleton Denb. 36 David Middleton Chesh. 189 Sir Henry Middleton Walter Mildmey Essex 335 Thomas Milles Kent 82 Anthony Milemay Northamp. 300 St. Milburgh Shrop. 3 Thomas Mitton ibid. 16 John of Milverton Somers. 35 William Minors Staff. 44 Sir Thomas More Lond. 208   & Dorset. 289 Margaret More Lond. 209 Peter Morwing Linc. 167 George Monox Lond. 233 Sir William Mounson Linc. 163 John Mordant Bedf. 105 Thomas Morton York. 229 John Morton Dorset. 279 Robert Morton Richard Montague Buck. 132 James Montague Northamp. 284 Edward Montague ibid. 287 & 293 Sir Henry Montague ibid. 289 Guido de Mona Anglesey 18 George Mountaine York. 199 Fines Morison Linc. 167 Sir Richard Morisin Essex 327 Sir John Mortimer Heref. 46 Edmund Mortimer Suff. 56 Lady Mohun Somers. 30 William Mohun Cornw. 211 John Molle Devon. 250 George Moncke ibid. 259 Thomas De la More Gloc. 358 Sr William Molineux Lanc. 113 John Mountgomery Essex 339 Jey of Monmouth Monm. 50,52 John of ibid. 50 Thomas of ibid. 53 Henry of Monmouth Radnor. 59 John Mush York. 213 Richard Mulcaster Westmor. 139 N. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir Robert Naunton Suff. 64 Thomas of Newmarket Cambr. 153 John Newburgh Doro. 289 William of Newborough York. 206 Cicely Nevil Durh. 291 Bishop Ralph Nevill Bishop Alexander Nevill ibid. 293 Bishop Robert Nevill Bishop George Nevill Hugo de Nevill Essex 342 John de Nevill Thomas Nevile Kent 99 Anne Nevill Warw. 118 St. Neots Essex 323 Hugh of St. Neots Hant. 50 Humphrey Necton Suff. 67 Thomas Neale Gloc. 359 Richard Neile Westminst. 241 —Nesta Breck. 23 Sir Richard Newport Shrop. 16 Alexander Nequam Hertf. 25 Sir Francis Nethersole Kent 85 Sir Aug. Nicholls Northamp. 288 Ambrose Nicholas Hunt. 53 Alexander Nowell Lanc. 115 Henry Noel Leic. 137 Martin Noell Staff. 47 Edward Norgate Cambr. 161 Henry Norrice Berk. 109 Sir Edward North Cambr. 168 Thomas Norton Somers. 35 Sir John Norton Kent 95 Lord Henry Norris Sir Thomas Norris Sir John Norris Sir Henry Norris Oxf. 334 & 335 Sir Edward Norris Maximilian Norris William Norris William Nottingham Notting. 318 William Noy Cornw. 200 John de Northwood Kent 91 Richard Northall Middl. 182 —Nothelmus Lond. 216 Richard of Northamp. 283 Adam of John of Northamp. 289 O. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Henry of Oatlands Surrey 79 Nicholas Ockham ibid. 85 William Ockham Owen Oglethorpe Oxf. 333 Sir Thomas Offley Chesh. 191 Sir John Oldcastle Heref. 36 Hugh Oldham Lanc. 109 Adam de Orlton Heref. 37 St. Osith Essex 323 St. Oswald Shrop. 3 John Overall Suff. 61 William Oughtred Buck. 137 Sir Thomas Overbury Gloc. 359 John Owen Northamp. 285
Sir Roger Owen Shrop. 16 John of Oxford Oxf. 337 Robert of Oxford P. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. William Pagett Lond. 210 George Palin Chesh. 182 Edward Palmer Gloc. 362 James Palmer Westminst. 444 Julius Palmer Warw. 120 John Palmer Henry Palmer Sussex 112 Thomas Palmer Eusebius Pagett Northamp. 290 Sir John Packington Worc. 181 William Packington ibid. 174 Katherine Parr Northamp. 282   & Westmorl. 136 Sir Thomas Parr Northamp. 298 Sir William Parr bis   Thomas Parr Shrop. 11 Richard Parr Lanc. 113 Richard Parry Flint. 39 Stephen Patrington York. 196 Henry Parker ibid. 208 Richard Parkr Camb. 159 Matthew Paris ibid. 156 William Paston   249 Sir Clement Paston Norf. 253 Sir William Paston   263 Peter Pateshl Northamp. 290 Martin de Pateshall ibid. 286 John Paulet Somers. 32 Walter Parsons Staff. 48 John Paschall Suff. 59 John Parkhurst Surrey 81 William Perkins Warw. 125 William Pemble Sussex 109 John Peckham ibid. 101 Sir William Pelham ibid. 106 Peter Petow Warw. 120 Thomas Peverell Suff. 59 Robert Person Somers. 29 Anthony Persons Berk. 90 Robert Perpoint Notting. 323 Dorothy Petre Essex 330 John Peach Kent 95 Thomas Penketh Lanc. 114 Andrew Perne Norf. 259 William Piercy York. 196 Sir William Piercy ibid. 222 Reginad Peacock Wales 9 Petrok ibid. 13 Robertus Perscrutator, alias the Searcher York. 206 John Plough Notting. 319 Edmund Plowden Shrop. 6 George Plantagenet ibid. 2 Edward Plantagenet Warw. 119 Marg. Plantagenet Wilt. 146 Richard Plantagenet York. 191 Thomas Plantagenet ibid. 192 Henry Plantagenet Monm. 53 Richard Plantagenet Northamp. 282   & Shrop. 2 Thomas Phaier Wales 12 Dr.—Phillips ibid. 11 John Philpot Hants. 5   & Kent 82 Sir John Philpot ibid. 84 John Phreas Lond. 215 John Pitts Hants. 13 Agnes Pirest, or Prest Devon. 249 Hugh Pirry Gloc. 362 John Pilkinton Lanc. 110 Peter of Rippon York. 206 William Platt Lond. 224 Thomas Playfere Kent 85 Thomas Playford ibid. 83 Robert Plympton Devon. 263 Sir Thomas Pope Lond. 223 Barnaby Potter Westmor. 138 Christopher Potter ibid. 140 George Porter Cumber. 220 Sir Lewis Pollard Devon. 256 Henry de la Pomeroy ibid. 265 John Points Gloc. 366 John Poynet Kent. 72 Sir Edward Poynings ibid. 73 Richard Poor Wilt. 149 William de la Pole York. 215 Reginald Pole Staff. 40 Sir John Popham Somers. 25 Sir John Portman ibid. 24 Sir Amyas Powlet ibid. ibid. William Powlet Hants. 8 Sir John Poulney Leic. 136 John Poultney ibid. 137 William Prude Kent 98 John Prideaux Devon. 254 Roger de Prideaux Cornw. 209 John Preston Northamp. 291 Sir Amias Preston Somers. 26 Elvodugus Probas Flint. 39 Sir John Puckering York. 201 Sir William Purchas Cambr. 160 George Purient Hert. 32 Robert Pullen Oxf. 332 Q. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Francis Quarles Essex 334 R. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Ralph Radcliffe Chesh. 180 Thomas Ratcliffe Essex 330   & Leic. 132 William Ratcliffe Linc. 168 Elas de Radnor Radn. 59 Gulielmus de Radnor Thomas Ramme Berk. 93 William Ramsey Hunt. 51 Sir John Ramsden York. 224 Ranulphus, or Randall of Chester Chesh. 190 Thomas Randolph Northamp. 291 William de Raleigh Devon. 252 Sir Walter Rawleigh ibid. 261 William Rastall Lond. 212 John Rastall ibid. 219 Richard Rawson ibid. 232 Thomas Ravis Surr. 82 William of Reivaulx York. 205 Ealred of Reivaulx Philip Repington Wales 9 Robert Record ibid. 12 William of Reading Berk. 92 Philip de Repingdon Derb. 232 Hugh of Reading Berk. 95 John Reinolds Devon. 264 Michael Reneger Hants. 11 William Read Kent. 71 Peter Read Norf. 255 Margaret Rich Berk. 89 Alice Rich Robert Rich ibid. 95 Richard Rich Hants. 8   & Lond. 232 Sir Rice ap-Thomas Caerm. 27 King Richard I. Oxf. 329 King Richard III. Cumb. 228   & Cornw. 210 Richardus Comes Devon. 268 Richardus Anglicus Lond. 215 Sir Richard of Wich Worc. 167 Sir Thomas Richardson Norf. 252 John Richardson Cambr. 158   & Chesh. 176 St. Richard of Wich Worc. 167 Sir John Rhese, alias ap-Rice Wales 15 Sir George Ripley York. 203 George Ripley Surrey 85 Sir Thomas Ridley Cambr. 158 Sir Thomas Ryves Dorc. 282 Edward Rishton Lanc. 118 Peter of Rippon York. 206 Sir Richard Roberts Cornw. 211
Thomas Roberson York. 209 Robert the Scribe ibid. 205 Henry Robinson Cumb. 219 John Rogers Lanc. 107 Robert Rogers Dorset. 283 Roger of Chester Chesh. 188 Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield Berk. 104 John Rochford Linc. 172 Sir John Rochford ibid. 174 Roger the Cistertian Devon. 263 Thomas Rokeby York. 221, 218 Sir Thomas Roper Lond. 213 John Rouse Warw. 125 Richard Role, alias Hampole York. 193 John Roman Cornw. 205   & York. 228 Henry Roulands Caernar. 32 Anthony Rouse Cornw. 211 John Roper Kent 96 Dennis Rolls Devon. 272 Rosamund Heref. 41 Richard Rothwell Lanc. 122 Sir Ralph Rowlet Essex 346 Henry Fitz-Roy ibid. 321 Sir Francis Russel Bedf. 125   & Northumb. 314 John Russel Hants. 6   & Dorces. 281 John Russel Worc. 181 Thomas Rudborne Hertf. 21 John Ruthall Gloc. 355 S. Rumald Buck. 128 Helias Rubeus Cambr. 157 St. Ruffinus Staff. 40 S. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Thomas Sackvill Sussex 105 Richard Sackvill   112 Arnold Savage Kent. 94 Thomas Savage Chesh. 175 John Savage   187 Edmund Savage, alias Bonner Worc. 169 Sir John Savace ibid. 179 Andrew Sackvill Surrey 92 Richard Sackvill     Sir Robert Sackvill     Sir John Sackvill     Sir Jordan Sackvill     Johan. de Sacro Bosco York. 206 Salkeld Cumb. 221 Sir Henry Savill York. 210 Sir George Savill ibid. 224 Goodwin of Salisbury Wilt. 155 Johannes Sarisburiensis ibid. 149 Sutton of Salisbury ibid. 157 John Saltmarsh York. 212 Salephilax the Bard Wales 13 Sir Ralph Sadlier Middl. 183 Henry Saltrey Hunt. 50 William Salisbury Denb. 34 Fulke of Samford Somers. 22 John of Samford     Nicholas de Sandford Shrop. 15 Sir Edwyn Sandys Worc. 174 George Sandys York. 212 Edwyn Sandys Lanc. 110 James Sands Staff. 47 Nicholas Sanders Surr. 86 Laurence Sanders Warw. 120 Henry of Sandwich Kent 71 Robert Samuel Suff. 58 William Sauter Lond. 203 Gilbert Segrave Leic. 128 Thomas Scroope Suff. 69 Richard Scroope York. 196 Sir Jervas Scroop Linc. 174 Robert the Scribe York. 205 Thomas Scott ibid. 214 John Scott Kent 95 William Scott ibid. 94 John Scotus Northumb. 307 Gilbert de Sempringham Linc. 154 William Sengham Lond. 216 John Selden Suss. 110 Sclater Bedf. 117 John Scrivener Buck. 129 Richard Senhouse Cumber. 219 William Sevenoake Kent 84 John Seintleger ibid. 94 St. Sewall York. 227 Thomas Seymore Wilt. 151 Edward Seymore     Jane Seymore ibid. 146 Sir Francis Seymore ibid. 164 Robert the Searcher, alias Perscrutator York. 207 Sertor of Wales Wales Wles William Shakespeare Warw. 126 Edmund Sheffield Linc 166 John Shorditch Middl. 188 —Shamborn Norf. 264 Robert of Shrewbury Shrop. 4 Ralph of Shrewsbury Shrop. 4 Robert of Shrewsbury   8 Sir Anthony Shirly Sussex 107 Sir Robert Shirly     Sir Thomas Shirly   108 William Shirwood Durh. 297 Robert Sherbon Hants. 6 John of Shepey Kent 71 Anthony Shugburgh Warw. 133 Nathaniel Shute York. 211 Joah Shute     Richard Sharpe Somers. 34 William Siveyer Durh. 297 Edward Simonds Herf. 28 Sir Henry Sidney Kent 74 Sir Philip Sidney   75 Francis Sidney   85 Humphrey Sidenham Somers. 29 Richard Sibbs Su. 69 Robert Skinner Northamp. 285 John Skelton Cumb. 221   & Norf. 257 Sir William de Skipwith, bis Linc. 160 William Skipwith Leic. 142 John Skuish Cornw. 204 Sir James Skudamore Heref. 47 William Sleightholm York. 193 Sir Henry Slgsby ibid. 223 Henry Smith Surrey 87 Sir Thomas Smith Berk. 94   & Essex 328 John Smith Chesh. 179 William Smith   184 Miles Smith, D. D. Heref. 38 Richard Smith Worc. 175 William Smith Lanc. 119 John Smith   120 Henry Smith Leic. 134 Robert Smith   136 Robert Southwell Suff. 71 Laurence Sommercote Suss. 108 Sophia, Daughter to King James Kent 67 Robert Sommercoat Linc. 155 William of Somerset Wit. 154 Maurice Sommerset Somers. 27 John Spicer Wilt. 148 John Spine Somers. 35 Thomas Spring Suff. 71 John Speed Chesh. 181 John Sprint Gloc. 360 Miles Spencer estmor. 140 Edmund Spencer Lond. 219 William Spencer Nor∣thamp. 299 Robert Spencer   300 Thomas Sparkes Linc. 167 Charles Stuart, Son to James D. of York stminst. 240 John Still Linc. 158 Nicholas Stanford ibid. 165 Sir William Stamford . 183 Sir Simon Steward Cambr. 169 Henry Stafford Breck. 23   & Staff, 45
Edmund Stafford Staff. 45 John Stafford     John Stafford Dorc. 279 Humphrey Stafford Leic. 141 Henry Standish Lanc. 109 John Standish   114 Thomas Stanley Staff. 53 James Stanley Lanc. 109 John Stratford Warw. 121 Ralph Stratford     Robert Stratford     William Fitz-Stephens Lond. 216 John Stow ibid. 219 Alexander Strange ibid. 224 Egid. Strangwayes Dorces. 289 Sir Humphrey Starkey Chesh. 177 John Stathom Derb. 233 John Stanbery Devon. 253 Thomas Stapleton Suss. 111 Sir Robert Stapleton York. 223 William of Strickland Westmor. 137 Richard Stocke York. 231 Simon Stocke Kent 80 Matthew Stoakes Buck. 135 Thomas Stuckely Devon. 258 Walter de Stuchesly Gloc. 363 Thomas Sternhold Hants. 11 —Stumps Wilt. 157 Henry Sturmy ibid. 161 Sir Richard Sutton Chesh. 182 Richard Sutton Linc. 168 Sir George Summers Dorc. 282 Simon Sudbury, alias Tibald Suff. 59 Richard Sulcard Westmin. 242 T. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir John Talbot Shrop. 7, 12 Richard Talbot ibid. 5 Sir Gilbert Talbot   16 Sir Edmund Talbot York. 221 Sir Edward Talbot, alias Kelley Worc. 172 Thomas Tarlton Staff. 47 William Tavernour Oxf. 344 Rowland Tailour Suff. 57 Thomas Tailour York. 210 Robert Testwood Berk. 96 Hester Temple Buck. 138 John Terer Chesh. 192 Alan of Tewksbury Gloc. 358 Thomas Thirlby Cambr. 153 Robert Thorne Somers. 36 Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Warw. 123 Sir Arthur Throgmorton Northam. 301 John Thornborogh Wilt. 151 Sir John Thin ibid. 164 Francis Thin Kent. 82 St. Theliah Merion. 43 Sir Rice ap-Thomas Carmar. 27 Thomas of Woodstock, Son to King▪ Edward III. Oxf. 330 Thomas, Son to Edward I. York. 191 Thomas ap-William, &c. Flint. 40 St. Theorithoid Essex 32 John Thorpe Norf. 257 Simon Thurway Cornw. 203 John Tiptoft Cambr. 155 Sir James Tirrel Cornw. 210 John Tyrril Essex 338 Gervase of Tilbury ibid. 332 Sir Frederick Tilney Linc. 161 Dr. Tighe ibid. 167 Christopher Tye Westmin. 244 Thomas Tisdall Oxf. 341 St. Tibba Rutl. 347 Simon Tibald, alias Sudbury Suff. 59 Cuthbert Tonstall York. 197 Robert Tomson Hants. 10 John Towers Norf. 149 Robert Townson Cambr. 153 Sir Roger Townsend Norf. 272 John Towers ibid. 249 Michael Tregury Cornw. 199 John Tregonwell ibid. 202 John Trevisa Cornw. 204 Bartholomew Traheron ibid. ibid. Nicholas Tremaine Devon. 266 Andrew Tremaine     Edward Trotman Gloc. 356 Sir William Tracy ibid. ibid. Richard Tracy Gloc. 359 Sir Edmund de Trafford Lanc. 122 Elias de Trekingham Linc. 164 George Trigg ibid. 168 —Trestram Middl. 186 Sir Thomas Tressam Northamp. 300 Thomas Tressam     William Turner Northumb. 305 William Tucker Devon. 275 John Tuckvile ibid. 276 James Turbervil Dorc. 279 Richard Turpin Leic. 133 Thomas Tusser Essex 334 Sir Brian Tuke ibid. 346 Roger Twiford Middl. 184 William Twisse Berk. 96 V. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Robertus de Vaus Cumber. 225 Sir Nicholas Vaux Northamp. 298 Walter Vaghan Wilt. 164 Richard Vaughan Carnar. 31 Henry Vavasor York. 222 Albericus de Veir Bedf. 121 Veal Corw. 205 John Vernon Derb. 244 Sir Francis Vere Essex 331 Sir Horace Vere     Henry Vere     Aubrey de Vere ibid. 333 Henry Veer Northamp. 298 Sir Robert Venile Norf. 252 John Vesty, alias Harman Warw. 122 Richard Verney ibid. 133 George Villiers Leic. 130 Richard Vines ibid. 134 Machell Vivan Northumb. 308 Thomas Vipont Westmor. 136 Robert de Vipont ibid. 141 Vinarius Capellanus Norf. 269 Richard Ulverston Lanc. 114 Sir Henry Umpton Berk. 94 Sir Edward Umnpton ibid. 110 John Underhill Oxf. 333 Thomas Underhill Warw. 130 Nicholas Upton Devon. 264 St. Ursula Cornw. 199 W. NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. John Watson Worc. 170 Robert Watson Norw. 276 John Warner Westmin. 241 John Walch Linc. 174 Sertor of Wales Wales 10 Richard Walsh Worc. 181 John Wallis, or Welsh ibid. 174 Henry Wakefield York. 196 Armigell Waad ibid. 202 Robert Walby York. 229 John Walby   230 Simon Ward ibid. 218 Samuel Ward Suff. 70   & Durh. 298 John Walter Heref. 41 Walter Bishop of Carlisle Cumb. 225 Robert Fiz-Walter Essex 330 Matilda Fitz-Walter ibid. 336 Sir John Walter Shrop. 7 Richard of Wallingford Berk. 95 George Walker Lanc. 118 John of Waltham Essex 325 Roger of Waltham ibid. 333 Sir Isaac Wake Northamp. 286 Nicholas Wadham Somers. 30
