F2527A R217407 99829074 33510
man with horns on his head
man with horns on his head Sir Fardinando Fumbler, Clerk of the Company.
Fumblers-Hall, KEPT And holden in Feeble-Court, at the sign of the Labour-in-vain, in Dee-little-Lane. Wherein divers Complaints & Agrievances, of the Feminines in Cornucopia, are present∣ed to the grave wisdoms of the Masters of that Company: concerning Non-perfor∣mance, want of due benevolence, Deficience and Corporal Disabilities in Man-kind, whereby poor distressed Females Languish under a pressing weight of misery, not only to the great decay of their Trade and oc∣cupations, but to the Destruction of Generation it self. Whereunto is Added the Second part, newly discovered and set forth for in∣formation of delinquents that are to answer to these interrogations that shall be ob∣jected against them. Printed for I. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T. Passnger.
The Summons being granted to Sir Fardinando Fumbler, Clerk of the said Company, to Cite in these persons following, Viz. Allice All-cok. Complaints against Sir Nicholas Frible Ione Wou'd-have-more, Complaints against Daniel Doe-little, Doll Hold-up, Complaints against Fran. Fain-would, Kate Knockwel, Complaints against Will. Dy-bones, Nan Tickle-tail, Complaints against Peter Bad-cosk. Bess Bear-up-stiff. Complaints against Simon Silly-P— VVho are all to answer to What shall be objected against them. VVhereunto is added. Margery Marall, against Iack Jolly-boy, Susan Shrews-face, against Dick Draball, Cicilly Suc-pot, against Robin Rocksby, Winney Wagtail. against Joseph Wood-ck All Delinquents, and to an∣swer to their several crimes.
Fumblers-Hall. The PROLOGUE. Come you brave Artists of the horned trade That boast how many marr'd how many made, You need none but your own Artillery, To advance the mistery of eniquity; The Suub are so fll you well may rally From street, from lane, from court, form yard from alley Bth tag and rag, both short as well as tall, May ll-a-row nw march to Fumblers-Hall: There do your duties to prevent your scorns, Pay tribute to the vertue of the Horns. THe Females of Cornucopia, being a great number of agrieved Mor∣tals that a long time have Lan∣guished: gnaw Sheets, eat Oat∣meal, and licked Walls for satisfaction of their longing desires, & finding none to pitty their cases, but growing worse and worse in their desired faculty, resol∣ved with one consent to draw up their a∣grievances; and present them to the Ma∣sters
of the Corporation of Fumblers-Hall, The said Masters being Twenty four in number, whereof twelve were Men-Mid∣wives, the other, Sons of Apothecaries, that had studied Aristotles Problems, the Birth of Man, & divers learned Authors, that hath treated largely on the Art and Occupation of the Femenines, in the way of Fructification, and increase of their Members: these being head men of the City of Cornucopia, having many com∣plaints and Agrievances presented them from the agrieved parties of Females in & about te City, resolved to build them  new Hall, all the Timber thereof be∣ing horn-beam, & a roof of Unicorn Horn, hly guilded, Studded, and Imbosied with lesser Horns, of all sorts of colours: the Table, Chair▪ and stools, being all of them of the same Livery: This Hall for the curiosity thereof, as far exceeded al other Halls, as the Cross in Cheap side did exceed the horned Pillar in Kent; being built in Feeble-Court, at the sign or the la∣bour-in-vain, near unto the Maid∣en-head in Doe-little-Lane; where the Court being set, Sir Fardinando Fumbler called in these persons following. Clerk. Alice Allcock, and Sir Nicola rible, come into the Court, and answer to
those objections alledging each from o∣ther. Master. Speak Allice, what canst thou say against Sir Nicholas? Alice. An't please this Honourable Ta∣ble, I have been his obedient Creature, waking and sleeping, these 3 long years, and yet am as pure a Virgin, as ever lay by the side of a young Bride-groom; & so am like to continue for him, whereby I receive many taunts and jeers of my Neighbours, who call me Barren-Doe, & and a thousand such names: when 'ris known, Gentlemen, the fault is not mine in the least: I have done my endeavour up and down, ever since I was his Wife, fed him with Anchovis, Caviarre, bought bottles of Muskadine, Montefis∣co Frontimack: nay, he has wanted no∣thing that the industery of Woman could invent, to make him capable of doing his duty: Yet he is no more to me, Gentle∣men, than a straw in the Nostrils of a ow, a very slug, a meer frible, an it please ye, Gentlemen hear what he can al∣ledge for himself. Mast. Sir Nicolas answer for your self, what can you alledge against the accusation of the Woman? Sir Nicholas. So please your Grave
Worships to consider of the Impudence of this woman, who is more insatiate then the Grave, nay, Hell it self: no man though never so lusty, being able to give her satisfaction: besides, one fluttish nas∣ty trick she hath, that every night she Faris in her sleep, which above all the rest of her bad qualities, is most hateful to me. Mast. That is but a weak infirmity Sir Ni∣cholas; you know he that refuseth a wife for a Fart, a Horse for a start, and a Groat for a crack, shall never be well wiv'd, well Hors'd, nor well money'd; come, come, Sir Nicholas, you must bear with her weakness, she is a wo∣man, and your wife. Alie. I, and will be a woman too in spight of his teeth, or else i'le want of my will, cannot I break wind when I catch cold, but you must mouth it? Mast. A Womans will indeed, is a resolute beast, and deserves a strong kirb; if they once get a bit in their mouth they'l run to the devil. Sir Nick. Therefore ile flye them, as I flye from evil. And shun bad women, as i'de shun the Devil. (Exit, Sir Nick. and Alice.) Mast. Clerk; Call in Ione Wood hv-more and Daniel Doe-lttle, to answer what shall be objected each by other.
Clerk. Jone. Wood-have-more, and Dani∣el Doe-little appear in the Court, and bring your Summons with you, Enter Ione Wood-have-more, and Daniel Doe-little. Mast. Ione, What canst thou say against Daniel? is he not a loving husband to thee? Ione. I cannot say but he is loving enough, but love is not all that pleaseth a Woman, will love beget such beautiful Children as my neighbour K. or my neighbour B. hath; no, no, Love will not do it alone: I must confess he is a Mu∣sitian, and as timbersome a man as any lives in Cock-Lane, yet has but a meer Gut, a Chitterling, a Fiddle-string, that will make no musick to a Womans In∣strument; yet when I tell him on't, he pulls it out and shakes it, and puts up his Fiddle-stick again, falls a kissing of me, & with a few other Iack-Puddings tricks, thinks that sufficient satisfaction; but this is the short & the long of the bu∣siness, I have been his wife long enough, and have found his performances to be meer fooling, and no real perfomance at all: as a fine speech to a roen Puppit∣play; but I look for Reality Gentle∣men,
and to have Children as well as my Neighbours: 'tis not now and then a Hoop-ring will please me, No, no, i'le get a Cooper i'le warrant him, that shall not want an Addze to labour withal. No Woman can indure so vile a wrong, As too too short, or have it too too long. Mast. Daniel, what say'st for thy self? Daniel. Will ye please to see, and if here be not enough to content any Woman in England ile— Mast. Fie on him uncivil beast, kick uim out of the Court, and commit him close pri∣soner to his own Horn-Pipe, and grant Ione liscence of freedom, to use and occupy for a a year and a day, and then this business to be called over again. Ione. I humble thank your good Wor∣ships, I shall not be unthankful to you. D. This is a doom I little thought to have. For natures gifts to be a womans slave. Exit Ione and Daniel. Mast. Call in two more. Clerk. Doll Hold up, and Frances Fain∣would, appear in the Court. Enter Doll Hold up, & Fran. Fain-would. Doll. Nay, I can hold-up & hold forth too, I have been at the Mouth at Alders∣gate, and as loud as the best of them all; I have knocked down humane Learning,
and have a Spirit i'le warrant thee that will teach thee something: Brother P. will not come to it like a Bear ward, or a Fecer, or a rude Cavileer that will swear dam him he will, but like a right spiritual Brother, seasoned for the work, and according to the right Rule of Foun∣dation of Generation. O the rudeness of these wicked men, good People cast them from you, let not the Wicked's Seed be sown in the ground of the Righteous, I beseech you cast them from you: though the World calls them Husbands, they are Thieves & Robbers, Men of this world, that shall have their Portion in the Lake, the foul Lake. Mast. This is a Quaker, away with her, if her Spirit be once rais'd, all the Devils in Hell cannot lay it again. Doll. Thou art a Lyar, a Dg, a Toast of the foul Pit, the froth and seuin of hell. Master. Avoid Satan, i'le not hear a word more. Fran. I fain would have reclaimedher from her Meetings, but it is as good to try to wash a Black-a-moor White, or to lade dry the Thames with a spoon, as to seek to turn her from her perverse will. Please her I cannot, but she calls me dis∣sembling Lyat, Devil, nay; and makes
Horns in derision. Mast. An absolute breach of priviledge, and deservs a severe punishment. Clerk, make her Mittimus into Horn-Castle, where she may continue close, safe, and strickt im∣prisonment for a year and a day: and for ho∣nest Frances, I one Wood-have-more may do well to employ him to do her Noctural drudgeries. Fran. If it be Digging or knocking, have at her. I can Humbore too, and have P—and praise abroad, though I can have none at home: but from all Quakers, Iohn-a-bob-tails, Brownings, and sha∣kers, Good Lord deliver me. For when pretended Zeal doth lead astray, Vertue forsakes, & vice doth shew the way. Mast, Sure the Devil would not marry a Quaker, if they be so perverse. Call in some more of them and see what they are. Clerk. Kate Knock-well, and William Dry-bones appear in the Court. Enter Kate Knock-well, and William Dry-bones. Mast. Come bonny Kate, what canst thou alledge against thy Husband, William Dry∣bones? Kate. An't please your Worships I have
been married these six years, and yet can find no comfort at all be fitting a woman; he told me he was a Clerk, but the Devil of one drop of Ink have I found in his Pen since I married him, whatsoeer he had before; He is dry, dry as a ix: Gentlemen, therefore I pray consider of a poor woman, I am Fcsh and blood as your Wives are, Gentlemen: Therefore either grant me Liscence to use my own, or I will do it, and do it again: we Wo∣men must & will have our benevolnce. The World was never yet so dull, If one Koave won't another will. Will. Were a Mans body a full Mary bone, thoud'st quickly draw it dry, I war∣rant thee, thou wearest thy Magnetick stone under thy apron▪ that will draw more then the succour of a well, or a team of Flanders Mares, and if it be true that some say that love is a well, they'l drain the sring dry, were it as deep as hell. But I know the worst, Horns are my fate, And horns do sometimes deck a Iordly pate. Mast. He hath confest himself a dry fellow, make Kate a commission to use her Talent,
while he hath recruited his lamp, & then both parties will be pleased. Kate. I am your Worships humble Hand-maid, and do tell, He that knocks best, Can knock at best but well. Exit Kate and Dry-bones. Mast. Call in Nan Tickle-tail, and Pe∣ter Bad-cock. (both enter.) Come Nan speak for thy self, & speak truth. Nan. So I will an it please your Wor∣ship, I have been married two years, & had as good I had never been married at all, he has been at Burnt-Wood an't please ye, the Barbar plaid the Iew with him, and instead of part, cut off all: he has not so much as would satisfie a Duck at a mouthful, an it please you: I hid it a long time for shame and reproach of peo∣ple, but noa I can hide it no longer: at night he quarrcls with me in bed, but hang him ingling Rascal, all the dogs in Cornucopia are little enough to bait him: Women are well hope up to marry with such Geldings. Peter. It is well known I was a sound man when I married thee, Nan Tickle∣tail, you have tickled me with the Pox when I was knocking at the Anvil, you were in Conjuncton with Tom the Ioy∣ner,
and would come home as drunk as a Sow, and call me at your pleasure: pawn Pettiroat, Smock, Wastcoat, and all to fre an Attoorney to maintain your hones∣ty, forsooth; though you have offended no less then three times, since you were my Wife; and once in the Cage, when the Taylors man in Black-Fryers had taken measure of your hide for a young bant∣ling, you know who you was beholding too for a three-penny caudle, and a half∣penny candle to stick in clay at the Beds∣head, every feather i'm sure was an ell loug: then you would come creeping home, crying good Peter, sweer Peter, re∣ceive in thy Nan, and I will work, and not desire a Penny of thee, but now whose worse then Peter; but I believe Peter must be the best flower in your Garden, when all is done. Nan. To him my Dog, to him my Dog, hallo, hollo, to him my Dog. Pet. The Devil is hunting, sure for why? Women more loud then Dogs, their game will cry. Mast. The business is very foul between both, let it be referred to our next sitting, & call in the rest. Clerk. Bess Bear-up-stiff, come into the Court and answer for thy self.
Enter Bess and Simon Silly. Bess. As I am an honest and upright Woman, i'le have Iustice against him for a Natural: this Simon Silly has enough on't, and enough to content any honest wo∣man, if he knew how to use it; and bid him turn to me, he grins in my fare, like Pugg upon a Close-stool, and turn his breech upon me, saith, he can play by himself. O Gentlemen, you little think what shifts I am driven too, to satisfie my longings. Sim. You took the parsnip you Queen, and made me eat it without butter, when you had done. Another time you put me to scour on old Copper, and lay with the Tinker all the while: another time you sent me for Beer for the Weaver, when I looked in at the window and saw all; and yet you perswade me the Moon was in the twincle, and made the Glass shew every thing double. Well, well, i'le say but little more, No man was ever curst with such a Whore. Mast. Make her a pass for Jamco, send for a yellow coat Francisco she shall be banished.
men come with complaints that they ∣vercome me with their clamours: some scolding, some swearing, and some cur∣sing their Husbands, and threatning the Worshipful h. Women corrupt, inrag'd, deny'd their wills, Consume like fire, & worse then worsest ills. Master. I fear their rage, lest they o're men should sway. Adjourn the court until another day, The Second Part PROLOGUE. YOu that are maim'd in Venus Wars, Ne'r saw service, yet have scars; You that play and never win, At the Game of In and In: Wives that draw as strong as Leeches, Women that do wear the Breeches; You that have your ground lye fallow, Rachel Riggle, Susan swallow: If your cases will bear action, Here you may have satisfaction.
Clerk. I Perceive we must with speed call a new Court, therefore it shall not be a miss to provide two horned Maces, that may spread themselves from one side of the streets to the other, to clear all before us, and to procure some attendance on Mars's Livery to guard us: and for that end I have bespoken a Horn-work, that is already made, being a font of invincible strength to curb those that shall insult over us; raise any Mutiny, o disturb the Proceedings of our Court: and now, since we have all thing  readiness, let us proclaim our Court, and proceed to Justice. O Yes, O Yes, O Yes; If there be any Man or Woman, in City, Town or Country, that hath been Marryed a Year and a Day, and cannot have their desires of ea other, in perfo∣mance of Covenants, they have free liberty to daw up their agivances, ud present thm to Fumblers-Hall, an they shall have spedy re∣dress. Or if ay e troubled with the Yellows, or Corns on their Foe-Heads, or the Napes of their Necks, they shall (paying the Fees of the Court) be suddenly cured of the same. But I hear the Din already, that the
Bench is sat, and the company crowd∣ing in, and therefore I must make no de∣lay, but proceed to read their India∣ments; therefore Mary Mar-all and John Jolly-boy, appear in the Court, and an∣swer to your several Indictments, up∣on the forfeiture of your recognizances. Enter Margery Mar-all, and John Iolly-boy. Marg. I desire of the Court, that I may first speak for my self. I am a Woman my Lord, and have nothing to defend me but my Tongue, and I am blest with more wit then my Husband, why should not I advance it to my uttermost profit? Yes, I will in spight of Fate: and since I have Marryed a Fool, a Fool I'le make of him; My Lord, he is not capable of ruling a Wife, and therefore 'tis fit a Wife should rule him; it must be a wise Man that governs a Woman, my Lord. Iohn. Ant please you my Lord, I had good Lands and Livings, Houses, and House-hold-stuff, Cattel, and Pullen abomination, all which I made her Mistris of, though she had not a Smock to her breech, when I first marryed her:
presently after she ingrossed all to her self, became a free-state, and made me (not a Duke of Venice) but a meet pro∣perty, a Iohn Hold-my-staff, an't please ye: so that I could not be Master of a Penny I had: she made me Dine with her Servants too, and lye above in the Garret, where she would lock me in e∣very night, and let me out at her plea∣sure. If this be fair my Lord, I ap∣peal to the Wisdom of your Court: nay, she kept retainers too, and would lock me up in the Celler amongst the small-Beer, while she was above in the Cham∣ber with her Bottles of Wine, Sweet∣meats, and other Iunkes, Well my Lords, none knows where the Shooe wrings but my self: If it where your Lordships case, as it is mine, I am sure you would never endure it. That Man that let's his Wife bear rule, Shall be both Wittal, Cuckold, and fool. Mast. Come, come, I say you shall submit to your Wife, and be a good Subject too, you had best, or you shall hear from us. Marg. I thank your Honour, I'le warrant you. Clerk. Susan Shrews-face, and Richard Drab-all, appear in the Court, and an∣swer
to what shall be objected against you. Enter Seusan Shrews-face, and Dick Drab-all. Susan. Gentlemen, they say a curst Cow hath short Horns, but they that meddle with me shall find that I have Horns, Sting, and Venome too, besides these ten Weapons at my fingers ends, call 'um what you will: if I charge, 'tis not with false fire, but with Grana∣does, Wild-fire, and the Artillery of Mischief, that ever a Woman can in∣vent; if I once give the Allarum, be∣ware of my Gun-shot with power, i'le fall on right or wrong; would I could see any sneaking Cuckold of them all that dares to charge me: Uts Fut, I'le quickly make him know sorrow, saw off his Horns, and put him to Grass; my Nicodemus follows Whores, an't please ye, spends all, Pawns his very breeches from his arse for 'um, 'twould make an Honest Woman speak, that had never a Tongue: they call me Shrew, but bet∣ter be Shrew then a Sheep, though I have a Sheeps-head to my Husband, that's bewitched to dessembling whores whose faces are Lures, their Beauties Baits, their looks Net, and their
Charms: and all to be witch silly Gulls and to bring them to siuine. Dick. Patience good Wife, 'tis thy urstness that undoes me, and makes me run-out. Susan. Sirrah, I'le thunder such a Peal in your ears, shall drive thee and thy Whores from Bridewell to Newgate, and from thence to the Devil; I'le make Cubs Trumps: and therefore, look to thy Coxcomb. (beats him) Dick. O good wife, spare but my life, and i'le mend presently. Susan. No, i'le scratch, tear, and kick thee limb from limb: and blow thee round the World as Attoms. Dick. What greater misery breeds a poor mans curse, Then a bad wife, a whore, or empty purse. Mast. The Iudgment of the Court is that for thy Fornication, thou shalt live wretched, and Dye a Beggar, thy wifes Tongue ringing thy dying Peal, Call in the rest Clerk. Sisly Suck-pot, Robert Rooksby, Winny Wagtail, Joseph Woodcock, ap∣pear in the Court, and save your Bayl. (from without) Mess. Sir, here's all the Scolds and Alley-birds in London, and the Suburbs,
for their Liberties and Freedoms, ot of ongues, and Tles: they the aren and speak high words against this Court: there fore ight I advie you, you shall adjourn the Court, for fear of further mischief: for they sing like Par∣rots, are all Horn-mad, carrying the Midsummer-Moon in their Banners. Mast. 'Tis good Council, Women ae full of danger, and too subtile for we Men: therefore we will take your Councel. Clerk. Adjourn our Court n∣tif another time, and give nice to all the more civil Women, that they shall shortly expect the Songs of these Al∣ley-Birds. Which if it can but once delight 'um; The Dvil after can't affright 'um. EPILOGƲE. IN the mean time good Women all, You'r welcome to our Fumblers Hall, Of your own will you cannot fail, To have content from head to tail. FINIS.
The Summons. THESE are to Will and require. That upon present Summons by Vertue of these presents he forth with maketh his Personal appearance at Fumblers-Hall, in eel-Court, at the sign of the Laur-∣vuin, near unto the Midenbead in Doe-l∣tle Lane, there to answer for his corporal disabilities, and such other charge as shall be objected against him by the present power, as he will answer the contrary at his peril. Given under our Hands. Ben. Badcock. Dan. Doe-little. Fran. Fain-would W. Would-do-more Peter Prickless. Sir Fardinando Fum∣bler, Clerk of the Company.
