F2560A 18110355 106799
A Further Narrative of the Passages of these times in the Common-Wealth OF ENGLAND. An Act for renouncing and disanulling the pretended Title of Charls Stuart; and for the taking away of the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Judgment of the House of Commons, pronounced by Mr. Speaker against James Naylor the Quaker; WITH The Triall of Miles Sundercombe, being indicted of high Treason for conspiring against the life of his Highness the Lord Protector, Feb. 9. 1656. A DAY Of Publick thanksgiving for the marvellous goodnesse of God to this Nation in the Island of Teneriffe under Generall Blake, and giving them great success against the Ships of the King of Spain, 16. fier'd and not one of ours lost. An exact relation of the manner of the solemn Investiture, or happy Inauguration of his Highness the Lord Protector at Westminster, June 26. 1657. With his Oath, and the Oath of the privy Coun∣cell, and every person who now is, or hereafter shall be a Mem∣ber of either House of Parliament before he sit shall from and after the first of July 1657. take the same. With a particular account of the taking in of the Fort of Mardike in Flanders by Dunkirke, with the names of the House of Lord. And some heads of the speech made by his Highnesse to both houses, Jan. 1657. Which Parliament was dissolved the 4th of Feb. 1657. Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, at the South entrance of the Royall Exchange.
AN ACT FOR Renouncing and disanulling the pretended Title of CHARLS STUART, &c.
FOr the better establishment of the peace of this Com∣mon-Wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Territories and Dominions thereunto belonging, and for the prevention of the designs and attempts of the enemies there∣of; The Knights Citizens, and Burgesses in this present Parliament assembled, Do in the name of all the people of this Commonwealth, fully, freely, absolutely, and for ever Disclaim and Renounce all Fealty, Homage or Allegiance, pretended to be due unto Charls Stuart eldest Son of the late King Charls, James Stuart, second Son of the said late King; Henry Stuart, third Son of the said late King; or any other the Issue or posterity of the said late King, or any person or persons pretending, or which shall at any time hereafter pretend Title by, from, or under him, them, any, or either of them, to hold or enjoy the Crowns of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or of either or any of them; or to have the Name, Title, Stile, or Dignity of King or Queen of Great Britain, King or Queen of England, Scotland and Ireland, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwal, Prince of Scot∣land, Duke of Albany, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, Duke of Gloucester, any or either of them; or to have and enjoy the Power, Government, or supream Magistracy of this Commonwealth, or of any part thereof, or of any the Territories or Dominions thereunto belonging, or to have or enjoy as King or Queen of England, Scotland and Ire∣land, or of either or any of them, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwal, Duke of Albany, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, Duke of Gloucester, or Prince of Scotland, all or any the Ho∣nors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions and Heredita∣ments heretofore belonging or appertaining to the said Crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland, or to any or either of them; or to the Principalitie of Wales, Dutchy of Lan∣caster or Cornwal, or any or either of them. And be it declared and Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector and this present Parliament assembled, and the Authority thereof, That the said Charls Stuart, James Stuart, Henry Stuart, and all other the Issue and Posterity
of the said late King, and all and every person and persons pretending, or which shall or may at any time hereafter pretend Title or Claim from, by, or under him or them, be, and are, and shall for ever be absolutely and utterly excluded and debarred from holding or enjoying the Crown of England, Scotland and Ireland, or any or either of them, or any the Dominions or Territories thereunto be∣longing; and from holding, or having the Name, Title, Stile, or Dignity of King or Queen of Great Britain, King or Queen of England, Scotland and Ireland, or any or either of them, or of any the Dominions thereunto belonging, Prince of Wales Duke of Cornwal, Prince of Scotland, Duke of Albany, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, or Duke of Gloucester; and from all Title, Claim or Right, as King or Queen of England, Scotland and Ireland, or of either or any of them, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwal, Duke of Albany, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, Duke of Glou∣cester, or Prince of Scotland, unto all or any the Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, or Hereditaments heretofore at any time belonging or appertaining to the said Crowns of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or any or either of them, and also from having, exercising, or enjoying any Power, Authority, Government or Magistracy, in or over this Commonwealth, or any the people thereof: And that all such Right, Title, Claim, or pretence of Right, Ti∣tle or Claim, which they or any of them, at any time heretofore, at present, or in time to come, have, doe, shall, or may make, is hereby declared and adjudged, and shall for ever hereafter be adjudged and taken to be utterly void and of no effect. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is enacted, That if any person or persons shall endeavour, or attempt by force of armes or otherwise, or shall be aiding, assisting, comforting, or abetting unto any person or per∣sons, that shall by any wayes or means whatsoever, endea∣vour or attempt the reviving or setting up of any pretended Right, Title, or Claim of the said Charls Stuart, James
Stuart, Henry Stuart, or of any other the Issue or Posterity of the said late King, or of any person or persons claiming under him or them, to any the Offices, Stile, Title Dig∣nity, or Authority aforesaid, or any of them; or shall declare, publish, or any way promote such pretended Right, Title or Claim; or shall give or contribute any summe or summes of Money, or other aid or assistance to the said Charls Stuart, James and Henry, any or either of them; That then every such offence shall be, and is hereby deem∣ed and adjudged high Treason, and all and every the Offen∣der and Offenders therein, their Counsellors, Aiders and Abettors, being thereof convicted within three years after such Offence committed, shall be deemed and adjudged Traytors, and shall suffer and have such pains of Death and forfeitures, as in case of high Treason is used and or∣dained. Hen. Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.
AN ACT For the taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries. WHereas the four and twentieth day of Februa∣ry, in the year of our Lord, one thousand six hundred forty five, the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries, Primer-seizins, and Oustrelemaines, and all other Charges incident or arising for, or by reason of Wardships, Livery, Primer-seizin, or Oustrelemain; and all Tenures by Homage; and all fines, Licenses, Seizures, and pardons for alienation, and all other charges incident thereunto, was by the Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament, taken away, And all Tenures by Knights service, either of the King or others, or by Knights service, or Capite, or Soccage in Capite of the King, were turned into free and common Soccage; For the further establishing and confir∣ming the same, Be it declared and enacted by his highnesse the Lord Protector, and the Parliament, that the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries, Primer-seizins, and Oustrelemaines, and all other charges incident and arising, for, or by reason of any such Tenures, Wardship, Livery, Primer-seizin, or Oustrelemaines, be taken away, from the said four and twentieth day of February, One
thousand six hundred forty five: And that all Homage, Fines, Licences, Seisures, Pardons for Alienation, incident or arising, for or by reason of Wardship, Livery, Primer-sei∣zin, or Oustrelemain, and all other charges incident there∣unto, be likewise taken away, and is hereby adjudged and declared to be taken away, from the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty five: And that all Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service of the late King, or any other person, and all Tenures by Soc∣cage in chiefe, be taken away; And all Tenures are hereby Enacted and declared to be turned into free and common Soccage, from the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty five; and shall be so con∣strued, adjudged, and declared to be for ever hereafter turned into free and common Soccage. Neverless, It is hereby Enacted, That all Rents certain and Heriots, due to mean Lords or other private Persons, shall be paid, And that where any Relief, or double anci∣ent yearly Rent, upon the death of an Ancestor, was in such cases formerly due and payable, a double ancient yearly Rent only in lieu thereof, shall now be paid upon the death of an Ancestor, as in free and common Soccage; And that the same shall be recovered by the like remedy in Law, as Rents and Duties in free and common Soccage. Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.
A Briefe Relation of the late dangerous Plot, and traite∣rous Design, for the destruction of his Highness Person. THe Common Enemy having failed in all their former Plots and Conspiracies for the ruine of his Highness and the Government, resolved (it seems) at last to bring a∣bout their intended Mischief by a vigorous and bloody at∣tempt upon his person. For this end and purpose, they sought out and gained to themselves instruments in all points fitted for the execution of their inhumane Cruelty. The principal man employed, was a notable desperate fellow named Sin∣dercomb, one who heretofore had been a Quartermaster under Sir John Reynolds in the Army, and was about two years agoe cashiered by Generall Monck among others, in Scotland. As Assistant to him in this wickednesse, he asso∣ciated to himself one Cecil; and many others were engaged in the Businesse, whom we hope time will discover; in the mean time only these two persons are in custody. For the carrying on their work, they held correspondence with some in Flanders, received directions thence from time to time, and for their encouragement, Don Alonso the late Ambassador of Spain in England, returned them over sums of money, with which they were enabled to proceed. The most likely way (as they conceived) to accomplish the devilish purpose was, to contrive some means how to dis∣patch his Highnesse as he should be going to Hampton Court, and that they might do it with security to themselves by having an opportunity to escape after the fact commit∣ted, they took a House at Hammersmith, which house hath belonging to it a little banqueting room, which stands upon the Road at the said Town, in a narrow durty place of pas∣sage, where Coaches use to goe but softly, and that Room they meant to make use of, by planting an Engine in it,
which  charged, would have upon occasion torn a∣way Co and person in it that should pass by, and they had such an Engine preparing. And because it was necessary for them to have information of the times when his High∣ness should goe abroad to take the ayre, and the places whi∣ther, Sindercomb cast about in his mind which way to draw in some one person near his Highness to be a partaker in the design; and acquaint them in what part of the Coach his Highness should sit, going to Hampton-Court, that so they might be sure not to miss him; and when the execrable Deed should have been executed, they intended to have made an escape. For this purpose, they had bought up divers of the fleetest Horses about London, which they kept in that House at Hammersmith, and for conveniency of escaping, the House they had hired stood down at some distance from that Road, and had an out-let to another Road, The person whom they made sure (as they thought) to be their Infor∣mer touching the Out goings of his Highness, was one of the life Guard, who had formerly been an acquaintance of Sindercomb in the Army, and they gave him ten pounds in money at first to engage him, adding thereto a promise of Fifteen hundred pounds, This was one way that they resol∣ved on, by making use of the place at Hammersmith; But they were not negligent in seeking other opportuni∣ties besides, and therefore (as occasion offered many times) they were wont to thrust themselves in among those that rode abroad with his Highnesse: Once they thought to have don their work as his Highness was taking the air in Hide-Parke; and to make way for their escape; they had in one place filed off the Hinges of the Gates, and rode about with the Train attending his Highness, with intent then to have given him a fatall Charge, if he had chanced to have gallo∣ped out any distance from the Company. After severall attendances of this nature, and pryings up and down, (having also recourse many times to White-hall) and finding no occasion as yet to favour their purpose,
thereupon they resolved to  Corres∣pondent a proof of their  White hall. To this end, they cut a hole in  of the doors of the Chappel, and so unbolting it, they on the eighth of this moneth went in and placed the materials for firing, which were discovered about nine a Clock that night for in one of the Seats was found upon the Floor a Basket filled with a strange composition of combustible stuff, and two lighted matches, aptly placed, which matches had been rub'd over with gunpowder, on purpose to keep them surely burning, and by the length of them, it was conceived they would have given fire to the Basket about one a clock in the morn∣ing. The Basket being removed, and trial made of some part of the ingredients, it appeared to be most active flaming stuffe. The next day, the two persons being apprehended, they were found to have scrued Pistols, which upon tryall, ap∣pear notable instruments to do execution at a distance more then ordinary; and they had also a strange sort of long Bullets, in the nature of slugs, contrived on purpose to rend and tear. These things are made manifest not only by many particu∣lars of discoverie, but by the confession also of one of the Parties, viz. Cecil, who hath cast himself upon the good grace and mercy of his Highness.
The seve Passages and proceedings at the Tryall of Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, at the up∣per Bench Bar in Westminster-Hall, on Monday, February 9. 1656. before the Lord Chief Justice Glyn, and Mr. Justice Warburton, being indict∣ed of high Treason for conspiring against the Life of his Highness the Lord Protector, he was found guilty by the Jury, and received Sentence to be hang'd, drawn, and quarted at Tyborn, according to Law. The Indictment was for High Treason, to this effect; viz. THat Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, and one William Boyes, with divers other Rebels and Traytors against the Lord Protector, and Government of the Common∣wealth, not having the fear of God in their hearts, but moved and seduced by the instigation of the Devill on the It was the first day of the Parlia∣ment. 17 of September 1656. and divers other dayes and times as well before as after at Westminster, and divers other places in the County of Middlesex, falsly, maliciously, and trayte∣rously did conspire, compass and imagine the death of the said Lord Protector, and to subvert and alter the Govern∣ment of this Commonwealth, and to raise Warre within the same. For effecting whereof. 1 They took a Room in the house of one Edward Hilton, and divers Rooms in the house of one James Mydhope in Westminster, whether they brought Guns, Harquebusses and Pistols, charged with leaden bullets and iron Sluggs, to shoot, kill and murder him. 2. January 1. 1656. they provided Horses and Weapons of War; And 3 Took a house and Banquetting house at Hammersmith, of one Henry Busby for the same purpose.
4 January 9. 6. 6. they conspired to burn White-hall, where his Highness was in his own Person; and to that end brought a basket filled with Match, Brimstone Gunpowder, and other combustible Stuff and materialls, and set the same on fire in the Chappel there; to the great danger and disquietment of his Highness, and ill example of others, in contempt of the Law, against their due obedience to his Highness and Government, against the Peace, and form of the Statute, &c. Thus far the Indictment Whereupon being arraigned, he pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Tryall put himselfe upon his Country, and the issue being joyned, there was immediately impanelled a Jury of Gentlemen of worth and quality to passe upon his life and death, he challenged severall of them; and twelve being sworn (with his own consent) His Highnesse Attorney Generall (the Indictment being opened) proceeded to the Evidence, which was very full and clear, and two Witnesses at the least to all the points of the Indict∣ment, with many aggravating Circumstances: The particulars whereof are herein after mentioned. The evidence to prove the Indictment. 1. THat there was one Toope of his Highnesse Lifeguard who was drawn into the businesse; and he proved fully, 1. What person Sindercomb is, how he inveagled him the said Toope, with money in hand, and promises of more, and great preferment, to joyn with him to murther his Highnesse, saying, Spain could never obtain a peace with us untill he were taken out of the way. 2. The circumstan∣ces of Time, Place, Means and manner designed for this murther. 3. That he the said Toope, was to give notice when his Highness went forth; and at what end of the Coach he sate. 4. Their buying and keeping of fleet Horses. 5. Their intent to fire White-hall, the Firework placed in the Chap∣pell; and other Circumstances, 6. Sindercombs resolution
if the fire did not take, to kill the Protector what ever came of it. Also one John Cecil proved the whole design of Sinder∣comb and Boyes, how long it was in hand; That Sindercomb engaged him the said Cecil in it; what words were used, how it should be done; what the consequence of he mur∣der would be; the money provided, and that when it should have been done; he the said Cecil was designed to goe to Col. Sexby, and to share with Sindercomb in his honor and profit. That the first thing agreed on, was to provide good Horses. What moneys were paid by Sindercomb▪ Sinder∣comb's resolution to assassinate his Highness when he went abroad; and the manner how. That they were upon the Road 5, or 6 times on purpose: and in Hide Park with Swords and Pistolls charged, and had notice given them by Toope of his Highness coming. That the hinges of Hide Park Gate were fyled off in order to their escape. That they took an house with a Banqueting house at Hammer smith, to shoot him with Guns made on purpose to carry 10, or 12. Bullets at a time. That Toops was to give notice of his Highness passing that way, and at which end of the Coach he sat. That he the said Cecil saw one of the Guns provided, which would carry 12 Carbine bullets and a slugg. He spake fully to the design of firing Whitehall: described the fire work prepared and the nature and intention of it, and other circumstances. Moreover, that Boyes assured them, That when the Protector should be dispatched, Forces would come from Spain and Flanders, and a great part of the Fleet would fall off, And that he beleeved Sexby to be the main Agent herein at Brussels, He proved also, the discourse Boyes had about seizing Portsmouth or some other Port in the West, and of a great summe for that purpose, That 30 or 40 are engaged in this design to kill the Protector, and it was so ordered, that not above two should know each other, untill the matter should be ripe for execution. And that Boyes knew the whole number. He spake fully to that design to kill his Highness the first
day of the Parliament; and their taking houses for that This Sun∣dercomb had engaged to kill Gene∣rall Monk in Scotland. and would have enga∣ged the said Mr. Cecil therein also. purpose at Westminster; and bringing Armes thither, and other Circumstances. That Boyes goes by severall names, and in severall habits; sometimes as a poor Priest in raged cloaths; sometimes well Clad as a Gentleman. It was further proved, by the said John Cecill, and Coll: James Mydhope, That in order to the destroying of his Highness, he the said Cecil, Sundercomb and Boyes; took the said Mydhopes House near the Abbey at Westminster, and when they took it, Sundercomb called himselfe John Fish, Clark to one Mr Havers a pretended Gentleman of Norfolke; and Cecill went by the name of Mr Havers Coachman. It was proved likewise, That the first day of the Parlia∣ment after they had taken Mydhops house, he being there, Sundercomb and Cecil went thither to him from one Ed∣ward Hilton a Sempsters house in Kingstreet Westminster, where they left a great Hilton de∣posed fully concerning the Viol case and Trunk of Arms. Trunk full of Arms brought from Flandors; and carrying with them in a Violl case, one Harquebuss, and some Pistols, charged with leaden bullets, and slugges, about Sermon time, to Mydhopes house, which they found very convenient for their purpose, and resolved to buy it, and to build a Room in the yard next the street: there being several back yards and doors, and resolved also to secure Mydhope, or otherwise to deale with him that he might not discover them, nor hinder their designe. It was proved moreover, by Cecil and Mydhope, that Sermon being ended, all three of them viz. he the said Cecil, Sindercomb and Boyes, went into the yard of the House next the Abbey, to shoot his Highness; as he passed from the Ab∣bey to meet the Parliament, in the painted Chamber, and to that end, he the said Cecil stood on the wall with his Pistoll charged, and Sindercomb walked in the Yard, but other Company coming in thither, they were prevented, and Boyes went out of the Yard into the throng of people. It was further proved by Cecil, that this enterprize not
succeeding they resolved to murther his Highness some other way, to wit, to furnish themselves with fleet horses to kill him as he rode forth. That Sindercomb engaged Toope, who constantly gave him notice of the life-guards going abroad, or of the sadling of the Pad Nags. That the first time they rode forth to kill him, was the latter end of September last (viz the Suturday after he had left going to Hampton Court. That the second time was when he rode to Kensington and thence the back way to London. The third time, when he went to Hide Park in his Coach. The fourth time, when he went to Turnham Green, and so by Acton home, at which time they rode forth to kill him, and resolved to break through all difficulties to effect it. The fifth time, when he rode into Hide Park, where his Highness alighting, asked him the said Cecil, whose horse that was he rode on, Sindercombe being then on the outside of the Parke; and then Cecil was ready to have done it but doubted his horse, having at that time, got a cold. That Sindercomb rode forth once himself to kill his High∣ness, and told Cecil of it. That all proving ineffectuall, they resolved to desist till the Spring, and in the mean time to fire White-hall. That the said Cecil put on a thin Holland Shirt, and thin cloathes for his better escape, when he rode forth to kill his Highness, and prepared his horse as if he had been to run a race. To prove the taking of the house and banquetting-house at Hammersmith, of Henry Busby, Coachman to the Earle of Salisbury, there was beside Cecil, the testimony of Hen∣ry Busby himself, William Page, and William Neal, Sinder∣combs servant. To prove the Basket of stuff for firing the Chappel, there was the testimony of Cecil and Toope, and others who were persons of quality.
To prove the buying and keeping of the Horses, there was the testimony of Henry Busby, who sould them one Horse for fourscore pounds, also of William Page, and William Neale, Sindercombs servant. To prove the Hinges of Hide-Parke gate filed off, and the Pales cut, there was the testimony of John Cecil, and Thomas Shell. The prisoner seeing the evidence so clear against him, had no∣thing materiall to say for himselfe by way of defence, yet carried himself very insolently at the Bar, and when the Court asked him touching any of the matters proved against him, he would con∣fidently deny what was laid to his charge; And after all the evi∣dence given and the prisoner heard what he had to say for himself; the Court summed up the whole to the Jury of Life and Death, and declared, That by the Common Law to compass or imagine the death of the chiefe Magistrate of the Land, by what name so∣ever he was called, whether Lord Protector or otherwise, is high-treason, he being the Chiefe Magistrate, and the spring of Justice, in whose name all Writs run, all Commissions and Grants are made; and that the Statutes of Treason made 25 Ed. 3. as to this, did only declare what the Common Law was before the making of that Statute, and was not introductive of a new Law, and more to that effect; and then proceeded to Judgment against the Prisoner, in this manner. The Sentence. IT is considered by the Court that the said Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, be sent from hence to the Prison in the Tower of London, from whence he came, and from thence be drawn upon a Hurdle through the streets of London to Tyburn, there to be hanged on the Gallows untill he be half dead, and then to be cut down, and his In∣trals and bowels taken out and burnt in his own sight, and his body di∣vided into four quarters and be disposed of as his Highness the Lord Protector shall think fit. Tower of London, February 14. Sindercomb having upon his tryal by a Jury in the Upper Bench, received sentence to be hanged drawn and quartered at Tyborne, for his treisonous designe against the life of his Highness, and having some dayes time afterward given him for the preparing of
his soule for another world, care was taken by the honourable Sir John Barkstead Lievtenant of the Tower, to send unto him, at se∣verall times, divers eminent and Pious Ministers of the City to con∣ferr with him touching his concernments in the life to come. Two things in his discourse were observable; that when any of the Mi∣nisters came to him, he would first condition with them, that they should not treat with him at all touching the crime for which he stood condemned. The other was, that he told them alwayes, as an entrance to his discourse, that he was for the Universal poynt; and being pressed to explaine his meaning, he told then he be∣leeved that all men were brought into a saveable estate by the death of Christ, and he doubted not but himselfe should fare as well as others, Which expression shews him to have been infect∣ed with that un-Evangelicall conceit of Universall Redemption. Little good could be wrought on him by any of the Ministers: And no marvell, if it be considered what discourse passed from him to others, since the time of his condemnation; for he was of the same opinion with many others that have slipt into Liberti∣ism; viz. That when man dyeth the soule sleepeth with the bo∣dy, and (said he) it may be it shall rise again. This is that wret∣ched opinion of that sort of men whom we (in English) call Soul▪ slepers, persons so far unworthy the name of Christians, that the ancient Heathens will rise up in judgment against them; and in the tendency of it so destructive to the conveniency of Govern∣ment, that it disposeth these who embrace it, to attempt any wickedness whatsoever, any Treason Sedition or Assassination, and to despise vertue, seeing it at once destroyeth both the hope of reward and the fear of punishment, after this life is ended. During the daves alotted him for his preparation, he made se∣verall attempts, with promise of a good summe of money (700 pounds first and last) to perswade his Keeper to permitt him to escape and that not being yielded to, he tempted him to procure him some poyson; and not prevailing with him, he sollicited his own sister (who was permitted to attend him) to the same pur∣pose. On Friday the 13 instant, betwixt seven and eight a Clock at night, the writ being brought and read unto him for his execution the next day, he trembled and quaked very much at the appre∣hension
of death, as was visible to them that were present, yet said he was not so much troubled at death as at the infamous man∣ner of it. What hapned afterward is as followeth. Immediately upon this sad news, his sister was heard to say in the house below stairs, that nothing troubled her so much, as that he should be hanged, &c. but she had rather see him dy before he went out of that room. He having discoursed a little with the men in his Chamber; (which were about four or five to attend him) called for a Bible, and having read a little while, he then desired them to withdraw out of the Room for about half an hour, that he might have liber∣ty to pray alone. The Attendants withdrew, and putting the door to, they stood there at the top of the stairs; but before the half hour was over, he came himselfe to the door and pulling it open, bade them come in, in a cheerfull manner, rubbing his hands to∣gether, and then about his mouth and his nose, saying, I have done, and now pray you come in. Not long after he undressed himself, and springing lively into Bed, well (said he) this is the last night that ever I shall lye in Bed. Being in bed, he had some discourse a while with the company, without any sign of sicknesse. Then drawing his Curtain, and lying a while silent, and afterwards snorting, one of the Company observing so, went and drew the Curtain gently to look on him, and found him in a dying sence∣lesse condition. All wayes were used to recover him; but nothing could availe, for he was in a manner dead by a eleven a clock that night, or a little after, though he languished till twelve. This death of his happening so suddainly and unexpectedly, and there being strong presumptions of poyson, his body was opened on Saturday, February 14. In the presence of Sir Richard Rapier Doct. of Phisick; and Doctor Fern Anatomy Reader at Gressum-Colledge by Mr. Charls Stamford, and Mr. Nicholas Brethers, Wardens of the Company of Chirurgions, and Mr. Laurence Loe, all able and known persons in their profession; who opening the Skull, found the brain much inflamed, red, and distended with Blood, swoln as full as the Skull could well contain; besides much Extravasal, gumous, and Clotted Blood, which they judged to be the ffect of some very violent and preternaturall cause; and their opinions were, that the said Prisoner had caused the same by
some extraordinary meanes, for the hastening of his death. February 15. Being the Lords day, Sundercombs Keeper ta∣king care for the airing and cleansing of the Chamber where he dyed, and the Close-stoole being removed, under it was found a Paper written and subscribed with his own hand as followeth. GOD knoweth my heart, I doe take this course, because I would not have all the open shame of the world ex∣ecuted upon my Body, I desire all good People not to Judge a∣misse of me, for I doe not fear my life, but do trust God with my soule, I did this thing without the privity of any per∣son in the World; I doe before God and the World clear my Keeper, my Sister, Mother, or Brother, or any of my Rela∣tions, but it was done alone by my self. I say by me. Miles Sindercomb. 13 Day, 1656. February 16. The Testimonies of the Phisitians and Chirurge∣ons as also Sindercombs own Paper, being considered by the Co∣roner and Jury, they unanimously resolved and agreed, That he by some extraordinary means had caused his own death, and that they verily beleeved the same to be by poyson. Miles Sindercom hauinge Murthered himselfe, was Drawne vpon Tower-Hill at a Horse taile with his Head forward and there vnder the Scaffold he was turned into a hoale Starke naked and a stake spiked & plated with Iron was driuen throug him into ye earth for ar to all Traytors, for tune to Come: seb. 17 1657
February 17. Their Verdict was given in as followeth. Middles. ss. WE find that upon the thirteenth day of Feb∣ruary, in the year of our Lord, 1656. about the hour of Nine in the night, Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish, late of the Parish of Peter in bonds, in the County of Middlesex, not having God before his eyes, but by the instigation of the De∣vill, being moved and seduced at the Tower of London, in the Pa∣rish and County aforesaid, Feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice towards himself aforethought, as a Felon against himselfe, then and there feloniously upon himself, did make an assault. And that the said Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish, then and there, certain poysoned powder, through the nose of him the said Miles, into the head of him the said Miles, Feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice towards himself aforethought, a Felon of himselfe, felo∣niously did snuff and draw, By reason of which snuffing and drawing of the poyson aforesaid, so as aforesaid, into the Head of him the said Miles Sindercomb, he the said Miles Sindercomb, by the strength and opperation o the poyson aforesaid, himselfe did mortally poyson; of which said mortall poysoning, he the said Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish, within three houres after died. And so we find that the aforesaid Miles Sindercomb other∣wise Fish, the said Thirteenth day of February, in the year afore∣said, at the Tower of London aforesaid, in the Parish and County aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, wil∣fully, and of his malice towards himselfe aforethought, as a Felon against himselfe, Feloniously himselfe did kill and murther. We finde no Goods or Chattels that the said Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish had, at the time of the felony and murder aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, upon himselfe, done and committed, In witnesse hereof, we have hereunto set our hands this seventeenth day of February, 1656. &c. And thereupon the said Coroner issued forth his Warrant for Burial of Sindercomb, the Copy whereof followeth. Middles. ss. WHereas the Jury Impaneld and Sworn to in∣quire of the Death of Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish, did present upon their Oaths. That the said Miles
the Thirteenth day of this instant February, did Feloniously poy∣son himselfe. These are therefore in the name of his Highnesse, the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, To require you to bury the Corps of the said Miles Sindercomb, according to Law, in the next Common High-way; hereof you are not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your perils. Dated the Seventeenth day of February, 1656. Thomas Evans Coroner. To the Constables and Headboroughs within the Liberty of the Tower of London. On the same day, February. 17. Miles Sindercomb aforesaid being found to have murthered himselfe, his Body was according to Law drawn to the open place upon Tower-Hill, at a Horses Taile, with his head forward, and there under the Scaffold of Common execution a Hole being digg'd, he was turned in Starke naked, and a Stake, spiked with Iron, was driven through him in∣to the earth; That part of the stake which remaines above ground, being all plated with Iron; which may stand as an example of terror to all Traytors for the time to come. A narrative touching Col. Edward Sexby, who lately dyed a Prisoner in the Tower. Tower of London Jan. 20. COl. Edward Sexby was by Warrant dated the 24 of July, 1657. committed to the Tower of London close Prisoner for High Treason, who within Ten dayes after he came in thither, fell sick of an Ague and a Vomiting, conceived to be the new di∣sease then predominant, which turned into a Feaverish distemper; in which sicknesse he continued about nine weeks, the strength thereof being so great, that it brought him into many distracted fits for a great part of that time, in which condition he would Cry out often, That he was damned, and in Hell, and utter such like Expressions; and his usuall answer to them that spake any
thing to him, was, That it was a Lye; yet notwithstanding lie was under that condition of  he had some-intervalls, wherein he spake very rationally  severall times when he thought himselfe in a Condition like to dye, he would send for the Lievtenant of the Tower with all speed, and sometimes late in the Night season, causing him to be called out of his Bed, affirming that he had somthing of secrecy to reveale unto him in reference to the State and Commonwealth before his death; But when the said Lievtenant of the Tower was come to him, and that he found his fainting Qualms over, and that he was a little better, he would fall into other discourse, and say, The Devill would not let him speak out the Truth, nor let him reveale any thing, although he had before resolved to it, and had much to speake to by way of Discovery; yet one day, viz. the 12. of October, 1657. being well come to himself, and having sent for the Lievtenant, he was so ingenious as to confesse in part, saying unto him; "Sir John, I sent to you to tell you, that I am guilty of the whole buisiness of Sindercomb, as to the design of killing the Lord Protector, &c. and to that purpose I furnished Sindercomb with about 500 l. in Money, and also with Arms, and tyed him to an Engagement that he should not reveale the design. And further he said, The Letters they have of mine, they could not prove them to be mine, but by my own confession, which I now confesse, and acknow∣ledge that they are mine, and that I was with Charls Stuart, and acquainted him that I was an Enemy to the Lord Protector; and I also declare, that I received a large sum of Mony from the Spaniard to carry on my said design, and to make what confusion I could in England, by endeavouring the Klling of the Lord Pro∣tector, and by what other wayes I had in design; and to the end, the better to effect it, I came into England in a disguised ha∣bit, and was the principal in putting on others in the said design. Many other like passages were spoken by him in presence of ma∣ny credible witnesses; and within two dayes after, in the presence of Mr. Caril, Minister, and others, he did acknowledg the former confession to be truth, but said it was indiscreetly done of him to acknowledge the letters which they had of his at Whitehall, to be his own, seeing they could not otherwise prove it; and before he had again seen and viewed them, And then he again confessed,
That he was the only man that put on Sindercomb to kill the Lord Protector; and that the Book called Killing no Murder, he owned; and said, he was  of that judgment; yet said, it was both foolishly and knavishly done in that book, to charge the Lievtenant of the Tower, touching Sindercombs death: With se∣verall other passages, which for brevity sake are omitted As to his condition in his sicknesses, He falling sick (as is be∣fore mentioned) sent for his own Physitian, which was of his acquaintance, viz. Doctor Brook, who finding him under a Fe∣verish distemper, caused him to be let blood and blistered, by attractive Medicines laid to his Feet and Arms, to draw forth the malignity; and he was thereby reasonable well recovered again: But not observing his Doctors directions—And although his Physitians and Nurses, and all people that were held conduceable to his accommodations in all his sicknesses, from first to last, were made choice of by him, and his wife, and other relations, Yet as to his Diet, he wilfully humored and pleased his own appetite, whereby he fell into a relapse, which brought him into the height of madnesse for a time. But after a while, by following his doctors prescription, he was recovered out of that distracted condition by application of Medicines, only he continued disconverted in minde, and used many subtil shifts and wiles to have the Guards taken from him, and was somthing per∣plexed, because he could not effect it, although he was in a great measure recovered from his bodily weaknesse for some season, till about the last of December, that he complained of something rising in his throat, and had stoppages that he could scarce breath, and feared an Imposthume to be gathered in his throat, and broken, and that he should not have strength to bring it up. His Wife then sent for a Woman to wash and cleanse his throat, but his distemper increasing and coming up to the height of a ma∣lignant Fever, Doctor Brook, his former Physitian, was sent for, who, when he came to him, upon the fourth of January instant, found him in great sweats, and his throat sore and inflamed, and that he was in a high Fever, having red spots, or Pustules, with white watery wheyish matter in them, like the Chicken Fox, upon his Brest, Neck, and Arms. All which the said Doctor judged to come from the putrefaction of his humors, heightned by the vio∣lence of his former madnesse.
The Lievtenant of the Tower being made acquainted in what a dangerous condition he was, ordered another Doctor and a Chi∣rurgion to be sent for to view him, and to advise with Doctor Brooke what they judged of him, and what was best to apply to him, who judged that he was in a very weak condition, and that it did arise from the Malignity of his Disease as aforesaid, in a way of naturall causes; in which weak condition, he continued a day or two more under violent inflamations and Sweatings, which so weakened him, that by reason thereof upon Wednesday morning the 13 of this instant January, having said, Lord have mercy upon me, I am very sick; about five of the clock he breathed out his last, and died; after which his wife desired his body of the Liev∣tenant to bury it; to which the Lievtenant answered, she might have it to bury, within or out of the Tower, after the Coroner and his Jury had enquired of his death according to the custome of the place; whereupon the Coroner summoned a Jury to view the body, and to give in their verdict concerning the manner and cause of his death accordingly, and the Doctors and Chirurgions having viewed the dead body together with the said Jury, found blacknesse and setling of blood about his shoulders which they judged to come from the violence of the Fever and the inflamation of those parts; which great distemper the said Jury was by them fully satisfied in, as also of his former condition; and also having examined severall other persons upon oath besides them, as his Keeper, his Nurse, and his Uncle, (who was often with him in his sicknesse) his Apothecaries and a Souldier that guarded him the night he dyed, his wife being present before them also, (who was constantly attending upon him in his imprisonement, except when she lay in, and then were none with him but Nurses of her own appointment.) They upon clear and full Information, gave up their verdict on Thursday the 14 day of this instant January, 1657. as followeth in haec verba. We find that upon the last day of December in the year of our Lord, 1657. Edward Sexby late of the Parish of Peter in bonds, in the County of Middlesex Esq at the Tower of London, in the Parish and County aforesaid, fell sick of a certain disease called a Violent Feaver, and lived langui∣shing from the said last day of December, untill the 13th day of January in the year aforesaid, at the Tower of London aforesaid,
in the parish and County aforesaid, of the Fever aforesaid, dyed. And so we find that the said Edward Sexby dyed by Gods visita∣tion in manner and form aforesaid, and by no other wayes or means, In witnesse whereof we have hereunto set our hands, this 14. day of January, 1657. It also appeared to the said Jury upon oath that the Lievtenant had ordered that the said Colonel Edward Sexby, in his severall sicknesses, should have what Doctors, Chirurgions, Apotheca∣ries, Nurses, he pleased as aforesaid, and all those that had to doe with him concerning food, Physick, or necessary attendance, were alwayes of his own choice, and by the Order of him, his wife, and friends; and that he was very well accomodated in his chamber with what necessaries were requisite for him; and when the Jury had given up their verdict as aforesaid, the Lievtenant of the Tower sent away a Warder and a Lievtenant to Mris Sexby, being then at her Mothers, who lived in White-Fryers, to acquaint her and her said Mother, that the Jury had done their office, and to know her further desire as to his buriall, and whether she desired his body or no, which then she might have if she pleased; who returned answer, that they had sent their maid with forty shillings to his Keeper for his Buriall in the Tower, seeing he was Priso∣ner there; whereupon he was put into a coffin, and a grave made for him in the usuall burying place near the Tower chappel, and the Bell having been rang for some space of time; and those that repaired to the Warders where he was to accompany him to his grave, being met together, which were divers of the Warders, Officers, and Souldiers of the said Tower, the Corps was in a seemly way carried to the said grave and intered upon the 15 of this instant January, about 12 of the Clock of the same day in the Tower aforesaid.
A Day of Publick thanksgiving, on Wednesday the Third of June next; For the Great successe God hath been pleased to give the Navy of this Common wealth under the Command of Generall Blake against the Spa∣niard. Together with a Narrative of the same Successe, as it was Communicated in a Letter from the said Generall. A Narrative Of the Action at Sancta Cruz. AFter taking in the Supply of Victuals that was brought us the latter end of March, we spent two or three dayes before the Town of Cadiz, and finding the Enemy there in no great for∣wardnesse to come forth with a Fleet as was expected; The Ge∣nerall on the 13th of April, One thousand six hundred fifty seven,
called the Commanders together, and communicated his thoughts o goe for Sancta Cruz on the Island of Teneiffe, laying before them the reasons that induced him to it, which they all approved of, and a favorable Gale-just at the time presented to carry us thi∣ther. On the Eighteenth following in the evening we discovered Land, supposed to be Point Negro. but being thick and hazy, could not certainly make it till Noon the next day, whereby the Enemy had longer notice of our being on the Coast, then we de∣signed he should before we came to Action. On Monday the twentieth of Aprill one thousand six hundred fifty seven, we were by break of day fair in the Offin of Sancta cruz, and, as soon as 'twas light, perceived by a signall from one of our Frigots a Head, that the West India Fleet were in the Bay. Whereupon after a short conference how to order the attempt and earnest seeking to the Lord for his presence, we fell in amongst them, and by eight of the Clock were all at Anchor, some under the Castle and Forts, and others by the ships sides, as we could birth our selves to keep clear one of another, and best annoy the Enemy. They had there five or six Galleons (whereof were Admiral, Vice-Admiral, and Rere-Admirall, with their Standart and Flags aloft) and other considerable ships making up the number of six∣teen, some having Goods brought from the Indies still on board them, others had taken in Goods and Provisions to carry back a∣gain: Most of them were furnished with brasse Ordinance, and (as we have been informed since) had their full companies of Seamen and Souldiers kept continually on board them, from their first coming thither, which was about the beginning of February last, their Generall himselfe in all the time lying but one night out of his Ship: they were moared close along the Shore, which lies in the manner of a Semicircle, commanded, as far as the Ships rid, by the Castle, and surrounded besides with six or seven Forts, with almost a continued line for musqueteers and great shot, as the Ground between admitted; And we were forced to come so near to doe our worke, that many of the men we have slain and wounded, were shot by the Musqueteers from the shore; Not∣withstanding it pleased God that in four hours time their men were beaten out, and all the Ships put a shore, except the Admiral,
and Vice-Admirall, who made the most considerable resistance. About two of the Clock the Vice Admirall was set on fire, and the Admirall, by some happy shot, or other accident, suddainly blown up; having as we perceived just before) many men on board her; by the evening all the rest were fired, only two that sunke down to rights, and had little but their Masts appearing above water. It remained to compleat this Mercy, that our own shis should come off well, wherein the greatest hazzard and difficulty lay; for some riding near into the shore and being sorely maimed, did require to be warped off, others when we came to weigh, drove with the wind all the while blowing right into the bay, and one of our best Frigates strook: The enemy in the mean time supply∣ed fresh men into his Forts for those we had killed and beaten out in the heat of the Action▪ and from them and the Castle continu∣ed plying upon us, till about seven of the Clock at night, every Ship and Vessell belonging to our Fleet, were by the good hand of God got safe out of Command. In this service we had not above fifty slain outright, and one hundred and twenty wounded, and the damage to our ships was such as in two days time we indifferently well repaired for present security. Which we had no sooner done, but the Wind veered to the Southwest (which is rare among those Islands) and lasted just to bring us to our former Station neer Cape Maries, where we arrived the second of May following: For which mercifull appearance all along with us, we desire the Lord may have the praise and glory, to whom only it is due, And that all thar hear of it may turne and say (as of a truth we have found) that among the gods there is none like unto him, neither are there any workes like unto his workes.
The Names of the Commanders of the New Spain Fleet and of the other Ships that were burnt in the Sancta Cruce Road on the 20th of April, 1657. Don Diego Diagues, Generall. Don Josepho Sentenno, Vice-Admirall. Roque Gallindo, Rear-Admirall. Gasper Goteras, in the Great Campeachan. Martin De Laxando, in the little Campeachan. These Commanders with their Ships came from Lavela Cruce in New Spain. Iohn Quintero. Francisco De Estota. Pedro Fegoroa. Don Francisco Velasques. Pedro Oreguel. Commanders of the Admirall and Vice-Admirall of Hundoras. Francisco Martines. Francisco De Arana. Pedro Sorrilio Commander of the Ship which came from Sancto Domingo. These Commanders with their Ships were in Sancta Cruce be∣fore their Fleet arrived from the Indies. Gregory Gomes. Francisco Marcadel. Fernando Sohes. An exact Relation of the manner of the Solemn Investi∣ture, or happy inauguration of his Highnesse the Lord Protector at Westminster. Mr Speaker in ye name of ye Par: presented Seuerall thinges to his Highness Viz: a Robe of Purple Veluet Lined wth Ermine: a Large Bible Richly Guilt & Bossed: Next a Sword & Lastly a Septer of Massi Gold: and then administred ye Oath to his Highnesse: Iune 26: an:1:
FRiday the 26 of June, 1657. being agreed upon for the In∣vestiture of his Highness the Lord Protector, and a large place being raised and prepared at the upper end of Westminster Hall, for that purpose, there was in the midst thereof under the great Window, a rich cloth of Estate set up, and under it a chair of state placed upon an ascent of two degrees; covered with carpets, and before it a Table with a chair appoynted for the Speaker of the Parliament, and on each side of the Hall upon the said structure, were seats raised one above another, and decently covered for the Members of Parliament, and below them, seats on one side for my Lords the Judges of the Land, and on the otherside for the Aldermen of the city of London. About two of the clock in the Afternoon his Highnesse came from Whitehall by water, and Landing at the Parliament stairs went up into the chamber called the Lords house, where having retired himself a while, Mr. Speaker and the members of parliament being come to the Painted Chamber his Highness attended by his Councell, the Officers of State, and the Judges met them, and gave his consent to the Additionall and Explanatory Petition and advice of the Parliament, and all such other Bills as were then presented to him. From thence the Speaker, with the Members of Parliament de∣parted to the great Hall at Westminster, where they seated them∣selves, in the places provided for them. His Highnesse after a short retirement in a Boom, near the Painted Chamber, returned into the Lords House, the Lords Commissioners of the great seale, the two Lords Chiefe Justices the Master of the Rolls, and the Judges, in the interim, placing themselves on one side of the said House, and the Lord Major, Recorder, and Aldermen of the City of London, on the other. From the said House, his Highnesse passed towards the Hall in manner following. In the first place, went his Highnesse his Gentleman, and other persons of quality? next an Officer of Arms going before the Re∣corder and Aldermen of London, in their Scarlets; next, another Officer of Arms went before Master Attorney Generall, and my Lords the Judges in their Robes and Order; next them, Norroy, King of Arms; then four Searjants at Armes with their Maces,
going before the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and of the Great Seale, (the Lord Commissioner Fiennes bearing the Seal) and the Lord President of his Highnesse Councill; Then came Garter, principall King of Armes, before the Earl of War∣wick, who bare the Sword before his Highnesse: on whose left hand went the Lord Major of London, by his Highnesse speciall fa∣vour bearing the City sword: After whom came his Highnesse, being attended by his Councill, the Principall Secretary of State, and divers of the Nobility, and other persons of great quality. His Highness being entred on the place, and standing under the Cloth of Estate, Master Speaker did in the name of the Parliament, present severall things (ready laid upon the Table) to his Highness, viz. A Robe of purple Velvet, lined with Ermine, being the ha∣bit anciently used at the solemn investiture of Princes. Next, a larg Bible richly guilt and boss'd; next a Sword; and lastly, a Sceprer, being of Massy Gold: which being so presented, Mr Speaker came from his Chair, took the Robe, and therewith vested his Highnesse, being assisted therein by the Earle of Warwick, the Lord Whitelock, and others. Which being done, the Eible was delivered unto his Highnesse; after that, Mr Speaker girt about him the Sword; and lastly, delivered his Highnesse the Scepter. These things being performed, Mr Speaker returned unto his Chair, and administred the Oath to his Highnesse, prepared by the Parliament, the form whereof is as followeth. I Doe in the presenec and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and swear, that to the uttermost of my power, I will uphold and maintain, the True Reformed Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to the uttermost of my power and understanding; and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same: And that to the utmost of my power, I will endeavor, as Chief Magistrate of these three Nations, the maintenance and preservation of  and safety, and just Rights and Priviledges of
the People thereof. And shall in all things, according to our best knowledge and power, govern the People of these three Nations according to Law. The speech of the Lord Widdrington, Speaker of the Par∣liament, at the Investiture of his Highnesse the Lord Protector, 26. June 1657. May it please your Highnesse; YOu are now upon a great Theator, in a large Chore of People. You have the Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland before you; on your right hand, my Lords the Judges; and on your left hand the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of London; the most no∣ble and populous City of England. The Parliament, with the interposition of your suffrage, makes Laws, and the Judges, and Governours of London, are the great Dispen∣sers of those Laws to the people. The occasion of this great convention and intercourse, is, To give an Investiture to your Highnesse in that eminent place of Lord Protestor: A name you had before, but it is now setled by the full and unanimous consent of the People of these three Nations assembled in Parliament. You have no new name, but a new date added to the Old Name; The sixteenth of December, is now changed to the 26 of June. I am commanded by the Parliament, to make oblation to your Highnesse of Four things in order to this Inaugura∣tion. The First is a Robe of Purple an Embleme of Magistra∣cy, and imports righteousnesse and justice: When you have put on this Vestment, I may say (and I hope without offence)
that you are a Gown man. This Robe is of a mixt colour, to shew the mixture of Justice and Mercy, which are then most excellent when they are well tempered together. Justice without mercy, is Wormwood and bitternesse; and Mercy without Justice is of two soft a temper for Government. For, a Magistrate must have two hands, Plectentem & Amplectentem. The Next thing is a Bible, a Booke that contains the ho∣ly Scriptures; in which you have the honour and happinesse to be well versed. This is the Book of life, consisting of two Testaments, the Old and New. In the first we have Christum velatum Christ in Types, shadows, and Figures; in the latter, we have Christum revelatum, Christ revealed. This Book carries in it the Grounds of the true Christian Protestant Religion; its a Book of Books, it contains in it both Precepts and Examples for good Government. Alexander so highly valued the Books of his Master A∣ristotle, and other great Princes other Books, that they have laid them every night under their Pillows. These are all but legends and Romances to this one Book; a Book to be had alwayes in Remembrance; I find it said in a part of this Book, which I shall desire to read, and it is this. Deut. 17. And it shall be when he sitteth upon the Throne of his Kingdome, that he shall write a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests and the Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord God, and to keep all the words of his Law, and those Statutes, to do them. That his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren; and that he turn not aside from the Command∣ment, to the right hand or to the left, to the end he may prolong his dayes in his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of Israel.
The next thing that I am to offer to your Highnesse, is a Scepter, not unlike a Staffe; for you are to be a staffe to the weak and poor. Its of antient use in this kind; its said in Scripture, in reference to Judah, the Royall Tribe, That the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of like use in other Kingdoms and Governments: Homer the Prince of the Greek Poets, calls Kings and Princes Scepter∣bearers. The last thing is a sword, not a military, but a civill sword, a sword rather for defence then offence; Not to defend your self only, but others also. This Sword is an embleme of Justice. The noble Lord Talbot in Henry the VI Time, wrote upon his Sword, Ego sum Talboti prop∣ter occidendum inimicos meos; This Gallant Lord was a better Souldier then a Critiek. If I might presume to fix a Motto upon this Sword, it should be this, Ego sum Do∣mini Protectoris ad protegendum populum meum. I say, this Sword is an Embleme of Justice, and is to be used as King Solomon used his, for the discovery of the truth in points of Justice. I may say of this sword as King David said of Goliahs sword, There is none like this, Justice is the proper virtue of the imperiall Throne, and by Justice the Thrones of Kings and Princes are established. Justice is a Royal virtue, which as one saith of it, doth im∣ploy the other three Cardinall virtues in her service. 1. Wisdom, to discern the nocent, the innocent. 2. Fortitude, to prosecute, and execute. 3. Temperance, so to carry Justice that passion be no ingredient, and that it be without confusion or precipitation You have given ample testimony in all these particulars, so that this Sword in your hand will be a right sword of justice, attended with Wisdom, Fortitude and Tempe∣rance. When you have all these together, What a comely and
glorious sight is it to behold A Lord Protector in a Pur∣ple Robe, with a Scepter in his hand, a Sword of Justice girt about him, and his eyes fixt upon the Bi∣ble! Long may you prosperously enjoy them all, to your own comfort, and the comfort of the people of these three Nations. His Highnes standing thus adorned in princely State, according to his merit and dignity; looking up unto the Throne of the most High, who is Prince of Princes, and in whom is all his confidence, Mr. Manton by prayer recommended his Highnesse, the Parlia∣ment, the councill, his Highnesse forces by Sea and Land, the whole Government, and People of these three Nations, to the blessing and protection of God Almighty. After this the people giving severall great shouts, and the trum∣pets sounding, his Highnesse sat down in the Chair of State hold∣ing the Scepter in his hand. At the right Elbow by his Highnesse Chair, sate his Excellen∣cy the Lord Ambassadour extraordinary of France; at the left his Excellency the Lord Ambassadour extraordinary of the states Generall of the Ʋnited Provinces: On the right side of the chair, stood the Earle of Warwick bearing the Sword; and on the left side, the Lord Major of London, with the City Sword: Near to his Highnesse stood the most noble Lord, the Lord Richard Crom∣well, his excellency the Lord Fleetwood, Lord deputy of Ireland, the Right honourable the Lord Cleypool Master of his Highnesse Horse, his Highnesse councill and all the officers of State attend∣ing. There stood also upon the lower descent, near the Earle of Warwick, the Lord Viscount Lisle, and Generall Montague; and on the otherside the Lord Whitelock, each of them bearing a drawn Sword. While his Highnesse thus sate, a Herald stood up aloft, giving a signal to a Trumpet to sound three times; after which, he did by authority and direction of Parliament, there publish and Pro∣claim his Highnesse Lord Protector of the common wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, requiring all persons to yeeld him due obedience. Hereupon the Trumpets sounded, and the people made several great acclamations with loud shouts, God save rhe Lord Protect∣or Then an officer of Armes, standing upon the top of the stairs, made proclamation again after the same manner; which was fol∣lowed with shouts and loud acclamations as before. After little pause, the whole Ceremony being ended, his Highnesse saluting the Ambassadors and publick Ministers, pro∣ceeded thence in his Princely habit, the train whereof was born up by severall noble persons, among whom was the Earle of War∣wicks Granchilde; the Lord Sherwood, and the eldest Son of the Lord Roberts of Truro. The Aldermen, Recorder, the Judges, with the officers of State, and the rest, proceeded in the same order as they came from the house of Lords, and passed through the Hall to the great Gate leading into the New Pallace Yard, where his Highnesse entred into his Coach of state, being in his Robes. The Earl of Warwick sat in the other end of the coach, and the Lord Richard Cromwel and the Lord Whitlock in one side, the Lord Whitelock having one of the drawn swords in his hand On the o∣ther side sat the Lord Viscount Lisle, and Generall Montague bearing the other two drawn swords in their hands, The Lord Cleypool Master of the Horse, led the Horse of Honour in rich Caparisons, the coach was attended by his Highnesse Lifeguard, and other guards, with the Officers of Armes on Horseback; the Officers of State Judges, Lord Major, and Aldermen, all waiting on his Highnesse in their coaches to Whitehall; the whole being managed with state and magnificence, suitable to so high and hap∣py a solemnity. The Speaker with the Members of Parliament, returned to the House, where it was. Resolved, that it be recommended to his Highnesse the Lord Protector, as the desire of the Parliament, that his Highness will be pleased to encourage all christian endeavours for uniting the Pro∣testant churches abroad, and severall Members were appointed to present this Vote to his Highnesse.
WHereas the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the par∣liament of England, Scotland and Ireland, taking into their consideration, the duty incumbent upon them, to provide for the future peace and settlement of the Government of these Na∣tions, according to the Laws and customes of the same, by their Humble petition and advice, have presented their desires into his Highnesse Oliver Lord Protector, that he should by and under the name and Stile of Lord Protector of the Common-wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territo∣ries thereunto belonging, Hold, and Exercise the office of Chiefe Magistrate of these three nations; Whereunto the Lord Protector, upon due and mature consideration of the said Petition and Ad∣vice, hath consented: And his Highnesse the Lord Protector and the Parliament, judging it necessary, that publication be made of the premises; have thought meet, and doe hereby strictly charge and command all and every person and persons, of what quality and condition soever, in any of the said three Nations, to take no∣tice of the premises, and to conform and submit themselves unto the Government so established, And the Lord Major of the City of London, and all Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffs, and other publick Ministers and officers, whom this may concern, are required to cause this proclamation, together with the said Petition and Ad∣vice to be forthwith published in the City of London, and the re∣spective Counties, Cities, Corporations and Market Towns, to the end that none may have cause to pretend ignorance in this be∣half. Given at Westminster, June 26. 1657. Westminster, June 24. A true Copy of the Oaths to be taken by his Highnesse privy Councill and the severall members of Parliament. It was resolved by the Parliament, That all such persons who now are or hereafter shall be of the Privy Council of his Highness. or Successors, before they or either of them, do act as Counsel∣lors, shall respectively take an oath before persons to be authori∣sed by his Highnesse and Successors, for that purpose; in the form following, viz.
I. A. B. Doe in the presence and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and swear, that to the ultermost of my power, in my place I will uphold and maintain, the True Reformed Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity there∣of, as is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same; and that I will be true and faithfull to his high∣nesse the Lord Protector of the commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belong∣ing as Chief Magistrate thereof, and shall not contrive, de∣sign, or attempt any thing against the person or lawfull authority of his said Highness; and shall keep secret all matters that shall be treated of in Councill, and put under secrecy, and not reveale them but by command or consent of his Highnesse, the Parliament, or the Councill; and shall in all things faithfully perform the trust committed to me as a Counseller; according to the best of my understanding, in order to the good Government, peace, and welfare of these Nations. Resolved that the same Oath be taken by the Members of his Highnesse Councill of Scotland and Ireland. The house resumed the debate upon the report this day made for an Oath to be taken by the Members of Parliament. And it was agreed, That every person who now is, or hereafter shall be a Member of either house of Parliament, before he sit in Parlia∣ment, shall from and after the first day of July, 1657. take an Oath before persons to be authorised and appointed by his High∣nesse and Successors, for that purpose, in the form following. I. A. B. Doe in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and swear, That to the uttermost of my power in my place, I will uphold and maintain the true re∣formed Protestant Christian Religion in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Tostament and encourage the profession and Professors of the same: And that I will be true and faithfull to the Lord
Protector of the Common wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, as Chief Magistrate thereof, and shall not con∣trive, design, or attempt any thing against the person or lawfull anthority of the Lord Protector, and shall endeavour as much as in me lieth as a Member of Parliament, the pre∣servation of the Rights and liberties of the people. His Highnesse upon the day of his Inauguration, meeting the Parliament in the painted Chamber before the So∣lemnity, passed all such Bills as were presented to him: The Bills concerning private persons I omit. Those that are of a publick nature were as followeth. 1. The Additionall Explanatory Petition and advice. 2. An Act to adjourn this Parliament, till the 20th of January. London, July 1. This day his Highnesse the Lord Protector was proclaimed in the City with great solemnity. About ten a clock in the morning at Whitehall Gate, the per∣sons met who were to give attendance upon this Ceremony. First, the Messengers belonging to the Councill; next Trum∣petters; next them the lifeguard of his Highnesse; after them other Trumpetters; next, his Highnesse his Gentleman; after them more Trumpetters; next, divers officers of the Army, gal∣lantly mounted; then Trumpetters again; next the Searjants at Armes, and the Heralds of Armes, and Garter, principall King of Armes betwixt two Gentlemen-Ushers, before his Highnesse Councill in their Coaches, proceeding in this order to Temple-Bar. At this place they were met by the Lord Major mounted on horseback, in his Crimson Velvet Gown, and his Colle of SS. with the Recorder and Aldermen of London, all in their Scarlet on horseback, attended by his Officers, Trumpetters, and the loud Musick of the City.
From thence an officer of Arms proceeded before the Alder∣men, then next before the Lord Major his Mace-bearer, the Sword-bearer, with his cap of maintenance, and a Herald of Armes. Then proceeded severall Serjeants at Armes belonging to his Highnesse and councill, with Norroy King of Armes; next after them, Garter principall King of Armes, between two Gen∣tlemen Ushers, going immediately before the Lords of his high∣nesse councill, and the principal secretary of State, in their coaches. In this manner they proceeded towards the Royal Exchange, making two stands by the way. First, at chancery-lane end over against the Inner Temple gate, where Proclamation was made by the common crier of London, according to the tenor of the proclamation already published by act of Parliament, the Lord Major, Councill, the Aldermen of London, and all Officers standing bare. The second stand was made in Cheapside at the end of Wood∣street, where proclamation was made as before. Thence they proceeded in order to the Royal Exchange, ari∣ving there at Exchange time, where Proclamation was made (as in all other places) by sound of Trumpet, in the form aforesaid; and the humble petition and advice was published: after which, the Trumpets sounding, three loud acclamations were made by the people, Long live the Lord Protector. Whitehall, Novemb. 5. The fury of the Jesuited popish party in Poland; having of late, with all violence, been executed in a barbarous manner upon the reformed professors, who are of the Bohemian confession in those parts, insomuch, that the Churches are dispersed, and the poor christians forced to fly into forein parts for safe∣ty of their lives; divers of their exiled Pastors being come into England to seek for reliefe, the case of the poor exiles stands referred by his Highnesse and the
Councill, to the consideration of those worthy and pious persons (Ministers, and others) who are the Committee for Piedmont. The most inhumane persecutions lately acted by the Papists and their party in Poland, against our Brethren of the Reformed Religion are some of them) as followeth. The first remarkeable is that of Lesna, a populous wealthy city, and the great refuge of the Reformed, who frequently came thither from other parts for shelter. The church there was divi∣ded into three congregations, the Bohemian, the Polonian, and the German. This City they first set upon, intending to put all to the Sword, and destroy it with fire; but the Citizens having notice of their coming on, quitted the City leaving all their wealth behind, flying through Woods and Boggs into Silesia: so that the enemy entring without resistance, found none but aged and bed∣rid persons, whom they barbaroufly flew; and after they had plundered the City, they reduced it to ashes. In other places, they cruelly murthered divers Minister; of the Word, and people of all ages and Sexes, making them to end their lives by exquisite tortures. The Pastor of the Church of Czvirzin had his eyes first pulled out, because he would not renounce the faith; then they pulled off with Pincers, the Joynts of his fingers; but he still remaining constant, they poured moulten Lead into his mouth; and lastly putting his head between the shuts of a door, they severed it from his body. The Pastor of the Church of Dembnick, and two others, after many vilanous abuses offered to their persons, had their throats cut. Finding also a young Minister in the field, they cut off his head with a Sithe, and afterwards mangled his body. The like cruelty they acted also upon a citizen of Lesna, and worse upon many others, not sparing even the weaker sex, nor children. A pious Matron of Lesna, with her three children, not getting quick enough out of Town, was murthered in the open street, her hands and feet cut off, and two of her children with their heads cut off laid upon her breasts, the third by her side. Another also having her hands and feet chopt off, and her
tongue cut out, being afterwards tied up in a Sack, lived so two dayes in a most lamentable condition, Nay, their cruelty extended to the very carkases after persons were dead, haling them out of their graves, and dragging them up and down the streets; some of the carkases they chopt in pieces, and some they exposed naked for spectacles, as the dead body of the Landgrave of Hessen, who was first slain at Kotzchi in a Barbarous manner, but buried at Les∣na, and by them taken out of the grave. The like usage had the body of Arcissenski, heretofore Admirall of the hollanders in Brasile. A Diuine burnte in the middell of his bookes his Childe pulled from ye brest & tost on a speare. Cords drawne thorow the legs & Armes. Mens guttes pulled out of there mouthes
Add to these inhumanities those of burning men alive, and casting great numbers with stones tied about their necks into rivers. They caused Pastors to fly for safety of their lives, demolished their Churches, or else burnt them down. At Skoki there was  church of the banished Bohemians, where sixty five men and women were miserably massacred, the numbers of the banished are very great being scattered (most of them) through Silesia, the Mark, Lusatia, Hungary, &c. exposed to hunger and cold, and naked∣ness: The Ministers and people are fain to hold their meetings in close places, or else Woods, enduring the utmost of misery, being exposed to the rage of unreasonable men in all places where they wander. Innumerable are the particulars of cruelty exercised by those Vassals of Rome in severall places, and too large to be reci∣ted; therefore let this serve as part of the account transmitted hither by Letters out of Forein parts. A Catalogue of the names of those Honourable Persons, who are by writ summoned to sit in the other house of Parliament. THe Lord Richard Cromwell. The Lord Henry Cromwel, Lord Deputy of Ireland. Nathaniel Fiennes, John Lisle Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal. Henry Lawrence Lord President of his Highness privy Council. The Lord Charls Fleet∣wood. Robert Earl of Warwick. Edmond Earl of Mulgrave. Edward Earl of Manchester. William Lord Viscount Say and Seal. Lord John Cleypole, Mr. of the Horse. Philip Lord Vis∣count Lisle. Charls Lord Viscount Howard. Philip Lord Wharton. Thomas Lord Fauconbridge. Lord John Disbrow, Lord Edward Montague Generals at Sea. George Lord Evre. The Lord Whitelock. Sir Gilbert Pickering. Col William Sydenham. Sir Charls Wolseley. M. G. Philip Skippon. Lord Strickland. Col. Philip Jones. Sir William Strickland. Francis Rous Esq John Fiennes Esq Sir Francis Russel. Sir Thomas Honywood. Sir Arthur Hesilrigg. Sir John Ho∣bart. Sir Richard Onslow. Sir Gilbert Gerard. Sir William Roberts. John Glyn, Oliver St. John, Lords Chief Justices. William Pierrepoynt Esq John Jones Esq John Crew Esq Alexander Popham Esq Sir Christopher Pack. Sir Robert
Tichborn. Edward Whalley Esq Sir John Barkstead Knight, Lievtenant of the Tower. Sir Thomas Pride. Sir George Fleetwood. Richard Ingoldsby Esq Sir John Hewson. James Berry Esq William Goffe Esq Thomas Cooper Esq Edmond Thomas Esq George Monck, Commander in Chiefe of his Highnesse forces in Scotland. David Earle of Castils. Sir William Lockhart. Sir Archibald Johnston of Warriston. William Steel, Lord Chancellor of Ireland. The Lord Broghil. Sir Mathew Tomlinson. In number Sixty, The Reader is to excuse this List, if the names be not set down in their due order, because the Copy came to my hand as here you see it. Some Heads of the Speech made by His Highnesse; January 1657. HIs Highnesse said, He met them there in that Capacity, by the Advice and Petition of this present Parliament after so much Expence of Blood and Treasure, to search and try what Blessings God hath in store for these Nations. That he could not but with gladnesse of heart remember and acknowledge the labor and industry that is past, which hath been spent upon a Businesse worthy of the best men, and the best Christians. That it was not unknown unto them all, what difficulties we have past through, and at what we are now arived, and that he hoped it might be said, we have arived at what we aimed at, if not at that which is much beyond our expectations. That the state of this cause, and the quarrel at first, was, the maintaining of the Liber∣ty of these Nations, our Civill liberties as men, and our Spi∣ritual liberties as Christians. That it was well known, the first Declaration after the Beginning of the late Warr that spake to the life, was a sense held forth by the Parlia∣ment, that for sometime before, Designes had been laid to Innovate upon the Civil Rights of the Nations; to Inno∣vate in matter of Religion; and those persons who a man would have thought should have had the least hand in med∣ling
with civill things, did justifie all irregular Tran∣sastions in Pulpits, Presses, and otherwise, which they thought would be a means to shelter them while they inno∣vated upon us in matters of Religion also, and proceeded so to Innovate, as to eat out the Core, and power, the heart and life of all Religion, by bringing on us a company of poyso∣nous Popish Ceremonies, and imposing them upon those that were call'd and accounted the Puritans of the Nation, and professors of Religion among us, driving them to seek their bread in a howling Wildernesse; they were forced to fly into Holland, New-England, almost any whither, to find liberty for their Consciences. That if this thing hath been the state and sum of our Quarrel, and of the late ten years Wars, and the good hand of God hath brought this Eusinesse thus home unto us, as it is stated in the Petition and Advice, then that He and they have all cause to blesse God, and the Nations have cause to blesse him. And if the enjoyment of our present peace and other mens Mercies may be witnesses for God, we feel and we see them every Day. That the greatest Demonstration of his Favor and love ap∣pears to us in this, that he hath given us peace, and the blessings of Peace, to wit, the enjoyment of our Liberties ci∣vill and Spirituall. That when we were plunged in the midst of our Troubles, it could not before-thought that ever the people of God should have had liberty to worship God without fear of Enemies; yet this is the Por∣tion which God hath given us, and he hoped we shall for ever heartily acknowledge it, it being our glory that we have a free possession of the Gospel. That notwithstanding this, we are not without the mur∣murings of many people, who turn all this Grace and Good∣nesse into Wormwood, who indeed are disappointed by the Works of God, and those men are of severall ranks and con∣ditions,
great ones, lesser ones, men of all sorts; men that are of the Episcopall Spirit, who gave themselves a fatall blow in this place, when they would needs make a Protestation, That no Laws were good which were made by this House, and the House of Commons, in their absence; and so without injury to themselves, they cut off themselves. That we have now a Godly Ministry, a knowing Ministry; such a one, as (without Vanity be it spoken) the World hath not the like, Men knowing the things of God, and able to search into the things of God, by that only which can fathome those things in some measure, to wit, by the Spirit of God. That the reason why men slip in this age is, because they understand not the Works of God, and consider not the operation of his hands: They consider not, that God resist∣ed, and brake in pieces the powers that were, that men might fear him, might have liberty to do and enjoy all that he had been now speaking of. Thence it is, that men slip, and engage themselves against God; and for that very cause (as it is in the 28 Psalm) He shall break them down, and not build them up. That if we would know upon what foundation we stand, we should own our foundation from God; he hath set us where we are; he hath pla∣ced us in the enjoyment of our Civil, and of our Spirituall Liber∣ties. That upon this foundation of a cause and Quarrel thus at∣tained, and wherein we are thus estated; he told the Parliament he should be glad to lay his bones with theirs, and would have done it with all heartinesse, and cheerfulnesse, in the meanest ca∣pacity that he ever yet was in, to serve the Parliament. His Highnesse concluded, That he had been speaking of but what they had done; and that if God should be pleased to make this Meeting happy upon this account, They would be called the bles∣sed of the Lord; the Generations to come will blesse them, &c. That having some infirmities upon him, he had not liberty to speak at large, but had desired an honorable person present, to discourse a little more particularly what might be more proper for this occasion, and this meeting. Which particulars were after∣wards delivered in a Grave and Eloquent Speech at large, by the Lord Fiennes, one of the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal.
Thurs. Feb. 4. 1657. The House of Commons this Morning resumed the Debate, touching the Appellation of the other House, viz. the House of Lords, betwixt ten and eleven his Highnesse came to the House of Lords, and Commanded the Usher of the Blake Rod to acquaint the House of Commons, that his Highnesse was come to the Lords House, and there expected them the Usher of the Blake Rod being called into the House of Commons, signified the same accordingly, whereupon the Speaker and the whole House coming into the Lords House, and standing without the Bar, his Highnesse standing under the cloth of Estate, made a Speech to them, wherein he declared severall urgent and weighty reasons making it necessary for him in order to the Pub∣lick peace and safety, so passed to an immediate dissolution of this Parliament, and accordingly his Highnesse dissolved the Parliament. Articles of Peace, treated on by the Commissioners of the two Northern Kings of Sweden and Denmark, pro∣posed and resolved on, Feb. 27. S. N. THERE shall be betwixt the two Kings and their Kingdoms an upright eternall peace, all the mistaken and misunderstand∣ings to be removed, and taken away and buried in oblivion, and never remembred any more. II. That no alliance be made with other Potentates, tending to the prejudice of each other. III. That the one ought not to make Alliance, without the knowledge of the other, nor to assist the enemy without the con∣sent of each other. IV. That neither party shall permit (as much as is possible) any Fleet of men of War to pass the sound or Belt, coming from an Enemy. V. The Bromsberish Treaty shall be in vigour and force, except in such poynts, which were expresly excepted against in that Treaty. VI. If any Kings, Princes and Potentates will come into this Treaty, they may seek for it from these Kings, who are ready to imbrace them: VII. All such ships as belong to Sweden and to the Subjects of the Crown of Sweden, are to passe the Horizont or the Belt, with∣out paying of Custom, or without being searched, assoon as they have shewed the Sea passe granted at the Custom, house of the
PIETATE ET CONSTANTIA
King of Denmark: but in case the Swedish ships have taken in any Forrein Goods, then they are to be dealt withall according to the Tenor of the Brombergish Treaty. VIII. The King of Sweden for the restitution of such places gotten and taken in this War, is by way of acknowledgment to have for ever the Provin∣ces of Holland, Bleke, and Schoneland and the Island of Bornholm, with the adjacent places. Item, the Castle Bahuys and the Fees belonging, to that Iurisdiction, which formerly did belong to the Crown of Denmark. IX. The King of Denmark giveth to the Crown of Sweden the jurisdiction of Dronthelm situated in Nor∣way, together with all the appurtenances belonging thereunto, and that for ever. X. On the other side, the King of Sweden is to restore to the King of Denmark all such Territories and strong holds he took in this War, whether they be in Denmark or Nor∣way, Sleswick, Holstein, or in the County of Pinnenburg, and all the claimes he pretended, in the Dukedom of Bremen, and the County of Delmenhrst and Ditmarsh, to renounce them, and resign them to the King of Denmark and his Heyres. XI. All prisoners, high and low, what condition soever they are of are to be set at liberty on both sides, without paying any ransom. XII. The King of Sweden is to clear the King of Denmark his Countryes, assoon as possibly he may, and to be gone at the fur∣thest on the 12 of May; in the interim he is to have quarters, and to keep good order and military discipline. XIII. All the states, Noble and Ignoble, spirituall or Clergy and secular men, are to enjoy fully their priviledges in such places, which by way of satisfaction are made over, whether they be in Denmark or Norway, and the Crown of Sweden is rather to en∣large their priviledges then to infringe or diminish them. Item they are to enioy without molestation and hindrance all such Goods which they either purchased lawfully or are fallen to them by inheritance. XIIII. The King of Denmark is to restore also to the King of Sweden all such places he took from him in this War, and the three ships taken from the Swedish in the Sound are to be prized, and the value thereof is to be restored to the Crown of Sweden. XV. The King of Denmarke is to resign to the King of Sweden all the claims, which he pretends to any place in the Island Rugen. XVI. The King of Denmark is to be reconciled
with the Duke of Hostein, upon such tearmes as may stand with justice and equity, and make an agreement answerably. XVII. The Forts and castles, taken by either party, are to be restored, but not any Artillery and Amunition, and the Subjects of Denmarke are to carry the Swedish Artillery to such places, as the King of Sweden shall appoint. XVIII. Count Ʋlefield is to be restored to his goods, and all his Revenues and charges shall be paid back from that time, as the Commissioners shall deter∣mine; His Lady, and Mother in Law, shall have liberty to dwell in Denmark where they please; the Fees which he and his Son had, as Hursholm, Moene, Hellingen, and St Johns Cloyster, he is to enjoy again, according to the priviledge which they had there; and his Lady also is to be restored to her due title of Honor. XIX. The published Minifestor of the King of Denmark is to be revoked and neither printed nor sold any more. XX. The King of Denmark is to let the King of Sweden have 2000 Horse, and 2000 Foot. Whitehall, March 12. This afternoon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councill of the City of London, came hither in a Body, to attend his Highnesse; as also the Commanders and Officers of the Ar∣my: And being admitted to his presence, his Highnesse was pleased in a Speech at large, to represent unto them the danger, wherein they of the whole City, and the whole Nation, were in∣volved at present, by reason of the new designes of the old Ene∣my, Charls Stuart and his confederates abroad, and his party here at home, who have been at work secretly to imbroil the na∣tion again in Blood, as soon as he should be able to make his in∣tended invasion. His Highness also told them, that he knew this to be true; That he knew it by Letters of theirs intercepted, by certain intelligence from abroad of their proceedings, and by in∣formation from the mouths of such persons as had been engaged to act with them. He acquainted them likewise, that the Lord of Ormond whom some now call the Duke of Ormond, in person had been lately here for three weekes together, being come over on purpose to promote the design, by encouraging and engaging as many as he could in and about this City; and that he went a∣way again on Tuesday last. Also, in order to this invasion,
Charls Stuart was waiting in Flanders, having about eight thou∣sand Men quartered in severall places near the water side, as at Brugges, Brussells, Ostend, &c. And that two and twenty hired Ships, were in readinesse to transport them, waiting only for the opportunity of some darke night to slip by our Fleet; which they may the more easily perform, ours being ships of great burthen, drawing much water, and so not able to ride upon the Flats. And therefore seeing a reall danger so near at hand, and that the peace and safety of the City; and the whole Nation is Highly concerned in it, he desired the Citizens might be sensible of it, and how much it behoves them to provide for their own and the Na∣tions security. And to that end, his Highnesse recommended to the Lord Major, and the Body of the City, the setling of their Militia: and that it might be setled in the hands of Pious and sober men, well affected to the present Government and such as are free from discontent and faction; persons that may carry on the worke with alacrity and discretion; to put the City in a post∣ure of defence, that they may be in a condition to suppresse tu∣mults and insurrections, designed by the Enemies of our Peace and Prosperity, Many other particulars his Highnesse insided on, to give them an account of the present state of affairs, and of di∣vers past transactions; but having no notes to help my memory, and being afraid lest I may already have faln short in relating the Heads of what was more copiously and much better spoken, I have only this to adde. That the citizens expressed much cheer∣fulnesse in the presence of his Highnesse; and departed with very great satisfaction. Whitehall March 27. These following persons having been lately presented from the City to his Highnesse and the Councill, to be added to the Com∣mittee of the Militia in London, they are accordingly approved. Sir Thomas Foot Knight, William Thomson, Walter Bigge, Iohn Frederick, Tempest Milner, Thomas Chaundler, Aldermen. Charls Lloyd, Therphilus Biddulph, William Gower, Esquires. Mr. Maurice Gethin, Mr. Thomas Steynes, Mr. Iames Edwards. This day a Presentation was made of the following Addresses to his Highness, and it was presented by the hand of the noble Lord the Lord Charls Fleetwood, attended by the Officers of the Army.
To his Highnesse the Lord Protector of the Common wealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, &c. The Humble Addresse of the Officers of your Highnesse Army. WE being deeply sensible of the continuall dangers from the common enemy that have attended your Highness person, and of the immense weight of businesse for the good of the Nation, that hath lain and still lieth upon you; together with the great opposition from severall sorts of enemies that you have met with, ever since you were pleased to undertake the Govern∣ment, for the procuring the quiet, and promoting the prosperity of this Common-wealth, do judge it our duty to contribute as much as in us lyeth to strengthen your Highnesse hands, and ob∣viate the designes of your enemies. And therefore do, as one Man, with plainnesse and sincerity of heart, declare unto your Highnesse; That (notwithstanding the base Calumnies and Lies, your and our enemies have cast upon us, and dispersed throughout the whole Nation, That your Army is divided, and much of it from your self) We doe remain, through the mercy of God, firmly united one to another, and all of us to your Highnesse, as our Generall and Chief Magistrate; and hope that God hath so in love and faithfulness cemented us together, as that neither the subtilty of Satan, nor the malice of crafty and ill-affected men, shall be able to severe us. And we make it our earnest and hum∣ble request to your Highnesse, That as a mighty man strengthned by the Lord, you will run and not be weary in that race God hath set you in, till it please the Lord you have setled the great ends of all our former engagements, our civill and spirituall liberty: which we hope is already in a good measure well provided for, by The Humble Petition and advice. And in all your actings tending thereunto, We doe freely and heartily engage (the Lord strengthning us) to stand by your Highnesse with our lives, and shall not be wanting to improve our interest with the Lord, for his gracious and mighty assistance with you, in the further prose∣cution of the great work he hath called you to. Charls Fleetwood. William Goffe. John Barkestead. Howard, Richard Ingoldsby, Thomas Pride. James Berry. Thomas Cooper. Philip Twisleton. Edward Grosvener. John Disbrow. Henry Ingoldsby. Thomas Talbot. George Sedascue. Thomas
Kelsey. Tobias Bridge. John Nelthorpe. William Bteler. Hezekiah Haynes. Edward Whalley. John Clarke. Thomas Sadler. Ralph Cobbet. Edward Salmon. John Mill. William Stane. Henry Whalley. Thomas Margetts. By the Committee for the affairs of the poor Protestants in the Val∣leyes of Piedmont. THe All wise and Holy God, whose wayes of Providence are alwayes righteous, though often secret and unsearchable, hath made it the constant lot and portion of his people in this World, to follow the Lord in bearing his Cross, and suffering persecutions, thereby holding forth and verifying that irreconcileable Enmity between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the Serpent, which was visible betimes in the Blood shed of righteous Abel, whom Cain (though his Brother) slew being of the wicked one, yea and for this cause, for that his own works were evill, and his Brothers good: Thus they that are born after the flesh, perse∣cute them that are born after the Spirit to this day, and so will do while the World lasteth. In which Cause and Quarrell the Lord hath very many glorious ends. But scarcely have any sort of the Churches Enemies more clearly followed the pernicions wayes of Cain herein, than hath the Anti-Christian Faction of Rome done, that Mother of Harlots and abominations, whose garments are died red with the blood of Saints, which they have alwayes cruel∣ly shed, and made themselves drunk with, even the blood of those holy Followers of the Lamb, chiefly who would not receive An∣tichrists mark, nor worship his Image, nor drink of the Golden Cup of his Fornications, but rather come out from them, and witnesse against them, though they did it in sack-cloth, and were slain for it. Among those chosen and faithfull Witnesses, the Lord seemed very signally to have raised up those Christians, who (though dispersed in divers Countreyes) have been commonly known by the name of Waldenses, who for some Centuries of years have lived among their enemies as Lambs among Wolves, to bear their Testimony for the truth of Christ, against the Apostacies and Blasphemies of Rome, for which they have been killed all the day long, and appointed as sheep for the slaughter. Nevertheless the Lord, the great Shepheard of the sheep, hath made their blood thus shed, to become a constant seed of faithfull and Valiant wit∣nesses
for him; which is indeed, the more marvellous in our eyes, that this Bush hath so long burned, and is not yet consumed. This little flock and remnant which the Lord hath left and reserved, are scattered in the Valleyes of Piedmont, of whose tragicall suffe∣rings we have not long since heard, and have drawn forth our bowels to them, whereof a very faithfull accompt is given to the World, both for satisfaction of Brethren and Friends, and for stopping the mouthes of all Calumnies. The other part of this poor, yet precious Remnant, hath been dispersed in the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Poland, whose sufferings, together with the Lords signall providences about them have been very eminent and re∣markable, as hath been made appear unto us by three godly per∣sons, delegated by those persecuted Churches, which are now the sad Monuments of their Enemies rage, and of the Lords sparing Mercies. These have made their addresses to his Highness the Lord Protector by Petition, declaring the deplorable estate wherein this persecuted Remnant now lieth, and with loud cryes importuning the Christian Bowells and Bounty of this Nation, which cannot but be moved to mourn over them, and to shew mercy to them. And indeed upon a due sense and consideration of this lamentable subject, even common humanity, but much more christian charity should provoke us to a fellow feeling of their present distressed condition. These somtimes flourishing churches, where by degrees worn out by the constant underminings and open out rages of the Antichristian party, being first driven out of Bohemia into Poland, then after their taking root and spreading in Poland unto a nume∣rous company, were forced out of the chief Cities there, and now at last by the Jesuited and inraged Polish Army persecuted in their few hiding places, with fire and sword. Their Ministers were tor∣tured to death by most exquisite and unheard of Barbarism, by cutting out of the tongues of some, pulling out the eyes, and cru∣elly mangling the Bodies of others; nor did their rage and Bru∣tish Cruelty reach only to Ministers, but to others, yea even to women and young Children, whose heads they cut off, and them at their dead mothers breasts. Nay, their rage brake out, not on∣ly upon the living (not one of whom they spared that fell into their hands) but also upon the dead, plucking the bodies of hono∣rable persons and others out of the graves, tearing them to pieces, and exposing them to publick scorn.
But the chief Eye sore and object of their Fury was the City of Lesna, which (after plundering and murthering all whom they found therein) they burned to ashes, and laid in rubbish, only the Lord in his mercy having a∣larm'd the City of their enemies approaching March, the greatest part of the Inhabitants (being three famous Churches) saved themselve by flight, and are now wandring up and down in Silesia, the Marguifate of Branden∣burg, Lusatia and Hungary, poor, destitute, afflicted and naked. His High∣ness and the Councill having referred unto this Committee the Testimonials and Petitions sent by the said Churches, We finding upon examination thereof, their case to be thus deplorable, which is more at large stated and declared in their own Narrative, have caused the said Narrative to be tran∣slated, and here with published, thereby to stirr up the Lords people in these Nations to put on bowels of mercies toward these their exiled and afflicted brethren, refreshing their hearts by your love, and the tokens of it in a cheer∣full and liberall supply; which will not only preserve this holy seed from perishing, that hath a blessing in it, but also uphold among them the Puri∣ty of Religion and power of the Gospel. The rather considerng the pre∣sent freedome from these bloody outrages, we the people of these Nations do by the blessing of the Lord enjoy, the continuance whereof we may the more comfortably hope for, by how much our compassions are more freely extended to those in misery. And if a cup of cold water given to one dis∣ciple, as such shall not lose its reward; how much more when a bountifull relief is given to more then five thousand disciples? Which we should be the more forward to advance, because they acknowledge they have received much confirmation in the Religion for which they suffer, by light received from our Country man John Wicklof, that famous witnesse of Christ against Antichrist, even in the darkest times of Popery. And I doubt no: but that God who hath lately opened your bowels to so large and eminent a Contri∣bution towards the persecuted Protestants at Piedmont, for which many Thanksgivings have been made to God on your behalf will again draw out your hearts upon this like sad occasion, to the like bountifull liberality, it being our duty to cast our bread upon the waters, and to give a portion to six and also to seven, not being weary of well-doing, because in due time we shall reap if we faint not. Considering also how honourable it is to ct grace, and to lay out our selves upon such occasions, we recommmend i again as the work of God accompanied with his own voyce, calling aloud upon us to inlarge our selves in this ministration, and withall to pour out our hearts in faith and prayer, that the Lord would yet please to raise up Son upon the Ruins of Babylon, hastening his work, and blessing means to it. John Trevor. Christopher Pack. Will. Purefy. Edward Cresse. Thomas Viner. Joseph Caryl. John Owen. Will. Jenkyn. Philip Ny. Will: Cooper. Edmond Cay.
A Breviate of the impeachment of high Treason exhibited by Mr. Attorney Generall against John Hewet, Doctor of Divinity, consisting of these heads. 1. THat to embroyl the Commonwealth in new and intestine troubles, and to stir up Sedition and Rebellion within the Nation; He, together with others, Traiterously and Maliciously raised force, and levied war against his high∣nes, and the government, to subvert and alter the same. 2. That he traiterously declared, published, and promoted Charls Stuart. Eldest Son of the late King Charls, to be King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, &c. 3. That he held correspondence with the said Charls Stuart. And declared the same by these open deeds. I. By conferring with one Trelawney, Jo. Stapely, and Henry Mallory, how to effect the same. II. By appoynting places of meeting to consult for effecting the same. III. By encouraging Stapely and Mallory thereunto. IV. By de∣livering Commissions to several persons in the Name of, and as from the said Charls Stuart, concerning the raising of forces, and leavying the power aforesaid, against his highnesse and the Government, and this contrary to the statute in that case made and provided. The substance of Sir Henry Slingsby's speech, at Tower-Hill, June 8. 1658. THat he stood condemned by the court of justice as contriving and endea∣voring to withdraw divers officers of the garison of Kingston upon Hull from their duty, and perswading them to a surrendring and yeelding up of that Garison, and one that held correspondence with some beyond Sea to that end. That it was true, he had conference upon that account with the officers of that Garison; and that he gave Major Waterhouse a commission signed Charls R. but that it was but an old one that had lain by him, though he thought fit to make use of it to the Major. Many passages he said there were which he would not insist on, That some friends of his had made application to his Highnes for the saving of his life, but it seemes it was thought fit not to be granted, &c. and therefore he submitted and was ready to dye, &c. He spake but low, and very little, and kept himselfe in a very even temper, both in words and behaviour. Then addressing himselfe againe to his friends, he called for the executioner, who having received his reward by the hand of a friend, came to him, placed the block in the middle of the Scaffold, which Sir Henry beheld with his armes folded, and a setled countenance; an officer stand∣ing by with the Ax. Then the prisoner declaring he had no more to say, stripped himselfe. Before he put off his band, he desired a friend standing by; to take off a Ring which hung in his Bandstring, 'twas in the form, and about the breadth of an ordinary seal; but instead of a seale engraven, it had the Picture of the late King done in little and very exactly. When the Gentleman had taken it off, he said these words to him, Pray give this to Harry. His doublet being off, he
kneel'd down before the block, and lifting up his hands as before, he again pray∣ed privately to himself, but was very short. Then rising up, and embracing his friends one after another, tooke his leave of them all. After this kneeling down, and placing his neck upon the block, the executioner struck off his head at one blow. The Head was immediately taken off the Scaffold, and put in a black Scarff, the Body into the Coffin, and the Head with it; which being nailed up, and covered, was conveyed off the Scaffold into a Herse drawn by six horses, which stood ready to receive it. The sum of Doctor Hewet's Speech on the Scaffold; Viz. That he had never been in such a Pulpit as this was; and that he came thither, within a few minutes to suffer death for the Truth, and to bear testimony thereto, according to that saying of our blessed Lord and Saviour, For this end was I born, and for this end came I into the world, to bear wit∣nesse to the Truth. And that in two respects; First, as a Clergy-man; and secondly, as a Member of the community in which he lived. As a Clergy-man, he blessed God that had called him to the office of the Ministry, though un∣worthy; and that he had been baptized into the true faith and doctrine of the Gospel, and thereby made a member of the Catholique Church, especially of that part of it, the Church of England, which he looked upon as the purest for sound doctrine and orderly discipline, of any in the christian world; and dis∣owned all others walking contrary thereunto. [Here the Reader is to observe, that the Doctor was not questioned for any poynt of Faith he held, but for being a Traitor; and so he dyed not for truth, but for Treason.] In the second place, as one of the community or civill state, he looked upon himselfe as borne a free Englishman, and in that capacity had a right to the Liberties and priviledges of this Land, and to the Laws thereof. Here he tooke occasion to speake of pas∣sages at his tryall before the Court of Justice saying that having been advised by persons learned in the Law, and being furnished with some books of Law cases and reports, he was thereby instructed to make severall demands in court; as that he might be satisfied about the jurisdiction of the court; then that he might have counsel allowed; afterwards being told in court that they were to try him in matter of fact, to which he ought first to plead; he in the next place said he desired that the matter might be heard by the Judges, and there∣upon appealed to them; which would not be admitted; he being told the court had a full Jurisdiction by Act of Parliament; That he had alwayes in∣sisted that he might have a Jury to be tryed by, but that was not granted him, but the court being erected according to Act of Parliament; they supplyed a Jury. These things he insisted on as the Rights and Priviledges of an English man, and being denied him, he thereupon refused to plead.
That the President of the Court, did indeed read the Clause in the Act, which declared, That in case he stood mute, he must be taken as guilty upon de∣fault of answer; and that he having made three defaults, was at last taken from the bar, then when he intended to have pleaded. [One would wonder such words should proceed from a dying man, whereas all persons present, and at his tryall, do know that the Court had patience with him some hours, and in a great deale of tendernesse towards him, caused the Clause in the Act which concerns default of answer to be read to him several times, and to the very last advised him to plead, but he still refused, and never uttered so much as one Syllable that he would plead.] That he said, he the next morning made application to the Court, sitting in the Painted Chamber, by Petition, that he might have liberty to plead; which being presented, and found to be defective as to the due Title, it was laid aside: Then another petition was drawn up, with the Title amended, which himselfe Sr. Hen: Slingsby; & Dr. Hewet. Beheded at Tower-Hill. June the 8th. 1658: Col: Ashton. & Iohn Betteley. hanged Drawne & quartred. Ashton at mark▪Lane end ye other in Cheep side subscribed, but that the return made to this, was, That he should have his an∣swer in Court: Which answer was, that Sentence of condemnation which brought him to this place; and that being now to dye, he might say, He was to dye the Martyr of the People, and that he did from his very soule freely for∣give those that were the occasion of his death. [Here I cannot but observe, that this dying mans Charity was greater then his memory; because, what he sayes here, clashes with what he said before, it ap∣pearing by his own very words, That if he were a Martyr for the people, it was
much against his will, seeing a little before, he tells us, he would have pleaded to be Court, and so have owned their jurisdiction; and that if the owning of them had been to have given up the rights of the people: It seems by his ow confession ere, he would have done it, in hope to have escaped this kinde of Martyrdome, s he calls it] Then he proceeded to this effect. That having declared what passed upon his tryall in Court, he would next proceed to cleere himselfe of some imputations laid upon him: one whereof was, That he was one engaged with those, who were said to have designed the firing of the City: to this he protested, That had he been engaged amongst such persons that should have ntended such a horrid busines, he would have been the first that should have discovered them. Another was, That it was reported he should entertain the Duke or Marquis of Ormond, and harbored him in his house, when lately here in England: to which he protested, That (to his best remembrance he ne∣ver saw his person, A third was, that it was reported he should be preaching at St. Gregories one Sunday, and that the next after, being absent, he should be at Brudges in Flanders, and there have communication with him whom he called the King, and kiss his hand: In answer to this he said, That for these three yeares past, he had not been threescore miles from this City, and I am sure said he, that Brudges in Flanders is a great deale farther. [This pains the Doctor might have spared, seeing none of the particulars he was pleased to dilate upon, were ever charged upon him by any Authority, but it is very observable, that in all his discourse upon the Scaffold, he never made any pr∣station to declare his innocency, concerning the matters charged in Court against him: It being a time (he thought) wherein he might make more bld to straine his Oratory then his conscience, and yet sure, that was no time to stand confuting the Tattles of the Town.] In conclusion he said, That having now spoken to the people, he would also pray for them, and blesse them in the name of the Lord: and so kneeling in their view, he made a long prayer, (the three Ministers kneeling behind him) which seemed by the contexture of it, to have been penned on purpose for the occasion; because of the very many passages of the Common Prayer Book, that were interwoven in it. His prayer consisted of severall parts. After which the Executioner asking him if he were ready, he answered Yea, and his head was severed from his body at one blow and a little rase of the Ax upon a small piece of the skin. His head also was put up into a scarf, and with his body put up into a coffin, which stood ready on the Schaffold.
A Breviate of the charge of High treason exhibited against Summer, and the rest, for plotting, contriving, and endeavouring, together with John Hewet, late of London, Doctor of Divinity, deceased, Henry, Mallery, late of London, Gen∣tleman, Hartgil Baron, Francis Mansel, and other false Traytors and enemies to his highnesse and this Commonwealth. 1. TO levv warre and raise force against his highnesse, and the Common-wealth. 2. For declaring, and promoting Charls Stuart to be King of England. For holding intelligence with Charls Stuart. And they decla∣red these Treasons by several overt acts. I. By appointing several places of Meeting. II. By conferring amongst themselves and others their complices, how to effect their said Treasons. III. By designing to fire the City of Lon∣don, or some part thereof. IV. By providing and furnishing themselves with barrels of Powder, and other habiliments of War. V. By delivering commis∣sion in the name of, and as from Charls Stuart. VI. By appoynting several Officers of War. And this against the forme of the Statute in that case made and provided. London, July 17. This morning between nine and ten of the Clock, Col. Ashton, who was by the Court of Justice sentenced to suffer death as this day, was accordingly con∣veyed in a Sled from Newgate, drawn with four horses (Dr. Warmistry sitting in the Sled with him) to Tower-street, over against Marke lane end; where a Gibbet was erected, being come to the place of Execution and taken off the Sled, at his going up the Ladder, he desired r. Warmistry to pray with him. And just as he was going up the Ladder, the doctor used these following words to him: [Almighty God who is a strong Tower, be with thee, and make thee know and feele, that there is no other name under heaven, whereby to attaine everlasting life, but by the name of Jesus. The blessing of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost be with you hence forth and forever Amen.] When he was upon the Ladder, he spake thus. Ashton. I hope I see my Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Dr. Warmistry. I hope so (sayes the D.) passe on from the crosse to the Crown. Remember who went before you. Ashton. I am brought here to a shamefull death. I am an English man born▪ and (as many know) a Gentleman born; I am brought here by occasion of two fellows that corrupted me, namely, Topham and Langhorn, who were the men that brought me acquainted with one Manley. And Manley and the rest told me they would raise a Regiment for me, and then I told them I would command it. I was drawn into the businesse. And now I am brought here
for my former sins; God hath delivered me severall times from severall judg∣ments; he hath visited me at this time, because I slighted, and did not follow that Repentance that I promised. Therefore I desire all protestants to leave off their sins for Christ his sake, and become new men, for it is that that brings all men to ruine; I beseech God of mercy have mercy upon my soule, Lord God, I come to thee, Lord the Father of heaven have mercy upon me, O God the Son Redeemer of the World have mercy upon me. O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon me. Re∣member not my offences, but spare me, good Lord God. I beseech thee spare thy servant whom thou hast redeemed, for thy dear Sons sake. I have no more to say, but desire the prayers of all good people. Doctor. One word, remem∣ber that saying of the Psalmist, Thou shalt answer for me O Lord. Ashton. The Executioner asking him, if he had any more to say, he answe∣red, No. But concluded thus; I commit my spirit into thy hands O God; the Lord have mercy upon my soul Which being said, the Executioner turned him off the Ladder; and afterwards being cut down, he ripped up his bely, tooke out the bowels, and burnt them in a fire ready prepared upon the place. Then his head was cut off, and his body divided into four Quarters. Execution being done upon Colonel Ashton, and his Quarters conveyed a∣way in a Basket upon a Cart, to Newgate; The Sheriffs officers went to the Tower, to fetch John Betteley to his Execution, (who was likewise drawn up∣on the same sled) into Cheapside; (where formerly the Crosse stood) where was likewise a Gibbet crected. The manner of the execution of John Betteley in Cheapside. Being come to the Gibbet on a Sled with a Minister, the Minister read, and the people sung with him a Psalm beginning thus, O Lord consider my distress &c Betteley. I trust in him that he will certainly save me. Then he went up the Ladder. His confession followeth. LOrd receive my Soul, and be mercifull to me: I commit my Soule into Almighty Gods hands; for he is my Protector and Redeemer. I am not ashamed to live nor afraid to dye; for, my conversation hath been such, in Christ Jesus I hope I shall find mercy. As concerning them that are my enemies, I pray God forgive them their sins, I freely forgive them all that have done me wrong. As for the late Plot, I was never but once in company with them concerned therein: I did know of such a thing, but deny that I acted therein. Shall I damne my soule at this instant? I will speake the truth. I doe acknowledge I offended God in it, and wronged this Nation in hearing it, and not discovering it. One Brandon that was one of them, drew
me into the businesse, and his man. I carrying worke to him, could not re∣fraine his house, he so often inticed me thereto, and would not let me a∣lone, till he had got me into a house where we dranke together. I have no more to say as to the plot, but desire mercy from God. Having thus done, the Executioner turned him off, and the rest of the Sentence was executed up∣on him, as before upon Col. Ashton, and his Head and Quarters were con∣veyed also to Newgate. As for the third man, Fryer, who was to have been executed this day in Smithfield, he was drawn on a Sled also from the Tower in the afternoone to Smithfield, where after he had performed his Devotions, being upon the lad∣der, and the Executioner ready to turn him off, a Reprieve came, and he was carried back againe to the Tower by the Officers in a Coach. Articles of surrender of Dunkerke, June 20. 1658. 1. That the Town should be yeelded up, with all their great guns, their stores of victual, Magazins of arms, and ammunition, without any imbesilment 2. That all Officers and Soldiers should have liberty to march out with their Arms, Drums beating, Colours flying, two pieces of Ordnance, and their baggage. 3. That they should have the liberty to march with a con∣voy to conduct them to St. Omers. 4. That the inhabitants should remain indemnified in their persons & goods, & enjoying their former custome & pri∣viledges for 2 years, & not be molested touching the exercise of their Religion. Hereubon they accordingly marched out on Tuesday the 25 instant, being 1000 horse and foot, and 700 more that were wounded men, and at the same time the besiegers entred into the Town; the King himselfe also in person, with the Cardinal, and the Lord General Lockhart: And his Majesty, desirous to give due testimonyes of reall friendship and good correspondence with England, put the Town into the possession of my Lord Lockhart: on the behalfe of his highnesse the Protector, our English being entred in here for that purpose, and more we expect for the preserving it in our hands. This wil (we suppose) be acceptable news to the Merchants who have formerly suffe∣red so much by this place, the obtaining whereof must be attributed (next un∣der God) to the prudence of his highnesse, and to that happy successe where∣with it pleaseth the most High to follow him in all his enterprizes and Actions, whereas on the otherside it is observed, that nothing but mischiefe and misfor∣tune hath accompanyed the Spaniard in this Country, ever since he gave en∣tertainment to, and joyned Interest with that Family, which hath a fate entail∣ed upon it, sufficient to sinke whole Kingdomes, as hitherto it hath done, and ruined likewise all its particular followers and partakers. Which was also most
observable even in the late victory, wherein the deadliest storm fell upon the Regiment of Charls and his Brother, so that very few or none of them escaped with their lives. The French Army is since marched to Bergen: but what they have done, or will doe there, we yet here not. The Spaniard left behind in this Town about one hundred and forty great guns, all brasse, except 7 or 8 An Oath to be administred to the Inhabitants of Dunkirke was passed by the Councill, being as followeth, vix. I. A. B. Do in the presence and by the name of Almighty God, promise and sweare, that from hence forth I shall beare faith and true Allegiance, and shall be true and faithfull unto Oliver now Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, and his Successors, as chiefe Magistrate thereof, and shall not de∣sign, Contrive or Attempt any thing against the person or Au∣thority of the Lord Protector, or against the safety, just defence, or necessary preservation of this Town or place of Dunkirk, in and for its safety, defence and preservation, under the Govern∣ment of the Lord Protector and his successors, against all Con∣spiracies and attempts whatsoever; and will doe my best endea∣vor to make known and disclose unto the Protector and his suc∣cessors, or the Commander in chiefe in this place, under his said Highnesse for the time being, all Treasons and Traiterous Con∣spiracies which I shall know or hear of to be against his Person or Authority, or against the safety of this Town or place of Dun∣kirke, or for the betraying of it into the hands of any other per∣sons, or that tends to the withdrawing of any the persons or peo∣ple in it from their fidelity, to the Lord Protector or to his Go∣vernment. FINIS.
Oliver Cromwell L. Ptor: of Engd: Scotd: and Ierld: borne at Huntington of the name of Williams of Glamorgan and by K: H: 8. changed into Cromwell was educated in Cambridge afterward of Lincons Inn at the begining of the Warres Cp: of a Troop of Horse raised at his owne charge and by the Parlimt: made Com̄ander in cheefe reduced Ierld: and South wales overthrew D: Hambletons Army the Kerkes Army at Dunbar reduced all Scotland defeted ch: Stewards Army at Woster he had two Sons Ld: Richard Protector in his fathers roome Ld: Henery now Ld: Debty: of Ierld: and 4: Daughters Ly. Bridget first married L: Ierton afterward Lt. C: Fleet∣od Ly: Elizabeth married L: Clapole Ly: Mary married Ld: icount Fauconbrige Ly: Francis married the Rt. Hoble: Rob: Rich Granchild to the Hoble: E: of Warwick was declared L: Ptr: of End: Scd: and Ird. 16: of Decemb: 1653. died 3. Sep: 1658. after. 14. dayes sicknesse of an agew with great assurance and serenitie of minde peaceabley in his bed. Natus. 15. Ap: 1599. Dunkerke in Flanders surrendred to him 20th: of Iune. 1658.
