h3696 99834537 39038
THE OBLIGATION Of Human LAWS Discussed. By J. H. . We are to give to Princes and the Pow∣ers that are set over us by God, such Ho∣nor and obedience as may not hurt us. Polycarpus. Too rigorous were it that the breach of every Law should be held a deadly sin, a mean there is between these extremities, if so be we could find it out. Hooker. London, Printed in the Year. 1671.
Reader, THese Papers were prepared against Easter Term last year, but the Printers failed us. Nevertheless the Subject being of perpetual occasion, and so long as there is any Common-Wealth and Laws there is none can say, I have need of thee, I see no reason to hinder the coming out now to the same publick advantage. The Author.
I Have perused this Discourse and do judge it will be of singular use unto all such as desire conscienti-ously to order their obedience unto Magistrates in civil things: For although it is written in the way of a defence of what was former∣ly more breifly offered unto the same purpose, yet the subject matter of it is so managed, and the truth asserted in it so vindicated from the opposition of another, that the un∣derstanding Reader, will be satisfied in the proper Rule of civil things, and in the rea∣sonableness of every Man making a Judge∣ment of their own actions in reference there∣unto. J. O.
THE Obligation of human Laws discussed. CAP. I. WE have before us a famous questi∣on, which is not only of great moment, constant use and con∣cernment, but of so much diffi∣culty, and doubtful dispute, as that some learn'd men of great note in the Romish Church, have judged it fit only for the Pope in Cathedra to determine it. I am not fur∣nisht so much as with my own books, which are from me, and much less with so many o∣thers as it would require to inform my self,
or my Readers, in the several judgements, of all, or the cheif Doctors in the Schools, with other Divines, and Lawyers, who have written of this point. But this I take to be notorious, that there are many of very great magnitude in the Church or Schools, with multitudes of several sorts of Divines, who have, or do hold, that humane Laws bind not the Conscience, whereof God only is the Lord, and which can be bound be no∣thing but his authority, as will be confessed. On the contrary there be others and per∣haps of no less, or of greater eminence and number, who yet on both sides, when they oppose one another may not defend them∣selves from extremity, but that there is a mean according to the judgement of sober and indifferent men, to be sought in these things, if we can light of it. I must confess I should very hardly ex∣pect any thing but confusion in my own thoughts if I trusted my self altogether to books, among such variety. By the little I sometimes read concerning this dispute I must need say, it did but serve to leave me at a loss, and how I have since retired my thoughts more into my own mind, to look upon that writing which is congenial with
us, even those principles of truth which nature and so God hath implanted in mans own heart, and having proposed from the result of all a determination so plain, and in the middle path, being careful that neither conscience should be left loose and dissolute, nor tyed by Mans command or Laws, any farther then God doth tye it, It hath plea∣sed the reverend Author of the friendly de∣bate, by an opposition in a Post-script to his Appendix to draw me out to my defence, and a farther explication, mainly of what I have in a lesser room before written. I perceive there is an expression fell from me among others of respect, concerning the Debater, that hath moved him to so much in∣dignation that I know not how I shall pacific him, for a man shall not lightly see two or three sheets of paper written thus tetrically upon so small an occasion. I receiv'd a case from you, a very weighty one it is, and as weighti∣ly and solidly resolved, if the casuist may be his own Judge. So he goes on; I must confess I lookt on this person as a Man of a most modest, humble, pious, ingenuous, calm tem∣per, and I have the same opinion as to his worth and abilities as I had, but I do not like the spirit of this appendix, there is in the Apo∣logist
so much gentleness and care of offend∣ing, as hath seemed too much. On the con∣trary, here is in these papers such a deal of animosity, indignation, and that indeed which in women we call vixenish humour, but especially such an inveterate espousing of a party, with that disdain and contempt of every man, and thing, that appears a∣gainst himself, or cause, that there is no do with him. Nevertheless I must needs say for my own part I am not yet converted to his opinion, but that I must think still that a Nonconformist who hath not taken the Oxford Oath, may live within five miles of a cor∣poration and yet be a good Christian, or Mi∣nister of Christ. And what is the ground for such an im∣prudent expression as this was, and that he should continue the justification of it? The ground of all doth lye on this single point as himself has it, whether humane Laws bind the conscience? In the resolving which point he is come here to an acknowledgement that there is difficulty. He that finds none (sayes he) may well suspect that he does not fully understand it. And why is he so angry then, when he laid down his matter so inconsiderately in his first book;
without any distinction or provision for any, that I should say only he was not so re∣flective as he ought, upon all the things at least, as he was to look to in so great an un∣dertaking? Alas, that there should be so much vanity and elation of mind, in impo∣tent man, that if you commend him never so much, for what is worthy in him, you must give him more then he deserves, or he will accompt what is due, but a dispa∣ragement to him. If you will praise a Man for his valour, and say he is as valiant as Hector, or Judas Macca∣beus, it will not serve, unless you say also he exceeds Hercules, and make him wiser too withall, then Solomon, and all Kings. I could be contented, to have wanted his good word (says he) upon condition he had not said—What? why something that is innocently true, he names, but that which sticks, is, that I count him one more happy in his expression and o∣ther abilities then in his depth or reflectiveness on the things he offers. Whether I have herein judged amiss, or not, I will be content to come to some tryal with him, and that I may treat with this Post-script in some method, it is convenient I should in the first place propose the deter∣mination
of this case, or question, as I have tendred it together with his conception, understanding or apprehension of it. In the next place that I should take notice of his objections against it. It is convenient then that I and he take a review of the de∣termination which he hath proposed in the place of it. And lastly that I answer to his exceptions, either here and there occasio∣nally as they fall in upon me, or more fully and industriously, at the end.
CAP. II. FOr the foremost, I wonder the less that this debater does show so much dis∣dainful contempt of my determination, when he is possessed with so much prejudice, as gives him not leave to mind the very main distinctions I offer him in it. After he hath therefore in the ensuing, first three leaves fallen upon a passage of providence, which I have set down as proper and indeed pecu∣liar to the matter of the Case, he enters the List with these words. This is sufficient to show what may be expected from this new un∣dertaker, who will appear I dont not as lame in his Reasonings as he doth in this, and prove as unfit to determine cases of Conscience, as to make observations of providence. I do not know what kind of gust one may have of the same thing which pleases another, but it does become any ingeuous mind to think, that
all men are not cast into the same mould, and to take heed therefore, least by censu∣ring of that which the most of others ap∣prove, he brings his own Judgement into question, and becomes the less regarded him∣self for it. And really if the spleen and ex∣travagancy, of five sides and a half, and no less of about twenty leaves in all, to no pur∣pose but abuse of his paper, do not shew more what may be expected in this stale un∣dertaker, who hath come out now this fourth time to debate; then that observation of mine will discover in me, I am mistaken. For my part let the determination of the case be found as solid as that observation upon the matter of it is pertinent, and I shall have no cause to be moved by his censure. But what is that which hath moved him thus? why, he makes me (sayes he) such a pittisul Gamester that I am not reflective (here he quotes the Page wherein I have delivered that hainous word) upon more removes then one of those many I ought to see.— Yet I have done my endeavour to comprehend him and to fathome the bottom of his deep discourse. I must confess I have ex∣prest my self in these words he quotes, I speak verily according to my thoughts, and I can't help that. But one would think by
these words, we should have at least so much integrity now from this person, as to set down my determination at least in my own words, being so few, if not made better by his, that the Reader might judge whether he does indeed look to the bottom of what I have offered, and if after these words he yet does not, he may be ashamed, to express himself thus, and shew such a spirit as this is. Well in my case, I distinguish then first, between the authority of the Magistrate, and of his Laws and Commands. To this pur∣pose there is a distinction which Dr. Field has, parallell with it, to wit, between sub∣jection and obedience, subjection is that which is due or proper to the Magistrate, or to the authority residing in his person: Obedience is that which is due to his commands, or to the authority of his Laws. By subjection we are to understand all that which stands in opposition to resistance, and so subjection in one verse in the Apostle, is aequivalent with not resisting in the other; and the word in the Original does kindly serve this purpose. Now subjection being what is opposite to re∣sistance, and what is due to the Authority which resides in the Magistrates person, it is
what is; and must be always due; so that we must never resist, but be subject, because this authority always resides there. But obedi∣ence which is proper to his Laws, or com∣mands, is not due always, because there may be some Laws, or things, commanded, de∣void of Gods authority, and then if we o∣bey them not, we do not sin. This is acknow∣ledged, or very near it, in two cases, by this person; in a case of sin, and in a case of intollerable grievance, from whence others will follow. The other distinction is between the obli∣gation of the conscience, and of the outward Man. Let this learned person now take of his eyes from the paper, and consider but a while before he reads on, what he thinks I mean by, and to what use I put this distincti∣on, and he may take the best conjecture whether he be not short in his comprehension of it. The outward Man let us know then is obliged by the penalty, the sword, or wrath: and by Gods command not to resist, or to be subject in reference to his authority re∣siding in the Magistrate himself. There are two things then you see go to the binding the outward Man, Gods command of not resisting, or being subject to the Powers,
and the Magistrates sword, and force. If we must never or by no means resist, then the Magistrate may make us do what he will, or else we must suffer. We cannot avoid suffering but by resisting or obeying, Resist we never may, obey we must then, if we will not suffer, unless the case be in the matter of sin, wherein we all agree in one, that we must always suffer. The Conscience is obliged only by Gods will, which is the adequate Rule of Conscience. I will explain it farther. There is Gods will, and Mans will, a divine and humane Obligation. When God will have a thing to be done as well as Man, I do accompt the Conscience is bound, because the Obligation is divine: but when Man will have it done, and God requires it not, but only his will is that whatsoever be imposed, the subject how∣ever must not rebel, I do account the Ob∣ligation to the thing to be humane altoge∣ther, and the outward Man bound only. Jus Regis vocatur (sayes Grotius I remember somewhere) non quia Rex ita agens juste ageret sed quia it a agenti nemini liceret vim ullam opponere. That is as much as to say there is a double right a Magistrate hath in his com∣mands or actions; A moral right when he
commands, or does, those things which he ought to do, or command: or a Political right, (called by Samuel the manner of the King) when though he commands or does those things he ought not (or what God does not allow, but he is accountable to him for them,) yet the subject may not resist him in those commands, or acts, and deliver himself from them by force. When the Magistrate uses the first of these Rights, I account the conscience is obliged: when the second the outward man onely. The termes are used we know by grave Divines such as Bishop Downham (to name no other) in his tract of Christian Liberty: and it will be one benefit of these papers, if we can retain with good discretion, and sense, what is so usefull, as rather then be without, we shall still use though with none. And by this distinction it does appear, how all that dan∣ger which hitherto this man hath fancyed consequent to my determination, does fall away as the leaves from the trees in summer. For so long as we do all acknowledge the authority of the present Magistrate in his person with our subjection thereunto, that in no case it is lawfull to resist, whereby the outward man comes to be bound, so that if
he will, and when he will, he can force it to obey by his sword, there is not so much as any certain disobedience, and much less is there any danger to his Government, through Insurrection, or Rebellion, that follows from my opinion. If in Religious things, or moral, when the Magistrate commands any thing against a mans conscience, and the Subject does not obey, his authority nevertheless is preser∣ved, though he cannot force them in that case to obedience if he would: how shall we think but in things which are secular, where be can force them to obey if he will, that there is any danger to his Government, for their obeying such and such a Law on∣ly because they dare not to resist (I mean for Gods sake that they dare not) and not out of conscience else? I would have this wor∣thy, and intelligent, but at this time over engaged person, who yet sees not all the removes which are to be seen in this busi∣ness, for all his anger at me for my thinking so, to consider whether there be not many learned Men, Writers and others, who hold that the Laws of Men do not obleige the Conscience at all; and that they cannot, see∣ing Conscience is Gods Throne, but the ex∣ternal
man only▪ and does he think that all such must be so shallow that they are not able to avoid his extemporanous consequen∣ces, or that they see not the weakness of such a Gamester (seeing he calls himself so, for it was not I used that word) who hath not come yet so far here, as to consideration with himself? For I say, is there any Men of parts or learning thinks he, that fear God and are Christians, who hold it lawful to re∣bel, or to destroy all Society and Govern∣ment.  And if not, how comes it to pass he should not resolve with himself, that cer∣tainly if such consequences which he would fasten on me will be avoided and denyed by those that hold that human Laws do never bind the Conscience, they may and must be denyed by me with more facility, who have determined that human Laws do with a di∣stinction bind it, but not indefinitely as he does. And what is that distinction then which after these two other not comprehended by the Debater, does determine the question in hand? That we are to be always subject as to the Authority of the Magistrate him∣self I have said and yet that we are not bound always to obey his commands, that is, we are not bound always in Conscience, when
yet we are bound in the outward Man. This being said, the determining distinction con∣cerning his Laws or Commands, which do bind, and which do not bind the Consci∣ence is this. The commands of the Magistrate are either such as are agreeable to Gods will, or not agreeable to his will. Those that are, bind it: Those that are not, bind it not. The Reason is, because the authority the Magistrate hath to command, is derived from, and to be founded in Gods will. In the way, The Casuist (sayes this benign Debater) seems to have no low opnion of his own performance, but rather thinks we may chance to be beholding to him for a new Inven∣tion. Here sayes he, is that very mean indeed for ought I know which is wanting. A great discovery! and for ought I know may any body reply that which is not wanting but the very dan∣gerous extream into which the people are apt to run, as he is to follow those with whom I have had to deal. As for those with whom he hath been dealing I presume it will be found there is nothing of this determination in what they have said; if & I did not esteem it uncommon, I should (I must confess) have restrained it.
Or if I did not think it considerable, I should have held my peace also. But after this scornfulness of his why did he not present us with that mean which follows in the words of the Case, that the Reader might judge, whether it be any discovery indeed, or none, or whether it deserves this Mans contempt or not? For as Cato said of Cicero when he played upon the Stoicks opi∣nions (which another hath noted) Cicero makes others laugh, but is himself ridicu∣culous: So say I, this person strives here to offer me and my determination to contempt, but the things I have said will bear them∣selves out, and he does but discover hereby his own desert. What is that mean then which follows? The words in the Case are these. That the Laws or Commands of the Magi∣strate (even in Political and indifferent things) does no less then bind the Consci∣ence, when he is the executioner of Gods will, but though the outward man (out of the Case of sin) may be bound if you will, the conscience cannot be obleiged, and ought to be still kept free, when he is the execu∣tioner only of his own. It may be the Debater will not yet be beholding to me
for this, and he may choose, when perhaps others will, and take it never the less kindly for that. It fares with those that beat their heads about notions, as it doth with Miners; they are the condemned Men, and the Gold they dig becomes others: Never the less the Man that hath been digging & finds a Veine, may say, what he hath found is Gold as well as another, and without pride. He doth not commend himself, for his commending the Gold. I think verily that that which I I have here digged is the mean, the Gol∣den mean we are to find in this case, and not an extream wherein I follow any as he sayes: but the avoiding both extreams. The one is of those who hold that human Laws do not bind the Conscience at all: and the other such as hold as this Man did when he first unadvisedly set out, and there∣fore will continue of the mind still, that they bind indefinitely without discrimination, at least so far by all means, as Dr. Manton his good Neighbor, and every one such as he (whatsoever the breakers of other Laws may be) might be none of Christs Mini∣sters or good Christians on that account. Well! The will of God which deter∣mines the commands of Man to be obliga∣tory
or not, upon the Conscience, must be considered in the concerns of Religion: in things morall: and in things civil or Political. The rule or Law of God in things Religious, is the Scripture. The rule or Law of God in things moral is the Light of Nature, which also is the will of God, as the word is. The Rule and supream Law which God hath ap∣pointed for things Political is the common good. If the Magistrate command any thing in Religion and it be not according to Gods word, then Conscience cannot be bound to it as Religious, though the out∣ward Man I think therein also is bound, if it be not against Gods word. It the Magi∣strate command any thing of moral concern, if it be against the Law of nature, or com∣mon principles of Light in Man, that is the moral Law in the heart, the Conscience cannot be bound but must refuse it. If he command any thing which is civil or Politi∣cal, and it be against the common good, then is it not agreeable to Gods will, being not consonant to the rule he hath commanded for civils, and consequently the Consci∣ence cannot be obleiged by it upon that accompt. In the mean while so long as it is not against conscience otherwise, that
is so long as it is not sin, the outward man is bound, and if the Magistrate will constrain a person to it, rather then suffer he will obey. There are several books and Sermons of Ministers about Religion, which do bind the Readers and Hearers by vertue of Gods will: but the supream Rule is Gods Word, unto which consequently, if what they have said; or writ, be not consonant, the Conscience is not bound, and according as the Conscience of a Man is convinced, whe∣ther that which the Minister says be agreea∣ble to the word or not, so is it bound, or not bound by it. The case is the same in Laws. The Magistrate doth give us such and such particular commands, or Laws. His authority he hath from God. The will of God as the supream Law, or Rule, in Politicalls, is, that the common good be attended and advanced. They are Gods Mi∣nisters a sending continually upon this very thing. So far as his Laws, or commands then are agreeable to the common good, so far is his Authority good, and must obleige the Conscience being from God. And so long as a man is convinced in Conscience,
that they are agreeable thereunto, he must be in Conscience obleiged: but if he be sincerely perswaded that such or such a thing commanded, be not for the publick good, the case is but the same with what I said in Religion, when the Ministers ex∣hortation disagrees with the word. The Magistrate is but Gods Minister in Politicals, and his commands disagreeing, with the supream Law, the common good, the Conscience cannot be obleiged in this Case. Nevertheless, so long as the outward Man is in the Magistrates power, and the Subject may not resist, he can command obedience, out of the case of sin, when he pleases to exert his Sword. Before I pass off, I am made a little sen∣sible how apt our question may be wrested into a dispue about Terms. It is hardly proper to say this or that Law binds the Conscience, for Conscience is the discerner of my duty, and it were more proper to say my conscience binds me to this Law, then that this Law binds it. It is scarce proper neither to say the Conscience is bound, seeing it is the person is bound. Conscience is placed in the understanding, and when a thing becomes a Mans duty, the will is obleiged rather then the under∣standing.
It is not easie likewise to appre∣hend how the outward man is bound with distinction to the Conscience, considering that this obligation hath it's rise, and vertue, from our duty of not resisting, unto which we are always bound in Conscience. The term Resisting likewise is liable to diver∣sity of acceptation. It is convenient therefore for me, in my way to give the sense of my Terms (if it be not yet done enough) to prevent needless contention. By human Laws I understand the declaration of the will of the rightful Governor, what he would have his Subjects do, I will not also put in the end of Laws, in order to the common good, because that will presently spoyl the question. For where the efficient is our rightful Ruler, and the Law serves indeed for that end, or hath it's right final cause also, there is no question of its obligation. Yet if I leave out the end the question indeed may be whether such a decla∣ration be a Law, rather then whether it binds. Nevertheless as I make a case of conscience of it (and count all our Acts of Parliament Laws) it is all one in effect to me, whether you say, such a Law binds not, or such an Act or Law is no Law, and binds not. Ex quo intelliges eos qui perniciosa et injusta populis jussa
descripserius, cum contra feceriut quod polliciti pro fessi{que} slat, quoduis potius tulisse quam leges. Cicero de legious. By Conscience I under∣stand a faculty in Man of descerning Gods Judgement concerning himself and Acti∣ons. It is more proper to say a faculty is ob∣leiged, then an habit, or an Act; and that fa∣culty which man hath hereunto, is charged (whilst himself is) to judge whether such a thing commanded be his duty in relation to God, or not. By obligation I understand the constitution of a due; Obligare est jus con∣stituere. By obligation of the Conscience I understand the constituting a thing to bedue from me so that if I do it not I must account or judge that God will condemn me for the neglect, or the making a thing my duty so that if I leave it undone I sin. The obligation of the outward man I account the constitu∣ting a thing to be due from me so as if I do it not, I may not resist, though I be punished; or I may be punished, and ought not to resit, though I could avoid both the thing, and punishment by resistance. The word, lacere, says Grotius (from one line of whom, a man shall have more Instruction sometimes then from anothers book) is dis∣tinguished in id quod impune fi, and in id quod vtio caret. So must we say the word obli∣gare,
is distinguished into that which if we do not the thing makes us liable to punishment (in foro humano, or according to the law:) or that which if we do it not makes us liable to sin. That is, there is an obligation human only (which we have had before) that tyes us to obedience upon the penalty of the law: or an obligation divine also, which ties us to the du∣ty upon the pain of Gods displeasure, & eter∣nal condemnation. The one of these we call the obligation of the outward man, and the o∣ther of the Conscience. By resistance, last∣ly, I understand the repelling force with force. The word resistance, may be taken largely or strictly. Resistitur contra Imperium agendo aut vim vi reprimndo. I take it in the last and strict sence. Let me yet note one thing more, when we distinguish in the obligation of human laws, between the out∣ward man and the Conscience, we do not dis∣tinguish the outward man from the will, when we distinguish it from the Conscience. The will is wrought upon under both obli∣gations, through fear of mans law, and through fear of Gods. If you divide the outward man from the will, you cannot bind it, but Physically, by putting it in Bonds and Fetters. But the obleiging it by the will, is binding it with an human obligation;
and that I account too, is not morally, but politicaly (as I have intimated,) to wit as human laws are, norma humani judicij, the man who breaketh a bad law, is according to that law to be adjudged to its penalty, and in sensu politico humano is an offendor of the law so that if he be punished by the judge, who judgeth by that law, he must submit, yet seeing the Law is no other then such, he is not made a sinner by that breach, or to be condemned by God. To sum up my opinion then without the terms, that those that will may assaile me fairly in my sence I am perswaded as Gods will is not mans, so every command of man in in∣different things is not the command of God: but that when there is no declaration of the magistrates will, but it does make the thing he would have, to be due from us so, as he may punish us by his law for the not doing if he please, and we must bear it with∣out defending our selves by force, and conse∣quently he may compell us to any thing not sinful by that means: yet does not every declaration of his will, make the thing he re∣quires to be our duty, so, that we are necessarily guilty of sin, if it be not done; but contraily though many a man lives and
dyes in the breach of some laws and statutes of the realm (so long as they offer no con∣tempt to the Ruler, nor scandal to their brethren, nor resist if they be brought to suf∣fer) they may be good Christians for all that (to come to our first lock which our debater) and servants of Christ. And here I have no more that I know needfull to be supplyed, but onely to do this: to produce what I have in my Case it self, that the main notion I offer here, and there may appear to be the same: and to vindicate that authority which alone sufficed me then, and shall now, for my confirma∣tion. The words which I offer in my Case are these. Power (say I) is a right to rule or command. This right in the nature of the thing must arise from the grant or will of the supream Lord, which is God; without whose will (or that grant or Charter which is an act of his will) no power can be derived to any. Now that grant or will of God which constitutes any to rule, or to be his Minister, being for the Peo∣ples good, (He is the Minister of God for our good sayes the text) it must follow that what∣soever is not indeed for the peoples good, the Magistrate is not to command, because it is Gods will that he commands only for their good.
And it he do command any matter that is other∣wise, that command hath no authority as to the Conscience at all as being without the warrant of Gods will. I know I have set down this in a few lines, but it hath been the fruit of seve∣rall thoughts and years. I thought good to confirm it with one testimony of Dr. Taylor, and I perceive this debater seems offended, and to accuse me of disingenuity for it, as if I had done him wrong. It is necessary therefore that I turn again to that Dr. and see; only I must say that I am glad (I must confess) that I have here such an authority as this Dr. so full for me, nevertheless Dr. Taylor is not (as farr as I know in a tittle) the author to me; but a witness to the light I offer. In the third Book of his Cases, and the first chapter, he comes to treat of human laws, and what obligation they pass on the Conscience. In his first rule he tells us, the Conscience is obleiged directly and actively to obey the Laws of Man. Several learned Authors, together with Nine Arguments to the contrary, are proposed, which he ha∣ving very hardly assayled, comes to his next Rule, that human Laws bind not when there is any intollerable, or grievous evil in the obedience. To make out this, be proceeds
to a third Rule, that the Laws of our supe∣riour, that are not just and good, do not obleige the Conscience, and then shewing what Laws are such he tells us, that a Law is unjust that contributes not to the publick advantage. What can be more orderly and desireable to my purpose! Only yet to be more sure, it is fit, I cite also some few of his expressions. This is the limit of a Prin∣ces power, so far as he relates to conscience, for beyond this the conscience is not bound. Again, If a Prince make a Law that is not for the pub∣lick good, it hath no sanction but fear, and no tye upon the Conscience. Again, all such things as are against the good of the subjects, the Law it self declares it to be no Law, that is, to be more then the superiour hath right, or leave to do. Again, Laws that are made to purposes beyond those measures, do no ways obleige the conscience. He is the Minister of God for good (saith St. Paul) otherwise he is not Gods Mi∣nister, and hath to other purposes none of Gods authority, and therefore cannot obleige the con∣science to an active obedience in such, where his power is in incompetent to command.
CAP. III. IT will be time now to come to see what he hath objected against this Determi∣nation. The proposition I am to maintain, and he to oppose, is this. That the laws of a common wealth, and particularly an act, or the acts of Parliament in this nation, that are nor for the common good, do not ob∣leige the Conscience of the subject. Though we acknowledge in the mean time, our alleadgiance and subjection to his Majesty as the executioner of the laws, that our out∣ward man is bound still, and spared through his clemency. It is true that there is a question fallen in, who shall be judge, whe∣ther that which is commanded in a law be for the common good? and I shall be ready to speak with the Debator about it, in its order: but in the mean while if it were not for that, what would this reverend man
have had to say against the main determi∣nation. In the first place he tells us, that I am a notable instance of my Lord Bns observati∣on, that there is a little dry Light in the World. I remember Plutarch hath a tract of self praise, and among several things he hath a∣gainst it, one thing he sayes for it, that there is some cases, and particularly in the case of a just defence, a man may speak of himself, or any thing of his own, as of ano∣ther. Vnder Plutarchs Apology, I will say I do believe this, that in this particular I am indeed an instance that there is but little dry light in the World. For let this De∣bater set himself to read as many books as he can, yet I suppose he may find but few, if any that determine this case altogether as I do. I know the same Light hath shone in on Dr. Taylor in several passages, when yet it is mixed with such abundance of other matter, that if this Man may be judge he would be ready to cite him as of opinion against me in it. There is lumen siccum therefore, and lumen maceratum indeed. I remember the distinction well, my Lord Bacon hath it, in his advancement. And I will say yet, that the Light which this
Debater pretends is macerated Light, Light steeped in a prejudiced mind and fetch from the conceptions of others, and mostly perhaps from that Dr. whose clearest rayes he wont receive: When the determination which I have offered hath been beaten out from my own thoughts, and will be found that lumen siccum (notwithstanding his a∣buse) which is to be attended in this matter. I am become a fool inglorying (says the A∣postle) ye have compelled me. In the next place he produces two places of Scripture, that to the Romans, Wherefore you must needs be subject not only for wrath but also for Conscience sake, and that of Peter, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. I answer, these Texts speak of subjection and not of obedience; subjection to the Authority, residing in the persons of the Magistrate, and if you will in the Go∣vernment it self: not obedience which is proper to their commands. I his appears from the first and second Verses. Be subject to the powers that be. He that resisteth the pow∣er, resisteth the Ordinance of God. The Powers no doubt are, but the Laws and Commands of men be not I hope the ordinance of God with this Man. VVherefore you must needs be sub∣ject,
It is the same word and spoken in re∣spect to the resistance before, and in refe∣rence to their persons: it is not wherefore you must needs obey all their particular commands for Conscience sake, when for Conscience sake we must suffer, rather then obey some of them. So likewise in Peter, every ordinance of Man, is every human crea∣ture in the Original, that is, submit to every sort of Governor, or Government, whether to the King as supream, or others under him. This is plain. Out of these Texts therefore may obedience arise, from the con∣science of not resisting, but no direct obliga∣tion on the Conscience to obey actively can be deduced from hence. Again the Apostle tells us in these places, that the Magistrate is Gods Minister for our good, a terror to evil doers, and encourager to well doing, with the like expressions. Upon this ac∣count he can be supposed to command only for the common good, and when a Law or Command of the supream Magistrate is such, I deny not but it binds the Conscience no less then he. This is sufficient between us, that no Argument possible can be drawn from either of these places to serve his turn, seeing a Law must be supposed to be against
the common good, and yet to bind the con∣science according to him. Moreover, this I must say agin is most evident that obedi∣ence indefinite cannot be proved by these Texts, because some commands of the Ma∣gistrate may be evil, morally evil (as hath been intimated) and we must not obey them: or civily evil, and then though we do obey for the Swords sake, and because we must not resist, the Conscience is not bound in such a Case. It is therefore a pievish obstinacy in this person to persist in these following words. VVe are no considering when and in what cases a Law may cease to obleige and quite alter its Nature, but whether while it doth obleige and is in force it lays a tye on the Conscience or no? and to this we say yes. Laws while they are ob∣ligatory bind the Conscience. Because the Scripture faith so, and we say so indefinitely, because that is the Scriptures language also. First it's certainly false that all Laws of Men do in∣definitely tye the Conscience, and therefore the Scripture doth not say so, nor can say so, which must be granted by him in the case of moral evil. Secondly this Debater is utterly lost that he would not learn of me to distinguish between the obligation of the
outward man, and the Conscience; an obli∣gation in foro extertori sive politico, & in foro interiori sive conscientiae. For it is false again that he sayes we are not considering when and in what cases a Law doth cease to ob∣leige, for this is the very thing we are consi∣dering, in respect to the Conscience; and as for the obligation of the outward Man, he hath not yet thought of it. And I say as Dr. Taylor hath again and again, that such a Law, as is not for the common good, hath none of Gods authority, and so ceases to be any Law as to the Conscience, when yet we being not to resist, (as is and must be often said) the outward man by the Sword may be brought to obey. Thirdly the speaking that Laws while they do obleige (or are of force) do tye the Conscience, in this Man, who hath not received yet the distincti∣on of the obligation of the outward Man Po∣litically, and the inward Man which is mo∣rally, is extreamly sensls, and consequently false if he understood the sense. For Laws that are obligatory or do obleige the out∣ward man, that is are Politically in force, may yet be morally null, as to the Conscience, that is, obleige it not, when being not for the common good I say they are without the
authority of Gods will. Fourthly there is a manifest bar and contradiction in these words to his own determination after, if he durst been plain in it. For here he will be so obstinate to say still that human Laws bind indefinitely, nay and suborn the Scrip∣ture to false witnessing in affirming that they say so, when they say only be subject indefinitely (while he makes all Laws (that is Universally) and indefinitely aequivalent here, least he come off upon that word,) which we must not do, and yet in the end he is forced to come to confession and acknowledge (see∣ing Dr. Taylor will tell him so, from whom he will borrow that he has) that moral Di∣vines and Lawyers (and I had hoped he were one of the first) do determine that human Laws bind not in the case of intollera∣ble grievance. I have cited these words in the way something more acrimoniously then any other passage hitherto, not that I have cause to be angry at them, as I have at o∣thers, but to shew occasionally how I might take up this Gentleman likewise in the rest of these raw Sheets, if I had a mind to exagitate that weakness which hitherto (till his eyes be opened farther by this con∣troverting the point) is such as may have
that epithite given to it at present which the Scriptures does in one place give unto darkness (though I acknowledge his suf∣ficiency otherwise,) even weakness that may be felt. In the third place he wont allow my little comment on Paul. The Scripture sayes the Magistrate is Gods Minister to us for good. Very true, and the Apostle makes that an ar∣gument why we should be obedient to him because it is for our benefit. But this Casuist turns the words another way, and makes them an outlet to disobedience, by taking that to include an ex∣ception to the general precept of subjection, which is in truth nothing but a reason to enforce it. By this passage and such as this I take my conjecture of the happiness of this mans ex∣pression, which makes what he sayes very often to look considerable, when if it be re∣flected upon with more thoughts (but that this Man himself tells the Apologist some∣where that he is no melancholly Man) it sig∣nifies nothing. If there be any thing sub∣stantial in these words it must hold, if it he put into others; and then must this be denyed that when the Apostle tells us the authority the Magistrate hath from God is for the peoples good, we may not argue thence that
he hath no auhority from God for their hurt. But this arguing is good, and there∣fore this passage is but words. For indeed, is there any man that serves not Levithan but God, will maintain that the Magistrate hath any auhority committed to him of God but for the publick benefit? Let this person take heed he turns not God into the Devil, and destroyes all. If he dare not maintain that, then whatsoever is com∣manded against the publick benefit hath no authority to bind the conscience; and it will be in vain for him to talk idly of the danger he apprehends from my determination which hath none in it, when if he look not better to himself he must be upon the justifying Ty∣rann, and bring ruine upon the World. Again suppose we build nothing on the very Text, this is a principle in the law of nature, as cealy written in mans heart as that he is a sociable creature to wit, that the end of Government and Laws, are for the good of the community, and consequently that there should be none, but for that end. From hence then, that the good of the community being the supream Law as the general and ultimate end, of whatsoever is commanded, it must irrefragable follow, that whatsoever Law is made or is to be made, it must be
over ruled by this supream, and have its obligatory power originally from thence. We know in all Laws or any other things in the world, the inferior must give place to the greater or to the chief. God re∣quires sacrifices and mercy, both are his Laws, it these interfare, mercy must be exercised and sacrifice binds not. It is no plainer in the earth that the elements give way from their own natures to serve the World, then that the greater or chief obligation must vacate the less. I might fill a side with in∣stances, if any else could not do it. Where∣as this matter then is written with a sunbeam on the heart of man, and the Apostle hath an intimation of it, it is but very sit and a∣greeable to reason, that we fetch a com∣ment on the sex from that book he hath touched, that is the book of nature, or this natural Light which will convince every man, that the publick good being the end of so∣ciety, there can be no power from God but for that end. Again it is true the Apostle from hence argues for subjection, and he may say that he does not argue for any thing else. But what then? when Paul argues one thing from this truth, may not another argue from thence also something too? St.
Paul argues well, the Magistrate is the Mi∣nister of God for our good, therefore we must be subject: And Dr. Taylor argues well, and therefore he hath none of his authority for other purposes; or that Law that condu∣ceth not to the publick good cannot bind the conscience, because it hath none of Gods authority. Moreover, the Apostle argues for subjection, and that indefinite, but I say he argues not, nor may be construed to argue for obedience indefinite, and therefore howsoever these words tinckle, there is no doubt but we may and must make an outlet from these and the like Texts, that in some cases of the Magistrates commands, we may not think our selves bound to obey in point of Conscience, though in regard of non-re∣sistance and subjection, there is no disobedi∣ence does follow in the case. We say not that this passage of the Apostle doth include an exception to subjection for that is Universall and indefinite; but we can say it must include an exception to indefinite or Universal obe∣dience, that is as to all the Magistrates com∣mands, because there may be many of them wicked, unjust, or morally evil, unto which we are not bound, and consequently, say I, nor to such as are civilly so.
In the fourth place we have this passage wherein appears the greatest weight. A Law is not meerly the signification of the Ma∣gistrates judgement what is good, but the decla∣ration of his will, that we do it, and God having given him his authority to command us, this de∣claration carries with it an obligatory vertue, to bind us to the execution of his will under the pain of sin. As for this, The declaration of the will of the Law-giver does indeed immedi∣ately bind the outward Man against disobe∣dience by resisting, or to whatsoever is contra∣ry to subjection (that is it binds us Politically) but as for doing the thing out of conscience (that is to be bound morally) I like well that this learned Man hath delivered himself so judiciously as to put in that, which is the true & only ground of all the obligation that the Conscience can be capable of under the com∣mand of Man, and which does administer therefore the solution to what he offers. I answer then to that branch which he hath of Gods having given the Magistrate his authori∣ty, and we say that God hath given the Ma∣gistrate no authority to command any thing but for the common good, which is a truth for which I need not again quote Taylor or Hooker, as I remember well that I might, or
twenty learned Schoolmen perhaps and o∣thers to this purpose, but that it were not worth my time and trouble to go to their books, Seeing there is indeed scarce any truth can shine more clearly from the Light of Na∣ture and the end of policy. And the Law of na∣ture must be acknowledged the foundation of all Laws, and the measure of their obligation. I do therefore advance here this argument which I think is a stone that cannot be re∣moved, and it is the Sum of my determi∣nation. Whatsoever is not agreeable to the will of God, or carries not with it Gods authority cannot bind the Conscience, be∣cause the Conscience hath an absolute and immediate dependence on the will of God, and his will is the adaeqate rule of Consci∣ence. But for the Magistrate to command any thing that is against the common good, is disagreeable to Gods will: or such a law carries not with it Gods authority. Ego whatsoever is commanded, or what law so∣ever is not conducive to the common good, can not obleige the Conscience. So that it must not be under the pain of sin, but un∣der the sence of wrath, and necessity that we must not resist, that we actively obey in such a case.
In the last place he quotes Dr. Saunderson and I must confess I shall put the less trust hereafter on this man for any matters of controversie, or cases of weight for this pre∣sumption he seems to have upon one great name, when nothing else for ought appears, but Dr. Saunderson having resolved this case, hath given him the confidence to write in such an Imperious fashion as he hath done these sheets, upon a subject whereof he seems to have had so few thoughts before. As for that Dr. I have read his Lectures de ob∣ligatione conscientiae, and dejuramento, and the first body of his Sermons. I do believe him an excellent Casuist, and to speak freely where∣in that excellence lyes, a man of a clear head, but yet not for all that, of so searching a head, nor quite so learned as such a one as Rutherford, in his way; and by no means on the Earth, of so large a head, so great a wit, and incomparable sufficiency as Dr. Taylor. Well Dr. Saunderson in his ninth prelection puts this case, what if a Magistrate intends only his own profit or ambition in a law? does that bind? he answers yes. Because that though the Law-giver may have an ill intention? the Law may tend to the common good. This is well resolved. In
a case or two farther then he puts this o∣ther, what if a law be unprofitable to the publick and something noxious? he answers it doth oblige, if the thing may be done without sin. This resolution is ill; for if the reason of the obligation in the former case was good, and the true right reason, then when there is not that reason, a law obliges not. If we must obey out of Con∣science when a law does tend to the common good though the Law-givers intention be bad, then though the Law-givers intention be good, if the thing commanded tend not to the publick advantage, the Conscience must not be obliged upon the same account. And thus Dr. Taylor resolves them both, it is in some transient passages, which I will not stand here to find out. But let us hear Dr. Saundersons reasons. The first is, Be∣cause every man ought to mind what belongs to his part and duty, and not trouble himself a∣bout other mens. But what reason is this? it does belong to every man to mind, yea and to consider and determine whether his Con∣science be obliged by a law or no. His second is, Because our duty is to obey, not to command or ordain. And what reason is this? our duty is to obey if what is commanded
be agreeable to Gods will, else we cannot be obliged to it in Conscience though we do it. These two reasons indeed are twins, both Stillborn, and say nothing. The re∣solution is ill, and nothing is to be said for it. But what means he by these reasons? The subject is to obey the Law, not make the Law, and he troubles not himself to judge whether a thing be good in reference to the Magistrates act, but his own. If the law pass, he may obey it in the outward man whether it be civilly good or no, and not trouble himself. But if he come to the point, whether it bind his Conscience or no, he must consider, whether it hath the authority of God in it, and consequently, whether both it be Lawfull, and conducive, to the publick advantage. I may add (says the Debater himself,) though the Magistrate ought not to ordain any thing but what is for the peoples good, yet when he doth otherwise, it will be more for their good to obey him, then refuse o∣bedience. I answer if the Magistrate ought not to ordain any thing but what is for the peoples good, then must the ordaining any thing not such, be against Gods will. But the Conscience cannot be obliged by any thing against Gods will; or the Conscience
is obleiged by nothing but by Gods will only. Ergo no Law or thing commanded us which is against the common good can ob∣leige the Conscience; and so hath he cut his own throat here out of self conviction. Nevertheless as to what he sayes else, there is one remove yet this Debater sees not, and that is we distinguish between non obligation of Conscience, and disobedience; it may be that prudence, and such considerations as he urges, or others may prevail with a man in the outward action to oey, when yet he accounts himself free from any obligation on his Conscience. There is one thing after this. I feel upon my own mind. I find it not in these papers: but I cannot hardly be faithful if I omit it. It is this. Suppose a Father or a Master, bids me do a thing, I conceive it like to pre∣judice his affaires, and eve it undone: If this Father or Master be discreet, he will commend me for my care, and be so far from charging me with disobedience as that he will account I have done his will better then he declared it. Upon this I have been apt to determine that the commands of men, and Gods, do thus differ; The one binds unless I can give a reason which is more con∣siderable
for the forbearance then that which appears for obedience: the other binds both as the rule and reason it self for my action. I think again, suppose I tell this reason to this Father or Master, and they will not admit it, but require the thing to be done notwithstanding, the prejudice which shall acrue. If it be in heat I may do well yet to forbear, upon my belief that they will take it well; when their thoughts have cooled, and the Wisdom herein of many faithful servants have been proved. But if I be perswaded fully that they will be displeased presently, and not pleased after, it seems to me here I am bound to obedience in things not sinful, though they be com∣manded to my own and their hurt. I an∣swer to this. In the first place it is suffici∣ent that a Child, or a Servant is not indefi∣nitely bound to do every thing they are bid, but that when they have such a reason as they judge their Parent or Master will be satisfied, and better pleased that they for∣bear the command, they may leave it un∣done. If their reason does not satisfie, they may be reckoned in the case of such as have no reason. In the second place when they have better reason to, forbear it then do it,
I may hold that they are bound to doing only by vertu of the Authority residing in the Parent or Masters person, and that they may not  hath been said about the Magistrate, will that otherwise they were free towards God in their Consciences, who accepts of no other but a reasonable vide. In the third place, I offer this, there is a diversity of Authority. The Go∣vernment of Parents, and Masters is not the same with that of the Magistrates over the People. The Soverainnity in some Common wealths is in a single Person; in others it may be in the Nobles; in others in the Common body. That Government which i y a Monarchy is either Despotical or Royal. The Government of this Nation is a Royal Monarchy regulated by laws, These laws are  by a Corporation of King, Lords, and mnds, called the Parliament, wherein the three Estates are assembled to consult what is for the common good, now though we may suppose (without granting) that the subjects of a despotical Government who have no propriety of goods nor liberty of person (as children and servants are in the house) may be bound to do what the Law-giver commands though it be to their
common disadvantage, because he may com∣mand any thing for his will and pleasure onely and not their goods: yet cannot we in our nation be so bound, because it is not to be supposed that the law-giver does re∣quire any thing for his own will and plea∣sure, but for the common good altogether. To suppose otherwise is to suppose a change of the Government, from Royal to Despo∣tical, which is a supposition to be abhorred The three Estates are assembled (says Sr. Tho. Smith de Rep. Ang.) to consult what is good, that is what is for the common good as be∣fore: and so long as this is their general end and intention, and the Law is the will of the Law-giver, it appears that if any thing really be not for the common good, it hath none of their will and intention, and consequent∣ly does lay no obligation on the consciences of the people. CHAP. IV. I Proceed to that determination which he brings in opposition to mine, if I can find
it, and know what to make of it when it is found. The case (says he about the begin∣ing) depends on this single point, whether human Laws bind the Consciences. In resolving this, he acknowledgeth a difficulty. For if on the one side we say (saith he) the Conscience  not concerned, I beseech you what is? nothing but our common discreton, to help our selves out of the reach of the Princes Sword. So says Dr. Taylor. If Conscience be not obliged then nothing is concerned but prudence, and care that a man be safe from Rods and Axes. If on the other side we say that Conscince is obliged, then there may follow great perplexities when any thing is commanded, that proves an intollerable grievance. And this is also from Dr. Taylor, who does determine thereupon that in dan∣ger of death and intollorable grievance human Laws oblige not the Conscience to obedience. And what does this Debater determine? why truly when he comes to it at the end, The morall Divines and Lawyers (says he) do grant so. Well! These Divines and Lawyers are such as Dr. Taylor knows, but what says this Evangellicall Divine and no Lawyer himself? why he has said already that human Laws bind indefinitely, and he cannot find in his heart to go from it. Let me ask him then
how comes it to pass, that he pretends to some better Medium then I have propounded in this Case? Those that say human Laws bind not the Conscience at all, and those that say they bind it indefinitely without distinction, are both in an extream. I and Dr Taylor have a Medium: and what mean is that which this man will set up in opposition to us? Here I turn to the place in his sheets and I find his words come to these. I think good briefly to direct him in a better Medium then any that he hath propounded to find out the severall degrees of sin against human Laws. Ridiculous! if this person would have of∣fered us a better Medium to determine the Case in hand, we ought to have thankt him: but as for a Medium to this purpose. what is it to me? Is there any question or under∣taking of mine about this in the least throughout the Case? If I had a mind to know the difference or degrees of sin a∣gainst human Laws, I need not come to his I think good briefly, Dr. Taylor hath laid down at large Rules of distinction, or the measures by which we shall prudently conjecture, at the gra∣vity or lessening of the sin of disobedience to hu∣man Laws. The truth is, if a man may guess at such a thing, this person as it is like upon
the quotation, gets Dr. Taylor, where, in one place there being those Rules of distinction, and in another he finds, cautions for those that reduce into practise the rule he had laid down, that human Laws, not good, oblige not the Conscience, he apprehends these to be both good materials for the building something against me, but when he hath brought them here together into his books, there is no work for ought I see will come of them, and he may return them back where he had thm. Here are a parcell of cautions, and notes of degrees of sin against laws, his cau∣tions in the Dr. who giving liberty to the Conscience in some cases as not bound by human laws are very significant, that we may yet walk unblameably in such cases: but as for him who gives none, but makes the law of man to bind indefinitely, he hath nothing to do, but to require Universal obe∣dience, upon the pain of sin, and can admit of no transgression under any caution what soever. His rules of distinction likewise, or of the degrees of sin against human laws, may have good use in the Dr. but how will they serve his purpose? the case (says he) depends on this single point, whether human laws ind the conscience. that is whether we sin, if
we be not obedient to them? It follows then when this single point or question is resol∣ved, that they do bind the conscience in∣definitely, and that we do sin if we obey not, the point determined; and as for the discourse of the degrees of sin, it is another point, that never comes between us in con∣troversy. In the mean while if this be the determination of the point which is single, what is become of the pretended difficulty? There is not the least difficulty in this case at all, if that be all the determination. Let us suppose the Negative extream to what he holds, that the conscience were ne∣ver concerned in human laws, and that to his words, I beseech you what then, it were re∣plyed tho outward man, which politickly is bound, and may not resist, it were a questi∣on might require more consideration, whe∣ther every mans own security, and conse∣quently the common discretion alone of all men, to keep themselves only from the danger they threaten, would not be a suffi∣cient preservative of them: so far is this person wide who speaks so slightly, as if we should then care for the Princes commands not a straw, when we our selves have known while we were boyes, and made no con∣science
of the command of any, yet did we observe what we were bid more certainly through cortion, then the most of us God knows doe now the divine precepts through the due conscience we owe to them. And if so, there is the more reason for this Au∣thor to be considerate, how he bends thus to this other extream, wherein he brings us into that open perplexity, which himself sees, but cannot find the way out, either with his distinction of sins, or cauons which will not suite his resolution of the question. Obedience is not to be denyed (sayes he in the first of these cautions) but when a law is against the publick good. This is the prime indeed of all the Drs. cautions, & what alone perhaps is enough to be regarded. For when the Dr. and I do both make this to be the determining distinction (though he hath not spoken indeed so dryly of it, through his large invention and multitude of matter as I do) between what does and what does not oblige the conscience, in the matter of human laws, if a man does but observe this caution, the main of his care is over in this busines; he neither will, for the saving of his own damage, dare to neglect the pub∣lick interest: nor will he omit obedience
but when he can render a reason. The rest of his cautions I will not concern my self in, who have the same power to alter these, or frame others, to the over ruling truth I offer, as they had who at first did frame them; but as for this which I have named, the very proposing of it in the first place, when the Dr. brings it in after others, doth seem to carry in it some conviction on this person (when otherwise it no wayes serves his purpose) that if a thing be not for the common good, it cannot in good earnest bind the conscience. For his distinction or degrees of sin, the main design of opposing my determination thereby being frustrate, let us see to what use else he can put it. That may stand him perhaps in some stead for his own excuse, which will not stand his reader in any for his satisfaction. This Debater then we know in his late books, having designed to expose the Nonconformist to derision and contempt, as much as he could, for the withdrawing the people from Schism, and recalling them to Church (to speak ho∣nestly of his end) hath thought it fit in his first book to bgin his charge of these men with the breach of the Oxford Act, the
charge is very high upon this, that they are not good Christians, not Ministers of Christ. To this end persisting in the same mind, through his books even to this Post∣script of his appendix, he gives us these notes for the discovering of the greatness of a sin against human Laws, the Issue whereof comes to this, that though there may be several Instances of persons besides living in the breach of other statutes the sin of the Nonconformist against this act, must come under thos more hainou aggravations, that when such are excused, yet as for thse, we may find he had reason to say what he did, not to use any other then his own words. And what is that then he will acknowledge e hath said? I never said that no man can be a good Christian that transgresseth an Act of Parliament: nor that every transgression of a statute is a deadly sin: Those are inven∣tions of his own upon occasion of a single In∣stance which I gave of defyance to a Law wherein some men live, mark my words, from whence he draws as Uninersall proposition. And does e say so. Let me turn to his book and see how he can come of thus. The Nonconformist, speaking of his Minister, the matter is thu Ushered in; How can he
be a Minister of Christ (says the Conformist) who is disobedient to his Sovereign, whom Christ blas to obey? And then Instancing wherein, he urges this Oxford Act, and concludes, therefore he is not a good subject, and conse∣quently no good Christian or Minister of Christ. Let any man judge here whether these words, How can he be a Minister of Christ who is disobedient to his Sovereign? be not aequivalent with this proposition. No man that is disobedient to his Sovereign is a Mi∣nister of Christ. With what face then can he accuse me with drawing an Universal proposition from his words, when there is one express in the book, and from thence this conclusion is deduced? I never said, does he mean these are not his very words? away I nor do I say they are, but does not what he sayes amount plainly to this very sence? I prove it. Therefore (sayes he) he is not a good subject, and consequently not a good Christian. I argue with him from hence this person is a man of Reason and Logick. Here then is a conclusion, no conclusion can be good but from an Universal proposition. This Universal proposition must be this, that whosoever i disobedient to his Soveraign, or transgresses an Act of Parliament is no
good Christian. And the Universal propo∣sition in his book is this, which howsoever we understand (to help him out) that he means, whosoever transgresses any act of Parliament in such a high and hanious man∣ner as the Non-conformist does the Oxford act, yet still is a Universal proposition: either this person therefore must renounce the words in his book as illogically or falsly concluded, which yet he cannot do, neither but by acknowledging the universallty, and the denying the truth of the proposition: or else he must be ashamed here of this un∣just accusation of me, who have done but right to him. But if this denial will not serve him, he is no destiute of other shifts. There is no occasion (says he) for thi question whether every transgression of a Statute be no less then a deadly sin, unless he is of opinion that all sins are equal. By these words he does seem manifestly here to make some escape upon that term deadly sin, and then he must distinguish between sin and deadly sin, which no Protestant will allow him to do, who say that all si is mortal; & there was nothing else intended by a deadly sin, but a sin that deserves or makes one guilty of death. In∣deed if this Person can tell me of any little
sin, in opposition to a greater, which a man may knowingly and willfully live in, with∣out repentance unto death, and it shall not damne him, or do him hurt, then I shall like well of his comming off here, upon this term: but if he cannot, then will not this serve, he must seek another shift. And what is that in the next place, for he is brought here into a shuffling condition, that is plain? why we must distinguish be∣tween a wilful living only, in the transgres∣sion of a law, and the living in the defiance of it. The instance I have (says he) is of the defiance of a law in which some men live. This word defiance therefore he hath up three or foure times, besides the cotation in the margent, and bidding us mark the word. But I pray why must the Waggoner that e∣very day transgresses the law concerning his Waggon, or any other the like instance, be accounted with this man only to live in the transgression of that law. and the Non-conformist in his non observance of the Ox∣ford act be adjudged to live in the defiance of it? Alas! who does not see here into what a pitiful shifting case he is driven? or who does not perceive what is worse, that is, the animosity, pevishness, or overbet∣ness
(to speak with candour) of the man mind against the Non-conformist, which does hinder him the coming off here with that ingenuity as he should do, which is by confession of several of his imprudent speeches, and craving pardon for the in∣temperance he hath used. But in the last place, there are still degrees of sin, and the man that breaks other laws may not be so deeply guilty as he that lives in the breach of the act at Oxford. Let us see then what he can alledge for this. The more needful a Magistrate judges a thing to be done or avoided or the more his will is set upon it, the greater or less is the sin of him who breaks such a Law. Now he argues from the Preface and the Penalty of the Oxford act, how much the will of the law-giver is set upon the ob∣servation of that act, unto which I answer, besides that Dr. Taylor doth toll us that the greatness of the penalty doth sometimes show the smalness of a thing that is forbid∣den (as tha which else would not be re∣garded) and not the haniousness of the transgression: it does appear that the will of the law givers in that act, was set upon the Non-conformist taking the oath there prepared, as that they would have enforced
them to by so great and present a danger, and was the thing which seemed to them so apt to prevent, the evil supposed in the pre∣face, when as for their living within five miles of a corporation otherwise, we cannot think the minds of the Majority to be at all engaged in it. Now this Debater should have endeavoured to give the Non-conformist satisfaction in referrence to his taking the Oath, if he would have served the State according as the will of the law-givert were then set, but this was a task which he hath declined, although he was put upon it, and directed to their objections, in the defence of the proposition. There is somthing after this, which may be said, that though this distinction, or de∣grees of sins will stand him in no advantage for the opposing my determination, or justi∣fying his censure of the Non-conformist to be no good Christian, yet may it be of use to him to alleviate the harshness of his judge∣ment in the main, that human laws do ob∣lige the Conscience so as without discrimi∣nation he that observes them not, does sin. Hence when he proposes the case of a law-giver enjoyning a thing to some particular good, for the publick, and it appears that he
is mistaken, this Debater does continue still (such an obedient Soul has he above o∣thers) that though he be not bound to be of the lawgivers judgement, yet does he take himself bound (he means bound in Conscience) to follow his will even while it were better for the publick it were other wife or dained. There are casts we know sometimes wherein by the change of things and occasions (as in Seiges) that which was for the publick good does suddenly turn to its hurt. In such instances we are not to obey a law sayes Aquinas, which Dr. Taylor hath no∣ted: and there is no doubt to me in the Case, where the lawgiver is mistaken in a matter, the like reason ought to prevaile. But if he be thus resolved, let us know how the degrees of sin will help him out at a need. Let me suppose a poor man who is render in his Conscience and fears God, coming to this reverend Person and telling him this case. His Grand-father got at∣tle mony, and built him a small Cottage on such a waste ground, his Father lived in it, and bestowed more cost of it, and hath left it him, where he and his wife and child∣ren have lived comfortably uppon his la∣bour: but now it hath so hapned, that be∣ing
the other day at his Masters where he wrought, he heard one read a certain book called the Friendly Debate where he perceiv∣ed, about the very begining that the Author was of the mind that a man could not live in the breach of the Law of the Land, and be a good Christian: and he hath understood long by his Father that it is against the Law for any cottage to be erected withot four a∣cres of ground belonging to it. Upon this he being afraid of his condition in regard of his open living in a known wilful transgression of a statute of the Realm, wherein he cannot think but that it is a very plain defiance of a-Law as that book speaks, he is come to him to see what he can offer for the reeiving his Conscience. If this author here deal round∣ly and plainly with the man, he must tell him that there is no remedy but he must pull down his house, and he and his wife and chil∣dren be turned to beging, rather then by his living in a known sin without amendment he should be damned. It he deal otherwise, then he may tell him that though indeed e∣very transgression of a human Law be sin, yet there are degrees of sin, and this sin of his is a lesse sin then that of the Non-Con∣formist living in the breach of the Ox∣ford Act and therefore he should be
of good comfort and go home in peace. I pray now will this indeed serve a Conscien∣tious man: It is nothing to him that ano∣ther's sin is greater then his, he is to look to his own soul, and if he lives in the least sin with full knowledge and consent, and hard∣ens his heart in it, he cannot see how he should be saved. So that unless you satis∣fie him, and that upon good ground, that every transgression of a Law is not sin, and then shew him how his transgression is but such a one you are not able to stand him in any stead in his Case. I remember a text of our Lord which I haue often thought upon, that by a mans words he shall be justified and by his words he shall be condmed. The ha∣rises were men very holy in their profession and did tye very heavy burthens upon o∣thers, but when they were to perform the same themselves they were it is like back∣ward enough: our saviour Christ therefore meets with them, for these shews without reality, and words without performance. Verily I say unto you that for every Idle word a man shall speak he shall give on account for it at the day of judgement. The word Idle in the Original as without work says Causabone de verborum usu  is contracted of
every Idle word is every word without deed; and must import thus much (what∣soever it does more) that when men make strict professions, and determine so rigid∣ly in points of duty, and do not answer their own dictates and sayings, let them take heed lest by their words (least ex ore tuo) as being Idle words they bring not themselves into a just condemnation. I will therefore advise this worthy person, and all men in resolving Cases of Conscience that they take heed of setting down any matter for the binding of others, then according to which in their own practise they dare be content to be judged by. The determining the obligation of human Laws Indefinitely on the Conscience is more then any mortall can bear. For my own part I will protest that whilst I allow the Conscience to be bound, by the Law of men when those Laws tend to the common good, yet do I not hereby cut my self of from the reserve of any liberty that may arise to me from a farther disquisition: although I count it but necessary both to give my reason why in sincerity I hold so, and to de∣liver my conception of that obligation. It is a saying of the Antients, a man is not born for himself only, but for his Coun∣try
which is not writ only in Cicero, but in the heart of all men, for this is a truth throughout the earth, and delivered by God all along his word, while he makes our own selves to be the rule of our carriage to∣wards our Neighbours, that we mind not our own things only, but every one the things of others. Though we study and seek the tranquillity and peace of those with whom we live: and consequently in all Societies and Communities, we should re∣gard the publick concern, even above our particular advantage. These are general moral precepts which are writ I say in the heart of man, and to be proved in Gods word. The Magistrate I account now is Gods Minister, to consider of, and then de∣sign and appoint the particular things or instances wherein every one in their several places are serviceable in these duties and ends; and upon that designation of the particular things, the obligation flows from those general precepts of God, upon the Conscience, for their observation. I say there is the general Institution of God for Societies, and that men in society shall mind and endeavour in their place the publick concern, and not their own only. The Ma∣gistrate
is his commissited Officer to design appoint or set apart, and so declare the in∣stances or particular things which are con∣ducive to this good of the community which they all are bound to intend upon the designation, appointment or declaration of these things, the obligation flows immedi∣ately from the general institution of God upon the Conscience for the observing of them, when there could flow none else from these particulars themselves. The particu∣lar laws or things themselves we know are not the precepts of God, and the Consci∣ence is obliged only by Gods will; but the general institution of society, and that we should seek and endeavour in our place the good of the Publick as our own, and above our own, in such particulars as be conducive truly to that end, is of God; and the Ma∣gistrate (I say) according to his office de∣signing these particulars, we come (not ra∣tione consequentis, or absoluté, only because such things commanded, but ratione conse∣qntiae, or ex hypothesi, because such things commanded do come under the divine insti∣tution) to have the Conscience bound to their performance. From hence it follows likewise that if these instances or particu∣lars
do not indeed come under the service of these general duties or end, such a law is to be lookt upon as cut off from Gods in∣stitution, and so can have no authority de∣rived to it from God, for the obliging the Conscience of any, when yet the outward man (out of the case of sin) is still acknow∣ledged to be bound. The particular com∣mands of the Magistrate does (I say) bind the outward man: but the general instituti∣on or the moral duty in general of seeking the welfare of the Publick, and not our own only, is that which binds the Conscience which otherwise were not bound. As for the fifth Commandement, which requires honor and obedience (such as is meet) to our superiours, I do not here dis∣tinguish it from, but include it in this gene∣ral institution, for that command must be understood as a comprehensive thing, con∣taining in it the whole commission, the su∣periour hath from God, which granting him his power to command, doth also set the bounds and limitations to that power, that he command no other things, or no other∣wise then as he hath appointed: and upon supposition that the superior acts only ac∣cording to his commission, that is, according
to his prescribed duty, or rule in civil things, this Commandement of God do lay an obligation on the subject to obey him out of Conscience. If you will say upon this that the Magistrate hath a derived authori∣ty from God, for this very act of determi∣ning the material objct of our obedience, and therefore besides the obligation which flows from his institution when the matter is determined, the Conscence must be ob∣liged from the Magistrats determination it self, by vertue of that derived authority from him, I have no need to gain say it, and whether you will make it a double obligati∣on, or an obligation from a double causali∣ty, or a mixt obligation divine and human, it matters nothing to our dispute, so long as Gods authority in the things commanded, or his allowance that they be commanded be first acknowledged, before we look upon the Conscience to be indeed concern∣ed in them. This is certain, every autho∣rity that is derived must be limited, and that according to the will of him from whence it is derived. The authority God reserves in his own hands is that alone which is unlimi∣mited and infinite. Now the limits God hath set the Magistrate as to the determining
the particulars of his subjects duty (which is his power of making laws) comes to this, that he choose them only out of that gene∣ral matter that is conducive to the end of government, the publick good (that is to observe the rule of things political): If he shall therefore appoint any particular things for his own profit, pleasure, or hu∣mour, which come not under this general matter, (to wit, quae habet rationem publici commodi) as God hath prescribed, it is mani∣fest that he acts not according to his com∣mission, and so can have no power derived from thence, for those acts or laws, and con∣sequently however such laws do bind us in his courts, they are of no validity in the court of Conscience. We will acknowledge in whatsoever he commands an authority divine for his Office and so if he will inflict the penalty we must not resist. But we can not acknowledge Gods authority in this or that exercise of his office. that we should do the thing out of Conscience. In short, we are indeed bound upon the penalty of his law, (if you will) but we are not bound up∣on the pain of sin, to obey the Magistrate in every case. I must profess here in the words of truth,
and soberness that so far as so mean a per∣son as I am can dicern there is a great deal of darkness hath spread it self upon the face of the earth, and more especially over many learned men, who when they have forsaken that light which they have flowing immediately from God, on their hearts to to seek unto the Cisterns of others works and books, they have been not only misled themselves, but bereft us of many truths of the clearest evidence, and greatest concern∣ment, such as this particulary concerning the obligation of human laws, how, when and how far the Conscience of man (which belongs directly only to the Regiment of Gods its or can be bound by them. If we will therefore but go as near as we can to the fountain, and look into our own minds, in∣to all which God shines according to a se∣veral measure with his light, though he influence but some with his saving grace, we may find, that as we are instructed in matters of Religion to seek unto supernatu∣ral revelation, and so to account that what∣soever is agreeable to the rule of Gods word is obliging to the Conscience, and what is not cannot oblige us as worship: and as in matters of morality, what is and
what is not agreeable to the law of nature, does or does not oblige us as virtue or vice: so in these matters which are of a ci∣val or political concern only, we do find that the rule which God lmighty hath written in the heart for us to judge by, and is the supream law in such matters, (which in words also is famously acknowledged) is the common good: so that according as any thing commanded in human laws is agrea∣ble or not, to that rule which is Gods rule for these things, the Conscience is bound or not bound by the same. Nay as things are not only religiously or morally good and evil according as they agree and not agree with the word of God, and the moral law in the heart, but the more or less they a∣gree with the rule, the more or less good or evil are they: so the more or less any thing commanded in a law doth agree with the supream rule of God, or law, in these po∣litical things, by so much the greater or less is the sin of not observing them. So short indeed is this Person and others in their notes of the degrees of sin against hu∣man laws, that the formal difference it self of these aggravations or diminutions in re∣spect to the conscience (whereof alone Di∣vines
should speak when this mans differen∣ces from the will of the law giver, belongs to the Lawyer) is not considered. And now when it hath pleased God Almighty by so inconsiderable a vessel, and in such a kind of careless and unregarded expression, (which others may mend) that the exellency of the truth may appear to be the more from him, to deliver to the world this law of his, to govern and resolve men in these cases, I do not know how few, or how many there be that will receive it. When Moses went up to God into the Mount, and brought down the law of the two Tables, it was a glorious matter? there is no man can go up to God now in that manner: but every one may go to him, (if we search af∣ter him who is not far from any of us as Paul speaks) as he dwels in that light which he hath put into our hearts, and from thence (as one who hath been conversing there rather then with the videturs of men) have I brought you down this law, or rule of his will in Politicalls, which though the gene∣ration of men no where, even amongst the most savage, is without, yet have they ta∣ken notice of it so little hitherto, that wax∣ing vain in their own imaginations, they
have not understood, when they have ac∣knowledged, that this indeed is the supream law to all others that are human, by which they must be tryed, approved overruled, and according to which, and to which alone, can the Conscience of any be obliged in their o∣bedience which they yield to these maters. CA. V. THere remains the last thing I have to do, which is the surveigh of this De∣baters exceptions, or other passages not yet considered, and to say something to them according as they are of moment. This general does contain the principle thing the Debater stands upon, and which re∣quirers the larger field for my debate with him, I shall devide that one business, there∣fore into three succeding Chapters, and leave a last for the rest.
CAP. VI. THe great and principal exception he hath, and which will deserve the pains, is upon a question which comes in as necessary to be askt upon my determinati∣on, and it is this. It being supposed, and to be granted, that the will of God is that alone which does oblige the Conscience, and that according as a thing commanded in hu∣man Laws does conduce to the pubick good or not, so is it agreeable or not to his will: the question is who shall be judge, whether a thing commanded by a Law be for the com∣mon good or no, and consequently agreea∣ble to Gods will and obligatory to the Con∣science. I answer every Man must be Judge on necessity himself in reference to his own action. I prove this. Every Man must judge of his own actions whether they be agreeable to the will of God or no. But to judge whether a thing commanded by a Law be agreeable to Gods will, is to judge whe∣ther it be conducive to the common good
or not. Therefore every Man is judge himself, whether a thing commanded be for the publick good or no, in reference to his own action. Again, to judge whether we are bound in Conscience to any thing com∣manded in a Law, is to judge whether it have Gods authority or not. But a Law or any thing commanded by a Law hath Gods authority or not, according as it is conducive to the common good. Therefore a Man must judge, whether that which is commanded him in a Law be for the common good or not, to judge whether he be bound or not bound to it in Consci∣ence. I must needs say there are some have had occasion to be more ready to re∣solve this question, then otherwise they have desired. We have had late impositi∣ons, and thought many times in what sense they might be taken. We have come quickly to see, if they be taken, it must not be in any sense of our own, we can frame, which were most loose; but it must be in the imposers meaning. This meaning is not certain, but some have believed thus and some otherwise. In the upshot then this is that I have been brought, in my last thoughts, to conclude, that if a Man after the
best means he can use for the understanding the Imposers meaning, can take what is im∣posed in that sence which he verily believes in his own heart to be their meaning, he shall do well and ought to take it; if he cannot, he must for bear and choose to suf∣fer. Being thus prepared in order to the determining a mans own act, about the ta∣king an imposition, when the question lyes upon the meaning of the Law-giver, and the subject I count being changed only in∣to his generall end in this, I had no cause to stick here, where there is but one and the same answer to be given to all such questi∣ons. To wit, that notwithstanding there may be severall good cautions of thinking reverendly of our superiours judgments, and not leaning too much on our own, with the like words used in the way, we must come to this result at last, that accor∣ding as every man for his own part (after the best enquiry or exercise of his reason he can make) does believe in his very Consci∣ence whether the thing commanded in a Law be for the publick good or no, I mean it in reference to his own doing it, that is most plainly according as he believes in his own soul that the doing the thing which
is commanded (by his example or other∣wise) is conducive to the publick good or not, so must he account it agreeable or not to Gods will, and his Conscience accor∣dingly be bound, or loosed in regard to the performance. I will convince the Debater from his own mouth and from the thing it self. From his own mouth we have a Case hath fallen very luckily before mentioned. What if Magistrate mistake in a Law, and the matter be not conducive to that end for the publick he ordained it? He an∣swers he is not bound to be of the Magis∣trates opinion, but may judge it better the Law were otherwise, yet thinks he is bound to obey it. But if this man and so another may be, and is, of a contrary o∣pinion to the Magistrate, that the thing commanded is not for the publick benefit, as he acknowledges in that Case of his own putting, then hath he acknowledged in ef∣fect all that for which he cavills so much at me upon my answer to this question. For the thing it self, In the first place no mortal man on Earth, can have power to make me, or him, or any understand, to think, or believe otherwise then we do. If
I do think then, that such a thing command∣ed be not for the common good, so I shall think, and must think do what the Magistrate can, or my self either. And it  do believe so then do I judge or believe that i is not ac∣cording to Gods will, and consequently that I am not bound in Conscience . If you say I should not think so, it is unlawful to judge so, you contradict this man, who says, he is not bound absolutly to be of the Law-gi∣vers opinion, that all such things are for the publick good as he decrees; which is as truly, as stoutly said against himself, for the mat∣ter will not bear it to be otherwise. In the second place, Conscience is a faculty which God hath put into Man, to judge of his own actions, in reference to his approving or condemning him for them. Whatsoever actions then are accountable unto God at the great day, are to be judged at present by Conscience. We are accountable now no doubt to God for our civil actions, as well as others; and when in matters that are civil, those things have or have not his ap∣probation, as they do, or do not conduce to the common good, it follows that every man must judge of the things commanded him, whether they be or they be not to the
common good, that he may be accountable unto God, according to what he is bound or not bound in Conscience by them. In the third place our Protestant Divines in their cont oversy which the Papist Do judice, do allow to every man a judgement of private discretion which is the same with this judge∣ment of Conscience, that what means so∣ever we use for our information, we must be the last judges our selves of the things we do, whether they are agreeable to Gods will or not, and according to our own be∣lief must resolve upon the practise or for∣bearance of them. It seems to me now a thing unreasonable and injurious unto man∣kind, if we shall take away from the sub∣ject this judgement of private discretion in things that are political which we cannot but allow them in all other their morall and religious actions. If there be an in∣fallible judge in Civils we may expect one in religions matters. But if there be no Pope nor Counsels but may erre in their Canons, there are no Law-givers but may erre in their Laws, and there is no cause why any should indeed be more shy of granting the subject this judgement of discretion in re∣ference to what the Prince hath Enacted,
any more then what the Church hath de∣clared, but only that they could not so well tell the rule to judge of things Civill as they could to judge of Doctrines and morall Precepts. As God therefore hath given us the Scriptures for a rule of religion, that when any thing is required of us to be∣lieve or practise as necessary to Gods wor∣ship or our salvation, we may and are to try it, by this rule, and can be obliged thereby no farther then we do judge it a∣greeable to this rule: and as in morals he hath given the law of nature for our rule: so hath the Almighty given to man his rule also in things politicall (which he hath written in his fleshly tables, as sure as there is any law of nature, and that is Gods will, as the scripture is) whereby the Laws of e∣very Common-wealth are to be tryed and judged, the Law-giver being accountable to God according as he acts by it, and the People obliged in Conscience, so far to o∣bey his will as he commands agreeably to it: and this Rule or Law as I have before said, is the common good. Things are religiously good or evill as they agree or agree not with the Scriptures. Things are moraly good or evill as they agree or a∣gree
not with the Law of nature. Things politically good or evill as they agree or agree not to the publick advantage. If I am commanded any thing about my reli∣gion I will go to the Scripture, if that com∣mands me otherwise I cannot obey it. I will go to the morall Law in matters of vertue and vice. In politicall things, or things required by human Laws, I must go to this rule I have proposed: I must judge of them as good or evill in their kind by that. If my doing the thing will not answer the rule, I am not bound in Con∣science to active obedience. In the last place if this be not granted, when you allow the subjects to be reason∣able agents in things religious, or morall, that may bring what is superiour command's of that nature to the rest of Gods will, you turn them into bruites in things civil while they may bring what they are com∣manded to no test, in relation to their own actions. If you deny me my judgement of private discretion, you will not let me act as a man. Indeed this person will have the liberty to judge otherwise then the Ma∣gistrate does, and yet be bound in Con∣science to obey, which is to be beneath a
bruite, for the best act spontaneously, and follow the dictates of their sense, if they be not hindred. But this man will have his judgement one way, that the thing is not good, and his will and actions another way, and that not upon constraint from without, but upon the principle of Con∣science, which is a contradiction against all good sence. But as for others and this man too otherwhere (who makes it a pla∣cing our selves in the throne to determine other∣wise concerning the publick welfaer, then the proper judge of it doth, so consistent is he with himself, and such need hath he to be angry if one advise him to be more reflective on what he writes  that will not let us have a judgement different from the Lawgiver, and so to act only upon theirs, they make men to become Horse as the and the Mule, upon whom the rider gets up, and they must go on, the why, and the whither as the driver pleases. But if this be the Issue which this mans opinion will lead us to, and this son of Circe should expect by the conjuration of these few leaves to transforme us presently out of our humanity, that we should be con∣tent to be governed hence forward without, the exercise of our own reason, or assent
that is, not to act out of election, but to be moved in civill obedience only as we are driven, we shall have little cause to be very forward to hearken to him. He may lay down his Penn and take a Whip in his hand and go Whistle. But let us hear his exceptions to this answer. Who shall be judge whether a Law be for the publick good or no. His answer is ready at his Tongues end, for he needs not go deep for it. The Magistrate must judge, what is for the publick good for the making the Law, and we must judge as to our obedience to it. Then which it is hard to write any thing more in∣considerate and dangerous. I do acknowledge this to be my judgement, and for which I have offered here some reasons, and it is not his saying this answer is inconsiderate and dangerous ought to prejudice it, if it be well adviced, and there be no danger indeed in it. For neither doth this man know the previous thought on other occasi∣ons upon which this hath been set down: nor hath he yet understood the state of my opinion right, that he should charge it with any of those consequences, as are but the Lyons, and the Bears, the Chariots and the Armies, that fly in the Clouds of his
own Immagination. But let us hear the reason of this wonderful decision which he hath as ready as he had his answer. Because saith he every man is made by God the judge of his own actions, I cannot for my life see how that follows from this, though I have put his reason∣ing into the plainest form that ever I could. It is pitty but this mans life should be saved, and therefore I will tell him my reasoning Those Laws, I was shewing, which be not for the common good are not agreeable to Gods will, or have not his Authority, and so bind not the Conscience. The question upon this was as it is set down, and the answer and the reason with the ad∣dition of the words following. Because God hath made every man judge of his own actions, and consequently of all circumstances, whether they are agreeable or not to his will for his forbearing or doing of them. If God then hath made every man judge of those things which he is to do in all the circum∣stances, whether they be agreeable or not to his will, then must he judge whether those things that he is commanded to do in human Laws be for the common good or no, because those Laws only are agreeable to his will (I had laid down before) which
are for the common good, and those that are not are devoid of his Authority and bind not the Conscience. This I deny not to be my very substance, and as the reason∣ing is manifest, and will appear so (I doubt not) to the indifferent, so must it not be thought to be inculcated too often, either there, or here, seeing no man can stand safe in dispute, but he that knows what is, and when he is upon his foundation. For the mans disdainful expressions I have (I account) my satisfaction, and he his suffi∣cient reproof, that he hath no more cause for them. It is not sence to say the Magis∣trate must judge what is for the publick good in reference to his act of making the Law, and we in reference to ours of obedience to it; for he doth not only judge but enjoyn, when he makes a Law; which leaves us no liberty but to judge whether his will and Gods do not clash together. And why is not this sense, what reason is this that  is not sense? if he could have said the Magistrate does enjoyn, and not judge at all before he enjoyns it, then he might have pretended to say thus. But if the Magistrate must not enjoyn any thing before he hath considered, and judges it to be for the common good, and if he doth
enjoyn any thing that is not for the com∣mon good he hath no Authority from God for it, then does it appear necessary, that we do consider likewise, and judge whether it be for the common good, and have his Authority, or else we cannot be bound in Conscience to it. And thus you see very good sense, evidence and fulness in this an∣swer to the question and that the Magi∣strates will, declaration of his will, or en∣joyning a thing, does not take away our liberty and duty, to consider when he hath enjoyned it, whether we be yet in Consci∣ence in obliged, or in prudence only, and the outward man to obedience. The mistake of this person is that he thinks we may not judge of a Law, but only whether it be against Conscience, when we must no doubt judge also whether it be obliging to Conscience, or otherwise how shall we make Conscience of it? We are not to judge only whether it claspes with Gods will, but whether it agrees with it. If the Magistrates will be not against Gods will, yet if it hath not his will and authority with it, it is not obligatory to the Conscience. The Ma∣gistrates will binds not asunder from Gods, In morals the case is not thus, whatsoever
is not according to Gods will is against it: But in civil and indifferent things a thing may not be against his will, that is against any moral precept (as our obedience I speak of to some human Laws) and yet have none of his Authority for it. Thus prudence, the preservation of my self, and the Magistrates honour, may prevail with me to do a thing which I think otherwise I have no obligation to do in my Con∣science. I will yet add. I distinguish my obediénce, and my obedience out of Conscience, or my obedience out of other generall rersons, and my obedience out of Conscience, to this particular command. I do not resolve my obedience, into a judgement of private discretion whether a Law be for the com∣mon good or no, for I can apprehend easily that when God hath required the Magis∣trate to make no Law but according to this rule, no unjust, or unprofitable Law, he hath not yet commanded that I should ne∣ver obey such a Law. I may obey out of a generall implicit apprehension of duty; or a singular love to my superiors person, for fear of his displeasure: to avoid the danger of the Law: or out of severall pru∣dentiall
considerations, regarding the Ma∣gistrate, my self, or others: when yet If I come to the point, whether I am bound in Conscience to do the particular thing commanded, that is whether there lyes a divine obligation on me as well as that from the Law to do it I am on necessity then to examine it, by the rule which God hath set me, and that being no other but the common good in politicalls, I must resolve my obedience out of Conscience into this judge∣ment, when I resolve my prudentiall obedi∣ence otherwise. It may suffice me therein, so long as the thing is not sinfull, that I am obliged by man. It may be but very rare if. I question my Rulers commandment, which is like to be only perhaps in some grievous pressure. If the Law be bad, my obedience yet and my example may do good, nor does the Magistrates abuse of his office I hope take away my liberty to endure it if I please. The true ends more∣over hapily of obedience, may be obtained, when the end of Ruling is neglected. Nay the common good may be promoted possibly, by my yeilding to a Law when the Law it self does cross it. And farther my diso∣bedience may do more hurt to the common
good then the obeying that hurtfull com∣mand would do. So farre am I from dis∣couraging any from obedience to human Laws (as a thing generally good and pru∣dentiall) when I would keep the Consci∣ence free, and not have it burdened with sin for every want of their performance. I see indeed by this and other learned per∣sons, what an immagination they have got, that if I resolve the question whether I am in Conscience obliged to obey such a Law, by my private judging of the thing com∣manded whether it be agreeable or not to the common good I do usurpe the place of the Ruler and make myself only my own Law∣giver, as they are apt to speak. But this is a mistake, for besides that when I judge of the thing commanded by its Rule, this judgement of mine is not the maker of my duty but the discerner of it, and so I do not become any Law-giver to my self in the business: I distinguish the obligation of a human Law, and the obligation of Conscience (formaliter. & simpliciter) by that Law. If I resolved the whole obligation of hu∣man Laws into this Rue, and my judge∣ment of the Law by it, so that I held it must never be obeyed on other reasons,
or that if I were punished for not obeying, I was not bound to submit, then did I offer injury indeed to my Ruer and usurped his Government. But if I resolve only the ob∣ligation of my Conscience by that Law into this rule, and my judgement of it accordingly, I usurpe no power of the Magistrates, which I leave him still over the exterior man, but I keep God only as I ought in his own feat of the Conscience. And verily if the Conscience of man be concerned in every human law, I would fain know, how any of our great Clerks can say that human laws bind not in the case of intollerable griveance. If God does command me to do the thing, it is not any griveance of minde can excuse me, but if it be man indeed commands it only and not God, the griveance will be reason e∣nough for me to call it in question, and to avoid it if I may; but the reason of my non-obedience, must not have this founda∣tion, that it is my grievance, or that I cannot endure it, but that consideratis considerandis, I am not obliged to it in Conscience.
CAP. VII. THus far his exceptions are but words, let us pass now to his reasons against my answer. His first reason is, It is no easy thing to judge what is best for the Peoples good, Kings themselves find it necessary to have their Coun∣cets to advise about it. To judge what is best for the Peoples good is indeed a high mat∣ter. To judge only whether a thing be for the common good or not, is another matter. The judgement of every one is free, and a∣ny body may judge of any thing as he is able, and as he will. The Cock may pass his judgement on the Pearl he scraped up. That which comes to carry any stress upon judging, is the consideration of the effect that depends upon that judgement. The judging of a thing which a Man himself hath to do, hath this effect depending on it, the doing his duty, every one is to judge
of all those things and circumstances which belong to his own acts, whether or no they be agreeable to Gods will, that he may do as he ought; and the rule of this will in po∣liticals, I have declared. There is the act now of the Magistrate, and the act of the Subject. There is a great difference of the concern or moment that lies on a judgement of the same thing when the act of the one depends upon it, and when there depends upon it the act only of the other. The act of the Magistrate is to make the law, and see it executed; the act of the People is to o∣bey it. By this first reason of his against my answer, do I see good reason for it, and the sufficiency of it. The Magistrate judges whether a thing be for the common good, or according to our supream rule in refe∣rence to his passing it into a law, and then to cause it to be executed. The People and e∣very particular person does judge, whether the thing commanded be for the common good, in reference only to the obligation of their Consciences to obedience. Upon the judgement of the Magistrate, there does depend an effect of universal concernment, that is the obligation of a whole Nation to live according to the Law he makes, upon
the judgdement of each particular when the law is made, there depends no concern but a mans own, and that respecting his inward man only. Now its certain that the Ma∣gistrate in regard of such an effect as de∣pends upon his judgement, hath need indeed of the greatest wisdome, and the ablest Councel, and he cannot be too cautions in his proceeding, seeing if he be mistaken, and the Consciences of the Subjects be not obliged by such a law, yet are their persons liable to be compelled and they must not resist, which may prove a vast inconvenience, and to be avoided only by a right infor∣mation at first about the matter. But as for a private person who judges not what is best for the peoples good (as he speaks right in regard to the Magistrate) but onely judges of the thing commanded whether it be agreeable or not to the will of God, or the rule of his (which he hath given to the world about Politicals, if they forget not to minde it, to wit) that it be in eneral for their good, the effect which (I have said) does attend such a judgement, is of that nature onely as requires no greater under∣standing or discretion, then every man hath for himself to act by in all the rest of his life
and conversation. He judges here accord∣ing to his Rule in these things, as he doth in other of his actions according to the word whether he be bound or not bound in Conscience to them. And God requires of him to judge and act but according to his talent in all business whatsoever. He will acknowledge the outward man to be bound, and in a matter of his soul which concerns no body but him, or the inward obligation of his Conscience, you must leave him to God and his own Judgement. His next reason is, That when Men know what is conducing to their good, they are not apt to do it without a Law. And what does this prove or contradict? It proves it good therefore that the people have a Law-giver or Governor, and that he should be wiser and better then they, as Plato may urge it: But does it follow they may not there∣fore judge, whether the thing commanded be for their good; Surely this will be a good reason why the people should judge of it. For if the good they conceive in it, is the reason they admit to have any Law, and the argument to press them to obey it, then must they judge of that good, and whether it be conducive to that good or
not. In the mean while the difference of the reason and ends, (which is distinguish∣ed, in the Magistrates judging of a thing to be for the common good or not, and the peoples does sufficiently declare the weak∣ness and vanity of such speeches, as this Man hath several of. He that makes every Man judge of what is for the peoples good, takes away the principal power of the Magi∣strate. And why so? as if it were an act of power, and that usurped for any but the Prince to have a judgement of discretion over his civil actions. Again, if the people be able to judge of that there is no need of any Law or Law-giver. As if when men knew their duty they needed no Magistrate to make them do it, and that while himself too is telling us the need of Laws, because men ae not like to prefer the publick good though they comprehend it, before that of their own particular persons. I cannot I perceive, be throughly intent to answer what is insigni∣ficant, but the substance in the main of these two reasons comes to this, that every man is not able to bring the thing commanded by the Magistrate to the rule, so as to judge whether it be for the common good or not, and therefore they must act only upon
the judgement of the Law-giver, and con∣sequently be no reasonable agents, in their Political obedience. For satisfaction there∣fore to this, Let us conceive the Magistrate commanding something moral or Religious, there are no Protestants but do hold that e∣very man for himself must bring here what is commanded to the rule of the moral Law and Scripture, and according as him∣self believes it consonant or not to the rule he judges it, so is he bound to obey it or not to to obey it. Now let any man who hath but the heart to think and speak with integrity, consider whether a rude and illi∣terate man that never could read a word in the Bible, be more able to judge whether a thing commanded by the Magistrate be a∣greeable or not to the word of God; or whether it be conducive or not to the common good? suppose the Waggoner as unlearned as any man, I will ask whether such a man be not more able to judge of the Law concerning Waggons, that is whe∣ther it be good for the high wayes and con∣sequently whether he had best or not ob∣serve the act, then to judge whether the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, or whether whatsoever is contain∣ed
in the whole Book of Common Prayer with the Rites and Ceremonies, be agree∣able or not to the Scriptures of the old and New Testament? I suppose there is no man will have the hardisse to oppose such a ma∣nifest conviction. And if in regard to his practice, this man and every other that uses the Common-prayer must judge as well as he can of the lawfulness of it, or else he cannot act in faith: and so likewise of all those doctrines or practises he yields unto them, then will there I hope be no stumbling block left here upon this ac∣count, I do advance therefore and rest up∣on this one argument, if the incapacity, un∣fitness, or little ability that some men have to judge of what is required by the Magi∣strate, whether it be agreeable or no to the common good, be a reason sufficient for the denying to the subject such a judgement: then must the lesser ability of such to judge whether that which is required be agreea∣ble to the word of God, be a reason suffi∣cient to discharge them from judging of it by the word. But the consequent is false, and therefore the antecedent. By the way, observe, if any man distinguish between judging of a Law whether it be for a com∣mon
good: and judging of the thing com∣manded by a law, or rather of a mans own do∣ing the thing commanded, whether it be for the publick good or not, I am to be under∣stood of the last, when I say the Magistrate judges of the thing in reference to his pass∣ing it into a law and we judge of it so passed in reference to our obedience or ob∣ligation by it. His third reason is the same with the first. The people are so far from being able to judge, that the wisest Princes find it diffi∣cult, only we have more words for the en∣largement; which consist partly in a grave kind of discourse from a passage of a Bi∣shop Bramhall, of the severall things and circumstances that the Law-giver is to weigh in his making of a law, which the people cannot consider and attend unto: and then in an idle descant upon this, that it is not fit therefore that laws should be suspended till the subjects be agreed they are for their good, with the like words, as if there were any indeed ever dream'd that a Law-giver, who is with us the Parliament, could not make a law untill they had con∣sulted the people first, whether they all of them judged the matter such, that if it
were passed into a law, they should be bound in Conscience to the performance, and before they had an affirmative answer from them (who must be made loath too to be satisfied about it) they could pass no act or statute of the Realm. This is the sense in which this man let his pen run here, and then concludes. The Prince is in an ill case who hath such subjects, and he is not in very good, whose Divines begin to in∣still such doctrine into them If there be any thing in those more words and the same reason that seems of moment, it is already answered I count by distinguish∣ing the part of the Law-giver, the subject, whose judgement of a thing commanded in a law already passed, for the satisfiy∣ing himself whether he be obliged in Con∣science to the doing, can by no means pre∣judice the act of the Law-giver in the passing the law as is manifest, nor does it throw it down being passed. For this is a mistake in this person very palpable, as if a human law could not be of force un∣less a mans Conscience be obliged by it. I observed this in him before where he said, Laws while they do oblige tye the Consci∣ence, and that the cause of his error was
the want of present knowledge to distin∣guish between Political and morall obli∣gation. The obligation which is on the Conscience is morall and can be no other, and passes on it I have said from Gods in∣stitution of our generall duty: but the ob∣ligation which is Political belongs to the out∣ward man and may stand good when the mo∣rall ceases, and for as much as this obligation of the outward man it self does so arise from the commandment of God for subjection, and that we should not resist, it may appear to the impartial that will consider aright of what is said, that the question or single point between this man and I concerning the obligation of human Laws, in reference only to the conscience, is really and in good earnest very little or not at all material to the Magistrate, or the civill Government, which way soever it is determined. And when there are so many learned men of divers sorts who exercise their liberty in maintaining the opinion of either extream without controle or prejudice to the world, its a thing hardly becomming either a tem∣perate minde, or modest Learning, or that I should have most expected from this Au∣thour a free Theology, to express himself in
this manner, as if a man could not endea∣vour the finding out a middle way that is so needfull in such a controversie but he must be adjudged one that is broaching of something against the State, and deserved correction. His fourth reason is, Grant the subjects such a power (that is, a power only of judge∣ing of their own civill acts) and in a little time no law shall be observed. He proceeds, Taxes will not be paid. He goes on. There will be Insurrections and Rebellion. Upon this, he brings in certain narrations, of the Subsidy of Head money in Richard the Seconds time and what followed; of the aid granted to Henry the Seventh in his third year and the Northern Rebellion; then of a subsidy in his thirteenth year when the Cornish-men took up arms, then of the case of Henry the eight about Aliens, and of one John Lincoln a Broaker that was hang∣ed. See more in a certain dialogue between a Couceellor of state, and a Justice, he has in his study; for this it is for the man to light on a new book, he must by all means be tel∣ing us of what he was reading last. And thus had we at the begining of these Pa∣pers from the tenth argument of Bellarmine
against Image worship, the relation of the Iconomachi and what befell them in the time of Leo Isaurus; in the time of Constan∣tinus Copronomus; in the time of the horrible cold and freezing of the Pontick Sea, the drought after, and the death of the Empe∣rour, The man hath a strange fruitful application. This brings to my remem∣brance an advice once I received from an ingenious and prudent Woman, who seeing me over ingaged in dispute sometimes with an Anabaptist, who was a man of much talk and being not willing I should be so much concerned: you must not says she, argue with these men in the way you do; you lay down the subject, and speak upon that, and then think to hold them to it, and are moved when they speak from the point, and so are confounded; but you should (sayes she) give them leave to speak so long until you can lay hold on something that they say, and whatsoever it is, you must speak of that; and by this means while you take them up still upon their last words, whether it be to the point or not, you will never want matter no more then they do, and by the use of their own weapon may deal with them. I must profess if this man who hath
so apt an expression, do come to get this knack of it, as he appears to have in these continuations and apendix, he may continue his continuations while he lives, and I know no body able to dispute with him, unless I could light on the fellow that would preach with any body, but it should be (he said) in a Negative way, And Peter went to Antioch. He went not to be drunk, here he speaks of drunkenness, gluttony, and all manner of excess. He went not to lye with women, there he speaks of fornication, and unclean∣ness and all other deadly sin. But he went to preach, there he speaks of the Scriptures from Genesis to the Revelation, of the Fathers the Schoolemen, the Councels, and all the books that ever he read to this day. For the reason it self without its appurte∣nance, I have I account prevented it in the state of my opinion. The state alone of what I have said, will wipe off any such mistaken consequence, which he would in∣juriously bring upon it. It is one question whether we are to observe a law: & another whether we are bound in Conscience to ob∣serve it. The question between us in the bottom of the point is not concerning out∣ward observation: but the inward obliga∣tion
of Consciences. And the truth is as I was saying at the close of the other rea∣son, that this business does not really con∣cern the Magistrate, or the Common-wealth directly at all (though indirectly and ex con∣sequenti any thing may concern any body) for what is it to the Magistrate or the com∣munity, so long as he can enforce the thing to be done if he will, whether a man does do it out of Conscience, or out of discreti∣on only: out of fear of God, or fear of the law, or his sword. The Magistrate cannot take any cognizance out of what principle a man acts; the judgement is not within his jurisdiction, and if a man doth not act out of Conscience, he cannot make him. It is sufficient, so long as a man acknowledges his authority from God, that he must therefore be subject and must not resist, and conse∣quently if in good earnest he stand upon it, and will have obedience from him, let it be in any thing but sin, there is no help for him that is, he may not help himself by resistance) but he must yield to it, whether he will or no. This is that which secures government, and Governors. Let every man be held bound in Conscience but thus far, and as for the rest, it is a matter con∣cerns
each ones own soul only and his pri∣vate peace, and it will become those that are prudent to be very tender what they de∣termine in the business. It is true this reverend Person thought I believe he had spoken well in his saying, that it is hard to write any thing more inconsi∣derate and dangerous then that I have: but if a man should write any word against sub∣jection to Magistracy, or his own present Magistrate, or that it were lawful to resist if the Magistrate should impose any law a∣gainst the common good (when yet it is not sin, I account many times not to obey it, and escape if we can without resistance), this let me tell him were dangerous (I can∣not say more dangerous because the other is not dangerous,) that the man may receive some shame and conviction for his own being so inconsiderate in his censure of what he understood no better. This De∣bater shall not have I will warrant him, a breath or Title of this nature from me. Nay if a law be good I mean politically good (and a law is politically good where it is for the common good,) I am ready to believe and hold it is obliging, obliging to the Conscience, not only that we must obey
rather then resist (which we must do if the thing be politically evil, unless we count suffering to be better) but if we could es∣cape with man, we must yet do it, I count least we offend God, if a law be not poli∣tically good, I say we must not resist for all that, and upon that account rather then suffer we are lyable to obedience. And what is there now, or what reason is there that any should desire more. Let us here our man of Proverbs. A man must not re∣sist (sayes our Casuist) that is express, and ra∣ther then resist he must suffer, but this is to steal a goose, and stick a feather; I thank him first for this, that he hath not left out this passage wholly in this place, least his Rea∣der else might have thought me indeed some dangerous person, whereas these words have acquitted me; and I answer, that this Goose he speaks of my stealing, is the thing ought to be stolen or removed, and that which he makes so light of, is to be brought in the Room of it, to wit, this man is of opinion that human laws even all laws indefinitely bind the Conscience, so that a man must sin if he break any of them, This is his Goose, that is, his foolish opi∣nion, an opinion intollerable: and instead
of this, that which I would bring in is, that though we conceive there be some laws, which if a man sometimes observes not, he is not to charge himself with sin, yet if he be compelled by the lawful Magistrate, ra∣ther then resist he must suffer, and rather then suffer obey. But why must he (sayes he) when he is already perswaded that he need not unless he be forced? this is strange! where is this Debaters reason! I say he must, though he should not sin else by neglect, because he is forced, and cannot help it, but for avoiding of suffering, he does it. But wrath or suffering is not to be feared when the multitude is agreed not to be injured. I answer here is the want of the distinction which this author would not take from me, between the authority which is in the Magistrates Person, and that of his com∣mands. The one is from God immediate∣ly, the other mediately by vertue of the things commanded being for the common good, and so particulars of that generall morall duty which is required of God. Some may use other words to express this distinction by the Magistrates authority it self, and the exercise of it in his commands or laws: but this must be known that dis∣tinguish
we must here to the same sense I intend, and be very careful too of the distinction or we shall be lost. If the multitude be agreed not to do a thing that is ill, it is well I take it, and as they ought, it was manifestly Jonathans case. But if they agree together not to suffer, if the Magi∣strate will enforce the thing, let there be but the least Officer will act in it, then they resist, and sin against God, and it is not justify able upon any terms, suppose a whole army and but two men in it will stand by the Prince, he may. I must affirm to speak strictly on the point of Conscience, by these two men alone, punish a whole army for any thing they refuse to do, and they must bear it, and cannot help themselves, but with sin which they must not do. For he that resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God, and receiveth to himself damnation. We know the case under Maximinian, when a whole legion of Christians were com∣manded to sacrifice, and they chose rather to suffer decimation twice over, being exe∣cuted man by man, rather then defend themselves while their lives were at stake, and the sword was in their hands. Such a Conscience ought we to have of our sub∣jection
(and so much does the concern of government and the whole World lye up∣on it,) when of obedience as to some particu∣lar commands we need to have none. In short there lyes no obligation upon Con∣science sometimes to obey, but there does alwayes not to resist, and that both serves the Magistrate turn, and suffices when he pleases to have a civil thing done.
CAP. VIII. I will not yet leave his last reason, seeing he layes so much stress on it, and his strength of all comes to this. I do not take here his very words, but matter which he may express as he will otherwise. The People must not be allowed to judge of their own actions, which are commanded by the Magistrate about civil things, because they will be swayed by their own interests, and judge those Laws a∣gainst the publick good which are not for their private profit: by which means unless they be taught and hold that all Laws indefinitely do bind their Consciences, they will notwithstand∣ing the Magistrates power, absolve themselves from what they please, no Laws will be observ∣ed, and all Government come to the ground, Unto this as his substance, besides my an∣swer I have already given, I shall crave leave to offer a few considerations. In the first place, this is certainly a shal∣w apprehension, which must suffer a con∣viction from the constant experience of the
world. For how is the world governed? there is not one of a hundred that observes the Laws out of Conscience; if they did, then must they for ought I know be care∣ful to gt the Statutes and read them as their bibles, which one of a thousand never do. But men understand, it they do such or such things, they are lable to be sued, or to be bound to the Sessions or the like, and to a∣void the danger of the Law, they ob∣serve it. Now it is a foolish thing to say the Laws will not be observed, or the world will not be governed, unless by another means then that by which it is governed, and the Law are observed. Our Nations and Heathen Nations, and those Nations which never had the fear of God to believe a judgement to come, have been kept under the observation of the Laws of their Country by these means. In the second place, this is not only a∣gainst universal experience, but it confronts the very institution of God, the appoint∣ment of the Magistracy, God hath made the Magistrate his Minister, and put the sword into his hand, for the ordering and govern∣ing Societies, and Common wealths, and if this indeed will not serve that purpose, then
you render his institution insufficient, and make his Minister to bear the sword in vain. The Law (sayes the Apostle) is not made for the righteous, but the disobedient and unrighteous. If all were righteous and would of themselves make Conscience of doing what they should do, there would be no need of Magistrate or Law: but when the Law and Magistrate is appointed for this end: to bring the refractory to order, and those that make no Conscience of what they do to be ruled, how fond must the imagination be which conceits, unless men do first beleive themselves bound in Con∣science to obey, they will not observe the Laws? In the third place, if it be for some persons particular interest to break the Laws, it will be the concern of others that they be forced to keep them if they be indeed for the com∣mon good: & so shall they joyn with the Ma∣gistrate in his causing the execution of them. This indeed is that which upholds all Laws that are good. The publick interest being greater then the private does uphold them. Whereas if a Law be not really for the pub∣lick good, this is one certain reason at the bottom of its invalidity, and decay, because
it hath not root enough, upon the publick utility, to maintain it self against particular enchroachments. If a Non-conformist come within five miles of a Corporation there is no body hurt by it, and no body like to be concerned at it, were this a thing truly con∣ducing to the publick good, then must the publick be disadvantaged in their breach of that Law; and if the publick, then must some more eminently, and those should be as much concerned, that they obey as them∣selves to avoid the observation. By the way, when the advantage for the publick does not countervaile and exceed the pri∣vate loss or dammage that particular per∣sons shall suffer by a Law, such a Law I take to be unjust, or at least Politically evil, and binds not the Conscience. However that which I here affirm is, that whether men make a Conscience of a Law or not, if the Law be good: the publick advantage will prevail (when the Magistrate is minded) or cause it to be observed. In the fourth place, it is a thing very un∣politick to offer to the world any principle upon which it should be governed, which is other then that which does govern it. If the world be governed by the Magistrates
sword, and the Conscience only that we must not rebell, and is governed as well as ever it is like to be governed: it is but an unhinging the world to pretend they must receive this principle, that human laws bind the Conscience; or else there will be no need to obey, seeing the People may joyn and chuse not to be forced as he speaks. It is a saying, if a Horse knew his strength, what might he not do? he would not let man ride him and use him as he does. If the world knew their strength, that the Magistrate indeed could not punish them whatsoever they did, unless they joyned with him one against a∣nother, when there is just cause for it, they might shake off every yoke: but as the whole body of the People cannot be made to know this, so as at once to agree upon it, any more then the Horse can, though every particular man does know it: so were it an utterly ruinous thing to speak of it if they could. It is true if the people did agree to∣gether (which agreement is their strength, and they cannot know one anothers present minds all) that they would not be forced, they might choose: but then when they made no Conscience to resist, how should this man think upon his principle, that they
would make such Conscience to obey. In the first place, it does seem to me a pernicious thing to the souls of pious and tender Christians, to lay any such load up∣on the Conscience which is more then it can bear. I say there is no temptation hard∣ly more dangerous to the undoing of a soul, then to press it upon such things as goes be∣yond it, and over sets it. If a man does believe he is bound to make Conscience of every command of his superiour and Law of the Realm or else he doth sin, it is enough to make him cast off all the Laws, and when his duty is made so grevious to him, that it seems impossible for him but to live in sin, to be ready for resistance next, and then all Magistracy is gon. The way to have some Laws obeyed out of Conscience, is to take off its obligation from others; and if a Ma∣gistrate indeed might choose whether his Subjects Consciences should be bound by all his Laws or not, there is good reason for him to be content that the matter should be as it is. They are bound in Conscience not to resist, and he knows not his own strength if he desire any more: although when a Law is for the common good, then is there Gods command also which takes
place. There is one thing I cannot but add, which might make another considerati∣on, what if a despotical Prince was so wick∣ed, as resolving to be damned himself to seek the damnation of all his people, and should thereupon make so many Laws, and about such trivial things on purpose, that none of his Subjects might regard to keep them, but live and die in the wilful breach of them: I pray let this Debater tell me re∣ally whether according to his opinion it does not lye in the power of such a Divel as this is, to carry a whole Nation to Hell with him. In the sixth place, let us suppose the Con∣sciences of men were bound indefinitely to all Laws, does this Author think really that the belief of this would make the world to observe them, and so maintain Govern∣ment more then the Magistrates sword? I doubt me he is here more wide: we see too well that when the worldly or carnal inte∣rest of men is concerned, what little regard Conscience has. It were happy indeed for the Earth if the fear of God Almighty did but prevail more with the Generality then the fear of a suite at Law, or a Penalty of twenty shillings. If interest will prevail
with a man, to judge a thing commanded him to be against the common good, when it is for it, the same interest of his it is like with such a man would prevaile still upon him not to observe the Law, though he were bound in Conscience to it. In the seventh place, then those few ho∣nest persons that would observe a Law if they thought themselves bound in Consci∣ence to it, not withstanding their private in∣terest be against it, will likewise make the like Conscience in their judging of a Law, so as not to be byassed by their particular concernment to think otherwise of it, then does comport with the publick advantage. And this in effect will come to the same issue. In the last place. I will offer you one president to pinne the basket. It pleased God in the late times that this case became Dr. Saundersons own case. The Act of U∣niformity bound the Minister to read Com∣mon Prayer. This Law the Dr. acknow∣ledges to be of force, for all the Times; but if he observes the Law he must loose his li∣ving. Upon this he considers of the Act, and when he looks on the immediate particular end of it, he can find nothing but that their remains obliged to it. He then looks on the general and ultimate end, and that he conceives
right to be the publick good, wch is intended or is to be supposed to be intended in all laws. Upon this end he comes to the considerati∣on whether all circumstances being weighed, it be conducive for the common good for him to observe this Law or not: and being in the result fully perswaded in his own mind that the benefit to the publick could no wayes countervail his particular loss and suffering he concludes it lawful by the neg∣lect of that Law to retain his living. There is a sober person having read my Case shew∣ed me a Manuscript of the Doctors (but would not let me write any thing out of it) for the confirmation of my judgement. I cannot relate either the whole matter or words of it, but these two things I affirm for truth in it. That be comes off upon the consideration of the general end of the Law, the publick benefit: and judges him∣self whether his observing that Law were conducive to that end in reference to the determining his own practice. And here I have (I account) my full weight for my self, and think I had best to fetch the poor man before also, who finding no sufficient relief from this Authour about his Cottage, may meet with it from this instance to his
satisfaction, and it will come to this, whit seems a little more then I have yet quite sai that not only when a Law is politically ¦vil, but when it is good in regard of its ge∣neral observation, yet if a man be perswa∣ded fully in his Conscience upon such du considerations and cautions as he ought to take, that his particular keeping of it under the present circumstances he lyes, is not so much for the common good really as his not keeping of it is (which I will take to be plainly this poor mans case instanced, who if he holds not his house must with his Family presently fall on the Parish), he is not to charge his soul with sin for his wholesome breach of it. After this I will yet subjoyn a little more in reference also to some others. When the Apostle gives us this precept, obey those that have the rule ovér you, though there be no words added by way of exception, it is to be supposed the things they command are for our edification, this being a condition necessarily implyed to all rightful obedience, that the Ruler hath authority in what he injoynes. But the Minister hath authority only for mens edification, and hath none in things against their spiritual good, according to our authority
(sayes the Apostle) for edification, not de∣struction. The Case is the same with the Magistrate. His commands that have au∣thority must be to our civil good. It is a mistake therefore (how ingenious and or∣dinary soever it may seem in some that say, the people have liberty to judge indeed, whether a thing commanded be lawful, but not at all whether it be convenient. That by all means they count it to be denyed, as if the allowing any such thing would presently (as this author fancies too) subvert all Govern∣ment. I hese Persons I perceive therefore distinguish not between judging what is sit for the general, or universality, which judg∣ment indeed is proper to the supream Ma∣gistrate: and judging what is fit for a mans self only to doe. All things are lawful for our (sayes the apostle) But all things are not expedient. I will not be brought under the power of any. a Christian judges for him∣self of both these; of the lawfulness and of the expedience of his own actions. If this be not granted then must he be brought under the power of indifferent things, which he ought not to be: and then does he submit himself unto the Ordinance of man or the hu∣man Creature as his servant and not as free
and as the Servant of God. Again these persons have not yet considered what I have been telling still in these papers, that this li∣berty is assumed of us in reference only to the Conscience or to our obligation in for interiori; and that while the outward man i still acknowledged to be bound, there is n danger at all to Government in the matter On the contrary side there is this intollera∣ble snare, or evil consequence does follow on the denyal hereof, that every time any human Law (the matter whereof is not for bidden of God) is not observed, the subject must sin, and consequently if he live and dyes knowingly and wilfully, in his neg∣lect he must be damned, I will yet propose therefore one or two instances. There is a Statute in Henry the eights time (if I mis∣take not) which remains unrepealed, that no man shall brew with Hopps. I do ask hereupon whether there be any Brewer in this Nation knowing of this, that can be saved? I do not find my Debator can answer me this question; and I do not doubt but there are many Brewers that are honest men and good Christians, as well as I believe he is. If you will say that this Law now is antiquated through disuse; I will ask then
what think you of those Brewers that dis∣used it at first? was they all damned ne∣cessarily who willfully brought it into dis∣use? the Case is a frequent Case as to all the like Laws, and you must come at length to this, that those who observed not this Law at first did judge it was not good for the Nation, or not fit to be kept: and upon that judgement are to be justified. It fol∣lows then both that a Law against the com∣mon good binds not the Conscience: and that every man for himself may judge whe∣ther it be so or no in reference to his own acting. Another instance shall be this, sup∣pose a Father or a Master lays some strict charge on his Son or Servant to lay out a Thousand pounds on a Commodity which is more perhaps (but for his Credit) then he is worth by half. This Son or Servant in going to do it, bears of the growing or com∣ing in of this Commodity by great quanti∣ties in some parts of the Kingdome, and up∣on his own discretion alone and good con∣sideration of what may fall our, forbears, his Father or Master perhaps now at pre∣sent is grievously chased: but within few days the price of the Commodity falls half, and then he sees that if he had been obeyed
he had been undone. From hence doe there appear not only the necessity, but be∣nefit, of allowing a judgement of discretion unto Persons of capacity, under the com∣mands of their Superiours; and that I say not meerly to judge whether the thing commanded be lawful or unlawful in re∣ference unto God whereof there is no question: but whether it be convenient or inconvenient to that end or outward good which by that command is designed. It ap∣pears also from both these instances, that the commands of men do not by vertue of the fifth Commandement it self bind the Con∣science immediately and absolutely, but medi∣ately and ex hypothesi, to wit upon supposi∣tion those commands are good, human laws Dr. Taylor will have it bind the Conscience di∣rectly and properly. I do not love to dispute about terms, but if any think he intends im∣mediately, he is out, for they do bind only by the intervention of Gods will, he argues, the authority of the Magistrate is Gods au∣thority. I answer the authority which is in the person of the Magistrate as Gods Mi∣nister is Gods authority, and binds directly and immediatly to subjection: but the com∣mands of the Magistrate have not Gods au∣thority,
unless the things commanded be a∣greeable to his will, and then it is by the in∣tervention of his will, I say, that the Consci∣ence is bound to obedience. A third thing appears that the Conscience of man is not bound by vertue of Gods authority unto every command of our Superiors though the thing commanded be in a matter sometimes which of it self or its own Nature, is in∣different because the consideration then of the external commodity, or discommodity only, could not justifie the breaker of any of them. If as soon as a Father or Master had forbidden any thing, the Commandment of God took place immediatly, and he there∣by is to be reckoned to forbid it too, this Son or Servant might not break such a com∣mand though he did gain a thousand pounds, or though either that Master or Father should be undone by it There be several examples might be fech't from Histories of great Commanders and Embassadors that to a chieve some great exploits have been forc't to leave the instructions of their Prin∣ces, for which though at their return they have begged their pardon (out of form) as being obnoxious to the Law, yet have they had that Conscience of their own fact to∣wards
them and toward God, as not only to be free from sin, in that disobedience, but to expect some signal reward for the service of such transgressions. CAP. ƲLT. THus much for his grand exception, I must now look out for others, or a∣ny passage else that requires Animadver∣sion. At the first there comes to my view in General, the cavilling way which he uses toward me, as if when a Man wanted a good answer, he should shew an ill Spirit, which I would not believe in this Author. I perceive he pretends often that the Apologist doth wrong him and so accuses him of falsifyings and impertinences, which are his frequent
words: But in the mean while I wonder he should not see how notoriously he is guilty of both these fine things himself. It would be no great matter (says he) if the Ca∣suist imitated not these men only in their phrase, and not in their weak reasonings, and then pro∣duces an observation I have of providence in transitu, as if I argued something from thence, which if he could tell what, he would confute no doubt, and he well might, wherefore it is manifest I lay that passage down and make no reasoning at all upon it, neither do I imitate any bodies phrase, nor tye my self to any part, And if this then be not falsifying neither shall his four or five sides after about Image worship, be any im∣pertinency: nor his six or seven pages in a∣nother place about the Taxes and Insur∣rections there has been in this Nation: no though he should tell you the whole Life and Death of Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw, with a more perfect Narration yet of that Dr. Standish, unto whom John Lincoln the Broker came when he was to preach at the Spittle on a Monday in Easter week. This should also be no impertinency, but a forceable confutation of whatsoever is said by the A∣pologist or me. He may next tell us any
other story as well out of the Chronicles. Of Jack Cad, and his Cozen Mortimer. Of Lambert Simuel and the Lady Margret his Aunt. How might he have mauld us with the Relation of Perkin Warbck, and Thomas Plammck, and Robert Ket with his Oak of Reformation, and then kil'd us quite dead with an arrow our of Robin Hoods bow? In the Reign of Richard the first there was the noble Earl Robin Hood, and one little John, and an hundred stout Fellows more, robbed the Passengers upon the High way. And what indeed is it that we may well think of such a Roving faculty we see in this Authors last books, but that the Mans pen hath got a leoseness, and that is the reason he hath so be spattered the poor Apologist, whose ill luck and my good one it was, that he came be∣tween him and me. This is the reason that makes him come abroad so often, in a Debate, a continuation of that debate, a continuation of that continuation, an appendix to that con∣tinuations continuation, and a Post-script to that appendix to that continuation, of the continuation of the Friendly Debate. Nec dum finius Orestes. I must needs say here, I have been tempted to use some expressions that perhaps might be grateful to many who
are willing to have a person (as they are apt to speak) met with in his kind, but I re∣member there is a self-denyal to be used in our writings as in our conversations, and there is an office of Love and honour we owe to worthy persons; and when I may use such expressions as these I think from the ex∣ample of Elijah, I must use no bitterness from the command of the Apostle, nor any word from an offended mind from the ex∣ample of our Saviour and Lord. The next thing which presents it self to my notice is a passage which hath a malig∣nant aspect on my opinion, or on what I have said, yet shall be found but a friend to it. I am sensible now and then of a learing hint from this engaged man, I choose to be a little free with him, seeing he hath chalked out that way to me, but do reflect again on that word as having too aptly or truly ex∣pressed the thing, whether I had best let it stand. By a learing passage I understand any such as reflects any thing upon me, which seems to him to render me obnoxious, besides the being slighted above what is just. Nevertheless when I perceive he speaks out of ignorance, that is out of the want of a fuller understanding in this particular mat∣ter,
of what he reproves, I am sustained with my own opinion and the integrity of it. Although too, while he conceits his know∣ledge so superior, it is all one for me, to tast his Spirit. When I say ignorance, to wit hitherto, in reference to this point, I under∣stand not this person to be an ignorant per∣son. No I hold him to be a learned Man of very much ability, and the least of his suffi∣ciency I take to be for dispute. I compare not my self with him. I know the short∣ness of my houshold stuff yet this have I, that when a particular point gets into my head, it costs me more thoughts usually then others will bestow upon it, and consequent∣ly ought not in every thing I say, be so readily contemned. In the most points that ever I studied I could arrive ordinarily but to this, that there is reason on both sides. That to be dogmatical is not safe. I do sometimes speak for a thing out of courage, to bear it up against the stream, rather then out of pride. I have scarce ever come up to so much confidence in any point as I have in this in good earnest, and if I shew it too much though i be out of the simplicity of my heart, I could help it if I would, but that I think the world requires it, and the matter
will bear it, for I am my self a peice of dust. The passage is this, The Casuists principle if persued will prove the very same with that in the perverse meaning of it so much cryed up, when all our mischiefs began, salus populi suprema lex▪ for the right understanding of which maxime I refer you to the last Lecture of Dr. Saunderson. It is very much that this person should see at first glimp upon what foundation all that I say does stand and that this foundation is made good by Dr. Saunderson, and yet that he should go to put such a slur as this on it, without any good consideration or ho∣nesty. As for the maxime which in the words is fercht from Cicero de legibus, out of what od Roman Law soever he had it, in the truth it is no less antient then Magistracy or Go∣vernment it self, and shall stand so long as there is any in the World. There be some have abused the holy Gospel and turned it into wantonness, but the abuse of the Gos∣pel is no cause sufficient to throw off the Gospel. No more is the abuse of this maxime sufficient reason to hinder any the patronage of it. You may as well lay aside the Gospel in Religion, as this truth out of Politicks, without which neither any society
or Common-wealth, or the World it self could stand. I do hugely like the design of this Dr. in that Lecture which is the vindi∣cation of that Maxime, that every one may safely imbrace it, and I assent to all so far as I remember he hath said of it; but yet I must needs say, I think not the Lecture most suf∣ficient of his Lectures, who appears rather as himself accounts, something out of his pro∣per study, when he is drawn upon it. That which he sayes is no less truth then obvious, that under the word populus we must comprehend the supream Magistrate as well as the Subject. It is trite, that Plebs and Populus in Political Writers are distin∣guished, and this may be most convincing that in Ciceroes time (whose words these are) the Roman people was a Common-wealth, so that the supream Magistracy it self lay in the body of the people, so far it is from any Justice or Right, that any should make use of this maxime to suppress the cheif Magi∣strate by it. The good of the people in their publick capacity is the good of the Com∣mon-wealth. A Common-wealth consists in the order of superiority and inferiority. The Common-wealths good then is the good of Magistrates and Subjects, the common
interest of one is also the Interest of the o∣ther. There being no consequence deduci∣ble therefore from this maxime for the peo∣ple to rise up against the King any more then against themselves, or their own wel∣fare, There is one question I think wanting in that Lecture of the Dr. whereof neither he (as the truth is) nor this man have yet cast any right account, It is this, How comes it to pass that when this maxime doth warrant the subject in not obeying some Laws which are made by the Magistrate, it will by no means warrant any subject to rise against or resist the Magistrate if he will execute them upon him? The answer to this will be like the invention of making the Egg stand an end, that is so apparent and easie, that you will wonder it should not be seen already by every body. VVhen the common good then or the good of the community, is said to be the supream Law, it must be understood most undoubtedly in reference to those laws which are made for the community. Ex illis haec suprema lex esto. If there be any one of such consequently does clash with this, which is the cheif or superior to them all, that is, if there be any law made which is not indeed for the common good, then is the subject manifestly discharged by ver∣tue of this maxime from any obligation to it, in the point of equity or conscience. But
it is as manifest likewise, that we are not to understand this maxime in reference to Gods Laws. To wit, The common good is the supream Law to all other Laws of the State, to ll human Laws, which are made to that end, the publick good of civil society: but it is not supream to Gods Laws, or to any Law of God religious or moral which are made to another end, to wit the glorifying of God, not in order to our civil happiness, but our everlasting salvation. VVhen God says Thou shalt have no other Gods but me, a Roman or a Greek might not say no it is son the good of our Country that many Gods be worshipped, and the common good must take place of other Laws. For besides that it is false to think it for the good of any state, to have more then one God; The Law of the common good is to take place over the Common wealths Law, or is the supream Law, I say to all human Laws, but not to Gods Laws, which comes not under any subordina∣tion to such good but do concern the salvati∣on of Mens souls. Now it is the Law or com∣mand of God that Magistracy be set up, that we be in subjection to the powers that are, that is the present Magistrate that we have, and that we resist not. This is no less his Com∣mandment
then that we have no other Gods but him. If there be any then will argue we are not obleiged in Conscience to obey a Law which is not for the common good upon the account of this maxime: Therefore we are not obleiged in Conscience to subjecti∣on to the Magistrate if he rule not for the common good upon account of the same, he is greatly mistaken. Because this maxime as we are to know, was Originally intend∣ed so is to be understood on necessity, in reference to the Laws of men, or the Com∣mon wealths Laws only, and not in refe∣rence to the Commandments of God. Again, when a human Law passes for the good of the community, the common good being the supream rule and measure of all, every one judges and ought to judge (upon the pinch of the question) whether the thing commanded be for the common good, that is, whether it be agreeable to the supream Law, and according as he judges and be∣lieves it to be or no, so is he obliged in Conscience or not to it. But when a Ma∣gistrate rules not as he ought, and so we are free as to his inordinate commands, there is no man may judge whether he him∣self, or the Government it self be for the
good or no. You will say why? Be∣cause the powers that be are of God, and his Ordinance, and whether the Ordinance of God be for our good or no, there is no mortal may question or is to iudge. God hath himself declared this that he is the Minister of God for our good even Nero was, and no man may once offer to determine contrary to Gods declared word, or tell the Almighty he sayes not truth. Consequently when a Law sometimes doth pass that is not for the common good, and a man judging of it according to truth is not obliged in Consci∣ence to obedience, vet the Magistrate him∣self being for our good (God having deter∣mined so and mans judgement being confi∣ned by his) even by this maxime it self that the common good is the supream Law, he must be still bound to subjection. And what now is become of this mans reproach which he hath laid to my charge with so much falshood, and little judgement? as if Dr. Saunderson and he were for this maxime in the right sense, and I was for it in the perverse meaning, when it is plain that indeed neither he nor Dr. Saunderson (how worthy soever in their pacts otherwise) understood this maxim in the full import of it, seeing else he
would have determined the main case no o∣therwise then I do. And this brings me to another passage of this Debater, which I was willing to reserve ill now, both for the agreement of it here, nd for making a discovery of some of this uthours strong reasonings, who counts mine o weak. It is resolved by the Casuist, that if the Magistrate command any thing for the Peo∣ples hurt, there lies no obligation upon the Con∣science to obey, and they are made judges of what s for their hurt. If then he require them not o resist and they find this is for their hurt, they are not bound in Conscience not to resist. Is not this very goodly? Does not the Gentle∣man shew us here indeed what a fathome it is that he has, as he speaks somewhere? why this can be no less sure then Bonaventures Son, or Bradwardines brother! What if the Magistrate should require us not to resist? If it were the Magistrate only required this, there were no doubt but we might resist if he hurt or wrong us, as well as not obey his Laws if they be for our hurt. But it is Gods Commandment that we resist not, and if he shall do us wrong or hurt we must bear it upon that account. It is but suffering ac∣cording to his well and that is the reason why
the Magistrate and Government it self safe, when the Conscience is yet at liberty  avoid, if we can, any unjust, unreasonab noxious, or unprofitable Law for the peop You will say are we not bound to obey h Laws, as well as not to resist his authority I answer, there is this difference, we ha no command from God that sayes you m obey this or that particular Law of the Com∣mon-wealth, or that you must indefinite obey them all seeing some may be unjust some wicked, some vain; But there is a La or command from God to be subject to the powers that are: whatsoever they are, and  whatsoever they are, that is rightful power (for else the devil may come in) and th we must net resist. I say moreover that to be ruled by the common good in civil affairs designed by his Minister, I take to be a Law of God of the same Nature as to be subject to the Magistrate, and to fear himself. After this, there is one passage more I will not pass because it looks lightly and is a concession against himself, but does not sa∣tisfie if the word may nto offend) without a farther remove upon it. It is this. It is sup∣posed when a case of intollerable inconvenience
happens that it being not the intention of a Prince to make his Subjects miserable, he would not have made that Law if he could have foreseen such a mischeif, and upon that account it cea∣ses to be a Law, and looses its obligation. I remember well that some indeed speak thus, and when any take a Latitude in apply∣ing it to an individual case it will come to this, that supposing the Law-giver to consi∣der the circumstances that this or that parti∣cular man is in, it is presumed that he would consent to the breach of his Law by that person, and upon this presumption there may be many perhaps that absolve them∣selves from several peices of obedience. That which may be said for this is, that if the Law-giver is to be supposed not to intend to make his subjects miserable by a Law; he is to be supposed not to intend to make any one miserable for he cannot simply do the one a∣ny more then the other. Eadem est ratio u∣nius cujusque & Universorum. If such a Law makes this or that particular man miserable if he keep it, he will judge it to be the Law-givers intention, that he be dispensed with, that those should observe it who are made happy, or at least not so distressed as he by it. There is something I suppose of solidity
in this, if we can find out for it a right bot∣tom. There is no particular person can say if the Law-giver had foreseen this or the particular mans inconvenience he would no have made the Law, because Laws in the nature are confinements and streightnin to particular persons for the good of the community. But this he must say, th notwithstanding the will of the Law-giver is indeed, that the generality should keep the Law being for their good, yet it is to be understood with exception, to such a ca or cases, as his is. If he can give a reason now for this that will hold, it is well. The saying he made not his Law to make an simply miserable is true, but in Relation to the publick he passed it though some should be distressed by it: He cannot say therefore that he made not this Law to make him mi∣serable, but this he may say, that he made not this Law to make him or any man mi∣serable, but for the advantage of the com∣munity, seeing for the benefit of the publick  any one may be made to suffer dammage, whereas to make a Law that any might suf∣fer it without advantage to the publick is unjust. There is necessity then to come here to my foundation and that is this. That the general end of every Law and Law-giver
is (or ought to be and so is supposed to be) the publick advantage. VVhen any case then general or particular is such that it is not for the publick benefit that a Law be observed, or that it is more for the pub∣lick good that it be not observed rather then observed, the Law-givers intention is to be supposed from the general end, that it should not be obligatory to the Subject. His in∣tention is to oblige us to such a thing for the publick good. But if such a thing in such a case be not for the publick good the obligation ceases being forsaken of his intention. There is much may be said here, be∣side what we insist on before from the will of God. At the close he presents us with the testi∣monies of two or three learned men for obe∣dience to all lawful commands of our supe∣riours. He might have taken the harmony of confessions, or most Diuines common pla∣ces, and added as many more as he pleased of greater authority. He might find ex∣pressions too as strict as any from some of our Nonconformist Divines. But that which is to be answered to all is this, that we are to apprehend such passages to be still spoken
upon supposition that the Laws or com∣mands of the superiours be good and whole∣some Laws. They may put in the word lawfull only, but under it this must also be implyed. The honest and learned Mr. Perkins there∣fore when he speaks of our duty to the Ma∣gistrate, does judiciously use such terms. VVe are bound to observe the good and whole∣some Laws of the Nation wheein we live. When he and others speaks thus it is plain that in the bottom of their minds they ap∣prehend, that if the Laws and commands of men be not good and wholesome Laws or com∣mands, they are not accordingly bound to them, that is not in Conscience bound, though the outward man be at the Magi∣strates service. And this I take it is that Light which does even almost Universally flow into the Souls of men, at the first con∣sideration of these matters, and as it is of Nature, it is from God. But who shall judge whether a Law be a good or whole∣some Law or no? This I know may be a∣gain askt. It is a good and wholesome Law I account when the thing commanded be for the common good. And I reply who shall judge whether that which be commanded be
lawful or not? It will be a thing most foo∣lish to say, that he who hath passed the Law as good already must be judge, for then it might be no question. You will say that e∣very man must indeed be judge of that. I say then that if every man must judge whe∣ther the thing commanded him in a Law be according to Gods word or not, which is a matter of so much more difficulty and con∣cernment to his Soul, and where of the most of men are so much more indeed uncapable to judge with soundness, and yet every one must judge for himself according to his abi∣lity in reference to his own practice, why should any scruple to have the same said in the question whether it be for the common good, being what is easier done and a less matter? The sum of the whole sheets will come to this. The most both of Religious and Learned men are at a loss (through their dispute and jangling I suppose when the mat∣ter else perhaps were more plain) in their conceptions about the obligation of human Laws. Two extreams we hear. The one that they bind not the Conscience at all; the other, that they bind indefinitely, that is, all bind under pain of sin. A middle path I have effered in resolving the case. We see where
it is the opposer does pinch. They will not allow the subject to be a reasonable a∣gent in Politicals, when they cannot deny him to be so in Morals and things Religious. If they will allow us a judgement of discre∣tion in Civils, They must be ignorant, or consider not, that the common good is the supream Law. That the supream must o∣ver-rule the subservient. So long as any know not this, they are in darkness and bon∣dage: But the Scintillations of this truth and Doctrine that I here have brought, are the feeds of Light and Liberty to the World. In which liberty the considering Christian will stand fast, and the tender will rejoyce in con∣solation. THE END.
Reader, BEfore I sent these Sheets to the Press, at first I shewed them a Learned Dr. a person of note, as of ability, and I received his thoughts of them in the words which you find in the beginning. Being re∣turned from the Printer, I had oppor∣tunity to shew them to another of the like eminency, and I received presently a full Sheet from him upon the subject, I will make bold to set down thus much of it which follows. The Office (to wit, of the Magistrate) and exercise or administration being di∣stinguished, you truly say that he that is not bound in a particular case to obey, yet may be a Subject still (which is the relation of one bound to ordinary obe∣dience)
and Rebellion which is the casting off this subjection, i forbidden notwith∣standing a particular Law may be diso∣beyed. A Law made against God or the safe∣ty of the Common-wealth is no Law in sensu uni voco but it is in sensu aevo vel analogico, and does not pperly bind the Subject. All men in their wits (that are masters of such discourse) are agreed that judi∣cium est vel publicum vel provatum. Pub∣licum est vel civile; Magistratus, per gla∣dium exe quendum: Vel ecclesiastum, Pasto∣rum, per verbum & clares exequendum: Et privatum discretionis est omnium. No Man ever obeyed without it, for authori∣tas imperantis agnita, is the objectum for∣male obedientiae and answereth the questi∣on Quare obedis? The Magistrate being by Office in∣trusted
with the bonum pubeicum the Sub∣ject is not called to try every one of his Laws whether they are suited to the bonum publicum or not, much less to be critical and busie out of his place. But being not bound to be blind or or careless in a notorious case or such of which he hath full and lawful cogni∣zance, he may and must discern what command is against the common good. R. B.
