L1500 99833300 37776
A Letter from Rotterdam, touching the Scotch Affaires, since November, 1650. SIR, Since my Arrivall heere, it hath beene my good hap to gaine a cleare confirmation of the truth of that Assertion, that it never was in the intentions of the Presbyterian Scots to have Charles the 2. for their King, and that you may al∣so bee confirmed in the Assurance thereof, I shall pre∣sume to offer to your more serious consideration this short view of some of their Actions since November last. As first, the strange rendition of the Castle of Edenbo∣rough, the strongest hold in all the Kingdome; whether out of cowardice or covetousnesse, I dispute not; sure I am out of no necessity, the stores of Provisions, Armes, and Ammunition (if Relations bee true) being almost incredible. Then the many secret Plots and Designes they have put in practice, for the more cleanely betray∣ing into the Enemies hand, the Towne and Castle of Sterling, and Burnt Eland, those two principall Keies or fastnesses of Fife and Stragherne, all which God in mercy hath hitherto frustrated, to the Enemies dis∣heartning, and the Actors confusion. I shall not neede to mention how heartily the Presbyterian entertained Ker and Stragherns Declaration, with those in the West of Scotland, though founded upon Independent Princi∣ples, and purporting little lesse then renunciation of Mo∣narchy: Or what cunning tricks they used for putting off the Kings Coronation, ambitious still to keepe the Reines of Government in their owne hands, and curbe
His Sacred Majesty in His Exercise of his Regall Pow∣er, by enslaving Him to the unreasonable Articles hee was forced to condiscend unto at Breda? Or how vio∣lently they opposed all Agreement with the Royall Par∣ty, openly protesting against it, and secretly fomenting Divisions amongst them, till through Gods blessing, in despite of all their Machinations, Loyaltie prevailed, and increased so fast, as in a short space to overpower those Machivillian Kirk-lings; whose guilt of consci∣ence, hourely pursued with just feares, affrighted them quickly to decline His Majesties Mercy and Goodnesse, and seeke for shelter and protection from the Enemies of their King and Countrie. As for particulars I referre you to the weekely Newes-Bookes; hee that will but waste so much time and paines as to peruse those Pam∣phlets, may soone observe all these, and many more, and more mischievous Presbyterian Practices, then heere are related. But not to insist on such perty proofes; a more con∣vincing Argument wee have in that right Presbyterian, and (without offence to so Sacred a Solemnity bee it spoken) sordid maner of Crowning their King on New-Years Day, 1650. For whether wee looke upon it in a∣ny of those Circumstances of Time, Place, Persons, or Ceremonies, the Presbyterian basenesse is most cleare∣ly to be discerned thereby. As for the Time, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of that Kingdome, having long groaned under the cruell oppressions of Kirke and State-Committees, were ready to shake off that Iron Yoke, and recover againe their Ancient Lawes and Liberties, under the Golden and Gentle Scepter of Monarchy, wherein their Forefathers
for many generations had happily enjoyd so great Peace and plenty; this the Presbyterian perceiving, for feare lest the Royall Party should grow strong enough to set the Crowne on the Kings Head without them, they re∣solve to doe it themselves, making this advantage of the time, still to ensnare His Sacred Majesty with the bonds of the Covenant, and limit His Royal Prerogative, ere the Nobility and Gentry could have free accesse to Court, or the Army come to a Generall Randevouz. The Place: the most Prophane and Sacrilegious place in all Christendome, a dining Chamber, (no Consecra∣ted Chappell) where the Belly is the onely God that is worshipped: To shew the Presbyterians that are so stiffe in observing of difference of Time, the Sanctifying of the Sabboth, &c. make no difference of places, but a Barne, a Stable, or a Dining Roome, is a place good e∣nough for their Solemn Assemblies. Then the most Sacrilegious Place: 'Tis confessed, the Abbey and Church of Schone hath beene famous all the World over, aswell for the Marble Chaire, wherein the Kings of Scotland Anciently had their Crownes set on their Heads; as for the Monuments and Tombes of those Pious Princes, whose Sacred Dust was there reli∣giously preserved; but since Sacriledge entred the World under the cloake of Reformation, that Abbey hath been dissolved, and out of the Ruines of that Beau∣teous Church, was erected this Palace of Schone, the Walls built with the Stones of that Church and Abbey, the Chimney-pieces and Pavements framed out of the Marble Tombes and Grave Stones of those dead Kings. This His Majesties Father (of Blessed Memory) percei∣ving when hee was invited to a Feast by the Nobleman
that is owner of that house, Hee refused to eate and drinke in so Sacrilegious a place: Yet this was picked out by the Presbyterian for the solemnizing Charles the Seconds Coronation, as if betimes they would season him with that cursed thirst after things dedicated to Holy Uses, and invest the Crowne with the spoiles of the Churches Patrimony, which his Blessed Father so much abhorred, ap. 4. that himselfe professed he had rather live of the Churches Almes, as some of his Predecessors had done, then violently take the bread out of Bi∣shops and Ministers mouthes; and by such Sacrilegious Rapines, as the Covenanting Presbyters gaped after, bring a brand and curse upon His Posterity by robbing God and his Church of what the bounty of His Ance∣stors had enriched it withall, for encouragement of Learning and Religion. The Persons and solemnities likewise were suitable: No Bishop to annoint him, and pronounce the benedi∣ction at the setting the Crowne on his Head, nor Noble∣man to present the Regalia; though for these thousand yeares the like president never was known in Scotland; where the Nobility ever counted it an Ensigne of Ho∣nour and loyaltie to attend their Kings Coronation, and behold his sacred Person inaugurated with all due so∣lemnities: his Anointing and benediction to be perfor∣med by a Bishop, as in all other parts of the Christian world, Kings have been ever since Christianity prevaild over the Thrones of Princes; not without a sacred pat∣tern of Samuels Anoynting Saul and David by Gods own appointmēt. And in the Age by-past this Ceremony was thought so Religiously necessary, that John Knox with his contemporary Presbyters (I am sure no friends to
needles Ceremonies) sent purposely for the Bishop of Aberdeen (who had received his Consecration from the Pope) to Annoint King James, even in his Cradle, that his Coronation might not be defective in such a Cere∣mony, whose name and Authority they abus'd, not on∣ly to oppose, but to imprison Queen Mary his mother, and force her to resigne up the Crowne into her Sons hands, that so themselves (the prevailing Faction) might Rule and Raigne as Kings during his minority. Thus whilest it serves their owne ends, the Presbyter is stiffe for this Ceremony in the Grandfathers daies, but now as regardlesse of it in the Grandchild: Charles the 2. is to bee Crown'd without any such Royall or Religi∣ous Ceremony; upon designe doubtlesse, as well to de∣vest him of that Jus Sanguinis, that hereditary right of Succession, which doth immortallize Princes here on Earth, and make their Names and Office (like his whose Vicegerents they are, and whose Image they beare) eternall to all generations: as also to render him the peoples Creature and servant, as if his Crowne and dignity had been the peoples gift, and not his owne by Birthright; as if his Power had beene derivative from his Subjects, and not Gods Ordinance, and as naturall o∣ver them, as a Fathers over his children: in a word, that his first Title might be Carolus Electione Populi: not Carolus Dei Gratia. For this purpose they had prepared three Lay-Kirk-men, and three Kirk-Lay-men to per∣forme the Office of the Bishop; my meaning is, three Presbyters of their own Brooding under their Classes, not of Episcopall Ordination; and three Ruling Elders; these last acting their parts in a double capacity: for first they stand for Representers of the People, and
Commissioners of the Representative Body, the Parlia∣ment; and next for Assisting Elders of the Kirke. Thus Presbytery, which was ever good at deposing and usurping upon Kings, hath at last (and may it prove the last) set the Crowne on their Kings Head, more in mockery (if without an ill Omen I may borrow that fi∣militude, as the Souldiers Crown'd our Saviour a little before his Crucifixion;) than out of any true intention: For the Crowne they put upon his Head, though it were of gold, yet was it debas'd by the Covenant, and rob'd of the choicest Flowers wherewith it was wont to be adorn'd, His Royall Praerogatives, those individu∣all and unforfeitable Ensignes of Soveraignty. The Sword they gave him, though it had a speci∣ous outside, yet it seem'd rather of Wood than Steele, the Edge being blunted, by taking from him the Mili∣tia, and depriving him of the power of the Sword, ei∣ther for offence, by doing justice upon malefactors, or for defence against Forreigne Invasion, or home-bred Rebellion. Lastly, the Scepter they put into his hand was but a Mock-Scepter, being divested of the Supreame Power, which is the very Essence, or Formalis ratio of Majestie; for by the Articles of Breda they had reserved that Po∣wer to themselves, tying him up to act nothing with∣out or contrary to the advice of Parliament and Assem∣bly; nor to denie his Assent to any thing that should be represented by them, or resolv'd on in their Commit∣tees of Kirke and State. Thus had the Presbyterians muzled their Lion, and at this first step into the Throne, throwne down his So∣veraign Majesties, had not the great God, by whom Kings
reigne, gratiously upheld his servant; and in a short space restor'd him to that height of Honour and Dignitie, which those Varlets sought to keep him from: For soon after his Coronation, the Nobilitie and Gentrie, for many years having been oppress'd by severall Factions in their turns, for the future to prevent all Faction, and u∣nite the whole Kingdome against the Common Enemy, they resolve forthwith to restore His Majestie to all his just Praerogatives, and no longer to suffer Committees either of Kirke or State to Lord it over them: the jea∣lousies of the two grand Factions of the Kingdome, the Hamiltonian, and Argylian gave life to this Resolution; who not more ambitious of, than envious at each others greatnesse, chose, rather than submit to the commands of their equalls or inferiours, to set up the King, and to yield obedience to one King, rather than many Kings; for which very cause, The Beasts of the Forrest once made choyce of the Lyon for their King. By this means in the month of January that glorious Sun began to mount higher and higher in the Zodiack of Majestie and Soveraigntie; and quickly warm'd with its bright beams, the hearts of his languishing Subjects into the love of Loyaltie and Regall Government; for which they now praise God that had sent them a King, under whose protection they might bee freed from the tyranny and oppression of their fellow subjects. But about the 5. of February this glorious Sun appea∣red brighter and brighter, when that free Parliament began to sit, which ashamed longer to deprive their King of the libertie to use his Reason with a good Conscience, admitted him to the power of his Negative Voice, and put him into the possession of his just Rights, whilst the
Kirke Assembly at the same time met at St. Andrew perplex themselves with hot disputes touching His Ma∣jesties Authoritie in Ecclesiasticals, and other private quarrels of their owne, rather than endeavour to com∣pose differences, and submit to the Kings supreame po∣wer over all persons, and in all Causes spirituall and temporall; His Majestie not much minding their Dis∣putes, nor they carefull to tender their due respects to him, till those contentions ended, and that Assembly dissolv'd suddenly, through the hot alarum given about this time by the English Forces, who sent a strong par∣ty to crosse the Forth above Sterling, whilest the maine Body fac'd Sterling it selfe; and other parties were sent by Sea to make some attempt upon Burnt Eland, and Fife-Nesse. I shall not need to expresse the losses the E∣nemy sustain'd in those severall places: Though your Mercury's, whose brib'd breath dares publish naught but Victories, conceale the particulars; yet the Dutch Ga∣zets talke of thousands of the English kil'd, and of their disorderly Retreat, and unseasonable mutiny of the Soul∣diery for want of pay, and hard duty, which begat a de∣bate, whether Fairfax his Counsell had not been more prudently follow'd, rather to stand upon defence, than invade a Countrey where they were to fight with two such potent Enemies, as Hunger, and Cold. Sir, I can assure you, the Scots, since their Kings Co∣ronation, magnifie Gods providence, in blessing them wonderfully beyond their deserts, aswell in the discove∣ry of some mens Treasons against his Majesties Person, and the Treachery of others that sought to betray Ster∣ling, and Brunt Eland into the Enemies hand; as also in repulsing Gen. Cromwels Forces, which have endeavou∣red
often and by sundry Stratagems to land men in Fife▪ but chiefly for that great piece of providence, by sen∣ding in unexpectedly to their relief, 3 English Ships la∣den with provisions and Arms for the supply of the En∣glish Army; and for the casting away of foure En∣glish Merchants Ships and their Convoy at the Towne of Are; And further, this you may take upon the assurance of an authentick witnes, that the Scots King himself, under his own hand very lately signified to his friends here, that he is in no inconsiderable condition, having already a very gallant Army of 36000. horse and Foot well appointed. This news hath much encouraged the English Cavaliers in these parts, and stir'd them up to furnish themselves with all necessaries fit for his Ma∣jesties service, insomuch that about the end of February 12. sayle of Ships, convoy'd by two men of War, went from the Brill in Holland towards the North of Scotland, stor'd with all sorts of Provisions, Arms and Ammuni∣tion, many Volunteers, and good store of Horses. I had like to forgot one observation worth your no∣ting, that whilest the King was under the tuition of the Scots Presbutery, they would not afford him the free∣dome to speak or write to any of his friends; all Let∣ters either sent by his Majestie or directed to him, they intercepted and opened: and the only use they made of his Royall Hand and Authoritie, tended ever to his dis∣honour, and ofttimes to the destruction of himselfe and his party in the three Kingdomes; for proofe of this I shall call to witnesse his Proclamations publisht in Au∣gust last; his peremptory command for disbanding Middleton and his friends in the North, his declaring that party in Ireland Traytors, who fought daily against
the State of England; his revoking the Commissions granted to the Marquesse of Ormond, Lord Inchequeen, and many others of that Nation, that were to act by Sea and Land; and lastly, his recalling all Commissions granted to divers of the English Nobilitie and Gentrie; in order to some action and designs then plotted against the Kingdome of England: all which is sufficient to shew the Presbyterian is no Changeling; Kings must be their Subjects and they themselves Kings, or else there is no living amongst them. And that you may see how much the Kingdome of Scotland hath groan'd under the Rigidnesse of Presbytery, I shall acquaint you with a few Grieveances, which of late have been represented to the King and his Counsell, by the Commons, with an earnest desire, and hope of redresse. Grievances against the Scots Presbytery. 1. Their Usurping a power over all secular and Military Affairs; for if by the major part in Parliament a Law be en∣acted contrary to their mindes, they presently excommunicate the Members for sitting and Voting in that Parliament: for this very cause Duke Hamilton, Earle of Lyndsay, Earle of Dumfernling, Lauderdaile, and divers others of the Nobili∣ty were forc'd to doe pennance: and if any man else yield obe∣dience to such statute enacted without their approbation, he is immediately brought to the Stoole of Repentance; witnesse all those that levied Horse or money for the use of Duke Hamil∣tons Army, or did serve under his command. 2. Their taking cognizance of things done in another King∣dome, and beyond Seas: an honest man was forced to doe pen∣nance for drinking in a womans house at Campheere in Zea∣land, who had been Excommunicated formerly by the Presby∣tery
of Aberdeen; likewise many others have been Excommu∣nicated, and constrain'd to doe penance for bearing Armes in England under Duke Hamilton. 3. Their defaming of Persons of Honour, and other parti∣cular Persons in their Pulpits; as also their publishing defa∣matory Declarations, to the scandall of Religion, and contempt of Monarchy. 4. Their secret subornation of children and servants to ac∣cuse and betray their Parents and Masters for words spoken in their Bed-chambers and private houses; there is scarce a conside∣rable Family in all the Kingdome, where they have not by one means or other set a spy upon them. 5. Their wresting out of the hands of the Nobility and Gen∣try the Patronages of all Ecclesiasticall Livings, whereby they have occasion'd great corruption and divisions among the Cler∣gy, insomuch that in some places Churches have lyen voyd with∣out any Minister two or three years, to the eternall prejudice of the peoples souls. 6. Their cruell interdicting of Churches; in one County, Atholl by name, 5 Churches were interdicted 3 years together, no Minister suffered to Preach or pray amongst the people all that time, nor to administer Sacraments, whereby many chil∣dren dyed unbaptised. 7. Their usurping an Arbitrary power over the souls of men, every Minister taking upon him to debar whom he please, even the best man of the Parish from the Sacrament, and their deny∣ing Baptisme to the Children of Malignants. 8. Their covetous increasing their owne stipends, in all Cor∣porations, procuring the State to lay an imposition of 3 d. Ex∣cise upon every Scotch pinte of Wine to be payd to the Minister of the Parish, making every house to pay the 12. penny, accor∣ding to the utmost rack'd Rent, which is 20 d. per pound.
Sir, All the effect these grievances produced at that conjuncture of time, was, That the King and His Councell thought it not fit to make the breach wider, or increase Divisions amongst His Subjects, onely for the present the Clergy were commanded not to intermed∣dle in Civill or Military Affaires; but to preach to the people obe∣dience to His Majesties Authority, and Unity and Peace one amongst another: Yet in the opinion of wise men, if things should settle that way, the Presbytery of SCOTLAND would be refined and made conformable to these in HOLLAND: For as your Refor∣mers did in the beginning call for a Moderate Episcopacy; so the whole cry of the Scots Nation is, for a Moderate Presbytery, which in time will end in JOHN KNOX his Government, whose designe was to place Superintendents in every County: The Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdome, as well as yours, cannot endure to heare of the restoring of Episcopacy, for feare their Sacrilegious Titles to the Churches Lands should once more be called in question. As I was closing my Letter, this certaine Intelligence I received, That the Scots King, having secured all the passes and landing pla∣ces in FIFE, and quelied the CLASSIS of STERLING, who de∣clared against Him and His Party, is lately gone to suppresse the like Faction which the CLASSIS of ABERDEEN hath countenanced to the great prejudice and safety of that part of the Kingdome. In His absence Duke HAMILTON commands the Southerne Army, who endeavours dayly to try his friends in levying Forces in the West of SCOTLAND. Here we expect some Scotch Nobleman, as an Ambassader from the Scotch King for that Kingdome, and the Report is, the Lord GERARD hath a Commission sent him to bee His Embassador for the Kingdome of ENGLAND. I have no more roome to write, but onely to subscribe my selfe, Your most humble servant. From Rotterdam 10/1. March. 1650.
