L2306 14918825 102922
THE CITY AND REPUBLICK OF VENICE. In Three Parts. Originally Written in French by Monsieur De S. Desdier. LONDON: Printed for Char. Brome at the Gun at the West End of St. Paul's. 1699.
THE PREFACE. WHat hath hitherto been said of Ve∣nice, hath been either little conso∣nant to Truth, or else hath only mention'd the least part of those things which ought to be known. The time I spent there, which was from the beginning of the year 1672. until the end of the year 1674, during the Embassy of the Count d' Avaux, first oc∣casioned me the Thoughts of making a most lively and natural Description of this City, their Government, with the manner of Li∣ving, and Customs of the Venetians; by com∣prehending in the Three Parts of this Work, whatsoever other Authors hath separately said of it, which, I can say, hath been ve∣ry imperfect. These Affairs do seem to me so extraordinary and particular, that I cannot think them less different from the other parts of Europe, than the Kingdom of China is from that part of France.
Yet the better to succeed in this Design, and to draw an exact Copy from this admira∣ble Original, I have not only applied my self to the strictest Enquiries during my abode there, and to the Conversation of Persons tho∣roughly instructed, with all the Maxims of this Repulick; but I did likewise consult their Chronicles, the Annal Manuscripts of Venice, the Register-Book of Families, and the Re∣lations which the most experienc'd Mini∣sters have made of them: insomuch that by adding these Informations to those which I gathered from the Chief Historians of the Republick, and the most exactest Remarks of all the singularities of Venice, I ought to believe that I shall no ways deceive my self in the livelyness of my proposed At∣tempt. However it hapned that the Author of the History of the Government Amelot de la Houssaie. of Venice, who was emploied in the preceding Embassy, did likewise re∣solve upon a Design much like to mine. His Book appearing when mine was just rea∣dy for the Press, occasioned me to believe I had taken all this Labour to no purpose. So I thought no farther of the pains I had taken after the Impression of a Book, which had so general an Approbation. As I know not the Author, so I am not possess'd with
any partiality to speak either well or ill of him: Yet as I am able to judge of his Book with more assurance, than they less conversant with the Affairs of this City; so I think my self oblig'd to say he hath penetrated into all the Mysteries of the Ve∣netian Republique, upon which subject scarce any thing hath escap'd his Enquiries: But I leave others to judge if he hath not shewn too much Passion, as likewise what reason the Republick had to complain of him. Having pass'd over Four Years, with∣out any farther Thoughts of what I had written of Venice; I should without doubt have been silent all the rest of my Life, if some Persons to whom I had com∣municated my design, upon my Return from Venice, had not engag'd me to go on with my first Resolution. The Draught and subject-matter of the Treatise seem'd so particular and curious, especially the First and Third Part, that they were so much persuaded, as they likewise induced me to be of the same Opinion, that the several Descriptions of those Matters there menti∣oned, were not less important to shew the Maxims of the Republick, and the Genius of this People, than the most refined Ar∣gument that can be made upon the Policy of their Government.
To give the ampler satisfaction in what may be expected from me, as likewise to avoid presenting the Publick with a Work filled with the same things, that other Per∣sons may possibly already have better ex∣press'd, than I can here describe; I have thought fit to prune this of whatsoever I had said of the Interests and Corresponden∣cies of this Government, with the several Potentates of Europe. I struck out several Observations that at present seem unneces∣sary, and have likewise abridg'd the Chap∣ters of the Strength and Revenue of the State; neither have I spoke of the Domi∣nions they possess, because those Matters are amply Treated in another place: So I have particularly applied my self to what∣soever I judg'd necessary to my Design. I have left it to the Readers liberty to draw such Consequences, as may be easily deduc'd from all the most Essential passa∣ges; and wheresoever I have touch'd upon their Policy and Maxims of Government, it hath been with the greatest Care. My Description of Venice in the First Part of this Treatise, will without all doubt be allowed to be very exact; and what I say of this wonderful City, will not be only as much to the commedation of it, as whatso∣ever her own Historians hath written to
the Glory of her; but it is likewise so justly taken from the Life, that it will pass free of that flattery which is ever observed in Authors writing of their own Country. In the Second Part, which is of the Government of the Republick; I have added nothing of my own, either in relation to the rise of Venice, the divers Revolutions that have been in the form of her Government; or as to the rigorous Conduct of the Council of Ten, and the Inquisitors of State: for of one side I have faithfully followed what is found in the Annals of Venice; and on the other I have mentioned only such things, as might be known to them who have made any stay at Venice; for one can scarce be there any time, without seeing or hearing of some very extraordinary things. In the same Part I have render'd to the Antient Venetian Nobility, all the Justice that is due to their Quality. The Proofs which I have given of the Antiquity of their Extraction, may possibly convince such, who either out of Ignorance or Prepossession do contest with them that illustrious Advan∣tage. In the Third Part, I have amply describ'd the Conduct of the young Nobi∣lity, with their particular Customs; and the better to shew all the singularities of them, there is the manner of living of al∣most
all the different degrees of People; to which I have added an exact Description of all the publick diversions of Venice, to shew the mighty difference, between the relish of this People, and those of other Nations. I am of the Opinion, that the Method herein observed will not a little contribute to the Beauty which I have particularly aim'd at in this Treatise. I thought it most Expedient first to give an Idea of the City before I entred into the Rise of the Repub∣lick, and the Particulars of their Govern∣ment. I thought it likewise necessary to have some knowledge of the Nobility, before I spoke of their Councils which are the Soul of the State. And as the Customs and Man∣ner of Living of the Inhabitants do not less depend on the Laws of the Government, than the publick Diversions upon the Na∣ture of the Place, so I have handled these two Heads in the Third Part. I did not think fit to draw into one Chap∣ter all the Laws of the Venetian Policy, as judging they would be better dispersed in the several Places, according to the Subject of the Discourse; so they will be sure to make a greater impression upon the Mind of the Reader, whose Memory being fixed, and by this means assisted, will more easily preserve an Idea of them. However, I have
endeavoured to keep every thing to its pro∣per Place and particular Chapter, as well to avoid Repetitions, as not to be oblig'd to seek for one and the same thing in seve∣ral different Places. For these Reasons and to avoid tiring the Reader with tedious Digressions and troublesome References, I have so ordered it, that whatsoever might seem obscure, is ever explain'd by what hath been said before. I could very much wish I had been able to write with more Politeness, yet am in hopes that the singularity of the Subject will make amends for the faults of the Stile: and as I have no other end in this Treatise than to shew a great many things of which we were very ignorant, without being mo∣ved to it by any other Reason or Design; so I hope it will be favourably received. I only desire that the small pains I have ta∣ken to bring this into our Language, and to divert the Inquisitive, may make amends for what shall be found amiss in the Translation. Fra. Terne.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART. THE description of the Lagunes, in the middle of which is Situated the City of Venice. Page 1 Of the Islands which are in the La∣gunes. p. 8 Of the City of Venice. p. 10 Of the Canals and Bridges. p. 13 Of the great Canal. p. 15 Of the Bridge of Rialto. p. 17 Of the Established Ferries or Passages for the publick Conveniency. p. 18 Of tbe Streets and Places p. 20 Of St. Mark's Place. p. 22 The Broglio. p. 25 Of the Ducal Palace of St. Mark. p. 28 Of the Church of St. Mark. p. 31 Of the Treasure of Venice. p. 36 Of St. Mark's Steeple. p. 41
Of the Religious Houses and Churches of Ve∣nice. p. 43 Of the Mercery and Rialto. p. 47 Of the Arsenal of Venice. p. 48 Of the Gondola's. p. 55 Of the Activity of the Gondoliers. p. 60 The Conveniency of having at Venice all things necessary to a great City. p. 62 Of the Trade of Venice. p. 64 Of the Merchants Bank, or what they call Bank Del Giro. p. 67 The goodness of the Air at Venice. p. 68 Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea and La∣gunes of Venice. p. 72 The CONTENTS of the Second PART. OF the Rise and Original of the Republick of Venice, and their Form of Govern∣ment. p. 3 Of the several Forms of Government that were at Venice. p. 10 Of the Antiquity of the Venetian Nobi∣lity. p. 15 Of the first Order of the Venetian Nobility. p. 18
Of the second Order of the Venetian Nobi∣lity. p. 22 Of the Third Order of the Venetian Nobi∣lity. p. 23 Of such as have been made Noble by their Me∣rits. p. 27 Of the Venetian Citizens. p. 30 Of the Venetian Gentry on the Conti∣nent. p. 32 Of the Procurator of St. Mark. p. 35 Of the great Chancellor of the Republick. p. 40 Of the Government of the Republick in Gene∣ral. p. 42 Of the Ecclesiastical Government. p. 44 Of the Patriarch of Venice. p. 46 Of the Patriarch of Aquilea. p. 48 Of the Election of the Curates or Parish Priests of Venice. p. 49 Of the Dependencies in which the Ecclesia∣stick and Religious live, in regard of the Government. p. 52 Of the Inquisition of Venice. 75 Of the Political Government of the Republick. p. 62 Of the College. p. 63 Of the Doge. p. 65 How the Doge goes Attended upon Solemn Ceremonies. p. 77 Of the Election of a Doge. p. 83
Of the Six Councellors of the Doge, the Three Presidents of the Council Criminal of Forty, and of the Vice Doge. p. 87 Of the Six Great Sages. p. 90 Of the Five Sages of Terra Firma p. 91 Of the Five Sages of the Orders. p. 93 Of the Audiences of Ambassadors. p. 95 Of the Pregadi. p. 102 Of the great Council. p. 107 Of the Council of Ten. p. 118 Of the Inquisitors of State. p. 121 Of the Two Avogadors. p. 126 Of the Council Criminal of Forty. p. 131 Of the Method observed in Criminal Cases. p. 133 Of the Magistrates of the Pomp. p. 137 Of the Magistrates for the Inspection of the Mo∣nasteries. p. 141 Of their Secret Spies and Informers. p. 143 Of the Podestats, Captains of Arms, and o∣ther Officers that the Republick sends into the several Provinces. p. 147 Of the Inquisitors of Terra Firma. p. 152 Of the Forces of the Republick, both by Sea and Land. p. 154 Of the Revenues and Expence of the Re∣publick. p. 161
CONTENTS. OF THE THIRD PART. Of the Education and Manners of the Young Nobility. p. 3 Of the Habits of the Noble Venetians. p. 11 Of the Venetian Ladies. p. 18 How the Noble Venetians wait on the La∣dies. p. 24 Of the Marriages of the Noble Venetians p. 30 Of the Religious Women. p. 35 Of the Liberty of Venice. p. 42 Of the Courtizans. p. 47 Of the Publick Diversions of the Carneval. p. 55 Of the Ridotti or Basset-Banques. p. 58 Of the Opera's. p. 60 Of the Comedy. p. 65 Of the little Balls, or those call'd Feasts. p. 68 Of the Herculean Exercises and Bull Feasts. p 69 Of the Ceremony upon Maundy Thursday. p. 72
Of the Fresque. p. 75 Of the Festival of the Churches. p. 80 Of the Dances of the Girls. p. 82 Of the Feast of the Ascension. p. 84 Of the First occasion of the Ceremony, that is observ'd upon Ascension-Day, in Espousing of the Sea. p. 87 Of the Feasts of the Doge. p. 87 Of the Feasts and Ceremonies that are us'd at the Marriages of the Noble Venetians. p. 96 Of the Regate, or Rowing Matches of the Gondola's. p. 102 Of the Entrances of the Procurators. p. 106 Of their Boxing, or Fights at Cuffs. p. 110
THE FIRST PART OF The Advantagious Situation OF VENICE, AND What is most Remarkable there. The Description of the Lagunes, in the middle of which is situated the City of Venice. THere is scarce any one who hath not heard, that the City of Venice is situa∣ted in the Sea; yet it is not an easie matter to form to ones self a true Idea of the particular Disposition of this Place, seeing among those who have been there, and that have likewise made some stay, there are many that do confound the Sea with the Lagunes, without ever observing that these are absolutely distinct from the Sea; as being certain great Plains
which industrious Nature hath purposely over∣flowed, designing to render the Situation of Ve∣nice not less strong, than agreeable. Above those Places, in the bottom of the Adriatick Gulph, on the West side, where the Rivers Fo and Adigè fall into the Sea, Nature hath opposed the Violence of the Winds by a mighty Dike, which runs from the South to the North for the space of about 35 Leagues, and 5 or 600 Paces in breadth, which defends the Country from being easily overflown; but the Sea having forced this Neck of Land, hath made it self six Passages in so many several places, which overflowing all the low Grounds beyond this Bank, gave occasion to this The Lagunes. Name of Lagunes, leaving in this great District several Islands about 5 or 6 Miles in compass, which are not much above the surface of the Water. The Lagunes lie from South to North against the Continent, or Terra firma. main Land, from the Polesin, towards the Po and Adigè; from the Padouan, to the Brente; from the Themisan and Friuli, towards the Mouth of the Plavis, or Anassus, making a great Demi-Oval, which is closed towards the Sea by the before-mentioned Remainders of the Neck of Land, being so many natural Defences against the A∣driatick; and whereby the Sea hath here made the same number of distinct Islands, as she hath opened Passages to drown the low Country, and form the Lagunes. The six Passages by which the Sea falls into the Lagunes, are the only Ports by which one passes from the Sea to this City. The first, to
begin at the most Southern part, is the Port of Brondolo, which being almost stopt up with the Sands, by reason of the Adigè, and the falling in here of the new Brente, is now no more fre∣quented. The second is the Port of Chiosa, an Episco∣pal City, situated 24 Miles from Venice, and is something like it, by reason of the Situation and Canals. The third is the Port of Malamoco, from the Village of that Name; here all the great Ships come, as being deeper than any of the other Ports; the Road is very good, and capable of containing a great number of Ships. The fourth is the Port of the Lido, over-against the most Eastern Point of Venice, and only a Mile from it. Through this Port, the Gallies and other great Vessels, after having unladed at the Lazaret of Malamoco, pass on to St. Mark's Place, as also to several other places of the City, by the means of the great Canal which cros∣ses it. There is above the Lido the Mouth of St. Eras∣mus, and something further that of the Three Ports, so called by reason of the three Openings pretty near one the other; but the Water is so low in these places, that they are only frequented by the Boats of Fishermen. It may be seen by what is here said, that Venice is naturally defended against all the Attacks of a Naval Force, being the Ships cannot come any nearer than the Port of Malamoco; for those that would pass on to Venice by the La∣gunes, are obliged, after being unladed, to be towed up through certain Passages, where the
deepness of the Water, sufficient for Ships of Bur∣then, is marked out by great Piles; or else to re∣turn to Sea, taking the same course that the Gal∣lies do, and come in through the Port of the Lido: For the great Currant of the Water hath preserved here, by means of the Flood, a deeper Channel than is found in any other part of the Lagunes. Of all the Ports, that of the Lido is most in their Eye, being the nearest to the City, and the easiest to be approached; but the Republick hath taken care of it by a well fortified Castle, with Water-Batteries on the right; on the left is only a Wall for Musketiers, whose Discharges must be of very good effect, being the entrance of the Port is nothing near Musket-shot over. Notwithstanding this advantagious Situation of this City, Experience hath shewn, that if a Na∣val Army should get the Possession of one of these Passages, the City of Venice would be in a little time reduced to great Extremities; as it happened in the year 1380, in the War between the Venetians and Genoueses, who by the taking of the Port of Chiosa, under their General Doria, struck the City into such a Fear, that it was de∣bated in the Senate, if they should abandon the Town, and transport themselves to Candia. This Deliberation had been followed with the Execu∣tion of it, if they had not at that time received the News of the Victory they gained at Sea by a General Victor Pisani, under the Doge Andre Contarini there in Person, which came so op∣portunely, as to deliver the Republick from the most terrible Fear they ever knew.
Wherefore as the Entrances of Malamoco and the Lido are the most important, and a Descent made at the first of these Ports, would easily render the Enemy Masters of the second, by possessing the whole Isle between them, which is not above 5 Miles long, and 4 or 500 Paces broad, so the Republick hath caused it to be cut near the Lido, by a A deep Ditch. Fossè that crosses it, fortified with Bastions, their Casemats, and Courtines faced with Brick towards Malamoque, which is the most dange∣rous Part. Venice enjoys more Security towards the side of the main Land; for in all that compass of Ground which borders upon the Lagunes towards the West, there are only two principal Ways that lead to the City; the one is a Village cal∣led Mestre, where all things are brought which come out of Germany to go to Venice, by the means of a Canal that goes into the Lagunes. The other is called Lizza Fusina; here ends the old Canal of the Breute: This Water is prevented from falling into the Lagunes by a Sluce, by rea∣son of the Prejudice it might occasion. What∣soever comes from Padua, and from the greatest part of the Territories of Venice, is brought to Fusina, if it does not go down the before men∣tioned Rivers. The Passages that lead from these two Places to Venice, as likewise some others less considera∣ble, are not direct, but marked out at certain Distances by high Piles, which the Republick are sure to have cut in any pressing Necessity, rendering the City inaccessible to all Enemies on that side. For however small their Boats may
be, yet it will be impossible for them to make their passage of Five Miles without running on ground; besides, with the help of certain Boats and Ma∣chines of Defence in the Arsenal of Venice, they will, according to their own Opinions, easily ren∣der ineffectual all attempts of an Enemy. King Lewis the XII. in Confederacy with most Princes of Europe, that Pope Julius the 11th. had Armed against the Venetians; after having beaten their Army, advanced to Fusina, from whence the City of Venice is plainly seen: Here he in∣tended to attempt the passage of the Lagunes, in order to render himself Master of the City; but the Pope having recovered Romagnia, that was not only usurp'd from him, but the chief occasi∣on of the war, became unwilling to see the en∣tire ruine of the Republick, and the too pow∣erful establishment of the French in Italy; with∣drew himself from the Ligue; which gave the address of the Venetians opportunity to separate the rest, and disperse that terrible Storm which must have ruin'd them beyond recovery. As the Principal strength of Venice consists in the shallowness of the Lagunes, so it sometimes causes great fears to the Republick, for the Ground rising continually higher, and damming up the entrances of the Ports, makes them ap∣prehend they may at length become dry, at least inaccessible to all sorts of Vessels, and at the same time not habitable, by reason of the cor∣ruption that would proceed from thence; evident in some neighbouring Isles, where the malevo∣lent Exhalations of those Marshy Grounds, cause them to be forsaken by every one.
In effect, the diminution of the Waters depth is so considerable, that formerly where there was Eight and Ten Fathom Water in the Port of Malamoco, there is not at present above Two or Three; insomuch that the great Ships are now oblig'd to take the opportunity of the highest of the Tide to get out. They must be undoubtedly mistaken who believe the Sea rather retires, than the Land grows upon them; it being evident that the common Tides beat against the foundations of the most Ancient Palaces and other Edifices of Venice, which are not of a much younger Date than the very Foundation of the Republick it self. These inconveniences being of the last im∣portance, have put the Republick to an inexpres∣sible charge within these last Forty years: They are very ready to hear all Enginiers that enter∣tain them with the cleansing and keeping the La∣gunes clear of Mud: For which reason they have always at hand a great number of vast Machines both to scour them, and deepen the Canals. As the Republick is of the Opinion that these Beds of Earth are particularly caused by the falling in of the Brente and Piave, occasioning the Sand to settle here; so they thought by an extraordina∣ry Work to take such measures as might prevent it, by turning the course, and conveying the Water towards Brondoto, a new Canal cut in the Plains, for above Thirty Miles together. So these Waters are carried above the entrance of the Three Ports by little Channels; which being scarce able to resist against the rapidity of the Stream, are found to be a great Charge and not much Benefit.
Some believe that this diminution of the depth proceeds from the enlarging of the Lagunes, to which purpose the Venetians levell'd a high Dyke, that was formerly from the Town of Chiosa to Lizza Fusina consequently above Twenty Miles long; for it being directly opposite to the flow∣ing of the Sea, so it was also the occasion of its re∣turning with greater force, which did not only car∣ry away that Filth and Mud which now remains since the motion is abated by the liberty of flow∣ing into that great space, but likewise the course being at that time more rapid, did then scour the Port of Malamoco, which is over against it. Of the Islands which are in the Lagunes. THere are reckon'd to be about 60 Islands in the Lagunes, of which above 25 are built upon, and very well inhabited; therein compre∣hending those that divide the Sea from the La∣gunes; To which the Venetians give the name of Lido, or Shoar-Islands. These are, as hath been already said, long and narrow, the Soil poor and Sandy; yet the industrious Labour of the Inhabitants hath render'd it rich and fertile in many places, insomuch that one sees here ma∣ny Gardens. Of all the Islands which lie against the Sea, that called Polesina is the best Peopl'd and the most agreeable; it reaches from Polesin. the Port of Chiosa to that of Malamoco, being about 15 Miles long, and 3 or 400 Paces over; towards the Lagunes it is built, the Houses small, but pretty and neat; the rest of it even to the
Sea is improved by Gard'ning, as likewise the most part of the other adjacent Isles, in which there are computed to be about Fourteen thou∣sand Inhabitants that cultivate them, and furnish Venice with the greatest part of those vast quanti∣ties of Fruits and Roots that are there consu∣med. The other inhabited Islands about Venice, are either entirely possessed by some one Religious House, whose Walls are encompassed with Wa∣ter on all sides, as those of the Holy Ghost, of St. George D'Alega, St. Seconde, with several others; or divided into Villages and little Towns well inhabited, As also handsome Churches, and Con∣vents of Religious of both Sexes: So are the Islands of Bouran, Mayorbe, Torcelle, Four or Five Miles from Venice. They were very considerable in the beginning of the Republick; but the alte∣ration of the Air, as formely mentioned, has caused them to be forsaken by their best Inha∣bitants. These Islands are erected into a Bishoprick, but the Bishop is forc'd to make his Residence in another place; even the Religious that have Houses there, are necessitated to quit them all the Summer by reason of the malignity of the Air, leaving some poor Priests to assist those In∣habitants that are obliged to continue there. As to the Religious Women, they not being allow'd the liberty to remove themselves, but forc'd to stay against their Inclinations, express to such as come to see them an extream dissatisfaction of carrying in their Faces, the evident signs of the ill Air they live in; for nothing can be a more sen∣sible mortification to them, than to be reckon'd
Forty at Five and twenty, by reason of their fallow and unhealthy Complexion. Of all the Islands of the Lagunes, next to those that form the Body of the City of Venice, that of Mouran is the most considerable: It is a little Ci∣ty lying North of Venice, and about Canon shot from it: There is a great Canal that passes through it, with several other smaller Canals, many Noble Palaces, and agreeable Pleasure-houses of the Noble Venetians. Here are several Churches, and some Convents; the number of Inhabitants are esteemed at 20000. The Island of Mouran is famous for its great number of Glass Furnaces, and Shops along the side of the great Canal: Here you may see them continually lading great quantities of Glass and Chrystal Glasses of an extraordinary Beauty, which are from hence sent into all parts of Europe. How∣ever, the Merchants to their great Concern, are sensible of this mighty decay of Trade, by the prohibition of France, against importing Glass into that Kingdom, and establishing those Glass-houses, which have attained there to such a perfection in ordering their Chrystal, that I have heard a Famous Master here, promise a hundred thousand Florins to any one that would shew him how to temper his Chrystal Glasses, like to that of an extraordinary clear and beautiful Cup, which was brought from France. Of the City of Venice. VEnice hath the quality of all extraordinary things, it being almost impossible by a de∣scription only, to form such an Idea of it, as shall
exactly answer to the reality of what it is: Ne∣vertheless, after having comprehended what the Lagunes or Lakes are, 'twill be easy to represent this famous City, as rising out of the Sea in the mid∣dle of these overflown Plains, which seems to have been the design of Nature, as contributing to its Beauty, Security and Conveniency; not less to the great Power, and long Continua∣tion of this Republick. And whatever part of the Town you arrive at, either from Terra Firma, or from the Sea; this City shews it self equally Peculiar and Majesti∣cal. Yet you have the prospect of the most Beauti∣ful part, in coming from Chiosa by the Lagunes: For at Ten Miles distance you begin to have the Prospect, it there seeming to float upon the Sur∣face of the Waters, environ'd with a Forest of Barques and Ships, which, by degrees, permits you full of Admiration to behold the Magni∣ficent Buildings of the Palace, and St. Mark's Place The Church Della Salute and the Palace of Cornaro. as likewise some others of the most sumptuous Edifices upon the Great Canal, which you have on the Left Hand. The draught of the Situation of Venice does much resemble the shape of the Turbot, and the Eastern extremity being the Arsenal makes the Tail; The City is wholly built upon Piles, whose Foundations are not only laid in those places where the Earth appear'd above the Water, but likewise driven into those considerably under it, by which means they have in a manner brought together a great number of little Isles, that encompass the principal, which being join'd by Bridges, forms the Body of this vast City,
that does not only seem to be the Queen of all the Islands in the Lagunes, but likewise absolute Mistress of the Gulf, to which Sovereignty she pretends. In short, her greatness, Situation, her external Majesty, join'd to the great number of her Inhabitants, the great concourse of Stangers, and her method of Government, render her ad∣mir'd by all the World. Sannazar one of the most excellent Wits of the Age, made formerly these six Verses, which gives Venice the glorious Preference, and to the Author the honour of having them engrav'd on Marble. Viderat Adriacis Venetam Neptunus in undis Stare Urbem, & toto dicere jura Mari. I nunc Tarpeias, quantum vis, Jupiter, arceis Objice, & illa tua Maenia Martis, ait. Si Tiberim Pelago confers, Urbem aspice utramque, Illam homines dices, hanc posuisse Deos. There is computed to be in Venice about One Hundred and Fourscore thousand Inhabitants; notwithstanding it is open on all sides, without Gates or Walls, having no other Ramparts than the Houses and Palaces of particulars, neither Fortification nor Citadel, and without Garison, yet it assuredly is one of the strongest Cities of Europe. Although the Island of Zueque is perfectly separated from Venice, yet La Zueca. it continues to be part of it. It seems to be a great half Moon, and a Counter-guard that co∣vers more than half the City towards the South, reaching from over against the Place of St. Mark, even to the most Western extremity, from which
places it is separated by a large Canal of above 300 feet over. This Island was formerly inhabited by the Jews, which occasion'd it the name of Judaic, and since by corruption that of Zueque. It is of an equal breadth, being about 300 paces o∣ver, there is a Key on that side of it which looks towards the City, nobly built with magnificent Churches, as likewise abundance of noble Houses, with spacious Gardens behind them, that reach even to the Lagunes. This Island being divided by 7 or 8 Canals that cross it, there are as many Bridges which continue the Key, from whence the prospect of the City is not less agreeable, than that of La Zueca from the City; and if the smallest gust of Wind did not continually hinder the Gondolo's from crossing the great Canal, La Zueca would undoubtedly be the most charming part of this City. Of the Canals and Bridges. THE great number of Canals by which one may come into this City from e∣very side, and that cross it in every place, divides it into an incredible number of small Islands, insomuch that there are several single Houses that are on all sides wash'd by the Waves; From whence it happens there is no place in Venice but to which one may come by Water, as likewise on Foot, by the means of a∣bout 500 Bridges that facilitate the Communica∣tion of a great number of little Streets &c. that cross the City, and almost as many Keys that are built along the Canals.
The greatest part of the Canals in the heart of the City are very narrow, and have no Keys; which evidently shews that the first Founders of Venice were mighty Husbands in managing the Ground that was so precious, or that they had not in their thoughts the Idea of what this City hath since attain'd. Some of the other Canals have but one single Key, and others Il Fundamento. two, but so narrow that two People can hardly walk together; yet there are some very spacious and convenient, but without either Rails or Ba∣lusters, open and made into Stairs over against each House, which descend very low, for the more easie use of the Gondolo's at all times of the Tide; by which means those frequent descents or stairs, have so La Riva. straitned the Keys, that all Passengers, more especially in the Night, are oblig'd to keep close to the sides of the Houses, or otherwise at almost every step expose themselves to the dangers of the Canal. The depth of these Canals are different; but when the Tide is at the highest it is in most places 5 or 6 Foot, excepting the great Canal, of which the depth is very considerable; it is no∣thing less than a worthy Subject of admiration, but more in those parts of the Town most fre∣quented by the poorer People, to see the great numbers of little Children playing upon the very sides and edges of these Canals, which in all o∣ther places would affect the Parents with the per∣petual apprehension of their falling into the Water, yet, it no ways troubles them here, nei∣ther is it scarce known that any such accidents happen in these places.
Most part of the Bridges of Venice are made of Stone and Brick, so delicately Built that the Arch is not above 8 Inches thick, but the sides and middle are of a very hard sort of free Stone, the Arches are so high that the passage is no ways incommodious to the Gondolo's and other Vessels that are continually passing the Canals. You ascend these Bridges on either side by 4 or 5 steps of white Stone that is much like Marble, which in time become so smooth and polish'd, that in a Rain or Frosty weather it is very difficult to keep from falling; as these Bridges are without Rails or any other security, so one ought to have a special regard to their Feet; for the white Stone is one of the 3 things that the Venetian Proverb recom∣mends to the care of all Stangers. Of the great Canal. NOthing contributes more to the beauty of Venice than the great Great Canal. Canal; which beginning near the Place of St. Mark, goes winding through the Centre of the City, and ends towards the West over against Fucina, where the Breute as hath been formerly observ'd, falls into the Lagunes; from whence it must be allow'd that the great Canal was hereto∣fore the true Course of this River, as likewise that part of the City where the Bridge of Rialto now is, was really the principal Port that the Paduans had in the Lagunes. This Canal is near 2 Miles long, and 50 or 60 paces over, which turns so often about the middle of the City, that to cross from one part to the other, you must pass this Canal at least 3
times. It is on both sides adorn'd with the no∣blest Palaces of Venice; but beside the want of a Key that might continue it as a Terrass from one end to the other, there is a great number of little Houses among them, which do diminish those advantages that would be otherwise due to these magnificent Buildings. In several other places of this City may be seen many noble Houses and Palaces: But without detaining my self here upon this Description of them, I shall only add that as the 2 Palaces of Cornaro and Grimani upon the great Canal, are the most Magnificent of all, so their Frontispieces may serve as Models to the Buildings of the great∣est Princes. Besides these, one sees upon the great Canal, and in all other parts of this City a great number of the more antique Artichecture, whose Fronts being adorn'd with large Balconies of Marble both in the first and second Floors, do evidently demonstrate the Ancient Wealth and Power of this Republick. The Water of the great Canal by reason of the great depth is always clean and clear, the Currant in the flux and reflux of the Tide, is not much less Rapid than those of Rivers. The Gallies and laden Vessels find sufficient Water in every part of it; this Canal seems to be the great Vein, which refreshes all the little parts of the vast Body of this City, by the means of an a∣bundance of little Branches or Veins that issue from it.
Of the Bridge of Rialto. THE great Canal that divides Venice into al∣most two equal parts, hath only one Bridge over it, which is directly in the Centre of the City, and in that quarter from which it takes the Name. This Bridge was Built of Wood until the Year 1587, at which time the Repub∣lick, under the Doge Pascal Cigogne, caus'd it to be built with Stone: The greatest Ararchitects of the Age were consulted about this magnificent Work; among the several Designs, that of one Arch was preferr'd to all the others; which is so large that a Gally with her Mast let down, can at all times go through it, and her Oars rowing. The foundation of this Bridge is on each side laid upon 10000 Elm Piles, after having first by a prodigious Charge kept up the Water in cer∣tain deep places, until they had sunk 16 Foot into the Earth, to render the Work more sub∣stantial. The Centre of the Bridge is but a moderate part of a great Circle, they not being willing to raise it in proportion to the Diameter, yet to ascend the Bridge with the most conveni∣ency; it is very broad, and all built of very large stones, not much inferior to Marble for hardness. This Bridge hath on each side 2 rows of shops, whose Timber-work being rais'd Arbour like, and covered with Lead, renders the appearance of it very agreeable; there is in the middle be∣tween this double row of Shops a space mode∣rately large; from hence you go up several steps
until you come to the uppermost part, which is open on both sides like a Porch, here you com∣mand on both hands the prospect of the great Canal, and enter into the 2 Corrido's or Galle∣ries, which being behind the Shops, continue from one end of the Bridge to the other: A great Ballustrade, with very handsom Cornishes is the support of these 2 Galleries; the whole is so re∣gular a Piece of Artichecture, that this Bridge is of an extream advantageous effect to the beauty of the great Canal. The publick Registers assure us that the Re∣publick spent upon this Building, the sum of 250000 Ducats, that for 2 Years all places of the City were filled The Ducat be∣ing about 4s. English. with Materials, and that a mighty number of Stone-Cutters were in∣cessantly employ'd; however this Bridge does not at first sight appear to have been an enter∣prize of such great Importance. Of the establish'd Ferry's or Passages for the publick conveniency. BEsides the excessive charges of building more Bridges upon the great Canal, I am of the opinion that the hinderance they would be to the continual passage of great Vessels, and the prejudice that the beauty of the prospect would receive, may be allow'd to be sufficient reasons a∣gainst all such attempts; moreover the Policy of this Government is that they may be able in any sudden Revolution, to defend one part of the Ci∣ty against the other, which would be no difficult matter, seeing there is but one Bridge to defend:
But as it would be an extream inconve∣niency to the Inhabitants, if they were oblig'd to pass the Bridge upon every Li Tragetti. occasion of going into the other part of the City; so there are for their greater ease, at least upon the great Canal 18 or 20 establish'd Passages; that is, several Gondoliers always ready at a convenient place to Ferry over in their Gondo∣liers the Passengers from one side to the o∣ther, for which they pay something less than a half-peny of our Money. There are many more of these Passages in those quarters of the City, where for want of Bridges the circumference of going by Land would be too large. All the publick Gondoliers are oblig'd to serve such as will make use of them at the rate of 15 d. their Money an hour, which does not exceed 5 of ours. The Ferry Gondolo's, having but one Oar, the Passage is not less tedious, than inconvenient; for these brutish Gondoliers, are so unreasonable when they happen upon a Stranger that is igno∣rant of the Language, and unacquainted with the Customs of the Town, to Treat him with the utmost incivilities, telling one another in such occasions, that they have met with a Polander, being then certain to insist upon the double price of what they ought to have, pretending they must by these means reimburse themselves of those considerable Sums which they are oblig'd to pay the Republick for the Liberty of the Ferry; that is for the permission of keeping a Gondole to that purpose: Besides they are oblig'd to answer those extraordinary contributions which is laid upon their Company in all the urgent necessities of the Republick.
Of the Streets and Places. LAnd is so precious at Venice, that it is not to be admir'd if all the Streets are so narrow, that those of the most frequented, will scarcely permit two People to Walk together; which is the occasion of frequent Jostlings, more particu∣larly at the several Turnings, which are very numerous. Nevertheless being pav'd with Brick, the side uppermost, free of Coaches, Horses, Carts and other Carriages, these conveniences of Walking are the more easie, and make a∣mends for the straitness of them. The Pavement grows smooth, and becomes so unequally worn in the length of time, that the least Rains make them extreamly slippery; but it is not the same upon the Keys, for here you go with less constraint, as not being enclos'd be∣tween 2 Rows of Houses, besides these discharg∣ing themselves into the Canals, are much cleaner, and drier than the Streets. You see at Venice the ends of several Streets moderately large, as also a great many little Places or Squares, besides those that each Church hath before it, which are generally pretty large; as likewise several others of a more inconsidera∣ble bigness. The want which they have at Ve∣nice of fresh Water, did oblige such as have built, to continue so many little Places or Squares, that they might have in the midst of each a publick Cistern, which they improperly call Wells, as being only fill'd with Rain Water, convey'd to them in Stone Gutters from the tops of Houses, by the means of little Pipes or Funnels, that are fix'd to all their Walls.
However, they do positively affirm, that there is spring Water in some of these Wells, which is not altogether improbable; for that yellow and ill smelling Clay, which upon their cleansing is thrown out of those places, may in some measure justifie their argument; besides, Reason and Ex∣perience shew us there may be Springs of fresh Water under such Grounds, as are cover'd with salt Water. Although the Water is not generally very good at Venice, yet some of these Wells afford that which is very good: But such as are desirous of better, have their Water brought them in Boats, for that purpose only, from the Brente, which they pour into those Wells to purifie, where it afterwards becomes extraordinary healthful. All the Dyers are oblig'd to this Expence in Water, more especially in delicate Tinctures, for that of the Canals is only proper for their first washings. It is wonderful that the Water should not be good at Padua, and almost throughout the whole Dominion of this State in Italy, but even much worser than that of Venice: I imagine this to be partly the Reason of their mixing the Wines with a fourth, if not a third part Water, that so by the Fermentation of the Wine in the Vessel at the time of the Vintage, the Water may the better incorporate, which alteration renders it abundantly more healthful. Besides, I am of the opinion that the natural hardness of their common Wines which grow upon great Trees about Venice, as likewise in moist Bottoms, do's much more oblige them to follow this method; for their natural harshness preserves
them a long time, although mix'd with Wa∣ter. I cannot forbear observing in this place the advantage the Country of Modena hath over her Neighbouring Provinces; for as that Province is very low of Scituation, you have the Water very bad when they only sink to such a certain depth, but up on passing that, they find a level of hard Stone, through which they must sink, & their trou∣ble is not only rewarded with an excellent Water, but the Stone serves them instead of Bricks for the Work and mouth of the Well; to which the Water rises in abundance. I remember one at the Capucins of Modena, which continually ran over, making a little Stream of most excellent Water. Of Saint Mark's Place. THat open space of Ground before the Church of St. Mark, commonly call'd St. Mark's Place, is assuredly one of the most magnificent Places of Europe, not only by reason of the greatness, but likewise for the sumptuous∣ness of the Buildings that surround it, and the mighty concourse of Strangers continually there. This Place hath much the Form of an L re∣vers'd; or is rather two different Places, the first whereof, and the least capacious 'is scituated to∣wards the South, and looks upon the Sea; here is without dispute the most agreeable prospect of Venice, being that part which is commonly re∣presented in the Draughts of this City. The Sea beats against the side of this Place, which is built of Free-stone, with several hand∣some
Steps. Upon this Key are rais'd 2 extra∣ordinary high Pillars of Marble, being both 2 intire solid pieces, and about 60 paces distant from each other. Upon that of the Right hand is seen the winged Lion of St. Mark, cast in Brass, on the other the Effigies of St. Theodorus first Patron of this City. The Architect that rais'd these 2 Columns after they had lain a long time upon the Key, there not being any Engineers whose experience af∣forded them sufficient assurance to attempt it, demanded only of the Republick as an ample recompence of his labours, the liberty of Play∣ing at all Games of Hazard upon the Steps that encompass the Pedestals of these Pillars; which was granted him, with a considerable Pension for his Life. Amongst a great number of Vessels over a∣gainst the Place of St Mark, there lies always an arm'd and equipp'd Gally, with her Stern be∣tween the 2 Pillars, ready, as they say, against any occasion that might unexectedly happen, to defend the Place against all Popular Tumults. In the mean time she learns the Slaves the use of their Oars, with which unhappy People the Gallies of this Republick are Mann'd. The Ducat of St. Mark closeth this Place on the Right hand towards the East, and one Wing of the Suburb building of the New Procuratory, which is here only one Story, but adorn'd at the top by a noble Ballustrade with se∣veral Figures, encloseth it on the opposite side. This magnificent Building is according to the Ar∣chitecture of Sansouin, and makes a return or right angle to the Left hand, representing the Front, 3
times Or in length. longer and double the height, so en∣closeth all that side of St. Mark's Place. One part of the same Procuratory adjoining to the No∣ble Gate of the little Church of St. Geminius, is the bottom, or lowest part of this Place: The An∣cient Edifice of the Old Procuratory being op∣posite to the New, is carried on in the same proportion with the other to the fine great Dial, that hath a Prospect upon the Sea, and this makes the Third side of the First Place: The Gate of the Church of St, Mark advancing more into the Place, than the Palace to which it is contiguous, and opposite to that of St, Ge∣minius, makes the Fourth side; as also the No∣ble Prospect of this Famous part of the City. There is under the two Wings of the new Procu∣ratory a large Arch'd Gallery, or Piazza, sustain'd by handsom Pillars wrought about their Middles, the Angles enrich'd with Ornaments and rais'd Works of an extraordinary Beauty. The old Procuratory hath likewise a Piazza on the other side of the Place; insomuch, that one may al∣most make the Tour of this Place, defended both from Sun and Rain. The great resort of People, and the diversi∣ty of all sorts of Goods exposed to sale in these Shops, which are in the Piazza, do not a little contribute to the Beauty of the Place, in which you see directly against the Gate of St. Mark, Three Great and Rich Pedestals of Brass; up∣on them Three extraordinary high Ancient Staffs, to which are fastned upon Festivals, and other Solemn Days, the Ancient Standards of this Republick.
The Broglio. ALL manner of Sollicitations for the accom∣plishing of any Business are at Venice, call'd Broglio; yet this expression is more Il Broglio. properly applicable to those Parties and Factions which the Venetian Nobility practise in the obtaining of the Dignities: But as this Name is given to the place where the Nobility Assemble to this intention, so my design is to speak here of that part of St. Mark's Place, which is called The Broglio; for here the Venetian Gen∣try daily appear to manage their Interests and form their Parties. The first Place of St. Mark seems to be divi∣ded in Three Parts, by the low'ring of the Pave∣ments, and the Two little Water conveyances which separate them from one another: When the Nobles meet in the Morning they make use of the Piazza, under the Palace of St. Mark; as also one Third Part of the Place on that side: When they go to the Broglio in the Afternoon, they have the Piazza of the first Wing of the New Procuratory, with the adjoyning part of the place; so that part which they frequent in the Forenoon is defended from the Morning Sun, as likewise that of the Afternoon from the de∣clining Beams of the Sun. While the Nobles are at the Broglio, Two Thirds of the Place of St. Mark remains free to such whose Business calls them thither, or other∣wise brought out of Curiosity, who are equally oblig'd not to mingle with the Nobility, by en∣tring into that space which they at those times
reserve to themselves; it being reasonable that they should enjoy a full liberty, when they are pro∣bably Treating upon the most important and pri∣vate Concerns of the State; as likewise of their own most particular Interests. Nevertheless, they do not immediately acquaint a Stranger with his inadvertency, that does unknowingly either cross, or stand some time upon the Broglio, much less occasion him to be detained, as many imagine. It is not one of the least Curiosities of Venice, to see in the Morning early of the more plea∣sant Season, a great number of the Noble Vene∣tians, even from the most elevated Dignities of the Republick, to the most inferior Particulars of that Body, Walking and Discoursing there, sa∣luting each other with the profoundest Reveren∣ces of Respect; but much more to behold the Chiefest Senators Brigue the Suffrages of the low∣est Nobility, which they do with all the extra∣ordinary demonstration of Civility: although the Government doth strictly forbid such indi∣rect Practices, and forming of Parties, unless it be in criminal Matters; yet the Broglio may be said to be the real Market of the publick Suffra∣ges of this State. The common use of these Sollicitations at the Broglio, do so well accustom the Venetian No∣bility to Civility, and Compliment, that it is by none so well understood, as by those of this Bo∣dy: Those several Humiliations are so necessary, that when a Petitioner hapneth not to make them profound enough to their Fancy, they say he is Duro di Schina, or, That he hath a stake in his Back, for which reason he is oftentimes ob∣lig'd
to a longer Attendance than he other∣wise had been, especially if they sollicite any Favour of importance. Which hapned not many years past to the young Mocenigo, who made it his business to be re-admitted into the Body of the Nobility, from which he was expelled by an irrevocable Act, sentencing him to death for assassinating one Foscarini in a Box at the Play-house; but as they never proceed to the execution of these Sentences upon the Nobility, unless it be in things that concern the State, so his Pardon pass'd the Great Council at the Second Balo∣ation. During the time of the Broglio, the rest of the Place is never without great numbers of People of all Qualities, and Nations of Europe; Turks, Armenians, Persians, Greeks, Spaniards, Germans, French, &c. But the Morning is chiefly for the Men of Business, and such of the Lawyers as are oblig'd to attend the Palace. In the Afternoon the Strangers, Novelists, and such of the Nobles as think fit, make there appearance here, with many others of all sorts, to divert themselves in regarding the Watermen, Mountebanks, Jugglers and Tooth-drawers, all whose Ha∣rangues are extreamly diverting. Among the many Diversions, and the several Gentlemen of Industry upon this Place, none are so ridiculous as the Fortune-tellers, who by an attentive observation of the Face, and by in∣specting the Lines of the Hand, taking their proportions and distances, which they measure with Compasses upon the Globe, persuading the silly People that they are perfectly conver∣sant
with the knowledge of things to come, and for about Five pence, not worth Two pence our Money, they whisper to them all the secret Accidents of their Lives. About this time of the day you may be sure to find the Friends and Partisans of the Two Crowns assembled in clusters about the Place, who, beyond all other parts of Italy, with much reason and vigour, descant upon the several Transactions of the Times, and by the Ga∣zetts decide the Fates of the greatest Prin∣ces. Of the Ducal Palace of St. Mark. THe Palace of St. Mark is a large square Build∣ing, one of the two principal Fronts where∣of looks towards the Sea; the other upon the first Place, as hath been already said. They are both Adorn'd with Two Porches one above the other, whose Pillars and open Arches are of common Marble, but of an order of Architect∣ure, not less Rich than Ancient. The Walls are quite plain, but divers Red, like some sort of painted Brick, and dispos'd into several large Quarrels of various colours, even to the very Pinnacles, which are entire of Free-Stone, and variously Figured. The Roof is of Lead, but very low, yet when this Building is exactly considered, the Magni∣ficence of the Republick is apparent in all its parts. The Third Front of the Palace being opposite to that which regards the Place, is up∣on a little Canal, to which you come by Gondole. This part is of a more modern Architecture, and
from the surface of the Water, for about Twelve Foot high, it is cut in Diamond-square. You go in∣to it by six large Doors, whose Steps are covered with Water, the rest of the Front which is an ex∣traordinary height and length, with long Bal∣conies on the First and Second Floors, is of common Marble, embellished with several fine Works Bas Relief, and so well built, that this part of the Palace seems to be of one entire Stone. The Principal Gate of the Palace, is in that corner of the Place which comes to the Church of St. Mark; it is a very Ancient piece of Ar∣chitecture, embellish'd with many Figures; the entrance is through a long Porch, which on the Right Hand hath a communication with the Court; That of the Left with the Church of St. Mark: The extremity of the Entrance on this side, ends at the foot of an open Stair-Case. The Court is reasonably large, the three parts of the House are the three sides that have been al∣ready spoken of, and the Piazza or Gallery at the entrance, supports one Story Magnificently Built, and contiguous to the Church, which makes the Fourth. Round about the Court ranges a very large Gallery, whose Pillars are of Marble, cut in Panes, and deep Pannels, supporting another Gallery which is in the First Story, even to that without, which looks upon the Place; but no∣thing equalizes the Beauty of the Front of that part of the Palace, which you see coming in from the Place, answering to that upon the Canal. This Building is not so Ancient as the rest of the Palace, but seemeth to have been built in the most flourishing Days of the Republick;
the whole height which is above the Second Gal∣lery, being Adorn'd with Demi-Pillars, Fesloons, Arabian Work, and other pieces in Bas relief, all which are in Marble of an extraordinary Beau∣ty. What is most remarkably fine in the Court of the Palace, both for the Marble and the Sculp∣ture, is the Front of the Gallery, by which you enter; for here are several very fine Antick Fi∣gures: but the Adam and Eve at the Gate of this Gallery which is opposite to the Stairs, are Two excellent Figures. The Stairs are of Marble of one Range, and open, conducting you to the Gallery of the first Story, terminated by Two Noble Colossus's of Sausouin. In the first Story of the Palace there is a ve∣ry great number of Rooms, that look both upon the Court and Place, being even with the Gal∣leries on both sides, which are frequented for the Assemblies of as many different Magistrates and Officers of Justice. A most Magnificent pair of Stairs that begins at the Second Story in the middle of that part in the Center, leaves you at the first Landing-place on the Left Hand at the Appartments of the Doge; and the next Ascent brings you to the Hall of the College, the Pregadi, Scrutiny, and Council of Ten; as likewise to the Inquisitors of the State, to the Great Hall of the Great Council: In short, by a Labyrinth of Communications you pass through all the Rooms of the Palace, from whence you descend another great pair of Stairs not very far from the first.
Here you see in all these places, great variety of Wainscoting, and Roofs richly Gilt and Painted: The Walls are covered, instead of Ta∣pestry, with noble pieces of excellent Paintings, purposely design'd for these places; The great∣est Masters of the Tuscan School, as Georgeon, Titien, Paul Veronese, Palme, Tintore, and seve∣ral others, have endeavoured to exceed each other in the several Master-pieces of their Pro∣fession: But according to my Opinion the most admirable of all these, is the Paradise of Tintore in the Great Hall of the Great Council, where you may count above a Thousand Figures, in∣comparably better finished then any of his other Works, and which by an admirable diversity, without confusion, plainly shew you the excel∣lent Genius of this Painter. I shall only touch at these things en passant, to the end it may be seen by the Instances of these excellent Works, and mighty Buildings, what the Greatness of this Republick hath been, more especially in the Third and Fourth Ages, in which time they could go by Land through their own Dominions, from Venice to Constantinople; The Doge then joining to his other Titles, that of King of Candia and Negropont, as likewise Lord of half the City, and a Fourth part of the Empire of Constantinople. Of the Church of St. Mark. ST. Mark's Church is the place where all the Solemn Ceremonies are performed, and pro∣perly the Chappel of the Doge: This is a Col∣legiate Church, without having any Jurisdiction
abroad; it depends entirely on the Doge, there∣fore he makes the Presentation where he thinks fit, which Person is likewise Dean of the Chap∣pel, officiating with Mitre and Cross, with all other Episcopal Functions. For which reason this Preferment is always conferr'd upon a No∣ble Venetian, whose Revenue is about Five Thou∣sand Ducats, besides an Abby that commonly goes with it: This Prelate hath Six and twenty Canons under him, who are all of the Doge's nomination. Besides these, there is a Seminary of young Men that are designed to the Service of this Church. Upon the Principal Solemnities of the Year, especially in the Holy Week, they follow the Rituals of the Church of Alexandria; for accor∣ding to Ancient Tradition the Body of St. Mark was brought from thence, which hath given oc∣casion to this Custom ever since, in observing se∣veral particular Ceremonies. The most remark∣able is the Procession of the Holy Sacrament, which is carried in great Solemnity upon Good Friday at Nine in the Evening round about the Place in a Coffin covered with Black Velvet. The Popes were never able to abolish this Custom; it was formerly practis'd throughout the whole State, but the Republick have limited the use of it now to the Churches of this City only; all which at that time, make the like Procession within the districts of their several Parishes. Nothing can be more Glorious than Venice upon this Night, which is illuminated with Millions of Flambeaux, the Place of St. Mark being then one of the finest Sights imaginable; for there are two great Flambeau's or Tapors of white Wax
at each Window of the Procuratory's, that sur∣round the Great Place: This double row of Flam∣beaus regularly placed, with those upon the Church Gate, have together a very noble Effect, illumi∣nating all the Processions of the Confraternity, and neighbouring Parishes, that purposely come into the Great Place. In these Processions you see several Penitents disguised with Caps of Two Foot high upon their Heads, who as they march just behind the Cross, do so severely lash themselves, that the Blood follows every stroke. They have for this purpose a Discipline of several strings of knotted Whipcord, which they hold between their two Hands, and dipping of it in a pot of Vinegar, for that use carried by them, they whip themselves so exactly, and in such a cadence, that they must necessarily have studied the Art to acquit themselves of it as they do. In the mean time the whole City seems to be on fire, by the great numbers of Processions, where the white Wax is so little spar'd, that one would almost imagine they consume as much there upon this occasion, as might serve all Italy a Twelve Month. The Church of St. Mark hath another parti∣cular privilege, which is to perform the Office of the Mass at six in the Evening upon Christmas-Eve. They begin the Office at the 24th. Hour. Two Hours afterwards they sing Mass with four Quires of Musick, in much Solemnity, and a mighty concourse of People. The disorders and scandals that were us'd to happen at this Solemnity, when perform'd at Midnight, was the occasion of the permission which this Church hath to celebrate that Office at Six.
The Architecture of this Church is Antick, Solid and Massive, with Five very low Domes covered with Lead, a row of small Windows ranging above the Cornish; the two sides of the Church are a sort of an inclos'd Gallery, and separated from the rest; There is in the Ex∣ternal Front of the Church five great Doors, Adorn'd with an abundance of Porphyr Pillars, and several other sorts of fine Marble; Above the Moulding of the Door there is a Caridor en∣closed with solid Ballusters, that reach from one end, of the Front to the other: in which place upon the four great Pedestals above the great Door, are placed four noble Horses of Brass, no where to be match'd in Beauty; these together with the Painting after the Mosaique manner, which reaching from the Moulding of the Doors to the highest part of this Building, compleats the rich Embellishments of the Gate of St. Mark. The Beauty and Antiquity of these Horses have occasioned the Curious to make a strict en∣quiry into them; and it is believed that these are the Horses which when Nero triumph'd over the Parthians, were given to him to be put to the Chariot of the Sun, upon the Triumphal Arch, then consecrated to him at Rome; as may be seen engraven upon the Reverse of some Me∣dals of this Emperor; Constantine the Great sent them to Constantinople, and plac'd them in the Hippodrome, or as others will have it, upon the Gate of Sancta Sophia. When the Venetians, joined by the Naval For∣ces of the French Princes, took the City of Con∣stantinople, Marin Zen, who was the first Podestal or Governor that the Republick sent thither to
Command in that part of the Conquest which belonged to them, was the Person who sent these Horses to Venice, where they were kept a considerable time before their Value and Beau∣ty were discovered, but afterward placed upon the Gate of St. Mark's Church. This Church is built in the form of a Cross, without any ornaments of Architecture within; the Walls, as likewise the Great Pillars that sup∣port the Body of the Church, are of a Grey Marble, streak'd with Black, which great pieces are so curiously inlay'd, and so rarely ordered, that one would imagin it to be the Work of some extraordinary Pencil; From the opening of the lowest Arches even to the Vaults and Domes, all is covered with Ancient and Modern Mosaick Work, upon a Ground of Gold: you see in many places, very noble pieces of Paint∣ing by the most Famous Hands; the Great Al∣tar, the inclosure of the Quire, the Three Doors within the Porch, are all of the finest Marble: in short, here is nothing that is not extraordi∣nary Rich and Noble. To avoid being tedious, I will not enter into the description of particulars, it will be sufficient to observe in general, the Marble, the Pillars, the large Tables of Gold and Silver set with the richest Stones, both in the Front and Tables of the Al∣tar; The Riches expos'd upon Solemn occasions; the Pavement of the Church, part Grotick, part in divisions of Inlayed or parketted Marble of several Colours and Figures; as also the great Doors of Brass, wrought through, and curious∣ly Adorn'd with rais'd Work, as they were when brought from Sancta Sophia hither; the
bare reflection upon all these things will suffici∣ently make it appear, that the Republick could not have any thing less than the Spoils of Con∣stantinople, to acquire this mighty Collection of inestimable things. Of the Treasure of Venice. VVHat is commonly call'd the Treasure of Venice, is but in effect the Treasure of St. Mark's Church, which is yet divided into two parts; One properly belonging to the Treasure of the Church, and the other to that of the Re∣publick. The Reliques compose the first part; a vast quantity of Jewels, as likewise of Plate, Vessels and Crowns make the other; all which are very carefully kept in the Church, as a most sacred Depository; whose Keys are committed to the Custody of a Procuratour of St. Mark, a Dignity that is by the Venetian Nobility esteem∣ed in the higest Rank, as it will appear in its proper place. There is to be seen among the Reliques of all that Religion esteemeth most Sacred, a great number of Gold and Silver Shrines, viz. of Sil∣ver Vessels for the use of the Altar: But of all the Reliques which the People and the Repub∣lick most esteem and honour, is the precious Blood that is kept in an Ampoule or Cruet, which with most particular Ceremonies, is three or four times a Year expos'd to the publick view, by reason of the frequent Miracles they pretend do happen upon these Expositions, by Curing many possess'd People, which they bring hither from other places against these Solemnities, in a
prodigious concourse of People and Processi∣ons. They have in the Treasure no other Reliques of St. Mark than that of his Thumb, which they say he cut off, because he would not enter into the holy Order of Priesthood, as thinking himself unworthy of it; and the Gospel which they pretend is the the true Original, and of his own hand writing; but they only shew, the rich Shrine in which they say it is inclos'd. But since the Tradition of the Country will have it, that his whole Body was brought hither, it is very surprizing that they should have no more of the Reliques; yet the reasons given for it, are too singular to be pass'd over in silence. In the Year 827, under the Doge Justiniani Participate Badociarius, certain Grecian Priests that serv'd a Chappel near Alexandria, in which lay the Body of St. Mark, were so enrag'd a∣gainst the Mahometans who possess'd the Coun∣try, for demolishing this holy Structure, upon the account of building other places with the Materials; that they yielded to the pressing in∣treaties of 2 Venetian Merchants, and deliver'd to them this holy Relique, which they convey'd to Venice: The Doge and People receiv'd the Body of St. Mark with an expressible Joy and Devotion. They made him the Protector of this City and Republick, and rais'd in honour of him this Church, which being almost quite consum'd by fire, was rebuilt more Magnificent∣ly than ever, and afterwards enrich'd with the Spoils of the Venetian Conquests in the Levant. The devotion which the People and the Re∣publick at first conceiv'd for their new Patron,
did apparently diminish; for about 270 Years after the Translation of St. Mark, there was no body that either knew, or had heard where the Body of the holy Evangelist was placed; upon which the People and the Republick made their recourse to God Almighty, with their general Prayers and a Three days rigorous Fast, and being assembl'd in the Church of St. Mark, they be∣sought him with Tears, to signifie unto them whereabouts his Body was, and they beheld as it is said, one of the Pillars of the Church to open, from whence came an Arm of the Saint with a Ring upon the Finger. All the Prelates and Principal Nobles then present, there reiterated upon this Miracle, the the fervency of their Prayers to the blessed Saint, beseeching him to bestow upon them the Ring he had upon his Finger, in testimony that his Body lay within that Chest, which appear'd in the middle of the Pillar, from whence his Arm came; but as there being no likelihood of ob∣taining this favour, the Noble Dominique Delphin out of much zeal and confidence approach'd the Arm, and kissing the hand of the Saint, he receiv'd this precious Relique: The Arm return'd into the Chest, the Pillar clos'd and the Ring was after∣wards lost, through a great number of various accidents, as may be seen at large in the Chro∣nicles of Venice. In memory of this famous Miracle, of the apparition of St. Mark, they have continu'd it as a Holy-day ever since, keeping it every Year with much Solemnity: Yet no body knows which is the Pillar that open'd and shut again. However the People are satisfi'd the knowledge
of it is reserv'd to the Doge, the Procuratour of the Treasure, the Dean of the Chappel and some other Officers of the Church, but that they are oblig'd by Oath never to reveal the Secret to any others. In a place adjoining to that where the Re∣liques are kept, they shew you the riches of their Treasure, plac'd upon the shelves of a great Press cover'd over with black Velvet, for the more advantageous appearing of them. The Procurator with the Keys stands within a row of Balisters, which is at such a distance that one cannot reach them with their Hands. The most remarkable things of this Treasure, are 12 golden Corslets, made like small breast-Pieces, set over with very large Pearls, and an infinite number of rich Stones of different Seizes, as likwise 12 Crowns of beaten Gold, of the same workmanship, with the Corslets, which do not weigh less then if they were for common use of Iron, and Musket proof. They say that 12 Ladies of Honour of the Empress of Constantinople, were us'd upon so∣lemn Occasions to carry these rich Ornaments on their Heads, but at present they are only us'd to adorn the steps to the Altar, when the other riches of the Treasury are expos'd upon any great Festival. There are likewise six great Rubies, although they are not cut, yet they make an extraordinary shew, they are not set, but run upon a gold Wyre that passes through them: it is affirm'd that the largest weighs six Ounces. The Ducal Horn or Cap, being the Crown that is worn by the Doge, in the Ceremony of
Coronation, is in my opinion the richest thing in the Treasury. It is a Cap of Crimson Vel∣vet, the back part being something rais'd in a round point, hath occasion'd to it that Name: The lower part of the Front is enclos'd by a Plate of Gold about 2 Fingers broad, which with the cross pieces that encloseth it at top, are cover'd with Stones of an extraordinary value; as likewise the 4 Angles within the cross'd Bars; at the point or extremity of it, there is set a ve∣ry fine Diamond, indifferently large, but very high; which was presented to the Republick by Henry the 3d. of France, at his return form Po∣land: Yet all these rich Stones are mightily ex∣ceeded by a row of very large Pearls, that are hung round the Front of the Crown; their beauty and greatness do undisputably render this both the finest and the richest piece of all the Treasury. There is a much admir'd Cup, which is cut out of a Turkish Stone, that exceeds in greatness an ordinary silver Porringer, the outside foliage of the Stone is wrought into a foliage of Vines, both large and deep. There is likewise a little Paile of one single Ruby, which is bigger than a com∣mon Ewer; if I had not seen an expert French Jeweller examine them in his Hands, assuring them to be really what they are said to be, I should have had some difficulty to have believ'd them right. Besides these, there are in the Treasury an in∣finite number of rich things, Crosses set with Pearls and Diamonds; great pieces of Plate, Scepters of great value, an abundance of Agat and Cornelian Vessels of several Figures, like∣wise
several other pieces in rare transparent Stone, of one price, as also very large, suffici∣ent in number to make out an intire Service; which evidently shews what hath been the mag∣nificence of the Emperours of Constantinople, the greatest part of these rarities being the fragments of that Court, brought hither by the Venetians and others. The Treasury had formerly many other things not much Inferiour in value to these, as a golden Chain of such an extraordinary length and big∣ness, that 40 Porters were employ'd to the car∣rying of it, as likewise 12 or 15 Millions of coin'd Gold, which was only kept to shew the People and Strangers their great riches upon days of Solemnity, the Chain being hung along the Piazza of the Palace upon St. Mark's place, with a Cup of Gold between each 2 Pillars; the Republick were us'd to add every Year some new Links to it: But the War of Candy swept away this Treasure, and the Chain became Se∣quins in the pressing necessities of the State, du∣ring which, several Noble Families found the means of turning the misfortunes of the Repub∣lick to their own private advantages, which are to this day possess'd by their Posterity. Of Saint Mark's Steeple. THE Steeple of St. Mark is not less remark∣able for the inconveniency and disadvan∣tage it occasions to the great Place, than for its own extraordinary beauty: Yet the Venetians e∣steem it as one of the chief Ornaments of their City. This Steeple is built near the Angle
which composes the two Wings of the new Procuratory's, so the Church being advanc'd into the Place of the other side, the Steeple possesses that spot of Ground which is between the two places of St. Mark, and being directly over against the door of the Palace, deprives it of that prospect it would otherwise have upon the great Place. It is a bold piece of Work, supports it self, is 4 square, and built of Brick, being about 25 Foot square on each side, and 180 Feet up to a certain Cornish of Marble, from whence you have a pleasant prospect of the whole City, without seeing any of the Canals by reason of the height of the Houses, which are extraordi∣nary close join'd; but one beholds the whole beauty, and mighty largeness of the Lagunes, in which the built Islands seem to be Villages and small floating Cities. It is about 160 Feet more from the Bells to the top of the Steeple, which is sustain'd by Pillars that have another Cornish, and a Pyramid on the top of it, co∣vered with several pieces of Copper guilt, which time hath rendered like Brass, as also an Angel near 8 Foot high, cover'd with the same, which is plac'd at the top of the Steeple with the Wings spread, and the hand pointing to the Wind. The Walls of this Steeple are double on the inside, between which you circulate, insensibly ascending without any Steps until you come to the Bells; insomuch as one is apt to believe that to raise such a building upon so mean a foundati∣on, the Expence under Ground cannot be much inferiour to that above; from whence is discern'd
their Dominion upon Terra firma, as likewise several other places beyond that Sea. Of the Religious Houses and Churches of Venice. IT will be a difficult matter to find any City so fill'd with Churches as this of Venice, there are 72 Parishes all serv'd by ordain'd Priests; above 30 Monasteries, and about 35 Convents of Religious Women, besides several Chappels and a great many Confraternities of Penitents, which are here call'd Schools, much like those that were formerly, and are yet in some Pro∣vinces of France. I do not know what hath been the occasion of the Veneteans affecting to dedi∣cate their Churches to the Saints of the old Te∣stament, there being several consecrated to St. Job, St. Mones, St. Daniel, St▪ Jeremy, St. Samuel, St. Zachary; as if the Book of Martyrs was not sufficiently fill'd when they begun to build their Churches. The greatest part of the Parish Churches are small, neither are they the richest or best adorn∣ed; those of the Convents, both Men and Wo∣men are the most handsome and neat; but some of the great Confraternities are incom∣parably more magnificently Built and better Furnish'd both with Pictures and noble Services of Plate: The Venetians having a greater Incli∣nation to these particular Devotions, than for their Parish Churches, which do not much af∣fect them. Yet nevertheless, there is not that Church in Venice, in which there is not some∣thing remarkable, either for Painting or Archi∣tecture.
Those who are well acquainted with Venice, are of the opinion, that she hath near upon as many excellent pieces of Painting as all the o∣ther parts of Italy together; for not only the major part of the Nobles Houses, but likewise other particulars are fill'd with the choicest pieces, yet much more the Churches and other publick Places, whose Walls and Ceilings are cover'd with the the best Drawings of the greatest Masters. The School or Confraternity of St. Roch hath the precedency for Riches, beauty of Architecture, and for the extraordinary number of Tintoret's Works. That of St. Mark is not much inferior, the Front being in Basse relief of extraordinary Marble, and the inside wholly painted by the hand of the same Master, which hath produc'd so vast a quantity of extraordinary Works, that the life of another Painter would not be suffici∣ent to execute what he did in two Years, only at the Church of St. Roch. The Church of St. Sebastian is admirable, both for its beauty and great number of pieces by Paul Veronese, who lies there Interr'd. That of St. Mary Major hath divers Works of Bassan, extreamly fine; but among all the modern Churches for Architecture, that of our Lady Delta Salute must be reckon'd in the first place when finished; it was built upon the occasion of a Vow the Republick made in hopes of being deliver'd from a great Plague, the design is particular, and its scituation admirable, being at the entrance of the great Canal. It is a great Octagonal that incloseth one not so large, whose eight Pillars at the Angles, sup∣port a very handsom Cupola. The great Altar
is at the lower end of a great Oval, inrich'd with several curious Figures of white Marble, which represent the driving away of that raging Sickness, by the zeal and piety of the Republick; there are six more Chappels, in the other six sides of the Octagone, with Altars and Ballusters of Marble; the Porch and outside of the build∣ing is not much less adorn'd than the Inside. The Church and Convent of St, George Ma∣jor, that solely possesseth a little Island over a∣gainst the Place of St. Mark, at the distance only of a Musket shot, are most noble buildings; here is that admirable piece of the Marriage of Cana in Galilee, it wholly takes up the end of the Refactory; and is esteem'd for the Master-piece of Paul Veronese. This Abby is of the Order of St. Benedict, the Garden is the most agreeable Spot of Venice, it is encompass'd with Terrass Walks rais'd like Ramparts, from whence you behold whatsoever is worthy of observation in the Lagunes. The Convent of St. John and Paul in the City, is remakable for the fine Dormitory; the Church is one of the largest; but the Piece of St Peter the Martyr done by Titian's Hand, is its finest Ornament, it was both the Master-piece of that great Painter, and one of the four finest in the World; but is at present so much abused, that it is in danger of being quite gone in 20 Years more; it being not only kept in a bad place, but likewise the Painters that are continu∣ally copying of it, have already passed their sponges so often upon the Face of the Saint, that the colour is in a manner quite extinguish∣ed, notwithstanding all the care that is ob∣serv'd
to prevent the Copyers from approaching it too nigh, as likewise to prevent their working but upon particular leave. There are at Venice several small Churches of an uncommon and particular agreeableness, built by the Architects Sansouin and Du Palcadio, the last of these never did any thing comparable to the Church of our Saviour at La Zueca, it be∣ing much like to that of our Lady De La Salute, and the effect of a Vow made by the Republick; as it was design'd for the Capuchins who would not accept it in that magnificence it was first in∣tended; so one must allow that Du Palladio hath dexterously deceiv'd their Eyes, and ac∣quir'd a more than ordinary beauty to the sim∣plicity of this Structure, by building it accord∣ing to the most exact rules of Art and Pro∣portion, rather than by the most ostentary de∣corations of Artichecture, which may neverthe∣less be there in some measure admir'd; the Roof is plain and even, vaulted, but thought to be too much declin'd. It would be very tedious to enter into the par∣ticulars of all things of this Nature at Venice, I shall content my self with mentioning only the great number of Mausoleum's that are in their Churches; they being Erected to the Memory of almost all their Doge's and principal Senatoss: The Venetians having been ever very careful in raising noble Monuments to the Virtue and Me∣mory of their great Men; by which means Ve∣nice abounds with a mighty number of fine Mar∣ble Sepulchres; amongst which the magnificence of that for the last Doge Pasaro, at the Corde∣lier's is much Esteem'd, as likewise that of their
victorious General Mocenigo at the Friers Men∣dicawts. Of the Mercery and Rialto. THese two places are the Richest in Venice, best Peopled, and the most agreeable to the Eye, next to the Place of St Mark, all that part from the Place to the Bridge of Rialto, is call'd the Mercury, which are 5 or 6 narrow Streets in Length, where are expos'd to Sale all sorts of rich Silks, Stuffs, Tissue's of Gold, Points de Venise, Rubans, Silver and Gold Lace, Velvets, Damasks and Brocards of an extraordi∣nary price; which being mixed with many other sorts of Merchandizes, makes this one of the most agreeable parts of all Venice. The little Place of St. Bartholomew that joins the Mercury to the Bridge of Rialto, is intirely Inhabited by the Druggists; where you find all the Commodities that come out of the Levant and Germany: the Liveliness of these places, with the continual concourse of People, do render them altogether as agreeable as the most fre∣quented Streets of Paris, or even the Galleries of the Exchange or Palace. The Quarter of the Rialto is the most an∣cient Part of the City, for here they laid the first Foundation of it; it is one entire and hand∣some Island, being apart from the Mercery on the other side of the Bridge; at the bottom where∣of, on the left hand, is a long Gallery with Shops of Draperies, and other sorts of Stuffs; the Ware-houses are over head, and on the right is the Place of Rialto, in which the little Church
of St. James, being the ancientest of this City, and built above 1200 Years since, makes one of the Sides near the Bridge; the other two is an Acrade, under which the Merchants meet about their Affairs of Commerce: Behind the Church of St. James, on the side of the great Canal, you behold a very ancient Building, and for the most part of Marble, under which are most dismal Prisons; it was formerly the Palace or Court of Justice for the whole City, they yet continue it the Assessions-house of several Magistrates, for Causes both Civil and Criminal, appertaining to the Jurisdiction of the Rialto. There is upon the same side of the great Ca∣nal, a large arched Building, in which they sell all sorts of Provisions; the great number of Ves∣sels that cometh daily to these Places laden with Fruits, Roots, and Fish, which they bring from the Isles adjacent and Continent, do evidently shew the Greatness of this City. Yet wherein most appears the mighty Riches of this City, is the extraordinary number of Goldsmiths and Jewellers at the end of the Street over-against the Bridge, where may be seen the finest and richest Stones of Europe. Of the Arsenal of Venice. THere is nothing so famous as the Arsenal of Venice, nor any thing that does so much demonstrate the Power of this Republick; it is the Object of all Strangers Admiration, and the Foundation of the Strength of the State: The Grand Signior values it so much, as (by Report) to prefer it to whatever else the State possesseth. It
is of a large Circumference, being more than 2 Miles about, taking up all the Eastern Division of the City, from which it is only separated by a small Canal that washes three sides of it, and the Lagunes the fourth, that lies towards the North; it is inclosed with very high Walls and Towers at certain Distances, where is kept a very exact Guard, especially in the Night; the Centinels can, by little Bells in those Towers, advertise the Corps du Guard in case of Attempts, and other Accidents of Fire that may casually happen, or premeditately break forth upon the Instigations of any secret Enemy. It was the first thing that was to have been executed in the Conspiracy of the Spaniards in the Year 1618, whilst the other Confederates attack'd the Body of the Nobility in the Palace of St. Mark; but Heaven prevented the Blow by the means of two French Men that had re∣ceived some Hints of their Design, and imme∣diately took Post to inform the Senate of their Danger: The Arsenal is so important to the Re∣publick, that there is not any thing which gives them so much occasion of Care and Distrust; for not only the security of the City and State, but likewise the greatest part of this Republick's Power depends upon it. It would take up a whole Volume to describe all that is remarkable in the Arsenal; therefore I shall let it suffice to observe in general, That there are in the several Apartments a most sur∣prizing quantity of Arms both for Horse and Foot, as likewise for the Ships and Gallies, all very neat, and kept in an extraordinary order; you see in one Room the necessary Arms for
10000 Men; in another for 20000, even to a third and fourth for 30 or 40000 each. The same Care is here observed in reference of the Naval Stores; for in one Room there are the Necessaries for 20 Gallies, another 30, and a fourth of 40: On one hand you see all sorts of Arms for 40 Ships; on the other for 10 Galeasses. In short, it's almost impossible to imagine what a prodigious quantity of Arms there is in these Magazines. The Republick entertained Henry the Third in great State when he visited the Arsenal, where the Pleasure they gave him in seeing a Galley fitted up and rigg'd out while he was at Dinner, was not the least Satisfaction they Com∣plimented His Majesty with during the time he stayed at Venice. Under these Rooms there are several distinct Store-houses for all sorts of Furni∣ture, and Military Equipage: It is reckoned there are above 800 Pieces of Cannon for the Service of Sea and Land; of Bullets, Bombs, Granades and Mortars a proportionable Num∣ber; and even the same of Collars for the Ar∣tillery-Horses. The Masts, Yards, Oars, Pulleys, Sails, Ropes, Anchors, Nails, and all sort of Iron-work neces∣sary in the building of Ships, are here kept in their separate and distinct Places; insomuch that whatsoever is necessary for any Expedition of either Sea or Land, may be seen in the greatest abundance. Without doubt they are al∣ways in a condition of fitting out a Hundred Gal∣lies or Galeasses, and as able to Arm a Hundred thousand Men; which would be more than suffi∣cient to allarm the greatest Potentates of Europe,
if Men and Money were equally answerable to these mighty Stores. There are in the Arsenal Three very large wet Docks, which are supplied with Water by the Lagunes, round which are a great many Houses large enough to contain Two Vessels, and keep them from the injuries of the Weather; here they refit and build their Vessels, Gallies and Galleasses, which are not Launch'd until they design to use them: These places are not only full of whatsoever is necessary for present Ser∣vice, but likewise of the remainders of their victorious Armies, and the many Prizes they have taken from the Turks, in those signal Vic∣tories they have frequently obtain'd both by Sea and Land. By these mighty Stores, the Republick is ever able to fit out in a very small time a Fleet of Forty Gallies, and as many Galleasses; of Nine or Ten that are in the Docks, there is one of an extraordinary largeness, but not yet finish'd. This sort of Vessels are equal to the largest Ships in Length and Breadth, their Compliment consist∣ing ordinarily of 1000 or 1200 Men; insomuch that these Galleasses may be truly termed floating Castles, they having in a Calm all the advantages of the smallest Gallies; for which reason as the gaining of the Day usually depends upon these Galleasses, so they can only be Commanded by Noble Venetians, which Commanders are yet ob∣lig'd by Oath, and to answer it at the price of their Heads, not to refuse Engaging against Twenty five Gallies of the Enemy. Whatsoever is made in the Arsenal, is of a Nature so Sacred to all manner of People, as
to admit of no Clemency upon the Embezel∣ment of it; all things have there the Impression of St. Mark, even to the very Nails; and if any Person should be found with the least of those things, he would be immediately and without Redemption condemn'd to the Gallies. The Cordage and Cables of Venice are famous for their goodness, insomuch that all others, are no ways to be compar'd with them: Yet I am very much of the opinion that their man∣ner of Twining doth not contribute less to it, than the excellency of their Hemp. They practise here the direct contrary Me∣thod to what they do in other Countries; for he that turns, goes backward with a Wooden Wheel fastned to his Girdle, and he that twists it is sitting, so Working at his ease, he must undoubtedly make a rounder and better wrought Ware, of which absolutely depends the good∣ness of the Cord. The Ropery is the best of any I ever saw, it is cover'd, and of a prodi∣gious Length; the Breadth is divided into 3 rows of Pillars, that sustain each a Penthouse of Wood, which serve as 2 mighty Maga∣zines for the Hemp all the Country is oblig'd to deliver here, at a rate prefix'd by the Ma∣gistrates. The Vessels that are built in the Arsenal are of a particular goodness, especially the Gallies, not only by reason of their Symmetry and ex∣act Proportions, that render them very nimble at Sea, as being less than those of France; but for their extraordinary goodness, which makes them last thrice as long as any built in other Places. The Ingenuity of the Arsenal Builders
gives them the advantage of the first; but the ex∣cellency of the Timber they Imploy in the building of them, is the principal reason of their long continuance. The excellency of the Wood they use, is chiefly occasioned by the great care they ob∣serve in seasoning of it; for no Timber is wrought in the Arsenal, that hath not been at least Ten Years in Salt Water, at the bottom of the wet Docks mentioned, where there is always a suf∣ficient quantity to supply the most extraordinary occasions of the Republick; each piece being mark'd with the Day, and Date, when it was put into the Water, where it so well settles and hardens after it comes to the Air, that it is never after subject either to fret or fly in the working or using. The Arsenal of Venice is Governed as if it were a little separate Republick of it self; they ob∣serve an extraordinary exact Guard at the Gate; the work People directed by Surveyors, are con∣tinually making all sorts of things, that appertain unto the Naval Stores; who are yet only Subordi∣nate to Three Noble Venetians that reside con∣stantly in the Arsenal: these are chang'd at the expiration of Three Years, contrary to the usu∣al Custom of the Republick, that hath deter∣min'd the expiring of almost all other Employs at the term of Sixteen Months; but this particu∣lar regard is observ'd here, lest the frequent al∣terations in the Proveditors of the Arsenal, might not occasion some impediment to those many and various works, which necessary knowledge is not attainable in a small space of time. All the Workmen are immediately subject to
a Director General of the Works, whom they call the great Admiral: He wears a Robe of Red Sattin, with a Vest down to the knees; his Cap is of a Violet Damask, with a great Gold Band about it; he is nevertheless no more than an able Workman, who oweth only to his great proficiency the Intendancy of all that is made in the Arsenal. The most illustrious of all his Functions is the conduct of the Bucentaure, when the Doge, accompanied with the Ambassadours and Senate, solemnly goes upon Ascension-day to espouse the Sea. This Officer is the Pilot of that magnificent Vessel, and the Men that work her, are the Ar∣tisans of the Arsenal: As the Republick hath no Subjects more truly affectionate to them than these, so they confide the more easily in them; for the Admiral by an Ancient and particular Custom, obliges himself at the price of his Head to bring back the Bucentaure, without ever run∣ning any hazard of being overtaken by a Storm; for which reason at the least appearance of an unsettl'd Day, he never goes far beyond the Mouth of the Lido, or rather defers the Ceremo∣ny to a more proper opportunity. There is in the Arsenal also an Intendant of the Military Engines and Forges, as likewise all o∣ther Mechanical Inventions, either useful in War, or to the scowring of the Lagunes; they are ever finding out some new Inventions of these kinds, which are referr'd to the examination of this Person. He is an able Mathematician, and hath several Models not less curious than his Instru∣ment for cleansing, reducing the Calibre bore of the Cannon to the extreamest Nicity of exactness; he
hath another that mounts them with an incredi∣ble ease, and a scale that is very just and exact, for the weighing of the greatest Pieces. In time of Peace the Republick does not maintain above Five hundred Workmen in the Arsenal, but in a War they augment the number to Two thousand or more. To engage these People the more to their Service, they are con∣stantly kept in pay, allowing to their Children some small matter so soon as they are capable of the smallest Services, by untwisting of old Cords and drawing out of Hemp, and as they grow up, so they find a proportionable augmentation: By which means they continue to follow from Father to Son the same profession, which does not only render them very expert in their busi∣ness; but they likewise are very well affected to the Republick, who recompences them accord∣ing to their merits, the only means by which they arrive to the Command of others. Of the Gondola's. I Do much question if Human Industry can add any farther Perfection to the Gondola's they use at Venice, instead of the Coaches in other Places. Their Figure and Lightness are altoge∣ther extraordinary; the middle sort are Thirty two foot long, and Four in the middle, which insensibly diminish until the Extremities end at last in two very sharp ends or points, which are rais'd directly up to the full height of a Man: Upon the rising of the Prow or head of the Gondo∣la there is an Iron of an extraordinary large∣ness, not above half a Finger thick, but full Four in
breadth, and set with the edge forwards; the up∣per part of this Iron is considerably broader than the rest, being advanc'd out like the head of a great Cleaver that is something better than a Foot broad; so dividing the Air by the swift motion of the Gondola, it looks as if it would cut down whatsoever opposeth its passage. The better to strengthen these high and slight ends of the Gondola's, against the rough shocks they sometimes occasion each other, as like∣wise to set off the great Iron head, there are fixed under it six other Plates of Iron at Four Inches distance each, Eight or Ten Inches long, and something more than Three broad, which Plates are round and much broader at the out end, than where it is fasten'd at the head: in short, it is all Hammer work, fil'd and so curiously polish'd, that it is no ways less be∣coming to the Gondola, than necessary to the safety and strengthening of the Prow. As the Gondola's do seldom come foul of each other by the Poope or lower end, so there is only a square Iron that comes up from the Keel, and Flat but round, at the Top, upon which most have instead of large Nailes, Foli∣age, and other wrought Works of Iron, which represents the Poope of the Gondalo, no ways less pleasing than the Iron at the Head, which they call a Dolphin; only Ambassadours, Mi∣nisters of Princes, and such as are not subject to the Laws of Regulating Apparel, and these sort of things can pretend to have Dolphins at both ends of their Gondola's.
The Gondolaes are not built of this great length so much for the conveniency of Carriage, as for the dextrous working of them; their head is built up like a litle Ridge, which returns equally sloping to the sides; the Prow is round at bot∣tom, and totally raised out of the Water; for the greater expedition it is likewise raised and co∣vered as the Head; The whole Body of the Gondola is so neatly rubb'd over with a mixture of Pitch and Oil, that it perfectly looks like Var∣nish: Under the Water they are tallowed with black Grease, that gives them an extraordinary easie passage through the Water, they seem to divide. When they fit out a Gondola, they spread a long Carpet at the bottom of it, upon Planks that are very well joyn'd, which reach from the Poop unto the Two Steps at the cover'd part of the Head end, which are there made for the conveniency of coming in and going out. They fix in the middle of the Gondola, a covering of about Eight Foot long, under which one may stand upright. This is supported by Two great Demi-Circles, whose Four ends being pointed, are fixed into as many niches in the sides; seve∣ral long sticks handsomly turn'd at the ends, are fastned at the top of the Cir∣cles Il felee. that support the Tilt, which is upon occasion, cast over all the rest to defend them from the in∣juries of the Weather. At the lower end of this Cover, they place cross-ways a Board covered with black Leather that serves for a Seat; as likewise Il trasto. another Bench handsomly covered against the Demi-circle behind, which serves as a Back-board
to a couple of Persons that may conveniently sit here, as the most Honourable Place: They have likewise a Bench on each side of the first, that will hold Four People, or Six, if close plac'd together, whose Backs are supported by Two long Poles, and Boards that are on each side fastned to the Pedestal of the Circles. When they would defend themselves from the Rain, they spread the great covering of Black Serge, that comes down to the top of the Wa∣ter; Il sopra felce. at which time nothing can look more uncouth, or more like the true resemblance of a Coffin. The two Circles before-mention'd, are the Two principal pieces of the Gon∣dola, whose greatest Beauty con¦sists Li Cerchi. in the largeness of the Front of these Cir∣cles, which are made through much strength and ingenuity; to effect it, they take the half of a Hoop about 10 or 12 Inches in breadth, and 3 thick, by the means of certain Engines they bend these Circles with the thin side brought downwards, whose alternative part consequently maketh the upper side of the Circle; and the broader it is in the Front, the more estimable it is, to which end they leave the middlemost part larger than the sides, which gives it a very handsom appearance. When a Gondola is handsomly fitted with a suit of Curtains, a little black Coverlet fring'd, and neatly tyed about with Il feleci. Ribbons, as likewise Four great Tossels beating against the Circles, which they keep very white, with two lesser Tossels for the more handsome comportment of the Body; One cannot but ac∣knowledge
these Water Machines to be extream∣ly pretty, although they are not allowed to be Adorned with any thing but Black, excepting the Foot-cloth, which is a Moquette, or any other Stuff of that nature. Ambassadors, Ministers of Princes, and other exempted Persons, that are not of the Body of the Nobility, have usually their Gondolas carved, and finely Gilt both within and without, Adorn'd with rich Brocades, together with the Arms of the Prince and Ambassadors; It is nevertheless necessary to observe the usual Form and proportion of the common Gondola, without which they will not be agreeable to the Eyes of the Venetians, who would certainly ridicule them, as they lately did that of an Ambassador's from one of the greatest Princes in Italy, who had pla∣ced a Crown upon the top of the covering, which gave them occasion to compare his Gon∣dalo to a Pye. Custom and use have established the Left hand in the Gondalo to be the chiefest place, but the Reasons alledg'd for it, in affirming that one is less subject to be wet on that side, by the dash∣ing of the Oars, are directly against common Experience; for my own part I am of the Opi∣nion, that formerly they making use but of one Oar, as the Ferry-Boats still continue; which lye of one side almost equal to the Water, by the standing of the Gondolier in this manner by the Keel's taking so much less Water, they make not only much more Expedition, but have like∣wise an easier passage; consequently the person on the Left hand hath an easier place than the other at the Right, who sits tottering upon the
declining of the Seat, and not without some in∣conveniency. Of the Activity of the Gondoliers. THey do not follow the same Methods in the Gondola's and Boats of Venice, as they do in all other places of Europe; for here they stand an end pushing forwards with their Oars, who are never more than two, even in the Gon∣dola's of Ambassadors; excepting those occasi∣ons that may oblige a Person of Quality to pass into the Country, at which times they ordinari∣ly double the number. The foremost Rower stands between the covered part of the Boat, and the two Steps at the entrance, who supports his Oar upon the side of a Board that is raised a Foot higher than the edge of the Gondola, about two Fingers thick, and made hollow for the more easie play of the Oar. The Gondolier behind stands on the Poop, to see over the Tilt or Covering, that so he may have a right Steerage: He is upon a long Board that reaches above four Fingers beyond the Left side of the covered part of the Poop; insomuch that he is quite out of the Gondola, holding the end of a long Oar that is supported on the Right side by a piece of Wood like to the other at the head, but about Two Foot high; After this man∣ner he Rows, keeping stroke to the Gondolier before, without which the Gondola can neither go right or even. It is very agreeable to observe the Air and Grace these Men affect in the management of their Gondola's; they stand most an end upon their
Right Leg, with the Left stretch'd out behind them, their Body bending down, and quite out of the Gondola; whereby, if it happens that they run foul of one another at the turning of any corner for want of giving timely notice, or by the breaking of an Oar, they are certain to fall into the Water, which is no great trouble or inconveniency to them; unless it chance to fall out at the course, where the mighty number of Boats, and the swiftness of their motion, does not seldom occasion them the utmost dan∣ger. As the Gondoliers have not their Oars any ways fastned to the Gondola, so they make their stroaks either shorter or longer, according to the breadth of the Canal, or the multitude of Gon∣dola's that are frequently seen together. Nothing can be more charming than the easiness of this passage; you Eat and Drink quietly, Read, Con∣verse, Sing, Play upon all sorts of Instruments, without any manner of inconvenincy, or pro∣bability of Danger. One cannot, without admiring, behold them pass so direct, smooth and fast; avoid in a moment such obstacles as one not us'd to them, must think impossible, turn the corners of the Canals with so great exactness and expedition, that it is no ways capable of a description; stop short in their full course, turn or go back with an equal facility; In short, they govern those Boats with the utmost dexterity: which are the effects of an Address that cannot but surprize all who see them. The Gondoliers do constantly every night take away all that is loose, or not fixed to their Gon∣dola, which they carry home with them, they
take down the whole Tilt or Co∣vering La Caponera. together, which they call La Caponera; afterwards whatsoever else is not safe to leave abroad, in the Morning early they E∣quip their Gondalo, with the same ease and ex∣pedition. The conveniency of having at Venice all things necessary to a great City. BEsides those Advantages here, common to all Maritime Cities, the City of Venice hath a more peculiar one, which comes from her being situated in the middle of the Lagunes: For she is the Center, in which several Rivers do end, as the Po, the Adige, the Brente, and the Piave; besides a great many Canals this Republick hath made in their Territories, for the conveniency of bringing whatsoever is necessary by the Brente, which the remotest Provinces of Tuscany pro∣duce. The Vessel you take at Turin, brings you to whatever House you please in Venice; without which conveniency of passage, it would be a very difficult Matter to see that mighty abun∣dance there is at Venice, of all things necessary to a great City; Few particulars would be able to build the fine Houses one sees here. The Wood is floated down hither, Stone and Mar∣ble are brought partly upon the floated Timber, and partly upon those great Pontons that cross even the Adriatick Gulph. In this manner all sorts of Materials are brought hither by an admirable ease, from a thousand different places into all the several Quarters and House of this City.
The great expence of Venice is, what they are obliged unto in the foundation of their Build∣ings; for besides the great quantity of piles and great Stones necessary to that work, the Damms only they are forced to make against the Water, to bring the place into a condition of being work'd upon, lies them in very considerable Sums: A Procurator of St. Mark offered lately Eight thousand Ducats, which is about Fourteen hundred pounds Sterling, to stop the Water, sink and raise about 60 Foot in length to the surface of the Wa∣ter La Procura∣tor Bon. the Front of a Palace, which he was at that time going to build upon the great Canal. By the conveniency of Boats they cry about the City their Fruits, Roots, Wood, Wine, Pro∣visions, and all sorts of Houshold-Ware; where∣by a poor Man that is but able to purchase an Oar, is sufficiently qualified to get an honest Livelyhood; You see Old Men, Women and Children managing all sorts of Boats; as likewise many begging Monks, who implore your Cha∣rity in the Boats they work; But what is most admirable, is to see little Children alone, mana∣ging of great Boats laden with Merchandize, that contain more than Twenty Carts would be able to draw, which is of mighty conveniency to such as must remove their Families, for one Man can carry at once all their Goods, without the least damage.
Of the Trade of Venice. VEnice is so advantagiously situated for Com∣merce, that since the foundation of the Republick to the present Age, there hath been scarce any City in Europe more known for it. Formerly the Venetians were the only Traders in∣to the Levant, and Eastern India, for their Ves∣sels received at Aleppo and Alexandria, such Com∣modities as were brought from Egypt, Syria, and the Red Sea, which they afterwards Transported into all the Ports of Europe, selling them at such prizes they were pleas'd to set upon them. The Spaniard discovering the Riches of the West-Indies, through the bold attempts of Christo∣pher Columbus, which inspiring the Portugueze, and some other Nations, with the courage of passing the Line, and doubling the Cape of Good-Hope, did the Venetians undoubtedly more da∣mage, than all the chargeable Wars they have had with the Turks; But of all those who have gained by the New Discoveries, none have done it with a success equal to that of the Hollanders, who have found the means of making themselves the Masters of all Trade. The most considerable Trade that remaineth now to the Venetians, are only those of Constan∣tinople and Germany: For which reason the vend∣ing of their rich Silks, and other principal Ma∣nufactures, is of the last importance to them; therefore they continue these Trades with the greatest application. Besides these, they furnish Germany, Italy and Spain with Chrystal and Look∣ing-Glasses; France with Velvets and Brocades;
and all places with their Points, excepting France, where they are prohibited, and Manufactures established for the making of them; yet notwith∣standing that perfection they have attained, they continue to value most those of Venice. It is hardly to be believed what great quantities of Brouards, Damasks, and Cloaths of Gold that the Turks and Armenians do continually send From hence to Constantinople and Persia; to maintain this important Commerce be∣tween the Venetians and the Subjects of the Grand Seignior, the Republick doth upon all occasions shew the greatest regards to those of that Nation inhabiting among them; They have given them an Old Palace upon the great Canal, in which all the Turks live together, Il Palazzo di Turchi. having sufficient Warehouse-room for such Merchandizes they export; as likewise for their Leathers, Wax and Silk, which they bring in great quantities from the Levant; but if there happen any difference between them and the Subjects of the Republick, in which the former think themselves injur'd, they demand satisfaction in such an extraordinary manner, and receive it so readily, that one would almost believe they dare not venture to refuse it to them. To render this Commerce more assured and easy, they have invented a particular Model of a Vessel, that is properly a Demi-Galeasse, here call'd the Traffique-Gally, which carries to Spalatro in Dalmatia, at a Crown per Piece, the Bales of all the Traders in this City; from whence they are carried upon Camels to Constantinople, and
Asia; This Galley is fraighted seven or eight times a year with a mighty number of Bales, to the great advantage of the Republick, and such particulars as are concerned in that Trade. The Commerce they have with Germany, is the first and the most ancient this City hath had; which being not much less advantagious to the State than that of the Levant, so they have omitted nothing that might contribute to the preservation of it; to which purpose the Repub∣lick hath accommodated the German Merchants with a very handsom and ancient Palace near the Bridge of Rialto, in which they keep their Warehouse: The Traders of that Nation are very conveniently Lodg'd there, and at a very easy Rate, enjoying many extraordinary Privi∣leges, which do very much contribute to the im∣provement of this Commerce. This Palace is finely Painted on the outside by Georgeon and Titien; but much decayed at pre∣sent, yet there remaineth several noble Frag∣ments; what is most valuable in this Magazine, is a Hanging of Gilt Leather, with several Fi∣gures, all done by Paul Veronese, which is un∣doubtedly one of the best Pieces this Famous Painter ever did. One sees continually before this Palace a great number of Bales, some of which they send by Sea into Syria, and others by Land: Upon the Revenues of this Magazine, is Assign'd those Appointments which are annually allow'd by the Republick to the Doge, for the maintainance of his Houshold; as likewise to defray the Charges
of those publick Entertainments he is oblig'd to make Four times a year, for such Ambassadors and Senators as are present at the Solemn Fun∣ctions of those Days, which shall be Treated of in their proper place. Of the Merchants Bank, or what they Il Banco del Giro. call Bank del Giro. THis Bank is a Depository of Money, which the Merchants of this City have made in∣to the hands of their Prince; for so they com∣monly call the Republick, who is the Guardian of it; they likewise defray the Charge of the Of∣ficers and Accountants belonging to it. The Sacred and inviolable Security of this Bank is a mighty advantage to the Merchants; As also an extraordinary conveniency to Trade in gene∣ral; very great Payments are hourly made without any manner of Disbursement, by only changing the Names of the Parties, whereby vast sums of Money are continually circulating and changing of Masters, without passing from the Coffers of the Prince, who makes use of this Fund free from all charges of Interest. If any of those concerned in this Fund, have occasion for their Money, or any part of it, they are sure of finding the Bank always ready to an∣swer Desires: But as these Effects are more va∣lued here than ready Money, by reason of the great conveniency, in safely negotiating without any manner of disbursements; so there are al∣ways a great many People who are willing to
purchase those Sums, at more than Par; not-notwithstanding this Fund allows of no interest; for the Bank being settled at Five Millions of Du∣cats, all others are debarr'd of the opportunity of making farther Subscriptions. They commonly judge of the Merchant's Riches by the Sums he hath in the Bank Del Giro, so called, by reason of the continual Cirulation of those Sums; such whose Families are not ve∣ry well known, have usually no more credit al∣low'd them, than what they find of Effects Re∣gistred in the Bank, whose Security and Admi∣nistration are so inviolable and faithful, that if a∣ny accidents happen by the corrupt manage∣ment of the Officers; The Republick is ever rea∣dy to make good such Sums with their own Money. The Goodness of the Air at Venice. ONe would hardly believe, that the Air of Venice is so good as it really is; but expe∣rience convinces such as continue there all the se∣veral Seasons of the year; notwithstanding the great moistness of the place, and the inconstan∣cy of the Weather, that passes from one Extre∣mity to another, both in Winter and Summer; should seem at first to occasion many indisposi∣tions to the People that live in an Air of this na∣ture. The Mists that are usually here in the begin∣ning of the Winters do often continue for several
days together, so thick and cold, that they are not to be endur'd in any other place, without very great inconveniencies; In Summer the Tem∣pests and extream heats are so very frequent, and so suddenly interrupted with cold Winds, Rains and Storms, that it is much to be admired, that in a City where they are not us'd to have three days of one continu'd weather, yet they should enjoy an Air, incomparably more sweet and healthful, than those we find in the more agree∣able and temperate Climates. The pernicious Effects of the Evening Air that reigns in all other parts of Italy are altogether unknown at Venice; Old and Young go bare-headed here Night and Day, both Win∣ter and Summer, without the least inconveni∣encies; and by the particular benignity of the Air, Rheums and Defluxions are less frequent here, than in any other place I ever knew; one cannot desire a greater demonstration of this Truth, than by what may be observ'd in the Churches, or in any other great concourse of the People, where during the seasons most liable to Coughs and Colds, it is very rare to hear the least symptomes of them. Besides, to the goodness of the Air is due the Colour and Complexions of both Men and Wo∣men, which are much better and more lively than those who live at Rome; as likewise in most parts of the other Cities of Italy: Their Teeth are sound and white; their Heads are well co∣vered with good full Hair, which grows very fast, especially among the Nobles, who are ve∣ry
curious of it, which is much the better, be∣cause they do not accustom themselves to the use of Hats: In short, it is very surprizing, that however hot the day is, which occasions the Nights to seem the colder, and more dangerous all over Italy, yet at Venise they undress to their Shirts, so pass the Evening uncovered in their Gondola's, or in walking by the Canals, with∣out perceiving the least of inconveniencies. The greatest part of such who find themselves, convinc'd by experience, and who are loath to admit the Air to be naturally good in such a si∣tuation, attribute the cause of this healthfulness to the great number of Fires, that must continu∣ally be in so compact and populous a City: for my own part I do not deny, but that the great number of Fires may for a time resist the bad Ef∣fects of an ill Air; but I am perswaded, besides the accustomed moderation of their Hearths at Venice, that it is scarcely to be believed that the ordinary Fires of a Town can have so much in-influence as to alter the nature of the Air, and render it healthful in all times of the year. It may be believed with more probability that the continual salt Vapours of the Sea, with which this Air must abound; preserves it in one constant quality, and more easily hinders those various inonveniencies, as being less subject to re∣ceive the thick exhalations of the Earth, which are undoubtedly of a more suffocating nature, con∣sisting of corrosive Salts that abound in most Grounds, which have a greater force and dispo∣sition to corrupt the goodness of the Air, than
the strongest influences of the most malevolent Planets; so allowing that the nature of the place renders the Air of Venice subject to frequent alte∣rations, yet nevertheless it preserves it self with∣out altering the quality. However, to speak truth, the Climate is not very agreeable in Winter, for as this City is eve∣ry where open, so it is consequently exposed to all Winds; this season is so cold and trouble∣some here, that I may say, as it is hotter here than it is at Paris, so one feels a more sharper cold, but indeed it is not of such long continu∣ance; to which may be replied, that it is not so easy to keep off the Cold here, as it is in ma∣ny other places, for whatsoever Care one uses in closing the Curtains of the Gondola, yet they can never be so close as the well fix'd Glasses of a Coach. Yet the pleasure of Venice in the Summer does amply recompence the inconveniencies of the Winter; for during the greatest Heats you are no sooner in your Gondola, but you are sure to enjoy upon the Canals, even at Noon-day, a most agreeable refreshing Air: but it is most commonly Two Hours before Sun set, that one begins to be sensible of those delightful Breezes that are yet infinitely more pleasant in the Even∣ing, at which time you enjoy the pleasure of the Water without disturbance, frequently meet∣ing extraordinary good Voices, and upon the great Canal extraordinary fine Concerts of Mu∣sick, which the Gallants of the City have in Boats to Serenade the Ladies and Nuns who are much pleased with these Diversions.
They are so extreamly fond here of these Nigh Concerts, that upon the least notice of them' the great Canal is oftentimes not large enough for those great number of Gondola's that come to partake of the Diversion; the liberty of the Night, and sweetness of the Air equally inspires with desire both Sexes to pass away en∣deshabille the Evenings upon the Water: every one endeavours to avoid being known, so you find a mighty silence in the midst of this great concourse, fully and quietly enjoying the plea∣sure of the Musick, and the most agreeable De∣lights of the cool Breezes. Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea and Lagunes of Venice. I will finish this first part with the obser∣vations I have made upon the Ebbe and Flood, which are very considerable both in the Lagunes and City of Venice- The Tide does regularly Ebbe and Flow Twice in Four and twenty Hours, which keeping the Water ever clean and clear in the Canals, is one of the greatest conveniencies, and those extraordinary advantages that Venice en∣joys in her Situation, as likewise one of the most particular things worthy of a Stranger's observation. There are two reasons of admiration in the Ebbe and Flood of the Lagunes at Venice. The first is because we have not thorougly penetrated into the general causes of the Sea's rising and
falling; the second is, seeing there is scarce any appearance of either Ebbe or Flood in the whole Mediterranean and Adriatick Gulph, yet that of the Lagunes at Venice is very great, as likewise regulated to certain times. I shall not amuse my self and the Reader by reporting the many extravagant opinions of se∣veral Authours, in relation to the general causes of so extraordinary a matter. Some do only entertain the curiosity of their Readers with Fables, and others with such improbable and ab∣struse reasons, as merit no consideration here. Among the Philosophers of the present Age, Galileas hath very ingeniously attributed it to the motion of the Earth, making it appear as a ne∣cessary consequence to the reasons he alledges for it. Not to detain my self upon a matter that may be difficult to render apparent, I shall think it sufficient to observe here that the Ebbe and Flood does answer exactly to the motion of the Moon, falling every day, like her, 50 Minutes later than the preceding; the Tides being higher in the new and full Moons, than in either of the other quarters, as also the same difference between the Equinoctial and Solstice; it is much to be suppos'd that the Body and motion of the Moon are the real causes of the Ebbe and Flood, as likewise those many various accidents that attend them. As the Opinion of Monsieur Descartes is sa∣tisfactory with all the probability that can be desir'd, in reference to this Wonder that hath for so many Ages kept the World in Suspence;
so it is reasonable we should admit it for the best, at least until Reason or Experience shall make those Discoveries that may afford our Judgments more Natural and Sensible Argu∣ments of the contrary: So allowing this to be the general Cause of the Ebbes and Floods, one may in Course come to the Reason of those in the Lagunes at Venice. It is impossible that the Cause which pro∣duceth the Flux and Reflux of the Ocean, should have those Effects in that vast Masse of Water without making any Impression upon those of the Mediterranean; but the reason why it is not so very apparent, must be attri∣buted to the manner of the Tides flowing in the Ocean, which is throughout that Sea be∣tween the Tropicks and Poles, from the South to the North: Whereas the Mediterranean lying considerably on this side the Tropick, and only a sort of a great Canal from the East to the West, and very small of breadth in comparison to the Ocean; so it is not to be imagin'd that the Flux and Reflux can be very sensible there, as well because this Sea is very narrow in breadth from North to South, as likewise by reason of the distant situation from the Line and Tropicks in which places the Flux hath the most considerable effects. From hence it comes that the Tides make but a small impression upon the Mediterranean, which not being able to move the Waters, causeth in them only Currents in many places; as may be observ'd in the Sea of Genoa, the Phare of Messina and several other Islands of
the Archipelago: But as the Adriatick Sea is a Gulph of the Meditarrenean, and the most Nor∣thern part of it, so consequently the impression it suffers being neither interrupted or stopt by such Coasts at the mouth of the Gulph, that hin∣ders its flowing in most other places, so it must indubitably occasion the Waters to fall in here, keeping their course along the Coasts to the very utmost end of the Gulf, where being stopt, they must necessarily rise until they have attain∣ed a moderate height. This is exactly what is observ'd in this Sea, for upon the Coasts of Calabria and the King∣dom of Naples you can only remark a setting of the Water without any manner of Elevati∣on; but in the middle of the Gulph and at Ancona the Flood begins to be visibly apparent, which becomes infinitely more sensible at Rimini, Ravenna, upon the Lido of Venice, and at Aqui∣lea, which lies directly in the very bottom of the Gulph. The Flux of the Ocean is greater as it is di∣stant from the places where it begins, which is between the Two Tropicks, consequently causing the Tides to be much higher upon the Northern than upon the Southern Coasts; so the Tide of the Adriatick Gulph, making only a small impression in the beginning, by degrees ap∣pears at the lower end of the Sea a very consi∣derable Tide, and the more by reason this mo∣tion ever gains new force by its continuation. So I am at present to give my reason for the Tides being much higher in the Lagunes and Canals of Venice, than they are even in the
Gulph it self. I attribute it to the nature and disposition of the Place, which I have already describ'd in the beginning of this part, shew∣ing them to be Plains that the Sea overflow'd when she made those Breaches in that Neck of Land which formerly denied her entrance: For that little the Flood is in the Sea, is by these natural Dikes which sustain the violencies, and afterward permitting an open passage into the Lagunes, mightily increas'd; especially after having pass'd those Channels formerly mention'd, it comes to be of so much consideration, by many reasons more palpable than those I have alledg'd, that what is not but little considerable in the Sea, occasions of course a very considerable Flood in the La∣gunes. In short there is Six hours Tide of Flood, which being stopt by the Coasts of Terra firma, it then commonly rises to the height of Four foot in the Canals of Venice; so takes its Course to the Sea through the Waters, being fallen by the Ebbe of the Gulph which affords it the requisite means of returning in the same space of time, and through the same places that the Flood brought it into the Lagunes. One may in a Calm Season at the Mouth of the Lido observe with much pleasure the making of the Tide; you see of a sudden, and from time to time behold certain great Waves that mount themselves above the smooth surface of the Water, which after having for some time held a murmuring and impetuous Course, do at length loose themselves in the Lagunes, at con∣siderabe distance from the place where they first
appear'd. In this manner the Water is rais'd by the Flood, and the Lagunes Swell'd like a great Sea, whose Islands in the middle seem to be as many Sands and half drown'd Cities. At, or about half Ebbe, you begln to see the Lagunes lie uncover'd of Wter, which then seem to be about the City so many fine Meadows, cross which the Tide hath made several Canals for the discharge of the Waters, which are at all times deep enough for the greatest Barque; to which purpose the most considerable of them are, as hath been observed, set out with Piles by which they keep on their Way when the Lagunes are cover'd, without any danger of running a∣ground. It is nothing less particular than agreeable to behold the Canals of this City that seem to be so many Rivers, change the Course of their Stream every Six hours; which is more remark∣able in the great Canals, but especially in such as are long, straight, and whose extremities lie to the Sea; they receive the Water directly without any circulation, which must always diminish something of that Force, attending the motions of the Ebbe and Flood of these Tides. It is observable at Venice that the Canals after the Winter Solstice, and espcially in February are drain'd so very low, that they are frequently not able to make use of their Gondola's for se∣veral Hours, between the times of Ebbe and Flood, excepting the great Canal, which by reason of the great Currant there, both in the ebbing and flowing of the Tides, does always preserve a sufficient depth, without being ever
cleansed, which they are frequently oblig'd to do with extraordinary charges in the other Ca∣nals of Venice. Upon the blowing of the Syroc which is the South-east Wind, the Tide flows so high as to cover with Water all the Keys of the City; the quarter from whence this Wind comes, does di∣rectly answer the Situation of the Gulph, and so mightily augments the strength of the Tide, that the Sea did once overflow all the Streets and Places, and fill'd with salt Water all the Wells of Venice. End of the First Part.
OF THE CITY AND Republick of Venice. PART II. Of the Foundation of the Republick of Venice, and their Form of Govern∣ment. The First Rise of Venice. THE Manner of Peopling the Isles of the Lagunes, and the Qualities of their first Inhabitants are variously represented; Some bring them from the City of Vannes in
Britany, by reason they were called Veneti in Caesar's Commentaries; others will have it that they were Originally only Fishers: As if the best Provinces of Italy, such as those are in the State of Venice, could probably want Inhabi∣tants; and that the Advantagious Situation of these Islands was not likely to draw to them some considerable Persons, as well as so many Poor Eugitives in that Calamitous time, which furnish'd this Countrey with Inhabitants. For my own part, I shall not detain my self here to assert my Opinion, as being contented to fol∣low the most probable Conjectures, and such which best shew us the true beginnings of the City and Republick of Venice. After the Emperour Constantine the Great had remov'd the Seat of the Empire to Constantino∣ple, Italy was afflicted with a long continuance of mis-fortunes, and frequently harrass'd with the Invasions of the Barbarians. In the Year 407, the Goths under their King Radagaisius, o∣ver-run Italy, putting all to Fire and Sword. The Neighbouring People to the Lagunes, found their safest Protection in those Maritime Islands, in the most part of which Isles were only a few Fisher's Cottages. But after the Army com∣manded by two Generals of the Emperour Honorius, had defeated their enemy Radagaisius, these Refugees return to their habitations upon Terra firma, as not having made any conside∣rable Establishment in the little time they re∣mained in those Islands of the Lagunes. In the Year 413, the Incursions of the West∣goths under Alaric, and the horrible ravages they
committed all over Italy, made these People be∣take themselves to the Sanctuary that Pro∣tected them Six Years before; insomuch these Islands of the Lagunes was this Second time the Ark that saved them from the Inundation of those Barbarians. But Alarick remaining longer in Italy than Radagaisius, these People begun to build Houses of Wood and Reed in order to Ac∣commodate themselves with some sort of con∣veniencies. The Paduans who were Lords of these Islands of the Lagunes had a Port at that of Rialto, where their River then Terminated. They resolv'd upon making this a considerable place, not only as an Asylum, but likewise to Pro∣tect their Commerce at Sea; To which purpose in the Year 421. The Senate of Padua sent thi∣ther three Consuls and declar'd Rialto a place of Refuge to all sorts of People; which occasioned it to be Peopled in a very little time, as well by Persons of all conditions that retired thither from the Terra firma, as by those that were dis∣pers'd in the other several Islands of the La∣gunes. The third Irruption of the Barbarians under Attila King of the Huns, reduced Italy to a most miserable condition. This scourge of the Almighty having ravag'd Germany, Italy and France, return'd again hither in the Year 453. adding to the Destruction of Pavia, Milan, Pa∣dua, and several other great Towns, the Fa∣mous City of Aquileia, which after a siege of three Years was at length constrain'd to fall under the mercyless hand of this cruel Enemy.
The miserable remainders of so many Cities, compleated the inhabiting with all sorts of People not only the Islands of Rialto, but like∣wise all those in the Lagunes and near the sides of the Sea, particularly the Lido of Malamoco; there being no hopes left to these People of re∣turning to their former habitations, they now begun to lay the foundations of what were to be their future abodes, fetching away the stones and Marble of the Demolished Palaces upon Terra firma; to build themselves others more safe in these Islands; so in about Fifty Years time both the People of Quality and those of the lower Ranks were conveniently accommodated accord∣ing to their Respective Conditions. Padua having in the mean time Established her self, and that the Senat perceiving the Rialto to become considerable through the Multitude of Inhabitants, send down Tribunes to govern these People with more dignity: Yet in some Histo∣ries of these beginnings, it is observed, that such who were most Powerful and Rich in these Islands, were in process of time acknowledg'd as Protectors of the People, by Reason of the occa∣sion they had for their Assistance: in this man∣ner each Island had their particular Tribunes, who continuing to increase their Authority either by Force or the Voluntary Submissions of the People, they came in time to be the little Potentates of these very mutinous Bodies. There are yet to be seen near the Rialto some Fragments belonging to the ancient Family of the Badouaire's, which is yet in being at Venice, who from those times unto the Election of the
first Doge, that is to say, for 300 Years, con∣tinued themselves Successive Tribunes at the Rialto. In the Year 709 the Tribunes of the twelve Principal Islands of the Lagunes, Judging it Ne∣cessary to enter into a better Method of governing these Islands that were so Extreamly Populous, thought fit to compose a Republick and choose one amongst them for chief: But as they per∣ceiv'd they could not proceed in this manner, without prejudicing the Rights the City of Pa∣dua had in these places to which they had re∣sorted for safety, so they sent Deputy's to the Emperour who was Sovereign Lord of the Coun∣trey, as likewise to Pope John the fifth, to obtain Permission of choosing a Prince, to whom they gave the Name of Duke or Doge. This Circumstance is observed by their own Historians, who have it, that after the Tribunes had obtain'd this grant, they met in Heraclea a City of the Lagunes, of which there remains only some Ruines near the place where the Ri∣ver Piave discharges it self into the Lagunes; there they Elected Paul Lucio Anafeste for their first Doge, in the Year 709 being two hundred eighty eight years after the proclaiming of the Rialto by the Paduans for a City of Refuge▪ Yet although it seems that the Republick of Venice should denie her beginning from the day of this Election, The Venetians do nevertheless compute it from the Proclamation made at the Rialto the 25th of March in the Year four hundred twenty and one, as we have already observed; and accord∣ingly upon that day do Solemnize the Nativity of the Republick, pretending their's hath three sin∣gular advantages over all other State, being
founded in Freedom, with the Benefit of Christi∣anity, and at the same time with that of France. Until this very time there was no Mention made of Venice, for as then there was no City of that Name; Heraclea was the first Seat of the Republick, and so continued until the Death of the third Doge, whom the People murthered for his cruelty, resolving to have no more Princes, whose absolute powers easily degenerated into Tyranny; This occasioned an Interregnum of Five Years, during which the Republick was go∣verned by the Eldest Knights annually Elected. But the People growing weary of this sort of Government, desire for the future a Doge; who was Elected at the Lido of the old Malamoco, be∣ing half a League farther into the Sea than the pre∣sent Malamoco, which former was totally swal∣lowed up without leaving the least Appearances where it had been. The Doges continued to reside at Malamoco until Obelerio the eleventh Prince of this Republick found himself oblig'd to abandon the Dogal Dignity, retiring to Pepin then Established King of Lombardy by his Father Charles the great, who had destroyed the King∣dom of the Lombards. You find in the Annals of Venice that Pepin was the Sovereign of all these provinces, in which quality the Republick payed him an Annual Tribute; who then resolving to visit the Mari∣time Islands within the Jurisdiction of his De∣mesne, but being refus'd entrance by the Doge Elected in the Room of Obelerio, by rea∣son of those suspicions he had of the Kings being Instigated, by the Counsel of Obelerio to disturb the quiet of the Republick.
Pepin irritated upon the refusal, took Arms against these People, ruin'd Heraclea, and went on the other side to Attack Malamoco, then the Capital Island; But finding it abandon'd by the Doge and all the Inhabitants who had saved themselves at the Rialto, he resolv'd to go through with what he had begun, which was to Attack them by Sea. The same Annals add, That Pepin having embarqu'd his Forces upon Floats, to transport them by Night to the Rialto, there rose so great a Tempest, that it broke his Floats, and drown'd most part of his Soldiers; which bad success so alter'd the Courage of the King, that he resolv'd to leave those people in quiet: but desiring to see the Rialto, was receiv'd there with such De∣monstrations of Joy, and so many Marks of Honour, that in a pure Sentiment of Affection for those People, he threw his Scepter into the Sea, with this Imprecation, Thus may they perish who attempt the Peace of this Republick. Nevertheless, the following matter of these Annals, and the Testimony of several Creditable Authors, do plainly prove that Pepin was re∣ceived at the Rialto, rather as a generous Conque∣rour, than a Prince ill treated by bad fortune, to whom the Republick would not have consented after the loss of his Army, what they had obsti∣nately refused when he was in a condition of getting it by force: In short, the King Exercis'd all Acts of Sovereignty, leaving several marks of liberality to the Doge and Publick, as like∣wise discharging the Republick of the Tribute they annually payed him, and presented them
with five Miles of extent on Terra firma against the Lagunes, with ample liberty of Trafficking both by Sea and by Land. It is moreover said that Pepin observing the Doge to wear no External mark of dignity, took off one of the Sleeves of his Vest, and put it upon the Doge's Head in the form of a Bonnet; from whence comes the Original of the Ducal Horn, so Named from the pointed end of this Sleeve upon his head; It was then that Venice received the first time, this appellation, for Pe∣pin would have the Isle of Rialto, with the other Neighbouring Islands, to bear the Name of Ve∣nice, which was then that of the whole Neigh∣bouring province to the Lagunes, and that the Rialto should be from thence forwards the resi∣dence of the Doges and Senate of the Repub∣lick. These were the beginnings and first Pro∣gresses of the Republick of Venice, who acknow∣ledgeth her Principal Establishment and first Grandeur, to be owing to the magnanimity and generous Conduct of a French King. Of the several forms of Government that were at Venice. BY what hath been said, it may be observed that this Republick was subject during her Infan∣cy to many changes, and several methods of Go∣vernment; for if we reckon from the beginning
of the Year 421, they were the Cousuls of Padua who Govern'd this State: The Power of the Tri∣bunes continued without Interruption near upon 300 Years: The Doges Reign'd after them with an absolute Power for several Ages: Yet before the Government arrived to that Degree of Per∣fection in Policy they now have, there happen'd under the Doges several considerable changes, which I shall observe in this Relation. From the first Election made in the Year 709, at Heraclea of Paul Lucio Anafeste, until that of Sebastian Ziani, the Doges reign'd with an abso∣lute Authority, the People electing him by their Acclamations whom they Judg'd most worthy of the Dogal dignity, who Acted as Monarch, for he was Master of his own Council, nor ac∣countable to any body for his Administration; in short, he had a despotick Power both in Peace and War: The History of Venice gives us the Examples of several Doges that made their Bro∣thers, or their Children, to be elected for their Collegues and Successours. But the Sovereign Authority of the Prince having oftentimes expos'd the State to many dangerous accidents, and the Tumultuary Ele∣ctions of the People frequently ending with the greatest Inconveniencies; The Principal Citi∣zens met together upon the Death of their Prince Vital Micheli, to consult how they might prevent those disorders before they proceeded to the election of a new Doge, and accordingly chose eleven Persons of Probity, who retiring into the Church of Saint Mark, elected Sebastian Ziani; And to take for the future from the Peo∣ple
the right they had of choosing the Doge; as likewise at the same time to moderate the great Authority of the Prince, they established an In∣dependant Council, from which should be drawn by Election the Electors of the Doge. An alteration of this consequence that esta∣blished an intire new method of Government, would without dispute have caus'd a Revolution in the State, but they found an expedient that pleas'd the People, which was to allow them in exchange the liberty of Nominating Twelve Tribunes, who should have Power of opposing the Ordinances of the Prince, which should be of no validity if they were not approv'd by them; re∣solving in this to follow the Example of the An∣cient Government of Rome. Their Tribunes, who were two in each of the Six Wards of the City, had moreover a right of choosing every Year upon the Feast of Saint Michael, Forty such Per∣sons as they judg'd proper in each Ward or Quarter, to Compose the great Council they then establish'd, consisting of Two Hundred and Forty Citizens impartially chosen, and without distinction in all the different Estates, to wit, the Nobility, Citizens and Tradesmen; as this Council was to be renewed every Year, so every one was to be of it in his turn, or at least had the right of pretending to it. This method of Government continued a Hundred and Seventeen Years unto the Year 1289; At which time the Doge Peter Gradenigue, took upon him the intire alteration of the form of this Republick, and to establish a perfect Aristocracy, in fixing the great Council for ever
to a certain Number and their Descendants, who taking upon themselves for the future the whole Cognizance of all matters of State, were to have the Sovereign Administration exclusive to all the other Families. Whether this Doge was desirous to abolish De∣mocratical government, out of a good Intention to the welfare of his Country, or by a more se∣cret passion of being reveng'd on these Fami∣lies that opposed his Election, is uncertain; but he pass'd a Decree in the Council of A Soveraign Court of Forty Judges. Forty, which Ordered, That all such who had compos'd the Great Council for the Four preceed∣ing Years, should be ballotted in this Chamber; and those who had Twelve Favou∣rable Balls, should be, with their Descendants, admitted to the Great Council for ever. He cau∣sed this Decree to be Registred, and took his Measures so well that he excluded all such as were disaffected to him. However, unjust and unequal this proceeding seems to be in regard of several considerable Families, yet the Republick owes to it the esta∣blishment of the perfectest Government that e∣ver was, and which happily continues to this very time: It is Nevertheless to be supposed that such a change was not made without occa∣sioning great troubles in the Republick; but they were soon quash'd by punishing of the Weak, and Satisfying of the more Powerful, with such Privileges as exempted them from the Number of the excluded.
Several Noble Families that did not then fore∣see the mighty consequence of this exclusion, yet irritated to see such preferr'd before them as were their Inferiors, did however detain them∣selves from discovering their Resentments, as possibly not thinking that by this Establishment, which is called, Il serrar del Consiglio, the Fami∣lies which Compos'd it should mount to those high Degrees of Preferment as for ever to re∣main Masters, and they the Subjects to be absolute∣ly govern'd by them for the future, who were only to have for their share a passive and blind obedience. But Bagamonte Trepolo, Chief of one of the first and Ancientest Families of the Republick, Joyn'd by the Quirini, and some other Illustri∣ous Families, animated by the hatred they had to the person of the Doge Gradenica, as likewise incensed against those Novelties he made in the State, entered into a Bloody Confederacy, to free themselves by Assassinating the The Esta∣blishment of the Council of Ten. Doge and all his Party; but this Chief, with several of his Confederates, perished in the attempt, which gave occasion to those New Regu∣lations, that have maintain'd and will preserve this Government for the future, in that Vigour and Union we behold it at present. Before we enter into the particulars of the Government of this Republick, it will be pro∣per to say something of those who are the Ma∣sters; That is, of the Venetian Gentry, after∣wards of the Citizens of Venice, and the Nobili∣ty of terra firma; for through an admirable Sub∣ordination,
they have all of them some part in the Government of the State. Of the Antiquity of the Venetian Nobility. THE Venetian Gentry pretend themselves to be of a more ancient descent, than any o∣ther Nobility in Europe; Some of these Nobles that were never beyond their Lagunes, do ima∣gine there is no difference between a Noble Ve∣netian and a Sovereign Prince: But not to en∣gage my self with these Ridiculous fancies, I ought to say before I enter into the Particulars of the Venetian Nobility, that it is true accord∣ing to the sentiments of the most experienc'd Genealogists, that it is very difficult, not to say im∣possible, for particular families to produce Au∣thentick Acts of their Nobility for above Six Hundred Years, especially to prove exactly a higher line of descendance. Whether this difficulty proceeds from the lit∣tle care of those who preceeded us, or that the great Revolutions to which all States are liable, by confounding the order of things, may not have been the occasion of it, or lastly, that our Families not being distinguish'd by Names, a∣bove those times, are the real cause of disabling us from penetrating into the obscurity it hath brought into this part of History. I do mantain that none of these Reasons are valid, in regard of
the ancient Families of Venice; there being those that have indubitable proofs of an Antiquity not only equal, but likewise which are before the time of the first Foundation of this Republick. The truth of this will admit of no Objection, if we observe that the Faliers and Candians with several other Noble Paduans that were sent by the Senat as the first Consuls to the Rialto; and that the Tribunes who govern'd afterwards these Islands for three Centurys together, were Per∣sons of quality Powerful both in Effects and Cre∣dit, as the Badouaire's at the Rialto; so if the Families that bear these Names at present in Venice, are really descended from those who were formerly there distinguish'd by them; it must be granted that the antiquity of this Nobility, goes much beyond those Limits the Genealogists prescribe. The proofs that may be deduc'd for the con∣tinuation of these Families without any Inter∣ruption, appear so much more Authentick, as they are Establish'd upon such acts that are no ways liable to any manner of Falsification: They being taken partly from the History of Venice, which is the less to be Suspected of Corruption in regard to the Antiquity of the Nobility, by Reason the Historian had no design in promoting it. The first of these proofs is, that there never happen'd at Venice any of those Revolutions that by Wars, Seiges and Burnings destroyed the Me∣mory of things, or that at least have troubled the order and confounded the knowledge of matters; neither hath there been those sorts of Interruptions and Suppositions, which have in
other Countries insensibly disjointed the descents of Families which even hinder us at present from attaining the True Knowledge of them. The Second and strongest of all the proofs to be alledg'd, is taken from the same History, where we find the Names of the Noble Veneti∣ans to be always certain, as never assuming the Names of either Titles or Dignities, which they usually do in France. The same Custom is yet inviolably observed at Venice, and as one of the Fundamental Laws of the State. So their Pro∣per Names have remain'd the same at all times, of which may be made several Instances beyond all manner of Contradiction. The Family of the Badouaires having given Tribunes to the Isle of Rialto, for Three Hundred Years together, as hath been already said, the last of those Tribunes was one of the Twelve Electors of the first Doge; and the first Doge Elected at Venice, was one of that Family, who afterwards continued Doges from Father to Son for six or seven Descents, insomuch that they miss'd but little of continuing that Dignity down to their Posterity. Since which time we may see for Eight Hun∣dred Years, several long Descendancys in the History of Venice, where the Sons are never o∣therwise called than by the Names of their Fa∣thers. I might alledg for the last Instance, as not be∣ing of small Importance, to prove the Verity of this Assertion, That their Ancient Houses ha∣ving been always within the City of Venice, so they have in all times been acknowledg'd for what they
are at present, notwithstanding that Lowness to which some are reduc'd; yet it never did deprive them of that Consideration their Antiquity gives them. The other Illustrious Families, whose Glory is not less interested to prevent the usur∣pations of a false Nobility, than to see those ex∣tinguish that have the right of antiquity, al∣ways give place, and still continue to shew them that honour. Of the first Order of the Venetian Nobility. THE first Order of the Venetian Nobility, consists in those twelve Families that were the twelve Electors of the first Doge of this Republick, which have wonderfully preserv'd themselves unto this instant; in which length of time, many other great Houses are intirely extinguish'd: Those twelve Families which they called Electoral are Contarini, Morosini, Badouari, Tripoli, Micheli, Sanudi, Gradenighi, Memmi, Falieri, Dandoli, Polani, & Barozzi. Nevertheless, this antiquity is of no advan∣tage to them, excepting a general considerati∣on, which may occasion them to be preferr'd before others in either Employments or Alli∣ances, provided that their merits be answer∣able to their birth; through which means seve∣ral of these Ancient Families have particularly rais'd themselves of late, for the new Nobility
created by Money, have not been able to find a shorter way, or a more Honourable method of establishing themselves, as likewise to come into Reputation, than by purchasing the Alliance of the Ancient Nobles. Those of these great Houses which have pre∣serv'd themselves in the highest consideration, upon the account of their great Riches and Alli∣ances, are the Contarini and the Morosini; It is the common Opinion that the first were Counts of the Rhine, before they settled here, which is now something more than Twelve Hundred Years; Yet they have no other Proofs of this Original, than the pretended Etymology of their Name: This House increas'd to such a degree, that it is divided at least into Fifty seve∣ral Branches; neither is there any in the Re∣publick that Counts a greater Number of Heads in the Great Council, and consequently can make a more Powerful Faction. That of Morosini is likewise one of the most numerous, and most considerable for the same Rea∣sons; after these two Families follow the Badou∣ari, the Tripoli, Micheli, Gradenighi and the Sanu∣di, which yet continue to be of great considera∣tion in this State; The Memmi, Falieri & Dan∣doli, are neither Rich in Effects, or Powerful by their Parties; the Polani & Barozzi, live in ob∣scurity, rather through the defect of their me∣rits, than by the want of Riches, which they might sufficiently find in the more Powerful Fa∣milies of the New Nobility, if they could but distinguish themselves fit to be rais'd by such Alliances.
Next to these Twelve Electoral Houses, there are four Families that do not yield much in an∣tiquity to them, for they are established upon the most Authentick Records, which were sign∣ed in the Year 800, upon a Contract made be∣tween the Abbey of St. George Major, and the before-mention'd Twelve Houses, for which Reason the first are called the Twelve Apostles, and the others the four Evangelists; They are the Justiniani, Cornari, Bragadini, and the Bembi. The Cornari and Justiniani, have maintain'd themselves in a much greater Figure than the o∣thers; the first hath had Alliances with Crown'd Heads; it was moreover a Daughter of this House Married to the last King of Cyprus, that brought this Kingdom to the Republick, which they possess'd until the conquest of it, by Musta∣pha Bassa, General to the Emperor Zelim. The Justiniani are reckon'd at Venice to be of the Blood of the Emperors of Constantinople, for which Reason they bear the Spread Eagle as their Arms. The Annals of Venice do mention a very advanta∣geous Passage to this House. The Republick having just Reasons of re∣sentments against the Emperour, who did ill by the Venetian Merchants Trading into the Levant, they made War with him at Constanti∣nople, under the Doge Nidal Micheli, about the Year 1156, All of the Family of Justiniani, em∣bark'd upon this Fleet of a Hundred Ships, which the Republick fitted out to Sea in so ma∣ny Days, to go and revenge themselves for the wrongs they pretended were done them by the Greeks, in depriving them of their goods, as
likewise of their Right to the succession of the Empire. After the conquest of the Kingdom of Nege∣pont, this Army was ruin'd before Constantinople through Misery and Sickness, but more especi∣ally by reason of the Waters which the Empe∣rour Emmanuel caus'd to be Poisoned. All the Justiniani dyed in this expedition, but the Doge Micheli, being desirous to re-establish so Noble a Family, obtained to this Purpose a Commission from the Pope to take from a Convent, Brother Nicolas Justiniani, of the or∣der of Saint Benedict, to whom he gave his Daughter in Marriage; from whence are issued all those of this House, who continue to make a very considerable Figure in this Republick; But the good Monk having had several Children return'd to his Monastery to follow the course of life he was in before his Marriage. They do likewise comprehend with in the first order of Nobility, eight more Houses, which with the other four make twelve, whose Antiquity is in a manner Parallel to those of the first twelve, in that long before the Serrar del Consiglio, they were considerable, and particularly the Quirini, Delfi∣ni, Soransi, the Zorzi and the Marcelli, which do yet distinguish themselves in the Republick; the others are fallen from their former lustre, through extream Poverty, to which they are reduced. After the General Tiepolo, had intirely de∣stroyed the City of Acria in Syria, for having se∣veral times revolted against the Republick who conquered it; Several Illustrious Houses of that City retired to Venice, where they maintain'd
themselves in a more than ordinary Reputation, before the establishment of the great Council, in which they had Session, and are received at present among the Nobility of the first Ex∣traction. Of the Second Order of the Venetian Nobility. THE Serrar del Consiglio, of the Doge Gra∣denigo, by Perpetuating the Government of the Republick, in those Families only that have since Compos'd it, did at the same time render them all Noble who were of it; the se∣cond order of the Venetian Nobility is Compos'd out of those Nobles, as have no Ancienter Ti∣tle than the Establishment of the Great Coun∣cil, and who are inserted from that time in the Golden Book, that is, the Catalogue they then began to make of all the Families of the Venetian Nobility; which being now four Hun∣dred Years since the first settlement of the Ca∣talogue, occasions this Nobility to be much esteemed, more especially since the urgencies of the State have obliged them to a farther aug∣mentation upon two several occasions. Of the great Number of Families that were upon this change united to the Body of the No∣bility, there are yet above Fourscore in Being, of which the most considerable are the Mocenig∣hi,
a Family that is Rich, Numerous and Illu∣strious for the great Men she hath given to the State, the Capeli, Foscarini, Foscari, Grimani, Grit∣ti, Goussoni, Loredani, Donati, Malipierri, Nani, Pisari, Pisani, Priuli, Ruzzini, Sagredi, Valieri, Venieri, the Basadonna and some others, most of which have given Doge's to the Republick, and have yet very considerable Interests through the great Number of Votes they make in the Council. In this second degree of Nobility, are rec∣koned Thirty Families that were admitted in 1380, Ninety one Years after the Serrar del Consiglio; they were received at the ending of the War with the Genoueses, during which these Thirty Families of Citizens and Burgers, of sun∣dry Professions, did assist the Republick with such considerable Summs, that the Senate Judg'd them worthy of an equal Acknowledgment. There are now Eleven of these Thirty Fami∣lies extinct, and of those which remain only the Trevisani, Vendramini, Reniere, the Justi & Pas∣quilighi, do distinguish themselves in this great Body of Nobility. Of the Third Order of Venetian Nobility. IN this Order is comprehended Fourscore Fa∣milies, that purchas'd their Nobility at one Hundred Thousand Ducats each, after the Re∣publick
had Exhausted her Coffers in the late War of Candia; at this juncture the Senate made no distinction among the Persons that of∣fered themselves, that is, from the Gentleman of Terra firma to the Handicraftsman, all were ad∣mitted who bid with ready Money; Notwith∣standing those Memorials that were upon this occasion presented to the Pregadi, were justly worthy of some consideration. Some of these Families maintain the dignity as it ought to be, others have brought them∣selves into Inconveniencies and almost ruin'd to get to this Greatness; Here follows some that are at present most considerable for their Rich∣es and Alliances. The Labbia's Gentlemen of Florence followed Merchandizing at Venice, without any Deroga∣tion to their Quality; according to the Privi∣leges of the Florentine Nobility. They make themselves to be Originally come from Avignion; They are vastly Rich, and have built a very Noble Palace at Venice, where they have contra∣cted the Alliances of the most powerful Hou∣ses. The Videmans are Originally Germans: Their Father was so Rich that he bought the Nobility, made his Brother Cardinal, and several consi∣derable Purchases in the State of the Republick, as likewise of several Baronys and Lordships in the Hereditary Provinces of the Emperor. The common Opinion is, that he got all he had out of the Quick-silver Mines he was concern∣ed in: but such as have more narrowly Exami∣ned from whence those mighty Treasures, came,
do say, that he inherited them of his Fa∣ther, who being Warehouse-Keeper in the German Warehouse at Venice, and coming after∣wards to be the Housekeeper in the time of the Plague, that swept away most of the Richest Merchants of this Nation, he then took the Advantage of the Opportunity, made the most of their Goods, and became Rich in a small time. The Ottoboni, a Family of a great Chancellor of the Republick, are in consideration here, up∣on the Account of the Cardinal of that Name, and Brother to him who purchased the Nobi∣lity. The Zanabis Merchants of Verona, but Ori∣ginally of Avignion, are esteem'd to be worth above an Hundred Thousand Ducats per an∣num. The Fini have very Considerable Riches: he that purchas'd his Nobility, made himself by the same means, Procurator of St. Mark. He was so Able a Lawyer, that in all Debates he even brought the Senate to his Opinion: and if he had Lived, he would have stood fair to be Doge, which had been what was never be∣fore known. The Family of the Manins are Gentlemen of Trivoli, who do in this come even with the Fini: for their Chief is yet alive, made himself by his Money, Procurator of St. Mark, which Evi∣dently shew the Mighty Riches of these Fami∣lies, who have reserved very Considerable Re∣venues, and yet purchased Two great Dignities at the most Excessive Rates, and that bring them in nothing.
The Gambara Gentlemen of Broscia, are con∣sider'd and well Allied at Venice. The Young Cornaro, Son of the Procurator of that Name and Branch from which descended the last Queen of Cyprus, is only a Gentleman of Venice, by dint of Money; his Father being oblig'd to pur∣chase the Nobility for him and his Sisters, be∣cause he had them by a Daughter of a Gondolier; for Notwithstanding he Married her after∣wards, yet the Laws of the State do not esteem such issue to be Noble, as shall be observed in the proper place. From the same Marriage came Helen Cornaro, who was regarded as a Prodigy at Venice, for her great knowledge of Languages, and her Intimacy with the Sciences, she was moreover esteem'd to be a most admirable Example of Solid Vertue. The Marquis Fonseca, was a Rich Portugeese Merchant, who lent very great Summs to the King of Spain, during the late Revolutions of Naples, and was afterwards recompenc'd with a Marquisat in that Kingdom; He was a Banquier at Venice, when he bought the Nobility; his Admission was much opposed, not only for his being too openly in the Interests of Spain, but likewise because he could not produce the Copy of the Register of his Baptism, but being Mar∣quis de Fonseca, Rich and a very Honest Man, he pass'd at last; he since Contracted the Allian∣ces of the best Families in the Republick, and continues to make the Remittances of such Summs as are sent from Spain to Germany, and from Naples to Milan, for the Service of that Crown.
This third order of Nobility, are not as yet employed in the great Charges of the Repub∣lick; for the Nobility of Ancient Extraction have in all occasions the preference to them; but seeing the urgencies of the State do not afford them an opportunity of getting those great Summs of Money they usually acquir'd before the end of the last War, those of merit in these Families, will not be long before they aspire to the Dignities of State. Of such as have been made Noble by their merits. IF the Republick hath sullied in some manner the Body of Venetian Nobility, by admit∣ting into this Illustrious Society, such improper Members as some of those are which Compose the third degree, yet they have very much ad∣vanc'd that Dignity in Associating with them some Crown'd Heads, a great many Sovereign Princes, and several very Illustrious Fami∣lies, both of France and Italy. One may almost say, the Republick hath acquir'd as much Glory as they could desire, that is, by making several great Princes, Citizens of Venice, as likewise that they have en∣gag'd into their Interests the most Powerful Houses, recompencing some of them as were Subject to the Republick, and that render'd
them the most Important Services; or who lying upon their Frontiers have enlarg'd the Limits of the State, by the gifts they made them of the places they possest. They are this sort of Nobility which I de∣sign to comprehend in the fourth order, at the head whereof Marches the House of Valois, in the Person of Henry the third King of France and Poland, who was present at the Great Council, where he was received by the Ʋnanimous con∣sent of all the Voices: The House of Bour∣bon hath done the Republick the same Honour; Henry the great being pleas'd to give the Se∣nat of Venice this mark of his particular A∣ffection, in acknowledgment that they were the first who declared in his Favour, and that Supplied him with very considerable Summs in his pressing Necessities; Notwithstanding the Honour this Great Prince shew'd to the Vene∣tian Nobility, yet there were some balls found in Opposition to his Admission. Almost all the Houses of the Princes of Italy, have been desirous of being Members of the Venetian Nobility. Those of all the Nephews of the Popes from Innocent the VIIIth, have been received out of a particular mark of esteem, that the Republick hath been pleas'd to give the kindred of the Soveraign Pontife; those of Joge∣use, Richelieu, Mazarin and all those that have arriv'd to great Eminences have courted and obtained this Honour either by Favour or the Summes they gave: Notwithstanding that by particular Law, the Children of the Nobility are esteem'd to be fallen from their Privileges, when
they are not inserted into the Golden Book, in the Term prescribed by that Law; yet this sort of Nobility are not Subject to that Rigour, by Reason their Residence is not within the State; so all such as are of it, may when they are at Venice, take the Vest, enter and ballot in the great Council. The Pio's, Malateste's and Bentivoglio's are the Principal private Families of Italy, to which the Republick hath presented the Venetian Nohi∣lity: The Martininguo's and the Colalte's both Powerful Lords, one in the Country of Brescia, and the other in the Marches of Trevisano, are two Houses which the Republick have for their Merits jointed to the Body of the Nobility, by Reason of the great Credit they have in these Provinces, which are Subjects of the State; but these Lords live at home without concerning themselves with the Affairs of the Republick, The Bennoni and Savorniani who for their Merits were received into the order of Nobility live at Venice, they wear the Vest, enter into the Council and are engaged in the interests of the Republick; the first gave them formerly the City of Crema, of which they were Lords; the lat∣ter were very Powerful in Frivoli; they gave the state divers Forteresses, which are at present Garrison'd Frontiers against the Emperour.
Of the Venetian Citizens. THey mean by the word Citizen, at Venice, all the good Families of Venetian Citizens, composing the Second State between the Nobi∣lity and People. I do place here the Citizens be∣fore the Nobilty of Terra Firma, because this Body hath a greater Affinity with the Govern∣ment of the Republick, than the Nobility of the Country and City's of the State; yet among this Gentry there is a considerable Number that would not yield in either Birth or Riches to the best Houses of Venice, if they lived without the do∣minions of the Republick. There are two distinctions in the Venetian Ci∣tizens; the first are originally Citizens by Birth, being descended from these Families, which be∣fore the Establishment of the Great Council, had the same share in the Government that the Ve∣netian Nobility now have alone, who did remain in the order of Citizens by their misfortune of being excluded the Great Council upon the new Institution of the Doge Gradenigo: In another form of Government, several Families of these ancient Citizens, may value themselves as the better sort of Gentry; for there are several of them, which have the same name and bear the same Arms, with the Noble Venetians of the first Order.
The second Order of Citizens is compos'd of such as have either by their Merits or Money obtain'd this place in the Republick; both of them enjoy the same Privileges; they may wear the Vest as well as the Noble, enter into the charges and Employs that the Republick hath design'd to the Citizens; who being upon Ter∣ra Firma are by their quality of Venetian Citi∣zens equal to the Nobility of the Country, ena∣bling them to enter with this Nobility into the Councils of Cities; These in return enjoy at Venice the same Privileges of Citizens; but the greatest part of them do not esteem themselves much Inferior to the Noble Venetians, Infinite∣ly counting below their quality all the privi∣leges of that Order in the City, in which are likewise comprehended the Physicians, Lawyers, Merchants, the Manufacturers of Gold and Silver Silks, and the makers of Glass at Mouran, who pretend themselves to be elevated to the de∣gree of Nobility by Henry the third. The Republick doth much honour or at least seemeth to respect the true Citizens; either to render their Subjection more tolerable, or be∣cause they being Modester than the Venetian Gen∣try, are much more beloved of the People. They confer upon the Citizens of Merit, and such as engage themselves to the Service of the Repub∣lick, the charges of Secretaries to the Senat, and of all Tribunals that take Cognisance of the Affairs of State; They are likewise made Se∣cretaries of Embassies, and Residents with for∣reign Princes; in short they give them all those Employs which are thought below a No∣ble Venetian.
The aim of all the Citizens, and the highest of what they can attain unto in the Service of their Several Employs and charges, is the dig∣nity of great Chancelour of the Republick; the Rank and seeming greatness of him that Possesseth this place, would render the execu∣tion of it worthy the most principal Se∣natour, if the Republick, Jealous of their Authority, had not Confin'd this Great Employ to the bare Execution of the Office, not allowing him either Voice or Cre∣dit in the Courts of Justice, as shall be ob∣serv'd in the proper Pace. Nevertheless this being the highest place a Citizen can pretend to, so they limit their Ambition to it, boasting with Justice that as the Republick does often∣times find Taitours among the Body of the Nobility, so they have always been exempt of these Reproaches; for the Citizens have ever been inviolaby Attach'd to the interests of the State. Of the Venetian Gentry upon the Continent. ALl the Gentry out of Venice and within the dominions of the Republick are compre∣hended under the name of Noble's of Terra Firma, excepting some Families of the third or fourth Class of Venetian Gentry: However
antient that the Nobility of the Gentry of Terra Firma is, yet the Venetian Nobles will admit of no Comparison with them, pre∣tending there is the same difference between them, as between the Sovereign and Subject: This uncouth and haughty usage does intirely Alienate the Affections of the Nobility upon Terra firma, and is frequently attended with dangerous disputes between them and the young Noble's of Venice, who being sometimes in the Cities of the States, do find themselves opposed as to point of place by the first, when they are from Venice without any Publick Imploys. The Gentry of Terra Firma do compose the Council of the Cities where they live; They can regulate several things in regard of the Go∣vernment and Publick interest, which are no ways relating to the Political part of Govern∣ment, for such the Republick confides intirely to the Management of the Venetian Nobility. Yet when ever these Gentlemen do engage themselves in the Service and Armies of the Re∣publick, they are consider'd with very good Em∣ploys, and Governments of Places and Cita∣dels in their Provinces; however they are not in this matter us'd more kindly than the For∣reign Officers. Least this Nobility should become too consi∣derable, the Republick is never backward in taking all occasions of reducing their Power; their smallest Faults are Capital Crimes, for which they are proscrib'd, and their Effects Confisca∣ted; if a Gentleman of Terra Firma hath the boldness to make or Sustain a Quarrel with a
Noble Venetian, the Severity of the Punishment does soon discover the difference which the Republick will have between a Noble Venetian who is believ'd born to command, and another whose Merits lye in Obedience. The Senat knows very well, that the Land Nobility cannot bear without Resentments the great Elevating of that Nobility, and that they are very uneasy at the thoughts of the Sovereign Power's being lodg'd only with them, to whom they esteem themselves no ways infe∣rior; for which Reasons upon the least trou∣bles that might happen to rise, the Senat could not but have very great Apprehensions of this Nobility, if they lived in a Perfect good under∣standing with each other, but they endeavour to keep them at variance, by sowing Jealousies among them, when more proper Occasions are wanting to enervate their Forces. There was a manifest proof of this Policy in the time of Francis Erizzo's being General of the Forces in Frivoli, who was afterwards Elected Doge. He observed that the Nobility of this Pro∣vince living in a very good Intelligence, might possibly join themselves at the first Opportunity and declare in Favour of the Emperour, to which province he makes great pretensions, and so de∣prive the Republick of a very Advantageous Fron∣tire to their States; he acquainted the Senate with his sentiments, who much approv'd the foresight of their General, and the expedient proposed against those dangerous consequences. The Project was for to send him several Let∣ters Patents with a blank space for the Names
of such he should think fit to honour with the title of Marquis or Count; so these marks of Favour being distributed by the General contra∣ry to what in Justice they ought to have been, did not miss of being attended with the pro∣posed Effects, in strowing among that Gentry those seeds of implacable discord, which di∣viding the Families arm'd Brother against Bro∣ther, causing an Infinite Number of Murthers, and the Treasury to be fill'd with the confisca∣ted Estates of this Nobility: Which for a long time freed the Republick of that fear they had conceiv'd from the good correspendence which was formerly among the Gentry of that Pro∣vince. Of the Procurator of Saint Mark. Gli Procu∣ratori di St. Marco. AFter having shewn what the qualities are of those Persons invested with the Manage∣ment of the Sovereign Power; I think it will not be improper to speak of the dignity of the Procurator of Saint Mark; as also of that of the Great Chancellor; for as they acquire those in possession of them very Eminent places in the Re∣publick, by introducing them into a great share of the Management of the State; so it is Nece∣ssary to know what these dignities are before we enter upon the description of the Councils of the Republick; as well to Facilitate the In∣telligence of the matters I shall engage in, as
to avoid sending the Reader to other places for what he may more properly find here. These Two great Dignities, with that of Doge, are the only Preferments that are conferr'd for Life, they being bestow'd upon services Done to the State. The great Priviledges, and Ex∣traordinary Prerogatives attending the Dignity of Procurator of St. Mark, do render it the ut∣most Point of the Ambition of the Venetian No∣bility, Especially seeing that of Doge, as shall be observed, is upon such hard Conditions, as make it only sought for by a few of the Senators: A Venetian Gentleman cannot pretend to the Ho∣nour of a Procurator's Vest, but through the important Services he hath render'd to the State in the discharge of several Embassies, by the command of the Naval Forces, or through the long Exercise of the most considerable Em∣ploys of the State: This dignity hath the pre∣cedence in the Senate, as likewise the place of all the Venetian Nobility; for the Procurators are esteem'd the first Senators, and by this Qua∣lity are exempted of all the Expensive Publick Employs, excepting that of Embassador extra∣ordinary, and other Important Commissions, as was the adjusting of the limits between the Port and the Republick, which the Procurator Nani successfully Executed after the Peace of Candia. We see by the Annals of Venice, that it is a∣bove Six Hundred Years, since there was a Pro∣curator who undertook the care of building this Church, he manag'd the revenue and was a sort of an Ecclesiastical Intendant: The Repub∣lick
made a Second Procurator about Fourscore Years afterwards; but the Revenues of the Church mightily encreasing, the Republick cre∣ated three Procurators, to each of which was assign'd at several times two Associates, so that about two Hundred and Thirty Years ago the Number was settled at Nine, who are divided into three Procuratories or Chambers, the first is called the Procuratory above Stairs, this takes Cognisance of whatever regards the Church: The Second and Third have the direction of whatsoever is bequeath'd to the Poor, Inhabit∣ing this side of the Great Canal, as likewise those of the other side that Canal; for which reason these Chambers are distinguish'd by these several Terms, Di Procuratie di Sopra, di Citra & di Ʋltra. The Republick was not only oblig'd to cre∣ate Nine Procurators of Saint Marks, for to dispose of the great Riches bequeath'd to the Church of Saint Mark, and the Poor, especially after they were much augmented by the great Gifts of the Rich Doge Sebastian Ziani; but they were likewise willing to encrease the Num∣ber of this Dignity, that they might be more able to recompence the Services of the Nobility, particularly observing that there is nothing so satisfactory, or so much sought for by the Veneti∣an Nobles. These Nobles are the Executors of all Charita∣ble and Pious Legacies, Tutors of Orphans, and the Protectors of Widows: They Annually ap∣ply considerable Sums to the marrying of poor Young Women, and permit several Families to
live Rent-free in the Houses that belong to their Procuratories. The Place which this Dig∣nity possesses in this Republick, hath Ever ren∣der'd it so much desir'd by the Venetian Nobili∣ty, that the Senate hath in all the troublesome Wars of the State, been able to raise consider∣able Treasures by selling the Vest of Procura∣tor; but so many have never been known at once, as in the last War of Candia, for in the Year 1672, there were five and thirty living. They that Execute the Nine places of the Ancient Procuratories, are called Procurators by merits, to distinguish them from such as have bought this dignity; Nevertheless, they all enjoy the same Privileges, there being no difference between them; excepting that when a Procurator by merit dies, the great Council do proceed always to the choice of another before the deceased is Interred; besides, they do not fill up those that have acquired it by their Mo∣ney, but endeavour to reduce them to the Num∣ber established; the Nobility that purchas'd the Vests of Procurators, pay'd for them Thirty Thousand Ducats, but those that I mentioned, who after they had bought their Nobility, would ascend to this dignity by a ladder of Gold, payed down double that Sum; as not being just that the most Junior Nobility should be used on this occasion with the same considera∣tion of that of the more Ancient Order. All the Procurators wear the Ducal Vest, that is with long Sleeves hanging to the ground; and according to their degree of Seniority, have habitations in the stately new
Procuratories. But the Library of which they are the Keepers, and the Chamber of the Ar∣chives of the Republick, to which they are Guardians, as likewise the apartment where the Council commonly assembles three times a Week, do take up the third part of this Build∣ing; so there is sufficient Lodging only for Six Procurators, for which Reason the Republick allows the other three reasonable Pensions, until such time as they have the Accommodation of the Procuratories. Although the sale of this dignity is of very great Advantage to the Republick, by Rea∣son of the considerable Summs it raises in the pressing Necessities of the State; yet the In∣conveniencies of it are very Prejudicial to both the Republick and Particulars; for by these means, those who ought to maintain the Glory of the Republick, in the Extraordinary Expences of Embassies, exempt themselves upon the account of this Dignity, through which Misfortune the Republick is frequently oblig'd to make use of such Gentlemen, who being not able to support the Grandeur as it ought to be, bring themselves into Inconveniencies, and pre∣judices the Reputation of the Republick.
Of the Great Chancellor. AS it hath been observed, the Republick can∣not be without the Ministry of the Citi∣zens; therefore to excite their Zeal, and to secure the State of the principal Members of this powerful Body, they are pleased to honour it with the Illustrious Dignity of Great Chancellor, Grande Can∣celier. which is only to be attained by much Assiduity, and very important Services. This Station is the height of Glory, and the ultimate Aim of all the Secretaries of the Republick, and parti∣cularly those of the Council of Ten, who are al∣lowed the Precedency to all others. The Ad∣vantages that are annex'd to this great Dignity, do in appearance seem to render him equal with the first Senators of the Republick, and seem to elevate him several Degrees above the other: for excepting the Councellors of the Seignory, and the Procurators of St. Mark, he takes place of all the other Magistrates; He wears the Ducal Vest of Purple, hath the Title of Excellency allowed him; the Entrance into all the Councils is open to him; he keeps the Seals of the Republick; he knows the secret of all Transactions; is present at the opening of Embassadour's Letters, as likewise at all Dispatches made to them, and whatsoever is treated upon in the Senate; He reads in the Great Council what is to be ballotted, and is the Head of the Citizens, as the Doge is of the Nobility.
The Election of a Great Chancellor is made by the Great Council; that is, by a General Assembly of all the Nobility; and when he takes possession of his Office, he makes his Entrance into the College with the same Pomp and State as the Procurators of Saint Mark; the particulars of which shall be described in the Third Part of this Treatise: He goes in the Ducal Garment of Pur∣ple, attended by several Procurators, a great Number of Senators and Nobles; and for the more Honour on this occasion to the order of Citizens, they do not only accompany the Relations and Friends of the Chancellour, but likewise give them the upper hand; moreover, all the Citi∣zens assisting in this Ceremony do wear with∣out any manner of Distinction the Ducal Gar∣ment of Purple: with this Pompous attendance which is always very great by Reason of the Honour which the Citizens receive, the Chan∣cellour comes to the College, where he makes a Speech to the Seignory, receives the Seals, and takes possession of his Employ. To this great Employ is allowed a Pension of Three Thousand Ducats, without including the Expeditions of the Chancery, and several other casual perquisites which amount unto Three Times that Sum, which Joyned to the great Privileges of his Office, raises his condition even above that of the Doge's, as not being oblig'd to live in that degree of Servi∣tude; And to the end that nothing may be wanting to the External greatness of the Chan∣cellour, the Republick is pleas'd to take upon them the Charge and Performance of his Fune∣ral
Obsequies, which are observ'd in the same Magnificence with that of the Doges; at least if there is any difference, it is only in that the Seignory is assistant at his Funerals in black, to shew their grief for the loss of their Chancellor, whereas they appear in Purple at the Funerals of the Doge, as shall be observ'd in its Pro∣per Place. If the Doge of the Republick is in Effect only the Idea and shadow of a Prince; the Chancellor is no more than an Honourable Ser∣vant, that is admitted to the confidence of his Superiors, who pay him well for his Services; yet after all he hath no deliberative Vote in the Councils; all the Privileges and Marks of Ho∣nour that are allowed him, do not really raise him to any one of the Nobles; insomuch this great dignity is but an Honourable Servi∣tude, that acknowledges it self inferior to the Nobility; for he never makes use of his Right of Precedence in the Administration of his Em∣ploy, and in particular renders the Nobles that Respect which is due from a private Citizen. Of the Government of the Republick in General. THE Government of the Republick of Ve∣nice may be compar'd to a great and Ingenious Engine, whose many secret Springs have an exact agreement with the
least of it's External Motions; in which may be seen so Just a temperament, such an admira∣ble Superiority and Dependance, between the Old and Young Nobility; between the Rich and the Poor; between those Possessing the Principal Dignities and the more private Parti∣culars of the Nobility; that from this Incompa∣rable and Reciprocal Subordination must of course Result a Perfect Union, and a Fervent Zeal for the Common Welfare, which are the basis of the Power and the Lasting Foundations of this Republick. Yet it is not to be expected that from this Common Dependance which so divides the Authority of those that are frequently of a quite different Character, that there may not possibly happen in several Accidents between the bad and the good, many Inconveniencies to the Disadvantage of the Subjects: For as art can Extract Poison from what Nature hath pro∣duc'd most Sweet and Agreeable; so to the contrary she can Procure the most Salutary re∣medies from the most Pernicious Poisons; must it therefore be thought strange that the wise Laws of Policy, should be sometimes attended with Troublesome Consequences? However it is, the most unjust Regulations do oftentimes procure the most Advantageous Effects. The Republick is desirous of preserving in the External order of Government, a Perfect Ap∣pearance of Monarchy, Aristocracy and Democra∣cy; and hath Effectually found the way of En∣joying all the real Advantages of these three different form's of Government: For by the
Person of the Doge in whose name are made all Ordinances, Dispatches and Negotiations, she perfectly represents the Majesty of a Sovereign Prince. The Pregadi, which is the Senat, repre∣sents a real Aristocracy, where the wisest heads of the Republick do Regulate, with an absolute Power, the most Important Affairs of State; and the Great Council which is the Assembly of all the Nobility, by distributing the greatest part of all the Dignities to such as are worthy of them, is a most lively image of Democracy, for the Greatest are oblig'd to sue for their Suffrages, having no more Authority than what is allowed them by this great Body, the gaining of which by Corruption is Impractica∣ble: But before we enter into the particulars of the Government, I think it will not be amiss to divide it into Ecclesiastical and Political, for the Republick is no ways less absolute in the first, than Sovereign of the other. Of the Ecclesiastical Government. ONe of the things which the Senate hath pursued with the greatest Application since the Establishment of Aristocratical Govern∣ment, hath been to prevent by all manner of means forreign Princes from penetrating into the Knowledge of their deliberations, and par∣ticular Maximes; as it would have been easier for the court of Rome to accomplish that mat∣ter,
than any other, and even to form a con∣siderable Party with the help of the Ecclesi∣asticks; so the Republick does not only endea∣vour to exclude from them all manner of En∣trance; but moreover they would never per∣mit the Common Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to be Established in their States, with the same Authority that most of all other Christian Prin∣ces allow it. Of all the States of Christendom, the Ecclesia∣sticks of the Republick of Venice only are exclu∣ded the Councils and all Publick Employ's, altho' they are Noble Venetians: The Senate hath so well found their account by this Maxim, and in remaining absolute Masters of their Subjects of whatsoever Condition or Profession they are of, that they have never shewed more Reso∣lution, than when this custom hath been dis∣puted with them. The History of the Inter∣diction of Pope Paul the 5th is a notable exam∣ple, in which occasion the Learned Franciso Paulo render'd his Country the most important Services, in sustaining by his Learned writings the Liberties of the Republick. With this Maxim the Senat keeps the Ecclesia∣sticks in dependance, and by that toleration which they have for them in respect of their particular conduct, they do entirely engage them to their Devotion; insomuch, they are not less abso∣lute in the Ecclesiastical Government, than they are in that of the State; for which Reason it will not be improper to observe here, after what manner the Clergy of Venice are govern'd before we enter into the particulars of the Political Go∣vernment.
Of the Patriarch of Venice. THE Church of Venice by which I compre∣hend that of the whole State of the Repub∣lick, acknowledges two Patriarchs, which are the Patriarchs of Aquilea and Venice. The last was formerly but a Bishop, whose Revenue was very inconsiderable; he had the Title of Bi∣shop of Castel, being that quarter of Venice in which this Church stands; But there having happened since the mighty increase of Venice, several Disputes about Jurisdiction, between this Bishop and the Patriarch of Grade who was Primate of Dalmatia and Venice; The Senote de∣sired of the Pope that the Patriarchy and Bishop-rick, might be united in the Person of him that surviv'd the other; by which means the Patri∣archy of Grade devolv'd in the Year 1450 upon the Bishop-rick of Castel, by the surviving of Laurens Justiniani, who was afterwards cano∣nis'd for his Holy Life and Miracles that hap∣pened after his Death. The Patriarch of Venice is Primat of Dalma∣tia, as likewise of some part of the Republick's dominions upon Tirma firma; The Bishops of Candia, Corfu and some Neighbouring Isles of Ve∣nice are his Suffragants; They must be Noble who have this eminent dignity, for which reason the Republick reserves to themselves the Nomination of him: It is however very strange that a Pre∣late
of this Character should be so limited in his Authority over the Clergy; the Priests and Religious do equally decline his Jurisdiction in Favour of two or three Magistracies; in which the chief Senators of the Republick do assume to themselves the Cognisance of all matters relating to the Priests and Religious, whereby the Authority of this Patriarch is re∣duc'd to a very small compass: As this Prelate is not permitted to have the Nomination of the Cures of Venice, nor any other Benefices in the Church, excepting two dignities; so his Credit is no ways larger than his Autho∣rity. Although the Power that the Pope's Nun¦cio's have among all the Princes of Italy, as well in Spiritual as Temporal matters, is not very considerable at Venice, yet it does very much diminish both the Dignity and Power of the Patriarch; for when this Prelate solemnly Offi∣ciates as high Priest in his own Church and in the presence of the Seignory, yet he cannot give Benediction to the People without the Permi∣ssion of the Apostolical Nuncio, who assists at all these Publick Ceremonies: For which Rea∣son the Master of the Ceremonies desires it of him in these Terms: Placet ut Celebrans Benedicat? and he answers, Placet.
Of the Patriarch of Aquilea. THE Republick did ever support the Patri∣arch of Grade, against the Patriarch of A∣quilea, endeavouring to enlarge the Jurisdicti∣on of the first, to the detriment and loss of the other; but since the Patriarchy of Grade is Trans∣ferr'd to Venice, his Dignity hath been in a much greater consideration; nevertheless the Patriarch of Aquilea is the first and the Eldest; his Jurisdiction does not only extend over Fri∣voli, Istria, and some other Hereditary Pro∣vinces of the Emperour; but likewise over most part of the Provinces which the Republick posse∣sses in Lombardy. Since the Republick had first the Nomination of this Patriarch, they have found an expedient to perpetuate this right, by giving the Patriarch power to choose a Coadjutor, as soon as he is arrived to the dignity, by which means the No∣mination of this Prelacy will never go from the Republick, who are certain to confer it upon one of the first Families of the Noble Venetians They are oblig'd to follow this method, least the Nomination of the Patriarch should return to the Emperour; for as the greatest part of the Clergy of the State of Venice are under his care, it might happen that by the Patriarch's not be∣ing their Subject, he might observe a different conduct from their Maxims of Government,
which would undoubtedly be the occasion of ma∣ny Inconveniencies, drawing the Ecclesiasticks from that affection and dependance in which they now live under the Laws of the Senate. The Emperour hath preserv'd to himself the Sovereignty of Aquilea, and is very sensible of the great consequence of losing the Right of Nomination to the Patriarchy; therefore he does not only hinder the Patriarch from residing at Aquilea, but hath likewise taken from him that Temporal Revenue, which he received out of all Estates that were subject to him: We even see by the new Declarations lately publish'd, whereby he forbids all his Ecclesiastical and Secu∣lar Subjects from having any recourse to the Pa∣triarch of Aquilea, upon whatsoever Pretexts they may be. This Prelate, who is at present Cardinal Delfin, hath his Brother for Coadjutor, and keeps his Residence at Ʋdine, the Capital of Frivoli. Of the Election of the Curates, or Pa∣rish-Priests of Venice. EITHER the Republick design'd to prevent the Ecclesiasticks from owing of Obligati∣ons to any other Power than that of the Senates or else to maintain only the Ancient Customs of the Church, by leaving the Election of the Curate to the Liberty of the Parishioners, who are to choose a Priest out of their own Parish,
and that seems most worthy of it, for his Ca∣pacity and Seniority of Service; but to evade the great Factions that were formerly made up∣on these Occasions, both by the Priests and the Parishioners, the Senate hath ordered that the E∣lection shall be made within the Term of three Days after the Death of a Curate, in defect whereof the Republick hath the Nomination. All Proprietors of Houses within the Limits of the Parish, Noble Venetians, Citizens and Tradesmen, do meet in the Church to proceed to an Election by plurality of Voices; but as it behoves them to examine into the Merits of all the qualified Priests, they compare one with the other according to their degree of Seniority; where in a studied Harangue, and the Youngest speaking first, they magnifie to you all the Ser∣vices they have done to the Parish and Parishio∣ners; after which they are ballotted to see who hath the Majority of the Suffrages; or else they choose by Acclamation he that hath the most Merit, or the greatest Party. The Ecclesiasticks of Venice, are generally of mean Extraction; besides, their Learning is not more eminent than their Vertue; so it is no wonder if there happen at these Elections such particular things as are hardly to be believ'd by those that are not acquainted with Venice: You see several of these Priests, who the better to perswade the Assembly of the Merit they have acquired in their Parishes, summon before them several poor Women, where they Inter∣rogate them: Who was it Assisted you in your Necessity? Who Maintain'd you in your Sick∣ness?
Who Protected you in your Persecution? Was it not I that did these things for you? It is no difficult matter to imagine what sort of Answers are made to these Interrogations: But what is incomparably beyond all the rest, is to hear the Harangue of a Pretending Curate, who endeavouring to exalt his own Merits, makes no scruple of exposing the greatest Infa∣mies of his Concurrents, assuring them he is not a Drunkard as such a one is, nor a Libertine like another; and that he gives no Scandal in keep∣ing Women, as the third doth: In short, he sticks not at exposing the most secret things, provided he can make any advantage of them to the prejudice of his Adversaries. The Address of him that was lately Elected in one of the best Parishes of Venice, seems to me the more Ingenious by being covered under the Vail of the highest Simplicity; this Man, who was the Ancientest of the Qualified Priests, and who probably had formerly miss'd of his Aim, by too much enlarging upon the Chapter of his own Merits, appear'd now the last of the Assembly, and follow'd a new Method; he came into the middle of the Company, leaning upon his Staff, and Coughing very much, where he utter'd these few words according to the Venetian Expression: These Gentlemen have obli∣ged me to appear before you, I can say nothing more for my self, than that I am an Honest Man; you may make me Curate if you please, but if you be∣lieve me not, you may let it alone. This new way made so great an Impression upon them, that without examining any further into his Merits,
he was immediately declar'd Curate by the com∣mon Consent of all the Assembly. The Rejoycings that follow these Elections, are no ways less particular, they make a great many Bonfires and Illuminations for three Nights together, before the House of the Cu∣rate; at which times they honour him with the Discharge of their Muskets; and others Write in great Characters his Commendations upon the Walls of all the Squares, and other open Pla∣ces of the Parish, which express all his Merits, and mentioning the Number of Years he hath pass'd in the Service of that Church. Of the Dependance in which the Ec∣clesiasticks and Religious live in regard of the Government. AS the Republick is very sensible, by their fre∣quent Experience, that it is of the greatest Importance to have both the Secular Priests, and the Religious intirely engag'd to their Interests; so they are willing to wink at several sorts of Disorders, which might be easily rectified; but they think it the surest way to engage both of them to their Interests, by that Indulgence they shew them, in regard of their Conduct: How∣ever the Senate never fails of obtaining that through fear and severity of Punishment, which they cannot effect by more moderate Methods;
for they do not only severely punish such as op∣pose the Execution of their Orders, but they likewise take notice of them that were not sub∣mit with a perfect and blind Obedience. The Jesuits are a late Instance of this Severi∣ty; for notwithstanding they were not less useful at Venice, than they are in other places, to whose College most of the Noble Venetians send their Children, yet that does not any ways di∣minish the Caution which the Republick hath of them, for they have a continual Eye over them, observe all their Motions, not pardoning the least appearance of things contrary to their In∣terests, or Intentions; especially since their Re-establishment at Venice. When Pope Paul V. interdicted the Republick of Venice, the Jesuits, Capouchins, and Theatins were the only Orders that obeyed the Censures of Rome; for which reason they were Expell'd both the City and State of Venice; but after that Difference between the Pope and the Venetians was adjusted, the Capouchins and Theatins were receiv'd, and admitted to the Possessions of their Houses; yet the Senate resolv'd to adhere to their Resolutions of Excluding the Jesuits, who were not comprehended in this Agree∣ment, but were afterwards Re-established at Venice, as likewise throughout the whole State of the Republick; upon the pressing Instan∣ces of Pope Alexander VII. to the Senate, in that Juncture of time when they expected from him very powerful Succours for the Relief of Candia.
Besides the Sollicitations of the Pope, the Je∣suits mightily wanted the good Opinions of some of the principal Senators; but the Eloquent Harangue for their Establishment of the Procu∣rator Pezzaro, who was afterwards Doge, de∣termin'd the Senate to consent to their Return: The Republick however had received the Ad∣vantages of the Sale of their Effects, yet that was not sufficient; for they made them pur∣chase very dearly the Convent they live in at present, which formerly belong'd to the Religi∣ous of the Crusado; which Order being aboli∣shed, their Effects were given to the Republick, to carry on the War of Candia; but since this Re-establishment, the Senate shews a greater Ex∣actness than formerly, to make these Fathers observe a quite different Conduct from what they do in all other Countries. It is not long since a Father of Wit and Merit among the Jesuits, undertook to erect a Congrega∣tion of Gondaliers, in which this sort o People, who are not indeed very well instructed in the Ne∣cessary Points of Religion, Assembled every Sun∣day, to learn the Duty of Christians, and the most important Truths of our Faith: So this Con∣gregation became in a little time very numerous, and there was much reason to believe it would have been attended with the best Effects; but some of the Noble Venetians knowing very well that their Gondaliers were not ignorant of what passed in their Families (nor even their more publick and private Designs, of which they dis∣course in their Gondalo's) occasioned them to su∣spect that the Jesuits intended to penetrate into
these Matters, informing themselves of their Affairs and secretest Intrigues by the means of this Congregation. Upon this bare Conjecture the Matter was made known to the Senate, where it was ad∣judg'd to be of greater consequence than it ap∣peared; so it was resolved at that instant to send an Order of the Senate, requiring them to desist the continuance of that Congregation, as likewise their Orders to the Father that undertook the Business to leave Venice and not return before such a time. There hath been lately another Instance of Severity upon the Jesuits, that was equally surprizing to every Body: A Young Man of Padua, after the Deah of his Father, retired to their Order, as designing to receive the Ha∣bit; he being left in full Possession of the E∣state his Father gave him, pass'd a Procuration to the Father Rector at Padua, enabling him to sell his Effects, and dispose of them as should be thought convenient, while he perform'd his Noviceship at Boulogna, to which place he was sent: The Mother of the Young Man perceiving the Injury done her, made her Complaint to the College of the Republick, who referr'd the Matter to the Tribunal of the Coun∣cil of Ten; they immediately summon'd the Father that received the Procuration, with Or∣ders to deliver it up to them. The Rector at Padua, by reason of his great Age, and his Indisposition of the Gout, sent a Father of their Order to appear for him, but omitted sending the Procuration: The Order
was immediately repeated, whereupon the Father took Boat, from whence he was brought to their Presence in a Chair; but these Judges making his Disobedience an Affair of State, delivered him to the Inquisitors of the Repub∣lick, who sent him to the Leads, which is a very dismal Prison, where he continued a Fort∣night; the Procuration was retain', and the Young Man appearing, declar'd he would not be a Jesuite. The Senate hath lately thought fit to lay the greatest Infliction imaginable upon them, by obliging thm to go several times a Year in Procession, like the other Communities, with the Surplice and Candles in their Hands, so to pass over the Place of St. Mark in the presence of the Seignory, then accompanied b the Nuncio and other Ambassadors residing at Venice. But the Parte, or Decree that the Senate lately made, which forbids any of that Order to remain a∣bove three Years within the States of the Repub∣lick, is the most sensible Blow that could have been given them; for it seems to over∣throw the most Essential Maxims of their So∣ciety. I shall leave it to any ones Judgment, if these Examples of severity towards one of the most powerful Societies, and which  the best recei∣ved by mst Courts of Europe, are not suffici∣ently perswasive to retain all the other Religi∣ous and Ecclesiasticks in that absolute Depen∣dance which the Republick requires from them in respect of the Governmnt; especially seeing they do not permit the Ecclesiastical Superiours
to regulate their Conduct, or trouble them for their disorderly ways of Living. Of the Inquisition of Venice. WHEN it is known with what Spirit this Republick governs, and the Jealousie they have of the Ecclesiastical Authority, one cannot at first but wonder to see the Inquisition establi∣shed in the City and Dominions of this Repub∣lick; yet when the Circumstances of the Admis∣sion are known, and how that Jurisdiction is limited, we must cease wondring, to admire on the contrary the Wisdom of the Senate, who perfectly knowing all the Consequences of that Formidable Authority, have been no ways less careful from the very beginning to prevent the Estabishment of it with that ample power which this Tribunal hath in other Countries, than they of the Court of Rome, on the other hand, have us'd Skill and Authority for the gaining of this important Advantage, but the Consent of the Senate being necessary to the Establishing of this Matter, the Pope was forc'd to agree to such Conditions as render this Tribunal of the Inqui∣sition little less dependant upon the Political Go∣vernment, than of the Secular Courts. The Holy Office, is Compos'd of the Pope's Nuncio Residing at Venice; of the Patriarch of Venice, who, as a Noble Vene∣tian, is a Religious Observer of the Laws of
the Republick; of the Father Inquisitor, who is ever of the Order of St. Francis; and of two Principal Senators as Assistants; without whose Presence and Approbation all other Proceedings are invalid, and their Decrees of no effect; by which means, and through the Pretences that the matter in question will be contrary to the Interest and Laws of the State: The migh∣ty business of this Tribunal is reduced to a nar∣rower compass than one would easily believe. Manifest Heresie is almost the only thing to which the Inquisition hath Right of Cognizance; it is said manifest, because the greatest part of those things that attend, or may proceed from it, and support it, belong to the Secular Judges, who having the care of the Publick Tranquillity committed to them, do both cause an exact Observance to all Orders, and particular In∣spection to be made into these Matters. Besides, the Inquisition is not to concern them∣selves with such as do not profess the Roman Catholick Religion; and since the compiling of the Catalogue of Forbidden Books, which the Republick caus'd to be made upon the Setting up of the Inquisiion, about one hundred Years past; the Holy Office is not permitted to censure any others than what are Condemn'd by the Repub∣lick. Nevertheless, that the Senate may be the more assur'd of their own Conduct, as well in relation to Matters of Religion, as in regard of the just Rights of the Court of Rome, they have thought fit to maintain two Doctors, which are called Counsellors of State, one is Religious,
the other is a Secular; according to whose O∣pinions they take their necessary Measures in these Occasions; insomuch, that the Senate doth never receive either Bulls, Briefs, or Excom∣munications, until such time as these Doctors have throughly examined them, and reported them to contain nothing contrary to the Laws and Liberty of the State. The Republick doth permit the Greeks and Armenians the free Exercise of their Religion, which they enjoy in their several Churches: al∣tho the Greeks have so much moderation as not to declare themselves to be Schismaticks; yet they sufficiently own, that they depend on the Patri∣arch of Constantinople; and that they differ from the Romanists in the five Points in which consists the Schism of the Oriental Church: However, when the Greeks and Armenians celebrate any Festivals, the People flock in Multitudes to them, to partake of their Indulgences, and they likewise the same to the Catholick Chur∣ches. As to the Hugenots and Lutherans, who are no where tolerated by the Inquisition, there are but very few of them at Venice, the Republick does not permit to them an open and free Ex∣ercise of their Religion; yet the Toleration is such, that the Republick seems not to observe what they do in that matter; neither have they much trouble upon the Decease of any one of them, to have the Person publickly interr'd in the Church, for these Curates are not very in∣quisitive, whether the Party died in the Catho∣lick, or Lutheran Faith. The Inquisition draws
no Advantages from the Sentence of the Con∣demnation pass'd upon Hereticks, the Republick having granted, That all such Effects shall go to their Lawful Heirs: This Custom is very different to what is practi'd in Spain, where the Inquisition hath not only all the Effects of the Condemn'd Jews, but likewise whatsoever they possess that are Converted from their Er∣rours, as being ill gotten, and which conse∣quently changes the purity of such Effects. There is no place in Italy where the Jews are so well used, as they are at Venice, excepting the Dominions of the Great Duke of Tuscany; where this People may be said to be in favour, by reason of the mighty Trade they draw to Leghorn: But yet at Venice every Noble Fami∣ly hath an Intimate and Confident Jew; for as they are esteem'd to be Men of Secrecy, so this good Quality gets them many Protectors among the Nobility, who have divers ways of employing them: As they cannot be troubled upon the account of Religion; so the Crimes they commit upon this Chapter, as Blasphemies, Sacrileges and many others, are reserv'd to the Examinations of the Secular Courts: To distinguish themselves they are obliged to wear Red Hats, which are of the very finest Scarlet Cloath, lined with Black Silk; this Fashion seems at first very par∣ticular to the Eyes of all Strangers. The Jews are not only tolerated at Venice, by reason the richest of them that are engag'd in Trade with these Merchants, do occasion a mighty Commerce between the Levant and this City, but likewise because they afford the Re∣publick
very considerable Sums in any times of Necessity, besides the usual Impositions that are laid upon them. They have a par∣ticular Il Cheto. place allowed them to live in, which they can shut with two Gates; they are about five and twenty hundred in number, which o∣bliges them to build their Houses six or seven Stories high. There are several sorts of Na∣tions among them, Hollanders, Spaniards, Portu∣guese, Germans and Italians, who have their par∣ticular Synagogues. But of all these different Nations, the Portuguese are counted the richest, who likewise esteem themselves to be in the highest degree above all the rest. As a greater Liberty in favour of these be∣fore mentioned Religious, the Republick hath e∣stablished a particular Chamber in the Universi∣ty of Padua, where several Professors to this purpose, have the Power of conferring Doctor's Degrees upon all sorts of Persons, without any distinction of Religion, as have pass'd the usual Courses of Study; insomuch, that being by this means excus'd from making Profession of Faith, required by the Bulls of the Popes, the Schisma∣ticks, Hereticks, and Jews, do without any far∣ther trouble commence Doctors of Law and Phy∣sick. After this manner the Republick permits her Subjects to taste the Sweets of Liberty, without being oblig'd to cover by other Pre∣tensions the Interest she hath to let every one live quietly in their States, and exempt of that Fear which the Inquisition occasions in all other places.
Of the Political Government of the Republick. THE College, the Pregadi, and the Great Coun∣cil, are the three principal Springs that act in the great Body of this State; but as the Re∣gularity of this Motion which composeth the Perfection of this Government, does depend upon the coherence there is in the Councils, so it is absolutely necessary to know the reciprocal Subordination, the Order that attends the Management of the most important Affairs, and the Authority they have each in particu∣lar; yet being it would be contrary to the Na∣tural Order of things, to begin the description of an extraordinary Noble Palace, rather by the Foundations than the Front that appears first to the Eye, so I should occasion more con∣fusion than clearness in the Matter treated of, by passing on to the innermost parts of the Go∣vernment, without stopping at the place which is the magnificent Entrance of this Superbous Edifice, where the Learned Architects that drew the Scheme, have placed the greatest Or∣naments of their Art.
Of the College. THE College is the Tribunal in which resides all the Majesty of the Prince; Embassa∣dours have Audience there; the Letters of all foreign Affairs are there read; all Petitions are presented to this Court of Justice, to whom belong the hearing of all Priviledge Causes, which are those of the Prelates and Benefic'd Clergy; all Suits between Relations, and the Competitions of the Judges are there decided; in short the College is the gate through which all Affairs must pass; for the College prepares the Things that are to be debated and Regula∣ted by the Pregadi, which is the Senate of the Republick. The College is compos'd of the Doge, of his six Councellours, the three Triumvirs of the Coun∣cil of Forty, the six Great Sages of Terra firma, and the five Sages of the orders, which make in all Twenty Six Persons; which being of different Ages and Dignities forms a Body that repre∣sents the whole State. There is in the Hall where this Council is kept, a sort of Throne that takes up the lo∣wermost part of the Room, to which you ascend by foursteps; here the Doge sits upon a wrought Wooden Chair after the ancient Fa∣shion, which is rais'd six inches higher than the benches on each side, a Piece of Flower'd
fastened to the back of this Chair, with a Carpent and Foot-cloath of the same, are all the Ornaments of the Dogal Seat; It is ne∣vertheless to be admired that the Republick hath not covered the Majesty of their Prince with a Cannopy, and that they should not have the use of them, in the Palace of the Doge; It may possibly be because Alexander the Third thought not of it at the time he presented Prince Zebastian Ziani with all the Mark of Pomp and Splendour that now ren∣der the Dogal Dignity Majestical in the Eyes of the People. The six Councellours of the Doge with the Three Presidents of the Council Criminal of Forty are Seated on the right hand of the Prince, and take up all the End of that side of this State; On the other side of the Prince and up∣on his left hand are plac'd the six great Sages and the five Sages of Terra firma: There is for each place a little Seat of gilt Leather, with little moving desks both high and Flat to Sepa∣rate them from each other▪ which by drawing to them when they please, makes Room for such as are to have place in their Audience according to the different Characters they ap∣pear in. The five Sages of the order are set upon a bench with a back to it, which is plac'd below on the left hand without the Estrade; and un∣derneath the Sages of Terra firma, the Secreta∣ries of the College, some of whom are Interpre∣ters at the Audiences of Embassadours and other forreign Ministers, who have their places up∣on
a bench on the other side, but at a much greater distance from the Throne of the Prince. Of the Doge. IT may be observed by what is said that since the Republick hath been govern'd by Doges, there hath happen'd no alteration in their Method of Government, which hath not tended to the Diminution of the Princes Authority; insomuch that the last reform at the Serrar del Consiglio in the Year 1289, de∣priv'd the Doges of the Credit then remaining to them upon the Creation of that Council, which was one Hundred and Seventeen Years before this reform: The Senat knows perfect∣ly well that the Liberty of the Republick is Incompatible with the Interests of a Prince that shall pretend himself to be above the Laws; therefore they have not only Subjected the Doge without any manner of Reservation; but they have likewise added some as to his particular, which do in many cases render his condition Inferiour to that of a private Sena∣tour; thus from being formerly Prince of the Republick he is now become a meer Image and the Real shadow of that Majesty, which the Senate truely preserves within the Limits of her own Power only. Nevertheless they raise to the Dogal Digni∣ty such Senatours as have most distinguish'd
themselves by their particular Services, and they are usually taken from being Procura∣tors of Saint Mark, or that have honourably supported the Dignity of Embassadours, the Supreme command of their Fleets, or that have exercis'd the Principal Functions of the State; But as the Senate Introduces them into this high place to make use of their Names on∣ly in the Government, so the ablest Senatours are not always the most fit Persons for that Station. The advanc'd Age, easy temper and the Illu∣strious Birth are the three principal and most essential qualities that promote them to the dig∣nity: Reason of State requires their Princes to be particularly mild and peaceable; that so they may yield and submit the easier to their sentiments, as have a greater share than he in the Government. Dominico Contarini, lately Doge, did not pass through all the degrees that usually raise the Noble Venetian to this Dignity, for he was at the time of his being Elected Doge improving the Pleasures of his Country Seat, but he being of one of the most Illustrious Families, and which hath at several times afforded Eight Doges to this Republick, to which may be added an evenness of Temper, an Affability so charming, and his Person so Noble and Majestical, that he equally gained both the Love and Veneration of the Nobility and People. The Young Gentlemen especially were so taken with his Merit, that I have of∣tentimes hear'd them say aloud upon observing
of him in the Administration of the publick Functions. Le adorabile quel vectio. Nicolas Sagredo who succeeded him is the first Doge of this Family, which is of the Second class or order of Nobility; he was made for his great Merits Procurator of Saint Mark, having been a great while in the most conside∣rable Employs of the Republick, and actually had the greatest share in the Government of the State: Insomuch that his Elevation must be rather ascrib'd to his own perticular Merits than to the Factions of his Friends. Notwith∣standing the severity of the Conditions that at∣tend the Dogal Dignity, yet there were never so many known to stand for it as upon this E∣lection, or so many Persons capable to dis∣charge the Duties of this great Place. This Dignity is no ways less burthensome to the Family than it is to the Person of the Doge; for his Brothers, Sons and Grandsons can have no considerable Employs in the Republick, which have any Affinity with the Government; if they have any or chance to be Embassadours, they are oblig'd to quit those Affairs upon his Election. If the Doge is a Married Man, his Wife is not Treated with the Title of Princesse, neither hath the Senate thought fit to Crown them this last Age, as being desirous either to Moderate the Ambition of the Women, or to save those great Sums that were expended upon the Coronation of the last Princess, Wife to the Doge Martin Crimani. The particular restraint that is laid upon the persons of the Doges, as likewise their ways of li∣ving,
and all these other Circumstances of that condition together, are not sufficient to deter such Families as have given no Doges to the Republick from making their utmost Efforts to attain this Honour; by which they do not only hope to bring themselves into a much greater considera∣tion, but likewise to Establish their Fortunes by the Sums they may acquire if the Doge hap∣pens to live many Years after his Election; which is one of the Reasons why the Doge is Created for Life: besides, if it was for a cer∣tain space of time only, he would not be so much consider'd in all other Courts, neither would the Senate be able to keep him in the great restraint that is now imposed upon him, through the Fear of being depos'd or of a re∣trospection into his conduct after Death, to the mighty Prejudice of his whole Family. As the Republick hath sometimes forc'd their Princes to assume and continue this Dignity, so they have likewise depos'd others whose Age or Infirmities have rendred them useless to the State; yet in reality the Republick ma∣kes a greater use of their name than their pre∣sence, upon which Apprehensions the Doge ne∣ver desists from going to the Colledge and all other Courts of Justice, to which the Duties of his Station oblige him, unless he finds him∣self altogether uncapable of doing it; there∣fore I do not in the least doubt but that Domi∣nico Contarini did expect some such Resolution, upon his long Indisposition of the Palsy that deprived him for Eighteen Months of the use of one side of his Body. For when any Em∣bassadour
sent to compliment him, he always concluded his thanks, with his being much bet∣ter; and that he was in hopes to see the Embassa∣dour in a little time at the College. The Doge presides in all the Councils, but he is esteem'd Prince of the Republick only at the head of the Senate, at the Tribunals where he assists, and in the Ducal Palace of Saint Mark; out of which places he hath much less Authority than some other particular Persons; for he dares not engage in any business whate∣ver. There are some who have reported in their writings that it is Lawful to affront or kill him upon finding him out of the City, and that he hath not the Liberty to go out of his Palace, It is true that there hath been for∣merly very severe Regulations as to this mat∣ter, but things are not carried to that Exire∣mity at present; however he goes not out of the City without asking in a manner leave of his Councellors: Dominico Contarini went fre∣quently to see his Daughters and Nieces that were in several Nunneries, as likewise very of∣ten every Year to his Country House to enjoy the Air of the Continent. When the Doge goes out of the City he is not attended with any External Marks that may distinguish him from any other Venetian Gentle∣man; his apparel is then a gray close Bodied Coat and his sword by his side; if any Noble happens to meet him, he seems not to know him to avoid rendring those respects that are due to him, when he is with the Republick; who are the same thing in his absence as when
he is present; upon any particular Visits that the Doge makes in the City, he is only atten∣ded like another Noble, with a Valet de Chambre and two Gondalo's; neither is that discernable from another but by a Carpet, and two flow∣er'd Sattin Cushions against the Back-board, which small marks of Dignity are so far from being exposed, that the Gondaliers most an end cover them all with the black Curtains of the Gondalo. His Dress is, on these occasions, like those of the Counsellors, which is Purple, but he wears a General's Cap of the same Colour, with his Vest; it is round made of Paste-board, only four Fingers high, the Crown flat, and the circumference of the whole, double to what the Entrance of the Head is. They give the Doge the Title of your Scre∣nity, and Most Screne Prince; and that he may be sensible that these Titles do not belong to his Person, all Embassadors take care to use the same Expressions when they speak to the Col∣lege, seldom saying your Screnity, without ad∣ding your Excellency's; being confus'd Ti∣tles; among which no difference ought to be made in this Assembly, where the Majesty of the Republick is dilated upon all the Members that compose the College. Altho all Dispatches are made in the Name of the Prince, as likewise the Answers of Em∣bassadors are address'd to him, yet he cannot open them, which may be done and answer'd without him; and that he may continually re∣member that he only lends his Name to the Se∣nate,
they forbear the Examination of all Pro∣positions made to the College by Embassadors, or other Ministers, until such time as he and his Councellors are withdrawn; then the Bu∣siness is examin'd, the Opinions of the Sages are taken, upon which they draw the Delibe∣ration into Writing, which is delivered at the next Assembly of the Senate, in the Presence of the Doge and his Counsellors, where he hath only a single Vote with the other Senators, to confirm or reject what was done in his Ab∣sence. The Money of Venice bears the Name of the Doge, but it is not made with his Impression upon the Coin, as it was formerly in the time when the Doge had the absolute Power of the Government, there being now, instead of his Effigies, a Doge in his Ducal Habits upon his Knees to St. Mark, to shew that the Prince is the Subject of the Republick, of which the Pi∣cture of St. Mark is the Hieroglyphick: Yet in the Mint where the Money is Coin'd all pri∣vate Persons upon paying the Duties to the Prince, have the Liberty of Coining what Sums they please; the Doge gives the Permission, and enjoys the Advantages proceeding from it. The Doge is allowed by the Republick fourteen thousand Ducats per Annum, to defray his Houshold Expences, and the Charges of treat∣ing four times in a Year all Embassadors, the Seignory, and such of the Senators as are assistant at those Festivals: The ordinary Retinue of the Doge consists of two Valets de Chambre, four
Gondaliers, and some other Servants; the Re∣publick discharges all other Officers that only wait upon him at publick Ceremonies: He hath the Sellings of the Offices of Commanders of the Palace, who are a sort of Serjeants, as also the Ecuyers, or Squires of the Doge, which are 25 in number; from these Profits and the Gifts of all Benefices belonging to St. Mark's, arise the principal Advantages of his Dignity. The Republick hath not only invested the Prince with all the apparent marks of Sovereign Dignity, but they have also obtain'd for him from the Popes and Kings, the real Preroga∣tives of Royal Majesty, and the preference next to Crown'd Heads of all other Princes in ge∣neral: It is to be admired that they should as it seems, go contrary to these Advantages of Pre-eminency, by reducing of him to the de∣gree of all other Princes, in respect of the Car∣dinals; for when a Cardinal hath Audience, he sits on the Right of the Doge, in his own Chair, that is made larger upon these Occasions; and upon any particular Visit, the Doge goes to re∣ceive him at his Gondalo. These particular Visits, as also those of Em∣bassadors upon extraordinary Occasions, are made with the Permission of the Senate, which is desired at the College; for the Doge hath it not in his Power to see whom he pleases, and he lives so retired that one may say, Solitude and Dependance are the most Essential Qualities of his Condition; neither are these Visits very agreeable to the Senate, who never give their Permissions, but for want of a civil Excuse to
avoid it: The Count D' Avaux was the first that undertook to visit the Doge Dominico Contarini, in his Sickness, to which the Senate consented: In this Occasion the Gentleman of the Doge, and some other Officers, are at the Landing-place of the Palace to conduct the Ambassadour to the Doge: The Senate are sure in these Junctures to be pun∣ctually informed of the most insignificant Words that pass in the Discourse. Altho the Marquis de la Fuente, Ambassador of Spain, was vex'd for being preceded in the Visit by Monsieur D' Avaux, yet he demanded leave of the Senate to see the Doge, esteeming that an Advantage which few Ambassadors receive in the whole Course of their Employs. The Doge can only give general Answers to Embassadors upon the Propositions they intend to exhibit to the College; for if he should word it so as to bring the Senate into the least En∣gagement; he would not only meet with the Confusion of having it disown'd, but would likewise expose himself to the most sensible Mortifications: However if the Propositions of an Embassador are prejudicial to the Dignity of the Republick, the Doge is not only supported in such a Juncture, by answering in the Name of the Republick, with all the Rigour of an in∣cens'd Prince, but he is moreover oblig'd to act in that Nature, if he would not be esteem'd unworthy of the Place he possesses. Upon the Audience of an Ambassador to acquaint the College with any Success of his Masters, or to congratulate the Republick upon the happy issue of their Affairs, the Doge hath at those times
the Liberty to answer more amply, but without ever entring into a particular. The continual occasion which the Doge Do∣minico Contarini had of expressing himself upon these Matters, had acquir'd him a mighty Faci∣lity of making such adequate Replies, and so proportion'd to the Subject, that no Prince was ever known to exceed him; nevertheless for having made some that did not seem to be suf∣ficiently laid upon general terms, he was forc'd to sustain in these Occasions the most sensible Reprimands. It is not in these Audiences only that the Doge is oblig'd to have a care of exceed∣ing the limits prescrib'd him, but it likewise behoves him to proportion the Steps of his Con∣duct: The Affair of Monseignior Altoviti, Pre∣decessour to Monseignior Varese Nuncio to the Pope, seem'd a thing of no importance in re∣gard of the Doge, yet it nevertheless made his Serenity extreamly sensible of the Misery of his Condition. This Nuncio had demanded satisfaction of the College, for that contrary to the Privileege of Embassadors, the Grand Captain, or Provost, had seized one of his Retinue for carrying of Pistols; the Person was Releas'd upon their be∣ing assur'd that he belong'd to the Nuncio; yet the Prelate was not contented with this satisfacti∣on, but demanded something more publick; and seeing the Senate was not dispos'd to humour his Niceties, he publickly shew'd his Resentments, by refusing to assist at the Ceremonies of the Chappels, which the Doge very frequently holds, which is the only means that Embassadors have
of discovering their Discontents to the People, when they pretend not to have Justice done them, as they ought in reason to expect: And as the Senate does usually receive this proceeding for a Mark of Contempt, and not being wil∣ling upon such frivolous Occasions to let the People perceive the Misunderstanding, so they become more tractable and easier inclin'd to give satisfaction to the Ministers, who ought to be assistant with the Seignory upon those Cere∣monies. The great Feast of Easter was then approach∣ing, at which time the Seignory goes for seve∣ral Days together to the Church of St. Mark, both in the Morning and Afternoon, which made the Senate unwilling to defer giving satis∣faction to the Nuncio, that so obstinately ad∣hear'd to his Pretensions: However all the Re∣turn was, That the Grand Captain who seiz'd the Person, was not to be assistant in attending the Doge upon three of those Solemn Functi∣ons; accordingly he appeared not at the first Ceremony of Tenebres, Holy Wednesday and Thurs∣day, but he came upon Good-Friday in the Morn∣ing to the Court of the Palace to march in his place: The Nuncio being in the Apartment where they assemble upon these Occasions, was inform'd of it by such as were to observe in what manner the Satisfaction was made; he complain'd at that very instant to the Doge, that they had contraven'd to the Assurances given him, protesting that he would proceed no far∣ther, if that Officer was not ordered to go out of the Palace; insomuch that the Prince believing
in good earnest, that they had forgot the Pro∣mise, sent his Orders for the Grand Captain to withdraw. The Senate however explain'd the Terms of this Satisfaction quite otherwise to what the Doge and Nuncio did; for they pretended that three different Functions at the Church of St. Mark, were what the Nuncio had taken for the officiating of three distinct Solemn Feasts; for which reason they equally resented the mat∣ter against the Doge, and the Captain, the one for Commanding, and the latter for having O∣beyed contrary to his Duty: The Officer was thrown into a Prison and severely us'd, to give him the Knowledge of his Superiors: And one of the Inquisitors of State, who have as ample a Power of Life and Death over the Prince, as over the least Gentleman of the Republick, made him so severe a Reprimand in minding of him that his Life was in their Hands, upon com∣manding any one to exceed his Duty; that the poor Prince burst into Tears, regreating with∣out doubt the Delights of the private Condition he enjoyed at his Country Seat before the Ele∣ction.
How the Doge goes Attended upon Solemn Ceremonies. WHEN the Doge marches in any Publick Fun∣ctions, assisted by the Embassadors and Seignory, the first that begin the Procession, are the Clergy of Saint Mark; after whom follow the Serjeants of the Palace, who are called Com¦manders; they wear Cloaks of Blue Cloath, which come to their very Heels; they have red Caps of the same Form with those of the Nobility, upon which are two Sequins, little differing from Crown-pieces of Gold, one be∣fore and the other behind: Eight of these Ser∣jeants have each of them a Standard of painted and gilt Taffeta, upon which is the Lion of Saint Mark; two of these are Blue, two Red, two Violet, and two White; which signifie Peace, War, Truce and Confederacy: In the Order of their March the two Standards which repre∣sent the present Condition of the Republick, are carried first. Six more of these Serjeants follow with Sil∣ver Trumpets all streight, and six Foot long: After them go five Hautboys in Vests of Red Serge, who always play to one Tune by Intervals, so long as the March continues: The Ecuyers or Squires of the Doge, march by couples after them. These Ecuyers are of an inferiour Condition to
the Citizens; they wear short Cloaks, are plain∣ly drest in Black, their principal Business is to Carve and Attend the Table at such times as the Doge entertains the Ambassadors and Seig∣nory. The Grand Captain, and the Gentleman of the Doge, who is his Master of the Ceremonies, that Invites and receives the Ministers when they come to the Doge, follow the Ecuyers; they are both in long Robes and Vests of Satin and Flower'd Damask: The first of these Offices was formerly executed by a Noble Venetian, af∣terwards by the Citizens; but is since so dimi∣nished in Credit, that a Captain of the Sbirris may pretend to it; seven or eight of those Cap∣tains follow these two Officers; one would not imagine them to be what they are, seeing them in Vests of Satin, and Flower'd Damask, which come down half way their Legs, they have no other Arms than a Silver-hafted Dagger stuck at their Girdles, which are adorn'd with Plates of the same. The Secretaries of the Republick follow them in their usual Vests of Violet Cloath, and Caps of Velvet: The Great Chancellour comes next, Cloath'd in Purple; as likewise all Senators assi∣sting at this Ceremony: Then two Ecuyers of the Doge, one of which carries the Gold foulding Chair, that is of Wood gilt, adorn'd with a Broccard of Gold; the other a Cushion of the same Broccard; a Clerk of the Chappel then marches before the Doge, carrying the Candle∣stick and White Taper of his Serenity.
Pope Alexander the III in acknowledgment of the Protection which the Republick shew'd him, and of the Singular Services of Prince Se∣bastian Ziani, presented the Doge with the Gol∣den Chair, the Cushion, and the Ombrelle of the same; as likewise the Tapers, the Standards and Trumpets, which are at present the chief part of the Pomp of these Ceremo∣nies. Then the Doge comes between the Pope's Nuncio and the Embassador of France; If there were any Embassadors at Venice, as formerly there was and are now at Rome, they would march a Breast according to their places on each side of the Nuncio and Embassador of France: But since the Republick according to the ex∣ample of the Court of Rome, decided the pre∣seance of place in Favour of France against the Crown of Spain (Messire Francis de Nouailes being at that time Embassador to the Republick from Charles the IXth.) the Embassador of Spain hath not appear'd at any of these Publick Functions, which is the Reason that he is less known and beloved at Venice than the Em∣bassador of France, who is commonly called by the People the Embassador, as if there was no other of that Character. Upon these Ceremonies the Doge wears a Vest with straight Sleeves, that reaches to the Ground, this is fastned before by about a dozen large Vermillion Buttons that come to his Girdle, which clasps together with Buckles of Gold; over these is the long Ducal Cloak all which are of a Gold brouard, or Silver
mix'd with Red or White according to the day of the Solemnity; the Ducal Cap is of the same Silk with a large border of Gold tishue, which represents the Diademe; his two Valets de Chambre hold the train of his Cloak and the eldest Ecuyer carrys the Ombrelle over his Head; which is very large rais'd like a Pavi∣lion covered with Rich Gold brouard, round about it is a Campage, like that of the Popes. The Councellors of the Doge follow two and two together, but the first is accompa∣nied by the Noble that is elected for the first Po∣dasty or Government that comes vacant with∣in the States of the Republick; he marches on the right hand of the Councellor carrying with both hands a large Sword in a Scabbard of Flowered Velvet covered with Vermillion Filagreen: This Sword is like that which the Pope Consecrates every Christmas Day; with a Hat of Black Velvet lined with Ermin, and the Holy Ghost embroider'd in Pearls upon the Head, which is sent to that Christian Prince who fights against the Enemies of the Church. That behind the Doge is the mark of the Dignity of great Ecuyer of the Eastern Empire, which was conferr'd upon the Doge Peter Gradenigo by the Emperor Michael, which seve∣ral other Doges possest after him; for if this Sword was carried after the Prince, and at the Head of the Seignory, it would represent the Senate to have the whole Authority, of which the Doge hath only for himself the shadow of that Greatness, whose Pomp and Trophies
that precede him, are no more than a vain, and an imaginary appearance of Dignity. The six Councellors of the Doge, are fol∣low'd by the three Presidents of the Council Cri∣minal of Forty, the two Avogadors, the three Chiefs of the Council of Ten, the two Censors, and several Senators marching two and two in the Ducal Vest of Purple, very large, and the Sleeves as wide as the Vest is long. The Doge attracts with this Train both the Admiration and Veneration of the People, who are much delighted in these Ceremonies, where they all continually implore the Benediction of the Almighty upon his Person, knowing well that although they have sometimes reason to ex∣claim against the Rigours of the Government, yet it is not the * Prince who is the occasion of them, notwithstanding that such Publications are made in his Name. When the Procession is in this manner come to the Church of St. Mark, the Doge places him∣self in the first Seat at the Right Hand of the Entrance into the Church; the Nuncio, and Ambassadour of France, are on his side, with∣out observing any void space of Respect from him; the Counsellors sit on the same side, and in the same Row, but at some distance from them: All the chief Persons assisting in these Ceremonies with the Doge and Counsellors, are seated on the same side upon two rows of Ben∣ches; the Senators, who here represent the Pregadi, are on the other hand; however they equally share in this Honour with the Doge, by receiving the same Ceremony of the Pax and
Incense, which is to inform the Publick, that they do not appear at these Functions to aug∣ment and grace the Train of their Prince, but that they are equally with him the Essential Members of the Body of the Republick. After the Ceremonies are over, the Doge goes back attended in the same manner to the Palace: The Nuncio and the Ambassadour bring him to the bottom of the Stairs, where they take leave of his Serenity: But instead of reti∣ring at that instant, they fall off to the right Hand, where they stand until the last Senator is past by them. This Custom which seems so very repugnant to the Dignity of Embassadors, was first introduced by the Nuncio of a Pope, who soliciting the Senate upon some important Affair, was pleas'd to compliment these Gen∣tlemen with this mark of Civility: But the Republick, who is so well vers'd in drawing Ad∣vantages from all Accidents, will never admit of any Overtures to abolish a Custom so very acceptable to them; for according to their real Maxims, the Senators are thereby as much ho∣nour'd as the Doge, by the Ministers of the grea∣test Princes of Christendom. These publick Ceremonies are chiefly occa∣sion'd by the happy Discoveries of some Con∣spiracy, or upon some Sedition appeas'd, the gaining of a Victory, or some other Advan∣tage to the State, in which Accidents the Re∣publick does much affect to shew their Piety and Acknowledgments by these Publick Thanksgi∣vings they offer up to the Almighty; which Functions are become so frequent, that with
those of the Solemn Festivals, they chiefly com∣pose the Business of the Embassadors residing here. Of the Election of a Doge. BEFORE they proceed to the Choice of a New Doge, they perform the last Duties to the Deceas'd with all the Magnificence due to the Condition of his Station; his Body is Embalm'd, which lies in State for three Days together, in a great Room, upon a Bed of Cloath of Gold, where the Sword, and Spurs are by a very particular Custom laid the wrong way. However the occasion of the Body's lying in this manner, is not only to give the People an opportunity of rendring their last Respects to the Prince, but it is particularly to receive such Complaints as may be made against his Conduct and Administration of Affairs, as al∣so time for the Creditors to call for their De∣mands, which his Heirs are oblig'd to pay im∣mediatly, or to have the Deceas'd depriv'd of the Funeral Honours, the Charges whereof the Republick defrays. For which reason, the first thing entred upon after the Death of the Doge, is to choose three Inquisitors to examine into his Conduct, to hear such Complaints as may be made against his way of Living, and to do Justice to the mean∣est
Demands at the Expence of the Inheritance, whereby the Misery of the Subjection in which he lived, appears not to cease with his Life. It even looks as if the Republick would moderate the satisfaction which the Doge might possibly have by dying, in hopes of being regreated by the Publick, for the Senate assists at this Fune∣ral Pomp in Vests of Scarlet, to shew the Peo∣ple by the Singularity of this Ceremony, that it is not the Government of the Prince which composes the Happiness of the State; as like∣wise that the Republick being free, ought not to shew any Marks of Affliction at his Death. The Obsequies of the Doge are no sooner over, but a Great Council of all the Nobility above Thirty is held, where they choose five Persons who are to draw up the Heads of the Inaugural Oath; that is, the Laws which he solemn∣ly swears to observe upon his Election: These Nobles are empowered to add, or retrench from them as they shall judge necessary for the good of the State, by which means the Republick de∣prives the Doge of explaining to their disadvan∣tage the terms of these Obligations, which compose an in the Volume. The Prudence of the Republick is much to be admired in her choice of the one and forty Ele∣ctors of the Doge, by making Merit and For∣tune equally to concur to such an important Action; for a long circuit of Ballotations and reciprocal Elections, has render'd of no effect the designs of all Parties, leaving the Families the satisfaction which almost every one of them finds in contributing to the Election of
a Prince; for all the Nobility that are at the Geat Council, draw each of them one Ball out of an Urn, in which are Thirty gilt ones: Such as have the gilt Balls are by Lot reduced to the Number of Nine; these Nine choose Forty, which are by Lot reduced to Twelve, who have the nominating of five and twenty that are af∣terwards reduc'd again to Nine, who choose Five and forty Gentlemen, out of which Num∣ber Eleven are taken by Lot, and these have the Nomination of the one and Forty real Electors of the Doge. After the Approbation of these Electors by the Great Council, they retire into the Palace of St. Mark, out of which they cannot stir, un∣til they have Elected a Doge. Altho these Ele∣ctions are seldom made very tedious, yet the Electors have been five or six Months before they could determine the Matter, for the one and forty Votes, there must be twenty five of Accord to choose the Doge: All the time the Electors are thus shut up, they are very carefully kept, and treated almost in the same manner as the Cardinals in the Conclave. The first thing the Doge does upon his Electi∣on, after the usual Oaths of observing the Statutes, is to shew himself to the People: But as the Republick does not permit him the Taste of pure Joys, without the Relish of some Bitterness, which may make him, sensible of the Restraint and Servitude to which his Con∣dition engages him, so they bring him down through the Hall, where his Body is to be ex∣pos'd after his Death: Here he is compliment∣ed
upon his Exaltation by the Great Chancellour, to the end he may remember that in this place he shall be Examin'd when he is Dead, if he hath quadrated all his Actions according to the Rules of Justice. The Doge after this goes into a sort of an Engine, which they call a Well, that is pur∣posely kept in the Arcenal for the use of this Cere∣mony. It really hath the external resemblance of a Well Supported by a wooden frame like a Litter, but of an Extraordinary length; the two sides of whose ends are joyn'd together. About two hundred men belonging to the Arcenal carry this Engine upon their Shoul∣ders, the Doge sitting in this Well, with one of his Children or nearest Relations, standing upright behind him, who hath two Basons full of Gold and Silver medals, pur∣posely coin'd for this occasion, with such figures and Inscriptions as he thinks fit, which he throws among the People, whilst the Doge is carrying round about the place of Saint Mark. The custom of bestowing these Liberalities upon the People was first Introduced in the Year 1172, by the Famous Doge Sebastian Zia∣ni that Triumph'd over the Emperor Frederick the second, by taking Otho, Son of this Empe∣ror Prisoner, in the Naval Victory he obtain'd over him in the defence of Pope Alexander the Third. The Doge thought it Necessary to shew this Liberality to the People, as the sweetest charm and the most proper remedy to allay their indignation for being depriv'd of
their Right of Electing the Prince, which they had alone enjoyed for several Ages. This Doge was moreover so Rich that he built at his own proper charge all the old Procurato∣ries, leaving besides very immense Riches to the Church of Saint Mark: Insomuch, as it was commonly believed among the People, that he had found some mighty Treasure. Of the Six Councellors of the Doge, the three Presidents of the Council Crimi∣nal of Forty, and of the Vice Doge. AS the Dignity of Councellor to the Prince is usually thought more Honourale, than judg'd necessary for them to be converiant in the important affairs of State; so they are not generally the best Heads of the Republick who officiate in this Employ; for they always bestow these promotions upon the eldest Senatours of the first Nobility; They are Coun∣cellors for a Year, yet they assist at the Col∣lege no more than Eight Months, the other four they preside in the Council Criminal of Forty, as the three Presidents of that Chamber have likewise two Months Session in the Col∣lege. The Doge, the Six Counsellours, and the three Presidents of the Council Criminal of Forty, who are called Vice Coun∣cellors, represent the Seignory, and give Judg∣ment in all Priviledge causes that are pleaded at the College.
There are so many Councellors as there are Quarters in the City, but a Noble that lives in one Ward or quarter cannot be Councellor for another; for every Councellor is the chief man of the Ward: Although they are call'd Councellors of the Doge yet they are in reality Councellors of the Seignory; For which Reason they have a greater Power than the Doge himself, seeing they can do that without him, which he can only do by their presence: They are cloath'd in Red and wear the Ducal Vest with great wide Sleeves all the while they are in Office; whereas the Presidents of the Criminal of Forty, wear the violet vest according to the common custom with narrow Sleeves. They advise together upon the heads they are to propose to the Great Council; yet a Councellor of the Seignory may alone make a proposition to the Senate, and the Great Coun∣cil; which the Presidents of the Criminal of Forty cannot do unless they all three agree in Opinion. These Presidents are however Treated with the Tittle of excellency, as likewise all o∣ther Nobles who enter into the great Employs. Nevertheless the rank of President of the Crimi∣nal of Forty, is only considerable for the entrance it gives them into the College and Pregadi. Therefore these Employs are usually possess'd by the Nobles of the Families, the narrowness of whose affairs oblige them to seek these Offices attended with Salaries, for the more convenient support of their Quality.
The Councellors of the Seignory can assemble a Great Council Extraordinary; for out of the College they exercise in that Council the greatest part of their Functions: although the Pregadi hath a nomination to this Dignity, and the great Council the same; yet the first have ever the Preference in the Great Council, who in this matter respect the Elections of the Senate; not but that they can depose them from their places; which lately happened to one of the worthiest Senators of the Repub∣lick; however by the Laws of the Gover∣ment a Noble cannot be depriv'd of his Charge witout trying of him, or providing for him with another Employ; so one of his ill affected Bre∣thren nominated him for one of the most inconsiderable Governments of the State, which are given only among the poorest of the No∣bility. Thus the faction of his Enemies ex∣posed him to the most sensible Mortification that a Gentleman of his condition was capable of receiving. As the Republick is never without the Doge, nor the Seignory without their President, so the ancientest Councellor assumes the business when he is sick, or the place vacant; whom he repre∣sents in the Administrations of all affairs; he marches among the Ambassadors in publick Cere∣monies, and answers to their Audiences in the College; yet he never sits in the Ducal Seat, neither doth he assume the habit of Doge, dis∣tinguishing himself only by the Cap which he never takes from his head, but keeps it on as the Doge doth the Ducal Horn.
Of the Six Great Sages. Isani Grandi.THE most worthy Subjects of the Republick are all chosen for the Execution of the place of Great Sages; for as they have the conduct of the greatest affairs in the Republick, so they ought to have acquir'd a consummate Prudence, and a most perfect knowledge of the several Interests of the Republick. Those Six Gentle∣men are the most intellectual part in the Soul of the Republick: Insomuch that the Pro∣curators of St. Mark esteem the officiating of these Employs as an honour to them; for the Six great Sages are Masters of the Govern∣ment during their six Months of Administra∣tion. They advise upon all things that are to be de∣bated in the Pregadi; They Summon the Senate upon any urgent affair that will not permit them to attend the usual Session: It is the Senate also that hath the choice of them, who observe the same method with them, as with the six Coun∣cellors of the Doge, three whereof are only chang'd at a time, that so they may avoid bring∣ing in at once into an Office six new and un∣experienced Persons: They wear the Ducal Vest of violet Cloth, and as a farther mark of Honour, the Republick never sends an Embassador to the Emperor, to the Pope or the Grand Seignior, who hath not been or that is
not upon this occasion advanc'd to the quality of Great Sage. The six great Sages take their turns by week throughout the course of their whole six Months, whereby the Sage for the week is at that time the chief of the Republick; for unto him are exhibited all Memorials and Petitions, he hath the proposing of affairs to the Pregadi, where his Sentiment usually Determines the resolution of the Senate; for he Sums up the Deliberations of the Sages, and draws such answers as are to be given to the Letters of the Embassadors from the Republick, as likewise to those of foreign Princes and Officers, that fall before the Senate, Of the five Sages of Terra firma THE Sages of Terra firma have not much less Authority in the College than the six Great Sages; for they consult with them upon all matters there debated, and that are to be presented to the Senate. They wear the Ducal Vest of Violet, they are treated with the Title of Excellence; the Repub∣lick confers the quality of Sage of Terra firma upon all Embassadors they send to Kings and Sovereign Princes. Those Sages are only six Months in office, they are chosen out of the Gentlemen of a middle age who in the several Offices they have
executed, have shew'd the requisite ability and application for the performing of these places, The first is the writing Sage, who is properly the Secretary of War; all Officers and Souldiers depend absolutely on him, he can both break and pass Sentence of Death upon them without appeal, as being sovereign Judge through all the Dominions of the State of this Republick, The second Sage is the Cashier or Treasurer of War, he orders the pay of the Troops, the Officers and Pensioners of the State. The third is the Sage of the Ordonnances, who hath the direction of the Militia upon the Terra firma. The two other Sages are for to supply the places of the former in case of indisposition any other occasion of absence. The Pregadi hath likewise the Elections of these Sages of Terra firma; who Nothwith∣standing their Dignity and the considerable Augmentation of their Authority, through the large acquisitions of those Inland Provinces which the Republick hath made within those last three hundred years, having moreover a deliberative Voice with the six Great Sages in the Debates of all the important affairs that are argued at the College: yet Nothwithstanding all these advantages, by a particular maxim of this Goverment, which tolerates no equa∣lity of power in Different Employs; these Sages lose their Deliberative Voices in the Assembly of the Senate, to which they must be Assisting, although those things are there
debated which they have already examin'd and digested in their Debates at the College. Of the five Petty Sages or Sages of the Orders. One cannot admire the wisdom of the Repub∣lick that hath found the means to have a lasting Nursery of Great men by the Establish∣ment of these five Sages of the Orders; as this Magistracy is without Jurisdiction, so it proves an excellent School for the improvement of the young Nobility, both to instruct them in pub∣lick affairs and to render them capable of exercising the Principal Offices of the State. The five places of Petty Sages are intended for the young Nobility of Ancient Extraction, who being desirous to enter into the Employs of the Republick, may begin to distinguish them∣selves here by their prudence and good con∣duct, or at least less irregular than most of the Youth whose actions are not much conformable to their qualities. The quality of Sage of the Orders does mightily distinguish these Gentlemen for the six Months they are in Office, they being by their entrance into the Senate, and by assisting at the Debates of the College, made partakers in the Secret of the State. It is true, they have not a deliberative Voice in either of the
Assemblies, yet they may communicate their Opinions to the Consultation of the Sages, and are then to speak standing, and bare headed; and that nothing may be wanting to their instruction, the La Se∣cret. Secret Chamber is ever open to them; wherein are preserv'd all the important Letters of Embassadors, and the Re∣cords of the State. It is from this Fountain that the Young No∣bility extract a perfect Knowledge of the Inte∣rests of the Republick; and from the Example of the Ancient Sages, whom they regard as their Masters, they learn the Art of governing the State. This Employ is on the other side the Touchstone of their Wit, Capacity, their Ge∣nius and Character. An Affability, Modesty, and Prudence in their Behaviour, are the prin∣cipal Vertues requisite to the Sages of the Or∣ders. But what is most particularly observed in these Commencements, is the Strength of the Parties they form to obtain these Employs; for the Old Cunning Senators behold with pleasure their Tacks and Turnings to wind up their Cre∣dit, and establish their Interests, and judge of the Power they will have for the future in the Republick, by the success of their first Address and Pretensions. This Magistracy is both the Entrance and shortest way of attaining the greatest Eminen∣cies in the State; for the Petty Sages have all the desirable Opportunities of shewing what they are, as likewise the amplest occasion of im∣proving the several Talents they have received from Nature, or acquired Study; particularly
by the Discourses they are oblig'd to make at their entring into the College upon the Marine Affairs; as also whenever they shall think to communicate their Thoughts upon the Matters debated in the Consultations of the Sages. These Nobles were formerly called Sages of the Sea, they wear the Purple Vest with strait Sleeves, like the three Presidents of the Council Criminal of Forty; yet they have not the Privilege of the other Sages, the Councellours of the Seignory, and the Procurators, who wear in Summer Purple Camlet instead of Cloth. Of the Audiences of Embassadors. THE first Audience of an Embassador is quite different from all others; the Sixty Sena∣tors which the Senate sends the Day before to meet him at the Isle of the Holy Ghost, a Mona∣stery in the Lagunes, about two Miles from the City, to accompany him in his Entrance, and to conduct him to his Palace, do afterwards receive him there in the same manner, and con∣duct him to his Audience: The Senator that up∣on his Arrival complimented him from the Re∣publick, who is always a Knight of the Golden Star, and one that hath passed the greatest Em∣bassades, conducts him again into his Gondalo; those of the Embassador follow empty, but very richly adorn'd; each Senator observes the same
Custom of the Day before, in taking one of his Gentlemen, or Officers of his Houshold, to whom he gives the upper Hand, excepting at the Embassadors; he is brought to the Palace of St. Mark with this great Attendance, where he goes up the Steps of the College extream slow∣ly, least the height of the Stairs should take a∣way his Breath, and hinder him at his Arrival from making the Harangue prepared for this Occasion. He finds the Doors of the Hall open, the Doge and College standing to receive him, and all uncovered excepting the Doge. The Embas∣sador salutes three times this August Assembly, with three Reverences each time, to wit, the Doge and the Counsellors, who are directly op∣posite to him, the Great Sages on the Right Hand, and the other Sages on the Left; the first time is presently after he comes into the Door, the second in the middle of the Hall, and the third time before he ascends the Estrade of the Seignory. In the mean time the Hall of the College is fill'd with all sorts of People, most of them in Masks, especially the Inquisitive of the Fair Sex, and many of the Gentry that come early to avoid the Crowd; who to satisfie their Curiosities, get as near the Seignory as they can. The Embassador takes his place on the Right of the Doge, to whom he presents his Credenti∣als, which is interpreted and read aloud by one of the Secretaries of the College, standing an nd over against the Embassador, who after∣ards makes his Discourse, to which the Se∣nate
with much silence gives an extraordinary Attention, altho very few among them under∣stand Foreign Languages, of which French is the most known of all. If an Embassador was not pre-inform'd of the particulars of this Ce∣remony, he would be much surpriz'd to see such a Number of Masks in such a Majestical and Se∣rious Assembly, and would have much trouble without doubt to acquit himself with Honour from this Action, upon the success of which both Private and Publick pretend to discern in∣to the Genius and Merits of the Embassa∣dour. The Secretary that took the Substance of the Embassador's Speech, repeats it aloud in Italian to the Seignory; to which the Doge answers with the accustomary Compliment, so the Am∣bassadour retires by making the same Reveren∣ces to the Seignory, who keep standing and un∣covered until such time as he is out of the Hall, from whence he is in the same Ceremony re∣conducted to his Palace, even unto his Audience Chamber; after the Compliments which the Knight makes him in the Name of the Se∣nate, all the Company withdraws, the Embas∣sador brings the Senator to his Gondalo, in which occasion he gives him the Right Hand, and all the Gentlemen of his Retinue do the same to the Senators that accompanied them. At all other Audiences the Embassador finds the Doors of the College shut, and a Carpet spread upon a Bench for him to sit upon, until such time as the College is acquainted of his be∣ing there by the Door-keeper, whereupon they
put themselves into a posture of receiving him, sending for all of this Body that are in the ad∣joining Apartments, who come in another way; after which the Door is opened, the Embassador presents himself; upon which the College rises, and uncover themselves, where the same is ob∣serv'd with what was before at his first Audi∣ence, excepting the leaving open the Doors. If the Affair which the Embassador represents to the College, is of any Importance; he is invited by a Secretary after it hath been Balloted in the Pregadi, to come and receive the Answer of the College; but if it is of no great moment, they send a Secretary to him with the Answer in Writing, a Copy whereof is left with the Embassadour. The Senate finds their account by treating in this manner the Ministers of Princes; for they avoid entring into the particular Reasons of the Debates, and likewise evade the Difficulties which the Arguments of an Embassador might alledge against the Motives that induc'd the Se∣nate to take such a different Resolution from what was in reason expected of them. Inso∣much that an Embassador is here engag'd with the Deaf and the Dumb, he is oblig'd to take his Answer without ever confering with the Sages, wherein he might probably make use of such Arguments as might engage them to alter their Sentiments; for which reason Venice may be said to be the School of Embassadors; yet ne∣vertheless where the Opportunities of acqui∣ring much Experience and Perfection in things of this Nature, are infinitely more rare, than
the Occasions of shewing the extraordinary Me∣rits of the Persons employed in this Em∣bassy. A Penetration of Judgment to discern the real Sentiments of the Senate, which must regu∣late his dexterity and delicacy in the manage∣ment of his Business, to give it a proper Re∣presentation, and to get it regarded on the most advantageous side, are the essential and requi∣site Qualities of an Embassadour in Negotiation at Venice; all his Audiences are no more than so many studied Speeches, which he repeats and gives in Writing to the College, for the Sages to examine, to which the Senate afterwards answer according to what they think convenient. The late Count D'Avaux shew'd his great Ability and consummate Prudence in the time of his Embassy, that continued five Years; du∣ring which the Affairs of Mantua, and the Siege of Casal, gave frequent Opportunities to several very delicate and important Treaties: to the Dexterity and frequent Good Offices of that Able Minister, are owing the greatest part of those Vigorous Resolutions which the Repub∣lick took in favour of the Duke of Nevers, and to support him in the Possession and Dutchy of Mantua. It was in managing the Sentiments of the Venetians, that he shewed himself capa∣ble of the greatest Negotiations, as likewise of the Principal Offices in the Kingdom, of which he so worthily acquited himself afterwards. The Senate does always affect to avoid saying NO, in her Negative Answers, this Expression being thought too hard, and too much diso∣bliging;
for which reason, when they do not concur to the demands of an Embassador, they use such a Circumference of fine words, that one would almost imagine they frequently grant the thing that is denied in Effect. But when they admit of the demand, they elevate the Favour to all its Degrees and Circumstan∣ces; insomuch, that what seem'd a Trifle, and not worth the Trouble of Asking, appears then a Favour of the greatest importance. It is certain, there is no people in the world that do express themselves with more Address in these Junctures; in which manner of writing lies the great Ability of the Secretaries to the Senate. The College receives the Ministers of all Princes, according to the Degrees of their Ma∣sters, and the Characters they bring: The Am∣bassadors of the Dukes of Savoy and Tuscany, are received at their first Audience with open Doors, and have the same place with those from Crowned Heads; but the College does not rise and uncover themselves, until they come to the middle of the Hall, where they make the Second Reverence. Envoys Extraordinary, and the Receiver of Malta, who is Minister of the Order, are received also with open Doors; they are placed next to the Sages of Terra firma, and speak covered. Residents are treated with∣out any Ceremony; they speak standing and uncovered, at the bottom of the steps where the Seats of the Seignory are raised. When an Ambassador goes to his Audience no Body comes from the College to receive
him at his Gondalo, nor to the stairs to In∣troduce him, which is contrary to the custom of all other Courts: But when an Embassador comes to the Palace to assist in some Publick Function, the Gentleman of the Doge, goes to receive him and conducts him to the Doge, or into the Hall of the College where they usu∣ally assemble before they go to the Ceremony. Notwithstanding that the Affairs which an Embassador Treats of in his Audience, are in themselves more important, consequently re∣gard more the Glory of the Prince; than the presence of a Minister is necessary at some solemnities of devotion; yet he is here in these last occasions treated with more honour. Although an Embassador demands Audience of the College the day before his coming, and the hour is appointed; yet the College is usually so far from being ready to receive him; that the Embassador is sometimes oblig'd to wait a quarter of an hour at the door. This custom was introduc'd (as these Gentlemen say) to the end such Ministers may have time to repose themselves, after coming up the steps, and to repass in their thoughts the business they are to speak upon in the College; this being so necessary that an Embassador of Spain complained of the doors being opened at his coming, for he was so out of Breath and em∣barrass'd that he was not able to express a word of what he had to say. For which Rea∣son the Embassadors expecting it upon the day of their first Audience, take the necessary Mea∣sures by ascending very slowly up to the College.
The Doge does not uncover himself upon the Publick Audiences of Embassadors: The Rea∣son they give for it, is because the Horn is the Crown of the Doge who takes it not off at Mass but at the Elevation: Nevertheless the Councellor that acts as Vice Doge observes the same thing upon the absence of the Prince, neither doth he so much as make a sign of put∣ting his hand to his Cap, when an Embassador makes him at three several times three profound Reverences. However the Doge takes off his Horn to the Cardinals that come to their Audi∣ence, the same to the Princes of Royal Blood, as was observ'd when the late Prince of Conde was at Venice. At the beginning of this Em∣bassy Monsieur D'avaux. perceiving at the mo∣ment he came to the door, that the College did not rise soon enough to receive him, stopp'd short at the entrance. Whereby these Gentle∣men seeing that the Embassador observ'd them so exactly, they rose and uncovered themselves with some sort of Precipitation, which evident∣ly condemn'd the backwardness they had shewn in rendring what was due to the Minister of so great a Monarch. Of the Pregadi. THE Pregadi is the Senate in which resides the Authority of the Republick; the Reso∣lutions upon Peace and War are made there,
as likewise all Leagues and Alliances; The Cap∣tains general, the Proveditors of the Armies, and all other officers that have Eminent Posts are there chosen: They have the Nomination of Embassadors, they regulate the Impositions according to the Necessities of Publick Affairs; The Elections of all such as compose the Col∣lege are made in this Place; They examin the Resolutions which the Sages made in the Consultations of the College, which the Se∣nate determines by their plurality of Voices, who have right of voting in this assembly; it is the Soul of the State and consequently the Foundation of all the Actions in the Body of the Republick. The Name of Pregadi is given to the Senate, because formerly it was assembled but upon extraordinary occasions, as when any affair of importance required the advice of the Prin∣cipal Citizens, they were then desired to be there. At present the Senate assembles every Wednesday and Saturday: But the Sage for the week can Summon an extraordinary Pregadi, when the affairs that are to be brought thi∣ther, require the speedy deliberation of the Senate. According to the first Institution the Pre∣gadi was compos'd of Sixty Senators which was called the ordinary Pregadi: But as they have been oblig'd to add several others, according to the urgency of affairs, so they created sixty more which is called la Guinta: These Sixcore are always possess'd by Persons of an advanc'd Age, and known Merits, and of the first Nobili∣ty.
All the Members of the College, those of the Council of Ten, the Forty Judges of the Council Criminal and all the Procurators of Saint Mark have entrance into the Pregadi, as likewise the greatest part of the Magistrates of the City: whereby this assembly of the Se∣nate may amount unto about Two Hundred and Fourscore Gentlemen, part of them hav∣ing deliberative voices; others are only there to observe and form themselves to busi∣ness. The Doge, the Councellors of the Seigno∣ry and the Great Sages, are the only Persons whose Opinions can be Ballotted, which is to avoid the confusion that would proceed from the diversity of sentiments in so great an a∣ssembly; where the Opinions cannot pass if they have not one half of the voices. Yet those who have not the right of voting, may harangue in the defence or against the Opinions proposed. As the Sixscore ordinary and extraordinary Senators are every year Ballotted in the great Council, to be chang'd or continu'd as this assembly thinks necessary; so the desire which every one of them have to be continued in the condition that is so very ho∣nourable, and the fear of being deprived of it by the great Council that never spares any Body; inviolably engages them to the Duty of their Employs, and prevents them from making any ill use of their Authority. No body can imagine but that there must be great Inconvenience's to be feared, seeing all affairs are regulated by the plurality of
Voices; more especially because they are made by balls that are thrown into boxes which the Secretaries carry about the Hall; some of which are mark'd with the word YES, and the other NO, the last are designed for the balls of such that equally reject both pro and the contra, which are called the Non Suceres; for as these Votes are given so, as it shall not be disting∣uish'd what any one hath done, so such a person is oftentimes of an Opinion that he durst not own if he was to declare himself publickly. Amongst the multitude of Senators in the Pregadi, there are some very Ignorant, who are only introduc'd hither in honour of their Age and Family; There are others very poor, who may be liable to err from the Right way; Neither is there any want of those Old fellows, who have any other knowledge than that of their Ancient Customes, these are the Opinia∣tors that never acommodate their Judgments to the various Junctures of time, and who regard Novelty as a Crime against the State. Insomuch that the Senate must be often Subject to fall upon those Resolutions which would not be ever conformable to the real Interests of the Republick, if the most able heads of this Body who are Sensible of the defects, did not prevent these inconveniency's by another, that some times ruines their affairs; which is by tem∣porizing, that so in time and by the force of their Speeches, they may prevail upon their Sentiments, to give the true motion to these important affairs.
Secrecy is rarely to be found in a multitude that abounds with Youth and Poverty; it is therefore much to be admir'd how it becomes inviolable at Venice; seeing the Examples of such who have sold it to the Ministers of Great Princes, are not at all considerable in Number: but the Republick hath provided against it by the power she hath given the Inquisitors of State to punish the Guilty, as shall be observ'd hereafter; and by the oaths that are renewed so often as they enter upon any matter of the last importance, as likewise by the exclusion of all such as have any relation with the Court of Rome, when the affairs lyes that way, how∣ever far the affinity or dependance is distant; for the Senate is not Satisfied with excluding all Ecclesiasticks from the Government, but they even distrust their Fathers and nearest Allied, insomuch that when any thing is there agitat∣ed which may any ways concern the Court of Rome, it is Publickly cried in the Pregadi, Fuora Papalini, that is for all such as have Children, or Brothers provided with benefices, or other Ecclesiastical dignities, to withdraw themselves, at that instant, least the Secret of the State should be made known to foreign Princes,
Of the Great Council. THE whole Authority of the Republick is divided between the Senate and the Great Council, and as the first regulates without controul the affairs of State, so the second disposes absolutely of all Magistracy's upon which depend the Order of Government. This Council, hath power to Erect new Laws, choose Senators, confirm the Elections of the Senate, Nominate to all Employs, to Create the Procurators of St. Mark, the Podestats, Governors and Commanders that are sent in to the several Provinces; in short the Great Council hath the rectifying of all publick r∣rors, as also to reform the methods of such who use not their Authority to the Satisfaction of the Nobles; consequently as the Great Council is the assembly General of the No∣bility, so it is also the first Tribunal, the basis and support of the Government. All the Venetian Gentlemen of five and twenty and that have assum'd the Vest may enter into the Great Council and claim the Right of balloting, that is, of Voting: To gratifie moreover the young Nobility of twenty, thirty of them are drawn by lot who have the same priviledge with those of five and twenty: This ceremony is observ'd upon the day of St. Barbara, so the thirty which Fortune
hath particularly favour'd from the Names of all the rest in the Urne, are called Barbarini. The Republick hath often times bestowed this privilege upon the Children of such Nobles as have very eminently served the State in any per∣ticular juncture; during the War dispensations of Age were sold at two hundred Ducates: this Sum is no ways considerable, in regard of the advantages, that are acquired by the entrance into the Great Council; which rend∣ers these Nobles of the Body of the Republick, who by the right of Balloting, are received into the same consideration, with the other more ancient Members of the State. The Great Council assembles all Sundays and Holidays excepting that of St. Mark, and those of the Virgin: This Council is not to continue their sitting after it is dark; in Summer they begin at Eight in the Morning and sit until twelve; in the Winter they sit from twelve to Sun-set; after which time no propositions can be made in that place, insomuch that such as are begun and cannot be expedited before these Limits elapse, are balloted again in the next Session as if they ha never been mentioned. This Assembly is held in the Largest Hall of the Palace, there is at the bottom of it a sort of a Throne like to that in the College, upon which the Doge and the Councellors of the Seignory take their places. The Presidents of the Council of Ten, the Avogadors and the Censors sit upon rais'd benches in the Hall, they being to take care that the Nobles may do nothing contrary to the order of the Statutes.
The greatest Assemblies of the Great Council are rarely above six hundred Gentlemen, who sit upon benches plac'd in rows along the Hall; but there are as many more that have right of entrance, who are either employed in the Pro∣vinces, or upon some other occasions of absence do not appear at the Council. As the Great Sages may Summon an Extraordinary Senate, so the Councellors of the Signory have power of Assembling the Great Council, so often as the multitude of Employs to distribute, or the urgency of business shall require it. To which purpose a bell is rung which they call the Trotiere; this is answered by the five principal bells in the five other Wards of the City, at which Signal the Nobility never fail of appearing at the Council, where the wearing of Arms is forbidden upon pain of Death, and to be immediately thrown out of the Windows, least the heats in Balloting might Chance to occasion some disorders. For which reason they leave their Stiletto's in their Gondalo's, as likewise such other Arms as they usually wear in all other places. For the security of this Assembly, against which, the History of Venice mention several Conspiracies, that were formely laid, with the Intention of destroying the whole Body of Nobility at once; they place guards at all the chief entrances into the Palace and the others are kept shut. In which occasions they make use of the Artificers and Workmen of the Arcenal, who are the faithfullest Subjects of the Republick. And as this Council is only held
upon Holydays, to the end that all the Magis∣trates may be present, so the Works of the Arcenal are thereby no ways retarded. This Militi a is under the Command of the Procurat∣ors of St. Mark; not only by Reason they are Persons of the greatest Authority; but like∣wise because they do not go to the Great Council, as being above all Magistracy's there distributed; or possibly being they are exempt of the passive suffrage, so they ought not to pre∣tend to the active. They never propose distribution of above nine Employs in a Session, by reason of the Custom of having the Names of the Electors that Nominate the Parties to be decided by Chance; leaving it to either merit or faction to dispose of it afterwards, in favour of one of the four Nobles which the Electors have chosen for the Execution of each Office. Yet that there may only be Six and Thirty Electors among all the Nobility then present, this method is observed in the manner of drawing the Lots. There is placed on each side the Throne of the Seignory, over against the two last Coun∣cellors, two high and deep Cups, into which they may reach their hands but cannot see which to choose; the Secretaries count so many balls as there are Nobles in the Assembly, which number is divided into the two Cups, in each whereof there are moreover thirty gilt balls; the others are white. At the feet of the Doge there stands a third Cup, in which there is the same Number of balls
as there are Gilt ones in the other two, that is Sixty, of which thirty six only are Gilt. After this the Nobles being call'd by a Secre∣tary according to the Benches they sit on, come two and two together to draw each of them a ball, out of the Cup on the side they are of; if it is white they throw it away, if a gilt one the Gentleman shews it and gives it the Councellor next the Cup, then advancing to the Doge draws one of the sixty balls, if he Pitches upon a gilt one, he is of the Number of Electors, that have the distribution of the Charge, but if it is white he retires to his place. After there are Nine Electors made in this manner, they withdraw with a Secretary into a separated Room from the Council, where after they have drawn Lots for their places, he that is the first, Nominates a Noble for the first of the Employs that is to be given, the others do the same according to the places of their Lots; These Nine Electors do then bal∣lot one after another the Nine Nobles elected, he that hath not six Balls is excluded; and he that is Nominated continues until there is one that hath six of the Suffrages. When Nine other Electors are by Lot drawn in the Great Council, they are to proceed in the same method, by Nominating and Ballot∣ing Nine several Nobles for the same Nine Employs, which is thus observed until the Six and Thirty Electors drawn into four seve∣ral Bodys of Nine each, have elected Thirty Six Gentlemen, that is four to each Employ,
upon which they are Balloted one after ano∣ther by the Great Council; he of the four ha∣ving most Balls, stands provided with the Employ to which he was Named. To accomplish these Ballotations with the less loss of time, there are a great many Chil∣dren of the Hospital of Foundlings, who carry in a Bag little Balls of stuff about the bigness of a Hasil Nut; they have likewise in their hands a Box, somewhat resembling to that which collects the Suffrages of the Senate, ex∣cepting in these there are only two distinct places, one for the YEA's the other for the NO's, there being no doubtful or indifferent voices in the distribution of the Employs, as there are for the uncertain ones of the Various Opi∣nions upon the affairs of State. These Chil∣dren go up and down the Hall, crying alloud the Name of the Noble balloted. But this way of balloting is manag'd with so much con∣fusion by the Children, that carry the boxes Tumultuously to and again, as likewise with so little dignity by the Nobles who some times unheedingly drop their Balls in walk∣ing unconcernedly about the Hall; in the whole this want of order is highly undecent and altogether opposite to the Gravity, that ought to be inseparable to such an Illustrious Assembly. There are several Senators dispers'd about the Hall, to take care that no abuses may be committed in the Ballotations, yet it is impossible for them to be sure that a Noble shall not take two Balls, being the long entrance of the box
intirely hides the hand, yet it is purposely so contrived, to the end they may throw the ball into which side they please, without being dis∣cerned: therefore to give several balls to serve a friend, or to injure an Enemy, is forbidden upon the penalty of being for ever excluded the Council, which is the same thing with being deprived of Nobility, as hath sometimes happened. In these Ballotations the party's of the Young∣men are almost ever the strongest, especially when the matter in debate is for the mortifi∣cation of a Senator, either by not continuing him in his Dignity at the end of the year, or by fetching a Noble out of the great Employs of the Seignory, to execute one of the least considerable Offices in the State, as I have al∣ready observed, for not having regulated his conduct according to their sentiments. In the Great Council hatred and Enmity put in Practice all the Artifices of revenge: it is there that Dissimulation reigns in the full height, where not being Liable to be detected of falsehood, they usually protest to the Excluded all the good offices of sincere Friendship. Notwithstanding that these secret ways of satisfying their passions, are attended with no other effect than that of preventing the No∣bility from carrying their resentments higher; yet this advantage is very considerable to a Re∣publick; which can apprehend nothing so much as the division of her principal Mem∣bers; but the reciprocal dependance in which the Great Council keeps the Nobles, and the
continual fear of seeing themselves Balloted to the prejudice, of their Interest and Honours, does not only oblige them to observe the necessary measures of living well with each other, at least, apparently in a perfect good understanding; but these considerations do moreover inspire them with a real Zeal and an intire attachement to the good of the Pub∣lick, which are the most assured meanes for a Nobleman to attain the principal Employs of the Republick, as likewise to acquire the esteem and affection of his equals, if he any ways studies their good Opinions. All the Ballotations of the great Council are perform'd in a manner before the eyes of the Publick, for the doors are not only open, but there is likewise an elevated bench for such Strangers who come out of curiosity to see these Gentlemen pass their Suffrages; but as the Nobles that come to the Great Council are permitted to speak their sentiments upon the things proposed by the Councellor for the week (according to the custom of the Sage for the week in the Senate,) or to give his Opinion upon any other important matter of State; so in these occasions all strangers are oblig'd to go out, that they may not enter into the Cognisance of those things that belong to the Nobility only. There is in the Hall of the Great Coun∣cil a sort of a chair which is design'd for the use of such as harangue in the assembly; it was there that Marc Attonio Cornaro, more than a Year after the loss of Candia, made an unex∣pected
Speech upon the Surrender of that place, where by the strength of his Arguments he brought the Senate at that instant to re∣solve upon the Trial of Francis Morosini Cap∣tain General, who delivered it to the Turks; and he made Avogador, to give the Instructi∣ons and prosecute the matter, that was the Per∣son who made the accusation. Nevertheless this General who got himself promoted to the Dignity of Procurator of Saint Mark, for the assurances he gave to the Republick that he would be buried in the ruines of Candia before he would yield up the place, even at that very time when he was forc'd in Necessity to capitulate; shewed here no less address to extricate himself out of the Danger. He endeavour'd at first to gain time, and to assure himself of what votes he could in the Great Council, by distributing large Summs of Money among the Poor Nobility, who are at Venice called Barnaboti, being most of them live in the Ward or Quarter of Saint Barna∣by; he likewise contriv'd it so that the Che∣valier Johannes Sagredo made there an excellent Speech in his behalf, wherein he shewed the weakness of the Accuser, who could not an∣swer the force of his Reasons, and consequent∣ly was thought not to be the Author of that harangue he pronounc'd against this General. Yet this did not hinder them from suspecting that the Chevelier Sagredo was well rewarded for the trouble; as likewise his Son after∣wards in another case, for having maintain'd a bad cause in the Senate in consideration of
two hundred Pistols presented him: The Son was banish'd both the City and State of Venice, and the Father upon the Point to suc∣ceed the Doge of the same Name, who did not so long enjoy that Dignity as his merits deserved, bad the Mortification of seeing his exclusion Publickly pass'd both by the Nobi∣lity and People. The Nobility sufficiently demonstrate the distrust they live in, by all the precautions they take  the safety of the Great Coun∣cil, and the  which the smallest occasi∣ons are capable of causing to them. Not long since there was near the Place of Saint Mark a lite Galiot of people from the Coast of Greece whom they call Maignotes, Greeks both by Religion and Nationa, but resembling the Turks by whom they are Subdued, yet their Upland Countrymen continue to defend them∣selves by the means of their Mountains; the poet Wretches Selling their Cheeses about the City were insulted by a Venetian; accord∣ing to the custom of their Country they went to his House, took him by force without doing him any harm, to carry him before the Judges of the Palace, in order to have Justice done them. The Great Council being Assembled that day; the Guards at the doors seeing these peo∣ple make to them, stopp'd and drove them away by force: but they not understanding the venetian Language, took this proceeding for a new affront, went back to their Galiot, from whence they return'd with the rest of
their Countrymen, and Seymiters in hand resolute∣ly going to attack the Guards, who immediately made a discharge upon them. Which join'd with the noise upon the place, and the sight of naked Arms before the Door of the Great Council, Struck such a Terrour upon the Assembly, that it was judg'd to be a Conspiracy against the Nobility. Some stood neither able to stir or speak, others endeavour'd to save themselves by the Top of the Palace; but the more couragious betook themselves to the Armes in the little Arcenal of the Council of Ten, which is for that purpose near the Hall. But the tumult being appeased by the presence of the Procurators of the Guard, the Ignorance of these strangers was excused, and the No∣bility got clear of their dreadful apprehen∣sions. I shall not stop here to enter into the descrip∣tion of all the Magistracies of Venice, which particulars would not be less Tedious than they are unnecessary to the understanding the form of Government in this Republick; I shall only add that there are above Three Score se∣veral Tribunals or Courts of Justice, which advantageously employ a great part of the Nobility, as well in the Administration of Justice in both Civil and Criminal matters, as likewise in the Magistracy's established for the more exact observation of the Laws of the Republick; besides the great Number of other Employs that take up the Nobility in the Provinces of the Republick. I will only speak here of some Tribunals, which for the great∣ness
of the Authority they have in the Repub∣lick, and for the Nature of Affairs that are brought to their bars, as Masters of the Go∣vernment of the State, are worthy of being known both for the ampleness of their Po∣wer, and the design of their first Institution. Of the Council of Ten. THere is not at Venice a more grave or for∣midable Tribunal than that of the Coun∣cil of Ten; To this Court appertains the Cognisance of all Criminal Matters happening among the Nobility both in the City and State of the Republick; This Tribunal gives Judg∣ment in cases of Publick Treason; For so are called those at Venice against the Majesty of the Prince, It hath Power to examin into the conduct of the Prodestats, Commanders and Officers that govern the Provinces; as likewise to receive the complaints of the People against them; the care of the Publick Tranquillity is committed to them, consequently this Coun∣cil is the Master of all holy days by permit∣ting or prohibiting of them as they think con∣venient; They are to Prosecute such as pro∣fess any particular Sect, Sodomites, Clippers and Coyners; in short this Tribunal hath so large a Jurisdiction, as that it is equally Terrible both to the Nobles and People which are Sub∣jects of the Republick.
It was first of all erected in the Year 1310; to restore the lost quiet and safety of the City, after the Famous enterprise of Bajamonte Tie∣polo in opposition to those alterations which the Doge Peter Gradenigo had made in the Government; but as they perceived this Tri∣bunal was of an extraordinary good effect towards the setling of this new method of Go∣vernment; so it was restablish'd upon several different occasions, until at length it was con∣firmed for ever, being then five and twenty Years after the first Establishing of it. The Doge comes with his six Councellors to this Council where he presides; yet the Senators that compose it have not a less power in the absence of the Doge, than if he was present with his Six Councellors. These Dignities are executed by Nobles of the first order, who are to be all Ten of so many different families; They are every year chosen by the Great Council; these elect three from among themselves to be Presidents, who are chang'd every three Months, during which these Presidents take their turns by Weeks. He that is for the week receives all Memorials, Accusati∣ons and the Reports of Spyes, which he communi∣cates to his Collegues, who upon the depositions of Witnesses and the answers of the Accused that are kept in dismal Prisons, proceed to the Trials of the Guilty; they are the Accusers before the Council, but the Accused are neither permitted by Council or in their own persons to defend themselves; this method is not only something Barbarous, but likewise severity is inseparable to this Tribunal, whereby the
Nobility are the more uneasy under this dreadful Authorty, as they are directly Subjected to it. The Council of Ten is held only once a week, but the Presidents may assemble it upon any urgency of affairs. It is to be seen in the Histories of the Republick that the Council of Ten hath in several occasions made Treaties of peace and alliance, Independently from the Senate, but this power does not now extend so far. As it belongs to this Council to provide for all things necessary to the safety of the Republick, so there are in the Arcenal both Cannon and Gallies to be dispos'd of by this Tri∣bunal; that which lyes always ready Arm'd over against the Place of St. Mark is under their command. And the better to oppose any Sudden attempt or Conspiracy, the Council of Ten hath a little Arcenal in the Palace, as hath been observ'd, near the Hall of the Great Council. One sees in this Arcenal a considerable quan∣ty of Arms of all sorts, some small Cannon that may be discharg'd several times, as like∣wise a great many other curious pieces of this Nature; the fire Arms are in a Chamber over the others, among which there are always Six Hundred Musquets ready charg'd, and a Hun∣dred Matches placed about a round Engine, which in an instant by the means of a Spring can be lighted all at once.
Of the Inquisitors of State. THE Tribunal of the Inquisitors of State, is more formidable than can well be ima∣gined; for as the business which is brought be∣fore these Lords, is the nicest of all Criminal matters, even so is their severity as much the more terrible; and their rigour inexorable, as their method of proceeding is extraordinary. The three places of Inquisitors of the State are Executed by two Senators of the Council of Ten, and one of the Councellors of the Doge: These three Lords have an absolute Power of Life or Death over the Doge, the Nobles, Strangers, and even all the Subjects of the Re∣publick; without being oblig'd to shew any reasons for what they do, or to Consult with the Council of Ten, in case they are all three of an Opinion. The Orders and Executions of this Tribunal are not less secret than their Judgments, excep∣ting it is upon a Publick offence; but otherwise to avoid giving occasion of exclaiming against so much severity, that punishes with Death a word accidentally spoken by a miserable wretch against their Rigorous Government; The Party offending is by Night sent to the bottom of the Sea, without any other formality than confron∣ting him with the two Witnesses, if there are any, or else upon the report of their Spyes, of
which the City abounds. And by the help of these Pensionary Informers, those merciless Judges have Eyes and Ears in all places, for which reason a Man accus'd to the Inquisitors of State, is esteem'd beyond Redemption, if his Innocency is not more clear than the Day. As this way of proceeding with so little Re∣gularity and Justice, hath been sometimes at∣tended by mighty Inconveniencies, so it is now enacted that the Inquisitors of State shall not for the future put to Death a Noble Venetian, with∣out hearing what he can say in his Justification. It may be Judg'd by this, what dangers such Persons incur as have no support, and who hap∣pen to fall into such terrible hands; Seeing bare suspicions in matters of State are punished with more severity at Venice, than the Crime it self would be in any other place; especially, when such trifling things as carrying of Fire Arms, and an Hundred several others, of but equal moment to it, are made Crimes of State, which every where else could only be Contraventions to the Orders of the Civil Government. The least Infliction that a Stranger of any Consideration hath to fear, upon any occasion of being suspected by the Inquisitors, is an Order sign∣ed by one of the Magistrates, Strictly requiring him, upon pain of Death, to go out of the City and State within the space of Twenty Four Hours. But as the Commands that are laid upon the Nobles, Not to have any Correspondence with Embassadours, or other Ministers of Princes, but likewise, upon pain of Death, are forbidden such Commerces even with the most inconsiderable persons of their
Families; so this is in relation of the nicest and most suspicious matters; for which reason, up∣on this Article, the Informers are most to be fear∣ed, as being the chiefest in their Instructions, and which they are most Vigilant in observ∣ing. It is not much above Fifty Years that they first begun to observe this Severity in regard of the Nobility, to the end they might pre∣vent all Embassadors from penetrating into the Secrets of the State; but the terror which this dreadful Tribunal occasions to the Venetian Nobility is so excessive, that the Nobles themselves have carried this order farther than it first was intended, least they might be deem'd faulty by not sufficiently clearing them∣selves from all manner of Suspicion, in things where the State is so Jealous; insomuch that if a Venetian Gentleman, whatever his condition may be in the Republick, should happen to speak to a Gentleman or Servant of an Em∣bassador, in any Church or any other Publick Place by imagining him to be a stranger; and he afterwards coming to know whom it was he spoke to, he immediately runs and makes his confession to the Inquisitors of State, who are certain to admonish him to be more circumspect, and to know whom it is he speaks to for the future. This order does not only regard the Nobi∣lity but likewise those Citizens that wear the Vest, and all Publick Officers are therein com∣prehended; consequently all such People of Fashion as have any intimacy with the Nobi∣lity,
think themselves oblig'd neither to Visit Embassadors or converse with any of their Domesticks, least they might become suspected, and occasion the like to the Nobles they fre∣quent; the Lawyers and particularly the Phy∣sicians are the only people wearing the Vest, that are excepted in this Rigorous Law, by Reason of the absolute necessity of their Fun∣ctions; However this exception does not pre∣vent them from using of the Liberty with a mighty Precaution. The Abbee Moro a Noble Venetian, but ex∣cluded from coming into the Great Council, as being a Benefic'd Person, was strangled by order of the Inquisitors for his secret Cor∣respondence with the Embassador of Spain. Nicolas Cornaro was taken sometime afterwards masqu'd in a Gondalo, where he was in con∣ference with a Secretary of another Embassa∣dor of Spain, he was Treated in the same Method: But the unfortunate Antonio Fosca∣rini a Gentleman of Singular Merits, is a most tragical example of the terrible se∣verity of the Inquisitors upon these matters. This Poor Gentleman was us'd to go every evening to a Courtisane that lived near the house of the Spanish Embassador; one of his Enemies took the advantage of this oppor∣tunity to ruin him, which was so much the more easy, as he was sure to be believed, by informing of the Inquisitors of State, that this Noble man kept a strict correspendence with the Embassador of a Nation, who for their divers attempts against the Republick, are
become much suspected to the Venetians. The informer desired he might have Wit∣nesses assigned him for the proof of what he said, and men to apprehend the accused upon his returning from the Embassadors House; but to make his detestable enterprise succeed, he posted a Man cloath'd in a Vest that resem∣bled this Gentleman, and when he knew the Noble was at the Courtisane's, he placed his Spies, and by the Glimmering Light of the Night shewed them the pretended Noble who effectually went into the Embassadors House and came out at another door. The Spies immediately made their report of what they had seen; and the Inquisitors to be better assur'd of the matter, order'd Foscarini to be search'd for at his House, or where ever he was supposed to be; but not finding him, Orders were given to the accuser to cause him to be seised upon, wheresoever he thought he might find him: So this unhappy Gentle∣man was apprehended in the Night about five and twenty steps from the Courtisane's, the Sbirri's not daring to approach by day the Houses of Embassadors, or to pass through the Limits of their Jursdiction without ex∣posing themselves to the worst of Treat∣ments. This innocent man was immediately hur∣ried to the prisons of the Inquisitors, who without any other formality sent him a Con∣fessor and a Hangman; the Gentleman cried, Tormented himself and Protested himself In∣nocent to the last degree, of all that could be al∣ledg'd
against him; the Confessor fully per∣swaded of his Innocence, thought himself o∣blig'd in Conscience to report his Opinion to the Inquisitors; but they were deaf to his re∣monstrances and their sentence was executed without Remission; whereby this poor Gen∣tleman became desperate in his misfortune, Re∣jected his Confessor, and was strangled, dying perfectly mad upon such inhuman usage. The execrable malice of the Informer lay hid until it was discovered by himself upon his death bed, who being forc'd through his anguish of conscience declared the artifice he had used to ruin this Gentleman; but the Guilty could not be Punish'd in this Life, nor the Innocent Noble Justified but after his Death: Publick honours were made him, as likewise atonement to his Family, and his Son created Procurator of Saint Mark by Merit; to avoid falling for the future into the like Errors, it was enacted that the Inquisitors should not upon such accusations put to Death any Noble, without hearing what they had to say for themselves. This Tribunal never abates of her severity, but alwayes punishes probable Suspicions as the crime self; these Rigorous Judges are pleas'd to order secret executions in those Junctures, to avoid all clamours against an Authority that is already so odious to the No∣bility; whereby such a Person is ever reputed to have died by some chance or accident, who fell by the hands of the Executioners of their sentences. It was for some time believed
that the late Leonardo Loridan, unfortunately fell from the bridge of a Canal in the night, and knock'd out his brains against a boat that lay'd underneath it; but such as knew that he was become Suspected to the Inquisitors of State, for frequenting the House of a Cour∣tisane where the Spanish Embassador sometimes went, even after he had caution given him of it; do no ways doubt from whence came the blow, that deprived the Republick of one of the most Worthy and most esteem'd Gentle∣man of Venice. Of the two Avogadors. SO are called at Venice these two Magi∣strates, whose Functions do something re∣semble those of the Attorney and Solicitor Gene∣ral. As they are to find the subject matters of Trials, and to plead the observation of the the Laws against Criminals, so they are called advocates of the Common good, Avogadors del Commun, but they have moreover a par∣ticular jurisdiction, which is the judging in all cases of Assault and Battery, stealing of Young Women, as likewise upon cases of Calumny and detraction; yet all important affairs are by them carried to the Tribunals which ought to have cognisance of them according to the matter in question. The greatest Authority of these two Ma∣gistrates
is that Power which they have of suspending for three days the sentences of all Tribunals, of the Colledge, Great Council, the Council of Ten as likewise the Inquisi∣tors of State, when the matter of fact is not a positive crime; but only the execution of the Ordinances which they can make in affairs of the State; insomuch that they represent the ancient Tribunes of the Republick; their Authority is the same with those of the Ro∣man Tribunes, for by interposing they suspend all manner of Execution; yet they are oblig∣ed in three Days to produce their Reasons for such Interpositions, which ought to be so valid as to to cause another Deliberation upon those Affairs. The Senate chooses the two Avogadors, who are to be afterwards approved of by the Great Council; they usually give the Execu∣tion of these Offices to Persons of known In∣tegrity, and of the first Families. They are not always the Richest of the Nobles, but are ever such as are sufficiently able to speak in publick, whieh they have commonly acquir'd by their professions of Barristers at Law, which they have actualy followed, as do every day many of the Nobility, rather choosing to support themselves by these honour∣able means, which is thought no derogation, than by a thousand base shifts that their quality gets off unpunished. The Avogadors wear the Ducal Vest of Violet, with the red Star, upon their usual Functions, but they wear the pur∣ple Vest without the badge in the great in-be
invalid if one of the two Avogadors were not assistant. Upon the prohibition in the year 1672 that was made at Venice against wearing of Perukes, there happened an accident which for the Singularity of it, in regard of the two Avogadors, ought not to pass here unmentioned: One of the most Ancient and principal Senators of the Republick, who was lately made Procurator by merit, was at that time Inquisitor of the State, who having a Lady of much merit for wife, and in humour very different from the other Venetian Ladies, as being mightily delighted with the Liberty's of civil conversation, he observed that there came to his House, some Gentlemen in great ligh colour'd Heads of hair, which at other tims seemed to be black; he grew suspicious upon the matter, inferring consequences from it that were not less danger∣ous to the Publick, than inconvenient to parti∣cular persons This Inquisitor had Credit sufficient, with his Two Collegues, to get his Project ap∣prov'd of; for which Reason, from that very day, all the Nobility were, upon great Penal∣ties, forbidden the use of Perukes, with Or∣ders to all such who had begun to wear them, to forbear the continuance. It is no very difficult matter to imagine what a perplexity this Order occasion'd to all the Young Nobili∣ty, who were then so very curious in their Wiggs, that even such as had very fine heads of Hair, preferr'd the acquired to their own; sparing no Costs to get those that were best made; but the indispensable necessity of obey∣ing
this Order of the Inquisitors, oblig'd the greatest part of the Nobility to retire into the Country, as not daring to appear in the City in the Conditions they were in. The Avogador Laurence Donat, being of the Number of them that wore Wigs, did ea∣sily believe that they would not have less regard to the rank which his dignity gave him, than to the necessity which obliged him to it; he went to the Inquisitor and uncovering his Head shewed him the condition he was in, re∣presenting at the same time that the duty of his Employ engag'd him without any respite to the service of the Republick, which made him hope he might be permitted to wear his Peruke; but seeing all the answers he could get were positively to the Negative of what he desired; he then intimated to the Inquisitor that by Vertue of the Red Srar which he wore on his Shoulder, he had power to Suspend the execution of the Decree: this remonstrance being express'd with some heat, procur'd him an answer that intirely stopp'd his proceeding any farther in that matter; for the Inquisitor made him remember, that by Vertue of his Office, he could have him thrust into a Sack and sent that night to repose in the Sea.
Of the Council Criminal of Forty. ALthough there are three Councils of Forty, that is Three Chambers compos'd each of fourty Judges, yet I shall only speak of the Crimi∣nal, as being, next to those that have cogni∣sance of affairs of State, the most considerable Tribunal in the Republick; It is the ancientest of them all, for the first use of it was unknown before the Creation of either the New or Old Forty. This Chamber did Judge both in Civil and Criminal matters; and before the Esta∣blishment of the Council of Ten, Crimes of State and all others of the Nobility were brought hither: Notwithstanding the Jurisdiction of this Tribunal, hath suffer'd great Diminutions; and the daily disputes between this Chamber and the Council of Ten, which draws from hence all important affairs; yet this does not hinder it from continuing in much repu∣tation; being the Forty Judges that compose the Court, have entrance into the Great Coun∣cil with right of debating, and the three Chiefs, who are the Presidents, have session at the College in the two last Months of their Employs. The Doge and his six Councellors of the Seignory did formerly preside in the Criminal of Forty; but at present three only of these Councellors do preside here for the four last Months of their year, which is to shew the affinity that there is between the College and
the Council criminal of Forty, who recipro∣cally know what passeth in these Tribunals, by the means of their principal Members. The Avogodors do often by their interposition send back to this Chamber, the decisions of the College, Senate and other Sovereign Courts, which decisions are in regard of cases civil and criminal of private persons, to be there re-exam∣ined, whose Sentences are sometimes broke and made void: The Doge Peter Gradenigo got this Tribunal to pass the La Parte, that is the Decree, which was the draught or Instrument of the Serrar del Consiglio, that brought about the greatest change of Government that ever hap∣pened in this State. The rich Nobility of the first Order would be glad to be Judges of the criminal of Forty, by reason of the great prerogatives belonging to them, but the strict attendance which they are oblig'd to give for Eight Months to the Ser∣vice of the Publick, is more than sufficient to make most of them forbear the thoughts of it. Therefore these places are usually possess'd by Nobles of the first and Second Orders, that Scruple not to attain unto these Employs, by others that are inferior to them, and the less being there are, besides the advantage of Thirty Ducates a Month Salary, many op∣portunities of bringing themselves into consider∣ation among the rest of the Nobility, by the means of their entrance into the Senate, and several other advantages which their Offices give them of attaining the principal Employs. The Nobles of rich families that are desirous
of the merits that are acquir'd in this Office, make use of their utmost endeavors and deepest intrigues to attain unto this Magistacy, without passing the other two Councils of Forty, which are the usual steps to that of the Criminal; but these Offices the rich Nobles infinitely esteem beneath them. Of the method of proceeding in Criminal Cases. UPon the committing of a Crime at Venice, i looks as if they applied them∣selves more to procure the necessary proofs of the fact, than to secure the offenders; And after they have got those proofs, they send the Cap∣tain Grand to force open the door of his House which is searohd in much order; and upon this Officers reporting that he could not find him, he is Summon'd to appear at such a time more or less ample, according to the enormity of the crime, during which time the Criminal is safe provided he appears not at the publick places of St. Mark and Rialto; he may likewise desire three farther Prolongations of time; and if he sees it will not be easy to prove his innocency, or to extricate himself out of the affair by the favour of a Protector, he provides for his sasety by the lightness of his heels, which is no very difficult matter if he hath the assistance of a Noble, whose Gondalo will
Transport him out of the State, setting him upon the Coast of Ferrara, or else the first Gondalo Lands him upon Terra firma, from whence he can easily get out of the State of the Republick. From whence it proceeds that the Major part of Criminals are at Venice condemn'd by contempt, this being what they call Bandire; but the sentence of Judgment is accompanied with these or other circumstances proportion∣able to the crime. That the condemn'd can never purchase his favour, as it is practis'd at Venice, that he who kills him within the States of the Republick, shall have such a Summ, which shall be payed double if he kills him in another Country, And if the crime does any ways sensibly touch the Republick, they add to this reward the power of pardon to another Cri∣minal, that so they may deprive the Offender of all means of Security; Yet it happened, not∣withstanding the Sentence of the Council of Ten against the young Mocenigo for shooting of Foscarini, as before observed, was accompanied with all the rigour that is usual in the greatest offences against the State, the Betrayers of their Country and the intacco di cassa, which is the Embezelling of the Publick Treasure, that this Noble had his pardon and was re-establish'd in his Estate and Nobility. When the Offender is in prison, and his case ready to be heard, the Avogador orders it upon what day he pleases, at which time the Criminal is brought to the feet of the Judges, where he alledges all he can against him, ex∣aggerating
the crime with all the Circumstances that can render it odious; always concluding with the merits of a very vigorous pun∣ishment. In all these publick Actions, as likewise in the Speeches that are made in the Senate and in the Great Council, the Nobility and Lawyers are to speak no other than the Venetian Language, ex∣cepting in the Introductions of their dis∣courses, where they may make use of the pure Italian if they can, or otherwise this affectation would undoubtedly cause a ridiculous Emula∣tion, which must at length render them unin∣telligible to the Publick. Besides, the natural Language is most consistent with the dignity of the Nation, which of late times is much improved in regard to what it was; for I have observed that in their Pleadings they affect a masculine stile, which words and expressions have much of the Latin Tongue, and likewise seem to have a greater force and Energy than those of the Tuscan. The Counsel for the Party replies to all the heads of the accusation, in short he Employs his whole force and runs through all the figures of Retorick in his pleading, to move the Judges to pity, he even descends from the chair where he speaks, throws himself at their feet with the Offender, his wife and his Children, all in tears, to implore the mercy of the Bench. This Melancholly Spectacle which resembles the custom of the ancient Romans, inspires so much pity to the Assenbly that it even causes tears from the most obdurate Natures. There is always a great Number of People
at these Criminal causes, who sit on each side and upon the steps of the Tribunal, that is ve∣ry much raised from the Floor; but it is very Surprising to see the most part of them that come hither out of curiosity, sitting in masks between the Judge and the Criminal. It is one of the Privileges of that Venetian Li∣berty, which this Republick so mightily boasts of. After the Council hath spoke every body retires, and then they ballot the Opinion of the Avogadors, against that proposed by the Judges, which is the most moderate, so the plurality of balls decides it; they do moreover de∣termine by ballotation all the Circumstances of the Punishment, and in this manner these Judges pass Sentence of Life and Death, with∣out being oblig'd to express the Reason of their Opinions, or without knowing who is either for, or against the Criminal; as they are the Masters and Sovereigns, so no Body examines if they have the Necessary know∣ledge, or taken their degrees in the Faculties of the Law, to render them Capable of these Judicatures. But they Judge according to their Laws, as do the Officers in an Army accord∣ing to the Military Statutes; their conscience and their Natural Lights are the Principal Rules of their Judgment. The greatest Inconveniency in the Justice of Venice, is the great length of time before they proceed to the Trials of Criminal Matters, usually letting the offender Lie and Rot in their Miserable Prisons, for to Expiate, as they say, some part of their Crime by this long Punishment: Yet what seems to me
more Rigorous, are the frequent condmnati∣ons to dark Prisons, for Eight, Ten or more Years and often for Life; for the Hideous∣ness of their Prisons which are almost under Water, is certainly something more Terrible than Death it self. Moreover the Republick having great occasions for Slaves, Sentence of Condemnation to the Galleys is pass'd for very small Crimes: But the abuse that reign∣eth at Venice of shewing Favour for Money, must certainly be a very Dangerous Maxim; Notwithstanding the considerable Profit of the invention, which brings Great Treasures to the Republick; yet it is an Encouragement to Crime, especially to such as may hope to get themselves off through the strength of their Purses. Of the Magistrates that have the Re∣gulation of Pomp and all things of that Nature. Gli Sopra Proveditori alle Pompe.AS the well Regulated and establish'd egality, among the Principal Members of a Republick, at least in external things; is one of the strongest bands of that Union which is there absolutely requisite; so it is certain that Luxury being the Inevitable ruine of many Families, becomes at length in course the undoubted destruction of Liberty, and
the Rock which all Republicks endeavour to avoid; To prevent the contagious disorders of Luxury, the Republick of Venice hath esta∣blish'd in imitation of them formerly at Rome, the three Sopra Proveditori alle Pompe, out of the first order of Senators, who by very severe Ordinances have Regulated the Tables, E∣quipages and Habits of the Noble Veneti∣ans. The Nobility are forbid to serve up both Fish and Flesh at one meal; but this Prohi∣bition of Luxury in eating can only regards some few Powerful Gentlemen, that have learn'd the way of living splendidly among strangers, especially such as have been in France, who cannot afterwards be without their French Cooks: Moreover the Venetians are not permitted to Ring a Bell at the hour of Dinner Time, unless in the Houses of Embassa∣dors in the Service of the Republick. The Procurators of Saint Mark only are permitted to go attended in the Streets, by one or two Valets de Chambre, who wear black cloaks but no Swords. All the other Nobi∣lity go without either Footmen or Pages: And as to the habit the great black Vest makes them all alike, being they are obliged to have it of one sort of Cloath: By this means a Poor Gentleman may in some Measure be satisfied by seeing the first of the Senators walk in the Streets of the City, without ei∣ther Equipage or Garments different from his own.
Notwithstanding the Orders of the Tribu∣nal of Pomp, the Rich Young Nobility know how to distinguish themselves in the City, both by Neatness of their Vests which they often change, and the Magnificence of the Cloaths they wear underneath; but they shew it much more in the Country by the Num∣ber of Footmen in Liveries, the Dogs and Equipages, that the Rich Gentry have at their Country Houses, the Pleasantest of them are upon the Canal of the Brente that goes to Padua. One may see there a great many Stately Palaces, the most part of which are according to the Architecture of Palladio, some are painted en fresco on the out sides by Paul Veronese: Insomuch these Palaces their Gardens and walks which join together al∣most the length of the Canal, are the most agreable and Magnificent sights one can see. The Ordinances of these Magistrates in Relation to the Superfluous dresses of the Wo∣men, are more exactly observed. The wear∣ing of Precious Stones, Gold and Silver are all Prohibited upon the same penalties; neither are the Venetians Ladies permitted to wear Necklaces of pearl any longer than the first two years of their Marriage, which is called the Noviciate; by which one may distinguish the new Married People, as also by their Gondaliers, who wear their Liveries during the said term of two Years. The most part of these Ladies have nevertheless great store of Jewels, some of them being furnish'd with
three or four several sets, of Diamonds, A∣methists and Emerauds, all compleat; as con∣sisting in Roses, Bodkins for the hair, Pen∣dants, Crosiers, Rings, Bracelets and Chains: Yet they are not to dress themselves with these things, but at the time of some Publick rejoicing and during the last days of Carna∣val. A Lady of great quality, was not long since accus'd before these Sumptuary Magistrates of having worn Diamonds, and was immediately condemn'd in a Forfeiture of two thousand Ducats, which she was oblig'd to pay with∣out any remittance, notwithstanding all the Interest she could make. Yet we see at pre∣sent the Buttons of Diamonds that are so much worn in the Women's dresses, are Tollerated, by these Magistrates of the Pomp, who hav∣ing suffered this Age to follow the French mode to avoid other abuses, have likewise had the complaisance to let them satisfie their passions of following it according to the vari∣ety of the Fashion. Although these Judges are very severe, by renewing their orders from time, to time and maintaining a great many Spies to inform a∣gainst such as act contrary to them; yet it almost ever happens that the Courtisanes are the only People that pay Forfeitures; for these Magistrates have a particular Jurisdicti∣on over them: It being almost Impossible, considering the desire they have of adorning themselves, that they can be able to forbear wearing of Gold, Silver and Prohibited
things, whereby the Tribunal of Pomp draws very considerable Summs. Such as have High and Mighty keepers, but here Protectors of Authority, do mightily endeavor to distin∣guish themselves in their dresses, who escape for some small contribution, especially by shut∣ting the Mouths and Eyes of the Spies, which is easily done for a Piece of Money. For these secret Sparks know how to behave them∣selves, when they are sure to be payed for their Silence. Of the Magistrates over the Mona∣steries. THE Republick does by the means of their Principal Senators enter into an intire knowledge of the General and particular a∣ffairs of the Religious, both Men and Wo∣men: To which purpose there are three Ma∣gistrates established, who are informed of all things in Relation to the conduct and Inte∣rests of both the one and the other. Inso∣much that this Tribunal is of a great impor∣tance, and hath a very ample Authority, maintaining order and Peace in the Convents of the Religious; they are also to prevent the Religious from having too great an Intima∣cy with the Seculars; being able to order
in this matter whatsoever may be thought Necessary, and to remove such Inconveniencies as might become dangerous; if these Ma∣gistrates did not apply their utmost endea∣vours, to have some sort of discipline observed in the Monasteries. The Religious and other Ecclesiasticks are forbid to converse with the Nuns, unless they have the particular Permission of these grave Senators: One may truly give various Inter∣pretations to the Motives of this order; but it is possibly by Reason of the special Interests which the Nobles have there, or may be they fear least the Ecclesiasticks, who are in other things much Suspected by the Republick, should possess those Women with Sentiments directly opposite to what they desire; or in short because the Senate really fears that disor∣der which in regard of their manners is alrea∣dy too abundant in those Monasteries, might not become more encreas'd by the great Fre∣quentation of the Religious and Ecclesiasticks, whose commerce is oftentimes more dan∣gerous in this Country, than even that of the Seculars. The Authority of these Magistrates does much exceed that of the Patriarch; for when this Prelate hath given Permission to a Priest to say Mass in the Church of a convent of Nuns, this Permission must be supervis'd by one of these three Senators, who terminates it to what time he pleases; and all lay Sisters or Women without doors executing the Com∣missions of the Nuns, are oblig'd upon pain
of Corporal Punishment, to have a written Permission sign'd by one of these Magistrates. To take care of the execution of all Ordi∣nances relating to the external discipline of the Convents of Nuns, these Magistrates have a Captain of the Sbirris who often Visits their Parloirs; as likewise a great many hired Spies, that inform them of the Persons that most frequent the Convents: But the Young Venetian Nobility esteeming the commerce they have with these Nuns as one of the greatest of their diversions, contemn the or∣ders, keeping both Captain and Spies in such fears, that their informations only fall upon those of the lower degrees; besides, this seem∣ing Rigor is only in Ostentation of a very, exact Government, and to prevent the Eccle∣siastical Superiours from medling any further than meerly to endeavour the cure of an evil, which seems not less necessary to them, than it is little Capable of a remedy. Of the Spies and secret Informati∣ons. INformers have ever been esteemed as the most Infamous Instruments of Tyranny; but the Republick hath found the means to conceal the shame of so much baseness, by receiving Informations from Mouths of Stone. The
places into which they throw these Informa∣tions, are certain hollow Trunks or Convey∣ances in the thickness of the Wall, the mouths of these extorted Faces swallow down all let∣ters brought hither, which they convey to an unknown place. The Palace of Saint Mark, and all other Places of the City, that have any Courts of Justice, are full of these Dangerous Mouths, with the Inscription of what Infor∣mations belong to the Cognisance of that Ma∣gistracy; if the Informer does not scruple at shewing himself, he receives in Person the reward mentioned by the Ordinance; or if he is, he need only send the other part of the Torn Piece of Paper upon which was the Information, whereupon the Tally is com∣par'd with the letter, and the Money paid with∣out any further Trouble. As the Republick is perswaded that the safety of the State depends upon the intire knowledge of what is said and done against their Autho∣rity in both City and Country; so they have laid a Trap that is very difficult to be a∣voided, however little one passes the bounds of their Duty. For by the means of these se∣cret Informations, he that is asham'd to play the Spie, or that dares not be a Publick In∣former against his Enemy, that he knows guil∣ty of any Crime, need only to acquaint them by a letter in which he is not oblig'd to Name himself; but mentions two Witnesses of the re∣vealed fact, and he may be assured the Informati∣on will have the expected Effect, the rather by Reason of those Witnesses being separately exa∣mined,
dare not deny the Truth, least they should be made partakers in the Punishment: Whereby if one does escape the Reports of the Spies, yet it is very rare to avoid the Informations of these Mouths, where even the worthiest People, if they have the Misfortune of being accused by them, although in things of little or no Moment, can expect at best but to get off for a pecuniary Punish∣ment. The Republick does not only openly main∣tain a great Number of Spies, who are all distributed under several heads of business, which they are exactly to observe and Report; but they have likewise a great many of the secreter sort in the Houses of particular Persons, especially in those of Embassadors, of whom she is perpetually Jealous: So by the means of these People which the Republick Caresses, and Punctually pays, she is sure to be inform'd of even the very meanest words that regard her Interests. Of all the Pensionary Spies none of them are better us'd than those of the Inquisitors of State; although this Profession is esteem'd as the greatest indignity a man is able to resolve upon, for the greatest affront you can offer any one at Venice is to call him Spia, di Inquisitori; yet it is most certain that there are Spies of all qualities, as likewise of all sorts of Nations, Professions, Citisens, Officers of the Army; but what is more surprising, e∣ven the Nobility themselves are not asham'd to be payed for services of this Nattre.
I shall not go on with a Repetition of the many Tragical examples occasioned by the Reports of the Spies to the less Prudent sort of People, and such strangers as have inconsi∣derately taken the liberty of speaking ill of the Government, or of Persons who are in Authority there: For whoever goes to Ve∣nice may be sure to return with his head full of these Tragical Accounts. I shall only Mention an accident that I know to be True, and although the Consequences were not Pre∣judicial, yet they do not less demonstrate the Diligence of the Spies than the small Likelihood there is of escaping such Informati∣ons. Two Citisens and intimate Freinds being alone with their Wives out of Venice, and having sent a shore the men belonging to the Gondalo; one of the two who had a few days before received some reprimand from the Magistrates of the Pomp, for having lately made a Vest with the Sleeves shorter than they usually are, thought he might safely open his mind in that place, by expressing his Re∣sentment and his sensible displeasure against such an unjust proceeding. But the next day one of the first of the Council of Ten, took of one side the Person, to whom this discourse was address'd, and said; admonish your Friend to speak hereafter in other Terms of his Superiors, for if I had not that esteem for you which I have, or if the business had been repor∣ted to any body else; your Friend would have had but an indifferent bargain of those
improper expressions he Yesterday used at such a place. Of the Podestats, Captains of Arms and other Officers that the Repub∣lick sends into the several Provin∣ces. After having taken a view of the inside of the Government of this Republick, it will not be amiss to observe how it is ma∣nag'd without, for the Preservation of the Provinces, and to keep the People to their Duty and Obedience. I do not design to give an account of all the particulars relating to this part of the Government, but suc∣cinctly to Mention what the Persons are to whom the Republick confides the Administra∣tion of the States upon Terra Firma, as like∣wise those she Possesseth on the other side of the Adriatick Sea. She sends into all the consi∣derable Towns upon Terra Firma two Nobles, one in the quality of Podestate, the other with the Title of Captain of Arms; these two Officers who do equally represent the Majesty of the Publick, the first by Admi∣nistring Justice to the People, the Se∣cond to command the Souldery and to keep them to their Duty, are ever Gentlemen of the first or Second order at least.
As there are frequent disputes between the Podestate and the Captain about the mat∣ter of Jurisdiction, so they are oblig'd to give the Senate an account of it before they proceed further; the Podestate hath the pre∣cedency in all Publick Functions where they appear together; so it is he who hath the bur∣den of the most important affairs; for the Cognisance of Causes Civil and Criminal, and whatsoever regards the Government, the Peace and Quiet of the People, belong to him. The Captain of Arms hath the command of the Souldiers and all Military People within the Limits of his Jurisdiction; he hath the Cog∣nisance of Crimes committed in the night, and the care of paying the Publick charges by the means of the Receivers, who are ac∣countable to him. The Cities of Padua, Vicenza, Verona, Bressia, Bergamo, Crema and Treviso, as the head Ci∣ties of Provinces and the most considerable upon Terra Firma, have each of them a Po∣destate and a Captain of Arms. In the o∣ther ess considerable Cities, these two Em∣ploys are united in the Person of the Po∣destate; they are both of them for Sixteen Months; and the Salaries the Republick allows these Officers, are from Ten to Forty Ducats a Month; for which Reason the Nobles which she deputes into the Great Cities, are usually very considerable for their Riches, to the end they may live handsomly and honour the dignity; the poor Nobles do sufficiently find their accounts in the small Podestary's, by
not being obliged to any manner of ex∣pence. As most of the Great Podestaries are very burthensome, so the Gentlemen Nominated to them, do sometimes rather choose to pay two thousand Ducats and to be debarr'd com∣ing into the Great Council for two years, than to accept those Employs which are more Prejudicial to them than these Penalties, which the Laws impose upon such as refuse them; yet is is a very Surprising thing how some of these Podestats, as those commonly sent to Vicenza, who are scarce Thirty Years of Age, and who rarely have perform'd any o∣ther study or acquir'd further experience than what they have gained in the Intrigues and Ballotations of the Great Council, should Judge and decide with so Singular a Prudence, the most important affairs relating to the Subjects of the Republick; It is true they always call to their Assistance Doctors of Ci∣vil Law in the Cities of their residence, by whose advice they Regulate the decisions of the more difficult cases. The Republick always sends a Noble of the first order into the Province of Frivoli, with the title of Proveditor General of Nova Palma, which is the handsomest and most regular Place in all their Diminions upon Terra Fir∣ma, it is a Frontier Town to the Emperor, and a mighty check against those Incursions that the Turks have frequently attempted on this side. At Dine which is the residence of the Patriarch of Aquilea there is a Lieutenant and
some Subaltern Officers. In Istria of which Capo'd Istria is the Capital, there are four Episcopal Cities, and five less considerable, who have all Podestats. The Magistracies of Frivoli and Istria are for two years, as like∣wise those of Dalmatia and the Isles of the Levant, by being too far to be oftner remov∣ed. The Republick confers the titles of Pro∣veditors, Counts, Governours, Captains or Castellans, upon such Nobles as she sends into the Cities of Dalmatia for the Admini∣stration of Justice; the Magistrates of the two principal places, the Counties of Zara and Spalatro, being two Archbishopbricks, are assisted by a Council of three Noble Vene∣tians, without whom they are not to come to any Resolution; yet all these Officers obey the Proveditor of the Province, who hath an absolute command in these af∣fairs, as likewise in those of the Mili∣tary concern. The Troupes maintain'd by the Republick in this Province, which borders upon the territories of the Grand Seignior, are however commanded by a foreign General; who is in all occasions to follow the orders of the Proveditor Gene∣ral. The Isles of Corfu, Zante and Cafalonia, are each of them Governed by a Proveditor, assisted by a Council of three Noble Veneti∣ans. Corfu is the most considerable not only for being an Archbishopbrick, but likewise because it commands the entrance of the
Gulph; therefore the Venetians provide for the Security of this place with so much more Application, as it is the Preservation of their Levant Trade, and observed with the Greatest Jealousie by the Turks. The Four Thousand Janisaries that appear'd not long since upon the Coast over against Corfu, occasioned to the Senate a mighty uneasiness Notwithstanding the strength and good con∣dition of the Fortress of this Important place. There is a General of the three Islands to whom the particular Proveditors owe the same obedience, which the Magistrates of the Cities of Dalmatia do to the Proveditor Ge∣neral of this Province. These are the Offi∣cers to whom is confided the Authority of the Prince in the several States of the Re∣publick. Yet as there is no part in the Bo∣dy of the strongest and Healthfullest Man, that is not liable to be abus'd by ill Manage∣ment; so there are no Laws in the best ordered State that can prevent the Corrup∣tion of some Members that compose it. The Republick therefore hath thought sit to make use of the Inquisitors, to prevent and cure at the same time both these Distempers.
Of the Inquisitors of Terra Firma. THE Republick commonly holds every five years in all the Provinces an Extrordinary Court or Session; and for this purpose chooses out three of the first Senators, to whom is given the Name of Inquisitors of Terra firma, to distinguish them from those of the State: but as this Commission is in no manner agreeable to them, by reason of the Severity they are oblig'd to shew against such as are complained of, so they only accept of it as not daring to refuse it; they are to examine into the admi∣nistration of the Podestats, the behaviour of the Captains and other Publick Officers, as likewise to receive the People's complaints against their behavour, and to do them Justice in the wrongs received; but, excepting of Ex∣tortion and the ill application of the publick revenues, the Noble Venetians need not much fear the Punishments that are due to an irregular Administration. These severe Magistrates go attended with a Troop of Horse, Officers and an Executioner; that so they may (seeing they have sufficient power and Authority) render a quick and rigorous Justice, upon the Lawful complaints of the People; yet Notwithstanding the great noise of these examining Inquisitors, the Tempest Lights commonly upon some
Miserable Wretch, or Gentleman of Terra firma; their Gentry having more cause of apprehension than any others whatever, as being the People that are most Liable to be made Examples. This Severity keeps the Magistrates to their Duty, the Country No∣bility in fear and Submission, and insinuates to the People the Mildness and equity of the Go∣verment under which they live. As the Provinces of Terra firma are in a manner under the eyes of the Republick; so the abuses of Officers in administration of Justice are neither so great nor so frequent, but the inquiries are more easy and the Punishment less rarely avoided. On the other side the Adriatick Sea, in the Goverments of Dalmatia, and the Isles of the Levant, an exactness of these inquiries would be of an extraordinary good effect to their Subjects, for when they have sent thither these Inquisitors, they have not only met with many difficulties in proceeding accord∣ing to their methods upon Terra firma, against Magistrates at such a distance and Separated from them by the Sea: but the Inquisitors them∣selves have not Judg'd it safe for their Persons, if they should attempt to execute their Commissi∣ons with the usual rigour; insomuch that there are none of the Senate to be prevail'd upon to execute these Employs beyond Sea.
Of the Forces of the Republick both by Sea and Land. THE Republick of Venice is rather pre∣serv'd through the reputation she hath acquired, than by the great Number of Troops that she hath in her Service; insomch that in time of Peace, she hath scarce Forces sufficient for the Garrisons she is oblig'd to have for the Security of the State. The whole Number of regular Troops that are kept on foot, since the conclusion of the Peace after the taking of Candia, does not amount unto six thousand Men, including both the Cavalry and Infantry, part whereof is distributed into the Fortified Places of Dalmatia, under the command of the Proveditor General of this Province, and the foreign General before mentioned; the remainder is under the Cap∣tains of Arms in the City's upon Terra firma, especially in those that border upon the Mil∣lanese The Infantery of the Republick in time of peace is chiefly composed of Capelets, that is Capaleti. Slavonians, Morlaques; and Albanians, which People come from the other side of the Adria∣tick Sea; they border upon the Turks; they are their irreconcilable Enemys, and never in Peace with them; and to such a degree that it
hath been observed in Candia, when any one of those Infidels have happened to be blown into the Town upon the Springing of a mine, he hath no sooner been upon the Ground, but these Slavonians have cut him in pieces to satisfie their revenge by eating him almost quick. Their Arms are long Sabres and Car∣bines, they are good Souldiers and Affection∣ately faithful to the Republick. The Cavalry is partly composed of the same Capelets, of Italians and Ʋltramontains, for so they call the French and Germans; as the pay and the Companies of these are larger, than those of the Capelets, so they are usually conferred as rewards upon those Officers that have Signaliz'd themselves in the service of the Republick; besides these there are about Forty or Fifty of them they call Condotti, or Pensioners; whereby they are ever assured of having ready a certain Number of experienc'd and faithful Officers, against any sudden occasion that may oblige them to raise new Troops; for which reason these Officers are well payed, enjoying those Privileges, which intitle them to much consideration in this State; moreover, when they have any business at the College, they are allowed to speak Sitting. The Republick hath in their Service upon Terra firma, only Fifteen Troops of Horse; however besides them there are Eight or ten thousand foot for shew, these do not cost them much, neither are they very Serviceable to them. They are the Militia of Terra Fir∣ma, commonly called Cernide, that is Men
Selected to carry Arms; whose chief business is to be frequently excercis'd and pass the review; that so Foreigners and neighbouring Princes may believe that the Republick is ever stongly provided; The Captains and Serjeants are only payed, as for the Souldiers they are contented with some Ex∣emptions; however upon any sudden occasion this Militia might be made very Serviceable to the Republick, by joyning them to the Body of their other standing forces. Although the Republick is of the Opinion that a War is much more chargeable to them than to all other Princes, by reason they Em∣ploy only foreign Troops, yet they rather choose to be at that charge, as likewise the uncertainty of being Well Serv'd by them, which is but Seldom; than to train up their own Subjects to discipline, and render them capable of being feared for the future. There∣fore when they are engag'd in a Land War, the Republick does not only raise their Troops out of their Dominions, but they likewise give the command of them to some Prince, or Person of consideration whom she engages to her Interest by the large Allowances that are given him. This General hath under him Generals of the Cavalry and infantry; but the two Nobles which the Senate gives him for Assistants, with the Titles of Proveditors General, do in effect only leave him the Name of Generalissimo, for they are to confirm all Resolutions and order the designs of the
Campaign; they rarely permit of any Opi∣nions that proceed not from themselves, fre∣quently obliging the experience of the Principal Officers, to give way to the Jealousie they have of their own Authority. The Senate gives their Principal Application to the Marine Affairs; the Genius of these People is very Inclinable to all Naval at∣tempts; they support the weight of these Wars with much less difficulty, than those upon Land; this Republick hath raised it self from the Sea, and to her she is indebt∣ed for her great increase; It is through her Maritime forces that she is become for∣midable to the Turks, and which formerly gained her those very large Conquests. As the Venetians are born in the Sea, so they are not less Skilful upon this Element than they are happy; insomuch that for one Dis∣advantage received, they may reckon a Hundred Times Success; their valour ren∣der'd them Masters of the Adriatick Gulf, and there is no question but they will as Vi∣gorously assert that possession, as they Judge the consequences of it to be very Impor∣tant. In times of Peace the Republick does not maintain a certain Regulated Naval force, however they are always able to set out in a very little time five and twenty Gallies; She keeps in the Gulf only a Squadron of Six Gallies, several Galiots and Brigantins;
which are continually cruising at the entrance of this Sea, for the security of their Trade against the Corsaires, but especially to Col∣lect the Duties upon all Merchants. Yet this does not prevent the Pyrates of Dulcigno, who are Subjects to the Turk, from some∣times making their Incursions into Romagnia, and the Marches of Ancona near Loretto this is very uneasy to the Pope who hath caus'd his Nuncio to make great complaints to the Senate; for he permits the Republick to receive the Tenths of the Clergy, upon condition that they shall defend the Coasts of the Ecclesiastical State from the Insults of these Infidels. This Squadron is commanded by a Noble of the first order, to whom is given the Title of General of the Gulf; this Commi∣ssion is for Three Years; the Galliasses and Men of War have likewise their distinct Generals in time of War; at present the Republick hath only two Galliasses at Sea, whose Station is at Corfu, there are likewise some Men of War for the Convoys of Merchants, who attribute their frequent losses in the Levant, to the want of the Necessary Num∣ber of Men of War, which the Republick ought to have at Sea for the Security of their Commerce. Whether the Republick hath a Naval Ar∣my for the execution of some design; or that she hath only the usual forces which she maintains in times of Peace, and the
Squadron of the Gulf; Yet she always Cre∣ates a Proveditor General of the Sea, who hath the command of the Fleet. This Em∣ploy is executed by one of first Senators, he hath an absolute Power over the Officers, Souldiers and Seamen, being enabled to put to Death any of them, as likewise to dispose of all the Offices of the Fleet. The Pro∣veditor General of the Sea commonly re∣sides at Corfu, his Employ continues two Years, at the end of which he gives the Senate an account of the administration of his Office. When the Republick enters into a War by Sea, she does not give the command of her forces to a foreign General, as is practis'd in those a-shoar: but in these important junctures, upon which seems to depend the intire safety of the State, the Republick constitutes some Noble Venetian General by Sea, who does not only command the other before mentioned General Officers; but like∣wise all Governours of Maritime Places, to whom he sends his orders according to the various circumstances of the time and War; he moreover disposes and orders without controul all Offices, and Revenues appoint∣ed for the support of the Army. Yet the apprehensions of an Inquiry, and the indispensable necesity of giving the Senate an exact report of what he had done; makes the General very assiduous in find∣ing out plausible pretences to all the mis∣carriages
for which he is accountable at the expiration of this almost Sovereign Autho∣rity; which always ceases before he re∣turns to Venice to appear befor the College, This most eminent Dignity in the State, is only while the War continues. The Pro∣curator Francis Morosini was the last that executed it, who defended the City of Candia in the late Wars; it is thought the Republick had not a more proper Person for the execution of this considerable post, and the examination which was made into his conduct for the Surrendring of that Place, and the inquiries into his Administration of the Revenues, which made him twice a Prisoner and both times in danger, is an evident proof how diffi∣cult it is to Serve a Republick; where a General is in a manner oblig'd to satisfie the the smallest Scruples of his greatest Eni∣mies. When the Republick creates a Generalissimo by Sea, She sends into the Fleet a foreign General, who hath the command of all the Forces that are to be Employed in their de∣scents on shoar; yet he is not to undertake any thing upon his own bottom, but this General receives his orders from the Generalissimo; The Marquess de St. Andrè commanded in that quality at Candia, whose acceptable
Services were acknowled'd by a considerable Pension from the Senate until such time as he died. Of the Revenues and Expence of the Republick. IT would be very Tedious to give a long account of the Revenues of the Re∣publick, and to make a particular Calcula∣tion of what each City and Province amounts to. I shall content my self with observ∣ing in General how much the usual account is, that by the knowledge of the Revenues of the State one may be able to Judge of the greatness of their strength. I shall at the same time endeavour to shew what ways and means the Republick hath taken, to oppose all the attempts of the Turks both by Sea and Land; as likewise to maintain a War for five and twenty years together against so Powerful an Empire. It is a difficult matter to know the exact value of these Revenues, being the Repub∣lick is always Augmenting and Diminishing of them, according to the Necessities of the
War and occasions in Peace. However according to Computation of the Rigister of Receipts, before the pressing Necessities of the last War of Candia, it appeared that the established Revenue did amount to no more than Fourteen Millions of Livers French Money. One half of this Revenue proceeded from the Duties at Venice upon the Importation and Exportation of goods, in the excise upon Provisions, and all other Merchandises sold at the tenth penny Duty, and duties arising from the Islands of the Lagunes, as likewise upon all goods in the Limits of the Country near Venice, which is called the Dutchy or Do∣gate. The other part of this Revenue rises from the Cities and Provinces of Terra Firma, in impositions upon Goods, Provisi∣ons, custom of Merchandise, in Tithes and the Tenth Penny, as likewise from what is raised in Istria, Dalmatia and the three Islands of Corfu, Zant and Chefal∣nia. To this Revenue must be added the Ca∣sual Emoluments of the Palace, Sale of Offi∣ces, Confiscations, and several other Duties that amount to considerable Summs. The Salt Works at Corfu produc'd two Millions; that at Chiosa, one; by which it appears that the Republick received above Eighteen Millions.
In War the Republick Augments the old impositions and establishes new ones, Taxes the easy, and the Ecclesiasticks, from whom by the Pope's consent she draws very considerable Summs, in all her Wars against the Turks; They likewise obtained the Abolition of several Orders as those of the Holy Ghost and the Croisade, the Sale of whose effects amounted to very consi∣derable Summs, The Republick doubles the Contributions of all the City Companies, as likewise those of the Gondaliers, the Six Great Confraternities of the City who are very Rich; she draws besides great Summs from the Jews, who were oblig'd in the late Necessities of the State to a Loan of Three Millions at three per Cent. Besides the particular Taxes of the Richer Jews, which amounted also to three Millions of Livers. At the opening of the entrance into the Great Council by the Creation of new No∣bles, the Republick hath in a manner al∣ways acquired Inexhaustible Treasures; the great Number of Supernumerary Procura∣tors of Saint Mark, who Purchase their Dignities at Thirty Thousand Ducats each; have been very Powerful Supplies to the Exigencies of this State: insomuch that these extraordinary ways of raising Money, the most important of which are here only mentioned, have been these Rich Mines
from which the Republick have found the means of making that Resistance, which hath been the Admiration of all Europe. The established expences of the Republick do not annually exceed Ten Millions of Livers, which are partly employed to defray the charges of the Doge, of Ambassadors, the Salaries of Officers, the pay of both Horse and Foot upon Terra Firma and in the Levant, as likewise to defray the charges of the Navy, Arcenal and Fortifica∣tions of the State. As to the other ex∣pences which the Republick is oblig'd to, in cleaning the Canals of Venice, and for the maintenance of such as Lie Commodi∣ous and useful to the City, there are cer∣tain Summs arising from several Impositions that are to this purpose given, and particularly applied to these matters; Beides, the In∣habitants of the Country are all oblig'd by some Light consideration to so many Days Work each man. The Summs which the Republick pays for interest of money upon the Zecque, or Treasury Chamber, are comprehended within the Calculation of Ten Millions; but since the Peace of Candia the Republick hath discharg'd her self of the great Interest she payed for Sums lent upon the Bank of Venice, by Incorporating them into the Constitution at three per cent; but as they only payed the half of that Interest, by
Reason of the great Necessities of the State during the late War, so they have turn'd the Arrears into Principal, for which is allowed two per cent. The Republick hath moreover reduc'd to five all other Summs that were formerly at six, seven and eight per cent. There being a great deal due to the Officers that had served the Republick in the late Wars, they thought fit to Pub∣lish a declaration importing that no Officers should be payed, but those whose accounts were admitted, and even they were only to receive the half of what appeared in their accounts; the Republick did not only thus avoid taking notice of the damage she did to particulars by these sorts of Retrench∣ments, that so much Augmented her Trea∣sure, by considerably diminishing her charge, but they likewise order no payment that is not ballotted in the College and Senate; so they are sure to be oppress'd with charges that prosecute their debts, for her custom is to pay no more than a very moderate part at a time. By these means the Republick in times of Peace does every year bring several Mil∣lions, into the Coffers of the Treasury. Which is the more easy by reason their Treasury is not only manag'd with an exact fidelity, but likewise because there can be no new Employ made without having a
General consent; By this it appears that it will be do difficult matter for the Re∣publick to acquit her self in a very small time of all the debts she contracted in the late War, although they were esteem'd at above fourscore Millions of Livers. End of the Second Part.
OF THE CITY AND REPUBLICK OF VENICE. The Third Part. Of the Customs and Manner of Living of the Venetian Gentlemen and Ladies, as like∣wise of other Secular and Regular Per∣sons, with the Description of the Publick Diversions of Venice. LONDON, Printed for Charles Brome, at the Gun at the West-End of St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1699.
OF THE CITY AND Republick of VENICE. The Third Part. Of the Education and Manners of the Young Nobility. IF it be true, That Education does not con∣tribute less to the Improvement of Youth, than the Natural Disposition to Good; one ought not to wonder at the young Noble Venetians, who not being restrain'd by those Considerations that usually engage Young People to the Principles of Vertue, or at least that preserves them from Vice; should Live so Irregularly and shew so little Moderation in their Conduct. I pretend to speak now only of the Young Nobility; as not designing to en∣gage my self here to a General Description of the Customs and Inclinations of the Venetians, which will be sufficiently shewn in the course of this Account.
The Fathers and Mothers here are so infinitely Fond of their Children, that they never lay any restraint upon them; for whom they have so great a Complacency as never to deny them a∣ny thing they desire. They are no sooner able to go, but they begin to Cloath them with the Richest things, and at Five or Six Years Old they put them into the black Habit, and Cloak ruffled with Gold or Silver-Laces, their fondness even reaches the Shoes, for they are then rais'd with very high Heels, which are to make them look Taller than they really are; and doubtless this may be one reason of their Walking so very ill as they do ever afterwards. It is not anly this blind Affection of the Pa∣rents that first begins to corrupt the Manners of their Young People, by rendring them Haugh∣ty, Imperious, Lascivious, and violent in all their Passions, but the sordid Flattery of their Domestick Servants does strangely help to in∣crease the Ill: For those Creatures think to e∣stablish their Fortunes by getting these Young Gentlemen to be their fast Protectors, for which purpose they use their utmost endeavours as be∣ing well assured that there is nothing that they may not hope for at Venice, when they are under the protection of one of their Powerful Houses upon which Considerations these Children are Ador'd and Regarded as the certain hope of their rising Fortune. These Gentlemen being thus early accustom'd to be Treated like Princes, and finding no oppo∣sition to the Career of their Desires, do insensi∣bly possess themselves with the thoughts of be∣ing Superior to all other Persons of Quality;
but when they begin to perceive that they are the only Mighty in the State, they then elevate the Notion to that degree as to become Insup∣portable to all others. For which Reason it is ve∣ry rare for Strangers to find much Civility from those People, unless it be among those that have learn'd the Rules of good Breeding in o∣ther Countries; of which number such as have seen France do much distinguish themselves from the rest. One may vainly imaginy that if this Young Nobility is not engag'd to the Study of good Let∣ters, by the Natural Inclination join'd to a great disposition of Learning; there cannot be ma∣ny expected to penetrate very far into the know∣ledge of the Sciences; insomuch that whatever Care is taken about the Instruction of these Gentlemen either in the School or their Houses, yet they are not to be prevail'd upon to exceed what they themselves think fit. In the mean time the Parents do not much trouble them∣selves about the matter, for they are contented with the hopes of seeing them Venetian Politi∣ans at last: However in this numerous Nobili∣ty there are some Gentlemen that Naturally take to Study, which they follow with great Success. So soon as these Young Gentlemen are Six∣teen or Seventeen Years Old, they begin to As∣sociate with those of a more advanc'd Age, and to pursue their Pleasures with the amplest liber∣ty: As they do not want Precedenrs in the Company they keep, nor for Opportunities in this Famous City of Venice; so it may easily be imagined without any farther Instances, what
sort of a Life they lead. Such as have Money commonly spend it in Pleasure, for they are not contented with one Courtisan, but employ it to the Support of several: Their Parents are so far from opposing the Libertinism, that on the contrary, they usually contribute to the Excess; or at best, but shut their Eyes to the Extravagancy of their Conduct. The Son of a Procurator by Merit, that had a great share in the Dogal Dignity, after the Death of the Doge Contarini, was so mightily in Love with the most Beautiful and Honestest Courtisan of Venice (if there are any so) that he never stirr'd from her. The Father being afflicted that he could not enjoy the Presence of his Son so much as he desir'd, advis'd him to bring the Mistress home; telling him, in soft Venetian, That he should not increase the Charge of his Table by their being with him, and that at least he should have the Satisfacti∣on of seeing him oftner. Such of these Gentlemen as have not where∣withal to support the Charge of their Desires, wreck their Inventions to acquire the Means of supplying their Necessities. They bestow their Protections upon Persons that are able to ac∣knowledge the Favour, and if they are those forward Gentlemen that are always ready to as∣sert the Value of their Merits, or of them that are become formidable for their Violencies and Bully-Deeds, they make a greater noise by their Names, and occasion more Terrour to all that are concerned with them, than the principal Senators are able to effect with their amplest Authorities.
If an Unfortunate Wretch has a declared Enemy, whose severe Usage he has reason to fear, he needs but to apply himself to one of those Noblemen, who immediately sends to admonish him not to undertake any thing a∣gainst the Person he has received into Protecti∣on; farther assuring him, That if the least Ac∣cident happens to the Person he protects, he may be certain of seeing himself deprived both of his Legs and his Arms. Or when any one knows not how to get in a bad Debt, his best Remedy is to one of these Noblemen, who presently sends to the Person owing the Money, assigns him a Term of time to pay it, which he dares no more refuse, than if he were condemn'd to it in a Court of Justice. This Proceeding of these Gentlemen is call'd at Venice, Tenir Tribunale, altho' it is odious to the Republick, and contrary to the Laws and Liberties of the Subject; nevertheless all Eyes are generally clos'd to these Disorders. This Arrogance of the greatest. Part of the Young Venetian Nobility, and the Violencies which they frequently execute upon private Persons, do insensibly acquire them that Hatred which may at some time chance to be fatal to them. The most Part of these Noble Venetians, have a certain sort of Men in their Service that are qualified for any Villany, they are known in France by the Name of Ham-stringers, but are at Venice honour'd with the Title of Bravo's: Their Business is to dispatch a Man with Powder and Ball, or for the greater Privacy, to make use of their Ponyards; as also to cut and slash
the Face of a Woman that has given any oc∣casion of Complaint, which is termed at Ve∣nice, dar un Sfriso; that is, to Scarify the Cheeks of such an Unfortunate Person: When any of these Braves have an Affair to adjust with one that wears a Sword, whom he designs to attack like a Man of Honour, da huomo ho∣norato, as they call it, without any manner of Treachery; they equip themselves with a good Coat of Mail under a Buff-coat, an Iron-Tar∣get, a well temper'd Helmet fastned to his Gir∣dle, and a Sword about two Foot long, but at least three Fingers broad, and cuts on both sides; at least when the Man is thus fitted out, he covers all his Equipage with a Champaign-Cloak that he throws over him. When the Bravo meets with his Man, he im∣mediately throws away both Hat and Cloak, he covers his Head with the Iron-Cap, draws his Sword, and in an instant puts himself into the proper posture behind his Buckler. I met once one of these Gentlemen in this Figure, his De∣sign was to have attack'd a Stranger, who sav'd himself at a Courtesans, and appearing at the Window, the Bravo becken'd to him to come down; saying, Messer foresto vegni abasso, veg∣ni abasso; but the Stranger did not think fit to expose himself to an Enemy so advantageously Armed. Play in general, but especially that of Basset, is the mighty Passion of the Venetians; yet this Game is rather us'd by those advanc'd to some Years, than by the more Youthful Nobility, who much rather chuse to pursue the Dictates of their Inclinations to Pleasure, than to engage
themselves to a Game that is not ordinarily us'd for small Sums. Not long since, one of the first Senators of the Republick, supported with much Affliction, the frequent Losses which his Son receiv'd at Play: However he was afraid to discover plainly to him the Grief it gave him, and only ventur'd to say one Night, upon his losing of two Hundred Hungars, Tu te sei portato bene oggi; You have play'd your Part very well to Day: To which the Son reply'd very briskly, Non voglio questi musi, I do not desire to be so received; and the very next Day he left Venice, acquainted his Father by one of his Friends, that he was not to expect to see him any more; and that he was then going to France. It is impossible to express the Grief of the Affiicted Father for the loss of his Son; who in a distracted condition enquir'd of every one he saw. Is it possible for me to live without the pre∣sence of my Son! Revien caro mio figliolo Pietro. Return my dear Child, and you shall not only have the Two hundred Hungers but likewise the Keys of my Cash, and forthwith dispatch'd away seve∣ral Expresses with Money to bring back the Son whom he never expected to see more. It may be imagined from hence, if the Young Nobility who are Educated with so much ten∣derness, equally adored by their Parents and Servants, free of all restraint, accustom'd to pursue with the amplest liberty all the Motives of their Desires, moreover possess'd with an imaginary Opinion of themselves, and of the Power they have to make themselves obeyed ei∣ther through Fear or Authority: If these Gen∣tlemen,
I say, who are thus educated, ought not to be very different in all things from those that are educated in other Countries; but more es∣pecially in France, where the study of good Let∣ters, the Exercises of the Body and the Conver∣sation of Persons of Wit and Virtue, do usually employ the more tender Years of Persons of Quality. As the Young Nobility are in some measure assured to escape unpunished, so they are scarce to be retain'd from their extravagances by any manner of consideration, of which take the fol∣lowing Example. About four or five years since five Young Gentlemen not knowing how to pass away the Evening, agreed among themselves to do something that might make a noise and themselves talked of. One propos'd to set on fire Il Ghetto, that part of the City Inhabited by the Jews; another was of Opinion to force into the Houfe of one the handsomest Ladies at Ve∣nice, and there to execute what their pleasure prompted them to; but the proposition of the third Man was agreed upon as most agreeable to these Gentlemen. He said that a Nunnery of the Order of Saint Francis in a certain Island two Miles distant from Venice was at that time Repairing, and that he thought they could not pass the tsme better than to take that opportu∣nity of entring the Breach. All of them immediately Dress'd themselves in White, took Boats and atriv'd at the Place about Midnight, which they entred unto the very Dormitories. The first of the Religious that came running out upon the noise by her shricks alarm'd the whole Covent, upon which
the Bell was Rung, and several of the Inha∣bitants came to give their Assistance: But the Nobles not thinking themselves safe fled to theit Gondolo's, and return'd to Venice. This Action was mightily nois'd about in the Morning, various were the Opinons upon this Disorder at the Nunnery, and several different Relations made of it; but at the end of Three Days the Authors were discover'd and Banish'd the City upon very rigorous Penalties: Yet in less than Six Months they appear'd there again without any farther Notice being taken of them. It is nevertheless certain that there are a great many Civil Gentlemen among the Young Nobility of Venice; yet they are generally these as have spent some time in other Countries; who having seen another Nobility in Europe, which not being less regarded for their Personal Merits than for their Births, do observe a quite different Conduct, and by their Civilities they shew to Strangers, which is even sometimes to excess, do mightily distinguish themselves from those Nobles that were never out of their State. Of the Habit of the Nobles. IT is observ'd that the Venetian Nobility have ever imitated the long Garnment of the Le∣vant, and the ancient Custom of Rome. For se∣veral Ages past rhey did wear along Blew Robe; but at length it was unalterably fix'd to a long back Vest that comes down to the Ground: The Sleeves are half an Ell wide and come down to the Wrist: They are made very narrow at the
end, leaving only space enough to put through the Hand, but the Sleeve is round at the bottom of the end like a Night-Gown, in which the Nobility carry what others usually wear in the Pockets of their Coats. The Collar of the Vest is rais'd directly up round about the Neck, and open before; as likewise the Doublet which is very high and of the same shape. A starch'd little round Band is sow'd to the inside Shirt negligently falls a Finger's breadth over the Col∣lar of the Wastcoat, and the Neck of the which is usually fastned with a Gold or Diamond-Buckle. In Summer they wear the Vest open and flying back, the forepart being lined with Black Taffaty. But the indispensable Obligati∣on of having it in all Seasons of Padua-Cloth, is during the great Heat, a most insupportable Punishment to the greatest part of the Nobility. The Gentlemen are all mighty fond of the French Fashion, for they wear under their Vests very pretty Wastcoats of Black Silk; but they always run into Excess, sometimes by short lit∣tle Wastcoats Scallop'd at the bottom, or else with others very large, and odly ruffled with Laces. Altho' they are forbid the Use of Points of Venice, yet the Necks and Wrists of their Shirts are frequently Laced with them, as like∣wise the Back of the Sleeve; and that this may be more seen, they usually turn up the Sleeve of the Vest, which ought to be worn over their Hands; for the Taylors that make these Vests, are obliged under great Forfeitures, to cut the Sleeves long, and the Vest short, that is, so as it may not hang upon the Ground, which is the direct contrary to what they desire.
All those that wear the Vest as Senators, No∣bles, and Citizens, have only on their Heads a knit Cap of Worsted, which is edg'd about with a sort of long wrought Fleece-Wool, that something resembles a Hat-band. The greatest part of the Young Nobility, wear this Cap more in their Hands than upon their Heads; by which use, and the care they have of their Hair, one sees here such beautiful Heads, that are no where else to be found. However this did not prevent them from making use of Scisars, when they were so earnestly bent upon Perukes; the Use of which is yet forbidden: However they begin to fall into them again, and the more by reason the Inquisitors of State are easily prevail∣ed upon to permit the Wear of the short Wig and Cap. I doubt not but that they will be permitted again, for these they wear at present, do perceptibly become longer every Day more than other; insomuch that a little more time will, without dispute, render that Fashion ge∣neral. They are oblig'd to wear a Stole of an Ell long over their Vests; this is a certain breadth of the same Cloath with the Vest, doubled and sowed together, with two very large Lists at the Ends: This is cast over the left Shoulder, to one of which ends was formerly fastned the Cap, as are at present the Aumuce of the Regular Can∣nons; so the other end of this Stole, or Hang∣ing-Sleeve, came almost down to their Heels: At present this is esteem'd for a Mark of Au∣thority, a Noble dares not appear at the Broglio without this on the Shoulder: However the Ci∣tizens that wear the Vest, have the same Badge,
with which they all cover their Head, when they chance to be surprized in the Streets by a Shower of Rain. Only the Counsellors of the Doge, the Pro∣curators of St. Mark, the Presidents of the Council of Ten, the great Sages, and the Sa∣ges of Terra firma, are excused from the In∣conveniencies of this heavy Garment in Sum∣mer, who by a particular Privilege wear, as it has been observed, a Vest of fine Camblet. But as the Nobility may be pitied in this Sea∣son, so they are no less to be envied in Winter: For in the Month of December, they begin to line their Vests with Furs, the more Ancient in∣tirely through the Body; but others the Extre∣mities and Sides only, with a Border of fine Blewish Fur, about four Fingers broad, that comes down on each Side from the top to the bottom of the Vest, the same is edg'd round the Hand of the Sleeve: This Border, or Edging, comes about a Finger's breadth below the bot∣tom of the Vest on the inside. The Vest is cross'd over their Stomachs from the Left to the Right, which they fasten by a Girdle of Velvet about three Fingers broad, which they wear about their Wastes; this Girdle is stitch'd on the Sides with an Edging of Silk, it is A∣dorn'd with a dozen Silver-Bosses that cover the whole fore part of the Girdle. This is made exactly to the bigness of the Waste, for at the Ends there are two large Silver-Hasps, which clasp together over the Belly. Nothing can look greater than this sort of Habit, under which the Nobility seem to be well made; they commonly turn back the fore∣part
of the Vest with the Left-hand, carrying he Right upon the Stomack in the opening of the Vest, whereby is commonly seen the Handle of their Dagger. One that would not look ve∣ry well in our Champaign-Dress, makes an ex∣traordinary Figure in the Vest: For few of them have their Legs well made, or Straight; besides they generally turn their Feet inwards: This fault is common to both Sexes at Venice, for the Policy of the Country does not permit to the Ladies the Advantage of Dancing-Masters; and the Negligence of the Young Nobility is such, that they will not long constrain them∣selves to go otherwise, altho' they have had the good Fortune to meet with some Foreign Ma∣sters, that have given them the necessary Instru∣ctions. The Young Nobility are not oblig'd to wear this Habit unless they have attain'd to the Years of entring into the Great Council, which is at Twenty five, provided they are not of the Thir∣ty which by particular Privilege are by Lot drawn every Year, from among those above Twenty two, that give in their Names for their chance to this Preferment. Nevertheless their Parents; if they can perswade them to it, put them into the Vest at Fifteen or Sixteen, for this Garment which is by the Republick call'd the Habit of their Religion, does in some mea∣sure oblige such as wear it, to observe some Rules of Decency, and engage them to live with more Moderation than those that are not ho∣nour'd with it. Yet the Nobility are not the only Persons that wear at Venice this sort of Apparel. The
Physitians, Lawyers, Secretaries of the Repu∣blick, Notaries, several other Officers of the Pa∣lace; and a great many Citizens have the same Apparel without any manner of distinction; insomuch that without a great familiarity with them, it is altogether impossible to make any distinction between them. It has been often times proposed to have some external Mark, whereby the Nobility might be distinguish'd from such as are not of that Body, but the Se∣nate could never be induced to admit of the proposition. Some say that the intention of the Republick is thereby to shew the number of their Nobility larger than it really is, and by that means ren∣der it more considerable in the thoughts of their Subjects and those Strangers that come to Venice: Others imagine that the Nobility think them∣selves safer by this mixture; for if there should happen again any Conspiracies against the whole Body of the Nobility, they would have less op∣portunity of saving themselves; as being now in a manner undiscernably mix'd with a multi∣tude of them which such Conspirators would not destroy. I am of the opinion that this Ha∣bit being in common between the Citizens and Nobility, does not a little help to acquire these the friendship of the Former, who are part of the Principal Members in the Body of this State, and who are much better beloved by the People than the Nobility, as being infinitely more o∣bliging and Moderate. Yet certain it is that the Republick has very good Reasons in adhering to these Resolutions, for she is absolutely against all Innovations of
this Nature, notwithstanding the Shame which the Dignity of this Vest receives, by a great many dirty Wretches going in it to Market to buy a Penny-worth of Anchovies. I do not mean any of those Gentlemen that do it for their Pleasure, by sending home what they like, which is the common Custome of Italy, and many Provinces of France. As the Habit of a Noble Venetian attracts a Respect to them that wear it, so it reduces them to such a Servitude to the Nobility, that except∣ing those who are by their Employs oblig'd to wear the Vest, few of the Citizens are found willing to put it on; for in the most of those Families that have several Children, they give it him that is least capacitated for any other Bu∣siness, and which is only to preserve to the Fa∣mily the Honour of having the Vest. The com∣mon People, Strangers, and all other Persons are no ways obliged to shew any particular Re∣spect upon meeting any of the Nobility in the Streets, and by the Liberty of the Country their Gentlemen do not expect to be saluted by them, but if any of those wearing the Vest, who are not Noble Venetians, should pass by them with∣out making their profoundest Respects to their Excellencies, of which Venice abounds, they would possibly expose themselves to something more severe than a simple Reprimand. The Young Nobility cannot behold a Citizen in a Vest, without Contempt and some sort of Envy, who are by this means as well clad as themselves; besides, they are sensibly touched to see their Inferiours so perfectly resembling to them; and their Capriciousness hath so far
transported them, which they term, Bel humore, that the Gentlemen of this Illustrious Body have often times forc'd into the Canals those Young Citizens who have according to their Sentiments so much copied upon the Original, and played the Gallants. Of the Venetian Ladies. ALL Ladies, whither Citizens, or Stran∣gers, that are of a Condition, above the Plebeians, assume at Venice the Quality of Gen∣tledonna; yet only the Wives and Daughters of the Noble Venetians, can properly be cal∣led Gentledonna's, and Patricie Venete. They are for the most part large of Stature, Majestick, High and Disdainful in appearance; for I am perswaded that in private they want neither Sweetness nor Complaisance; they on∣ly seem to be of this Humour, as not having that Air of Quality which the Ladies of other Countries have, by living more sociably, and less retired from the Commerce of the World. Their way of living is so particular and reser∣ved, that it is not altogether exempt of Brutish∣ness; they never, or very rarely visit each other, and if they happen to meet any where, they do not converse together, unless they are very particular Friends; and even this only hap∣pens among them that have established a parti∣cular Society, In the main they are continually at home and Undress'd, excepting on Holidays, and some other Publick Solemnities of the Church, at which these Ladies do usually ap∣pear,
at least they whose Husbands (are less Jealous, and more Affable than a great many o∣thers) have so much Complaisance as to permit them to go to Church, which is one of the greatest Diversions they enjoy, and they stay there as long as they can, before they return: Yet there are those who allow their Wives no farther Liberty than to perform their Devotions in the nearest Church to them. Some carry this excess of Jealousie to a higher degree, who without any scruple make their own Houses their Wives Prisons, from whence they are ne∣ver permitted to stir. Of six or seven Hundred Ladies of Venice, there are not above fifty or sixty that appear at Church at a time, or any where Publickly. But upon any general Rejoycing (or at the Marriage of a Person of the first Quality, upon which oc∣casions the Ladies are usually invited, as they were to a splendid Ball at an Academy about two Years since) upon this occasion there appear'd a mighty Number, among which few could be said to be either beautiful, or agreeable, but e∣specially the last of these Charms was general∣ly wanting. There are several of those that are allowed by their Husbands to appear abroad, who are Agreeable, Gentile, and very Hand∣some: However they are strangely Accoutred through the great desire they have to follow the French Fashions; for they always run be∣yond the Rules of the Mode, by the ill Judg∣ment of their lamentable Taylors. In former Years they Dress'd themselves with great Bunches of Ribbans on each Shoul∣der;
and when the Men left off those Knots of Ribans, for large Tufts of Silver and Gold, the Ladies did the same, wearing great Knots of that Work upon their Shoulders, and Tossels at their Girdles tagg'd with great Points. As the Old and Deform'd love to spruce themselves no less than the Young; so they Curl, Powder, and cover themselves to that degree with Ribans so ill suited to their Age and Complexions, that in reality one cannot see a more extraordinary Figure, than one of these antiquated Ladies u∣sually make. In coming from France to Venice, one finds so great a difference between the Air of these Ladies, and those of France, as one would not believe that the Eyes should ever be able to Fancy them. But having seen the other Parts of Italy, one soon acknowledges that the Venetian Ladies appear very well, and if the Severity that is observed upon their account, did not re∣strain them, they would always appear in that Magnificence they are sometimes seen when they are permitted to shew themselves in their Pearls and Jewels. Next to their fine Points, and magnificent Gowns of Gold or Silver Tissue, they have no∣thing that does adorn them more, or better be∣comes them, than the Flowers they wear, espe∣cially those on their Heads; they have an ex∣traordinary Fancy in disposing of them in their large Commodes: As these Flowers have an ad∣mirable good effect in their Dresses, so they have of them for all the several Seasons of the Year. It is the most agreeable Present that a
Lover can make to his Mistress, and he in return takes it for a most peculiar Favour to have that Flower bestowed upon him, that hath had the preference of the rest, by having been worn in the middle of her Bosom, which they ever have very much exposed to view. When a Lady goes into the Church, she moves very slowly; her Gown is very long and large, training upon the Ground. The use of Pages or Footmen, being utterly unknown at Venice, she is forc'd to choose her own Place, which she does with the greatest Air of Haughtiness, dispossessing both Citizen and Gentleman, without shewing any Demonstration of Civility for the Place she takes from either: As their Parents, when they are Children, nor their Husbands after they are Married do much regard, if they can make the Reverence customary with other Ladies; so there are very few that know how to acquit themselves of it, when they are indispensably obliged to receive the Salute, or to return the Civility to any Person of great Consideration; they are then out of Countenance; for they per∣form that Civility by three several Motions, bending the Knees, lifting up the Belly, and nodding the Head to each Gesture, all which is done with Eyes and an Air that sufficiently ex∣plain the Confusion they are under. The Venetian Ladies are attended to the Church, by as many Waiting-Women as they have, who do not stir one step from their Mi∣stresses, for they usually stand in the greatest Crowds both before and behind their Ladies, not a little proud to wait upon Persons of that
Quality: Nothing can be more inconvenient than these Troops of Waiting-Women, in such great Crowds; yet the Nobility are no ways backward in Civility to them, by reason of the good Offices they are able to do them, but more especially to those that wait upon the more beautiful Ladies. These Waiting-Women, part of whom being hired only for Days of Ceremony, are all clad in Gowns of black Serge, and great Taffeta Scarfs; they are usually so familiar with their Ladies, that Strangers do wonder, not without reason, to see them upon their Knees leaning a∣gainst their Ladies, but such ought to know that these Women are all the Company they have at home, with whom they pass their time in working of Point de Venise, and consequently are fallen into the Custom of Laughing and Talking familiarly with them. The Unmarried Ladies, never see the Light in Publick, but through a great Veil of fine white Gause, which comes down before to the bottom of their Gowns, the two corners are tied with Knots of Ribbans that hang just above the Ground. This Veil being thus cast over them, covers their Arms and Face, which they sometimes remove with their Hands, yet only so far as is requisite to see be∣fore them. In this manner the Young Ladies of Quality go to Church upon Holy-days, and as for other occasions of going abroad; they are Strangers to them. This Veil hath something of Majesty in it, and becomes them very well that do not cover
their Faces with it. The Young Ladies of Qua∣lity that design to be Religious, wear it in that manner some time before they renounce the World; the same Veil is the usual Dress of the City Ladies. The Courtisans are forbid the Use of it, however they sometimes wear it to coun∣terfeit the Honest Women, and deceive. Stran∣gers: The Venetian Ladies wear it sometimes en deshabillee, especially when they are perform∣ing their Devotions: I remember some Emi∣nent Preachers exhorted them to the Use of it, at least in the Time of Passion Week, during which they frequently go to the Sermons that are Preach'd upon that extraordinary Occa∣sion. The Reports of those prodigious high Shooes or Pattins, that the Venetian Ladies wore not long since are really true; for the Daughters of the last Doge Dominica Contarini, were the first that freed themselves from this intolerable Fashi∣on. Some of them were at least two Foot high; so that they seem'd like the Statue of Colossus rather than Women, as not being able to set one Foot before the other, without the help of two Wo∣men to lean upon. It is much to be supposed that the Policy of the Husbands introduced this Fashion, with which they are said to be very well pleased; for an Ambassadour discour∣sing lately with the same Doge, and some of his Counsellours at the Assembly of the Palace, before they went to the Chappel, fell upon the Use of these extravagant Engines designedly, al∣ledging, That these little Shooes were undoubt∣edly much more Commodious; to which one of the Councellors replied with an Austere
Meen, and twice repeated it, They are indeed too Commodious, Pur tropo Commodi, pur tropi. How the Noble Venetians wait upon the Ladies. THE Young Nobility have usually no other Business than to go, if they think fit, upon Sundays and Holy-days, to the Great Council, as also to appear at the Broglio, if they have any Parties to make; the rest of their time is a great Burthen to them, which they commonly spend in serving of the Ladies, for so they call their way of making Love: It is however but of late Days that the Nobility have applied themselves to Court the Ladies, formerly they only frequented the Courtisans, among whom they diverted themselves with less trouble. I do not know if the contrary proceeds from the Ladies having more liberty than they were formerly allowed; or that the Fair Sex is be∣come less severe, or probably the Nobles may have judg'd it more advantagious to make their Addresses to the Gentledonna's, than continually to frequent the Society of the Publick Courti∣sans: However it is, there is scarce, at present, a Gentleman of Venice, Married, or Unmarried, that does not most diligently engage himself to the Service of some Lady, and who does not seek all Opportunities of seeing her in Publick, for he cannot expect to have free access to her Habitation, or to see her without danger, but at
the time of some Publick Diversion; or possi∣bly in private, when the Correspondence is set∣led, and no more to be done than to take proper Opportunities for the execution of their De∣signs; but the frequent Masquerades are the most assured and most favourable Junctures that our Lovers meet with at Venice. Notwithstanding the severe Restraint of the Ladies Gentledonna, and the many Precautions of their Husbands, and their Brothers in Law, who are sure to be their most diligent Observers; as likewise the Vigilancy of the Servants, who are here strictly required to watch all the Mo∣tions of a Wife, whose Husband suspects her Conduct; it is most certain notwithstanding all these and many other Precautions, that Persons of Quality ever find some opportunity of making their Passion known. A Lady in this Condi∣tion, cannot choose but resent the Capricious∣ness of a Husband, or the Reservedness of her Parents, which deprive her of the small Liber∣ties that the Custom of the Country permits to People of her Quality, and consequently endea∣vours to have a faithful Waiting-Woman, or some other Affectionate Servant, who out of Compassion, Friendship, or Interest, becomes en∣gag'd to her Service, although at the Peril of their Lives. When a Gentleman designs to serve one of those Ladies, that go freely to the Course, the Church, and the Parloirs of the Nuns, he then begins to shew himself very Assidu∣ous at all those Places, he is sure to be seen by her as she comes and goes out of her Gondo∣lo; he pursues her with his Eyes, and places
himself at some distance, where in that silent Language he acquaints her with his Passion, which no Body perceives besides her self; this great Assiduity, and the Language of the Eyes, are the only Means a Lover hath at first to ex∣plain himself: As this manner of Conversation is not unknown to the Italian Ladies, so they are not long in comprehending the Meaning of it. The Gentleman then endeavours to know if his Service be acceptable to her, by making several Signs in observing of her, as raising up of his Hair, putting his Hand to his Face, or taking out his Handkerchief; and if the Lady answers to these particular Expressions by a Motion of the same Nature, he is no more to question her good In∣tentions, for without any other Declaration, the Intelligence is established between the Lo∣vers. Those that address themselves to Ladies of a more easie Access, and who are us'd to Gallan∣tries of this Nature, make use of a less tedious Method; but when they are indispensably o∣blig'd to observe all these Measures, the first thing which the Galant does after he hath hopes of Success, must be to gain the Wait∣ing-Woman, whom the Lady dextrously distin∣guishes to him from the rest by affecting to Talk with her in Publick. There is nothing that a Venetian Gentleman will not do in these Occa∣sions, he immediately applies himself to her Father, Mother, her Friends, or Relations, whom he obliges either through Fear, or Affe∣ction, to bring him to speak with the Woman. But to engage this Creature to advance his Inte∣rests with her Lady, he mingles his Presents
with Threats and Embraces; but they are eas'd of this trouble when the Lady finds her self in∣clined to the Gallant; for in those Occasions she is never backward in making the necessary Ad∣vances to her Woman. If the fear of danger to which these Waiting-Women expose themselves by rendering Servi∣ces of this Nature to the Wives of those Hus∣bands that do not understand Rallery, should absolutely engage them to refuse the Mediati∣on. He must then take other Measures, he forces the poor Creature to quit the Service of her Lady, and as they are wonderfully adapted to all the Contrivances of Address in this Affair; so they are sure to introduce some other, whose Services will be more effectual, whereby it of∣tentimes happens through the violent proceed∣ing of some of these Gentlemen, who make it a Point of Honour to surmount the most diffi∣cult Obstacles, that not only the poor Waiting-Women are necessitated to render the Services desired of them, but even the Ladies themselves find it necessary to have a forc'd Complaisance for these Dangerous Lovers. After the Gallant hath established the secret Commerce with his Mistress, he is sure to be punctually informed of all the Places this Lady designs to visit, which are usually the Churches, and the Parloirs of the Nuns, where the Noble never fails of paying his Attendance; and that he may be more likely to succeed, he endea∣vours by all manner of ways to render the Reli∣gious Nun the Friend of his Mistress, Advocate to his Suit; for at Venice it is no Novelty to find those retired from the World, perfectly di∣sposed
to enter into the Confidence of such Lo∣vers; by this means Letters pass securely, the Flowers and other Presents are made, which the most quick-sighted Husband can never dis∣cern. As it is nevertheless impossible for a Noble to serve his Lady, without the Knowledge of his Gondoliers, who are the perpetual Witnesses of his private Transactions, so he makes them to settle a Friendship with those of the Lady; from this Intelligence, which is confirmed by some little Interest, the Gentleman receives all the Instructions, Lights and Services that can possibly be desired from these sort of People, who are extremely faithful to the Nobility in such Junctures; provided they are none of those Gondoliers which Jealous Husbands have plac'd with their Wives, particularly to inform them of all their Proceedings, and even what Gondo∣lo's seem most to follow them at the Course, and all other Places. When our Lovers do not meet with those Obstacles that are not to be surmounted with∣out much difficulty, they are not long before they find the means of seeing each other by se∣veral different Methods. This is the great Em∣ployment not only of the Young Nobilty, but likewise of such as are Married; yet what is most to be admired, is that the Jealousie which every where else makes Rivals bcome the Mor∣tal Enemies of each other, oftentimes produ∣cing the most Tragical Effects, seems here to be of no force, and intirely to have lost her Sting; for here at most she operates only by an indiffe∣rent Hatred, which in all other Places, is carried
to the height of Resentment. But the Genius of this People does not engage them to prosecute that Method of Revenge which is too frequent with the Nobility of other Countries; besides, the Republick gives her utmost Endeavours to impose Silence to their Disputes, and to take up all Quarrels at their first breaking out: More∣over these Gentlemen choose rather to reserve their Revenge for the next Balloting, than to enter into the Lists of Danger upon Subjects of Gallantry. Be it Wisdom, Policy, or Moderation in Matter of Love, as indeed it may be so thought by the short continuance of it, these things do not in reality proceed to that height they might: Moreover, as there is no handsome Lady that is not followed by several Lovers, so these Gen∣tlemen are not of a Humour to be treated with Contempt or Partiality; for there is nothing more certain, than that the desire of receiving some Favours from their Mistresses, is a more probable reason for these Proceedings, than any real Love they have to them, which is plain by the Revolutions incident to these Matters, as likewise by the Liberty they afterwards take of publishing the Favours they have received, which must seem to any Impartial Person to be a con∣vincing Demonstration of the Vanity of their Passion. However great that the Danger is which the Ladies expose themselves to, by correspond∣ing with the Desires of the Nobles, seeing the Example of such as have been Poisoned by their Jealous Husbands, are not to be struck out of their Memories, yet they are not always a∣ble
to resist the Assiduities of a Courtship, that in some measure amounts to a great Inconveni∣ence; or at least they would, by continuing Obstinate, be comeexposed to as imminent Dan∣gers. In short, Can one have a more lively In∣stance of the Truth of this Matter, than those Methods which some Noble Gentlemen pursue to attain their Desires, who make it no scruple to take the Advantage of a Lady's Secret Cor∣respondence, and thereby either induce or force her to admit of their Addresses, unless she ra∣ther chooses to expose her self to the certain loss both of Life and Reputation? Of the Marriages of the Noble Venetians. SAbellin reports, That the Ancient Custom of Venice, was to set up their Daughters by way of Auction, who were delivered to them that offered most: This Custom was very Ad∣vantagious to the Beautiful, their Charms pro∣cur'd them many Purchasers, who endeavour'd to out-bid each other by offering very considera∣ble Sums for the Preference: And that the less Handsome might not remain Unmarried, they wisely applied Part of that Money they recei∣ved for the Beautiful, to pass off those now mentioned, to whom Nature had not been suf∣ficiently liberal of her Graces, to acquire them Lovers without any other Consideration. But this Custom, it seems, did not continue after the Establishment of the Republick; and if at present we observe something singular in their
Marriages, it is the Method which is yet some∣times practised among the Nobility. Can any thing in reality be more extraordinary, than to have two People of one Town, and of a like Condition, enter into the Bands of Wed∣lock, without ever seeing one the other? This is nevertheless so free from Fiction, that in the time I was Writing these Observations, a Mar∣riage was concluded between a Gentleman that bears one of the greatest Names of Venice, who after the Ratification of the Marriage Articles, was yet near upon a Month without knowing what sort of a Lady he had Married; for ac∣cording to Ancient Custom, after all Matters are agreed upon, the Young Gentleman is to make Love for some time, A la mode de Venise, by passing to and again under the Windows of the Lady, at some certain Hours in the Even∣ing; and the Fair One then appears at the Win∣dow both to shew her Self, and to have a full View of him. The Gentleman I am speaking of, by what he had heard, knew very well that he was not to expect much Beauty with his Lady: Insomuch that the first time he began to perform this Ce∣remony in his Gondolo, he perceived among se∣veral others at the Window, a Face very far from being agreeable; upon which he acknow∣ledg'd, That if she was the Lady designed him, Patience was to be his Support, for he could not have any thing worse: Yet it seems this Home∣ly Person was posted there, that his Spouse might afterwards be less disagreeable to him; for when he knew that it was not her who had appear'd so horrible in his Eyes, he thought
there was reason sufficient to be contented. The Person whom this Gentleman intrusted with the Discovery, and the Progress he every Day made in the Course of his Amours, did her self assure me of the truth of these particular Circumstan∣ces, which seemed to me not altogether un∣worthy of being mentioned in this Place. The same Customs restrains the Engag'd Spouse from waiting upon his future Wife, un∣til he carries her the Necklace of Pearl, which he is oblig'd to give her; these first Meetings of Persons that never did see each other before, have frequently given occasion to such extrava∣gant Eruptions, that one can hardly conceive a∣ny thing like them: This generally proceeds from the Solitary Lives of the Ladies, or pro∣bably from the Company of their aukward Wait∣ing-Women, with whom they perpetually con∣verse for want of better Society; insomuch that the Uncouthness of their Natures are rarely po∣lished either by Education, or good Company. I remember one, who in this juncture thinking the Gentleman at first sight that was to be her Husband, very ugly; cried out, without min∣cing the Matter; O what an Ugly Face is there! How, am I to spend all my Days with thee? Cer∣tainly I shall take care what I do: O che bruto Muso! Mi ho di star centi? Ohito. She was not the first that in these Occasions made this sort of Compliment to her Husband; nevertheless these Ladies who are so fierce at first, do no sooner enjoy the Liberty of seeing the World, which the Quality of Wife then allows them, but they immediately change that Conduct for Engagements infinitely more agree∣able:
I mean by shewing themselves rather than seeing the World; for the greatest part only ap∣pear to be seen, without ever enjoying the ad∣vantages of Visits and Conversation, which re∣ctify the Mind, and mightily help to correct the Imperfections of the Body. Although there are many Brothers in a Fami∣ly, yet seldome above one of the whole num∣ber Marries; to the end they may preserve their Riches intire; and he that enters into this Engagement, is seldome the most hopeful of all the Brothers, or the more like to attain the principal Dignity of the State; whether the o∣thers consider the troubles attendant to Families as obstacles that must divert their Application from Publick Affairs, in which they place their greatest Honour and most important Advan∣tages, or that they find sufficient Pleasures in those unrestrain'd Lives they lead, which they esteem amply equal to the Pleasures of Matri∣mony, is not to be determin'd by me: But most certain it is, that they are very willing to charge the Care of the Family, upon him they judge most proper to perpetuate the Name of the House. This Custom has been the occasion of that Scandal which is so ready to every Body's Tongue, as believing, That the method of Ve∣nice is for one Brother to Marry for the con∣venience of all the others: I can affirm, this is not said without some Reason. Yet it would be of very little purpose to search out any in∣stances of this matter. For all such as know the Disposition of the Venetian Nobility, will easily agree, That those Persons who make the
Debauchees to pass for acts of Gallantry, are not to be credited in their Opinions, unless their Sentiments seem sufficiently strenuous to make us submit our Faith in favour of what can at most, be but barely believed. A Gentleman said one Day to a Woman of Intrigue, upon the ac∣count of a Gentledonna famous at Venice for her extraordinary Beauty, That it must be a great satisfaction to serve a Lady of so much Merit She replied without Hesitation, There was no∣thing to be done; Perra la gha quatro cognai in case, for that there were Four Brothers in Law at home with her. The Nobility is permitted by the Laws of the Republick, to Ally themselves to the Families of Citizens, to Marry the Daughters of the Glass-makers of Murano, as likewise of those who Work in Rich Silks of Gold and Silver-Tissue; by reason they do enjoy, as has been al∣ready observ'd, the Privilege of Citizens: In this manner the Repuhick gives the Decaying Families frequent opportunities of Re-establish∣ing their Fortunes, by Marrying those Women where want of Quality is recompens'd in the great Summs they bring to their Husbands: Be∣sides, they do not only render the Citizens more Affectionate by these Alliances which unite them in Blood, and common Interest to the No∣bility; but likewise in Honouring these Pro∣fessions, they make their Commerce Flourish, and the City Famous in Foreign Countries; so the Repullick does hereby continue to preserve the greatest Advantage emaining to them, which is their Reputation. If a Gentleman Marries any other Person, the
Issue is deem'd Ignoble; the Order they observe is so exact and rigorous in avoiding of all Abuses of this Nature, That a Noble of the First Or∣der would not be excus'd, if he does not with∣in the time limited by the Law, which is only a few Days to those Residing at Venice, appear before one of the Avogadors with two Witnesses, to affirm, That this Gentleman has had by such a Person his Wife, according to common Fame, a Child call'd by such a Name. After this Formality the Avogador Records it upon the Golden Book: Without which, however Legi∣timate the Child of a Noble may be, having all other requisite Marks of Lawful Extraction, yet it will not be esteem'd for Noble Venetian. He will be debarr'd from entring into the Great Council, until he is Re-invested with the neces∣sary Qualities, which is not be done without so much Difficulty, Trouble and Expence, that there are even at this Day several Branches of the Nobility of the First Order, who are reduc'd to the Order of Citizens, by their Childrens be∣ing ommitted to be inserted into the Golden Book within the Terms limited. Of Religious Women. AS I have engag'd my self to say something of the way of Living of all sorts of Peo∣ple, so I must not pass by the Nuns unmention'd. I acknowledge this matter to be not less Ample than Curious, yet I am perswaded that all is not to be Credited which is commonly said upon this Subject; neither would it be handsome for any one to Write all he knows, after having attain'd
a particular famialiarity with the Transactions of some Monasteries- Of Four and thirty Convents of Nuns at Ve∣nice, above half of them Live according to the Rules of other Places. Of those Monasteries whose Rules do not oblige them to a Life so much retir'd from the World, there are Seven or Eight particularly which admit only the Ve∣netian Gentledonna's; the others are fill'd with Persons of different Qualities. As the Convents in which the Nuns are Gen∣tledonna's, do esteem themselves infinitely above the others; so there are likewise a much greater number of brisk Ladies, handsome and very agre∣able, withal extremely delighted in the familiari∣ty they maintain with the Town. The other Mo∣nasteries not being in that Consideration, which a Nobility without mixture acquires to the first; nevertheless are never without having some pro∣fess'd Gentledonna's and Citadine's, who are no ways inferior to the former: It is a difficult mat∣ter to meet with any of the Young Religious in either of these Convents, who will not as to her own particular ingeniously own, That she is purely become engag'd to that Life, through the Obedience she had to her Parents desire, or from being plac'd there from her very Childhood; in∣somuch that if one entertains them with the Thoughts of coming out, they commonly make their Answer, Magari, that is, very willingly, if it were possible. Upon telling these Religious they are under Vows which oblige to a quite different Life from that of the World; many of them will say, They know not what the Nature of a Vow is:
And ask you, If their Hearts could be capable of forming such real Intentions, at the time they were forc'd to shew their Compliance? Some en∣deavours being us'd to perswade one of these Nuns, That by Virtue of the Habit she wore, she was engag'd to a Course of Life directly oppo∣site to what she observ'd. Very well, says she, I wear this Habit here because my Friends will give me no others; but if I could have those that are made after the variety of the fashion, I would more readily wear them than these I have on. When one considers according to the true sen∣timents of Religion, the Irregular Lives of most of these Nuns, I must confefs the Disorder seems strangely deplorable; but on the other Hand, by regarding these Persons as Ladies of Quality who never had a Vocation to the Condition they are in, and that do not prefer the Convent to the Houses of their Friends out of any other rea∣son, than for the Liberty they enjoy there, as being permitted to see whomsoever they please; it may be alledg'd, That they are not to be so severely Censur'd, as other Women in Religion that might chance to lead the same Course of Life. Moreover such as establish any Commerce with them, esteem them for a sort of Young Women whose Parents do rather choose to throw into these Places, than to be their Guardians in the World; for here they are sure to spend their Lives with much more Discretion, than possibly they might in any other Condition: This Conjecture banishes all difficulties that might be made against Courting of them, so they likewise are no ways offended in hearing themselves agreeably Complimented, and to en∣tertain
that familiariny with the World, which in most other Places is only us'd by such as are par∣ticularly engag'd to it. No People are so well acquainted with Pri∣vate Matters, or the Gallantries of particular Persons, as they really are. There are scarce a∣ny Amorous Intrigues, wherein they have not some share, or to which are not at least Confi∣dents, for upon this Topick of secrecy they place their principal Point of Honour and even to administer their best Offices and more effectu∣al Endeavours, between the Gentlemen of their particular Acquaintance and such Ladies as are either their Relations, or their intimate Friends. As they frequently present their Friends of both sorts with variety of Presents, Flowers and those sort of things, so by the means of these Presents, our Lovers convey their Letters and Tokens to the Ladies without giving any manner of Su∣spicion. Those Nuns who have Brothers keeping Courtisans, do rarely miss taking the opportu∣nity of the Masquerades in the Carneval to bring these disguis'd Young Women to their Parloirs, where they take much Pleasure in entertaining them with the Advantages they have of posses∣sing the Friendships of their Brothers, they Re∣gale and Caress them with Tenderness, even so far as to call them their Sisters. One ought not to be much surpriz'd at this proceeding, for e∣ven those Nuns who are Exemplary for their good Lives, and whose Conduct is free of all reproach; yet having made some sort of intima∣cy with Gentlemen that are Strangers, they do expect to be inform'd of their Gallantries, and if
these Gentlemen own an Affection to any par∣ticular Lady, they earnestly desire the sight of her, to whom they express all the Civilities imaginable; and shew by their little Presents the esteem they have for the Gentleman, whose tenderest Affections they have acquir'd. No Places are more frequented than the Par∣loirs of these Nuns; notwithstanding the severity of the Magistrates against these Monasteries, yet the Nobbes that frequent them, are not to be kept from making their continual Visits. As there is not a Pretty Young Nun that has not variety of Gallants, so all the vigilance and pre∣cautions of the Lady-Abbess, serve only to make these Young Creatures more Ingenious in finding of Expedients to try their Lovers. I do remember upon this occasion, That an Old Aunt chiding her Niece for having answer'd to the Assiduties of an Enamour'd Noble, who stood a great while in the Church to observe her at the Grate of the Choir, where she often appear'd, because she was not permitted the liberty of the Parloir as she desir'd; was only answer'd, That it was the least thing she cou'd do, to avoid being thought Uncivil and Ingrateful to a Gentleman that Honour'd her with his Service. One of the things most inconvenient to the Religious is the openness of their Parloirs, that is, there are several Grates in one, or several Rooms into which all People go without at∣tending the coming away of Company there be∣fore them. But when they hear how we Con∣verse in France with the Nuns in separate Par∣loirs, they do acknowledge, That such Conve∣niencies would be extremely agreeeble to their
Humours. In Carnaval-time, the Parloirs are the Rendevous of the Masque, and the more they are Buffoon and Ridiculous, the better they are re∣ceiv'd. The Young Gentlemen make it their endeavours to Disguise themselves as extrava∣gantly as possibly they can, and then go from Convent to Convent diverting of the Nuns with a Thousand pleasant Cajoleries. The Lady-Ab∣besses sometimes appear, to get both the Masques and the Religious to retire; but as these go away of one side, so they return again on the other; in the mean while the Masques Play their Tricks, which oftentimes makes the Abbess Laugh, and forces her to retire with the Flock. Upon the last Days of Carnaval, one sees at the Grate of some of these Monasteries, seve∣ral of the Religious disguis'd in the Dress of the Fashion; some I have seen in Mens Cloaths, with Feathers in their Hats, and playing the Gallant in amplest order. I knew a Noble Ve∣netian that had so great an Engagement for a Beautiful Religious, That when he went to see her he took his Place in the Parloir as soon as it it was opened in the Morning, where he re∣main'd with his Head against the Grate without ever stirring until the entrance of the Night, and without either Eating or Drinking, unless a Bisquet, or some such thing which the Nun might chance to get him. But to maintain a Conversation of this length the Lady-Abbess must be deceiv'd, by the diligent watching of her Friend or principal Confident, who are ever ready to render their Friends the like Services in such Junctures.
The greatest part of these Nuns go no oftner to the Choir than they think fit, they Rise and go to Bed when they please, frequently enter∣taining each other with what their Acquaintance send them, which oftentimes amount to entire Meals and Collations; that their industrious Friends get pass'd into the Convent. By this it seems as if the Inclosure only distinguish'd them from People in the World. Notwithstanding the Scandal which this may occasion, and the Stories that are told of some Nuns, who have had the Curiosity to see the Opera, and that they found the means of doing it: Yet I am apt to beleive that these are Untruths, and that the other Liberties they enjoy, which are of small Consequence at Venice, have been the occasion of saying more than the Truth in this matter. One can see nothing more singular or a∣greable, than the Habits of Five or Six several Orders of Nuns at Venice; for instead of Vail, Fillet and Biggin, they have only a Forehead∣cloth of fine white pleated Gause, somewhat like those that are in France worn upon Mournings; with a little Biggin of fine pleated Linnen that covers the Top and Hind-part of the Head, rhe two Ends of which meet under the Throat, their Hair comes out behind, which is Cut so as to fall about the upper part of their Necks; they have their Hair on the Forehead usually Curl'd, and oftentimes Enamel'd Buckles in their Ears for Pendants. In most of the Monasteries their Habits are of white Camblet, and their Bodies are stiffened, a sort of fine black Crape is sow'd round about the upper part of their Bodies; this is brought
straight down before for the advantage of the Shape, which is likewise no small Grace to the Neck, that is almost wholly expos'd to the Eye. The Necks of their Shifts are of the finest Lin∣nen and ruffled at Bottom, they come only a little below the Elbow, where being ty'd with Ribbans they have the appearance of Ruffles. As these Ladies are extremely Neat in their Linnen, the gayest of them being never without Flo∣wers, which they fasten before them, or in their Bosoms; so it must be acknowledged that no∣thing can be of a more agreeable effect to the Eye. Of the Liberty of Venice. I Do not pretend to speak of the Original Li∣berty of Venice, for those who are desirous to inform themselves farther than what is mention'd in the Beginning of the Second Part of this Treatise, may find that Matter in other Works examin'd to the Bottom: I only Design to say something of that Liberty which is at Venice so much in every one's Mouth, even from the meanest of the People to the first of the Se∣nators; Somo a Venetia, We are in a place of Li∣berty. Which is frequently the Answer for the Incivility of the one, and the Insolence of the other sort, who are oftentimes wanting in the Respect they ought to have for some Persons, al∣tho' they are not Noble Venetians. For the Peo∣ple think when they have done what becomes them in this matter to the Nobility, that they are not oblig'd to have a Deference to any others whoever they are.
I should be mightily embarrass'd if I were to give an exact Definition of the Liberty of Ve∣nice; for it does not only comprehend the Free Condition of all the Subjects of the Republick, especially for the People of Venice to follow without restraint whatsoever may contribute to their Pleasures, provided they are not incompa∣tible with the Publick Good; but likewise this very Liberty comprehends in those occasions where the Authority of the Government is not prejudic'd, an intire exemption from Punishment, the deficiency of that Respect which is due from Inferiors to Superiors. True, it seems to me that this Liberty of Venice is properly a Politi∣cal Libertinism, advantageous to the Republick, convenient to the Nobility, and agreable to the People; who are not sensible that this Liberty which they pretend to have above those People that are under a Monarchy, is in reality but a vain Chimera. What has been already said, sufficiently shews their manner of Living, as also what are the prin∣cipal Occupations and Inclinations of the Vene∣tian Nobility. Therefore in the remaining Part of this Treatise, I will endeavour to give a live∣ly Draught of the real Genius of this People; yet not so as to enter into the particular Con∣duct of all sorts of Conditions; believing that upon this Subject of the Venetian Liberty, e∣nough may be said in general, to shew in what manner they Live at Venice, and how every one may Regulate himself by the Dictates of his own Fancy. Upon Observing of the Religious we shall meet with those Irregularities of Conduct that
are no where else to be found, and the Reason of it is, because they cannot expect to escape so esialy as at Venice: Besides as to the Court of Rome no Prince is so much engag'd in Interest, to assure himself of the Religious, by the means of a Liberty that takes from them the Esteem of the People, and consequently brings them into a more absolute Dependance than can be ac∣complish'd by a Soveraign Authority: That the greatest part of the Ecclesiasticks are only Ex∣emplary for the Scandal they occasion to their Orders. And as they are generally, of the mean∣est Extraction; so there are very few Houses of the Nobility, where one of these Priests do not Execute divers different Employs; moreover, it is very rare to hear of an unfortunate Acci∣dent and a Priest not concern'd in the Business. It is not to be deny'd, but that there are many Curates of an Irreproachable Life, who are with∣out Dispute sufficiently qualify'd to procure some Moderation in these Publick Disorders, if the Evil was not Originally without Remedy: However when the Reformation of Manners de∣pends only upon the Pastors, it is much to be suppos'd, That for one who shall have the Zeal and Abilities necessary to perform it, there will be many whose Engagements lying directly op∣posite to the Application of their Duties, will make but a very indifferent progress in any Works of this Nature. The Liberty of Venice makes every thing Authentick, for whatsoever the Life is, or Religion one Professes, provided, you do not Talk, or Attempt any thing against the State, or the Nobility, one may be sure to Live unmolested, for no Body will go about to
Censure their Conduct, or to oppose the Dis∣orders of their Neighbours. If any tender-conscienc'd Persons should be desirous to remove a Courtisan out of their House or Neighbourhood; they would not be a∣ble to accomplish it without alledging some Rea∣sons besides the Scandal and bad Example of it; for they take so little notice of things of this Nature, that it is nothing extraordinary to see a Noble Venetian Living in the First Story of a House and a Courtisan in the Second, or pos∣sibly this may be some Place of Publick Business, which the Noble no ways esteems as inconveni∣ent to him: Herein consists the reality of this Liberty of Venice; yet nothing renders the Sub∣jection of this People more easy, than to see there is no Diversions at Venice, which is not in common between them and the Nobility; for they mingle themselves with those of that Illu∣strious Body at all Ceremonies, and other Pub∣lick Rejoycings without any manner of constraint; and these Gentlemen of their sides require no sort of external Respect from them, which Po∣licy produces all the good Effects that can pos∣sibly be expected from such a Conduct. If we consider the Country-People, we shall find them sensible of this Liberty; for besides their being in a manner almost exempt from Im∣positions, and free of all Military Quarterings: yet they do moreover find the Government of the Republick extremely easy, by reason their Po∣destates being only for a short continuance, and their Administration ever liable to a Retrospe∣ction, detains them mightily from making the People uneasy; therefore the Conduct they ob∣serve
is so much to the contrary, That they ra∣ther affect the most Popular manner, and even to allow free Access to their Palaces whensoe∣ver they please, which strangely gains their Af∣fections: They behold also with much Pleasure the Nobility of Terra Firma that are so very proud of their Quality, to be not only treated with the same measure that is us'd to them; but even worse, for those Gentlemen rarely meet with less severity than the Senate thinks it intirely their Interest to diminish their Power; insomuch the People of the Provinces and those of the City are equally possess'd, That they cannot be more Happy than they are under the Government of this Republick. This Famous Liberty draws Strangers hither in Multitudes, where the Pleasure and Diversions of the Place as sure empty their Pockets. Sove∣raign Princes and other Persons of the greatest Quality are frequently there; for that conve∣nient Custom of being Incognito joined to the Charms of the Venetian Liberty do mutually engage them to purchase their Pleasures at ex∣traordinary Rates. The late Duke of Savoy un∣cer the Name of Marquess de Salluces, was there a considerable time, in which he con∣sum'd mighty considerable Summs: The Duke of Mantua makes several Journeys hither in the Pleasant Season of the Year, besides which he never misses a Carnaval; but he Lives in such a manner at Venice, as it plainly appears he does not much apply himself to what ought to be in∣separable to the Rank and Dignity of a Sove∣raign Prince. The Princes of Brunswick had a Furnished
Palace at Venice before the War, in which they usually pass'd the Winter: It is affirm'd, That in the time of Fifteen or Sixteen Years, they spent at least Twelve Millions of Crowns, and that the Banker who made these Remittances got at least Five hundred thousand Livres for his own share, with which he afterwards Purchas'd the Dignity of Noble Venetian; and these are the Principal Franchises of this so much boasted Liberty. Of the Courtisans. MAny of those who know Rome and Venice, are at a loss which of these two Cities is the most Libertine, and most plentifully serv'd with Courtisans. For my one part I am certain nothing can be equal to what is Practised at Venice, both as to the great number of Persons and the ample liberty which every one takes without the fear of being troubled for it. To say the truth, the Character of Courtisan ac∣cording to the Sentiments of the People, does something diminish the Credit of them that profess it, yet on the other side this Character is so far advantagious as it acquires to them a con∣sideration proportionable to the Quality of those that frequent them: And as there is not a Cour∣tisan who does not shelter her self under the name and protection of some Noble Venetian, which they sometimes do at an extraordinary Price; so this renders them respected by the meaner People, who Envy more their good For∣tune, than they have Aversion to the Trade they Profess.
Two hundred and fifty four Years since Venice being destitute of Courtisans, the Republick was oblig'd to procure and encourage the coming in of Foreign Women. Doglioni that writ the Re∣markable Transactions of Venice, does here much amplify the Wisdom of the Republick, who by this means provided against the frequent At∣tempts, that were daily made upon the Persons of many Modest Women; for even the most Sacred Places could not be esteem'd as assur'd Sanctuaries, and in which the Chastity of the Women were out of all danger. Therefore as the Republick seem'd to believe that the Sea-Air render'd this Disorder habitual and without re∣medy, so they judg'd it necessary to provide a∣gainst those bad effects in permitting the use of Courtisans, as likewise by establishing an Order, whereby they might contribute to the mutual Support of each other. The Conduct of all these Bonny Lasses was committed to the direction of an Honourable Matron, to whom was deposited the Profits they made by their Calling, who every Month distributed the Sums she thought necessary for them, allowing each of them proportionable to the Merits of what she earn'd. This prudent Conduct has so well establish'd the Courtisans, that the Republick need not fear Venice will e∣ver want them for the future. All the Streets and Canals are abundantly supplied with these sort of Ladies; who commonly stand at their Windows and Balconies set out with a mighty profusion of Ribbans, where they expose their best Charms to excite the Inclinations of all passing by them; butas they have the Reputa∣tation
of being the Handsomest of all Italy, so they have that also of bestowing those Presents which are not soon to be forgotten. The Daughters of the Common People a∣mong whom there are a great many Pretty Creatures, are the Nursery that stocks the Cour∣tisans: For the Young Nobility Living in Idle∣ness, place their greatest Diversions in finding out those from among these Young Women that are most agreeable to their Fancies; endeavour∣ing by Perswasions, Promises and Money to in∣duce them to deliver up what is desired of them. The Gentlemen that are able to pay for their Pleasures choose the Handsomest of them, whom they endeavour to have at Eight or Ten Years Old: These are carefully elevated as Fruits which they Design to pluck, when at the height of Perfection. But as most of these poor Creatures do at length find themselves betrayed in their Hopes, are at last reduc'd to take up the Pro∣fession of Publick Courtisans A Gentleman thinks himself no ways ungrate∣ful to a Person that has treated him with the last Complaisance, if he associates to their Commerce some substantial Merchant that con∣tributes handsomly to her Maintenance, and his Equivalent is Pay'd in the Protection he gives her. Thus they divide between them the Days of the Week, alternatively enjoying their Plea∣sures without any mixture of Jealousy. But these Gentlewomen most commonly grow wea∣ry of the Constraint they are oblig'd to Live in, being much Delighted to be Courted by others, as Persons of Merit; that so they may make a better Hand of their Favours, or possibly be∣coming
sensible of some new Tenderness trespass upon the Friendship of those that Maintain'd them: So they are not only Abandon'd, but like∣wise see themselves strip'd at once by the No∣ble of whatsoever might contribute to their fu∣ture Establishment. When a Young Woman goes privately from her Parents to yield her self up to the Lover, she is esteem'd very fortunate if the Gentle∣man or Citizen that Debauch'd her, makes some small Provision for her Maintenance. The whole consists in some Poor Lodging that he Hires hung with Gilt Leather, a few Cloaths, and a small Weekly Allowance. This is the Fortune of these Young Women, who are yet Envy'd by all others of their Condition. From whence it happens that although one hears e∣very Day of those Rapes; yet being with the Consent of the Women, they are thought no ways Criminal, so it is only call'd Menar via una puta: Such of the Young Wives as are not sa∣tisfy'd with their Husbands, or that love their Diversions, are sometimes seen to do the same thing. Notwithstanding the Avagadors are the Judges of these Disorders; yet it is very dif∣ficult for the Parents or Husbands to obtain Judi∣ciary Satisfaction, when a Noble is at the bot∣tom of it. To speak the Truth, there rarely happens a∣ny Prosecution upon these Matters; for of Ten Young Creatures that engage into this Conditi∣on, Nine of them are Prostituted by their Mo∣thers or Aunts, who may receive One or Two hundred Ducats as the Price of their Childrens Virginity, which they say, is to Marry them
after the time of the Agreement is expir'd. I was once by chance at a Treaty of this Nature. A Foreign Gentleman of my Acquaintance had been sometime Bargaining for a Young Woman; the Aunt at last brought her to him, but he de∣ferring to give a positive Answer; alledging, That the Young Woman was not as then suf∣ficiently Furnished, nor her Neck come to the Perfection he desired: The Aunt told him plain¦ly, That he was not to make any farther scruples-about the business; for the Father Preacher of one of the First Convents of Venice, which she Nam'd was in Treaty for her, and had already made very Considerable Offers. As this Libertinism cannot be particular to the Nobility only, without infusing the Conta∣gion into all other Conditions; so it comes to pass, That all Citazens, Tradesmen and Stran∣gers have (in regard of their Pleasures) full Liberty at Venice to do what they please; yet they are to avoid all such Places which the Ve∣netian Gentry reserve to themselves; for by do∣ing otherwise they might chance to be made sensible of that Intrusion: But the Nobles agree very well among themselves as to the matter of Keeping, for if Two of them are not able to Maintain a Woman they like, which Society is term'd Farcasa, than each of them brings in his Friend to the Partnership, that so they may render the Charge more easie. I have known Three Gentlemen in Treaty about a Woman for a Year together, before they could settle the Conditions of the Bargain; yet what is more Ex∣traordinary, one of these Nobles was Marry'd to a Gentledonna of one of the best Houses of
Venice, and is likewise one of the Richest of all the new Created Houses: However he Associ∣ated himself to the others, which looks as if he did expect to find those Pleasures more agreeable being divided than in particular. Their whole Society usually consists in these sorts of Extravgancies. They meet at the Cour∣tisans, where they Divert themselves by all manner of means; pretending, That by Living thus in Common, they have no reason to be jealous, and consequently enjoy their Pleasures with less inquietude: But as it is difficult for such a Licentious Voluptuousness to be con∣tented with one sort of Excess; so it is not hard to believe those who affirm, That the Courtisans are employ'd to such Infamous uses, that notwithstanding all the Charms of Ensna∣ring by their extraordinary Laciviousness such as frequent them; yet it is impossible but that so much Lewdness must create in most the grea∣test of Aversions. Where there is so much Disorder and such a general Corruption, it is not to be admir'd that the Distemper which usually follows this Vice should be generally spread; I do not say, only a∣mong the Courtisans, who are almost all infected with it, but likewise among the Marry'd Wo∣men, of which number I must less except the Gentledonna's than the Wives of the Common∣alty: The reason of it is, the Young Nobility and the Marry'd Nobles being equally addicted to this excessive Lewdness; so they must necessarily share among them the Trouble which this Disorder produces. As the one makes no scruple in communicating to their Ladies what they have
acquir'd by their Ungenerous Proceedings, so the others pay the Favours they receive from their Mistresses with Presents of the same na∣ture; whereby it happens this Corruption is, in a manner, here Universal. It may be easily imagined from what has been said, That there is scarce a City in Europe, where this Distemper is so common. I am cer∣tain by my own particular knowledge that se∣veral New-marry'd Gentledonna's mistaking this Distemper for Indispositions usual to Women, have been reduc'd to a most Deplorable Condi∣tion without knowing what it was, until the virulency of the Illness, and the nature of the Remedies they took, did at length acquaint them with the truth of their Distemper. The Republick does not think She ought to Rectify these Disorders or stop the progress of so much Libertinism. But on the contrary She esteems it for an Evil that is advantagious to the State, which like a Lethargy stupifies the boil∣ing Blood of their Youth; not only enervating the Vigour of them whose Impetuous Natures might be dangerous, but it likewise empties the Purses of such Strangers, who come in great numbers to Venice for the love of Her Lascivi∣ous Pleasures. Moreover the People being edu∣cated in Softness, are not desirous of any altera∣tions in Government: So the Nobility being in∣tirely addicted to the pursuit of their Pleasures, are not distrusted of meditating Novelties that might be prejudicial to the State, but expect without impatience the Places and Dignities which Age and their Qualities Intitle them to in the Republick.
As there is nothing more certain, That with∣out the particular favour of the Almighty, the Vices of Youth follow Man to the Grave; so it is no wonder if the most Venerable Heads of the Venetian Nobility do continue to observe the same Habitude: They are so little Circum∣spect in things of this nuture, and so extremely open in these Practices; that the Husbands make no difficulty to say, they are to Dine with their Courtisans that Day, and their Wives are to send them what they order to be brought upon such occasions: I shall rather leave it to be imagin'd than to express here, those Base and and Extravagant Artifices that these Reverend Heads use as Incitements to those Pleasures, which the natural weakness of their Ages yet deprive them from tasting. To conclude this Matter at the Place where I begun it, I shall add, That the Condition of a particular Courtisan is so little prejudicial to her Reputation who only Abandons her self to one Person, that if such a Young Woman re∣tires from that Life, and Marries, she is after∣wards esteemed free of all Reproach. In these Hopes several Young Caeatures deliver them∣selves to their Inclinations, but it is rare to see them retire; for their Lewdness join'd to that Liberty which they so much esteem, as being free from the Constraint they were forc'd to un∣der their Parents; are indissoluable Bonds, en∣gaging them to a Profession that is actually Honoured by Daughters of Noble Families.
Of the Publick Diversions of Venice. IF all that has hitherto been said, may be al∣lowed to be a true Idea of the City of Ve∣nice, the Government of the Republick, and the Customs of the Venetians: I am in hopes the Subject I am at present entring upon, will not only give the finishing Touch to this Portrai∣ture, which I have endeavour'd to draw with the greatest Exactness and Resemblance; but I am in hopes it will illustrate the rest, by shew∣ing in their most lively Colours the Wit and Ge∣nius of the Venetians. Therefore as Venice has hitherto appear'd singular in all things, so She will much more, in the nature of her extraor∣dinary Diversions. There are various sorts of Diversions for the several Seasons of the Year. I will say some∣thing of all those that agreeably Divert such Persons as are only at Venice upon the account of their Pleasures: Yet to observe some order in this matter, I will begin with the Carnaval, by describing all the Diversions that render it so Fa∣mous. Afterwards I will speak of those that are perform'd in the Summer, concluding with the Publick Rejoicings which frequently hap∣pen upon many Occasions. Of the Carnaval. THE Carnaval of Venice is so Famous all o∣ver Europe, that those of other Coun∣tries who are desirous to see Venice, wait this Opportunity, at which time this City is usually
full of Strangers of all Nations, but the greatest part of them whom Curiosity brings hither find themselves deceiv'd in their Expectations; for the Beauties of the Carnaval doe not as they imagine consist in the Magnificence of the ma∣ny Publick Shows, or in the Pompous Masque∣rades that are oftentimes seen in several other Parts of Italy. Therefore it is something difficult to say precisely, from whence proceeds that e∣steem which is so generally conceiv'd of the Car∣naval; yet I am perswaded that an infinity of things concur to the rendering of it Famous; particularly the Custom of assuming any sort of Disguise, the great Liberty which all Masques every where enjoy, the inviolable Respect that is shewn them, and the great number of Diver∣sions which are then at Venice. Nothing can be more singular, than to see in a manner all the City in Masquerade, the Mo∣thers carrying in their Arms their little Chil∣dren in Disguise: Such of both Sexes as go to the Market, or to the Haberdashers for Six Pen∣ny-worth of Tape, are sure to be in Masque. The Place of Saint Mark is the great Theater, upon which is to be seen the chief Appearance of the Carnaval; for there is scarce a Masque in Venice that does not come here about an Hour before Sun-set, insomuch that the great Capaci∣ousness of the Place is barely sufficient to receive them and others that come to see them. The Gentledonna's do not only Disguise themselves to partake of the Diversions in the last Days of the Carnaval; but such as have Intrigues do at this time by a Thousand different ways deceive both Husband and Guards: For there is hardly any
or House which is not in a manner open to the Masques; whereby this time of Carnaval seems to be the Season in which the Gallants get in the Harvest of their Amours; for in this juncture are gather'd all the Fruits of those Intrigues that have been in suspence during the other less favou∣rable Seasons. New Correspondences are settled even with the Ladies most narrowly watch'd, by taking the exactest and most probable means for the long Continuance of them. The length of the Carnaval which begins after Christ-mass Holy-Days, is one of the things that contribute most to render it agreeable. 'Tis like∣wise impossible to express what a Consternation there is throughout the whole City, especially of such Persons that wait with impatience the va∣rious Advantages of this Season; when One of the Presidents of the Council of Ten, either through Capriciousness or possibly some other Motives, forbids the use of Masquerade or at least restrains the appearance of them to the last Days of Carnaval only. As this Order takes away the greatest part of the Pleasures of the Season, so it may be said, That it is very rare notwithstanding the frequent threatnings to ac∣complish the Execution of it; especially if some Reason of State do not particularly oblige the Council to it. However they are always per∣mitted to go in Masques to the Banque's, the Opera and Comedy. The Carnaval is likewise the principal Sea∣son of the Courtisans. They Dress themselves very Neatly in their Disguises, in which they appear upon the Place of Saint Mark, where they endeavour to Contract new Familiarities.
Yet a great part of them are Hired or retain'd for the whole time of the Carnaval, seeing he cannot expect to pass for a Man of Gallantry, that has not such a Companion in this time of Diversion, in which it is accounted Honou∣rable to appear with a Lady at the Opera, Play-House, Ball, and all other Places of Diversion. Of the Ridotti or Basset-Banque's. WHen the Evening puts an end to the Di∣versions of the Place of Saint Mark, those of the Ridotti begin; these Places being so call'd where the Venetian Nobility keep an open Bank against all such as are desirous to try their Fortunes at Play. There are several of these Banks at Venice which the Nobility fre∣quent all the Year round; but the Great Ridotti of the Carnaval is in a House near the Place of Saint Mark, to which resorts a great deal of Company when the Diversions of the aforesaid Place are over. They scruple at letting any en∣ter that are not in Masquerade, for that Privi∣lege is reserv'd to the Venetian Nobility. Howe∣ver a counterfeit Beard, Nose, or any other thing that causes an alteration in the Face is sufficient; and such as are not desirous to Play may take it off if they please when they are in. There are a great many Sconces, &c. in a Hall and several other Rooms of the same Floor, round which are plac'd a great many Ta∣bles, to each of which there is a Noble who sits on that side next the Wall to keep the Banque: Before each of them there are Two Candles, several Packs of Cards, a Cup full of Gold-Pieces,
and another of Silver-Ducats. In this manner they sit ready to receive all such as are willing to Play, either Masques or Venetian Gentlemen. The Crowd is so great that very often one can hardly pass from out of one Room into another; nevertheless the Silence here ob∣serv'd is much greater than that in the Churches: Strangers are much surpriz'd at this Spectacle, which is infinitely more admirable for the Sin∣gularity, then diverting in its Pleasures. The Game play'd here is Basset only, which was unknown in France, until Signior Justi∣niani now Ambassador for that Republick very lately brought it into fashion at Paris: Since which it is become so common as to need no Description here; it being only used with this difference at Venice, that neither the Noble who deals, or the Masques that Play do ever ex∣change any Words with each other. The Young Venetian Gentlemen commonly choose rather to Play, than to keep the Banque; but to see in how much Tranquillity and Gravity very Con∣siderable Summs are lost, is really so very Ex∣traordinary; that one would almost think this is a School, to learn the Art of behaving one's self with Moderation in the Alternatives of Fortune, rather than a Place of Diversion and Gaming, A Noble Man very rarely continues to keep the Banque for a whole Carnaval, so the Ta∣bles are successively undertaken by different Gen∣tlemen who are not all equally good Gamesters, for some lose and others get Considerably; but those that love Play and are well acquainted with Venice, do generally know which are the
Nobles that have the Reputation of being the fairest Gamesters: For however equal this Game seems to be, yet there are several Gentlemen so very dextrous in cutting and drawing the Cards, that the most intelligent and quick-sight∣ed Player may be sometimes deceiv'd. As the Person who Plays may heap what Summ he pleases without any exception by the Noble that Deals, so he may leave off after he has acquir'd a considerable Summ, at once or by length of Play, to which the Noble has no other remedy than biting his Fingers and saying to himself, La maledetta Maschara. The Gentledonna's frequently Play at the Ri∣dotti without any other Disguise than that of a Velvet-Visard, whereby such as know them Un∣mask'd have not much trouble to do it here, seeing nothing of their Necks or Shapes are hid∣den: Here are many sorts of Liquors and Ices for the Accommodation of the Ladies; in which there are likewise convenient Places for the Dressing of all sorts of Victuals, that lie expos'd and ready for the Spit, to engage such as wait upon the Ladies at the Opera and Play-House, to divert the remainder of the Evening with the Collation-Pleasures which are usually taken in these Places. Of the Opera. THE invention of Opera's is due to the Ci∣ty of Venice. Although they were for∣merly particularly fine, yet Paris at present surpasses whatever can be seen here of this na∣ture. It was not at first imagin'd that these Compositions could agree with the Genius of
the French Language, which is almost natural to the Italian; and in reality, if it had not been for that able Master who first undertook it, who was no less Lully. Familiar with all the Beau∣ties of the Italian Musick, than with those De∣licacies of the French, if it had not been I say for his great Experience, in making those a∣greeable Compositions which are sung in two such different ways, it may be believed, that this Noble and Magnificent Diversion would not have been attended with that Success which it has since had both at Court and in Town. At Venice they Act in several Opera's at a time: The Theaters are Large and Stately, the Decora∣tions Noble, and the Alterations of them good: But they are very badly Illuminared; the Ma∣chines are sometimes passable and as often ridi∣culous; the number of Actors is very great, they are all very well in Clothes; but their Actions are most commonly disagreeable. These Opera's are long, yet they would divert the Four Hours which they last, if they were compos'd by better Poets, that were a little more conversant with the Rules of the Theater: For in this matter their present Compositions are very deficient, inso∣much they are frequently not worth the Expence that is made upon them. The Ballets or Dan∣cings between the Acts are generally so pittiful, that they would be much better omitted; for one would imagine these Dancers wore Lead in their Shoes, yet the Assembly bestow their Applauses on them, which is meerly for want of having seen better. The Charms of their Voices do make amends
for all imperfections: These Men without Beards have delicate Voices, besides which they are ad∣mirably suitable to the greatness of the Theater. They commonly have the best Women-Singers of all Italy, for to get a famous Girl from Rome or any other Place, they do not scruple at giving Four or Five hundred Pistoles with the Charges of the Journey, and yet their Opera's last no long∣er than the Carnaval. Their Airs are languishing and touching; the whole composition is mingl'd with agreeable Songs, that raise the Attention; the Symphony is mean inspiring rather Melan∣choly than Gaiety: It is compos'd of Lutes, The∣orbos and Harpsicords, yet they keep time to the Voices with the greatest exactness imaginable. If the French have at first some difficulty to understand their Words, the Italians and all o∣ther Strangers have much more trouble in France; where they do not only Sing lower, but pro∣nounce their Words with much less distinction. The great Chorus of Musick that so often fills the French Theater, of which one indeed can hardly distinguish the Words, is very disagree∣able to the Italians, who say, That this is much more proper to the Church than the Stage, as likewise that the great number of Violins spoils the Symphony of the other Musick, which they think can be only agreeable to the French, unless it is when they play alone in other Occasions. Although they allow the French to succeed very well in their Dances, yet they are of the Opinion, that there are too many of them in their Opera's; whose Compositions are likewise too short for their Fancies, which they think are not sufficiently fill'd with Intrigues. Their
Compositions are always concluded with the Character of an Old Woman that gives good Advice to the Young, but falling in Love her self without any probability of a return, she runs into the repetition of a great many pleasant Fancies. They that compose the Musick of the Opera, endeavour to conclude the Scenes of the Princi∣pal Actors with Airs that Charm and Elevate, that so they may acquire the Applause of the Audience, which succeeds so well to their inten∣tions, that one hears nothing but a Thousand Benissimo's together; yet nothing is so remarka∣ble as the pleasant Benedictions and the Ridicu∣lous Wishes of the Gondoliers in the Pit to the Women-Singers, who cry aloud to them, Sias tu benedetta, benedetto el padre che te genero. But these Acclamations are not always within the bounds of Modesty, for those impudent Fellows say whatever they please; as being as∣sur'd to make the Assembly rather Laugh than Angry. Some Gentlemen have shewn themselves so Transported and out of all bounds by the charm∣ing Voices of these Girls, as to bend themselves out of their Boxes, crying, Ah cara! mi Butto, mi Butto, expressing after this manner the Ra∣ptures of Pleasure which these divine Voices cause to them. I need not omit the Priests in this Place, for according to the Example of Rome, they are no ways scrupulous of appearing upon the Stage in all manner of Parts, and by acquiring the Character of a good Actor they commonly get that of an honest Man. I re∣member once, that one of the Spectators dis∣cerning
a Priest in the Disguise of an Old Wo∣man, cry'd aloud, ecco Pre Pierro, che fa'la vecchia. Nevertheless all things pass with more decency at the Opera than at the Comedy, as being most commonly frequented by the better sort of People. One pays Four Livers at the Door, and Two more for a Chair in the Pitt, which amounts to Three Shillings and Six-Pence English, without reckoning the Opera-Book and the Wax-Candle, every one buys; for without them even those of the Country would hardly comprehend any thing of the History, or the subject matter of the Composition. The Gentledonna's frequent the Opera much more than the Comedy, by reason the Diversi∣ons of that place are express'd with more Civi∣lity than those of the other: As they are at this time allowed to dress with their Jewels, so they appear most splendidly by the means of the many lighted Tapers which are in those Boxes. Here their Lovers are employed in the Contem∣plation of their Charms, and they on their side, shew by some Signs that they are pleas'd with the assiduity of their Services: Whenever a new Girl appears to Sing at the Opera, the principal Nobles esteem it a point of Honour to be Ma∣ster of her, and if she Sings well they spare no∣thing that may accomplish the Design of getting her. One of the Cornaro's was upon one of these occasions Rival to the Duke of Mantua, they both endeavour'd to exceed each other in their Presents, yet the Charms of her Voice were not accompanied with all those of Beauty: The Venetian was successful and got the better of the Duke.
The Owners of these admirable Female Sing∣ers Print a great many Songs in praise of 'em, which are scatter'd up and down the Pit and Boxes, when any of 'em acquire the general Ap∣plause of the Audience. Of the Comedy. THE Comedy is only at Venice in Carnaval-time; however, it sometimes begins in the end of October or beginning of November, in which Month one frequently finds here three se∣veral Gangs of Comedians, each infinitely worse than the other. The Theaters in which they Act, belong to the Noble Venetians, as like∣wise those of the Opera's, from whence they receive very considerable Profits; for they let their Boxes at such a certain Price for the whole Car∣naval, or else so much a Day. The Profit of the Actors is only what they receive at the Door, which do's not exceed five Pence each Head. The greatest part of the Audience commonly choose the conveniency of being in Masquerade both at the Comedy and Opera. Their Dress is usual∣ly a Champain-Coat or riding Cloak, a sort of a Bonnet of a black Taffata upon their Heads, which only permits the sight of their Nose and Eyes; over this some add a half Vizour neatly made, and cover'd with fine glaz'd Linnen: Those that wear the Venetian Vest with this Disguise are look'd upon for real Nobles, yet the Nobili∣ty are rarely in Masques, either at the Opera or Comedy; unless they are those that dare not ap∣proach their Mistresses, nor enjoy the satisfaction of such mutual regards, without creating to the
Ladies, both troublesome dangerous Affairs. The young Nobility do not go so much to the Comedy to laugh at the Buffoonry of the Actors, as to play their own ridiculous Parts: They commonly bring Courtesans with them to their Boxes, where there is such a confusion and sometimes such surprizing Accidents, so contrary to the Rules of Decency, which are at least due in all Publick Places, that one must indeed see these Transactions before he can believe them. One of their most ordinary Diversions is not only to spit in the Pit, but likewise to pelt them with Snuffs and ends of Candles, and if they perceive any one decently clad, or with a Feather in his Hat, they are sure to ply him with the best of their en∣deavours, which they may do as being free from all notice or punishment; for the Nobles that are the Protectors of the Theater, have their Bravo's in disguise at the Doors, who are well armed, and ready to obey Orders: Besides the Comedy and Opera are look'd upon as Privilege-places, where the least Violence would be reckon'd a Crime of State. The liberty which they in the Pit take, accor∣ding to the Example of the Nobility, do's finally raise the Confusion to its utmost height. The Gondoliers chiefly do give their impertinent Ap∣plauses to some certain Actions of the Buffoons, that would be tolerated in no other Place; nei∣ther is it seldom that the whole House makes such terrible Exclamations against the Actors, who are not so happy as to please, that they are forced to retire to be succeeded by others; for the continual cry is, fuora buffoni. The Gentlemen find this so agreeable to 'em, that even they them∣selves
are frequently this hissing Party; and if one inquires how it comes to pass, That they are so very prudent and wise at the great Ridotti where they Game, and so extravagantly foolish at the Co∣medy; you are answered, That they sit at the for∣mer Place to take the hazards of Fortune, but that they come hither to divert themselves only; and as Masters, they are pleas'd to do it accor∣ding to the method most agreeable to them. Nothing can equal the Noise which is made when a Play has given satisfaction to the Assem∣bly, or to speak more properly to the Gondoliers; for when they come to name the Play to be Acted the next Day, that Mob cries out questa, questa, play the same again, which must be of course o∣bey'd. Whereby one usually brings away from these pitiful Comedies, the dissatisfaction only of having delay'd Supper until nine or ten at Night; yet they sometimes act such as are very serious. Their Compositions are in Verse, and these they call Opera's, with which they have indifferent good Success. At other times they represent such as would not be tolerated by the Inquisition any where out of the Territories of the State of Ve∣nice; as that of Don Giles, who in the Habit of a Religious, preaches against the Debauchery to which he abandons himself: Yet it is no ways strange that these things pass unregarded, seeing the Nobles suffer themselves to be ridicul'd up∣on the Stage, in the Person of Pantalon, who is a real Copy of them, in Habits, Actions, and Words, which he really imitates with the great∣est exactness.
Of the little Balls or those called Feasts. THere are a great many of these little Balls, during the Carnaval at Venice, which they call Feasts, according to the Custom of Rome; excepting that at Venice the Dancers pay the Musicians: As the Feasts occasion a great Liberty and great Profits to those that make them, so it happens that they are either intirely forbidden, or else such as would have them must have a Permission from the Magistrate. Upon which a House is fitted up to this purpose, a Lanthorn deck't with Garlands is set as the Sign at the Door, where it continues the whole Carnaval. A Violin with a pair of Virginals is the Musick of the Place, which is open to all sorts of People. Their Dancers are usually of two sorts, some∣times according to the French way of Dancing, and sometimes a Figure-Dance, or sort of a Brawl, which the little Girls of Venice perform to admiration. The Master of the House is always present to gather in his Profit, to which purpose the Instru∣ments forbear playing, so soon as the Company has danc'd four or five Rounds, or a Four lane; for so they call this sort of Brawl. The Dancers are thus to pay their Acknowledgments, which is about a half-penny English; the Women and Girls that go to these Feasts are always in Masques, and as they are generally either Cour∣tesans or Women of good Qualifications; so the Noble Venetians take the amplest Liberties of
these Diversions, by endeavouring to pass the Hours pleasantly with the handsome Masques that are sometime there, not much regarding the trouble they give those that brought them thi∣ther. The Master of the House do's accommodate them with convenient Rooms, as are desirous to eat and drink, where it is not to be doubted but things of farther moment are sometimes trans∣acted, all which little matters do amount at last to a considerable Profit. Therefore this was us'd to be formerly a particular Privilege belonging to the Servants of Ambassadors, who kept those sort of Musick-Houses within the Limits of their Masters Jurisdictions: But this shameful Com∣merce appear'd so sordid to the Ambassadors of France, that they first forbid the use of it to their Servants, since which the Example has been follow'd by all others. The Nobles and Citadins have oftentimes those Balls that last only one Night, to which every Man comes with his Courtesan Masqu'd; yet only those Persons that are known are permitted to enter, as it is often∣times practis'd at Rome, where those that fre∣quent these sort of Night-Dances, are wrapt up in their Cloaks, the long Sword under their Arm, and a dark Lanthorn in their Hand. Of the Herculean Exercises and Bull-Feasts. THESE Exercises of Hercules and the Bull-Feasts, are Sports that are Represented in the several Seasons of the Year; but seeing the Carnaval is the chief time for Pleasure and
Sights, so they then endeavour to perform their principal Feats of Activity in these matters. The common People are much delighted with the two last, by reason they are of that Body who shew them to the Publick, but more especi∣ally the Exercises of Hercules, which are per∣form'd by certain Companies of Artisans and Boat-Men, who continually Exercise themselves for it: To which purpose there appears about twenty young Men, upon a great Scaffold rais'd in some publick Place, all of them being clad in close straight Breeches, and little Wastcoats of Brocatelle; to their Garters are fastned some small gingling Bells. The first thing they shew when they mount the Scaffold by an easy Ascent, is one of their most agreeable Actions. Each of them carries one of his Companions upon their Shoulders, in a manner very particular; for they that are car∣ried have only their right Foot upon the Shoul∣der of him that supports them: They incline their Bodies forward, by leaning altogether on the right side; their Arms are stretch'd out, the one up and the other down; in which manner they fol∣low each other, each of them holding the Heel of the left Leg which he stretches out that is carried before them; so they seem to be along Chain of Men in the Air, who only support themselves by their Hands and the ends of their Feet. They afterwards observe a sort of Cadence to their Bells, by making of several Rounds, as like∣wise at Intervals several Figures, which in their mo∣tions and postures are quite different from each other. Sometimes four underneath, having upon their Shoulders the ends of two Poles, carry eight
up an end to the height of five Men, by including a little Boy, that is over upon the Shoulders of the uppermost: Sometimes four of the strongest form an Arch of Bodies, with their Stomacks out∣wards, and so sustain six or seven Men upon the transverse of their Bellies. Others having two Men one above the other, upon the Shoul∣ders, walk about, sit them down and rise with this heavy and tottering Burden. In short, up∣on having represented several strange Figures, by as many different Postures, which do not require a less share of Agility than a most prodigious Strength of Body; they conclude these Diversi∣ons, that are much to the satisfaction of the Spectators, especially to those of the People, who like the ancient Romans, only desire Bread and fine Shews. The People do not flock in less Crowds to the Bull-Feasts, than to the Herculean Agilities. To which purpose they sometimes erect several Scaf∣folds round a great Square, or as often a Rail on∣ly, for their Bulls are not of the more furious sorts. Two Men commonly hold them by their Horns with two long Ropes: After this, they loose their Dogs which fasten with so much fury upon their Ears or their Throats, that they would both lose their Breath and choak themselves; if they were not sometimes dextrously drawn off. This Diversion would be very inconsiderable, if it were not for the pleasant Disorders that some∣times happen by the Bull's breaking loose from them that have hold of the Ropes; for finding him∣self violently pinch'd by the Dogs, he makes use of his utmost force, over-turns some of the Scaf∣folds,
and so brings the whole Company into Confusion. In the same Places they sometimes entertain the Company with the Diversion of Bear-Baiting, which sort of Creatures are particularly kept for the diversions of the People: Not long since a Bear being severely us'd by the Dogs, made a greater effort than could be imagin'd from such a Creature, broke loose from his Stake, and leap'd upon a Scaffold, which caus'd so great a Disor∣der, that several of the Spectators were dange∣rously wounded. They sometimes turn the Bulls through the Streets, but particularly in the Car∣naval-time; which is not only to render the Flesh better, but likewise for the Diversion of the young Nobles, who putting back their Vests take hold of the Ropes, and run after them, guiding through the Streets those poor Creatures to be torn by the Dogs; the narrowness whereof do's sometimes occasion the greatest difficulties to Passengers, that meet them at the end of a Turn∣ing, or are otherwise unexpectedly met by a Bull enrag'd with the Dogs. Of the Ceremony upon Maundy-Thursday. MAundy Thursday is a Day of Publick Re∣joycing, by reason of the Ceremony Jeudigras. which is at this time perform'd upon the Place of St. Mark, in the presence of the Seignory, and the Ambassadors of Princes. This great publick Festival consists in seeing the Head of a Bull cut off, after which they have the Diversion of an ar∣tificial Fire-work, which is but very indifferent; yet what makes it worse, is, its being performed by Day-light. Then come the Rope-Dancers and
Vaulters who show their Agilities upon a Scaffold erected upon the Place over against the Gallery of the Palace in which the Seignory is seated. This Festival derives its Original from the happy Success with which the Arms of the Repu∣blick were attended, in the Wars she formerly had against Ulric Patriarch of Aquilea, in behalf of the Patriarch of Grado: For the irreconcila∣ble Hatred of the former having several times en∣gag'd him to take up Arms against his Competi∣tor; the Republick had as often recourse to their Arms, in defence of the last, who was not so pow∣erful; and having at length taken that Patriarch Prisoner, as he design'd to have secured himself of Grado, which he unexpectedly attack'd, he was with twelve Canons, Prisoners with him, con∣demn'd to have his Head cut off upon the Place of St. Mark; but the Republick, as it was thought, left him to expire between two Walls. In his stead they cut off the Head of a Bull, and twelve Hogs in those of the twelve Canons. To perpetuate the Memory of this Advantage of the Republick, who has ever been very care∣ful in preserving the Memory of all her Victo∣ties; She Solemnizes every Year the Festival of Maundy-Thursday, whose Preparations and Pomp do very much resemble some ridiculous Tragedies. All the Butchers of the City dress themselves very strangely, with all the fine things they are able to borrow, they afterwards appear at the Place of St. Mark, divided into several Companies; but as they are every one of them arm'd with what they think fit, so it is the most extravagant Sight imaginable, to see some with old Halbards, others with great Scymiters, some
with Pikes, and others with old fashion'd Spadons, which they carry naked between both their Hands. When the Seignory comes down into a great Room, that is even with the Galleries of the first Floor of the Palace; this pleasant Militia passes in a Re-view before the Doge and the Am∣bassadors. The variety of their Arms and Habits join'd to the Irregularity of their March, occasi∣ons a Sight the most extraordinary in its nature that I ever yet beheld: For some run, others march gravely; some make their most profound Reverences to the Seignory; and others strutting by without taking notice of them. All this is perform'd with the Sounding of Trumpets that run a Foot at the Head of each Company; in short, this whole Ceremony resembles more some Popular Emotion, than any Publick Rejoicing. From hence they pass to the Piazza, that go's out upon the Place, where they are no sooner arriv'd, but he of the Butchers to whom the Ho∣nour of the Execution is design'd, with one flou∣rish of his Sword strikes off the Head of the Bull, in presence of almost the whole City; the Place, the Palace, the Procuratories, and seve∣ral Scaffolds erected on this occasion, being all full with an infinite number of People, that come hither to see the Ceremony, as likewise to partake of the Diversions that attend it, of which the Fire-works at two in the Afternoon seem the most singular. To all these is usually added that most agreeable Spectacle to the People, of see∣ing a Man fly down a Cord, which is fastned to the Steeple of St. Mark at one end, and the other to the Galley that lyes between the two Columns.
At this time all the City seems to be in a terri∣ble Confusion, which continues the rest of the Week; every one being Jours gras. permitted to wear in his own De∣fence, excepting some Arms, what sort of Wea∣pons he pleases; which is by reason of the great many Bulls that are Baited in several Pla∣ces, and afterwards run through the City. One sees the Populace glittering with Axes, Sabres, naked Swords, great Forks, and Iron-headed Clubs; insomuch that one can hardly believe but that all the City, of which the Shops are shut, must be in some dreadful Sedition; so all such as are any ways apprehensive of Enemies are sure to be upon their Guards, these last tumultuous Days of the Carnaval. Of the Fresque. THE Diversion of the Fresque is not only the first of all those which the pleasant Wea∣ther brings in; but it is likewise the most agree∣able to the Ladies and Gentlemen, as it is also the most singular, and the most surprizing thing that a Stranger can see at Venice; for so they call the Cours, and the Evening-Diversions upon the Waters: It is certain one cannot give it a more proper Name than that of the Fresque, for in the greatest heats of Summer, one is sure to be free from those sultry Heats, and clouds of Dust, that are so troublesom in other Places; on the con∣trary, you are, during those Heats here, sensible of a charming Coolness; for it would be even im∣possible to take this Diversion in any other Sea∣sons than that of the Spring and Summer.
They regularly begin the Fresque upon the second Holy-day of Easter, which continues un∣to Saint Jerom's Day, being one of the last in September. But as the Ladies do not dress them∣selves every Day, by reason most of them live ve∣ry retir'd; so it comes to pass that the Fresque is only us'd upon Sundays and Holy-days, and some particular solemn Days of Churches, which the Gentledonna's frequent, or upon the occasion of any Publick Rejoycings, to which the Ladies are Invited: For during the good Season, all these Diversions are ended with the Fresque, which is taken towards the end of the Great Canal, over against the Church of Saint Jerom, being this Place is less frequented with Barques and other Vessels: Besides, such as are desirous to see this agreeable Diversion, may conveniently see it up∣on one of the two Keys, which are at this Place of an indifferent length upon each side of the Great Canal. They begin to appear at the Fresque, about the three and twentieth hour, that is, a good half hour before Sun-set. The Company comes by degrees, and the Gondoliers shew not their vi∣gour in the beginning, but make an easy way by turning backwards and forwards in the length of eight hundred Paces; but these Men, by insen∣sibly putting on, or the emulation that always reigns amongst them, animates them to excite each the other; it so happens at length, they pass with so much force and swiftness, that it is hard∣ly to be credited; and the Sweat that comes through their Sattin-Doublets, which they who are in Liveries do generally wear, shew plainly
they are not less wet, than if they had been dipt in the Canal. It is not long since this Diversion of the Fresque was introduc'd, or at least brought to what it is at present: For the Gentleman that first establish'd it, do's yet enjoy the satisfaction of his Inventi∣on; who, for having been the Author of this a∣greeable and singular Diversion, do's certainly de∣serve to have his Statue erected in the middle of the Great Canal: Such as are not accustomed to the Gondalos, do not at first relish the Plea∣sures of this Recreation; for when they see this part of the Great Canal, covered with three or four hundred Gondolos, that continually pass by each other, with an inconceivable dexterity and swiftness; their Heads run round, and they ima∣gine they are just upon the point of being crush't in pieces, and inevitably lost. In reality, the Sight of a great many Gondolos, that are work∣ing one way, and just ready to run upon others that steer an opposite course, both of them ma∣king such good use of their Oars, that the Wa∣ter is all in a froth, from the swifness of their mo∣tions; is enough to make one imagine, that either the one or the other must be broke into a thou∣sand Pieces. Yet by the Agility and Experience of these Gon∣doliers (upon which the most timerous repose themselves without fear of Danger) these thin and nimble Boats do pass like Lightning without hurting each other. The worst of it is, one is sometimes a little wet; for the Water being so violently agitated and press'd between two Gon∣dolos holding a different Course, do's frequently fly over so unexpectedly, that it is almost im∣possible
in those occasions to avoid the small in∣conveniency of it: As the Salt-Water is apt to spot any coloured Silks, so the Ladies provide against those Accidents, by turning up their up∣permost Petticoat. They are generally alone, and attended only by one or two Waiting-Women, at most. But those that are particular Friends do oftentimes take this Diversion together, and leave their Women behind them: When there are four of 'em, they place themselves at the Cor∣ners of the Gondolo, regarding each other like speechless Statues; for their principal Employ is to observe the Proceedings of the Gentlemen, who do not miss these Occasions of making a regular Court to their Mistresses. As the Liberty of going to the Fresque, is one of the greatest that Husbands allow to their Wives; so it is one of the most sensible Chagrins for 'em to be debarr'd of it: The Men of Gallantry do not only distinguish themselves by the neatness of their Gondolos and Watermen, but likewise by the small and light Bodies of their Gondolo's, which are purposely made for the Fresque; as likewise by the charge they are at in getting these Gondoliers that are eminent for their great strength and Address: For with this Equipage they follow the Ladies where they please, and at four stroaks, without the least appearance of Design, are always able to come up with the Boats of the Ladies; for all this good management is under∣stood by Signs made to the Gondoliers, who dive so readily into the Intention of their Ma∣sters, that it looks as if hazard only had occasi∣oned those Meetings.
The greatest piece of Malice that can be offer'd to a Rival in these Junctures, is when he keeps up with the Gondolo of the Lady, to open the passage with the Head of one's own Boat, and so pass between them. The Ambassadors go com∣monly Incognito to the Presque, that is, with on∣ly one Gondolo and a Gentleman. Sometimes they appear there in Ceremony with all their Attendance, but then they keep the middle of the Canal, with a slow motion; for at those times their Gondoliers are not to shew the utmost of their Vigour: Nothing is more curious or ad∣mirable, than to observe the dexterity of these Men at the two ends of the Course, where in all the seeming appearance of Confusion, fifteen or twenty Gondolo's shall turn at a time with so much exactness; that notwithstanding their great Lengths, they are seldom or never seen to jostle or run foul of each other. The Courtesans are forbidden to appear at the Fresque, unless it be upon some Day of rejoice∣ing, at which time they are permitted to go in Masques. But all Foreign Gentlemen enjoy herein the same liberty with the Venetian No∣bility. All these frequent Turns with which our enamour'd Gallants endeavour to shew the assi∣duity of their Services, are concluded with the Day; so this Diversion generally lasts about an Hour and half at most; and longer than this time the strongest of the Gondoliers would not be able to bear the fatigue of so violent an Exercise.
Of the Festival of the Churches. THERE would be some reason of Admira∣ration to see the solemn Festivals of the Churches, plac'd among the Publick Diversions; if the Custom of Venice had not converted them into a Recreation, so much pleasing to the Ladies and Gentlemen, as it affords them wherewithal to pass the Day very agreeably: I shall not speak here of the usual Holy-days, nor the Places where the Ladies us'd to hear Mass upon Days of Obli∣gation; as at the A fine Church in Venice. Salute in Summer, at the Carmelites in the Winter, and the Chap∣pel of the Rosary, belonging to the Dominicans, every first Sunday in the Month; in which Places the handsome Ladies seldom miss appearing, and to stay from nine in the Morning until twelve at Noon: For these Occasions are esteem'd as Permissions which they are sure to enjoy: But what I design to say here, is something of those particular Festivals which are Celebrated with Solemnity, and which for the Noble Entertainment of Musick, and the great Concourse of People, are esteem'd as convenient Opportunities for the Nobles and Ladies to see each other twice a Day. The most diverting of these Festivals, are those Monasteries of Religious Nuns, of Saint Lawrence, Saint Daniel, Saint Cosmo de la Ce∣lestia, Saint Katharine, and several others, where those Ladies, especially the Sacristines, are always Employ'd in making of Artificial Nosegays of Gold and Silver-Thread, as like∣wise
of Points de Venise, to which they add some Natural Flowers. They distribute a prodi∣gious Quantity of these to the Nobles and Gentle∣donna's, and to their particular Friends, to whom they are sent, so soon as they come into the Church: And if the Person to whom they pre∣sent the Nosegay, is distinguish'd by some Cha∣racter, then a Priest in Surplice brings it to him, upon a Silver-Plate, with a Compliment from the Nun that sent it. One sometimes sees of these Nosegays that are all Point de Venise, and of a very considerable Value. The Churches are always Magnificently A∣dorn'd, and the Musick is Excellent; yet these are not the Motives which bring hither such a number of Gentledonna's, for whom are plac'd in the Church, a great many Elbow-Chairs, in which they remain from Morning to Noon, like∣wise from after Dinner to the Hour of the Fresco, which always ends the Diversions of these Holy∣days. But as the Ladies talk of one side, and the Gentlemen on the other; so the Crowd and Cla∣mour is generally so great, that these Assemblies shew but a small appearance of Devotion; for e∣ven in time of Service they entertain the Nuns at the Grate of the Choir, who without any diffi∣culty Treat their Friends with Iced Waters and Liquors, especially in the more sultry Season. These Feasts are so frequent in Fine Weather, that they who only endeavour to Divert them∣selves, or that love Musick, may find sufficient Opportunity of passing their Times pleasantly: But those who are not altogether Strangers at Venice, but have some Familiarity with the In∣trigues of particular Nobles and Ladies, may be
wonderfully diverted, by Observing in these Junctures the various Personages of Lovers; as their Regards, their Actions; and all the different ways of assuring the Ladies, they serve with the fervors of an excessive Passion. Of the Dances of the Girls. SUCH as have been delighted in observing the singular and agreeable Manner of the usual Dances of the young Women, will not think it strange to see this reckon'd here, in the Number of the Publick Diversions, which in it self appears so common. Yet seeing this Di∣version do's oftentimes amuse the Venetian No∣bility; as likewise the Ladies, who stop their Gondolos to behold these Dances upon the sides of the Canals; but especially all Strangers, being so mightily pleas'd with it: I have thought it not amiss to speak particularly of this, among the other Diversions of the pleasant Season. Upon all Holy-days, the Daughters of the Com∣mon People assemble in the most spacious Places of the Streets or Keys, but most common∣ly in the little Squares of their Quarters. A∣mong the Common People there being not much less liberty between the Men and the Women, the Boys and the Girls, than is usually practised in France; so these Girls are not always the only Dancers. They are very neatly dress'd, in a Garb not much differing from Ours: They usually have for these Occasions, a coloured Silk or Brocatelle-pair of Bodice, without Sleeves, a Serge-Petti∣coat bound about with a small Galoon, and a
Pair of curious white Shoes; the Sleeves of their Shifts are of an extraordinary fine white Linnen, these are set full and ruffl'd upon the Shoulders; which is no ways less becoming to 'em, than the Flowers they fasten to the Tresses of their Hair, that fall about their Ears. The famous Dancers have commonly a Taffata-Petti∣coat, little Leather-Pumps, lac'd with a small Silver-Lace, and the Soles extremely thin: In this manner they are most commonly dress'd, in which they dance to Admiration. Besides their Activi∣ty and exactness of Time, is no ways less sur∣prizing, than the Exercise is agreeable to the Be∣holders. Their Musick is a Tabor, which is accompa∣nied with the Voice of the Person that beats up∣on it; the Tune is always the same: Sometimes two Girls Dance the Four lane together, and sometimes a Boy and a Girl, who standing for a little while opposite to each other, move their Feet forwards; making all their little Steps with so much ease and swiftness, that although they never have both Feet down at a time; yet it is impossible to distinguish which of the two is either up or down. Afterwards, they cast off on both sides, and then turn round contrary to each other; but so even, and with so much Swift∣ness, that when the Girl pleases, she overthrows the Boy that Dances with her, by only holding her Elbow stiff at the time they pass by one another; this is always taken for a particular Favour, as likewise for a great Mark of Address in the Girl. The Venetian Gentlemen are not only Specta∣tors at these Recreations, by reason of the Pleasures
they afford 'em; but likewise as the most easy Opportunities of being Familiar with these young Lasses, and afterwards to choose from among 'em, such as are agreeable to their Francies: In∣somuch, that these Dancings of the young Wo∣men are a sort of Market, where the Beauty of the Merchandises expos'd, occasions oftentimes such to Purchase, as had no Thoughts of it, un∣till they came thither. The Feast of the Ascension. THE most August Ceremony which is to be seen at Venice, is that of the Doge's E∣spousing the Sea, upon Ascension-Day. All the Seignory, goe from the Palace, according to the Method and Pomp before-mention'd, passing through the mighty Crowds of the People; and Strangers that come out of Curiosity to see 'em Embark upon the Bucentaur, which is brought upon this Occasion, to the Pillars of St. Mark: This extraordinary Vessel is somewhat longer than a Galley, but built very high, without either Yards or Sails: The Company that Work this Vessel are under a Deck, upon which is rais'd an arch'd Room or Cabbin of Wainscot, finely Gilt and Carv'd on the inside: This reaches the whole Length of the Bucentaur, being supported on each side by a great many Figures; as likewise a Third Row that Supports the middle part of the Roof, which forms a sort of a Double Galle∣ry, nobly Gilt and Parquetted, with Seats of all sides, for the conveniency of the Senators assist∣ing at this Ceremony.
The extremity of the Poop, is a Semi-circle, upon which is a small Inclosure, that is raised a∣bout a Foot higher than the other Part. The Doge is here Seated, with the Nuncio and Am∣bassador of France, on his Right and Left. The Councellors of the Seignory, and the Presidents of the Forty Criminals sit below them in the same Order: However, the Bucentaur do's not appear less Magnificent without than within; as being almost every where Gilt: The Carpet that is spread over the whole Length of it, is of flower'd Damask, fring'd with Gold, with Cur∣tains of the same between the Gilt Statues that sustain the Roof. The Great Standard of Saint Mark flying from the Poop, the other Flaggs of Ceremony, the Trumpets and Haut-Boys at the Head, the Majesty of the Senate in Purple, and the great Number of Strangers and others that get in, notwithstanding the Care that is taken to let no Body enter, without particular Leave, do ren∣der this one of the finest Sights that can possibly be seen. When this stately Vessel puts off from the Place of St. Mark, she is Complimented with the Discharge of all the Cannon, and is accom∣panied by the Gallies then at Venice, several Galliots, many Peotes which are long Vessels rich∣ly Adorn'd; as likewise with an infinite number of Gondolo's, that almost cover the Lagune's: By this means this floating Palace, in which are at least five or six hundred Persons, seems to be a Castle, that is Built in the midst of a great many little Houses, or rather a Huge Elephant, en∣compass'd with Herds of Mice. They proceed in this Order to the Mouth of the Lido, and some∣times
a Mile or two into the Sea, which is ever ac∣cording to the goodness of the Weather; for the before-mention'd Admiral, who is call'd The Royal Pilot of the Republick, being answerable for the safe Return of the Seignory, do's take so much care, that they are safe from all manner of Dan∣ger; insomuch that I have seen them Return im∣mediately after their Departure from the Place, upon a thick Cloud that appear'd in the Air. And another time I knew the Ceremony deferr'd, to the Sunday after Ascension-Day, by reason the Weather was a little Windy. When the Bucentaur is come to the Entrance into the Sea, the Musicians begin the Ceremony, with singing of several Compositions that are particular to this Occasion. The Patriarch of Venice, who attends this Ceremony in a great Boat, gives his Blessing to the Sea. Then the Bucentaur comes up with her Poop towards him, at which time the Back of the Chair of the Doge is taken down, who receiving from the Master of the Ceremonies a plain Gold-Ring, of about two Pistoles and a half in Value, Throws it over the Stern into the Sea, after having solemnly and distinctly pronounc'd these Words, Desponsamus te Mare nostrum in signum veri perpetuique Do∣minii: Thus we Espouse thee our Sea, in token of the real and perpetual Dominion which we have over thee. After this, to adorn and beautifie the New Bride, they throw a great many Flowers, and O∣doriferous Herbs into the Sea. This Ceremony has given Occasion to a Witty Expression here, which is, That the Doge by Marrying of the Sea, ought not to take it amiss, if he should be sent to
lye with his Bride. Yet I cannot understand thro' what Piece of Policy, the Honour of the most Illustrious Function at Venice, should happen to be reserved only to the young Nobility: For instead of the Senators of the Pregadi, they send only the Under Pregadi with the Bucentaur, who are those of the Nobles that are admitted into the Senate for their Instruction; as having no o∣ther Rights or power of Voting. But possibly the Republick may imagine, That this Floating Palace cannot be intirely safe from all manner of Accidents; consequently, if the worst shou'd happen, the loss must now be much less conside∣rable to the State. When the Ceremony is over, the Bucentaur Floats up the Lagunes, with the same Atten∣dance, and stops at the Church of St. Nicholas, at the Lido, which stands on the Shoar, towards the City: Here the Patriarch Celebrates High Mass, after which, the Seignory goe into the Bucentaur, and return to the Place of St. Mark, with the Salutations of the Artillery and small Shot of the Castle at the Lido, and the same Compliment's are made 'em, by all the Ships that lye between this and the City of Venice. Of the first Occasion of the Ceremo∣ny that is observ'd upon Ascensi∣on-Day. THEY who imagine, That the Right of Sovereignty, which the Venetians have Acquir'd in the Adriatick Gulf, is deriv'd only from the pretended Donation of Pope Alexander
the III. do undoubtedly deceive themselves, by taking the Acknowledgment of the Power to be the Thing given. I do own, several regard the History of the first Rise of this Ceremony as whol∣ly Fabulous; yet seeing it is reported by several creditable Authors, and moreover, being suff∣ciently warranted, through the Antiquity of the Tradition; these Reasons will be sufficient to en∣gage me not to omit mentioning a thing that would be intirely Opposite to the Design I have undertaken, so shall proceed to Observe here, several of the most Remarkable Circumstances of it. About the Year 1175. Pope Alexander the III. being violently Persecuted by the Emperor Fre∣derick the II. who had set up another, with the help of the Cardinals of his Faction, retir'd pri∣vately to Venice; where, after he had liv'd some time conceal'd, in a House of the Canons Regu∣lar: He was at length discover'd, although in the Habit of a mean Servant. Upon which, the Doge, Sebastian Ziani, went in Ceremony to re∣ceive his Holiness, who was thereupon brought to the Palace, where he receiv'd all the Honours that were due to his Dignity. The Emperor was no sooner inform'd of this Passage, but he sent to acquaint the Venetians, That if they did not abandon this pretended Pope, that they must expect to see the Roman Eagles suddenly flying in the Place of St. Mark. And to accomplish the Menace, he sent his Son Otho to Venice with a mighty Naval Force: But the Generous Doge, to whom Heaven seems to have reserv'd the Glory of the Greatest Actions, that are to be found in the Annals of this Republick, immedi∣ately
set forth thirty Gallies, which he himself Commanded in the Engagement against Otho, De∣feated his Ships, and took him Prisoner. An Advantage of this Importance fill'd the whole Republick with Joy. The Pope went to receive the Victorious Doge, at the Entrance of the Lido, and having Embrac'd him, he presented him with a Ring from his Finger, telling him, That a Sea, Ut omnis Posteritas in∣telligat Ma∣ris possessio∣nem Victoriae jure vestram fuisse. upon which the Venetians were so powerful, ought to be so subject to them as the Wife is to the Husband. However, the Pope not being then able to acknowledge this signal Service of the Republick; he pre∣sented the Doge with the Right of using the Ombrello, the Cushi∣on, and the Golden Chair, the Taper and the Candlestick, that are carried before him, upon particular Days, with the same Solemnity as they are before the Pope: He likewise presented him with the Silver-Trompets, and the above-menti∣ned Standards, which do at present compose all the External Pomp of the Dogal Dignity. Otho was Releas'd upon his Parole, which he gave them to return again, in case he could not engage his Father to make an Honourable Peace; but he return'd with the Emperor, who found Pope Alexander in the Pontifical Garments, up∣on the Steps of the Church of St. Mark; and as the Emperor stoop'd to kiss his Feet, the Pope is said to have put one of them upon his Neck, re∣peating this Verse, Super aspidem & Basiliscum ambulabis. To which the Emperor reply'd, Non tibi sed Petro; and the Pope made Answer, Et
mihi & Petro. As it was upon Ascension-Day, that this Prince acknowledg'd the Pope; so the Republick chose the same Festival to Solemnize the Memory of such an Illustrious Victory; which is an Authentick Title, that confirms to Perpe∣tuity, this Right of Soveraignty, which she has by Arms acquired in the Adriatick Sea. Some Circumstances of this Account may be question'd; but there is no possibility of doubt∣ing of the Protection which Venice afforded to this Sovereign Pontiff, persecuted by Frederick the II. However it be, the Venetians do mighti∣ly Value themselves, upon the Merits of this Action, which they got Inscrib'd with Great Cha∣tacters, in the Royal Hall of the Vatican, as an Eternal Monument of that Important Service which the Republick render'd to the Holy Chair, upon this Occasion. For there is to be read the History of the Victory of the Famous Sebastian Ziani, who left to the Republick, The Glory of having Conquer'd and Humiliated a great Empe∣ror; as also that of Re∣establishing the Pope in the Chair of St. Peter. I cannot but in this admire the Policy of the Republick, who have with such Authentick Marks of Acknowledgment, Entitl'd themselves to a Pu∣blick Right they insist to be due to them in this Hall; where it seems, that so long as the Memo∣ry of so great an Obligation appears upon the Wall; the Holy Chair cannot do otherwise than receive the Ambassadors of the Republick in it, and to use them (as has been hitherto observ'd) with the same Marks of Respect that are shewn to Crown'd Heads. Therefore the Republick was never more sensibly offended, than when Pope
Urban the III. caus'd this Inscription to be struck out, but his Successor had it re-inscrib'd, which gave occasion to this Ingenious Pasquinade; Quod Urbanus inurbaniter deleverat, Inno∣centius innocenter restituit. Of the Feasts of the Doge. AScension-Day is not only one of those Festi∣vals upon which the Doge Entertains the Ambassadors, the Seignory and the Senators assisting at the Function; but it is likewise that which is perform'd with so much more Magnificence, as the Ceremony of the Solemnity upon this Oc∣casion, is infinitely more considerable than the others. These Feasts are made in a Hall of the Palace, that is on the side of the Doge's Ap∣partments. At the bottom of this Hall there is a rais'd Estrade, of about half a Foot high, upon which is plac'd a Demi-Circular Table, that takes up all the breadth of the Hall, except∣ing the necessary Spaces at the end of the two Angles. The Doge takes his Place in the middle, between the Nuncio and the Ambassador of France, the six Councellors of the Seignory, and the three Presidents of the Criminal of Forty, are on the Right and Left; five on one side and four on the other. These Persons take up the Places of this Table, which looks upon six other very large ones, that are down the two sides of the Hall; at which sit in order, on each side of them, they whose Dignities Entitle them to the first Places at these Publick Ceremonies. Then the Seignory, and after them all the Senators take their Pla∣ces,
according to the Seniority of their Stand∣ing. The Tables are before Dinner covered with a Service that remains there the whole time of the Entertainment. Every Body goes to see the Preparations of the Feast; there being upon each Table, Trophies, Great Figures, Triumphal Ar∣ches, and Castles of white Wax Gilt; as also an infinite number of small Dishes of Fruit, Roots, dried Sweet-Meats, Tongues, prepar'd Sau∣sages, Counterfeit Pheasant-Pies, other Birds in Feathers, and other such like things, that are never open'd. The usual Custom is to have twelve Services by two Dishes at a time to each Table, excepting that of the Doge, to which is brought three, that is, one Dish at each end of the Table for the Councellors, and a third for the Doge, and the Ambassadors, which is pla∣ced upon a small Table in the middle of the Hall, a little distant from that where his Serenity sits. Upon Flesh-Days they intermix the Services, as one of Flesh and the next Fish; to which there are so many Carvers as there are Dishes serv'd up to the Table; but he that Carves for the Doge, by one of his Squires, the Portions he cuts in a cover'd Plate; that so there may be a distinction between his Serenity and the Ambassadors, to whom the same Ecuyer presents them uncover'd. The Doge do's ever present the first Plate of the first Service to the Nuncio of the Pope, and the second to the Ambassador of France, honouring in their Persons the Princes they Represent. The Carvers at the other Tables do take care not to help the Senators, until such time as the Doge and the Ministers are Serv'd. At the Entrance of
every one of the Services, the Haut-Boys Play a Tune, and at the Serving up of the Fruit, the Trophies and other Intermisses are taken away, to make Room for the other Dishes of Fruit; among which there is always good store of Roots and Pulse, to wit Pease and Beans in Garlick, and other Rarities of the Season; as, Beans up∣on St. Mark's Day, Figgs and Rasberies upon Ascension Day; but of all things there is never no want of Sweet-Fennel. After the Cloath is taken away at the end of the Dinner, every one is serv'd with a Wicker-Dish, covered with Cut Paper, in which are cer∣tain Pasties of Pistachio's and Pine-Apples, as al∣so some Papers of Sugar-Plums, and dri'd Com∣fits. This is the Present which the Doge makes to the Guests to carry home with 'em. The Nuncio and Ambassador of France never miss doing the same. However, the Entertainment upon Ascension-Day, is not so serious as the three others, that are upon the Days of St. Mark, St. Stephen, and St. Vido; upon which was Dis∣cover'd the Conspiracy of Bayamonte Tiepolo; by reason the Junior Pregadi, or the young No∣bility assisting at this Ceremony, make such a Noise and Confusion, during the Dinner; even to forget, in some measure, the Respect which is due to the Doge, and the Ambassadors; not being asham'd to pelt each other with Oranges, cross the Hall; as likewise to make the Windows clatter with those Salvo's of Sugar-Plums, which every Table gives to each other, at the end of the Dinner. The Old Senators, the Councellors, and the Doge, are much delighted with this Gayety of
the young Nobles, or at least seem to be so in ap∣pearance, as not daring to check 'em upon the ac∣count of their Behaviour. They may sometimes endeavour to excuse 'em, when there are those Persons present, who might happen to be scanda∣liz'd at so much liberty, at which time they palli∣ate the Matter, la nostra giuventa sta allegramente. After Dinner, when all is taken away, and every one serv'd with his Dish of Comfits, the Ser∣vants of the Nuncio and the Ambassador of France, carry away the Services of the little Side-Board-Tables, which were cover'd behind their Masters, where they had all sorts of Wine they are used to drink; lest the alteration of them might any ways prove prejudicial to their Healths. In the mean time several of the most Famous Musicians are brought in, who entertain the As∣sembly, with all the New Opera-Songs, which are accompanied with a Consort of Violins, a Harpsi∣cord, a Theorbo and a Tabour. No one stirs from his Place, until such time as the Doors of the Palace and the Hall are open'd to let in the Foot-Men, that come to receive their Masters Services of Confits, which they carry to their Gondolos. In the time of the late Doge Contarini, they had much reason to be weary of this Entertain∣ment of the Musick: For they were then not us'd to open the Doors of the Palace, until such time as they had got up all the Plate that was em∣ploy'd at the Feast. This Custom was first in∣troduc'd through the extreme Covetousness of the Procurator Contarini, Son of that Doge, who made no difficulty to go about the Hall in a Mask, to see that none of the Plate might be diminish'd, which was brought from the Tables.
Once he detain'd the Company above an Hour more than usual, whom he endeavour'd to divert with several tedious Songs, until such time as he had found a Silver-Plate that was missing. To conclude this Feast upon Ascension with more than usual Rejoycings; they go in the Eve∣ning to enjoy the Fresque upon the Canal of Mu∣rano, where all the Balconies and Windows are full of the best sort of People of Venice. As the Ceremony in the Forenoon, notwithstanding the seriousness of it, was one half compos'd of Peo∣ple in Masques; so one sees at the Fresque of Murano, whatsoever was most Gallant at the Nuptials of the Sea; as, abundance of Boats with Trumpets, and very finely Equipp'd, and a great many Strangers in pretty Barques, as also the Courtesans, who appear here in Masques, but very neatly dress'd in white, and their Gon∣dolo's cover'd with Roses. All these added to the usual concourse of Ladies and Gentlemen, compose this agreeable Diversity of the Fresque of Murano. This Ceremony on the Ascension, is yet more famous, by reason of the Fair that is at this time held upon the Place of St. Mark, for fif∣teen days. That Spot of Ground is quite fill'd with Shops, which are dispos'd in Rows and co∣ver'd with Tents. As the Masques are com∣monly permitted for these fifteen Days, unless forbidden upon some particular Occasion; so you are certain in that time, to find them here in abundance. The Ladies likewise, and all the bet∣ter sort of People never miss being there in the Evenings. All the Diversions and Rarities of Ita∣ly, as Rope-Dancers, Vaulters, Wild Beasts, Mon∣sters,
with an infinity of such sorts of things are then at Venice; which are kept in little Hutts, upon the remaining part of this Place; where∣by this Festival of Ascension seems rather a Carna∣val that draws hither against this time, a great number of Strangers, who agreeably pass away these few Days of the finest Season in the year. Of the Feasts and Ceremonies that are us'd at the Marriages of the Noble Venetians. NEXT to the Diversions usual to the plea∣sant Seasons, I will say something of them, accidentally proceeding from different Occasions: And of these I esteem the dancing Parties of the Nobility, as one of the principal Diversions of Venice. They frequently happen upon divers ac∣counts, but I will here endeavour to describe those that are observ'd at the Marriages of the Nobles, which may at the same time set forth the most remarkable Passages in the Nuptial Ceremonies of the Venetian Nobility. Yet as it is necessary to know in some Degree the particular dispositi∣on of their Houses, before one can comprehend their manner of Dancing; so you will find that they are generally all after the same Fashion. The Entrance is commonly by a long Passage, whose Walls are extremely white, without any other Furniture, than some Benches of a very white Wood, with Backs to support the Body from the Wall: These Benches are painted in various Colours, as likewise the Racks on both sides, which are furnish'd with Pikes and Hal∣bards,
more for the Ornament of them than any other occasion of Defence. The Stairs then re∣ceive you, which lead to another sort of Gallery, that is over the Entry below: This Place takes up the length of the whole House; there are Win∣dows at each of the Ends, from whence you have a Communication to all the Chambers, both on the Right and Left; for they open into each other, whereby you are enabled to make the Tour of the whole House upon a Level, which may be done several ways. The Richer sort of Gentlemen are mightily delighted with Magnificent Furniture, in whose Houses may be seen great Quantities of Velvet on Gold-Grounds, others Imbroider'd, Lac'd and Fring'd with Gold. An abundance of fine Ta∣bles and Looking-Glasses of great Value, but there are no Beds in the Chambers of the first Sto∣ry, which is to leave more Room to the great resort of People that are here upon these Occa∣sions, even in spight of the Guards that are pla∣ced at the Doors, to prevent the confusion and disorder of a Crowd. The Day of Betrothing being appointed, the first Senators, that is, the Procurators of Saint Mark, the great Sages and others that are their Relations (the Nobility and Ladies being usually Invited thither) do assemble in the Gallery above-Stairs. But before they let in the Crowd at the Door, the La Novizza il Novizzo. Noviciate (so they call the New-Married People for the first two years) appears at this Place, in a Brocade of Silver, being led by the usual Master of the Ce∣remonies, who is the Dancing-Master that teaches
the Lady the Dances she is to know, according to the Custom of the Country, upon the Day of her Marriage. This Man wears a long Robe, a short Cloak of Black Damask, and a Collar of the same; so with Hat in Hand, and a grave slow Motion, he leads the Spouse to her Father, where a Vel∣vet-Cushion is laid for the Lady to kneel, who then destres her Father's Blessing. In the same manner, and upon the same Account, he con∣ducts her to her Mother, and the rest of her near Relations, which is observ'd with so much Modesty and Conduct; that it may in reality pass for one of the most extraordinary things that are to be seen at Venice. After this, the Master of the Ceremonies conducts the Lady to the middle of the Gallery, to give her Hand to the Husband, and there to receive the Bene∣diction of the Priest or Bishop that is to perform the Function. Whereupon the Married Couple are permitted to Salute, which they pretend to be the first Favour that the Gentleman receives in Earnest of those he is to have the Night after: At this Instant the young Nobility present, ac∣company the Kiss with a many agreeable Wishes, crying out aloud, Basa, Basa, &c. This Custom of lying together before Marri∣age, is not practised only at Venice; for the same is observ'd almost throughout the whole Ecclesi∣astical State: But it is moreover a particular Privilege of the Nobility, or rather a Custom introduc'd from an ample Power of Marrying without any other notice given of the Banes, than the Declaration which is made in the Great Coun∣cil: For as the Nobles are a separate Body from
the other Members of the State, and the Lords of the Government; so no body but they only of that Body, can pretend to enter into the dis∣cussion of their Interests. After this Ceremony is over, the Violins be∣gin to play, upon which they make an open Space in the middle of the Crowd, where the new-married Lady dances alone, two or three several Courrants, as likewise so many of this Country-Bourreys. However, I believe they think to do them according to the French Fashi∣on; yet it is no less difficult for us to know their Tunes, than the Steps and the Motions of their Bodies seem intirely different from the Liberty and Grace that is Habitual to the French. One must have been Born and Bred at Venice to bestow one's Publick Applauses upon these mean Performances of the poor Ladies, which are moreover very rarely seen to keep time with the Musick; yet they please, and the whole As∣sembly usually cry Ha balato divinamente. When the Ball is thus begun, a young Gen∣tleman of the nearest Relations to the Lady, takes her by the Hand; several others do the same by the rest, or greatest part of the other Gentledonna's; so they walk two and two dis∣coursing from Room to Room, through all the Apartments of the House. There is Musick in all the Places where the Ball passes, but their Tunes are very different, and more proper to In∣spire a desire of sleeping, than that of Mirth; for which reason, without observing either Mea∣sure or Cadence, they only apply themselves to entertain the Person they have by the Hand: For as the Liberty of Conversation is not a Happi∣ness
frequently enjoy'd at Venice; so these Balls are regarded as the most favourable Opportu∣nities of unfolding their Sentiments, where they make the most use of their Time, without any thoughts of Dancing. This manner of Walking continues until Night, by reason there are ever some new Dancers, that are ready to succeed to the first, who seldom leave a Lady that is agreeable to them, until she is either weary, or that they apprehend the two long continuation of it may render their Conduct su∣spected. But the Ladies may well be soon tir'd, the Crowd being commonly so great upon these Occasions, that one must frequently in a manner force their way through it, to pass out of one Chamber into another: Besides, an endless num∣ber of Embarrasments stop them at every turn, but especially their mighty long Trains are none of the least Inconveniencies. The Gentledonna's that are not taken up with Dancing, sit in Elbow-Chairs, that are plac'd round about the Gallery. Such as are not invited to the Feast, appear in their Masques, to the end they may not be ask'd to Dance: And they of the Invited that are not desirous of it, keep their Glove on their Hand; which is allow'd for a sufficient Excuse. And the Nobles that present themselves to the Ladies are not to take the Refusal amiss; for which rea∣son they do not Address themselves to a Lady, unless she be without her Glove, which is an as∣sured Sign that the Lady will not decline the Of∣fer; since, according to the Custom of Venice, it would be a high piece of ill Breeding, for a Lady to give a Gentleman her Hand with the Glove on.
The Pleasures of these Balls are only to the Venetian Nobility; for Strangers and the No∣bles in Masques are not admitted to the liberty of Dancing. However, both the one and the other endeavour to Entertain the Ladies they like, at least they have the satisfaction of taking a full View of them; and if they are in Intrigue with them, they endeavour to make use of the favourable Juncture; which is very rare, by rea∣son they are too narrowly observ'd in these Pla∣ces. Yet during the last hour of the Ball, the Masques are usually permitted to Dance. It is then that our Secret Lovers make the best of the Opportunity; and that they may Entertain their Mistersses with more freedom and less suspicion, they frequently find the means of expeditiously changing their Habits. As there are very few Husbands who are not inquisitive to know with whom their Wives have Danc'd; so there are likewise but few of the Ladies, that are not able to answer the Impertinencies of such frivolous Questions. However, no Body but the Brothers and the nearest of Kin to the Gentledonnas, do assume the liberty of talking familiarly with them, who sit fix'd in their Chairs like so many Statues; all the Gentlemen standing at some little distance from them, while the Masques and the Stran∣gers go through the Rows, considering with much ease the Beauties of the Ladies, as they slowly pass by them: In the mean time they are con∣tinually ply'd with cover'd Crystal-Cups of Sher∣bet, and all sorts of ic'd Waters. The Venetian Gentry and the Strangers have their Shares of these Liquors; but for the Entertainment of the
others, there is a separate Chamber. In this manner these Marriage-Feasts continue, for the space of two Days, that is, from two in the Af∣ternoon, until the Hour of the Fresque in the Evening; and in Winter they Dance by Candle-Light, until it is Supper-time. Of the Regate, or Rowing-Matches of the Gondolo's. WHEN the Republick thinks fit to Enter∣tain a Prince or any Foreigner of Qua∣lity with a Publick Sight, it is usually with the Diversion of the Regate; that is, a Tryal of Skill is appointed between several sorts of Boats. These are the beloved Holy-days, and the Darling-Diversion of Venice; for the Use of the Oar is so much the Genius of the People, that every one in a manner applies himself to it; as like∣wise the greatest part of the young Nobility, not only through the design of shewing their great Strength and Address, but that they may upon cer∣tain Occasions be able to dispense with the Ser∣vice of their Gondoliers, especially in those Trans∣actions that are perform'd best without Witnes∣ses. When a considerable Regate is design'd, there is order'd a certain number of middle and lesser siz'd Gondolo's, with as many Fisolero's, which are so very small and light, that they may be easily carried upon a Man's Shoulders. These Matches are commonly for three of each sort of these Boats, one with four Oars, the other of two, and the the third but one: The diver∣sity
renders the Shew very pleasant, which is yet more, for the greater number of Matches. They who strive for the Regate or Prize, of the Gondolo's, endeavour to chuse them that are the lightest and best Built, from whence they take all the Furniture; even so much as the two Irons at the ends: They Scrape and Tallow her, and sometimes use Soap, to render her way thro' the Water more easy: Yet least these disfurnish'd Boats might chance to open, through the great stress of the Action, they fasten a Rope very strongly from the Head to her Stern; nailing cross her several light Triangular Plates, which mightily preserves her from the Violence of the Agitation. They that have the Management of the other sort of Boats, do use the like necessary Precautions, as likewise to prepare themselves for it, with Exercising their Bodies, and trying their Boats. Nothing can be finer than the Great Canal upon which they Row these Matches. The Bal∣conies and Windows of all the Houses and Pa∣laces, are Adorn'd with rich Carpets and Cushi∣ons and fill'd with mighty numbers of People: The Roofs of the Houses, the Bridge of Rialto, and a prodigious number of Gondolos and Barques on both sides are cover'd with People: In this manner appear'd that Regate, which Cardinal Delfino made not long since for the Cardinal Chi∣gi, notwithstanding he was then at Venice Inco∣gnito. To render this Diversion the finer, several of the Young Nobility set out certain Peotes: These are long Barques, that have a Deck of Planks, upon which are spread Carpets of Damask, or
Turkey-Work, that reach even down to the Wa∣ter. Ten Gondoliers, all clad in the same Live∣ry, have the working of these Vessels, which they ever do standing upright; and the two or three Nobles that are at the Expence of the Boat, lye in Masques upon the Cushions that are at the Head, attended by several Trumpets in the Stern. The great Number, and the variety of the Peotes, are the principal Ornaments of these Sights; which are always made in fair Weather. The Boats that are to Row for the Prizes do meet at that end of the City nearest the Lido, where those that are Equipp'd for the same Match, lye rang'd in a Line, from whence they give way upon the Signal that is made them by the Trumpets. It would be no great Diversion to see the Boats that contend for the Prizes, pass alone with much swiftness; but the Peotes which in a manner fly through the Water, do preceed the rest, to ob∣viate all Embarassments that would be otherwise continually happening. The great number of Four-Oar Gondolos; the multitudes of Boats fol∣lowing them; the perpetual Acclamations of the People, to animate the Contenders in Emulation of each other, and to shew their utmost Strength and Address. All these added together, do certain∣ly make one of the most extraordinary Sights that can possibly be seen. The length of this Course, is from the place before-mention'd, to the end of the Great Canal, where, in the midst of the Wa∣ter, there is a great Pile Erected, round which they are oblig'd to pass, returning with all ima∣ginable Expedition to the Palace; for here the Prizes are distributed to them who first leap into a Boat that is adorn'd and assign'd for this pur∣pose.
Three Prizes are allow'd to each Regate; the first and second are in Money or Plate, but the third is a Pig of two or three Months old, from whence comes the Revilings of the Gondoliers, Terzo di Regate. When the first Match is over, the Peotes re∣turn to the Starting-Place, to set off another, which is perform'd with the same Ceremonies: Yet of all these various Regates, the Boats with four Oars, that pass with most swiftness, are not esteem'd as the pleasantest Sights. Those that are work'd by one Man, whether Gondolos, Boats, or Fisoleros, have something that render them much more extraordinary: For you behold a ro∣bust Gondolier upon the Poop, naked to his mid∣dle, his Head bound, his Face pale and fixed, his Body stooping to the Oar, all his Muscles extended, and his Breast swoln; using his utmost Efforts to get the better of his Adversaries: How∣ever, he is to manage his Strength in such manner as it may last him to the end of the Course, which is about two Miles. As Skill is not less requisite than Strength in all these sorts of Exercises; so it is extremely pleasant to observe these Men take their Advan∣tages, either in avoiding the force of the oppo∣site Stream, and keeping in the very Heart of the Tide, when it is with them: Or directly follow∣ing the Course of the Peotes, which by opening of the Water, do render their way more easy. Their Artifices do sometimes proceed farther, es∣pecially when near each other; for he that has got on Head of the other, seldom fails of cun∣ningly giving his Foot to the Boat of his Adver∣sary, by which means he advances himself, and
throws back the other. Yet the Regates of the Women, which for their singularity, excell all those of the Men; are frequently added to ren∣der the Sight more diverting. For many of the Fisher-mens Wives being us'd to go off with their Husbands, are in a manner no less dex∣trous at this Work than the Men; insomuch that they of two Oars, have oftentimes done very extraordinary Matters in these Occasions. But as the Women have not that Vigour and Boldness, which is necessary in Attempts of this nature; so the Prizes that are bestow'd upon them, are inferiour to those which are design'd for the Men. Of the Entrance's of the Procurators. UPON the Publick Entrance of a New Pro∣curatour of St. Mark, that is, when he goes in Ceremony to Compliment the Doge, and take Possession of his New Dignity, which is perform'd with much Pomp and Shew, to the great Satisfaction of the People in general. These Magnificent Entrances, being to pass through the Mercery; so the Merchants of this Place never fail in adorning those Streets with the greatest variety of Beauty and Riches, by which they en∣deavour to shew the Respect they have to the Person and Family of the Procuratour. The Streets being cover'd over Head, from the Bridge of Rialto to the Place of St. Mark, with great Pieces of White Cloth, do seem to be so many Galleries, adorn'd with fine Pictures, rich Brocards, Cloths of Tissue, the finest Points of Venice, and the richest Laces both of Gold and
Silver: Insomuch this Appearance of so many Rich Things, with which the Merchants endea∣vour to exceed each the other, renders this Shew one of the gallantest and most diverting Specta∣cles that can possibly be seen. During which, you are sure to find a prodigious Concourse of Peo∣ple upon the Place of St. Mark, and the same in the Mercery, where the Ladies do usually take up their Standing, in the Shops of the Mer∣chants. Yet as a Publick Rejoycing, without the Liberty of the Masques, would here be but little satisfactory; so seldom less than one half of the Spectators are sure to be in Disguise; especi∣ally the Women and Courtesans, to the end they may partake of the Joy of these Ceremonies with the less Constraint, as likewise the Pleasures of their farther and more particular Designs. The New Procuratour goes to the Church of St. Salvador, at the Entrance into the Mercery, where he is met by all the Procuratours, Sena∣tors, and such of the Venetian Gentry, as ac∣company him to his Audience. After ha∣ving heard High Mass, which is perform'd in great Solemnity, and with the best of Musick; they go out two and two together. If the Pro∣curatour is a Knight of St. Mark, he wears a Cap of Gold upon his Head: He is led by the Senior Procuratour, in which manner he is fol∣low'd by the rest. These are follow'd by the Nobles, the Friends and Relations of the Procu∣ratour, all in the Ducal Vest of Purple: In which Order they proceed through an incredible Con∣course of People, until he comes to St. Mark's Palace, where he goes up to the College, whose Doors are open, according to the Custom that
is observ'd at the first Audiences of Ambassadors. He likewise is to observe the same Method in three times Saluting of the College, but he takes his Place between the Great Sages, and the last of the three Presidents of the Forty Crimi∣nal, which is the Place that belongs to the Envoys of Princes. After having return'd his Thanks to the Republick, for his Election, and taken the usual Oaths; he goes from thence with the same Attendance, to the New Procuratory's, where he enters into the Possession of his Dignity. If the Finery of the Mercery, the concourse of People, the great number of Masques, that are permitted, even to enter the College, and the Presence of the Nobility assisting at this Ce∣remony, do render this Shew very Noble and Magnificent; the Return of the Procuratour is no ways less Graceful and Stately. He goes in∣to his Gondolo at the Pillars of St. Mark, where he is saluted by the Cannon of the Galley, that always lyes there; and in case there be any more lying ready at Venice, they, upon this Occasion come to an Anchor in the Great Canal; where they hang out all their Streamers and Penants; saluting him with the Discharge of both great and small Shot. In the mean time several other Barques are Mann'd forth, by the Servants and Dependants of the Procuratour's Family, who mingling among the other Boats, incessantly divert them with the Musick of their Trumpets, and the Discharge of their Guns. As the Gondoliers of all the respective Ferries of the City, are oblig'd to set out a Peote of ten Oars, to attend this Solemnity, for which they receive half a Ducat, and a certain quantity
of Bread and Wine, that is distributed to them at the House of the Procuratour: So nothing can be more delightful than the variety of their Barques; for these Gondoliers, being desirous to be distin∣guish'd, disguise themselves very odly: For one Peote seems to be Mann'd by ten Spaniards ridi∣culously dress'd, another by so many hump-Shoul∣der'd Fellows, the third by as many Men in Womens Apparel; and the others according to their particular Humours: Insomuch, that it is al∣most impossible to imagine any thing resembling to this Sight, who continually pass backwards and forwards upon the Great Canal, with perpe∣tual Huzza's to the Procuratuor; as Vivat la ca Grimani, when the Cavalier Giovanni Grimani was rais'd to that Dignity. Yet in case of any Defraud in the distribution of the Bread, the Wine and the Money, as happen'd at a preceding Election; these Huzza's and Acclamations of Joy, are then but feebly repeated; as likewise the whole medly of this Confusion, which com∣poses the principal part of the Feast. So that by this means it sometimes happens, that the Thrif∣tiness of the good Management is visibly appa∣rent, through the whole Course of the Trans∣action. Such a Rejoycing is not ended in one Fore∣noon, but the Diversion is for three Days con∣tinued, by Balls at the House of the New Pro∣curatour; where the great Resort of People, the number of Masques, the Riches of the Furni∣ture, the cooling Liquors, which are not in these Occasions less abounding, than at the Marriages of the Nobility; during which, there are not only Fire-works and Bonfires, before the House
of the Procuratour, but likewise throughout the whole City, before those of his Friends and Re∣lations; which Rejoycings being ever accompa∣nied with the frequent Discharges of Powder-Boxes, render this Feast not less Great and Magnificent, than if the Republick had gain'd some notable Victory over her Enemies. Of their Boxing or Fights at Cuffs. Il Pugni.THE City is divided, as it has been observ'd, into Six several Quarters; three being on this side, and as many on the other side of the Great Canal. Yet the People are divided only into two Factions, each of which has three Wards or Quarters in their Parties. The Castelani are the first, who have that Name from the Quarter of Castelo, in which is the Patriarchal Church at one of the extremities of this City. The others are the Nicoletti's, so call'd from the Church of St. Nicholas, at the farthest end of the Quarter, which has the greatest number of Common People and Fishermen, who are the bravest and those that make the best Sport in these Engage∣ments. So the Party of the Nicoletto's has commonly the Advantage over their Adversaries the Castelans. The Animosity of the People seems so great in these Occasions, which I am at present upon Describing, That one would think a People brought up in these Partialities, and in this manner so strangely divided should never be able to live in that Union and Tranquillity which is ne∣cessary to the preservation of the State. There are among these sorts of People, several Heads of the Factions, who really believe, That
they cannot be esteem'd as Men of Worth, if they engage into the opposite Party. Insomuch that they had rather miss a good Opportunity of pro∣viding for their Daughters, than to marry them to a Man of the contrary Side. These Partiali∣ties are not found to affect the Common People only, but even in some measure to reach the No∣bility, who declare themselves of the Faction of the Quarter they live in; yet with this Diffe∣rence, That they esteem these Boxing-Matches for Diversions, which the meaner People convert into an Affair of Importance and Reputation. And among the rest, even the Strangers are En∣gag'd into the Parties: For such as come to Ve∣nice from Chiosa are esteem'd as Castelans; and those who arrive here by Mestre, or by Fucine, are reputed Nicholettis. There is no doubt but that the Republick can, without much trouble, disperse these Partialities, by continually preventing the two Parties from coming to Blows, as it sometimes happens. But the Senate is of the Opinion, That if the People should form a Conspiracy against the State, or the Nobility, that it would be almost impossible, for two such opposite Factions to u∣nite so far, as to joyn in a Design of this nature: By which means they think themselves secure of one half, or at least to oppose the Designs of the other, by the ready Succours they might expect from the contrary Party: And the rather, by rea∣son that the Castelans esteem themselves for a more civiliz'd People than the Nicoletti's; as also more engag'd to the Nobility, and zealous to the Government: Therefore the Republick do's not only tolerate this Division already reign∣ing
in the People; but they likewise encrease it, by permitting of it to be observ'd, in that man∣ner it is acted. If the Presidents of the Council of Ten, who are the principal Officers of the Civil Govern∣ment, should permit the full Liberty of these Fights to the People, so great is the Animosity, as likewise the desire of acquiring the Reputation of being a Man Che fa ben i pugni. that uses his Fists well, so strong among the Gondo∣liers and Populace; That these Ex∣ercises would not only happen up∣on every Holy-day, as they frequently do upon certain Bridges of the City; but they would undoubtedly become common to the Day, even throughout all the Seasons of the Year. The difficulty which is found in preventing these Fights, when any of the Presidents of the Coun∣cil of Ten are against it; may be admitted as a very good Instance of what is here said. For the Captain of the Sbirri's and his People, are scarce able to get those Orders obey'd, being the Guard that is placed upon Saint Barnaby's Bridge, which is the usual Field of Battel, and do's only prevent them at that Place; for they are sure to seek others more remote, rather than to be depriv'd of the pleasure of Fighting. Such of the Gondoliers as have acquir'd the Reputation of good Boxers, will not hire them∣selves, unless they are permitted, by the Agree∣ment to signalize themselves in these Famous Oc∣casions. Even the little Children, that acciden∣tally meet in the Streets, do demand of each other, who they are for; and if they are of con∣trary Factions, they are certain not to part with∣out
Blows. The Humour runs strangely upon this rough Exercise, for the people do ever stop to behold and encourage them; even to such a degree, that the most general Diversion of this City, is the Sight of the Pugni, as they are practis'd in almost all the Seasons of the Year; being sometimes seen, even when the Ice is in the Canals. The order that I did propose to my self, has not permited me to speak of it in any other Place; so I shall Conclude the De∣scription of the Publick Recreations, with that of these Fights, which are of three different sorts; viz. La Montre, La Frotte, and the Battel-Array. La Montre is that sort of Fight which is per∣form'd Hand to Hand, between two Men, but with very singular Circumstances. The Bridge of St. Barnaby is usually the Theater of these Tragy-Comedies; for this Bridge hath an equal number of Steps on each side, as likewise two Keys, almost of an equal bigness, which is pos∣sessed by the Parties of the two Factions; so that the Advantages in all respects are equal on both sides: Moreover, the Canal is long and directly straight, whose Houses are by this means con∣veniently scituated for the great number of Spectators that flock hither from all Parts of the City, so soon as these Boxing-Matches are known. The Houses and Windows are not only fill'd with them, but likewise the tops of the Houses; the Keys and Neighbouring Bridges are cover'd with 'em, as also the Barques and Gondolo's in the Canal. Yet the particular Matches are not begun un∣til the Godfathers are come to the Bridge. These are two serious and notable Burgers, who have
by their Valour in these sorts of Exercises, rais'd themselves to the Dignity of Arbiters of Victo∣ry, and Judges of the Bravery of the Comba∣tants: These Worthies lay by their Cloaks, and after several Conferences on both sides, for the Regulation of such things as might otherwise oc∣casion a Difference, they go up to the Top of the Bridge, which is built like others; that is, flat about four or five Paces in length, and three or four in breadth, Pav'd with Brick, and rais'd on each side with Free-Stone, but without any Rails, or other Security. These are the Principal Articles of the Fight. 1. They are not to strike their Adversary when they have thrown him upon the Ground, without passing for mean-spirited, and unworthy the Ho∣nour of Fighting; therefore the Judges do imme∣diately part them. 2. That the Victory shall be declared in his be∣half that first draws Blood of his Adversary at the Nose, Mouth, or the Face, which is call'd romper il mustaccio & esser rotte: But as the Combatants are not obliged to open their Mouths, and to shew if those slaps on the Chops have not mov'd the Blood; so it is very ridiculously pleasant to see them keep their Lips close shut, and making Signs to the Judges, that they are not out of Heart, but re∣solv'd to dispute the Victory to their utmost. 3. That in case there is no Blood shed on either side, in the first three Heats, the Combatants shall go off, and make way for others; but they are made to Embrace by the Judges, and so part good Friends. 4. He that throws his Adversary into the Ca∣nal, is to have a double Victory adjudged to him. 5. And Lastly, If one of either Party presents
himself, and none of the other dare to dispute it with him, as it sometimes happens; that this Ad∣vantage shall not be less esteem'd, than if he had Vanquish'd his Rival. So he that meets with this Piece of good Fortune shews himself not a little proud of it; for having some time stood to offer himself, to all that are willing to An∣swer the Challenge, he salutes the Company with a Leg and his Cap, and retires. When Matters are thus order'd, the Endea∣vours are on both Sides equal, to go first up to the Bridge, for to shew themselves the first Be∣ginners of these Exercises, who get immediately free of their Shoes and Wastcoats, and slipping their Shirts down to the Waste, they roll it about them, with the long Sashes which they usually wear. They have a Glove on their Right Hand, to the end the Fist may be the firmer, and their Hair being tuck'd up under their Caps, they place themselves at the two Angles, opposite to the Platform of the Bridge; and the two God∣fathers take their Standings on the other two sides; leaving to them the full Liberty of the Field of Battel. It is no small matter of Admiration to see with what Strength and Fury the stoutest of these Fellows do accompany the Parassalto. Blows they give their Adversaries; the Sound of which may be almost as far heard as seen, which are commonly made at the Face or the small of the Ribbs; insomuch, that some∣times one of them is knock'd down with the first stroke of his Enemy, when it chances to light full upon his Chin or Temple, which lays him as flat as if he were Thunder-Struck. To see them
thus tumble inanimate, and frequently breaking their Heads in the Fall; one would not imagine that it shou'd pass for a trifle, and they recover again. Others are so vigorous and sure of their strokes, which they repeat with so much Dexterity and Agility, without ever coming to closing, or gi∣ving time to their Adversaries to look about them, but quickly oblige them to seek their Safety, by leaping into the Canal; immediately expressing the Joy of so compleat a Victory, with their re∣bounding Capers, which are accompanied by the repeated Huzza's of the People of that Faction. The Venetian Gentry, who are at the Windows on that side of the Bridge with their Party, are usually those who make the most noise, and that shew themseves most affected with these Ad∣vantages; who stretching themselves out of the Windows, flourish their Handkerchiefs in Te∣stimony of the Victory's being on their side; as likewise to animate the remaining Combatants, to an ample Performance of their Parts. However, those Accidents are no sooner over, and the Combatants retir'd to their respective Parties, but their Places are instantly possess'd by two others, who, that they may not lose time, do generally stand ready-stripp'd, and in a Posture of engaging. This usually continues a whole Afternoon, before the Victory becomes determi∣nable; upon which, the Successful have no other Prize, than the Reputation and Glory of their brave Actions, which they are sufficiently careful to perpetuate, even to Posterity. For many of them will have themselves painted in the Posture they are accustomed to Fight, with their Names,
and the Particulars of their mighty Deeds. The latter end of the Day is concluded with reckoning up the Number of Battels won and lost of each side, which is ever very Honoura∣ble to the Superiour Party: But what is most re∣garded, is the number of those that are thrown into the Canal; as being what the Combatants do most endeavour to avoid, after they are come to Closing, by using their utmost Efforts to preserve themselves from the dis-reputation of such an Overthrow; rather chusing the worst of Conse∣quences, from those terrible Falls that sometimes happen to them, by lighting upon the Steps of the Bridge, than to be thrown into the Water, where they meet with no Contusions. But the pleasantest Sight of all, is to behold one of these Fellows thrown over the Bridge, yet hanging by his Adversary's Hair, and the other endeavouring to avoid being drawn into the Water by him, who is most an end finally oblig'd to follow him into the Canal, where the Water parts them; For no sooner are they over the Bridge, and from the Ground, but all Animosities cease; each of them strugling for himself, and they the same good Friends they were before the Fight. La Frotte is an Engagement of several that be∣gins Accidentally, and without Design; but proceeds from the La Frotte. Impatience which the Crowd of Combatants shew, when they are once got to the Rendezvous, and the Judges not come regularly to receive the several Parties, according to the way of the Mon∣tre. The Children being got first up to the Bridge, in imitation of the Men, do commonly begin to Skirmish: The great Boys insensibly ming∣ling
themselves with them, render the Dispute so warm, until at length the Men thinking their Ho∣nours concern'd for to be Masters of the Bridge, do likewise engage in the same Fray. Then is the Fight at the highest pitch, for each Party endeavours their utmost to drive off the Enemy: This Controversy is maintain'd with so much Obstinacy and Heat, that great numbers of them are tumbled into the Canal; who notwithstanding their being cloathed, do seem no more concern'd than if they had fell upon Straw. Such as do not Fight, on these Occasions use their utmost Endeavours to excite their Parties to behave themselves Gallantly. The Venetian Gentlemen encou∣rage the Contenders, by sometimes promising them to Reward their Courage. It has several times hap∣penned, that some of these Nobles have been so zealous for the Reputation of their Factions; that through In∣dignation to those of their Party that have not behav'd themselves to their Minds, they have gone from the Bridge, and stripping themselves of their Vests, have espous'd the Party with the best of their Endeavours; by their Example inspiring Courage to the Vanquish'd, and bringing them off with Victory, or at least by ha∣ving more Honourably contended for it. The Battel-Array is a General Engagement that is made between the two Factions; but with all the ne∣cessary Precautions that can be taken between the Par∣ties, to render the Fight more Equal, that so the Glory may be entire to the Victorious. When Cardinal Chigi was at Venice, Cardinal Delfino that Entertain'd him, was very desirous to have shewn him this Diversion, and was accordingly a considerable time Negotiating with the Heads of both the Parties, to induce them to a ge∣neral and famous Battel. The Difficulties were so great, that the Cardinal in Person sollicited those of the Artisans, that had the greatest Authority in their Facti∣ons: He went to their Shops, caress'd, intreated, and promis'd them to bestow a considerable Prize on the Victorious. Matters were at length agreed on, a Bridge was cho∣sen upon the Key of the Incurables, which is very spa∣cious.
The Steps were made larger that were some∣thing smaller than those on the other side of the Bridge; and certain Places of the Key were taken in with Planks, which otherwise would have permitted more space to the Nicoletti's, than it was possible for the Castelans to have. The Fury of the Combat wholly possess'd the Thoughts of the People, nothing else was discours'd a∣mong them; insomuch that it seem'd as if the entire O∣verthrow of one of the Parties was at hand. But the Pre∣sidents of the Council of Ten, with much reason fearing that this Animosity, which had hitherto never appear'd so great, might be attended with dangerous Conse∣quences; thought it absolutely requisite to forbid the Bat∣tel: So unless these Parties do secretly agree between themselves, there is no general Battel, or Guerra ordinata to be seen; yet when it happens, the greatest part of the Combatants provide themseves with Back and Breast-Pieces of Gilt Pastboard, which they put over their Naked Bodies, both for the finery of the Shew, as also to break the force of their Adversaries Stroaks. The Victory of this Battel, consists in getting Posses∣sion of the Bridge, for which reason it do's not so much depend upon the dint of Blows, as upon the Endeavours of both Parties to drive away their Adversaries. Yet that the Dispute may begin upon equal Terms, the Combatants put themselves in order: The first Ranks are brought close to each other, upon the very Center of the Bridge: Then they begin to break each others Ranks with the greatest Fury; but being well supported, and each side alternatively push'd by the other, such vio∣lent Efforts are usually made, by the great number of Contenders, that they in the first Ranks are of course born from the Ground; or the main Bodies being clo∣ser join'd than the Flanks, those of both the Right and Left sides, are consequently so violently press'd by the Center, as they are sometimes forc'd to leap into the Water, by Ffties and Sixties at a time. In this Condition, only the first Ranks of the two Parties are able to Fight, who are yet oblig'd to hold their Hands up, to have the free Exercise of them: The hindmost are sure to get upon their Companions, and
passing over their Heads go to Attack their Enemies, whose Noses and Faces would undoubtedly suffer, with∣out any Danger to the Assailants; if they of the contrary Party did not take the same Method; insomuch that the Fight of this second Story becomes more terrible than the other: In which Occasions the utmost Endeavours being repeated, with all imaginable Fury, to bring each others Flanks into Disorder; the greatest Confusions hap∣pen; at which time they are born by Crowds into the Canal. Insomuch, that it is really wonderful that these Fights are not terminated with the Death of a great many of the Combatants. Besides, the Heat of their Contention do's so Animate this Multitude of People, and the Indignation of the Inferior Party is so great, that they would undoubtedly betake themselves to their Arms, if the Order was not very exact and rigorous in preventing the Danger of these Accidents. However, it has sometimes happen'd, that the Pavement of the Key has been torn up, to make use of the Stones, for want of other Arms, whereby it is not without some reason that this Fight is call'd by the Venetians, una stragge di Christiani. The Rejoycings of the Victorious are continu'd for three Days after the Fight, for which purpose a Boat is Adorn'd with Garlands, and a great Crown hung in the middle, which they conduct with Beat of Drum, thro' all the Canals and Quarters of their Party; as likewise to the Houses of the Nobles as most espous'd their Cause, who always bestow some Money or Barrels of Wine on them, to Solemnize the Glory of the Victory. By Night they walk up and down with Flambeau's of Straw, fol∣low'd by the Boys, who run after them on the Keys, per∣petually Huzzaing the Name of their Faction. The Vanquished are on the contrary so mortifi'd, as some of them dare not return to their Habitations; for their Wives have sometimes not only refus'd them Entrance, but driven them away; reviling their Cowardize with the most injurious Terms, Via di qua infami, por chi vituperosi. FINIS.
