M522 13720334 101559
XVIII SERMONS ON THE Second Chapter of the 2d Epistle TO THE THESSALONIANS, CONTAINING The Description, Rise, Growth, and Fall, OF ANTICHRIST. With divers Cautions and Arguments to establish Christians against the A∣postacy of the Church of ROME. Very necessary for these Times. By that late Reverend and Learned Divine THOMAS MANTON, D. D. LONDON, Printed by I. D. for I. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Church-Yard; and B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, over against the Royal-Exchange, 1679.
Reader, Doctor Thomas Manton was not so unknown to London, nor is he so much forgotten, as that his Name or Writings should need any of my Commen∣dations. But Booksellers expecting such an office, I have geat reason to be willing to serve thee, in serving the Memorial of such a Friend. What he was I need not tell even strangers, after the Character truly gi∣ven of him by his Friend and mine, in his Funeral Sermon: How sound in Iudgment, against extreams in the Controversies of these Times; a great Lamenter of the scandalou and dividing Mistakes of some Self-conceite Men: How earnestly desirous of the heling of our present Breaches and not unacquain∣ted wih the proper Means and Terms; of which the Author of his Funeral Sermon and I had more than ordinary experience. How hard and successful a Student he was; and how frequent ad laborious a Preacher, and how highly an deservedly esteemed; All
this and more, is commonly here known. The small distaste that some few had of him, I took for part of his Honour, who would not win Reputation with any, by flattering them in their mistakes, or unwarrantable ways. He used not to serve God with that which cost him nothing, nor was of their mind who cannot expect or extol God's Grace, with∣out denying those endeavours of Man to which his necessary Grace exciteth them: He knew that without Christ we could do no∣thing, and yet that by Christ's strengthening us, we can do all things which God hath made necessary to be done by us. He was not of their mind that thought it Derogatory to the Honour of Christ, to praise his Works in the Souls or Lives of any of his Servants, and that it is the honour of his Grace that his justified Ones are Graceless; and that their Iudg should dishonour his own Righte∣ousness, if he make his Disciples more Righte∣ous personally than Scribes and Pharisees, and will say to them, Well done good and faithful Servant, Thou hast been faithful over a few things — enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord. He knew how to regard the Righteousness and Inter∣cession of Christ, with pardon of Sin, and Divine Acceptance, instead of Legal per∣sonal Perfection, without denying either the necessity, or assigned office of our Faith, Repentance, or Evangelical Sincerity, in obeying Him that redeemed and justifieth us: He knew the difference between a Man's be∣ing justified from the charge of being [liable to Damnation, as a Christless impenitent un∣believer and ungodly] and being [liable to Damnation for meer Sin as Sin, against the Law of Innocency, which required of us no less than Personal, Perfect, Perpetual Obedience]. He greatly lamented the wrong which the Truth and Church underwent, from those that neither knew such differences, nor had humility enough to suspect their judg∣ments, nor to forbear reviling those that had not as confused and unsound apprehen∣sions and expressions as themselves. But he hath finished his Course, and is gone before us, and hath left here a dark self-distracting World, and a Church of such
as Christ will perfect; but alas yet lamenta∣bly imperfect, as their Errours, Divisions, Contentions, and Scandals have these thirteen hundred Years too publickly declared: Chil∣dren of the Light we are, while the World is in darkness; but alas, yet how dim and clouded! with thousands it does not so much as convince them of their Ignorance, nor ma∣keth them humbly suspicious of an Erring Iudgment: So that through the copulation of Pride and Ignorance, few cry out so loud of Errour as the Erroneous, or of He∣resie as the Heretical, or of Schism as the Schismatical: And false conceptions are so common among Men, that I think with al∣most all Mankind, the number of false Ap∣prehensions in comparison of the true ones, is far greater than unhumbled Understand∣ings will easily believe; and yet while Man∣kind doth swarm with Errour, those that least know their own, cry down even the toleration of that which alas we cannot Cure: And if a multitude of Errours must not be tolera∣ted, I know not the Person that must be tole∣rated: And who then be they that shall be
the avengers of other Mens mistakes? Christ knew that none are so forward to reproach, and so backward to bear with the Motes in Men's Eyes, as they that have Beams in their own. Among such, what sort of Men on Earth hath more cried down Errour, Heresie, and Schism, than the Papal Tribe, [Away with them, Exterminate them, Burn them] hath long bin their cry, their Laws and Pra∣ctice; little thinking how they are polluted with Errour, Heresie, and Schism them∣selves. The revived attempts of this consu∣ming Fiery Spirit, hath made those that di∣spose of Doctor Manton's Papers, tak these against Popery, as now most seasona∣ble: And their plainness suited to common Capacities, may make them to many, more useful than more Argumentative Disputati∣ons. They that would have such, may see Errours that are unanswerable (I should say, unrefutable, for I find that Men and Women too can answer any thing). I con∣fess my self not throughly studied in these Pro∣phetical parts of the Scriptures, and there∣fore
none of the fittest to commend such Wi∣tings, any further than they commend them∣selves. But I am hasting after this my dear departed▪ Brother to the World of Light, where all Divine Mysteries are unviled, and Life, and Light, and Love, are perfected; for which, even at the Door, I am (though weak) a Believing, and desiring Expe∣ctant. Rich. Baxter. Iuly 8. 1679. An ADVERTISMENT. To prevent false Copies, that may be published in Dr. Manton's Name: These are to give Notice, that nothing is to be received as Genuine, but what shall be Attested under the Hands of Dr. Bates, or Mr. Baxter.
SERMON I. 2 Thess. 2.1, 2. Now we beseech you (Brethren) by the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ, and our gathering together unto him: That you be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, that the day of Christ is at hand. THE former Chapter was spent in a Consolation against troubles, this in a caution against Error, or to rectify their Judgments concerning the time of Christs second coming. In these two first Verses; we have the manner of proposal V. 1. the matter proposed V. 2. 1. The manner of proposal is very pathe∣tical, by way of Adjuration or Obtestation. 2. The matter, an Error had crept in among the Thessalonians, concerning the speedy and immediate coming of Christ to Judgment, while they were yet alive; which error the Devil set on foot to subvert their Faith, and ex∣pose the whole Christian Doctrine to con∣tempt. First, The manner of obtestation falleth
first under our consideration, in which two things are mentioned. 1. The coming of Christ. 2. Their gathering together unto him. Obtestations are by those things which have great reverence and respect with us, as most likely to prevail. Now these two things are mentioned, 1. As weighty, 2 Tim. 4.1. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his appearance and his Kingdom. 2. This was the Article mistaken and per∣verted as to one circumstance, the Time; but the thing is taken for granted, as an unque∣stionable truth, and the support of all their hopes, 2 Thess. 1.10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe. 3. This was a famous Christian Doctrine, with which the Apostles usually began, in plan∣ting Religion in any place, 1 Thess. 5.1, 2, 3. But of the times and the seasons ye have no rea∣son that I write unto you, for ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night, &c. 4. It was of precious account with them, 2 Tim. 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Iudge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing.
So that the obtestation implyeth both the cer∣tainty of their belief, and also their dear ac∣count of this Article of Faith; and therefore the sense is, As you do assuredly expect him, and love, and look, and long for this day, that it may go well with you, and Christ appear to your glory, so be not troubled. 1. Doct. That the coming of Christ to the judgment, is a truth well known, firmly be∣lieved, and earnestly desired by all true Chri∣stians. 2. Doct. That when Christ shall come, all the Saints shall be gathered together unto him. 1. Doct. That the coming of Christ to the judgment, is a truth well known, firmly be∣lieved, and earnestly desired by all the Saints. 1. That it is well known, the Apostle pro∣duceth the testimony of Enoch, Jude 14. Be∣hold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his Saints; David often mentioneth it as a thing delighted in by Believers; therefore in a Po∣etical, or rather Prophetical strain, he calleth upon the Heavens, Earh, Sea, and Fields, to rejoice; before the Lord, for he cometh, for h cometh to judge the Earth; he shall judge the World with Righteousness, and the people with his truth, Psal. 96.13. and again, Psal. 98.10. He calleth upon the Creatures to rejoice; be∣fore the Lord, for he cometh to judge the Earth;
with Righteousness shall he judge the World, and the people with Equity; passages whih relate, not only to the Kingdom of the Messiah, as it is exercised now in the World, but also to his final act of judging, till which time they are not fully verifyed: Solomon bindeth he whole duty of man upon him by his consideration, Eccles. 12.13, 14. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his Com∣mandements, for this is the whole duty of man; for God shall bring every work into Iudgment, with every secret thing; whether it be good, or whether it be evil: And the Apostles, when they went abroad to Proselyte the World, usually began with this point. 2. That this is firmly believed by all true Christians. This must needs be so; because it is the grand inducement to all Piety and God∣liness, and none ever disbelieved it, but those, the interest of whose Lusts ingaged them to question it, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4, 5. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the last days, scof∣fers, walking after their own lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation. For this they willingly are ignorant of, &c. willingly ignorant; their interest puts them upon it, rather than their Conscience, because this Do∣ctrine filleth them with unquiet thoughts, that they cannot so securely follow their sinful pra∣ctices,
till they blot out the fear of it, or ba∣nish the thoughts of it out of their hearts; but all that obey the teachings of grace (take it for objective or subjective grace) they firmly believe it, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13. For the grace of God, that bringeth Salvation, hath appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodlness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righte∣ously, and godly in this present World; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God, and our Saviour Iesus Christ. The sound belief of it is not so much encoun∣tred with the doubts of the mind, as the incli∣nations of their perverse hearts. Now the seem∣ing reasons of partial men are not to be heard, especially as delivered in a scoffing, malicious way; and on the other side, Godliness and Mortification standeth upon such evident rea∣son, as mans unquestionable duty, that it needeth not to be maintained by a lie and manifest falshood: Certainly, they that deny it do not so much reason against this Article of our Christian Faith, as scoff at it; and it is to be imputed to the malignity of their tem∣pers, rather than the acuteness or sharpness of their reason, that they do not believe it. Ma∣ny things which they urge are a manifest to∣ken of the contrary. As the calamities of the good, 2 Thess. 1.4, 5. So that we glory in you for your Faith and Patience in all your Perse∣cutions and tribulations, that you endure, which
is a manifest token of the righteous Iudgment of God; The perversion of Justice, Eccles. 3.16, 17. And moreover, I saw under the Sun, the place of Iudgment, that wickedness was there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there; I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked; for there is a time there, for every purpose, and for every work; Things must be reviewed and judged over again; A State Engine to serve Order and Go∣vernment: doth the benefit of mankind need a lie to promote it? Doth carnal interest go∣vern the World, or Vertue? If meer carnal In∣terest, what a confusion would there be of all things? Then men might commit all Villany, take away mens lives and goods, when it is their interest, or they could do it safely and secretly, without infringement of their inter∣est; Servants poison their Masters, if they could do it without discovery, and there were no sin in it; men prey upon others, if it be in the power of their hands; and catch he that catch can, without impunity, would be the truest Wisdom. Clear it is, Vertue can∣not be supported, without the thoghts of a World to come; and it is unreasonable to imagine, that God would make a World, which cannot be governed without falshood and deceit. 3. That it is earnestly desired by all true Christians, that is of chief respect here; for
the Apostle conjureth them by all that is dear and sacred in their most holy Faith; and up∣on this I will mainly spend the first part of this Discourse. I shall prove it by these two choice pieces of Scripture, which describe the Communion of the Church with Christ, or the dispensations of Christ to the Church; the one concerneth Gods internal, the other his external Government; the Canticles and Revelations. The Book of Canticles is ended with this desire, vote and wish, Cant. 8.14. Make haste my beloved, and be like a young Hart or Roe upon the Mountains of Spices; the Brides last and great suit to the Bridegroom is, make haste, as to his coming in Glory to judge the World; not that Christ is slack, but the Churches affections are strong; they that go a Whoring after the World, neither desire his coming, nor love his appearing; but the Spouse would have all things hastened, that he might return; he cannot come soon enough to set the World to rights, and compleat their Hap∣piness; it is that only that will perfect their Consolation, and therefore would have the blessed and longed for meeting hastened. In the other Book of the Revelations, see how it is closed, Rev. 22.20. Christ saith, Surely I come quickly; and the Church like a quick Echo, saith Even so, Come Lord Iesus, come quickly; it taketh the word out of Christs Mouth, and presently improveth the Promise
into a Prayer, and so Christs Voice, and the Churches Voice, are Unisons; the Acclamati∣on of the Saints answereth to his Proclama∣tion; Christ saith, I come, as desiring to meet with us; the Church answereth, even so, come, as desiring his Fellowship and Company: when once Faith apprehendeth the glorious coming of our Lord Jesus to Judgment, Love presently desireth it, as the most comforta∣ble thing, which we can ask of him, that is the farewel suit of the Church to Christ; if he will grant this, all complaints, and sorrow, and sighing, will be no more. Now I shall give you Reasons, why this is desired by all true Christians. 1. In respect of him, who is to come. His Person, that we may see him, who is our great Lord and Saviour; all that believed any thing of Christ, desired to see him; those that li∣ved before his coming in the flesh, Jon 8.56. Your Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad; and the same affection possesseth us that live after his coming in the flesh; we know him by hear-say, we have heard much of him, he wooeth us by a Proxy, as Eliezer Abrahams Servant did Rebekah. Now Christians would fain see him, of whom they have heard, and whom they loved, and in whom they have believed, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love, and in whom, though now you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with
joy nspeakable, and full of glory; they do not see Christ, but they have a taste of his goodness, 1 Pet. 2.3. If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious; They have felt his comforts, and live by his Life; all that is wanting, is but ocular Vision, that they may see him Face to Face; therefore they long for his coming. 2. The Excellency of Christ their head, shall then be fully revealed, therefore it is comfort∣able to his Saints to think of his second come∣ing; it is called, the Revelation of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Christ is now under a Vail, retired within the Curtain of the Heavens; the wick∣ed often ask, where is now your God? and our own unbelieving hearts are apt to que∣stion the glory of his Person, and the truth of his Promises, when his most faithful Ser∣vants are under disgrace: Christ is a glorious King, but little of his Glory is seen in the World; therefore they desire that he may ap∣pear in Glory, and Royalty; we pray that his Kingdom may come. 2. The persons desiring, there is somewhat in them to move them to it. 1. The Spirit of Christ, Rev. 22.17. The Spirit in the Bride, saith come; the Holy Ghost breadeth this desire in the Church; nature saith, it is good to be here; but this is a dis∣position above nature; the Flesh saith, Depart, but the Spirit saith, Come; the great work
of the Spirit is to bring us and Christ toge∣ther, he cometh from the Father and the Son, to bring us to the Father by the Son; his bu∣siness is to marry us to Christ, the promise be∣ing past, the Spouse longeth to see her belo∣ved. It is the Spirit kindleth a desire in us of his second coming, when the Marriage that is now contracted, shall be consummated; when the Queen shall be brought unto the King in rayment of Needle-work, and shall enter into the Palace with him; there to abide for ever. Well then, though guilty Sinners would have Christ stay away still, and if it might go by Voices, the Carnal World would never give their Voice this way, Even so, come Lord Iesus, come quickly; no, they are of the Devils mind, Why art thou come to torment us before the time? Mat. 8.29. Thieves and Malefa∣ctors, if they might have the liberty to choose, they would never look, nor long for the day of Assizes; but the Spirit in the Bride is ano∣ther thing, it giveth us other inclinations; the sooner Christ cometh, the better; they can never be soon enough taken up to him, nor he come to them. 2. There are Graces planted in us, Faith, Hope, and Love, to move us earnesty to de∣sire his coming. 1. Faith believeth Christ will be as good as his word; I will come again, if it were not so, I would have told you, John 14.2. And if Christ
saith in a way of Promise, I come, the Church saith, Amen, in a way of Faith, even so, Com. If Christ had gone away in discontent, and with a threat in his mouth, Ye shall never see my face more, we should altogether despair of seeing him again; but he parted in Love, and left a Promise with us, which upholdeth the Hearts of Believers during his absence. Would Christ deceive us, and flatter us into a Fools Paradise? What need that? He can strike us dead in an instant, if we do not please him, and we have hitherto found him true in all things, and will he fail us at last? 2. Hope, which is Faiths Handmaid, it look∣eth for that which we do believe, it is the im∣mediate effect of the new Creature, 1 Pet. 1.3. Begotten to a lively hope; as soon as Grace is infused, it discovereth it self by its tendency to its end, and rest; it came from Heaven, and carrieth the Soul thither. 3. Love is an affection of Union, it desi∣reth to be with the party loved, Phil. 1.23. I desire to depart, and to be with Christ; therefore its Voice is, Come, Come, he hath Communion with us in our Houses of Clay; therefore we desire presence with him in his Palace of Glory; his Voice now is very sweet, when he saith, Come unto me ye that are weary and heavy laden, but much more will it be so, when he saith, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit a Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundations of the
World were laid: Reconciliation with God is comfortable, but what will fruition be! 3. Look upon a Christians Priviledges, Be∣lievers then find the fruit of their interest in him, and have their reward adjudged to them, Rev. 22.12. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me. Christ doth not come empty handed; it is but maintenance we have from him now, but then Wages; earnest now, but then the full sum; It is our Pay-day, yea ra∣ther it is our Crowning day, 2 Tim. 4.8. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righte∣ousness, which God the righteous Iudge will give me in that day: 1 Pet. 5.4. When the chief Shep∣herd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory, which fadeth not away; those that have been faithful and diligent in their duty, shall not need to seek another Pay-Master; tha which Christ giveth us in hand, is worth all the pains that we lay out in his Service; Grace and in∣ward Peace: but then we shall have Glory and Honour; he will honour us in the sight of those that have opposed, contradicted, and despised us: Our comfort is hidden, but our Glory is sensible, and visible, and publick be∣fore all the World. Objection. But how can true Christians earn∣estly desire it, when so many tremble at the thought of it for want of assurance of Gods Love? Ans. We suppose a Christian in a right frame,
and one that doth prepare for his coming: But 1. The meanest Saint hath some inclination this way; it was one of the points of the A∣postolical Catechism, Heb. 6.2. The Doctrine of Resurrection from the dead, and of eternal Iudgment: and the Apostolical Catechism was for the initiating, or enring of Christians in∣to the Faith and Profession of the Gospel, when they laid the foundation; this was one truth, which was never omitted, the coming of Christ to Judgment; now Faith is a be∣lieving, not with the mind only, but the heart; they were to be affected with what they did believe, Sapida scientia, was the qualification, and not with trembling only, for that would deter them from Christianity; but with re∣joicing of hope, which did invite them to the practice of it, Heb. 3.6. Whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence and rejoicing of hope firm unto the end; and indeed what other af∣fection can become the thought of Christs re∣wards which he will bring with him? 2. Sometimes there may be a drowsiness, and indisposition in the Children of God, when their Lamps are not kept burning; Luke 12. 37. Blessed are those Servants, whom when the Lord cometh, he shall find watching; but the wise Virgins slumbered as well as the foolish; and so for a Season they may be unprepared for his coming, by carelessness, or remission of
their watchfulness, and neglect of preparati∣on, yet the Spirit and inclination this way be∣ginneth with the new birth: A Wife desireth her Husbands coming home after a long Jour∣ney, but it may be all things are not ready, and in so good order: Sometimes all good Christians desire the coming of Christ, but sometimes they are not so exact and accurate in their walkings, and therefore their affecti∣ons are not so lively; security breedeth dead∣ness, and God is fain to rouze us up by sharp afflictions. 3. The Church doth really and heartily de∣sire Christs coming, though they tremble at some circumstances of his coming: there is a degree of bondage, that hindereth much of our confidence and boldness, 1 John 2.17, 18. Herein is our love made perfect, tht we may have boldness in the day of Iudgmen; because as he is, so are we in this World. There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear, be∣cause fear hath torment; he hath feareth is not made perfect in love; while we are imperfect, there may be some fears, how it shall go with us in the Judgment. The day of Judgment may be considered in esse rei, or in esse cognio, the suc∣cess of the day it self, that we may stand before Christ in the Judgment, or in our apprehension of it, that we may think of it with boldness, confidence, and desire; all sincere persons shall speed well in the Judgment; but while we
are thus weak, and imperfect, we have little confidence of our sincerity. Certainly, the more holy we are, the more we are embol∣dened against Judgment to come; therefore we must every day get a Conscience soundly established against the fears of Hell and Dam∣nation. 4. To be of such a temper as not at all to value, and prize, and delight in it, quencheth all sense of Godliness and Religion; surely they are not touched with any fear of God, who wish it would never come, who would be glad in their heart to hear such news; they have the Spirit of the Devil in them, who count his coming their burden and torment; they cannot say the Lords Prayer without a fear to be heard; and pray thy Kingdom come, when they desire it may never be; the thoughts of it casts a damp on their carnal re∣joicing, and he that is afraid, left his Pray∣ers prove true, can never pray heartily; no not with a moral sincerity. Vse. To press us to keep up a firm belief, and an earnest desire of Christs coming; this will make you Heavenly minded, Phil. 3.20, 21. For our Conversation is in Heaven, where we look for the Saviour the Lord Iesus Christ. It will ingage you to Fidelity in your duty; for every one of us must give an account of him∣self to God, John 2.28. And now, little Chil∣dren, abide in him, that when he shall appear, we
may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming. To watchfulness as well as faithfulness, Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted wor∣thy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of man. Yea to diligence, that you may clear up your title and interest, Heb. 9.28. And to them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto Salvation: 2 Pet. 3.12. Wherefore, be∣loved, seeing that ye look for these things, be di∣ligent that ye may be found of him in peace, with∣out spot and blameless. Oh therefore let this be a precious truth to you, which you would not forgo for all the World; if others tremble at the mention of it, still carry it so that it may be your comfort and solace. In short, believe it strongly, think of it frequently, prepare for it diligently, improve it fruitfully to all holy Conversation and Godliness, yea to get Oyl, not into your Lamps only, but Vessels, Grace in your hearts, as well as profess your selves to be Christians. II. Doct. That when Christ shall come, all the Saints shall be gathered together unto him. For evidencing this, let me clear to you, that at the day of Judgment there shall be, 1. A Congregation. 2. A Segregation. 3. An Aggregation.
They are all intended, but principally the last. A Congregation; Mat. 25.32. Before him shall be gathered all Nations; And not only all Nations, but all Persons, 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all (collectivè) appear before the Iudgment-seat of Christ, that every one (distributivè) may re∣ceive according to the things done in his body, &c. All that have lived from the beginning of the World unto that day, shall without ex∣ception of any one single person, from the least unto the greatest, appear before the Tri∣bunal of Christ; no Age, no Sex, or Nation, or Dignity, or Greatness, can excuse us. In the World some are too high to be questioned, others too low to be taken notice of, but there all are brought forth to undergo their Tryal; there is no shifting or avoiding this day of appearance; Adam will there meet with all his Posterity at once. Take all the distinctions of Mankind, Infants, and grown Persons; I mean Infants who die before they are in an ordinary way capable of the Doctrine of Life (the Scriptures are written for grown persons, the Case of Infants is more obscure,) those of them who are born within the Church, God is their God; Gen. 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlast∣ing Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee. Good and bad is the next
distinction, both forts come to receive their Sentence; only the one come to the Judg∣ment of Condemnation, the other to the Judgment of Absolution, John 5.28, 29. Those that have done good, to the resurrection of life, and those that have done evil, to the resurrection of Condemnation; Acts 24.15. There shall be a resurrection of the dead; both of the just and unjust. The next distinction is men of all Cal∣lings, Apostles, Ministers, private Christians; Apostles, Paul expected to be judged, 1 Cor. 4.4. I know nothing of my self, yet am I not thereby justified, but he that judgeth me is the Lord; he speaketh with respect to the execu∣tion of the Apostolical Office: Ordinary Mini∣sters, Heb. 13.17. They watch for your souls, as those that must give an account: If Souls mis∣carry through their negligence, they are an∣swerable to God for it: Ordinary Christians, Rom. 14.12. Every one must give an account of himself to God. Men of all conditions, poor or rich, weak or powerful, high and low, Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; I mean those that are so distin∣guished now; these distinctions do not out∣live time, there all stand on the same level; the rufling men of the World shall then be afraid, and call upon the Mountains to cover them from the wrath of him that sitteth upon the Throne, Rev. 6.16. The poor are not forgot∣ten, they are Gods Creatures, and must un∣dergo
his Judgment. Thus shall all people that live scattered up and down in the World, how much soever they differ from one ano∣ther in Rites, Tongues, Customs of living, be brought together in one place. 2. There is a Segregation: Mat. 25.32, 33. He shall separate the one from the other, as a Shep∣herd divideth the Sheep from the Goats; and he shall set the Sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his left. There may be now a con∣fusion and mixture of the godly and the wick∣ed, as Sheep and Goats feed in the same pa∣sture, and they may be all raised together ac∣cording to the places where they lived and died; but then a perfect separation: good and bad are first gathered together, but the good are drawn into a Company by themselves, but no pure Company, till the great Shepherd will judge between Cattle and Cattle, Ezek. 34.17. He will gather his Saints together, Psal. 50.5. Psal. 1.5. The ungodly shall not stand in the Iudg∣ment, nor Sinners in the Congregation of the righteous. So Mat. 13.44. At the end of the World the Angels shall come, and sever the wicked from among the just. 3. An Aggregation; Believers are gathered together to him for several ends. 1. To make up the number of Christs Train and Attendants, to wait on him, Iude 14. , with his holy ten thousands; Zech. 14.5. And the Lord my God shall come,
and all the Saints with him; 1 Thes. 4.17. The dead in Christ shall rise first, and we which are alive shall be caught up together in the Clouds with them, to meet the Lord in the air. 2. That after Judgment we may be solemnly presented to God, by head and Poll, we were given to Christ to be preserved unto the Glory we were designed for; John 17.6. I have ma∣nifested thy name unto the men, which thou ga∣vest me out of the World, thine they were, and thou gavest them me; not by way of Alie∣nation, but Oppignoration, recompence, and charge, Christ is to give an account, John 6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life; and I will raise him up at the last day. The Form of Presenta∣tion is, Heb. 2.13. Behold I, and the Children which God hath given me. 3. That in one Troop we may be brought into his Heavenly Kingdom; John 14.3. And if I go, and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self; that where I am, there ye may be also; The whole Flock shall then follow the great Shepherd of the Sheep, into the Everlasting Fold. Vse 1. Believe this gathering together to him; we are joined to the Church of Gods Elect, now by Faith only, Heb. 12.22, 23. Ye are come to the general Assembly, and Church of the first-born, which are written in Heaven, &c.
, is a meeting made up of many dif∣ferent Persons, gathered together from seve∣ral Countries into one body, and one place, as the meeting of all sorts of persons, from all the Corners of Greece, to see the Olympick Games, was called the , People of all Coun∣tries came to behold their ; so the my∣stical state of the Church of the Gospel, is a general Assembly, because it is not consined to one Nation, but extended to Believers of all Nations, and Ages, they are drawn into a Body, or Heavenly Society, into one Fold, un∣der one Shepherd; but they never meet in an actual Assembly, until the last day, which is the great Congregation, or Rendez∣vouz of the Saints, so that now it is matter of Faith. 2. See you be of the number, when some are admitted others are thrust out; Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Ja∣cob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and ye your selves thrust out; The wick∣ed shall not stand in this Congregation. Oh it is a blessed and a comfortable thing, when we are made Members of the mystical body of Christ, and have hopes, that we shall be in the number of those that shall meet together in the great Assembly, and Congregation of the righteous; that we are trained up in the Church of Christ, which is the Seminary of
Heaven, that we are no more Strangers, and Foreigners, but Fellow Citizens with the Saints. 3. Let us improve it many ways. 1. To comfort us against the paucity of seri∣ous walkers, and real Christians. Alas! now they are but like two or three Berryes upon the top of the uppermost bough; here one, and there another; in some places thinner, in others thicker, as God hath service for them; in appearance , A little Flock, Luc. 12.32. But take all together, they are a general Assembly, that are redeemed out of every Kindred, Tongue, and Nation, Rev. 5.9. Yea, Rev. 7.9. A great multitude, which none can number, of all Kindreds, Tongues, People, and Nations; As few as we are, and as despised as the interest of the godly is, we shall not want Company in Heaven, we see few going to Heaven, but when we are gathered toge∣ther, we shall see that our everlasting, Compa∣nions are many. 2. To comfort us against the dstance of Christian Friends, we are often separated from the Society of good Christians, whom we love dearly, but we shall be gathered to∣gether in one Congregation; The Saints are now scattered by Providence; they live in divers Countries, Towns, Houses, have little comfort of one another; They live where they may be most useful; as Stars do not shine
in a Cluster, but are dispersed throughout the Heaven; and as they are the light of the Earth, so they are the Salt of the Earth, which is sprinkled here and there, not laid in a heap: sometimes by violence of men, persecution, and banishment; sometimes by Death, which parts Friends, Perfectus est quem putas mortuum, like people in a wrack, got to shore before us. Now what a comfort is it to be united to all Gods people, which have been, are, or shall be, to the end of the World; and to meet in one Assembly, Mat. 24.31. They shall gather together the elect from the four winds; from one end of Heaven to another; The Saints shall be gathered from all quarters of the Earth; though they live in several places, several times, many we never saw in the flesh, Christ will assemble them all, bring them in unto one place. 3. To comfort them under the degenerate and collapsed state of Christianity, (1.) The mixture of the wicked; the good and bad are here mixed, they live together in the same Kingdoms, Cities, Societies, Visible Church, Family, Bed, (perhaps) but then a perfect se∣paration, Zach. 14. Last, There shall no more be the Canaanite in the House of the Lord of Hosts: Rev. 21.27. Nothing that defileth shall enter there: such a difference shall there be between the State of Gods Church in this World, and the World to come: here Tares are mingled with Wheat, good Fish with bad in the Drag
Net, it is hard by Discipline to keep the sound from the infected. (2.) Discord; the Saints are divided in Affection, but then perfect Har∣mony; they are all gathered together to Christ, and have no signs and badges of distin∣ction, to herd apart. (3.) It's Universal, with all the Saints. (4.) Perpetual, never to part more.
SERMON II. 2 Thess. 2.1, 2. —That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. WE come now to the matter of the Apostles Caution, which is in the se∣cond Verse, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. In which words take notice, 1. Of the error disproved, that the day of Christ is at hand. 2. The effect which this error might pro∣duce; trouble and unsetledness of mind, That ye be not soon shaken in mind or troubled. 3. A removal of all the supposed Foundati∣ons of this error, or the means which these Impostours used to intice them to embrace it; Three are mentioned, Spirit, Word, and Letter. 1. Nor by Spirit, that is, pretence of spi∣ritual Revelation, be not soon shaken in mind by it.
2. Nor by word, some word of the Apostle, which they pretended to have heard, and that is another slight of deceivers; some tradition or doctrine delivered by the Apostle by word of mouth. 3. Nor by Letter as from us: this may be understood, (1.) Either of some passage in the former Epistle, for the Apostle saith there, 1 Thess. 4.17. Then we which are alive and re∣main, shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and because he joins himself with them, they thought he should survive until that day, or else those warnings which the Apostle gives them. 1 Thess. 5.1, 2, 3. Of the times and season: I need not write unto them, for your selves know perfectly that the day of the Lord cometh as a thief in the night, &c. Now these warnings they might abuse, and this is one way by which men may be unsetled and unshaken; i.e. by false glosses and interpretations of Scripture. (2.) Or ra∣ther the sence may be, some spurious and coun∣terfeit writings, which was one means of de∣ceit used in the Primitive Times; suppositi∣tious or Apocryphal Legends, wherein the Apo∣stle might be said to write something, as if Christ should come in that age wherein they lived. Now to obviate this, the Apostle is supposed to insert that passage, Chap. 3.17. The Salutation of Paul with mine own hand, which is the token in every Epistle: so I write.
First, From the Error disproved, observe, Doct. That the time of Christs coming to Judgment must be patiently expected, not rashly defined, or determined; for this is the Error, which the Apostle with such earnest∣ness opposeth here. But you will say, is this such an error? Do not the holy Apostles themselves say, in effect, the same, as the Apostle Iames, Chap. 5.8 The coming of the Lord draweth nigh; and the Apo∣stle Peter, 1 Pet. 4.7. The end of all things is at hand: Yea Paul himself, 1 Cor. 10.11. These are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come; and Rom. 13.12. The night is far spent, and the day is at hand; where by night is meant the state of Igno∣rance, Sin, and Paganism before Conversion, and by the day is meant the state of our full Regeneration and Illumination in eternal Glo∣ry; when the corrupt World shall come to an end, and all shadows shall fly away. As if he had said, the Mornings of the Resurrecti∣on is at hand, the night is far spent, not quite past, and the day is at hand; the night is not throughly gone, nor the day wholly come, yet he saith, it is at hand. What evil was in this Opinion, that the Apostle should with such vehemency argue and reason against it? Ans. There is some difference in the words, for , signifies it draweth near, , it is begun already. But the sense is vastly different;
for by these and such like expressions, the Apostle only did intend that the last dispensa∣tion was then on foot, no other change of dis∣pensation or worship was to be expected, till the Coming of Christ. But I shall more clearly, and distinctly shew, 1. What reason the Apostle had to speak at this rate. 2. What little reason these Seducers had to pervert this Speech to countenance their Hy∣pothesis or supposition. 1. For the first, the Apostle had reason to say the day of the Lord was at hand. 1. With respect of Faith; for Faith gives a kind of presence to things, Heb. 11.1. Now Faith is the subtance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen: That is, it gives a being, a kind of existence to things fu∣ture, and afar off, and sets them before the eyes of our mind, and gives us some sight of them, as if they were already come. And therein it agrees with the light of Prophecy; look as by the light of Prophecy, Iohn saith, Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the Books were opened, &c. so saith doth in effect see what it believes. Wl then, Faith looking upon things distant an absent, as near at hand, the Apostle had reason to use this language to Believers, as if the Judge were at the door. Phil. 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord
is at hand, not only in regard of his present Providence, but also with respect to his se∣cond coming to Judgment; it is as certain to Faith, as if he were already come. 2. With respect of Love, Love will not ac∣count it long to endure the hardships of this present World, until Christ come to set all things at rights: Iacob served seven years for Rachel, for the love he bare to her, and it seemed to him but a little while, Gen. 2.20. If we had any love for Christ, we should be contented to suffer a while for his sake; The time is coming, when the wicked shall persecute no more; when the mouth of iniquity shall be stopped, when the desire and hope of all Be∣lievers shall be satisfied, when the Redeemers work shall be consummated, when the King∣dom shall be delivered up to the Father, when those that made a jest of this day, shall be fully confuted; Faith sees the certainty of it, and love makes us hold out till the time come about. 3. The Apostle might speak so, as compa∣ring time with Eternity, Psal. 90.4. A thou∣sand years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past, and as a Watch in the night. 2 Pet. 3.8. One day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. The longest time to Eternity is but as a drop lost and spilt in the Ocean; and all the tediousness of the present life, is but like one rainy day to an Everlasting Sun-shine, 2 Cor. 4.17.Our
light affliction which is but for a moment, work∣eth for us a far more exceeding▪ and eternal weight of glory; though troubles are length∣ened as long as our lives are, yet they are but a moment in respect of Eternity: we reckon by time, and not by Eternity; and therefore these expressions may seem strange to us. 4. The Apostle speaks this to particular men, whose abode in the World is not very long; Eternity and the Judgment is at hand, though Christ tarry long till the Church be compleated, and the Elect be gathered. 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Pro∣mise, as some men count slackness. Now what is long, and what is afar off to the whole Church, considered in several successions of Ages; it is short to particular persons. Death soon puts an end to their conflict, and then their Triumph ensues; And to Christ is ready to judge at all times, though the World be not ready to be judged. The Coming of Christ is uncertain, and hidden for this very purpose, that men in all Ages might be quickened to faithfulness and watchfulness, and make that preparation which is necessary. Now therefore it concerns the Messengers of God, to bind mens duty upon them, by showing the near∣ness of it in all the forementioned conside∣rations, that they might be always ready; for so we find our Lord himself pressing it, Luke 12.40. Be ye therefore ready, for the Son cometh
at an hour, when ye think not; Mat. 24.42. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord cometh: He may come in a moment, our duty is unquestionable, but the time of his coming is uncertain; And to please our selves with the thoughts of a delay, is a mighty deadening thing, and quencheth our duty; yea, it is an inticement to all evil, Mat. 24.48. The wicked Servant took liberty to beat his fellow Servants, because of his Lords delay; we are bid to be sober and watchful, and always to be looking for the coming of the Lord. 2. The Seducers had little reason to per∣vert this Speech to the countenance of their Hypothesis, or supposition, and therefore the Apostle had very good reason to be zealous in the confutation of this Hypothesis of the Se∣ducers, who maintained that Christ would come in that Age. 1. To inquire after the time, is curiosity: Acts 1.7. It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put into his own power. Those things which God hath re∣served to himself, for us to inquire after, is sin∣ful: It is a great evil to pry into our Masters Secrets, when we have so many revealed truths to busy our minds about; we take it to be a piece of ill manners, to pry into that which is purposely concealed; as to break up a secret Letter, and the like: the practising of known
duties, would prevent this curiosity; these things tend not to our profit and edifica∣tion. 2. Much more was it a sin to fix the time, it was an arrogant presumption; for of that day and hour, knoweth no man, no not the An∣gels of Heaven, but my Father only, Mat. 24.36. The peremptory time of the day of Judgment God keeps to himself, and it is arrogance for any to define it, and set a time, when God is resolved to keep it secret. 3. The fixing of that time did a great deal of hurt. 1. For the present it drew away their minds from their calling, because they expect∣ed a sudden coming of the Lord; Ill impres∣sions either destroy or waken necessary duties. 2. The least Error doth gratifie Sathan, and the interest of his Kingdom, for he is the Fa∣ther of Lies. 3. It might shake their Faith in other things, when their credulity was disproved by the event; the Gospel might be brought into contempt, when their Error only was confu∣ted; as many men who have been peremptory in fixing times, afterwards, have thrown off their Religion. 4. It shewed a diseased mind, that they were sick of Questions, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Tim. 6.4. Doting about questions and strifes of
words, whereof cometh envy, &c. when they had so much wholsome food to feed upon. 5. It did but ingender strife among Christi∣ans, begat wranglings and disputes in the Church, 1 Tim. 6.4. He is proud knowing no∣thing, but doting [or sick] about questions and strifes of words, whereof cometh envy, strife, rail∣ing, evil surmisings. Vse 1. Let us not fix times: many of the Antients were too bold this way, and we are apt to it. Lactantius peremptorily said, The World would endure but two hundred years after his time: So, many will fix the time of the calling the Jews, and of the destruction of Anti-Christ, without evident grounds and rea∣sons. What God hath revealed is enough to bear us out in our duty and suffering: in other things let us patiently wait; we see rea∣son to do so, when we consider how many men have proved false Prophets. 2. Let us not put off the time, and set it at too great a distance; distant things, though never so great, will hardly move us; that which men put off they do in effect put away; they put far off the evil day, they would not let it come near their minds, to have any ope∣ration upon them. Look as the Stars, those vast Globes of Light, by reason of the distance between us and them, do seem but as so ma∣ny spangles: so we have but a weak sight of what is set at a great distance, and their ope∣ration
on us will be but small; the closer things are, the more they will work upon us; one that looks upon what God hath revealed of this as sure, and near, is more affected with it than others are: therefore set your selves at the entrance of that World, where you must everlastingly be, and watch, and be rea∣dy: they that put it off, are apt to loyter in their work. If Christs coming be not near at hand, certainly the time of our departure is at hand, and it will not be long e're it come about. But this is but Introductive to the Do∣ctrine of Anti-Christ: Therefore I come to the second thing. Secondly, The effect that this error might produce, trouble and unsetledness of mind; that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or troub∣led. In the words there is a two-fold Meta∣phor; the one taken from a Tempest, or Sea storm, as the word plainly implies, that ye be not shaken in mind; and the other word is taken from the sudden alarm of a Land Fight, which breeds trouble. 1. Doct. That Errors breed rouble of mind: they do not only trouble the Churches Peace, Gal. 5.12. I would they were even cut off which trouble you; but they hinder tran∣quillity of mind, Gal. 1.7. There be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. How do Errors hinder tranquillity of
mind? Partly because it is an unsound foun∣dation, it can never yield solid peace; we only find rest for the Soul in a true Religion, and there where it is purely professed: Others are left to great doubts and uncertainties. The Lord seems to direct us in this course, when we are upon consultation about the taking up of a Religion, Jer. 6.16. Stand in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Soul-rest is only found in Gods way, and where it is most clearly pro∣fessed. Partly, because whatever false Peace is bred there, it will at last end in trouble. The Apostle compares Seducers, Jude 13. to raging waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame; and we are told of the Locusts that came out of the Bottomless-pit, Rev. 9.5. That they stung like Scorpions. Every erroneous way of Religion is comfortless; yea, their Doctrine breeds anxiety, and vexes the Spirit; for they have no true way of quieting the Conscience; Let us therefore detest Error, be∣cause it is so much our interest. It is the pro∣perty of truth to beget a delectation of mind, it is sweeter than honey, and the honey comb. Ve∣rum est bonum intellectus. Truth is the good of the understanding; now when we understand truth satisfyingly, it breeds an incredible de∣light; when we have been in some perplexi∣ties, and begin to find out a truth, Prov. 24.
13, 14. My Son, eat thou honey, because it is good, and the honey comb, which is sweet unto thy tast: So shall the knowledge of wisdom be, when thou hast found it. Honey is no so sweet to thy tast, as this is to thy understanding. When a man hath found out any truth, though it be but a natural truth, it breeds its oblecta∣tion; much more spiritual truth, it is very pleasing to the understanding, and most of all when spiritual. Truth is obeyed and practised, for the understanding gives us but a sight of it, but obedience gives a tast thereof. Our Saviour saith, Mat. 11.28, 29, 30. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart. For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. If you will but come under Christs blessed Yoke and Scepter, and that way of Religion he hath recommended to you, you will find an incredible Peace, Joy, and oblectation in your mind. 2. Doct. That Christians should be so esta∣blished, and have such constancy of mind, that they should not be easily shaken and mo∣ved from the Faith. 1. Let us see how this is pressed. Sometimes it is pressed from the encouragement of your great hope, 1 Cor. 15.58. Be stedfast, and un∣moveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord; forasmuch as you know, that your labour
is not in vain in the Lord. First, He would have them stedfast and unmoveable; these two words have their special signification, the one is a degree above the other; a man may be stedfast in a thing, though he be moved a lit∣tle in some by-matters; but now, since your Innocency will bear you out, be not only stedfast, but immoveable, which is a higher degree; but take it thus, Be stedfast in your selves, and unmoveable by the storms of Temp∣tation from without: a man is stedfast in him∣self, setled upon his own foundation; and you are unmoved, when you are strengthned against outward assaults: Acts 20.24. None of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto me, so I might finish my course with joy. A Man may be setled in the knowledge of the truth, but he is not unmoveable, ex∣cept he be fortified against all Temptations, that may draw him off from his profession: Such constancy of mind may be well inforced, because of our great hope; thus it is pleaded for there. Then the absolute necessity of it is urged at other times, as Col. 1.23. If ye con∣tinue in the Faith grounded and setled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel: the same condition is required to continue, as to begin our right in the priviledges of the Gos∣pel; there are some conditions required for the beginning, others for the continuing of our right; now this is absolutely required for
the continuing of our right, both for present reconciliation with God, and future Glory; it is upon this condition, if ye continue in the Faith. 2. Let us inquire what is necessary to this constancy and establishment of mind, that we may not be soon troubled and shaken; partly, that our minds may be inlightened to know the truth, and our hearts renewed to believe and love the truth; for without this there can never be any constancy of mind in Religion. 1. A clear Conviction of the Truth, or cer∣tainty of Knowledge, a rooted assent, or well grounded perswasion, not some fluctuating opinion about it: an half light maketh us ve∣ry uncertain in our course, James 1.3. A dou∣ble-minded man is unstable in all his wayes; ; First, try all things, 1 Thess. 5.20. then, hold fast that which is good. When men resolve upon Evidence▪ or after due Examination, the truth sticketh the closer and faster by them; but when they take up things, hand over head, they have no firm Principles, and therefore waver hither and thither; as Vessels without Ballast are tossed with every wave, 2 Pet. 3.16, 17. Beware lest ye also being led away with the errour of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; , substantial grounds within themselves; they do not stand by the knowledge of others, or
the Faith of others, and consent of others: light chaff is carried about with every wind, , Eph. 4.14. That ye henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine; they go through all parts of the compass; sometimes this wind of error taketh them up, sometimes that; sometimes taking up one opinion, then changing it for another; this is the fruit of half-Convictions. 2. The other oart of our Basis, is a resolu∣tion to adhere to the Truth; what likelihood is there, that we should continue, who are not so much as resolved so to do? The heart must be established by Grace, as well as the mind soundly convinced, Heb. 13.9. Be not carried about with divers and strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing that the heart be established with grace; as the Apostle speaketh of a pur∣pose not to marry, 1 Cor. 7.37. He that stand∣eth stedfast in his own heart, &c. So here , Acts 21.13. I am ready not to be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Iesus Christ: A firm, thorough resolution, is requisite to fortify us against all changes in Religion; otherwise we are but as Trees without a Root; or an House without a Foundation. Now this resolution of the Heart, is by Faith and Love; Faith, Heb. 3.12. Take heed, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living
God. Love, 2 Thess. 2.10. They received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, and for this cause God shall send them strong de∣lusions, that they shall believe a lie. We are not only rooted and grounded in Faith, but rooted and grounded in Love, Eph. 3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that ye being rooted and grounded in love, &c. 3. The opposite to this is Levity and incon∣stancy of mind, that soon quitteth truth with∣out difficulty, or without much hesitancy and resistance, yields to the temptation. The Scrip∣ture often taketh notice of this sudden imbra∣cing of Error, Gal. 1.6. I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another Gospel; and in the Text, soon shaken in mind; credulity is a light∣ness in believing, when we are like Reeds shaken with every wind, Mat. 11.7. and have a faulty easiness ready to be carried away with every Doctrine, which pretendeth to Truth; The simple believeth every word, Prov. 14.15. There is a readiness of mind, which is good, but it goeth on sufficient evidence; so the wisdom that is from above is gentle, and easy to be intreated, James 3.17 and the Bereans were , Acts 17.11. They received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scrip∣tures whether these things were so or no: but a readiness of mind differs from a weakness of mind, or a lightness in believing upon slender
and insufficient grounds, they never received the truth with thorough Efficacy, and are prone to Error. 4. The Causes of this Levity and Incon∣stancy of mind are these. 1. Want of solid rooting in the Truth, they receive it hand over head, as the stony ground forthwith sprang up, Mat. 13.5. and 20. ver. Anon they receive it with joy; they do not so soon re∣ceive the word, but they as soon quit it. 2. Want of Mortification, 2 Tim. 4.10. Demas hath forsaken us; having loved this pre∣sent World: Lusts are uncertain, fear of men, favour of men, carnal hopes will easily pre∣vail. 3. A certain readiness of mind, which dis∣poseth men to conform, and comply with their Company, as the Looking-Glass repre∣senteth every Face that looketh on it, so they are very changeable and unstable as water, as Zedekiah, Jer. 38.5. The King is not he that can say you nay; soon turned this way and that way. 4. Want of a thorough inclination to God, so that they are right for a while, or in some things, yet they are not universally true to his interest, 1 Kings 2.28. Joab turned after Adonijah, though he turned not after Absolom; Hos. 7.8. Ephraim is a Cake not turned. 5. Want of Holiness, and living up to the truths we know, 1 Tim 3.9. Holding the
mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience. Choice Liquors are best kept in a clean Vessel; men provoke God to desert them, and leave them to a vertiginous Spirit. 6. Libertinism, men think they may run from one Sect of Christians to another, as the wind of interest bloweth: if they were to turn to Ethnicism, Turcism, or Judaism, they would die rather than change ther Religion; but they think the differences among Christi∣ans are not of such moment, as to venture any thing upon that account. Every truth is pre∣cious, and must be owned in its Season, and it is damnable in it self to do any thing against Conscience, and he that giveth way to a small temptation, will entertain a greater: As a Man that hangeth over a Precipice, when he lets go his hold, will sink further and further, till he come to the bottom; therefore it is good to be faithful in a little. Vse. Let us take heed of this evil credu∣lity. and lightness. 1. Till Christians get a setled and sound Judgment, they never have peace within them∣selves, for fears and scruples arise in the dark, and those that live in error are full of perple∣xities, and have not that tranquility of Spirit, which They have, who are fully perswaded in their own mind. Rom. 14.5. Let every man be fully perswaded in his own mind. 2. If hardned in error, consider, your opini∣ons
will ordinarily have an influence upon your whole Religion, and will pervert your carriage towards God and Men; your Pray∣ers will smell of your opinions, and be like Balaams Sacrifice offered to God to engage him against his own people; your Love will be dispensed according to the interests of your Faction, 1 Cor. 1.13. Every one of you saith, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Is Christ divided? 3. The danger of error to others, Vice is like a duel, error a War, 2 Tim. 2.17. Their word will eat as doth a Canker. All in Asia have turned from me, 2 Tim. 1.15. 4. There is danger to your selves, though the error be not damnable, 1 Cor. 3.13. You have not so full Communion with God. Thirdly, The third thing is the means, which these Impostors used to seduce them from the Faith; Spirit, Word, Letter; by all which, the Apostle would not have them troubled, and shaken in mind: none of these Engines, which the Seducers used, should draw them from the Truth. What should poor Christians do thus assaulted? Ans. Stick to the Aposto∣lical Doctrine. I shall observe, Doct. That a Christian should be so per∣swaded in Religion, that neither Spirit, nor Word, nor Writing, should be able to shake or unsettle his mind. I shall shew you, 1. What wayes, or what means God hath
appointed, whereby a man may settle his choice, as to opinions in Religion. That the word of God will sufficiently fortifie him against all these false ways, by which Error is wont to be insinuated. 1. For the first, if a Christian would be established and guided aright in the choice of a Religion, he must follow both the light of Nature and Scripture. 1. The light of Nature antecedently to any external Revelation, will sufficiently convince us of the being of God, and our dependance upon him, Rom. 1.19, 20. That which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God hath shewed it to them; For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things which are made, even his eternal Power and Godhead. For I must know there is a God, or else I cannot be certain that he hath given us a Rule or Reve∣lation of his mind. We begin with what is natural, and then go on to what is Spiritual; Nature will tell us, that there is one God, the first cause of all things; of infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness; that it is reasonable he should be served by those whom he hath made; that he will reward and punish men, as they disobey, or serve and please him; but how God will be served, how they shall be rewarded or punished, or how they shall es∣cape punishment, if after a breach they are
willing to return to their duty and obedi∣ence to him; this is revealed in the word of God. 2. The written word shews us the true way of worshipping and pleasing God, and being accepted with him, therefore it is a sufficient direction to us; there is enough to satisfie Conscience, though not to please wanton Cu∣riosity; As that may quench the thirst of a sober man, that will not satisfie the lust of a Drunkard: there we are made wise unto Sal∣vation, 2 Tim. 3.15. Thou hast known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, and Psalm 119.105. Thy word is a light unto my feet, and a lanthorn to my paths: there we have the knowledge of many things evident by the light of nature, discovered with more clearness and certainty: And that which could not be found out by natural light, as Salvation by a Redeemer, or the re∣medy of our lapsed Estate, which, depending on the sole will, and good pleasure of God, could not be known till it was manifested and revealed by him: when man sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, it was necessary, that God should some way or other reveal his mind to him by word of mouth, or by wri∣ting: By word of mouth, that is, either by Oracles or extraordinary Messengers: that suf∣ficed, while God saw fit to reveal but a few Truths, or such as did not much burden the
Memory; and men were long lived, and the Church confined within a small compass of ground, and not liable to so many miseries and changes, as now in the latter Ages; and then he put it into writing, that men may not obtrude upon us their own conceits, but we might have a Standard or Rule of Faith and Manners, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk accord∣ing to this Rule, &c. 3. The natural Truths contained in the word of God, are evident by their own light; The supernatural Truths, though they are above natural light, yet they are not against it, or contrary to it, and do fairly accord with those Principles which are naturally known, and are confirmed, partly by an an∣tecedent Testimony, which is Prophecy; part∣ly by an innate evidence in their own frame and contexture; partly by a subsequent Evi∣dence, which is valuable Testimony, as to matter of Fact. The antecedent Testimony, John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye have eternal life, and they are they which te∣stify of me: 2 Pet. 1.19. We have a more sure word of Prophecy, to which we do well to give heed, as to a light shining in dark places. The innate and concomitant evidence, 2 Cor. 4 2, 3, 4. We have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in craftiness, nor hand∣ling the word of God deceitfully, but by manife∣station of the truth, commending our selves to
every mans Conscience in the sight of God. For if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, in whom the God of this World hath blin∣ded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them. The subsequent Testimony, the Apostles, Acts 5. 32. We are witnesses of these things, and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him; they were Eye and Ear Witnesses of great Fidelity and Credit; their Religion forbiddeth them to lie for God, and they were accompanied with the mighty power of the Holy Ghost; not only in giving them success in the face of the learned World, hunting out the Devil every where; but al∣so by Miracles, divers Signs and Wonders: and they and their followers endured all man∣ner of torments and death, to witness the truth of these things, and transmitted them to us with assurance of Gods owning ths Do∣ctrine. 4. The word being thus stated, and put into a sure Record, it is intelligible enough in all necessary matters at least; for if God should speak or write darkly to his people, especially in necessary things, it is because he could not, or would not speak otherwise: the former is direct Blasphemy, Exod. 4.11. Who hath made mans mouth? have not I the Lord. The latter cannot be said, because that is contrary to his
goodness, Psal. 25.8. Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will he teach Sinners the way. It is not to be imagined that the great and universal King should give a Law to Man∣kind, and speak so darkly, that we should have no sure direction from thence, nor be able to know his mind in any of the Duties God hath required of us; or expose us to great difficulties and hardships in the World: And if he had not plainly expressed his will to us, man would never leave writing, and di∣stinguishing himself out of his duty, surely he that will venture his All for Christs sake, had need of a clear warrant to bear him out; for none will hazard all that is near and dear to him, but for weighty Reasons. 5. Besides, the Illumination of the Holy Spirit doth accompany this word, and make it effectual to us, to shew us God as revealed in Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath sined in∣to our hearts to give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Iesus Christ: and for Heaven, Eph. 1.17, 18. Praying, that the God of our Lord Iesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your understanding being inlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. He sanctifieth and healeth our
Souls, and prepareth us for the entertainment of the Truth, that as natural things are natu∣rally discerned, so spiritual things are spiritu∣ally discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 6. There are promises of direction, made to humble and sincere minds, Psal. 25.9. The meek shall he guide in Iudgment, the meek shall he teach his way; to the industrious, Prov. 2. 4, 5. If thou seekest her as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; then shalt thou un∣derstand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God; to the godly and well-dis∣posed, John 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self; so to them that pray much, James 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him: They that thus sincerely endea∣vour to know the will of God, will come to a sound establish'd Judgment in the Truth. II. A Christian, that is thus established, is fortified against Spirit, Word, or Writing, or all Suggestion that may perplex his mind. 1. Against pretended Revelations, called here spirit. 1. Because having his mind thus setled, he may boldly defy all Revelations pretended to
the contrary: Gal. 1.8. Though we, or an An∣gel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel than we have preached, let him be accursed: Any Doctrine, if divers or different from, or besides the written word, much more contrary to it, a Christian may reject it, and account it Cur∣sed Doctrine: Therefore neither Church, nor Angel, nor Spirit, is to be heard against it. 2. Because a Christian is upon better terms, having the written word, than if God dealt with him by way of Revelations, 2 Pet. 1.19. We have , a more sure word of Prophecy; comparing it with the voice from Heaven, of which he spake before; not as if there could be any uncertainty in the Lords Voice, speaking from Heaven, but because a transient Voice is more easily mistaken, or for∣gotten, than an authentick standing Record, as Samuel thought Eli called him, when it was the Lord; it is quoad nos, though God gave evidence of the Truth of such Revelations as he made, yet we have more accommodate means. Our Lord intimateth such a thing, Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be perswaded, though one rose from the dead. This is the surest ground for Faith to rest upon, of any that ever hath been, or can be given to Sinners, subject to forgetfulness, jealousies, and mistakes. 3. Because it is not rational to expect new Revelation, now the Canon and Rule of
Faith is closed up, Heb. 2.1, 2. Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip, &c. Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you. John 17.20. Neither pray I for these alone, but for them which shall believe on me through their word. 4. Because if any such be pretended, it must be tryed by the word, Is. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it is because they have no light in them; So 1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because many false Prophets are gone abroad into the World. 5. Because they that despise ordinary means, and pretend to Vision, Revelation, or Inspi∣ration, are usually such, as are given up by God to a vertiginous Spirit, and cast into the Dungeon of error, for the punishment of other sins, Mic. 2.11. If a man walking in the Spirit of falshood do lie, he shall be the Prophet of this people. God will permit those that are both deceivers, and deceived themselves to come amongst them for a Plague to them. Sleidan giveth sad instances of some given up to this phantastical frenzy, that killed their own relations, on pretence of inspiration, and of others that murdered 50000. in one day.
2. By word or unwritten Tradition; this also should not shake the mind of a setled Christian, for this hath no constat, no evidence of its certainty, and would lay us open to the deceits of men, blinded by their own In∣terest and Passions; and if such tradition could be produced, as hath unquestionable Authority, it must be tryed by the Scripture, which is every where commended as the pub∣lick Standard, and true measure and rule, both of Faith and Manners. 3. Not by Epistle as from us. 1. Supposititious writings, which the Church in all Ages hath exploded, and received only those, which are unquestionably theirs, whose names they bear. 2. False Expositions, these are confuted by inspection of the Context, scope of the Wri∣ter, comparing of obscure places, with plain and clear. Thus you see what certainty God hath provided for us guide us in the way to Eternal Life.
SERMON III. 2 Thess. 2.3. Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first; And that man of sin be revealed the Son of perdition. IN these words we have these two things. 1. A Caution against the errour, set a-foot at that time, concerning Christs sudden come∣ing to Judgment. 2. The confutation of it: it is disproved by two antecedents and fore-runners of his coming. 1. A general Apostasy, or a defecti∣on of the visible Church, from the true State of Christianity. 2. The Revelation of Anti∣Christ, described here by his names, and pro∣per Titles, 1. That Man of Sin, 2. And Son of Perdition. 1. Let us speak of the general Apostasy, that must be before Christs coming to Judg∣ment. Except there come a falling away first. Now concerning it, take these Propositi∣ons.
1. That Apostasy is any defection from him to whom we owe, and have performed subje∣ction: or a falling from that Lord to whom we owe fealty. I am sure in religious matters, it importeth a defection from our right and proper Lord: Thus the Devil is an Apostate, because he abode not in his first estate▪ Iude 6. And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting Chains, &c. Abode not in the truth, John. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do: He was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth. That is, forsook his obedience to God, and so became the Ring-Leader of all rebellious Creatures. So it is true of our first Parents: They were Apostates, they did re∣volt from God, and their obedience to him: Therefore it is said, Rom. 5.19. By one mans disobedience many were made Sinners. So of their Posterity, their Apostasy is described by turning back from following the Lord, Zeph. 1.6. and departing from God, that is, his wor∣ship and service, Isa. 59.13. In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God. Let us then be agreed of this notion of Apostasy, which is evident, that it is a falling off from the obedience which we owe to our rightful Lord. 2. The Apostasy mentioned in the Text, was not civil. The falling away of many
Kingdoms from the Roman Empire: But an Apostasy of the visible Church, from him who is Lord of the Church. I prove it partly from the persons to whom the Apostle wrote, who did not intermingle themselves with State af∣fairs, or were not concerned in the Interests of the Roman Empire, further than that they li∣ved within the bounds of it. And this Apo∣stasy must be understood as they would conceive of Apostasy, with respect to the main cause wherein they were concerned and inga∣ged: which was the profession of Christianity. Partly, From the use of the word, in the Christian Doctrine, falling away there, is cer∣tainly falling away from the Faith, and pu∣rity of the Gospel, Luc. 18.13. Which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. And partly because to them it was ex∣presly foretold, that , Some shall fall away, or depart from the Faith, 1 Tim. 4.1. Lastly, Because those who are most con∣cerned to maintain the notion of the civil Apo∣stasy, from the Roman Empire, are most no∣torious in this defection. It is true, the Ro∣man Empire lost Asia, and the places adjacent, by the Invasion of Eastern Nations, but it was thrust out of Rome by the Rebellion of its Subjects, and chiefly by the influence of the Pope there, as Histories manifest: So that this interpretation will not help them a jot, but hurt them not a little. So that here is a defe∣ction
from our proper Lord, and a spiritual defection, not a civil. 3. The proper Lord of the Christian Church, is Jesus Christ, who hath purchased it with his blood, and died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of dead and living, Rom. 14.9. and again Eph. 5.23. Christ is the head of the Church, and the Saviour of the body. He that saveth, and recovereth the Church, out of the general Apostasy of Mankind; and re∣storeth them to their due obedience, and pro∣per happiness, He only is fit to be head of the Church; and this only is Christ; we ex∣pect no opposition here. 4. The Apostasy from the Lord will be de∣termined, chiefly by these two things. By un∣dermining his Authority, or destroying the interests of his Kingdom; by these two we may understand the falling away, which is to come first. 1. By undermining his Authority. Certainly his Authority is undermined, when others pre∣sume to usurp his place without his leave. Therefore to super-induce an universal head of the visible Church, which Christ never ap∣pointed, is manifestly to usurp his Authority, though the party so intruding, should pretend to hold his Soveraignty from Christ, and un∣der him: yet this is treason against Christ, for here is an authority set up without, and there∣fore against his consent. Put the Case in a tem∣poral
Kingdom, and the thing will be clear. And thus the Pope is an usurping head, of a Rebellion against Christ. Where did Christ in∣stitute him to take this Office? Tu es Petrus, is such a stale pretence, so often baffled and de∣feated, and pretended upon so small grounds, as that Christ hereby conveyed singular authority to Peter, above the rest of the Disciples: That from Peter it descendeth to his Successors, and to those of Rome (if ever he were at Rome) and not those of Antioch; that it is endless to pur∣sue the absurdities of this impertinent allega∣tion. The argument holdeth the more strong∣ly, when the Pope condemneth all the Church∣es, that will not be his Subjects; how holy, good, and obedient to the Laws of Christ so∣ever they be. Surely if any thing, this is an Apostasy, or a revolt from our rightful Lord, and to consent to this Rebellion, and Usurpa∣tion, is to be drawn into a Conspiracy against Christ, and to submit to the head of the most pernicious Schism, that did ever rend the Church of Christ; and to betray the Liberty of the People of our Lord, to a Tyrannical Usurpation. 2. Or corrupting and destroying the inter∣ests of his Kingdom; certainly, wherever there is a degeneration from the purity and simplicity of the Gospel, the interests of Christs Kingdom are destroyed. I fear (saith the A∣postle) 1 Cor. 11.3. lest by any means as the
Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. The ancient, pure, Aposto∣lick Christianity doth only preserve the In∣terests of Christs Kingdom in the World; there is no way of safety but by keeping there; for since Godliness is a mystery, and we shall see afterwards, the iniquity that is contrary, is a mystery also, 2 Thess. 2.7. The mystery of ini∣quity doth already work, We need to be exactly careful to keep close to the doctrine, worship, and Discipline of the first Gospel Church; for if these had remained pure, Antichrist had never risen. Christs Institutions would have preserved his Interests in the World. But as these were corrupted, the Apostasy prevailed. When the Faith of the Gospel was turned in∣to dead opinions, and curious questions, if not direct errours; and the worship of the Gospel was corrupted, by giving divine ho∣nour to Saints and Angels, and turned into a theatrical Pomp, and the Pageantry of empty Ceremonies, which eclipse the Majesty and splendour of it; and the Discipline of the Church into a temporal domination, and all is carried in the World by sides and interests, that Christianity looketh like another thing, a design Calculated for the present World, ra∣ther than a serious preparation for the World to come; Then certainly, there is an Aposta∣sy, and a defection from Christ; however the
corrupt manners of the Church be varnished over with the name of Christianity. There is a degeneration questionless, and that is Apo∣stasy, in a Mystery, such as this is, though not an open revolt from the Christ. But to make this more evident to you, let us consider what the Kingdom of Christ is▪ The Gospel Kingdom, is a Kingdom of Light, Life and Love. Opposite to Light, is ignorance and errour; to Life a Religion that consists of shews, dead rites, and empty Ceremonies; to Love, uncharitableness, malice, and espe∣cially hatred of the power of Godliness: now where these prevail eminently, there is an op∣posite Kingdom set up to the Kingdom of Christ; certainly, a falling off from his King∣dom. That is to say, where in opposition to Light, errour is taught, and ignorance is coun∣ted the Mother of Devotion, and people are restrained from the means of Knowledge; as if the height of Christian Faith and Obedi∣ence, did consist in an implicite believing what the Church believeth: and where instead of Life, men place their whole Religion on super∣ficial Rites, and Ceremonies, and some trifling acts of seeming Devotion, and exteriour Mor∣tifications: and instead of love to God and Souls, all things are sacrificed to private Am∣bition; and forcing Consciences with the highest penalties and persecutions, to submit to their corruptions, There is a manifest sub∣version
of the interest of Christs Kingdom. In short, Gods witnesses were slain in that City, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, and our Lord was crucifyed, Rev. 11.8. That City which answereth to Sodom for impurity, to Egypt for Idolatry, and to Ierusalem for per∣secution of the Saints; there may you find the great Apostasy. 5. This Apostasy from our Lords Authority, and the interests of his Kingdom, is some no∣table and discernable Apostasy, and the Head and Patron thereof is Antichrist; The defecti∣on is not of one, or a few, or many in divers Churches: there have always been back-sliders from the Faith, 1 Joh. 2.19. They went out from us, but they were not of us: and the Spirit of Antichrist wrought in the Apotles days, 1 Joh. 2.18. As you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many Antichrists: and again, 1 Ioh. 4.3. we are told of the Spi∣rit of Antichrist, and this is that spirit of Anti∣christ whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the World. Then described to be afterwards, Verse 5. a Worldly Spirit. They are of the World, and speak of the World, and the World heareth them: Though they profess Christianity, Carnal, Worldly Hy∣pocrites, which never Conquered the fleshly mind, and interest, have the Spiri of Anti∣christ: These obscure the light, and obstruct the life and love of the Gospel, They that
wholly affect a life of pomp and ease in the Church. Now this hath always been in all Ages: The false Christians forget, their hopes are built upon a Crucified Christ, and are to be derived to them from a Glorified Christ in the other World. Crucified in this World, and Glorified in the next, which indeed are the two considerations, that keep Christianity pure and lively: That all was purchased by a Cru∣cified Christ, and all is dispensed by a Glorified Christ; and I wish you would oftner think of it. But the great Apostasy is eminently found in some external visible Church, where these corruptions are generally received and defended. For the head of that Church is An∣tichrist: where Doctrine is corrupted, and the worship mingled with Idolatry, and the Go∣vernment an Usurpation, and bent against the Holy Seed, that desire to worship God in Spi∣rit and in Truth; there is this manifest revolt from, and a Rebellion against God and Christ, though they push with the Horns of the Lamb. That the Papists are a corrupt Sect of Chri∣stians, is beyond dispute, to any that will try their Religion by the Scriptures; and that they are far more corrupt than the Protestants  Reformed Churches, will also soon appear by the comparison, or a view of both Churches. But whether they are so corrupt, as to become the Seat of Antichrist, is the matter under de∣bate.
Therefore let any one conside, where the eminent Apostasy is to be found. Who are they that invade Christs Authority, by setting up an Universal Head over all Cristians? Who are they that establish the Doctrine of Daemons, or revive the worship of a middle sort of Powers, between God and mortal men? 1 Tim. 4.1. who through Hypocrisy nvent so many lies to maintain it, and when Christians should keep themselves from Idols, 1 Ioh. 5.21. yet in defiance of this, worship Angels, and other Creatures, Col. 2.18. Let n man be∣guile you of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, &c. and erect the Images of Saints, commanding and compelling men to adore them, and pray to them; who are they that are not contented with the one only Mediatour? 1 Tim. 2.5. For there is one God, and one Mediatour between God and men, the man Christ Iesus. 1 Cor. 8.5. For though there be that are called Gods, whether in Hea∣ven, or in Earth (as there be Gods mny, and Lords many.) But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him; but set up other Meditours of Intercession? Who are they that plead for In∣dulgences? and the supererogatory sasfactio of the Saints, as gathered into the Treasure of the Church, and so profitable for the remissi∣on of sins? and condemn them who think
the contrary? Who are they that keep Beli∣vers from reading the Scriptures, when they are so expresly injoined to do it, Joh. 5.39. and Psal. 1.2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law doth he meditate day and night: That deny one part of the Lors Supper to his Disciples, notwithstanding his Institution to the contrary? 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. After the same manner also he took the Cup, whe he had supped, saying, This Cup is the New Te∣stament in my blood: This do ye, as often as ye drink it, in remembrance of me: for as oft as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew forth the Lords death till he come. It were end∣less to instance in all, I shall speak more of it in the following Verses. 6. This Apostasy is not only forbidden, but foretold as a thing that would certainly come to pass. This consideration is necessary for di∣vers reasons. 1. Because the Papists ask how this can be consistent with Christs care of his Church, that there should be an Universal Apostasy, and de∣cay of Christian Religion? who hath promi∣sed, The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Answ. That promise is made chiefly to the invisible Church, or community of the Elect, not to all the visible Societies of the Christians, against whom the Devil can and hath pre∣vailed, and doth daily, to the destruction of many Souls. And we say not that the whol
visible Church did apostatize, though all are faulty. 2. Because some require the time when this Apostasy began to be particularly assigned, and noted to them, and by what persons these corruptions were first introduced, or else de∣ny that any such thing hath been. But the Case is clear: it began to work betimes, only it wrought in a mystery: but cannot we prove a man to be old, unless we prove the first mo∣ment when his gray Hairs began to appear, or his natural force to be abated? Who can tell every step of the progress of the coruption of the Jewish Church, and why should the like be required of the Christian? This Dunghil of corruption was not raised in one Age: and suppose that in tract of time Authors be for∣gotten, matters of Faith are not to be contra∣dicted because of the defect of Hitory, and yet Histories are not altogether wanting in the Case, only in things that came in by degrees, they are not necessary. In the introducing of the general Apostasy, some erred in the sim∣plicity of their hearts, as the people followed Absolom, 2 Sam. 15.11. But shall we deny a thing to be done, because we cannot speak the particular moments of time, and circum∣stances of them when, and how it was done? Shall we say the pointer in the Dial passeth not, because we do not see its motion? Might not the Priests judge of a Leprosy, though
they knew not how it was contracted? Ini∣quity mystical did by degrees prevail. 3. Because some think if we should grant such an Apostasy, it would interrupt the whole course of visible Christianity, and so deprive the World of a Ministry and Ordinances, till Christ send some new Nuncio's from Heaven, or by miracle at least authorize a new Mini∣stry, that may be owned by the World, and received by his people. A vain conceit! for though this Apostasy is foretold, that it should come to pass, yet it is also foretold, that Christ will be with the Apostles, and their Successors, to the end of the World, Math. 28.20. and prayed for all them that should believe in him through their word, Ioh. 17.20. and though the Church was corrupted by degrees, yet all this while it ceased not to be a Church, nor the Officers thereof to be Christs Ministers: when the Ten Tribes fell away, yet God til their dissolution continued the Spirit of Pro∣phecy amongst them; and in the Christian Church a Ministry, though many had their calling from such who consented to the in∣croachments of Antichrist. God had not so wholly cast off his people, but that there was a Ministry and Ordinances; their Ministry was a true Ministry, and the Baptism a true Bap∣tism, to be owned in foro externo: for these things remain whilst any thing of Christianity remaineth. In a body mangled with wounds,
or all over grown with sores, there is a life remaining; and so some Functions and Offices of Life. God called Idolatrous Israel his peo∣ple, and was not angry with them for circum∣cising their Children, but for offering them to Moloch, Ezek. 16.20, 21. But of this in the next Verse, where Antichrist is said to sit in the Church of God. 2. The Revelation of Antichrist. And that man of sin shall be revealed, the Son of perdition; where two things are notable. 1. His rise and appearing. 2. The names and titles given to him. 1. His rise and appearing, expressed in the word [revealed] that is, that great and chief Antichrist, upon that Apostasy or falling away, shall be extant and shew himself to the World. A thing is said to be revealed two ways; Ei∣ther when it is in being, or when it is disco∣vered; both ways are proper here. He shall publickly appear, exercising a Tyranny in the World, or cast off his Vail, and shew himself in his Colours: God by his Providence per∣mitteth him to be, and by the doctrine of the Gospel discovereth his impostures to all those who have no mind to be deceived. 2. The names or titles given to him, they are two. 1. The man of sin, wherein he is compared and likened to Antiochus. 2. The Son of Perdition; wherein he is compared and likened to Iudas.
For the first, The Jews called Antiochus, The man of sin, 1 Macch. 2.48. They gave not the power to the Sinner; in the Greek, , They gave not the Horn to the Sinner; The Syriac Version hath it, They suffered not the Horn of the Sinner to be lifted up: and Verse 62. Fear not the words of the man of sin, , From the words of the man the Sinner be not afraid, Now why did they call Antiochus the man of sin? Because he sought to alter the Religion of the People, and by cruelty to introduce a change of Worship and Idolatry, and such Laws as he would set up: now according to this pattern, Antichrist is a man of sin; that is, either a man given up to all sin eminently, a Sinner addicted unto sin, and a Ring-lea∣der of others unto sin, either by fraud and violence, or as he giveth incouragements and encitements to sin; or as a special kind of Sin∣ner, an Usurper and Invader of the Empire of the Son of God. So was Antiochus. So was Antichrist. Now how much open sin is pra∣ctised, allowed, and maintained in the Papacy, I list not now to rake into, their own stories speak enough. The Sodomy, Blasphemy, In∣cest, Adulteries, Sorceries, Murders, Treasons, Parricides, which they have authorised and countenanced, Histories witness, that hardly hath the World yielded a more abominable sort of men, than have sate in that Chair of
pestilence. This I am sure of, that a man can sin no where at so cheap a rate as in Popery, where what by dividing their sins into mortal and venial, and these expiated by a little pen∣nance, accompanied with a single Attrition, and bare grief and trouble, because of the pu∣nishment; what by Faculties, Pardons, Li∣cences, Dispensations, Indulgences, sin is di∣stinguished out of the Conscience. But because he is called the man of sin, here it cometh fitly to be inquired, whether Anti∣christ be an individual person? for that man of sin would seem to be some single person; No, he is put for a Society and succession of men, that make up the head of the Apostate State. As one Lyon figured the whole Kingdom of the Babylonians, and one Bear the Kingdom of the Medes and Persians, and one Leopard the Kingdom of the Graecians, Dan. 7. and there the fourth Beast is the fourth Kingdom: So one person that succession of men, that head the Revolters from Christ. So Dan. 8. a Goat figured a succession of Kings: So the As∣syrian, Isa. 10.5. several Kings in that Empire: So Isa. 14.9. The King of Babylon, meaning not one but many. So this man of sin doth not note a single man, a but succession of men, a body politick or corporate, under one oppo∣site head to the Kingdom of Christ: So the man of God is put for all faithful Ministers, 2 Tim. 3.17. So, Honour the King: 1 Pet. 2.17.
Series Regum. So , Heb. 9.25. The High Priest every year entreth into the holy place; meaning not one, but the succession of the order; and in reason it must needs be so here. Because Antichrist from his beginning to his end, from his rise and Revelation, till his ru∣ine and destruction, will take up such a long tract of time, as cannot fall within the Age of any one man; even from the time of the Apo∣stles, till the end of the World. Antichrist is the Head of the Apostasie: for here the Apo∣stasie, and the Revelation of the man of sin, are conjunct; now the mysterious Apostasie could not be perfected in a short time. 2. The Son of Perdition: wherein he is likened to Iudas, Joh. 17.12. None of them is lost but the Son of Perdition. Him he re∣sembleth in Covetousness, Treachery, and fi∣nal destruction. The Term may be explained, either passively, or actively. 1. Passively, As one condemned to everlasting destruction. As the Son of Death, is one condemned to die, 2 Sam. 12.5. He shall be a Son of death; we translate it, He shall surely die: So Children of wrath, Eph. 2.3. So here, Son of Perdition. 2. Actively, Bringing destruction upon him∣self and others. One that shall destroy others: and so he is called Abaddon, and Apollyn, Rev. 9.11. and is opposite to Christ who is the Au∣thor of Salvation, Heb. 5.9. but Antichrist of destruction: And let us see the parallel be∣tween
him and Iudas: for the person is a Type, as well as the name hath a sigificancy: Antichrist then is like Iudas, in Profession a Disciple of Christ; in Office, a Govenour of the Church; but in practice a Traytor: As they said of the blind man, John 9.9. Some said, this is he, others, he is very like him: The Pope boasteth, that his Seat is Apostolical, his Chair is Peters Chair, and that he is the Suc∣cessour of the Apostle: Grant it, but there is an errour of the person, not of Peter but of Iudas. Let us see the Parallel. 1. Iudas was not a stranger, but a pretended Friend and Apostle, Acts 1.17. He was numbered with us, and obtained part of his Ministry. Turks and Infidels are Enemies to Christ, but Antichrist seeketh to undermine him, under a pretence of Friendship: , is one in shew for, and in effect against Christ: and the Beast in the Revelation is said to push with the horns of the Lamb, Rev. 13.11. If he were a professed Enemy, what mystery were there in it? but mystery was written upon the Womans forehead, Rev. 17.5. and here ver. 7. The mystery of iniquity. It is wisdom to discern the false Prophet, Rev. 13.18. but there needeth no great wisdom to discover an open and pro∣fessed Adversary. 2. He sold Christ for a small matter. Omniae Roae venalia, Pardons, Indulgences, freedom from Purgatory, all to be bought with mo∣ney,
and it is small matter, considering the things put to sale; The pardon of sins; the Souls of men redeemed with Christs precious blood. The Antichristian State maketh a Mar∣ket of Religion: Truth is made to yield to interest and profit. 3. Iudas betrayed Christ with a Kiss, under a pretence of honouring him, Luke 22.48. Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a Kiss? Antichrit is a true Adversary of Christ, though he pretend to adore him, as those that muthered the pre∣sent Prophets, would by all means beautify the Tombs of the Prophets deceased, and bear a respect to their memories. Matth. 23.30. He pretendeth to be his Servant, yea a Ser∣vant of Servants, but is really his Enemy. The Apostle telleth us of some, that were Ene∣mies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18. Who to appearance such friends to the Cross, as the rabble of nominal Christians? but they are op∣posers of his spiritual Kingdom, vertue, and power of the Cross: You have Crucifixes every where, Painted, Carved, Gilded: they are ready to worship the Cross with a holy Worship: they set it in their Temples, Altars, wear it in their bosoms, and where ever they meet it, shew it reverence; adorn it with Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; their Popes and Prelates have it carried before them, and are not these friends of the Cross? No, they live a
Worldly, sensual life, and all their Religion tendeth thereunto: therefore Enemies of the Cross of Christ, because they mind earthly things. This is right Antichrist-like, to betray Christ under a colour of Adoration. 4. Iudas was a guide to them tat came to take Christ; and one main work of Anti∣christ is, to be a Ring-Leader in persecuting for Religion. Christ is in Heaven, death hath no more power over him: his natural body is above abuse, but his mystical body still suf∣fereth: Acts 9.6. Why persecutest hou me? Antichrist is the head of the persecuting State, others are his Emissaries and Agents, to take Christ in his members. It is a politick Religion, that must be carried on with Worldly Artifi∣ces, with power and Cruelty. Lastly, The Covetousness of Iudas is set forth. He was a thief, and one that carried the bag, Joh. 12.6. England to its bitter cost know∣eth the poling exactions of the Papacy: All its dealing with us was to fill the Bag, out of this Puteus inexhaustus. Now all these things should open our Eyes; we may behold the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition; one egge is not more like to another, than Iudas and Antichrist. 1. Vse is to perswade us to a detestation of what is Antichristian. And to that end, let us mark the progress of the Text. 1. The Apo∣stasie made was for Antichrist. 2. Antichrist
rising upon the Apostasie, becometh a man of Sin. And 3. The Man of Sin is also the Son of Perdition. 1. Let me begin first with the falling away. There is a twofold falling away, either from the power and practice of Godliness, or from a true Religion to a false, particularly to Po∣pery. 1. I begin with the falling away from the power and practice of Godliness, though the profession be not changed; and the rather partly, because this disposeth to the entertain∣ment of errour. When a people that are car∣ried with great fervour and vigour of zeal for a while, lose their affections to good, and return to a worldly sensual life, then the byass of their hearts doth easily prevail against the light of their understandings: And so un∣sanctified men may the sooner be drawn to Apostasy; they never felt the quickning vir∣tue of Faith, and were never wrought by it to the true love of God, or an holy and hea∣venly mind and life: And partly also, because if a lively Christianity had been kept up, An∣tichrist had never risen in the World: And it is the way to keep him 'out still. When the Ser∣vants slept, the Enemy sowed Tares, Matth. 13. A sleepy Religion, and corruption of man∣ners, made way for corruption of doctrine, worship, and order: It was with the Church according to the Spouses complaint; I sleep but my heart waketh, Cant. 5.2. Some care
there was, but much drowsiness and deadness in Religion, and that produced the great Apo∣stasie. Partly too, because there is such a com∣plyance between the nature of Antichristia∣nism, and the temper of a carnal heart: For superstition and profaneness, grow both upon the same Root: A lothness to displease the flesh; the sensual nature of man is such, that it is loth to be crossed, and that breedeth profaneness: For wherefore do men ingulf themselves in all manner of sensualities, but because they are loth to deny their natural appetites and desires, and row against the stream of flesh and blood: but will walk in the way of their own heart, and in the sight of their own eyes, Eccles. 11.9. Again, if nature be to be crossed, it is only a little: It hall only be in some external actions, and obervances, and dead rudiments, which neve kill our lusts, nor promote the divine life: And this pleasing superstition shall make up a Religion, which is a fit pillow for a carnal heart to sleep upon. Popery is the easiest Religin for the flesh that can be found out; for it never bi∣teth nor disturbeth their lusts. The duties of it, are like the Pharisees fasting, which our Lord compareth to old Wine, Matth, 9.17. Fit for old dried skin Bottles. Well, take heed, of falling away from a lively Godliness: no man entreth seriously upon Religion, but with some tasting or rejoicing, Heb. 6. now as this
decayeth we fall off. The Heavenly life is ob∣structed, if not choaked and quite lost. Now to prevent this observe two things. 1. Your coldness in duties. 2. Your boldness in sin∣ning. 1. Coldness in duties, when the will and affections grow more remiss, and the worship of God which keepeth up the remembrance of him, is either omitted, or performed perfun∣ctorily, and in a careless and stupid manner, Jer. 2.32. My people have forgotten me days without number. Job 27.10. Will he always call upon God, will he delight himself in the Almighty? God chargeth Israel with growing weary of him, and it began in not calling upon him, Isa. 43.22. Now when you seldom think or speak of God, and do not keep up a delightful Com∣munion with him, there is a falling away. 2. Boldness sinning, when men lose their tenderness and strictness, and the awe of God is lessened in their hearts; and they do not only sin freely in thought, but freely in act, have not that hatred of sin, and watchfulness that for∣merly, but more abandon themselves to a car∣nal life. You are falling off from God a-pace, 2 Pet. 2.20. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the World, through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the beginning: At first the heart checked you for sin, but you did not
kindly come off, were not troubled about it, hoped God would pardon it; and then you are bold to venture again, and so by egrees are entangled in the sensual and worldly life. Now consider the causes of it: 1. Want of Faith in God, Heb. 3.12. Take heed Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God. You have not a sound belief of his being and presence. 2. Want of love to God, Rev. 2.4, 5. Never∣theless I have (somewhat) against thee, because thou hast left thy first love: Remember therefore from whence thou art fln, and repen; and do thy first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of its place, except thou repent. Your hearts decline from that love you had to him, and his ways; and then your work is intermitted. 3. Want of a due sense of the World to come, Heb. 10.39. But we are not of them who draw back to perdi∣tion, but of them that believe, to the saving of the Soul. 4. The love of the present World, 2 Tim. 4.10. For Demas hath forsaken me, ha∣ving loved this present World. The more that is valued, the more your hearts are taken off from things to come, and the care about them; you have too great a liking, either to the profits of the World, 1 Tim. 6.10. The love of money is the root of all evil; which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the Faith; or else the pleasures of the World, 2
Tim. 3.4. Lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. As the inclination of the heart groweth stronger to sensual pleasures, your thoughts of God are less serious and pleasing to you. Now look to these things, left you grow quite weary of God, and the holy life, which once you had an affection unto. 2. From a true Religion to a false: which may be done two ways. 1. Out of corrup∣tion of mind. 2. Out of vile affection. 1. Out of weakness of mind, as those do that were never well grounded in the truth, Eph. 4.14. That we henceforth be no more Chil∣dren, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the slight of men, (and) cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to de∣ceive, 2 Pet. 3.16. In which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are un∣learned, and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction. Therefore we need to be established: but the forsaking of a truth we were bred in, usually cometh from some falseness of Heart: Some errours are so contrary to the new nature, that they discern them by the unction, Joh 2.20. But ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things. 2. Out of vile affection, when they forsake the truth, for the advantages of a fleshy Worldly life, some places to be gotten by it, &c. and as the Whore of Babylon hath a Golden
Cup, Riches, and Preferments, wherewith it inviteth its Proselytes; now these are worse than the former, for they sell the birthright, Heb. 12.16. Lest there be any fornicator or prophane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat sold his birthright: Oh! Christians take beed to your selves. Apostasy brought Antichrist into the Church: Let it not jure postliminio, bring him back again into the Land, or into your hearts. 2. The next step is the man of sin: As the first Apostasy of Adam and Eve brought sin into the World so this great Apostasy brought in a deluge of sin into the Church, and defi∣led the Holy Society, which Christ had ga∣thered out of the World. Idolatry is often called Adultery, or Fornication; spiritual un∣cleanness disposeth to bodily, and bodily to spi∣ritual: Usually a corrupt state of Religion, and corrupt manners, go together: otherwise the dance and the fiddle would not suit. The World cannot lie quiet in a course of sin, if there be not some Libertine, Athestical Do∣ctrine, and carnal worship to counenance it, Rev. 11.10. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another: because these two Prophets tormented them that dwelt on the Earth. 3. The man of sin is also the Son of Perdi∣tion. 1. Actively: False Religions strangely
efferate the mind: Jude 11. These go in the way of Cain, and Hosea 5.2. Revolters are pro∣found to make slaughters: men think no cruelty nor dishonesty unlawful, which serveth to promote the interests of their Sect, and lose all Charity to those that are not of their way. 2. Passively, shall be destroyed. Sometimes grievious Judgments come in this World, for the corruptions of Religion; but in the World to come, dreadful is the end of Apostates. 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ, they are again inangled therein, and overcome: The lat∣ter end is worse with them than the beginning; for it had better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after they had known it, to turn from the Holy Commandement, delivered unto them.
SERMON IV. 2 Thess. 2.4. Who opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped: So that he as God sitteth in the Temple of God shewing himself that he is God. IN this matter of Antichrist, we have made this progress. First, that he arose upon and by a falling away, from the ancient pure state of Christianity. Secondly, That the Holy Ghost points him out by his names and Titles, which are two, the man of Sin, where∣in he is resembled to Antiochus, and the Son of Perdition, wherein he is resembled to Iudas. As Antiochus he is one, that by force and power should change the Laws and Ordinan∣ces, and compel men to his abominations. As Iudas he should betray Christ by a Kiss, for Worldly gain, and be one that is in pretence an Apostle, but indeed a real Adversary to Christ. Now after the Apostle had pointed at him, by his names and Titles, he describeth him by his practices, wherein his names and titles are verified; for here he proveth, that
he should be as Antiochus, by his exalting him∣self above all that is called God, which is said of Antiochus, Dan. 11.36. And the King shall do according to his will, and he shall exalt and magnify himself above every God, and shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods. And as Iudas, one sitting in the Temple of God, that is, he sitteth there as exercising a publick Ecclesiastical Office; yea, challenging the highest Seat in it. He sitteth there Potestate Regiminis, by the power of his Government; he doth Chathedratica potestat praesidere (E∣stius.) His sitting there as chief, shews him as Iudas; his sitting here as God, and exalting himself above all that is called God, sheweth him Antiochus. But to handle the words more closely, An∣tichrist is here set forth, 1. As opposite to Christ: , one set to the contrary, that is, in respect of Pride chiefly. Christ was the pattern of humility, Antichrist is the King of Pride: Christ would not so much as assume to himself an Authority to divide the Inheritance between two Bre∣thren, Luke 12.14. Man, who made me a Iudge, or a Divider over you? but Antichrist will de∣pose Kings, and dispose of Kingdoms. 2. The instances of his Pride. 1. In exalt∣ing himself above all human power, who ex∣alteth himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped: 2. An usurpation of divine
honour; he as God, sitteth in the Temple of God, shewing himself that he is God. Let us open these things more particularly. 1. He is represented in the term , as one diametrically opposite to Christ, and contrary to him, who is the true Head, and Lord of the Church, Acts 10.36. He is Lord over all; but Antichrist opposeth him∣self, that is, sheweth himself in a quite con∣trary appearance. That which is most remark∣able in Christ, and should be in all his fol∣lowers, is humility. He expressed a wonder∣ful contempt of the riches and greatness of the World, and all the honour which is of man; taking the form of a Servant, and ma∣king himself of no reputation, and living a mean inferiour life. He came not to be mini∣stred unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Matth. 20.28. He kept no state, nor affected pomp of Attendants, though he were Lord of all, yet he became poor to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. But it may be this was proper to him, doth he expect it from his Ser∣vants and Officers, in the Church? Yes, this is the grace which he hath recommended to all his Followers: Matth. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly. But especially to the Ministers of the Gospel: our Lord foresaw what spirit would work in them, and there∣fore he forewarned them of Pride and Lord∣liness, Matth. 20.25, 26. Ye know that the
Princes of the earth do exercise dominion over them, and they that are grea exercise Authority upon them: but it shall not be so among you, but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister. Among Christs Servants, he that is chief, must be chief in service; even as a ser∣vant unto all, Luke 22.26. He that is chief, as he that doth serve. Domination, Greatness, Principality and Power, is allowed in the Ci∣vil State, for there it is necessary; yet it is excluded the Church. This affecting prehe∣minence and chiefness is the bane of the Church. It is taxed as a great sin in Diotrephes, 3 Ioh. 9. Be it either over their fellow Labour∣ers, or the people of the Lord. You see how tender the Apostles were in this point; ever where they disclaim this affectation of Lord∣ship, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not that we are Lords of your Faith, but helpers of you joy. And Peter recommendeth it to his Fellow Elders, 1 Pet. 5.3. Neither as being Lords over Gods Heri∣tage, but being examples to the flock. And if the Apostles would not assume Lordship, who may? It is true, there is a Government in the Church, and the people are to obey their Guides, Heb. 13.17. And to have them highly in honour, for their works sake, 1 Thessa. 5.13. but yet the Pastors of the Church should go∣vern by Light and Love, not by pomp and force, and not be known by such pomp and Authority as begets fear. Well now, let us
see the opposite state. If humility and meek∣ness be in the very Essence of Christianity, and woven throughout the whole frame of it, then it is Antichristian to be Lordly, and proud, es∣pecially in them who pretend to be Successors of Christ, and his Apostles. Now in the Pope and his Adherents, you will see the ost odi∣ous pride set forth, that ever the World was conscious unto, without any Cloak and shame. And all their business is to get power: what designs they have for preferment in the World, how studiously they have, and do prosecute it, they blush not to own openly, before Angels or Men. This worldly Ambition to rise higher and higher, is their design and Trade of Life. As the Bishop of Rome, at first from the chief Pastor of that City, affected to be an Arch∣bishop over the Suburbian Towns and Ci∣ties: then a Patriarch over many Cities, and because two opposed him in Italy a long time, Ravenna and Milane, he gets power over them, and then he must be Oecumenial Bishop over all the World. But Constantinople resist∣eth for a long time, yea, arrogateh within the Empire the same Titles. Who more earnest against it, than Gregory whom they call the Great, and more forward to charge the assu∣ming of this Title as Antichristian? But then, when once they began by powerful means, and many indirect courses, to be owned as univer∣sal Bishop: then inlarging their bonds, not
only over the Ecclesiastical Power, but Civil, and all Kings and Princes must stoop to them, as well as Bishops. So that here was the pro∣gress and gradation, first from the Chief Pres∣byter, a Bishop over many Presbyters in the same City; then a Metropolitan over many Bishops, in one Province; then a Patriarch over many Provinces, in one Diocess (for i the Roman Division there were seven Provin∣ces in one Diocess) then Universal Bishop in the whole World, then the only Shepherd and Bishop, and others but his Substitutes; pretty steps of ambitious incroaching! But yet exalt∣ing himself further, challenging all power in Heaven and Earth. And the like is practised by his followers (at this day in the Church of Rome) from private Priests, they grow up in∣to some Prelature, as Arch-Deacons, Deans, then a Bishoprick, then a better or richer; then Archbishops, Cardinals, then Pope. And the Devil is grown so impudent by the help of these Churchmen, as that it is counted a great piece of spiritual wisdom, publickly own∣ed in the World, to be able by these steps to get higher and higher, and Lord it over God Heritage; as if ambitious affectation were the honour of Christianity, and Gospel humility would expose the Church to scorn; and pomp and grandeur were a greater Orna∣ment to Religion than Grae: when in the mean time they have nothing to prove them
to be true Pastors of the Church, but Iudas his Kiss, a little owning of Christ to counte∣nance their Ambition. Secondly, the particular instances, wherein the pride of Antichrist is set forth, are two. 1. His exalting himself above all humane Pow∣ers: He opposeth and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped. Here the object is set forth by two terms. 1. All that is called God. 2. Or worshipped. They both belong to the same thing. 1. That which is called God, that is Magi∣strates, Princes, and Kings, Psal. 81.1. He judgeth among the Gods, and verse the sixth, I have said ye are Gods, all of you are Children of the most high: and Joh: 10.34, 35. It is writ∣ten in your Law, I said ye are Gods. If he call them Gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, &c. God hath cloathed Magistrates with his own ho∣nour, so far, that he hath put his name upon them: and their eminency is a part of his Image, as it lyeth in Superiority, Dominion, and Power. Though Magistrates be but like their Brethren, as to their common nature, yet in respect of their Office, they have the glorious Title of [Gods] conferred upon them, as being his Vicegerents, and bearing his per∣son in Government, they are honoured with his name. So that without impeachment of Blasphemy, those that excel in the Civil power
may be called Gods. Now over these Anti∣christ exalteth himself, that is, above all Kings and Potentates. Secondly, The other notion is, , we render it, or is worshipped, the Greek word is, whatever is held in the highest de∣gree of reverence, whatever is August, or Il∣lustrious, as the Emperours of Rome were cal∣led , Acts 25.21. Paul appealed to be re∣ferred to the hearing of Augustus; it is , not Augustus Caesar, who was then dead, but his successour. Well then, here is the Cha∣racter of Antichrist: That he exalteth himself above all Civil Authority, Authed and per∣mitted of God, not only above ordinary Ma∣gistrates, but Kings and Emperours. Now we find in History no less than twenty Kings and Emperours, trampled under foot by the Pope of Rome, some of whom he had excommuni∣cated, and deposed from their Kingdoms, and their people dispensed withal, in denial of their subjection to them; others brought to cruel shameful Deaths, and their Kingdoms miserably rent and torn, to the destruction of Millions of men, by their means. He that hath any knowledge of the Histories in Christen∣dom, cannot but know these things; how he treadeth on their necks, kicketh off their Crowns with his Feet, and hath brought them to the vilest submissions. And if Kings and Emperours have received more spirit and
courage, and the Popes of Rome learned more modesty now adays, thanks is due to the light of the Gospel, which hath shined so far, and to such a degree, as to the consuming of Antichrist, though not to his utter destru∣ction. Secondly, The next instance of his pride, is his usurpation of divine honour, expressed in two clauses. 1. The one sheweth the usurpa∣tion it self, That he as God, sitteth in the Tem∣ple of God. 2. The other, the degree of it, shewing himself as God. Both must be explained and vindicated. 1. For t usurpation it self, he sitteth as God in the Temple of God. By the Temple of God, is meant the Church, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Know ye not, that ye are the Temple of God, and the spirit of God dwelleth in you: if any man de∣file the Temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are. So 2 Cor. 6.16. What agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are the Temple of the living God. The external visible Church which professeth the Faith of Christ, and bear∣eth his name. So that the place wherein Anti∣christ shall arise, is the visible Christian Church: not Rome Ethnick, but Christian. But is then the Church of Rome, the Church of Christ? Answ. It was one part of it be∣fore it was perverted; it usurpeth still that name, it retaineth some relique of a Church
mangled as it is: (saith Calvin in his Epistles) I think I have given some strong reasons, that it yet retaineth some shew of a Church. Now in this Temple of God he sitteth as an Officer and Bishop there, as I before explained it: And whereas other Princes are said to Reign so ma∣ny years, the Pope is said to sit so long. It's his Sedes, his Cathedral or Seat. And again, here he is said to sit as God, that is, as God Incar∣nate: for Christ is the true and proper Lord of the Church. None should Reign there but he. And the name of this Man of sin is not Antitheos, but , not one that di∣rectly invadeth the properties of the supreme God, but of God Incarnate, or Christ as Me∣diatour: he sitteth negatively, not as a Mini∣ster, but positively as supreme Lord upon Earth, whom all must adore and worship; and Kings and Princes kiss his feet. In short, he usurpeth the Authority due to Christ. Now I shall prove that by a double argument. 1. By usurping the Titles due to Christ. For he that will make bold with names, will make bold with things: as to be, Sponsus Ecclesiae; the Husband of the Church. As Innocent cal∣led the Church Sponsam suam, his Spouse. Ca∣put Ecclesiae, the head of the Church, which is proper to the Saviour of the body. Supreme, visible, and universal head, which only Christ is, who hath promised to be with her to the end of the World, and will be visible to those
who do at length approach his Court in Hea∣ven, where his Seat is. To be chief Pastor: Christs own Title, And when the chief Shep∣herd shall appear, 1 Pet. 4.5. To be Pontifex Maximus, The greatest High Priest. Whereas Christ alone is called the High priest of our profession, Heb. 3.1. and the great High Priest over the House of God, Heb. 4.14. So his Vicar General upon Earth, whereas the ancient Church attributed this to the Holy Ghost, call∣ing it Vicariam vim spiritus sancti, he supplies his room and absence. Now Titles including Power, certainly they are not to be usurped without Warrant. Therefore to call the Pope the chief and only Shepherd, and the like; It is to usurp His Authority to whom these things originally belong. Secondly, He doth usurp the thing implyed by the Titles; the Authority over the Church which is only due to God Incarnate. Supreme Authority may be considered, either as to the claim, right, property, and preheminence, which belong to it, or to the exercise. 1. The claim and right pretended. He sit∣teth as God in the Temple of God, that is, by vertue of his office there, claimeth the same power that Christ had, which is fourfold 1. An unlimited power, over all things, both in Heaven and Earth. This was given to Christ, Matth. 28.18. and the Pope, as his Vicar challengeth it. But where is the Plea and
ground of the claim? For one to set up him∣self as a Vice-God, without Warrant, is Re∣bellion against Christ. To set himself in his Throne without his leave; surely none is fit to have this Authority, that hath not his power to back and to administer and govern all things for the Churches good, which power God would trust in the hands of no Crea∣ture. 2. An Universal Headship and Supremacy, over all the Churches of Christ. Now this supreme power over all Christians, is the right of God Incarnate, and whosoever challengeth it, sits as God in the Temple of God: and it is very derogatory to the comfort of the faith∣ful, that they should in all things depend up∣on one man as their supreme Pastor, or else be excluded from the hope of Salvation: Cer∣tainly this power as to matter of fact, is im∣possible to be managed by any man, consider∣ing the vast extent of the World, and the va∣riety of Governments, and different Interests, under which the people of God find shelter, and protection; and the multitude and di∣versity of those things which are comprized in such a Government; And as to matter of right, it i acrilegious. For Christ never in∣stituted a such Universal Vicar and Bishop. It is a dignity too high for any Creature: none is fit to be Universal Head of the Church, but one that is God as well as Man.
3. Absolute Authority, so as to be above controul. When a mortal man should pretend to be so absolute as to give no account of his actions, that it shall not be lawful to be said to him, what dost thou? and all his Decrees must be received without Examination or Complaint, this is such a Soveraignty as be∣longs to none but God, Job. 9.12. Behold he taketh away, who will hinder him? who can say unto him what dost thou? Now this is in their Canon law, that the Pope is to be judged by no man, that though he should lead Millions of Souls into Hell, none can say, Domine cur ita facis? 4. Infallibility and freedom from errour, which is the property of God: he neither is deceived, nor can deceived. Let God be true and every man a Lyar. Now that corrupt and fallible man should arrogate this to himself, such an unerring in judgment, is to usurp di∣vine honour, in matter of right, and in matter of fact. For the Pope to arrogate this, is as great a contradiction to all sense and reason, as if a man sick of the Plague, or any other mortal Disease, should say, that he was im∣mortal, and in that part wherein the Disease was seated. 2. As to the exercise, there are two acts of supreme Authority. 1. Legislation 2. Judgment
1. Legislation: It is the peculiar and in∣communicable property of Christ, to be Lord and Lawgiver to the Church, Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Iudge, The Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our King, he will save us. God alone hath such interest in his people, as to prescribe supreme or universal Laws to them, and we are his Subjects, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy. Now whosoever will make Laws, that shall imme∣diately bind the Conscience, they invade Christs Soveraignty. This is spiritual Tyranny, and the worst sort of Tyranny, to arrogate a power over the subjects of Christ, and their Consciences, as Lord of their faith. He that taketh upon him to rescind and make void his Institutions and Ordinances, and set his own in their place, and give that reverence and honour to them which only belongeth to the Ordinances of Christ, He is Antichrist, what∣ever he be. 2. As to Judgment. It is an exercising an Authority no less than Divine. So to take up∣on him to absolve man from his duty to God, or the penalty which sin hath made his due. The one is done by Dispensations, the other by Indulgences. And therefore whoever by Dispensations, antiquates and dispenses with the Laws of God, himself is thus guilty: As dispensing with marrying the Brothers Wife. Nay, one of the Popes dispensed with one
that took his own Sister to Wife. I do not al∣ledge this so much for the particula facts, but to shew the power which they challenged to be inherent in themselves. Bellarmine, saith Christ, hath given Peter and his Successors, a power faciendi peccatum non peccatum, to make a sin, to be no sin; and again, If the Pope should err in forbidding Vertues, and com∣manding Vices: the Church were bound to be∣lieve Vices to be good, and Vertues to be evil; which certainly, is to set man in the place of God. 2. As to Indulgences, as to pretend to give Pardons for sin for so many years; a thing that God himself never did; to pardon the sin before it was committed; that is, to give a li∣cence to sin. So for the highest crimes to absolve men, upon a little attrition, or trouble about the sin, to do all this and more than this, as of right, is to sit in the Church of God as God. 2. And shewing himself that he is God, that is meant, not of what he professeth in words, but what he doth in deed. It is not said, that he saith he is God, but , he sheweth himself, or sets forth himself as God: the reason of the thing shew∣eth it. 1. Antichrist gets power by seduction, or the deceiveableness of unrighteousness, therefore does not openly call himself the true and only God. He is represented as a false Prophet, that speaketh lies in Hypocrisy. If one would openly and plainly profess himself
to be God, he might be a frantick Usurper, but could not be a cunning Seducer, and few would be so stupid and senseless as to be led by him. 2. Antichrist whoever he be, is to be a Christian by profession, and to have a high and great charge among the visible Professors of Christianity. He is a secret Adversary, that groweth upon the Apostasie, or degeneration of the Christian State. Now such pretend observance, and obedience to Christ, and there∣fore he would not openly declare himself to be God; and he sitteth in the Temple and Church of God as before. And it is a mystery; All which imply crafty conveyance, and that he doth not openly assume the Godhead, but slily and secretly; which doth not mend the mat∣ter; for the insinuating, devouring, unsus∣pected Enemy, is the most perillous and per∣nicious: as Ioab to Amasa, and Iudas to Christ. 3. Antichrist is plainly a man; now for a man to disanul all Religion and set up himself directly as God, is improbable. Nero, Nebu∣chadnezzar, Simon Magus would be adored as Gods, they did not deny other Gods, nor a greater God above them. Therefore it is the arrogance of works is intended: If Antichrist will shew himself as God, certainly he will sweeten his Blasphemy with some Hypocrisy, as that he is the Vicar and Vicegerent of God. 4. His shewing himself as God, is either ac∣cepting, or doing such things, which if they
did rightly belong to him, they would shew that he is God. Two persons I find in Scrip∣ture charged for usurping divine honours: The one Herod Agrippa, who was smitten by an Angel for not giving God the glory when the people cryed, the voice of God and not of man, Acts 12.22. his fault was, accepting what was ascribed by others. The other is the Prince of Tyre, Ezech. 18.2. Because thy heart is lif∣ted up, and thou hast said, I am God, I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the sea, yet thou art a man, and not God, though thon set thy heart as the heart of God. His fault was taking upon him as if he were God, to accept divine honours, to do those things which would make him equalize himself to our Lord Christ Blessed for ever; so doth he shew himself that he is God. 1. His accepting Antichrists Dis∣ciples, who call him our Lord God the Pope. Supremum numen in Terris, a certain Deity upon Earth. That the Pope hath the same Consistory with God, and the same Tribunal with Christ: That he is Lord of Heaven and Earth: That from him there are no appeals to be made, no not to God himself. That the Pope may do all that God doth, that he is the Husband of the Church, and the founda∣tion of Faith. In the Council of Lateran, Sess. 4. Alter Deus in Terra; that the words of the Pope in Cathedra, are for certainty of truth, equal to the Scriptures; that he can change
the form of Sacraments delivered by Christ, or Decree contrary to Scripture. If any do ob∣ject, that these were the applauses of his Flat∣terers and claw-backs; it is true they were so uttered; but those flatteries of the Canonists and Jesuits, do come to be received Doctrines among them: And whereas divers Popes have directed special Commissions for perusal of the works of the learned, with authority to ex∣punge and purge out whatsoever is not Or∣thodoxal, many better things have come un∣der censure, but these things stand still, as being very pleasing to his Holinesses humi∣lity, and so not to be altered. Besides many of these things have been spoken to his face without rebuke. Conc. Latt. Sess. 2. He is cal∣led the High Priest and King that is to be adored by all, and most like unto God. Sess. 9. It is said, the Aspect of thy Divine Majesty dazleth our Eyes, and applyeth to him that of the 72. Psalm, All the Kings of the Earth shall worship him, and all Nations shall serve him. Now to accept and approve of these flatterers, is to shew himself that he is God. 2. By do∣ing such things as if he were God, not by the usurpation of the formal name, as arrogating to himself such things as belong to God, his right and property, to take upon himself to be Lord of Consciences, to command what Faith is to be believed, suppressing the true doctrine of Christ, and setting up his own Inventions,
dispensing with Gods Laws, taking upon him to pardon sins. One Article for which Luther was condemned is this, That it is not in the power of the Church, or Pope, to make new Articles of Faith: another, That the best pe∣nitence of all is the new life. Qui facit Deos Divosque Deo major est. The Pope doth Ca∣nonize Saints, and his Decrees must be recei∣ved as Oracles, &c. The Use, is to give us a clear discovery where to find Antichrist: every tittle of this is fulfilled in the Bishop of Rome, that we need no longer be in doubt, and say, Is this he that should come, or shall we look for another? Who is the , but he that opposeth himself, to that humble state and frame where∣in Christ left the Church, and will be Prince of all Pastors, and swear them to his obedi∣ence, and hath made such troubles in the World to make himself acknowledged for Head and Chief? Who is he that exalteth himself above all that is called God, and is August in The World? but he that takes upon him to deprive and depose Emperours, Kings and Princes, by his Excommunications, Suspen∣sions, Interdictions, and Decrees, discharging Subjects of their Allegiance and Oaths; and giving away their Kingdoms: that doth Crown and Uncrown Emperours with his feet, and tread upon them as one would do upon a Viper? Who is he that sitteth as God, in the
Temple of God, that is, affecteth the honour due to our Lord Jesus Christ? but he that doth thus imperiously aspire [subesse Romano Pontifici definimus esse de necessitate salutis] that takes upon him a power to make a new Creed, and that we are bound to obey him; that saith he can change the things which God hath commanded in his word, and dispense with them, and so by his Decrees make the Commandment of God of none effect; and to forgive sins, not only already committed, but to be committed; which God himself ne∣ver would do; that lords it over Conscien∣ces, enslaving the World to his Usurpations: In short, that will be obeyed in those things which God hath forbidden; and take upon himself an Office, which no humane Creature is capable of. Who is he that sheweth himself that he is God, but he that suffereth himself to be decked with the spoils of Gods own Attri∣butes; to be Optimum Maximum, the best and chiefest, our Lord God the Pope, a visible Deity, and will be adored by all the Poten∣tates of the Earth, with such veneration, as greater could not be given to Christ himself if he were corporally present, and will have all the World to submit to his Decrees, as be∣ing infallible: that challengeth a power over Angels, Purgatory, and Hell? These things are as clear as day-light, and ought to be regar∣ded by us, partly that we may bless God, who
hath freed us from this Tyranny, and have a liberty of judging of truth and falsehood, out of his holy and blessed word: Partly, that we may stand fast in this Liberty. Those that were never Pope-bitten, know not the mis∣chiefs that attend this spiritual Tyranny, and God grant that we never more know it to our bitter cost. Therefore as Samuel dealt with the Israelites when they would cast off the Theocracy, or Gods Government, under which they had been well and safely governed, unless they forfeited the protection by their own sin, that they might be like all the Nations round about them, 1 Sam. 8.20. Samuel telleth them, what would be the manner of the King, that should reign over them, 1 Sam. 8.11, 12, 13. And he said, this shall be the manner of the King that shall reign over you, he will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to be his Horsemen; and some shall run before his Chariots, and he will appoint him Captains over thousands, and Captains over fif∣ties, and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his Harvest, and to make his instruments of War, and instruments of his Chariots; and he will take your Daughters to be Confectionaries, and to be Cooks, and to be Bakers: And he will take your Fields, and your Vineyards, and your Olive-Yards, even the best of them, and give them to his Servants, &c. So if such a wanton humour should possess us, that we must have
the Religion of the Nations round about us, consider whom you receive spiritually to reign over you. The King of Pride, who opposeth, and exalteth himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped, &c. one that will not only devour your substance, but lord it over your Consciences, and put out the eye of your reason, that you may the better swallow his damnable errours, pestilent. Superstitions and Idolatries, and bold usurpation on the Authority of Christ, or else burn your Bodies with temporal fire, and cast out your name as one to be condemned to that which is eter∣nal. It is easy to open the Flood-gate, but when that is done, it is not so easy to call back the Waters: and when you come to dis∣cern the difference between the blessed Yoke of Christ, and the Iron Yoke of Antichrist, it will be too late for a remedy to repent of your errour. The second Use is, to shew us how things should be carried in the true and reformed Christianity. 1. With such meekness, modesty, and mor∣tification, that our Religion may be known to be established by a Crucified Lord, whose doctrine and example do visibly and emi∣nently hold forth the contempt of the World. The pride and ambition of the Pastors of the Church, hath been the cause of all the evil in it; therefore nothing so unsuitable to the Gos∣pel,
as a domineering spirit; we that are to preach Heavenly mindedness, and self-denial, should not affect the greatness of the World, lest our lives contradict our doctrine. 2. How eminent and exemplary we should be in our obedience to Magistrates. For this is to be opposite to the Antichristian Estate. God is very tender of the honour of Civil Powers and Authorities, and will have every soul to be subject to them, Rom. 13.1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God; and again, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or to Governours, as them that are sent by him. Great respect and submission is due to them for Gods sake, and that we may commend Religion to the profane World, and live down the re∣proaches of the Gospel. They were branded as wicked men, that were not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, that despise Governments in their own hearts, or weaken the esteem of it in the hearts of others by their speeches, 2 Pet. 2.10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Govern∣ment; presumptuous are they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. 3. What a wickedness it is to usurp divine honours. We do so when we take that praise and admiration to our selves, which is only
due to God, Acts 3.12. And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people. Ye men of Israel why marvel ye at this, or why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our power or holiness we had made this man to walk? The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our Fathers, hath glorified his Son Iesus, &c. and his name, through faith in his name, hath made this man strong whom ye see and know. Yea, the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.
SERMON V. 2 Thess. 2.5, 6, 7. Remember ye not, that while I was with you, I told you these things. And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity doth already work; only he who now letteth will let, till he be ta∣ken out of the way. IN these words is, 1. A Digression, calling them to remem∣brance of what he delivered by word of mouth. 2. A Progress, in the further description of Antichrist. He had hitherto been described 1. By his Names and Titles. 2. His nature and properties; now 3. By the time of his appearing; where take notice of three things. 1. That Antichrist was not then revealed; because there was an Impediment hinering his Revelation. 2. That though he was not then revealed, yet that mystery of iniquity did begin to work, but secretly.
3. That when that impediment shall be re∣moved, then Antichrist shall be revealed. First, I begin with his putting them in mind of what he had told them before by word of mouth, Remember ye not that when I was yet with you I told you these things. This sheweth the certainty and usefulness of this Doctrine; for though the event were not to be accom∣plished in their days, yet he taught them be∣fore when present, and now repeateth it again when absent; he preached it in private, and now writeth it for publick good, and labour∣eth to confirm the truth of it, and fasten it upon their memories. Observe then, that the Doctrine of Anti∣christ is a profitable Doctrine, and a point ve∣ry necessary to be preached, and known. 1. It is a point very necessary, to admonish and warn the faithful, that they be not cir∣cumvented with these delusions, and be found in the opposite state to Christ Jesus, and the interests of his Kingdom. God hath blown his Trumpet, Rev. 18.5. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues: God calleth his people out of spiritual Babylon, it is dan∣gerous and unsafe being there; if we would escape Babylons punishments, we must escape her sins, not live in that Communion and So∣ciety, where there are such Temptations to Idolatry, and other detestable enormities. It
is disputable, whether the errors of Popery be damnable? or there be any possibility of Salvation in that Religion? some deny all pos∣sibility; others abating from the rigou of that opinion, assert a very great difficulty, 1 Cor. 3.13. Saved as by fire; if so much Christianity left as to save them, it is with much ado: But the question is not about our benefit, but our duty; not whether possibly we may be sa∣ved, but what is the way the Lord will have us to walk in; and if there were possibility, or probability of Salvation in the way, in the general, yet there is very little or none for them that live in a known sin, and especially in a sin of such a dangerous nature, as abetting an opposite faction to Christ, such as is that of Antichrist. 2. It is necessary to fortify and forewarn the people of God against a double Temptation. (1.) Against Scandal. (2.) Against Persecu∣tions. 1. Against Scandal; it is a dangerous temp∣tation to Atheism, to see Christianity so cor∣rupted, and debauched by a vile submission to serve Worldly ends, and turned into the Pa∣geantry of empty and ridiculous Ceremonies, which beget scorn and contempt of it in the minds of all considering Beholders; and there∣fore there are more Atheists in Rome and Italy, than in other Countries: supernatural things, disguised with a vain pomp, lose their reve∣rence,
and do not alarm the Conscience, but harden the heart in a setled Atheism, and con∣tempt of Christ: Now it is a mighty stay to the heart, to see that this Degeneration was foreseen and foretold, John 16.1. These things have I spoken to you, that you should not be offen∣ded. Mat. 18.7. Wo unto the World because of offences, for it must needs be that offences come, but wo to that man by whom the offence com∣eth. 2. Against Persecutions; for the man of sin is also a Son of Perdition, a destroyer of the Saints, and maketh havock of the people of God; now it is grievous when Christians suf∣fer by Christians, and we may have many doubtings and misgivings about our cause; But when Antichrist is clearly discovered, we sub∣mit the more chearfully to suffer the hardest things under his Tyranny; for suffering under Antichristian Persecution, is Martyrdom and suffering for Christ, as much as suffering under Pagan Persecution, Rev. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write Bles∣sed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, &c. not only the Primitive Mar∣tyrs, who were put to death by Heathens, but those that are condemned by Christians, and burnt for Hereticks, those are Martyrs also. 3. That we may the better understand true Christianity; ,
opposites illustrate each other; the two opposite States are Christianity, and Antichristianity; the one is a mystery of God∣liness, 1 Tim. 3.16. the other a mystery of Ini∣quity; the design of the mystery of Godliness is to recover men from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh unto God; the other to seduce men from God to the Devil, the World, and the Flesh again; and that by corrupting the former mystery, or the most excellent Institu∣tion, that ever the World was acquainted with, for the ennobling and refining mans na∣ture: so that Christs Religion is turned against himself, to lull mens Consciences asleep, whilst they gratify the lusts of the Eyes, the lusts of the Flesh, or live in Pride of Life; the Devil is gratified by all sin, but especially he is , as Synesius calleth him, one that de∣lighteth in Idols, as knowing this is the best way to make men brutish, or to live in an ob∣livion or neglect of God; for an Idol is a teacher of lies, Habak. 2.18. doth imprint up∣on the mind carnal and false conceptions of a Deity. 4. To confirm us in the truth of the Chri∣stian Faith, when we see the Prophecies of it expresly fulfilled; for that is the Lords dire∣ction to know a true Prophet; Deut 18.22. If the thing come to pass, and the event doth punctually answer the Prediction; but when Prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord,
and the thing follow not, nor come to pass. that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken. Now the Apostles did not only teach the Church the Doctrine of Christianity, but by a Prophetick Spirit, and Divine Revelati∣on, foretold things to come, and among these the great thing which is to happen, and come to pass before Christs second coming, is Anti∣christ, or the appearing of the man of sin. Therefore that we may not doubt of what is past, nor suspect what is further to come, it is good to study these Prophecies, and know, they are to be fulfilled in their time, that we may say, that God hath kept touch with the World hitherto in all the Predictions of the word, will not fail at last. Use (1.) To reprove them, that think this is a curious point not to be searched into; why then did God reveal it, and that so often by St Paul, by St Iohn, in so many Prophetical Representations of it? surely it is not curio∣sity to search into things revealed, but to in∣trude our selves into things hidden, and which God hath put under a vail of Secresy: It is true, men must know their measure, and not attempt to run before they can go, and ven∣ture upon obscure points, before well versed in plain; and it is true in more abstruse points, men must not rashly define; but soberly and modestly to enquire, and compare Predictions with plain Events, this is no way culpable.
To reprove those, that are so impatient of giving a little attendance to such Doctrines for a while, and think at least matter more profitable should be insisted on; they are per∣swaded enough already. It is well if it be so; but those that stand, should take heed lest they fall; and presumptuous confidence soon∣est giveth out, and forsaketh Christ. I would but propound this Argument to them, If it were profitable for them that were to go out of the body long before Antichrist was reveal∣ed, to be taught these things again and again, and they be charged to keep these things in re∣membrance; certainly it is more profitable for others, that live at the time when these things are in being, and the temptation is at the next door, ready to break in upon them; surely it is profitable to discover Antichrist, to reduce those that are gone astray, much more to prevent a revolt, that we may not return to this bondage after a deliverance from it. Secondly, I come to consider the time of his Appearing, and there to observe three things. That Antichrist was not then revealed, because there was an impediment hindering his Revelation, and now ye know what with∣holdeth, that he might be revealed in his time, that is, what keeps him back for the pre∣sent, until the time that God had prefixed.
The Apostle doth not expresly mention what this , or impeachment was, either because he thought it enough to appeal to their memory and knowledge; now ye know what withholdeth: there was no need of re∣peating that, which was formerly mentioned, they sufficiently knew: or partly, because he would not give the heathen an occasion of raising a persecution against the Christians, if they should come to understand, that one professing himself a Christian, should erect a Throne for himself at Rome, and that the Em∣pire should be taken away to make way for him. The Romans were very jealous, , because they talkt of these innocent notions, the Kingdom of Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven, they were apt to accense them laesae Majestatis, as if they would with open force and violence attack, or as∣sault the Empire: therefore the Apostle had spoken that, which he thought not fit to write in an Empire: or lastly, he leaveth it in this obscurity, because all Prophecies were but darkly uttered, that their accomplishment be not hindered; since it is the will of God, that such events shall fall out in the World, and out of Indulgences to his people, he is pleased to foretel this: It is not meet, that the Pre∣diction should either be too clear, or too dark; if too clear, the event would not follow, nor Gods Government of the World be carried in
such a way, as might suit with the liberty of mankind; if too dark, the comfort and cau∣tion of Gods people would not be sufficiently provided for. But what was this Impediment? The Anci∣ents generally determined it to be the Roman Empire; for so Tertullian, The Empire of Rome, which was to be divided into ten King∣doms; and reason sheweth it, because the Man of sin could not rise to his Greatness as long as the Roman Empire sood; why? be∣cause he that was to exalt himself above all that is called God, and above all that is Au∣gust, could not bring his designs to pass, as long as the Roman Empire retained its Maje∣sty; but when once that was eclipsed and re∣moved, then he was to be revealed is his time; all things have their time, and so the man of sin. Well then, it was the Roman Empire that stays the manifestation of Antichrist, he being to build his Tyranny on the ruins and wrack thereof; and therefore the Primitive Christians prayed, pro morâ finis, that it would please God to defer the fall of this Empire, fearing worse things upon the dissolution thereof. Now this impediment sheweth both the Time and Place of Antichrist; and Time and Place, next to the nature and state of things, are the best circumstances to discover him. (1.) The Place, Antichrists Seat and Throne
was to be there, where the Seat of the Roman Empire was; and St Iohn telleth us, it was situated on the City that had seven Hills, Rev. 17.9. The seven heads are seven Mountains, on which the Woman sitteth; and that is Rome, which is famously taken notice of to be seated on seven Hills or Mountains. Now Antichrist had not room as long as the seat was filled with the Roman Emperour, for this seat could not be filled with two Imperial Powers at once, especially with such a Tyrannical Power, as that of Antichrist is, exalting it self, not only above Kings and Kingdoms, but , the August State of the Emperours them∣selves; there was no exalting this Chair, till there was a removal of the Throne; while the Roman Emperour possessed Rome, the Seat was full, and till it was void, it could not be the Seat of Antichrist. (2.) The next circumstance is the Time, when the impediment is taken away, when the Roman Empire is so weakened and remo∣ved from Rome, that this Power may grow up, and that was when the Roman Empire was divided into ten Kingdoms, as Tertullian saith, and is agreeable enough with the Pro∣phecy of St Iohn, Rev. 17.12. And the ten horns which thou sawest, are ten Kings, which have not received their Kingdoms as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast; that is, near that time when the Roman Em∣pire
was broken and divided, which began near 600. years after Christs Birth. II. The next Observation is, that though he was not revealed in the Apostles days, yet the mystery of Iniquity did begin to work, but secretly; for it is said, v. 7. beginning, The mystery of iniquity doth already work. This is given as a reason why it would break out sooner, but it was kept back, there as some∣thing a brewing, that would make way for Antichrist; some disposition of the matter, some propensity thereunto, something begun, which would afterwards shew it self more emi∣nently in the great Antichrist. Here two things must be explained. 1. What is the Mystery of Iniquity? 2. How it began to work in the Apo∣stles days? 1. What is the mystery of Iniquity? I an∣swer, the design of usurping Christs Kingdom, and his Dignities and Prerogatives over the Church, to countenance the Kingdom of Sin and Darkness, under the mask of Piety and Religion: surely it is something quite contrary to the Gospel, which is the mystery of Godliness, 1 Tim. 3.16. So that this mystery is such a course and State design, as doth frustrate the true end and purpose of the Gospe, and yet carried on under a pretence of advancing and promoting it. So that to state it we must con∣sider,
1. The mystery of Godliness. 2. The mystery of Ungodliness or Ini∣quity. 1. The mystery of Godliness is known, by the ends of God by the Gospel; and the way he took to promote those ends. 1. The end of the Gospel is to recover man out of a carnal ungodly state; into a state of holiness and reconciliation with a God; the Terminus à quo; men are carnal, ungodly. (1.) Carnal, when man fell from God, he fell to himself, self interposed as the next Heir, and that self was not the Soul, but the Flesh; ma∣ny wrong their Souls, but no man ever yet hated his own Flesh, and therefore men would rule themselves, and please themselves according to their fleshly appetite and fancy, John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is lesh, and therefore love the Pleasures, Ho∣nours, and Profits of the World, as the ne∣cessary provision to satisfy the desires of the Flesh; And whosoever live thus, they live in a carnal state, as all do, till grace renew them, Rom. 8.5. but this carnal estate doth brek forth, and bewray it self in various ways of sinning, Titus 3.3. For we our selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. All are not Fornicators, Drunkards, Persecutors, nor live in the same way of sinnng, but all are
turned from God to the World, and have a carnal mind, which is emnity to God, Rom. 8. 7. (2.) The next word is ungodly, men thus constituted, live either in a denial of God, Psalm 14.1. The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God; or a neglect of God, Ephes. 2.12. Without God in the world; without any ac∣knowledgment or worship of him, Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God; or if not depri∣ved of all sense of a Deity, they worship false Gods, as those, Acts 14.12, 13. the men of Lycaonia, that called Barnabas, Iupiter, and Paul, Mercurius, because he was the chief Speaker, and would have sacrificed to them; and the Apostle saith to the Galatians, Gal. 4. 8. When ye knew not God, ye did service to them, which by nature are no Gods; they wor∣shipped plurality of false Gods: And though the wise men of the Gentiles had some confu∣sed knowledge of the true God, Rom. 1.19, 20, 21. yet they glorified him not as God, but committed Idolatry by setting up a false medi∣um of worship, an Idol, which begot a bruit∣ish Conception of God in their mind: so that a false Religion is so far from shewing a reme∣dy of corrupt nature, that it is a great part of the Disease it self. 2. The Terminus ad quem, into a state of Holiness and Reconciliation with God, in whom alone man can be happy. [1.] For Holiness and Obedience to God; the
great design of the Christian Religion, is to bring us back to God again; (1.) As we are carnal, by the denial of fleshly and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. The Grace of God that bring∣eth salvation, hath appeared to all men, teaching us; that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, &c. 1 Pet. 2.11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, that war against the soul; and Gal. 5.24. They that are Christs have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. (2.) As we are Un∣godly, to bring us to the Knowledge, Love, Worship, and Obedience of the true God, Acts 14.15. We pray you, that ye should turn from these vanities, to the living God, that hath made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and all things therein; and to seek after the Lord, from whom we have life, breath, and all things Acts 17.25, 26, 28.1 Thess. 1.9. How ye turn∣ed from Idols to serve the living and true God. [2.] Reconciliation with God, that we might have commerce with him, for the present, and live for ever with him hereafter, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing their Trespasses unto them, and hath committed unto us the word of recon∣ciliation: 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversations, &c. Heb. 7.25. He is able to save unto the uttermost all that come unto God through him; That whereas before they were
alienated from the life of God, they might live in his love, and in the expectation of be∣ing admitted into his blessed presence, that they may see him as he is, and be like him, 1 Iohn. 3.2. 2. The way it took to obtain these ends, how God may be satisfied, man renewed and changed, God pacified by the Sacrifice, Merit, and Intercession of Christ Jesus, who came in our flesh and nature, not only to acquaint us with the Will of God, and the unseen things of another World, but to suffer an accursed death for our sins: therefore the mystery of Godliness is chiefly seen in God manifested in our flesh, 1 Tim. 3.16. and man must be re∣newed and changed; for our misery sheweth what is needful to our remedy and recovery, that we be not only pardoned, but sanctified, if ever we will be saved and glorified: for till men have new and holy hearts, they can ne∣ver see God, Hob. 12.14 Without holiness it is impossible to see God: Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; &c. nor for the present love him and delight in him, nor take him for their chief happiness. As none but Christ can satisfie Justice, and re∣concile such a Rebel to God; so none but Christs Spirit can sanctifie and renew our Souls, that we may live in obedience to him, 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
name of the Lord Iesus, and by the spirit of our God. This is the Mystery of Godliness. 2. Now for the mystery of ungodliness or iniquity, that is a quite opposite state, but car∣ried on plausibly, and with seeming respect to the mystery which it opposeth; To know it take these considerations. 1. Where the rnal life is had in request and honour, there certainly is the mystery of Iniquity to be found, whatever pretences be put upon it: Now the carnal life is there had in request and honour. (1.) Where all is referred to Worldly gain and profit, and the whole frame of the Religion tendeth that way: for certainly they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, and who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Now Pardons, Indulgences, Purgatory, Shrines of Saints, what do they all tend unto but to make a merchandize of Religion? It was an old by-word, Omnia Romae venalia, all things may be bought at Rome, even Heaven, and God himself, &c. And these things are used, not only to open the peoples mouths in Prayer, but their hands in Oblations, and Offerings. The Complexion of their Religion is but a gainful Trade. But the Papal exactions and traffickings have been so much, and so loudly insisted upon, and the evil runneth out into so many branches, that I shall forbear. (2.) Where temporal greatness is looked upon as
the main prop of their Religion: The Kings Daughter is glorious within, rich in Gifts and Graces, Psal. 45.13. and Psalm 93.5. Holiness becometh thy house, O Lord, for ever. But the false Church is known by pomp and external splendor. It is easy to discern the true Mini∣sters of Christ from the false; the true are known by being much in ours, much in af∣flictions, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5, 6. In all things ap∣proving our selves the Ministers of God, in much patience, afflictions, necessities, distresses▪ in la∣bours, and watchings, and fastings; by pure∣ness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, &c. where∣as the false Ministers are known by the life of pomp and ease; the rule is plain, Because self-denial is one of the great lessons of Christia∣nity, and self-seeking the bane of it; there∣fore where men professedly seek the geatness of the World, they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies. 2. Where men are turned from God to Idols, though it be not the Daemons of the Gentiles, but Saints, as Mediators of Inter∣cession; there Godliness is destroyed, and the mystery of iniquity set up: For the great drift of the Christian Religion is to bring us to God, through Christ; so the great Whore (which imports a breach of the fundamental Article of the Convenant, Thou shalt have no other Gods but me) it is said, Rev. 17.5. Vpon
her Forehead was a name written, Mystery, Ba∣bylon, the Mother of Fornications, and abomi∣nations upon Earth, debaucheth Nations with her Idolatry, and so seduceth from God to the worship of the Creatures, that the great intent of the Gospel is lost. 3. Wherever power is usurped in Christs name, and carried on under the pretence of his Authority, to the oppressing of Christs sincere Worshippers, who hate the carnal life, and would by all means keep themselves from Idols, or bowing and worshipping be∣fore Images, but excel in unquestionable du∣ties, there is the mystery of Iniquity: for the Beast, that hath a mouth like a Dragon, push∣eth with the Horns of a Lamb, Rev. 13.11. The violence and persecution against the sin∣cere pure worshippers of Christ, is nothing else, but the mystery of Iniquity, the enmity of the carnal seed against the holy Seed, or the Seed of the Serpent, against the Seed of the Woman disguised. 4. Where there is a lessening of the merits of Christ, and his satisfaction, as if it were not sufficient for the expiation of sin, without pe∣nal satisfactions of our own; there is the my∣stery of Iniquity: for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. 5. Where the new nature is little thought of, and all Religion is made to consist in some
external Rites and Adorations, or indifferen∣ces, there the reducing of man to God is much hindered, and Christianity is adultera∣ted, and the Religion that designedly coun∣tenanceth these things, is but the mystery of Iniquity. To worship God as the Papists do, with Images, Agnus Dei's Crucifixes▪ Crossings, Spittle, Oyl, Candles, Holy Water, kissing the Pax, dropping Beads, praying to the Virgin Mary, and other Saints, repeating over the name Iesus five times in a breath, repeating such and such Sen∣tences so often, praying to God in an unknown Tongue, and saying to him, they know not what; adoring the consecrated bread as no bread, but the very flesh of Christ himself; fasting by feast∣ing upon fish instead of flesh; chusing a tutelary Saint, whose name they will invocate; offering Sacrifices for quick and dead, praying for Souls in Purgatory, purchasing Indulgences for their deliverance, carrying the Bones and other Re∣liques of Saints, going in Pilgrimage to Shrines or Images, or offering before them; with a mul∣titude more of such trashy devotions, whereby they greatly dishonour God and obstruct the motions of the Heavenly Life, yea, quite kill it: For instead of the power and life of grace, there are introduced beggarly Rudiments, or ritual observances in indifferent things, and vain traditions by which Christian liberty is restrained, and these pressed with as much se∣verity as unquestionable duties, established by
Gods known law, for the renewing and reform∣ing Mankind. We are to stand fast in the li∣berty wherewith Christ hath made us free, and not to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5.1. Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat, or drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moons, or of a Sabbath day; These things are left to arbitrament, to abstain or use them for edification. That Physician may be born with, who doth only burden the sick with some needless prescriptions, if faithful in other things; but if he should tire out the Patient with Prescriptions, which are not on∣ly altogether needless but troublesome, costly and nauseous, and doth extinguish and choke true Religion by thousands of things indiffe∣rent, making our bondage worse than the Jews, this is the mystery of Iniquity, to cheat us of the power of Godliness, by the shew of it, burdening of men with unnecessary ob∣servances. 2. How did this work in the Apostles time? Something there was then which did give an advantage to Antichrist, and laid the founda∣tion of his Kingdom, and did dispose mens minds to an Apostasie from pure Christianity; as (1.) Partly, the Idolizing of Pastors by an excess of Reverence, such as was prejudicial to the Interests of the Gospel, setting them up as heads of Factions, 1 Cor. 1.12. Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am of Paul,
and I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas: 1 Cor. 3.22. Glory not in men, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, &c. This in time bred Tyranny and Slavery in the Church. 2. The Ambition of the Pastors themselves, and the spirit of contention for rule and pre∣cedency, Acts 20.29, 30. There shall arise among you ravening Wolves, speaking per∣verse things, to draw Disciples after them; and within a little time began to affect not only a primacy of Order, but of Jurisdiction, and Authority; so that then Antichrist did not exist in his proper person, but in Spirit and Predecessors. 3. The errors then set afoot, corrupted the simplicity of the Gospel; 1 John 2.18. Now there are many Antichrists, 1 John 4.3. Every Spirit that confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, and this is the Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard it should come, and even now already is it in the World: The Spirit of Antichrist is even now in the World; there was a Spirit then working in the Church to introduce this mystery of Ini∣quity, only the Seat was not empty, but fil∣led by another; the Seeds of this mystery were sown in ambition, avarice, haughtiness of teachers, and their carnal and corrupt Do∣ctrines. 4. Some kept their Jewish, others their Gentile Customs, so that Christian Religion
was secretly tainted and mingled with the Seeds of Heathenism and Judaism, which af∣terwards produced the great Apostasie. Paul in all his Epistles complaineth of the Judai∣zing Brethren, and seeks to reduce them to the simplicity of the Gospel; In the Corinthi∣ans he complaineth of their resort to Idol Temples, their Communion in Idol worship, 1 Cor. 10.14. Wherefore, my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry, and v. 20. But I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice they sacri∣fice to Devils, and not to God, and I would not that ye should have fellowship with Devils, and 2 Cor. 6.16. The worship of Angels, Inter∣diction of certain meats, then will-worship, and shews of humility, Col. 2.16. Let no man judge you in meat and drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days: and v. 18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility,: and worshipping of Angels, intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puft up with his fleshly mind: and v. 22, 23. Why are ye subject to Ordinances, after the Commandments and Do∣ctrines of men? which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will-worship, and humility, and neg∣lecting of the body. Contempt of Magistracy, 2 Pet. 2.10. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government; presumptuous are they, self-willed, and are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities.
Thus you see how it began to work, and that the Devil from the beginning had sown these tares. But was it then in the Apostles time that the mystery of Iniquity did begin to work? then 1. We see what need we have to withstand the beginnings, and not give way to a further encroachment on the Church of God: and 2. That the word of God should dwell richly in us, for we have to deal with mystical Iniquity. III. Proposition. That when that impedi∣ment shall be removed, then Antichrist shall be revealed; only he that now letteth will let, till he be taken out of the way: where observe, 1. It was before, , that which let∣teth, now it is , he that letteth, the Empire, and the Emperour; and mark, a long succession of Empires is called , why not then a long succession of Popes, the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition? 2. He that now letteth will let. Antichrist was but in fieri, and that secretly▪ and in a mystery; there was desire of rule, some super∣stitious and false Doctrines, some mixture of humane inventions, borrowed both from Jew∣ish and Heathenish Rites▪ mingled with the worship of God, some secret rising of Anti∣christian Dominion, some playing at lesser
Game, as Victor took upon him to excom∣municate the Eastern Churches for the matter of Easter, but before this obstacle was remo∣ved he could not fully appear, and invade the Empire of God and Men, till the Empe∣rour was removed out of that City: while the Heathen Emperours prevailed, there was no place for Church-mens Ambition, their times were times of Persecution, and it is not Persecution, but Peace and Plenty, that breedeth corruption in the Churches. 3. He that is the Emperour, must be taken out of the way, that is, either by the remo∣val of his Person and Throne from the City of Rome, or till the Roman Empire be ruined, as it was in the East by the Turk, in the West by the Incursions of many barbarous Nations, parting it into ten Kingdoms, and then by the Translation of the Empire to Charles the Great. Well then note three things for the time of Antichrist. 1. Before the obstacle was removed he could not appear. 2. When this obstacle was removed▪ pre∣sently he appeared. 3. The degrees of the falling of the one are the degrees of the exaltation and establish∣ment of the other, for Antichrist did grow up upon it. But they say, the Roman Empire is not
quite fallen, there being a Roman Emperour still. But (1.) The present Empire is but inane nomen, or umbra Imperii; a meer name, or shadow of the Empire. (2.) He that then letted in St Pauls time, was the sucession of the Roman Emperours, but this is the German Empire; now if the Roman Empire were the only impediment (the Apostle useth te word ) therefore as soon as that should be removed, Antichrist would infallibly be re∣vealed. (3.) Though this Empire be not abolished, but removed out of Rome, it is enough to make good Pauls Prophecy, Dixit Apostolus, Imperium esse de medio tollendum, non prorsus delendum: Whitaker. Well then, since the Seat is left void, either the Prophecy is not accomplished at the time, or else the Pope is Antichrist; for the Nations are long since fallen away from the Roman Empire, and the Emperour hath no power nor Authority at Rome. Vse. To give a new note to discover and desery the man of sin; certainly Antichrist is already revealed, and we may find him some∣where. I prove it by two Argument. (1.) The mystery began to work in the Apostles dayes, therefore surely it is compleated by this time, and not reserved to a short space of time a lit∣tle before Christs coming to Judgment. (2.) This spiritual usurped Power ws to break forth upon the fall of the Empire, accordingly
so it did, though it grew to its monstrous ex∣cess and height by degrees, as to Ecclesiastical Dominion in Boniface the Third, who ob∣taineth from Phocas the Title of Universal Bishop, whereas Gregory the Great calleth Iohn of Constantinople, the fore-runner of Anti-christ, for arrogating the same title as to Kings and Princes.
SERMON VI. 2 Thess. 2.8. And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming. THese words contain both the rise and ru∣ine of Antichrist▪ his Revelation, and Destruction. 1. As to his Revelation; there are two things. 1. The Title given to Antichrist, , the wicked. 2. His appearing in the World, upon the taking away the impediment, shall be re∣vealed. 2. As to his ruine, three things are obser∣vable. 1. The progress of his destruction, which is here considered as begun, or as consumma∣ted. 1. A diminishing of Antichristianism, whom the Lord shall consume. 2. The finishing there∣of, in the word, destroy.
2. The Author, the Lord. 3. The means. 1. Gods word, called his breath, or the spirit of his mouth. 2. The brightness of his coming, name∣ly when he shall come to judge the World in the Glory of the Father. First, Of the rising of Antichrist, and then shall that wicked be revealed. 1. The Title given to Antichrist, , that lawless one, or Son of Belial: it is the property of Antichrist to boast himself to be above all laws, and to be judged by no power upon earth; for therein he resembleth Atio∣chus, of whom it is said, he shall do according to his own will, Dan. 11.36. Now if this b one of his Characters, it will not be hard to find him out: for who is that infallible Judge, that taketh upon him to decide all Contro∣versies, and judgeth all things, and is judged of no man? and whosoever doth but mutter against his Dcrees and delusions; if a private person, he is to be destroyed with Fire and Sword; if a Prince, to be excommunicated, deposed, and his Subjects freed from all Alle∣giance to him? Who is he, that taketh upon him with Faculties, Licences, and Pardons, to dispence with the Law of God, and to allow open and notorious sins? Who is he that by his own Writers is said to be solutus omni lege humanâ, freed from all humane law (Hostiensis)
nec ullo jure humano ligari potest, that hath a Paramount Authority to all Laws, that he cannot be bound by them, whether they con∣cern Parricide, the murder of Princes; or Perjury, the obligation of Oaths; or Matri∣mony, the bond of conjugal Relations? but one expresly saith, that he is supra jus, contra jus, extra jus, above Law, against Law, and without Law; a plain description of the law∣less one in the Text: And another, not with∣out some spice of Blasphemy, apud Deum & Papam sufficit pro ratione voluntas, God and the Pope have their Will for a Law. Lastly, Who is he that hath brought into the Church the great impiety of worshipping of God by Images, and the worship of the Saints and An∣gels, with a worship which is only due to God? which is the great , the lawless∣ness, which the pure Christian Rule condemn∣eth, and brandeth for such: if there be not such a power extant in the Christian World, then I confess we are yet to seek for Anti∣christ; but if there be, none so wilfully blind as they that cannot see Wood for Trees, and know not where to fix this Character. 2. His Revelation, then shall that wicked be revealed: the word revealed noteth two things. 1. His appearance in the World. 2. Gods discovery of him. 1. Then he shall be revealed beareth this
sense, he shall be in the World, and begin to lift up his head as soon as the Roman Empe∣rour and Empire shall be removed; this law∣less one shall begin to discover himself, and set up his Kingdom. Now to understand this, consider this. 1. The most learned Interpreters, both an∣cient and modern, agree in this, that the im∣pediment was the Roman Empire, as we shewed before, and therefore as the Roman Empire and Emperour was removed out of the way, Antichrist was to be revealed, or the Predictions of the Scripture are false. 2. Things of great moment cannot be re∣moved, nor established in a minute. The re∣moving of the Roman Empire was not all at once, nor the rising of the Pontificate, but by degrees the seat began to be made void, when Constantine began to remove the Imperial Throne to Byzantium; though the Majesty of the Empire continued still at Rome, yet this was a step to the removing of the impedi∣ment, for by that means the Popes grew in greatness: but as the Emperours Authority was lessened, so grew that of the Popes, who still incroached to themselves more and more Power, and that to promote the Apostasie and Derogation from the pure Christian Religion: But as soon as he arose, he came not to the height of his power, either Eccleiastical or Temporal, nor shall he presently decay.
3. To state the progress of Atichristian Tyranny, is not for a Sermon, it filleth whole Books; but thus in short. About the year 600. or in that Century, their Ecclesiastical Power began to be raised, when the majesty of the Empire was low and weak in Italy, and therefore then was Antichrist advanced a good step: when Iohn of Constantinople had usurped the Title of Universal Bishop, Gregory the great saith, Rex superbiae prope adest, the King of Pride is near; & sacerdotum exercitus ei praeparatur, an Army of Priests is prepared to serve him as their General, this he, (fidenter dico, I speak confidently:) and within six years or thereabouts, Phocas conferred on Pope Boniface the same Title, to ingratiate himself with the people of that part of the Empire, after the murder of his Lord and Master; and then many superstiions were gotten into the Church, as about the year 688. the Pope obtained of the Emperour the Pantheon, or Temple of All-Devils, and Con∣secrated the same to the Virgin Mary, and All Saints: the temporal Monarchy was long in hatching, but yet the beginning of this mystery soon bewrayed it self. In the begin∣ning of the seventh Century, Constantine the Pope would have his foot kissed, like another Dioclesian, and in defence of Image worship he openly esisted Phillipicus the Emperour of Greece, and encouraged Iustine and Anastasius,
Tyrants and Murderers, who submitted them∣selves to him with Adoration: Rebellion and Idolatry have been ever continued since. In the year 720. or thereabouts, Gregory the se∣cond and Third, continued the same Idolatry and Rebellion; And caused all Italy to with∣draw their obedience from the Emperour Leo, because he had commanded all Images to be broken and burnt, and for the same cause Ex∣communicated him, and took to himself the Coctian Alpes as the gift of the Lombards. In the same Century 749. Zachary incourageth and assisteth Pipin, to depose his Master Chil∣derick, King of France, and to take upon him that Kingdom. Afterward Adrian took upon him to translate the Empire of the Greeks to the Latines; and ever since depo∣sed Emperours, and made broils in King∣doms. 2. Gods discovery of him to the World; that is, when Antichrist was not only extant, but impleaded as such; and this also was by degrees, God raising up in every Age, witnes∣ses against the Tyranny, and Usurpations, that Rome, as the Place, and the Pope, the Person, as considered in his succession, claiming the same power. 500 years before Luther, Peter Bruis begun, and Henry his Scholar succeeded him, and both of them succeeded by the Wal∣denses and Albigenses, then Wickliff, the Bohe∣mians, who have all pleaded and proved that
the Pope was the very Antichrist; then Sva∣norella in Italy, preached this boldly. In the fifteenth Centurty, about 1500. there were some remainder of the Albigenses about the Alpes, some few Reliques of the Hussites and Calixtines in Bohemia, so few, and so igno∣rant, that they had neither learning nor abi∣lity to oppose this potent Tyranny. Then God raised up Luther, and many other Worthies to assault the Idolatry, Tyranny, and Errors of the Church of Rome; and it is reported in History, that the Angel on the top of the Tower St Angelo, was beaten down by a Thunderbolt; and in the very Day, and in the Church, where Pope Leo the Tenth at Rome had Created 31. Cardinals, a sudden Tempest dashed the Keys out of the hands of the Image of St Peter, shewing God would be∣gin to take away their Power. Vse. If God hath revealed Antichrist, let no man shut his Eyes, but let him be shunned, forsaken, and abhorred; when Christ was to come into the World, it was a day of rumours; some sent to Iohn Baptist, whether he were the Christ, others cryed up false Christ and Impostours, but the people were alarmed with a general expectation: so when Antichrist was to be revealed, it was a day of rumours, just about the time there was a great expectation, some pitched it here, some there, until the Pit was discovered to the Church, and the
snare layed open; and now to run wilfully into these errours, how damnable is it? If Papists cleave to him, let not Protestants fall to him; to continue Papists is dangerous, for they favour Antichrist, and serve Antichrist; but to turn Papists is more dangerous, for this is a downright revolt from Christ to Anti∣christ: and how God may in mercy dispense with errors, imbibed in our Education, we know not, but to turn our back on the truth, wherein we have been educated and instruct∣ed, maketh it more dangerous to our Sal∣vation. Secondly, We now come to the more com∣fortable part, his ruine; where note, I. In the general, that the Apostle, as soon as he had showed his rise, he presently fore∣telleth his ruine, to support the hearts of the aithful, though he hath yet more things to speak concerning his discovery, v. 9. I cannot let this pass without an Observation. Doct. That a spiritual eye can discern the ruin of wicked instruments, even in their rise and Reign. Job 5.3. I have seen the foolish taking root, and presently I crsed his habitation: by the [foolish] is mean the wicked, by their [taking root] their seeking to fix and settle themselves in their Worldly prosperity; I [presently] that is, without any great deli∣beration, which in this matter needeth not, [cursed] their habitation, not as desiring, but
as forseeing and foretelling. I pronounced them accursed, or to be in a cursed condition; when carnal men seek to root and establish themselves upon Earth to a spiritual eye, their best estate is miserable and detestable; when we see their rise, we may foretel their fall. Reasons. 1. Their Faith occasion such a reflection, which is the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. they lookt not at things, as at present they seem to short-sighted men, or as they relish to the flesh; but as they appear, and will be judged of at last, their ruine is as present be∣fore them, as their rise; present time is quick∣ly past; but now without Faith this cannot be, 2 Pet. 1.9. He that lacketh these things is blind and cannot see afar off, , but are dazled with present splendor, and so mis∣arry. 2. This Faith is necessary. (1.) Partly to prevent scandal at the prosperity of an un∣godly party, who obey not the Gospel, but corrupt and pervert it to their Worldly ends. Dvids steps were even gone, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, till he went in∣to the Sanctuary, and understood their end, Psal. 73.17. that setled his heart to consider, what end these men were appointed unto, how prosperous soever they seem to be for the present, yet the end must put the difference, there they see the wicked in the height of their
prosperity, as ready to be cut down and wi∣thered. (2.) To prevent Apostasie, they chuse the better part, that chuse the Holiness and Patience of the Saints, 2 Cor. 4.18. While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal: but things present carry away our hearts, because we have so dim and doubtful a sight of things to come; whereas if we did look upon them as sure and near, they would fortifie us against Temptations, Prov. 3.31, 32. Envy thou not the Oppressor, and chuse none of his wayes; For the froward is abo∣mination to the Lord, but his secret is with the righteous. II. More particularly the ruine of Antichrist is set forth, (1.) Partly by the manner of his fall; it is represented both as begun and finished; he shall be consumed, he shall be destroyed; the one noteth a lingring delay, the other an ut∣ter Perdition; that he shall be finally rooted out. First consumed, to consume is to waste and melt away by little and little. Doct. Antichrist is not presently to be de∣stroyed, but to waste away by a lingring Consumption; as his rising was by little and little, so is his fall, he loseth his Authority in Christendom by degrees.
Now the Reasons may be these. 1. God hath a Ministry and use for him, and the abetters of his Kingdom, as he hath an use for the Devil himself, therefore permitteth him some limited power, but yet he holdeth him in the Chains of his invicible Providence; so hath he a use for the Devils eldest Son, for Antichrist, and Antichristian Adversaries, which if their power were wholly gone could not be performed, as 1. To scourge his people for their sins, as their contempt of the Gospel, and wantonness under the several priviledges, which they en∣joy by it: God will not want a rod to scourge his disobedient Children, as Isa. 10.5 he cal∣leth the Assyrian the rod of his Ange, the In∣strument that he maketh use off to punish those with whom he is angry; and again, the staff of his Indignation, the Staff is an heavier and sorer instrument of correction than a Rod: what the Assyrian was to the Jews, that Anti∣christ is to professing Christians; God useth him, till he hath sufficiently chastised his Chil∣dren, and then he will cast this Rod into the Fire; Heathens and Turks are at a distance from us, our miseries will come from Anti∣christianism, who are nearer at hand to exe∣cute the Lords vengeance when we grow wanton. 2. To try his people, for he expects a tryed obedience, what Christianity we will accept
and chuse, that calculated for this World, or that which is calculated for the next. Anti∣christianism in all the branches of it is a sort of Religion suited to Worldly interests, 1 John 4.5. They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World, and the World heareth them: but true Christianity for the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received, not the spirit of the World, but the spirit which is of God, therefore God will try who are the formal and pretended Christians, that serve their own bellies, and the sincere Christians who look to an unseen World, and are willing to hazard their own interests out of their fidelity to Christ; Therefore when the Saints under the Altar groaned, Rev. 6.10. How long Lord, holy and true, dost thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth; the Answer given was, v. 11. That they should rest for a season until their fellow servants, and also their brethen, that should be killed, as they were, should be ful∣filled: in every Age God will have his Wit∣nesses, who by their Faith and Patience, and not loving their lives to the Death, should promote the Lambs Kingdom, before they re∣ceive their Crown; and therefore, though Antichrist be consumed more and more, yet he hath so many abettors of his Kingdom left as may try Faith and Patience of the Saints. 3. To Cure our Divisions, Nazianzen called
the Enemies , the common re∣concilers; the Dog is let loose to make the Sheep flock together; we are hardened in our strifes against each other, till a common dan∣ger unite us. It is noted, that when there was a strife between the Herdsmen of Abrahams Cattle, and Lots Cattle, the Canaanite and Pe∣rizzite were yet in the Land, Gen. 13.7. God will unite those in common sufferings, whose stubborn humours will not suffer them to meet upon other terms. 4. To keep up a remembrance of his mer∣cies, Psal. 59.11. Slay them not, lest my peo∣ple forget, scatter them by thy power, and bring them down, O Lord, our shield. od maketh us sensible of the care he hath over us, not by the utter destruction of the Enemies of his People, but by lingring Judgments on them, which affect us more than if they were cut off suddenly. 2. Many other reasons may be given, be∣cause it serveth the beauty and harmony of his Providence, to cut them off in their time, and by such means, as he hath appointed, and in such a way, as shall most conduce unto his Glory. But I pass them by; we must tarry his leisure, and not question his truth and care over us, and be content, that our Faith and Patience be exercised. If God should bring a sudden destruction upon a Power and Tyran∣ny, so supported by the combined interests of
the World, we were not able to bear it. Thorns serve for a fence to a Garden of Roses; God would not destroy the Canaanites at once, lest the beasts of the field should increase upon them, Deut. 7.22. nor all abettors of Antichristia∣nism, lest his people should lye open to such evils as they cannot bear. 1. Observe this Consumption, how it is ac∣complished, if we find Antichrist risen, disco∣vered, and consumed, why should we be in doubt any longer? The pomp and height was much about 1500. years after Christ, what a Consumption hath happened since, by the re∣viving Religion and Learning, the Christian World should with thankfulness take notice of, by the falling of Germany, England, France, and Hungary in a great part, together with Denmark, Sweden, Poland, and other Coun∣tries; and by what means hath this been, but by the spirit of his mouth? It is profitable to know Antichrist by his rise and description, but it is comfortable to know him by his dis∣covery and Consumption, and Gods blessing such unlikely means at the beginning, so such a wonderful effect. When Luther first appear∣ed, the Bishop of Strasburgh told him, Abi in coelum, mi frater, & dic, miserere nostri. But God hath done great things for us too, when he first turned the captivity of his Churches, we were like unto those that dream. 2. Caution, Antichrist is consumed, but he
is not yet dead; what strength he may reco∣ver before his last destruction, God knoweth. Popery, after it was cast out, hath re-entered Bohemia and Austria, and the Emperours He∣reditary Countries, and what havock hath been made of the Evangelical Churches, the Book of Caraffa, the Bishop and Legat of the Pope, called Germania sacra restaurata, shew∣eth, wherein many notable things concerning their Artifices, to replant Popery, are set down. As to England, some hope his Consumption is not desperate, and many fear, that Popery may recover again, unless God in mercy pre∣vent it: we know not what is in the Womb of Providence, or how far the Prerogative of Free Grace may interpose in our behalf, whe∣ther England shall be made a Theater of mer∣cy once more, or the feat of Idolatry and su∣perstition and Blood: But though we do not know what God hath determined, yet we may soon know what England hath deserved; And that is enough to quicken us to watch∣fulness and Prayer, and expectation, and seri∣ous preparation for the day of evil: and by these things, if it cometh to pass, it will do us no harm. 1. When God hath laid in great store of comforts against sufferings, usually there is a time of expence to lay them out again. Christ warned his hearers to make use of the light, because of the darkness coming upon them,
Iohn 12.35, 36. You never knew the Gospel powerfully preached, but Tryals came; Heb. 10.32, 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that you have in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. Ca∣stles are first victualled, then besieged; the mi∣nistry is consolatory mostly. 2. When men can neither bear our vices, not their proper remedies; Ezek. 24.13. In thy filthiness is lewdness, because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee: Hosea 7. 1. When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria, for they commit falshood, &c. 3. When there are great differences amongst Gods own people, the end is bitter; we warp in the Sunshine, will not know the way of Peace. Eusebius says before Dioclesians Persecu∣tion, , the Church was torn with intestine broils, Pastors against Pa∣stors, and People against People: Ease be∣gets Pride and Wantonness, and that maketh way for Contention. 4. When Prophaneness increaseth, and men do not walk becoming the Gospel, God taketh the Gospel from them. The Apostasie from the power and purity of Religion first made way
for Antichrist, and is most likely to let him in again. 5. When a people are prepared for such impressions, there is a party formed, partly by opinions, that symbolize with Popery; partly by doting on the pomp and outside of Religion, and neglecting the life and power of it; and partly, when indifferent and A∣theistical conceits do dispose their minds no more to one Religion than other, usually then is a Nation fitted for such a change. Now what shall we do? 1. Watch and pray; a people well awaked will not change their Religion, he envious man sowed tares, while the servants sept Mat. 13.25. Be instant with God in Prayer, as all good Christians should be, when the Church is in danger: as David, Psal. 59.13. Consume them in wrath, consume them, that they may not be, that they may know that God rules in Iacob, unto the ends of the earth. Selah. The Consumption is at hand, Luke 21.36. Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass. 2. Reform and repent: Rev. 2.5. Repent, or I will remove the Candlestick out of his place; our disorders must be bewailed and redressed; there are two stumbling blocks, the Idolatry of the Romish Synagogue, and the evil man∣ners of the reformed Churches.
3. Be fortified and established, 1. By knowledge; if we have not , a stedfastness of our own, we shall fall, 2 Pet. 3.17. in a time of long Peace, Arms hang up a rusting; and o we are not prepa∣red to resist temptations. 2. By Grace; it is good the heart should be established by Grace, Heb. 13.9. the new nature will caution men against many Popish errors, 1 John 2.20. Ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things; A Child of God hath something in his bosom, that will not permit him to hearken to Popery; the very life in us is opposite to this dead shew and mummery of trashy Devotions. Now I come to the Author, with the means of Consuming. The Lord shall consume him with the Spirit of his mouth. The Lord, that is the Lord Christ. But what is meant by the Spirit of his mouth, or the breath of his mouth, as some render it? Two things may be meant hereby, either his Providential Word, or his Gospel, accompanied by his Spirit. 1. His Providential Word, that is, when Christ faith, Let it be done, it shall be done. Isa. 11.4. He shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked; those that are called wicked, they are also called the Earth, because they are earthly minded, and have their por∣tion
here, and possess much on earth, and have great power, by the advantage of which they oppress his People: Now to execute Judgment upon them, Christ needeth no more than the Rod of his mouth, that pow∣erful Word, whereby he created all things, Ps. 33.6. By the words of the Lord were the Hea∣vens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth; Upholdeth all things, Heb. 1.3. Upholding all things by the word of his Power; And brings all things to nothing again, John 18.6. As soon as he had said to them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground; one word of his powerful Providence is enough. Or secondly, 2. It is meant of the Efficacy of his Gospel, as it is accompanied by his Spirit, called the Sword of the Spirit, Eph. 6.17. and it is said to be quick and powerful, Heb. .12. and Rev. 2.16. Repent, or I will come against thee quickly, and smite thee with the Sword of my mouth; by this word he shall confound the falshood and cunning practices which are car∣ried on under this myy of Iniquity, and give it such a deadly and incurable wound, that it shall languish before it be utterly de∣stroyed. Doct. That Antichrists Destruction is by the preaching of the Gospel, and the victori∣ous evidence of Truth. It must needs be so; For his Kingdom and Tyranny is upheld by
Darkness, which is dispelled by the Light of the Truth: And therefore the Papists, as all other Hereticks, are lucifugae Scripturarum Dei, cannot endure the Scriptures, deny them to the people, and seek to make them contempti∣ble by all the means they can. Again, his King∣dom is carryed on by Falshood, and his Cheats, and Impostures, and Wickedness, and Usur∣pation, and false Interpretations and Delusi∣ons are discovered by the truth and simplicity of the Gospel, and so is consumed yet more and more. Lastly, Popery is a dead form of Re∣ligion, and there is not only Truth in the word of God, but Life; we are not only enlighten∣ed, but quickened by it, and converted to God, and made partakers of his Spirit; And these will go against their own experience and inclination, if they should sit down with such empty, beggarly Rudiments. But here ariseth a Question, shall Antichrist be consumed no other way  but by the Spirit of his mouth? We read in the Prophecy, of Wars, by which the Antichristian State is brought to nought. I answer. The pure and powerful preaching of the Gospel is the prin∣cipal means, whereby the Spirit of the Lord consumeth Antichrist in the hearts of men; but this is not exclusive of other means, which God in the ways of his Providence may use to weaken his Worldly Interest. But we must distinguish between the means God may use,
and we must use: Simply to put down a Reli∣gion by force of arms, is not our way, it is not lawful certainly to invade other Nations upon the pure and sole title of Relgion: But if they invade us on that account, no doubt a Prince and People so invaded, may defend themselves. But when a War is commenced on other occasions, it is the most chearful cause to ingage in; when we War against the Abet∣tors of Antichrist, we War against an Enemy whom God will consume. Constamine warred against Licinius, his Collegue not because an Infidel, but because he persecuted the Christians, contrary to their Capitulations. Lewis the XII. caused it to be disputed in a Sy∣nod at Tours, Num liceret Papae abs{que} causa Prin∣cipi bellum inferre? when it was answered, Non licet: a second Question, Num tali Principi sua defensione fas sit eu invadere? Their An∣swers were, Licet; which he undertook, and caused money to be stamped with this Inscrip∣tion, Perdam Babylonem. 1. Vse. We learn hence, not to be discou∣raged in our greatest extremities, when all temporal hopes seem to fail, and we have no∣thing left us, but the word of our Testimony: let us not distrust our spiritual weapons; for they are mighty through God to bring down all the strongs holds of sin and Antichrist, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Oh incourage your selves in the Lord, you have the merit of his Humiliation, and
the power of his Exaltation: Merit, what can∣not the blood of Christ do to fetch off men from their inveterate prejudices and superstiti∣ons? 1 Pet. 1.18. We are redeemed by the blood of Christ from our vain Conversations: so for the power of his Exaltation, there is his Spi∣rit; the success of his Spirit on the pouring out of the first Sermon, Acts 2.41. fetched in 3000. Souls, that had embrued their hands in the blood of their Saviour, and were in no very devout posture at that time: his Word, that is, the Rod of his strength, Psal. 110.2. which hath a mighty power to convince, trans∣form and convert Souls, Rom 1.16. For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, which is the power of God unto Salvation. Then there is the power of Providence; all Judgment is put into Christs hands for the advancement of his own Kingdom, Iohn 5.22. if all be in Christs hands, why should you distrust your cause, or the success of it? 2. If you would defend your selves, and wound the Enemy, be much acquainted with the word of God, which is the Sword of the Spirit, Eph. 6.17. thereby you may ward off every blow of a Temptation. Surely then we should be much acquainted with this wod, that it may dwell in us richly, that we my have it ready, this is enough to make wise the simple for all necessary duties and de∣fence.
3. Pray heartily, that the word of God may have a free course, 2 Thess. 3.1. and tat God would send forth labourers into his Harvest, Matth. 9.38. 2. The final destruction of Antichrist, and destroy him by the brightness of his coming. This coming is most likely to be the coming of Christ, so often mentioned, 2 Thess. 1.7, 8. When the Lord Iesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on those that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ. 2 Thess. 2.1, 2, 3. Now we beseech you Brethren, by the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, That ye be not soon shaken in mind, nor be troubled, neither by spirit, not by word, nor by letter, as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Others con∣ceive some notable manifestation of his Pre∣sence and Power in his Church; but this would ingage us in many dark Prohecies, which I shall not meddle withal (intending only a doctrinal discovery of Antichrist) as how long before his coming, by what means: Sure I am, that at his coming, the Beast and false Prophet shall be slain, and cast into the lake of fire, Rev. 19.20. but for other things, I have not light enough certainly to define. That the utter ruine of Antichrist is not to be expected till the second coming of Christ.
Vse. Be not discouraged though Antichrist yet remain after all the endeavours against him. It is enough that Antichristianism shall be finished, and finally destroyed. And for the time, refer it to God; If it be not till the Day of Judgment, or Christs final Conquest over all his Adversaries, you must be conten∣ted to tarry for that, as well a for other things.
SERMON VII. 2 Thess. 2.9, 10. Even him, whose coming is after the working of Sathan, with all Power, and Sins, and lying wonders. And with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. WE have considered the Titles of Anti∣christ, his nature, and properties, the time of his rise, and with it his ruine. Now we are to consider the way and means, how he doth acquire, and keep up this power in the World. The means are, (1.) Principal. (2.) Instrumental. (1.) Principal, , af∣ter the working of Sathan. (2.) Instrumental, which are also two. (1.) Pretence of Miracles, with all Power, Signs, and lying wonders. (2.) Other Cheats and Impostures, with all deceivableness of unrighteousness; Their gene∣ral
way of dealing being Sophistical and falla∣cious. Let us a little explain these things. 1. The great Agent in setting up this King∣dom, after the working of Sathan. It may note the manner, as we render [after] that is in such a way, as Sathan deceived our first Parents; for he was a murderer and a lyar from the beginnning, John 8.44. I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve by his subtilty; so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity, which is in Christ: 2 Cor. 11.3. So all this mystery of Iniquity shall be carried on after this manner, by deceit, by the tricks of lying men, and the works of deceiving Spi∣rits: Rather it noteth Sathans Agency and In∣fluence, and after, or according to the work∣ing of Sathan, is as much, as by the working of Sathan, noting not only his Pattern, but his Influence; so is  often rendered, and the energy of the Devil, and Influence upon all wickedness is spoken of elsewhere, Eph. 2. 3. The Spirit that now worketh in the Children of Disobedience; the Devil hath a great hand over wicked men in the World, his way of dealing with them is most efficacious and pow∣erful, and certainly he is the first Founder and main supporter of the Antichristian State. 2. The Instrumental means. 1. By pretence of Miracles, with all power, and signs, and lying wonders: These three words signifie the same thing, and are often
joined, when true Miracles are spoken of, as 2 Cor. 12.12. Truly the signs of an Apostle were wrought among you in all places, in signs and wonders, and mighty deeds, , : So Acts 2.22. Iesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you, by miracles, won∣ders and signs: So Heb. 2.4. God also bearing them witness, both with signs and wonders, and with divers miracles: Rom. 15.19. Through. mighty signs and wonders, through the power of the spirit of God: Powers they are called, because they issue from Power divine and ex∣traordinary: Signs, from their use, because they served to seal and signifie the Doctrine to which they are applied: Wonders, from their effect, because they breed astonishment in the minds of the beholders; These were the true Miracles. Now Antichrist, to countenance his false Doctrines and Superstitions, would ape and imitate Christ; and pretendeth to Pow∣ers, Signs, and Wonders; as Iannes and Iam∣bres sought to imitate Moses, God permitting it in some degree; so Antichrist seeks to pro∣mote his Kingdom the same way which Christ took to promote Evangelical truth. But they are called Powers, and Signs, and lying Wonders; i.e. lying Powers, lying Signs, and lying Wonders; for it agreeth to all the words, though affixed to one of them. But why lying wonders? partly because the great∣est number of them are meer. Fables, notori∣ous
Impostures, and Forgeries: partly, because others are Diabolical illusions, things beyond humane, but not Angelical Power; if they are , Wonders, they are not , as Chrysostome distinguisheth, fit signs to signi∣fie the truth of the Doctrines: partly from the end and scope, for that must also be re∣garded; God cautioneth his People, that if they gave them a sign and wonder, though it came to pass,. if it were to draw them to other Gods, it was to be rejected, Deut. 13.1, 2, 3. the Spirits must be tryed, whether they be of God, 1 John 4.1.1 Cor. 12.3. No man speak∣ing by the Spirit of God calleth Iesus accursed: If a wonder be wrought, or pretended to be wrought, to draw us off from Christ, or to promote things clearly forbidden by the word of God, it is a lying wonder as all Antichrist's are; for their end is to confirm the Popes Do∣minion and false Doctrine. The sum is this then, That many things are pretended, not re∣ally done, Impostures and Forgeries, not Mi∣racles; other things done by Diabolical illu∣sion, as there may be Apparitions, Visions, Spectres; for Sathan will bestir himself to keep up the credit of his Ministers. Lastly, if we cannot otherwise disprove them, if they tend to false Doctrine and worship, they are to be rejected, whatever extraordinary appearance there be in them. (2.) The other expression concerning the
means, is general; with all deceivableness of unrighteousness: which comprizeth, (1.) Their Sophistical Reasoning from An∣tiquity, Universality, Unity, Ifallibility, without coming to the intrinsick merits of the cuse, but condemning the truth rather by prejudice. 2. Their practical Acts, and feats to beguile Souls, by Fawning or Threatning, or Prefer∣ment and Persecutions: these are the Arts, by which Antichrist shall deceive men into Un∣righteousness, that is, to bring this corrupti∣on into the Church, and acquire this power to himself. Now I shall observe some points. 1. Doct. The Devil hath a great hand in set∣ting up Antichrists Kingdom, as he hath a great interest by it; his coming all be by, or after the working of Sathan. He is the rai∣ser and supporter of that Estate, ad he is the great Seducer, Opposer, and Adversary of the Gospel. This will appear, if you consider, First the properties of the Devil, how the De∣vil is set forth in Scripture, and by what ways he promoteth his own Kingdom. 1. By Ignorance; for the Devils are called, Eph. 6.12. The Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and his Kingdom is called, the King∣dom of Darkness, Col. 1.13. the Princelike Authority and Government, which by Gods permission he exerciseth in the World, is over,
those, who remain in a state of Darkness and Ignorance. Well then, necessarily the Devil must be a great Friend to Popery, where Ig∣norance not only raigneth, but is commended as the Mother of Devotion: it is into the ig∣norant part of the World and the Church, that the Devil hath brought in Errors in Do∣ctrine, Formality and Superstition in Wor∣ship, and Tyranny and Usurpation in Go∣vernment. 2. The next thing ascribed to him is Error, so it is said, John 8.44. He abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him; when he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own; for he is a Lyar, and the Father of it. He soon Apo∣statized from God and his way, and ever since is an Enemy of all Truth and Goodness; he turned from God, and is a deceiver of others: To our first Parents he called the Truth of God in Question, and was the inventor and begin∣ner of all Errors, that have since fallen out in the World. Well then, where should his emi∣nent Power and Residence be, but in that Society of professed Christians, where most errors and corruptions in Doctrine and Wor∣ship have been introduced, where they teach men to pray to, and for the Dead, to adore the Bread, and worship it with divine wor∣ship, and to worship Images, and to pray to God in a language which they understand not, and maime the Lords Supper, and pro∣fess
they can live perfectly without sin, and meritoriously, and supererogate besides, and lay up a Treasury of merits to redeem Souls from Purgatory, &c. There will be errors and mistakes in Religion, while men are men; but where there is a wilful opposing of evi∣dent Truths, and an obstinate refusing of all healing means, and men will abide in their Errors, rather than acknowledge that they have erred; surely they are governed by the influence of his Counsels, who abode not in the Truth, and seeketh what he can to hinder the prevalency of it in the World. 3. That which is ascribed to Sathan is Ido∣latry. Thi was his first and great endeavour in the World, to bring man to worship other Gods, rather than the True, or the True God by an Idol: so he prevailed among the Heathens, they thought their Images did re∣present their gods, and that their gods dwelt in them, as our Souls do in our Boies: there∣fore the Psalmist saith, All the gods of the Na∣tions, are Idols or Devils, Ps. 96.5. and the Devil was the great Master and Contriver of this Idolatry; therefore it is said, Psal. 106.37. They sacrificed their Sons and Daughters un∣to Devils: the service done to Idols, or Ima∣ges of mans devising, is not done to God, as men pretend who worship them; but to De∣vils, who are the Devisers, Suggesters, and enticers of men unto all sorts of unlawful
worship, and are in effect served and obey∣ed by a false Religion, Deuter. 32.17. They sacrificed unto Devils, not unto God: 2 Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifi∣ced, they sacrificed unto Devils, not unto God: 2 Chron. 11.15. And he ordained him Priests for the high places, and for the Devils, and for the Calves which he had made: they otherwise meant it, Ieroboam intended it to the true God, Iehovah; but it was of the Devils In∣vention, Now if the Devil can get such a party in the Church, as hall not only set up but be mad upon Image-worship, who can more serve his turn, among professing Chri∣stians, than they, who have consented to, and continued in idolatrous worship? Surely then Sathan is concerned to befriend their Usurpa∣tions, and uphold their Interests; for what will more conduce to the ruine of Christia∣nity, or at least the ecay of the power thereof? 4. That which is ascribed to Sathan, is bloody Cruelty, or seeking the destruction of Christs most faithful Servants; for he is cal∣led a murderer from the beginning, John 8.44. and Cain is said to be of that wicked one, be∣cause he slew his Brother; and wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous, 1 John 3.12. Enmity to the power of Godliness came from Sathan, and wherever it is encouraged, and notoriously
practised, they are a party of men governed and influenced by Sathan. Now where shall we find this Character, but in Antichrists Con∣federacy? In the Prophecy of him, Rev. 13.15. he caused as many as would no worship the Image of the Beast to be kiled; and again, Rev. 17.5. The Woman, whose name was Mystery, was drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus: and it hath been eminently fulfilled in the blood shed in Germany, France, and England, and other Nations; and all this to extinguish the light of, and suppress the Reformation. The World is no stranger to their bloody Persecu∣tions Oh, how many seeming Chrisians hath Sathan employed in these works of Cruelty? When once he had seduced the Church to so many Errors, and corrupted the Doctrine and worship of Christ, he presently maketh the erroneous party his Instruments of as cruel and bloody Persecutions as were ever commenced by Infidels and Mahometans; witness their murders upon so many thousands of the Wal∣denses and Albigenses, whom they not only spoiled, but slaughtered with all manner of hellish Cruelty. Some of their own Bishops complained they could not find Lime and Stone to build Prisons for them, nor defray the charges of their food. The World was even amazed at their unheard of Cruelties, smoaking and burning thousands of Men, Wo∣men,
men, and Children, in Caves, others at Stkes, and many ways butchered them; proclaiming Croisados, and preaching up the merit of Pa∣radise to such bloody Cut-throats, as had a mind to root them out, driving multitudes to perish in snowy Mountains. What Desolations they wrought in Bohemia, what horrible Mas∣sacres in France, what Fires they kindled in England, and of late, what Cruelties they ex∣ercised in Ireland, Piedmont, &c. Histories will tell you, and will tell all Generations to come, what Principles Rome is acted by, and how in∣fatiable their thirst is for the blood of upright righteous men, And after all this tell me, who is he, whose coming is after the working of Sathan? and whether we have cause to be mamoured of Blood, and Fires, and Inquisi∣tions? 5. That which is ascribed to Sathan is, that he is the God of this World, 2 Cor. 4.4.; and again, the Prince of this World, John 12.31. he playeth the God here, the Riches, Honours, and wealth of this World, are the great Instru∣ments of his Kingdom; and the men of this World whose portion is in this life, are the proper Subjects of his Kingdom. Of the Saints Christ is their Head; but of the wicked, un∣godly, ambitious World, surely Sathan is the Head. There are two Cities (as Austin distin∣guisheth them.) Ieusalem is the City of God, and Babylon that Incorporation which be∣longeth
to Sathan. Now then, whee shall we find him, whose coming is after the working of Sathan, but with him, who with the loss of Christianity exalteth himself, and affecteth an ambitious Tyranny, and domineering over the Christian World, both Princes, Pastors, and People? and to uphold the Tyrany, careth not what havock he maketh of the Church; and the whole frame of their Religon is cal∣culated for secular Honour, Worldly Pomp and Greatness. Secondly, By the visible Appearances of the Devil, and where he is most conversant, as in his own Kingdom. Before Christs Kingdom was set up, the Devil did often visibly ap∣pear, but since he playeth least in sight; when God openly manifested his Presence by appear∣ing to the Fathers in sundry ways and man∣ners, as he did before hen spake to us by his Son, Heb. 1.1, 2. so did Sathan; Vsions Ap∣paritions, and Oracles, were more frequent; and where Christs spiritual Kingdom prevail∣eth, the World heareth less of thee things; but where it is obstructed, more. Now two instances in Popery. (1.) In their Chiefs: how many Conjurers and Necromancers, (who expresly consulted and contracted with the Devil) from the Year 600. to the Year 1500. the Chair of pestilence yielded, the Histories tell us. (2.) In oreder  the Devil had formerly, in the times of Popery, and still
where it is allowed, incomparably more power among men, to appear to them, and haunt their Houses, and vex them, than now he hath; all that I say is, haunting of Houses, and Ap∣paritions, were much more common. Uses. 1. A detestation of Popery, whatever is of the Devil should be hated by us, for we are Christs Souldiers, listed in his Warfare in Bap∣tism, Rom. 6.13 Yield your selves unto God as those that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness unto God; but yield not your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin: Rom. 13.12. Let us cast off the works of darkness, and put on the Armour of Light: Now after our military Oath should we revolt to them, that join with the Devil, and his Angels, to make War a∣gainst Michael and his angels? 2. To be more careful to be compleatly armed, For we fight not against flesh and blood, but principalities and powers, and spiritual wick∣ednesses in heavenly places, Eph. 6.11, 12. that is, not only with the one, but the other. The Abettors of Popery ae Sathans Auxiliary For∣ces, whom he stirreth up and employeth. Now the Devils are of great cunning and strength, and by Gods permission exercise great Autho∣rity in the World, and the matter about which we contend with them, is the Honour of God and Christ, and our Eternal Salvation. There∣fore
since the Subtilty, Power and strength of the Enemy is so great, we had need to be the better prepared, and put on the whole Ar∣mour of God. That bodily and humane Power, that befriendeth the Kingdom of Sa∣than, is formidable, and that can only reach the outward man; but Devils and damned Spirits are a more terrible and dangerous party, who secretly blind our minds, and weaken our courage, and strangely and im∣perceptibly, by our own carnal affections, promote our eternal ruine. 3. It sheweth us the folly of recociling Ba∣bel and Sion; Rome, as it is, and the Reform∣ed Churches, For what concord hath Christ with Belial? 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. What agrement hath the Temple of God with Idols? You can never reconcile God and Sathan, the Seed of the Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent. I speak not of holy endeavours to adjust the Contro∣versies; and reclaim Papists from their Errors; that must be pursued, how fruitless soever the attempt be; but o hope for an agreement, as things now stand, is impossible. 4. Caution, that the Devil prevail not a∣gainst us; he once suprized Peter, Mat. 16.23. Get thee behind me Sathan; he hath pre∣vailed over them, that usurp the highest Chair in the Christian Church. Let him not blind your Eyes in whole or in part; though you be not drawn to Antichristianism, do not live
in a carnal Worldly course; For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. E∣very wicked act is Sathans Invention, he stir∣reth it up, is served by it, delights in it, his Kingdom goeth forward by it: He gaineth by every wicked action. Shew plainly, that you are not of his party, nor ever mean to be. Give way to fleshly and worldly lusts, and you are very prone to entertain the grossest Temptations; and by subtle evasions will wriggle and distort your selves out of your duty, as the Papists do. I come now to the second means. Doct. That Antichrist doth uphold his King∣dom by a false shew of Signs, and Wonders, and mighty Deeds. To evidence this, 1. We must inquire what is a Miracle. Mi∣racles are works extraordinary, exceeding, the ability of second causes, and done to confirm the Truth. Where we may observe, 1. The general nature of them. 2. Their author. 3. Their Use. 1. Their general nature and kinds, extraor∣dinary works. Some are either besides nature, when the course of nature is changed, as the standing still of the Sun in Ioshuah's Days, the going back of the shadow on Ahaz his Di, in Hezekiah's time: Above nature, as the open∣ing of the eyes of a man born blind by Christ,
Iohn 9. Against nature, when the operation of it is obstructed, as wen the three Children remained untouched in the Fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. the fire had not lost its property to burn, for those that cast them in were singed and scorched. 2. The Author, they are works exceeding the ability of second Causes, and therefore are always done by the Power of God, either im∣mediately, or mediately; using some Creature in the performing of them, as the Apostles of Christ. Well then, the primary efficient cause is God, and the manner of working is extra∣ordinary and unusual, exceeding the power and force of any Creature. 3. The end and use is to confirm some Truth; when they are done for Curiosity, Ostentation, and Delight, they are but jug∣ling tricks, and have not God for their Au∣thor; much less when they are pretended to confirm a false Doctrine, or evil end. But real Miracles do oblige by way of sign, declaring Gods interest in, or owning of the truth and Testimony to which they are annexd. For God being the Ruler of the World, good, mer∣ciful, just, it is not to be supposed he will co∣operate to a lie or cheat, or leave suc a stum∣bling block before his Creatures. II. That the Miracles wrought by Christ, and his Apostles, did sufficiently prove, that they were Teachers sent from God, for Christ
often appealeth to his works, John 5.36. For the works which the Father hath given me to fi∣nish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, and John 10.38. Though ye believe not me, that is, his personal verbal Testimony, believe the works, that is, his Miracles, That ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him. And when Iohn sent his Disciples to know, whether he were the Messiah or no, (not so much for his own Confirmation as their satisfaction) Mat. 11.4. Go, shew him what ye hear and see, and what is that? The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, &c. So Nicodemus was convinced by these, John 3.2. We know, that thou art a teacher come from God; for none can do the works that thou dost, except God were with him. To im∣prove these Scriptures, let us consider, 1. The necessity of this Attestation. 2. The sufficiency of it. 1. The necessity thee was, that Christs Person and Office should be thus attesed: He had the Law of Moses to repeal, which was well known to be Gods own Law; a yew Law to promulgate, which is the Law of Faith, or the Gospel, and before this could be recei∣ved, it was needful for him to manifest his Authority. Besides, he came to redeem, and recover Sinners to God, from the Devil, World, and Flesh: And that he might be more rea∣dily
and chearfully entertained, it was neces∣sary to be evidenced, that he came not only by Gods Permission, but Commission; for him hath the Father sealed, John 6.27. that is, au∣thorized by Miracles. Look as in the first In∣stitution of the Aaronical Priesthood, Fire came from Heaven to consume the Sacrifices, whereas afterwards the High Priests were con∣secrated and admitted by the ordinary rites, without any such attestation: so there was a greater necessity then, when God brought forth his Son into the World, and id first set up the Gospel State, than there was after∣wards, when the course and order of it was setled, and received in the World. 2. The sufficiency of it; the Mircles then wrought were numerous, evident, and unde∣niable, being done publickly in the sight of all, and therefore the clearest attestation to his Doctrine, that flesh and blood could ex∣pect; such a stream of holy, necessary Mira∣cles, that were for the most part not acts of pomp, but of succour and relief, and such as could be done by no power less than divine; not like those ludicrous Miracles they talk of in Popery which look like a cheat rather than a sign from Heaven; These Miracles of Christ could no way be impeached. For either it must be by some truth of God, which the new Revelation did contradict, and delivered by more certain means than those Miracles were;
but no such Revelation was there, all fairly accorded with those former Revelations of his mind given to the ancient Church: and Christ and his Apostles preached no other things, than what suited with Moses and the Prophets, Acts 26.22. Or else by some greater works, which should contradict the Testimo∣ny of these Wonders; as Moses did the Magi∣cians of Egypt, Exod. 7.18. but no such thing could be alledged, or was pretended, there∣fore these were sufficient. 2. After the Faith of Christ was sufficiently confirmed, Miracles ceased; and it was fit they should cease, for God doth nothing un∣necessarily: The Christian Doctrine is the same that it was, and is to be the same till the end of the World; we have a sure and au∣thentick Record of it, which is the Holy Scriptures. The Truth of Christs Office and Doctrine is fully proved, and cometh tras∣mitted to us, by the consent of many successi∣ons of Ages, in whose experience God hath blessed it to the convertng, comforting, and saving of many a Soul. Look as the Jews, every time the Law was brought forth, were not to expect the Thundrings and Lightnings, and the voice of the terrible Trumpet, with which it was given at first on Mount Sinai, (one so∣lemn Confirmation served for after Ages) they knew it was a Law given by the Ministry of Angels, and so entertained it with Veneration
and Respect; so Christianity needed to be once solemnly confirmed after Ages have the use of the first Miracles: for the Apostle com∣pareth these two things, the giving of the Law and the Gospel, Heb. 1.2, 3, 4. For if the word spoken by Angels was stedfast, and every trans∣gression and disobedience received a just recom∣pence of reward: How shall we escape if we neg∣lect so great Salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him? we must be contented with Gods owning it now, only in the way of his spirit and Providence. 3. That upon the ceasing of Miracles or their growing to be unnecessary, we have the more cause to suspect them, who will revive this pretence, of a power to work Miracles; especially after we are cautioned against these delusions, as here in the Text against the ly∣ing wonders of Antichrist, and elsewhere, Mat. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great sgns and wonders, in so much, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect▪ and again, Rev. 13.13. He doth great wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from Heaven upon Earth, in the sight of men. But herein they triumph, when did they ever pretend to do so? Ans. This is not to be taken literally, for the whole Chap∣ter is mystical; none can be so ignorant, that Antichrist shall arise as a Beast out of the Sea, with
with seven Heads and ten Horns; therefore to fetch fire from Heaven, is only an allusion to Elias, that he should pretend to work Mira∣cles, as did Elias, who brought fire from Hea∣ven, 1 Kings 18.24. and yet in the Letter it was fulfilled in Pope Hildebrand, or Gregory the VII. as one Paulus, who wrote his Life, testifieth, who mentioneth divers wonders of fire wrought by him, and sundry times re∣sembles him to Elias; the meaning is, he shall make his followers as confident of their errors, as if they saw fire come from heaven to con∣firm them. But to return. We being thus cau∣tioned and forewarned, Miracles thus per∣formed are deceitful. But you will say, though Miracles are not necessary to confirm the Faith; yet they are necessary to convince the false∣hood of Heresies? Ans. Heresies being a cor∣ruption of the Faith once received, are to be confuted by Arguments, not Miracles; by evi∣dence of Doctrine, not wonders; partly, left the people be deceived by magical Impostures, for it requireth some skill to ditinguish true Miracles from those that are deceitful, and done by the power of the Devil: partly, be∣cause Verum est Index sui & obliqui, Faith ta∣ted and confirmed, sheweth what is Error; so that to confute Error by Miracles, is nothing but to confirm Truth by Miracles. 4. Whosoever teach false Doctrine, not consonant to the truth of Scriptures, or that
Faith of Christ which was confirmed by Mira∣cles, their Wonders are lying wonders, and, how plausible soever they seem are lying won∣ders, and not to be believed. Surely Miracles must needs be false and pretended, which are brought to confirm a Doctrine contrary to that which is already confirmed by Miracles; For God is faithful, and cannot deny himself, and therefore he cannot be the Author of Mi∣racles, whereby things contrary to ch other may be confirmed; if the Faith one be esta∣blished by other Miracles, we are to believe the latter Miracles to be a meer Imposture; for Christ is not yea, and nay, but yea, and Amen, 1 Cor. 1.19, 20. The Appariion of an Angel is a great Miracle, but if an Angel preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. It is a supposition of an impossible Case, necessary to forewarn the people of God a∣gainst the delusions of the Devil, changing himself into an Angel of Light. Srely God will never contradict himself. 5. The Miracles wrought by Antichrist and his Adherents, are mira, but not miracula, some wonderful things, but no true and proper Mi∣racles, else, as Austin faith, figmenta mendaci∣um hominum, portenta fallacium spirituum, ei∣ther the fictions of lying men, or the illusions of deceiving Spirits; many times the matter of fact is not true, at other times the thing
done is but some illusion of the senses by the Devil; or something taken for a Miracle, which doth not exceed the power of nature; either way it is an Imposture: and indeed the Miracles of the Legends are so false, so ridi∣culous, so light and trivial, that they expose Christianity to contempt; or else if there e any thing in it, it giveth suspicions of magical illusion and converse with the Devil, which among their Votaries and Recluses, is no un∣usual thing. 6. There are seven points in Popery, which they seek to confirm by Miracles, and which being senseless in themselves do most scanda∣lize Protestants. 1. Pilgrimages, they show the Shrine, and also the Chamber of the House of the Blessed Virgin: how the Virgin at Loretto was trans∣ported out of Galilee into Dalmatia, and by Angels in the Air to the remote parts of Italy, and setled there after some removes. The Story is ridiculous, and I am serious, yet this draweth an infinite Company of Pilgrims there, where new Miracles are pretended to be wrought continually. 2. Prayers for the dead, Bellarmine alledg∣eth out of Gregory, the miraculous Apparition of Paschal his Ghost, beseching St Germanus to pray for him. 3. Purgatory, all their Miracles are framed, especially for the establishing of this point,
which is of such gain to them, as that a dead mans skull spake to Mercarias praying, When thou dost offer Prayer for the dea, then do we feel a little Consolation. 4. The Invocation of Saints Alypius a Gram∣marian, being forsaken of his Physicians St Tiola appeared to him by night, demanding what he ailed? or what he would have? He answered, (to shew a touch of his Art, in A∣chilles his Speech to his Mother Thetis, in Ho∣mer, &c.) Thou knowest, why should I tell thee, that knowest all; whereupon she con∣veyed a round stone to him, with the touch, of which he was presently healed. 5. The Adoration of Images, but especi∣ally of the Cross, Crucifix, and Image of Christ; Malvenda saith, that at Meliapore in the East Indies, where St Thomas was killed by those barbarous people, digging to lay a foundation they found a square stone, in it a bloody Cross, and an Inscription implying the Saint was slain in the very act of adoring and kissing the Cross, hereupon on went the building, and the Chappel being finished, in the beginning of the Gospel, in sight of the whole multitude, the Cross did sweat abundantly, the sweat wiped off, drops of blood appeared in the Lin∣nen with which they wiped it, till at length it returned to its own colour. 6. The Adoration of the Host is made good by such a number of Miracles, as fill whole
Volumes. Bellarmine himself telleth us of an hungry Mare, kept three days wihout meat, yet when Provender was poured to her, in the presence of the Host, she forgetting her meat, with bowed head, and bended knees, adored the Sacrament. 7. The Primacy of the Pope hath been the beginning, and is the end of all Popish Le∣gends. A Bishop, being excommunicated by Pope Hildebrand, and inveighing against his Pride, was smitten with a Thunder Clap. Ba∣ronius, That while Pope Eugenius the Third, was Celebrating the Mass, a beam of the sun shone upon his head, in which were seen two Doves, ascending and descending, which an Eastern Legate seeing, submitted instantly to the Primacy. Vse. Another note of Antichrist; These Impostures are not only countenanced, and encouraged in that Church, but made a mark of it, the Power of Miracles. When Anti∣christ first appeared, ridiculous Miracles of all sorts began to be cryed up, and established: Yea, and to this day, these are pleaded, chal∣lenging us for the want of them; what they cannot prove by the Oracles of God, they en∣deavour to prove by Miracles of Sathan.
SERMON VIII. 2 Thess. 2.10. With all deceivableness of unrighteousness in tm that perish, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved. WE have described unto you the head of the Antichristian State; we come now to the Subjects, especially the zealous Abettors and Promoters of this Kingdom. They are described, (1.) By the means how they are drawn into this Apostasie and defecti∣on: . Secondly, By their doom or misery, they are in a state of per∣dition, in them that perish. Thirdly, By their sin, which is the cause and reason of his doom▪ because they received not thelove of the truth that they might be saved. 1. The means, with all deceivableness of un∣righteousness. That Antichrist shall be a de∣ceiver, and that he deceiveth by lying Mira∣cles, we have seen already, and is foretold, Rev. 13.14. And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth by the means of those miracles which he
had power to do in the sight of the beast, &c. but the deceived are not altogether guiltless, for the fraud would soon be discovered by an ho∣ly and pure Soul: His great engine is either the baits of lust and sin, which work on none but those that have pleasure in unrighteous∣ness; verse 12. the geneality of wicked and carnal Christians, are easily drawn from Gods pure worship, and true Godliness: or by Wordly means, either by the offers of pre∣ferment, riches, dignities, or else terrors of the flesh. Now none catch at these wordly baits but whose eyes the God of this World hath blinded, 2 Cor. 4.4. Secondly, Their misery, they are said to be those that perish. That beareth three senses. (1.) That they are worthy to perish, because they do not use care and diligence to under∣stand their duty, being blinded by their wordly affections. That is the mildest see we can put upon it, they deserve to perish. No man perisheth but for his own fault, Hos. 13.9. O Israel thou hast stroyed thy self, but in me is thy help. Now they that will yield to the deceivableness of unrighteousness, justly perish▪ though there be deeit in the Case , yet there is unrighteousness in the Case also. Frau∣dulent dealing should not so cozen us, as ap∣parent unrighteousness, o unfaithfulness o Christ should warn us. 2. That they are in an actual state of perdition and unlss they
come out of it, are undone for ever. The Apostles when they propounded Chistian Do∣ctrine at first, did use this term to distinguish impenitent unbelievers, from those that recei∣ved the Gospel, as 1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching of the Cross is to them that perish foolishness, but unto us that are saved, the power of God. So 2 Cor. 2.15. We are unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that perish, and in thm that are saved. So he distinguisheth them that receive the Faith, and them that receive it not; pe∣itent believers are those that are saved, but impenitent unbelievers are those that perish; that is, are for the present, during their infi∣delity and impenitency, in an actual state of perdition. So 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost: that i, who are for the present in a lost condition. We know not Gods secret decrees, but those that refuse and oppose the only remedy, to all appearance are lost men. Now this he applyeh to those that yield to Antichrist, shewing them that though they are Christians, yet they have no more benefit the Gospel than Infidels, they receive not the truth, these revolt from the owning of it upon carnal reasons. And there∣fore it is foretold, Rev. 14.9, 10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, and in his hand, the same shall drink of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, into the Cup of his indig∣nation,
and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and the presence of the Lamb. That is, all those that give up themselves as Servants and Souldiers to the Antichristian Estate, and obstinately ad∣here to, and promote that profession; they shall taste of the Mediators vengeance, which will be very sore and severe, Luk. 19.27. These mine Enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring them forth, and slay them before me. Popery is the high way to damna∣tion. 3. It beareth this sense, that they are fe appointed to perish who are left to these delusions. They are such as God hath past by, and not chosen to life: This is to be consi∣dered also, for damnable errors take not ef∣fect on Gods Elect. Mat. 24.24. If it were pos∣sible, they shall deceive the very elect. The Elect cannot altogether be seduced and drawn away from Christ, for God taketh them into his protection, and guardeth them against the de∣lusions of false Prophets, that if they be for a time, they shall not always be deceived. So it is said, Rev. 13.4. The Locusts shall hurt none of those that had the seal of God in their foreheads. The delusions of Antichrist have only their full effect on those who are not elected and sealed; upon the Hypocritical professors that live in the visible Church. So it is said again, Rev. 13.8. All that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the
Lambs book of life. And again, Rev. 17.8. And they that dwell on the earth, shall wonder (whose names were not written in the book of life, from the foundation of the world) The Elect are still excepted, which is much for the comfort of the Godly, who belong to Gods Election, that he shall not prevail over them, totally, finally, God hath chosen you to life. Thirdly, The reason of this doom, because they received not the love of the truth, that they might he saved. By the truth is meant the Gos∣pel, the chief truth revealed in Gods word, and the only means of Salvation, Eph. 1.  In whom also ye trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. This is the truth most profitable to lost Sinners: re∣ceiving is put for entertaining, or believing the words, as Acts 8.14. When they heard that Samaria had received the word of God and Acts 11.1. That the Gentiles had received the word, and elsewhere. This reception must be with love, Acts 2.41. As many as received the word gladly, and Acts 17.11. They received the word with readiness of mind. And this affection must produce its effect, so as to convert them unto God. Now this is denied of them who are seduced by Antichrist, that they never had any true love to the truth, nor minded it in order to their Salvation. Now the business is, whether the clause concerned only the Jews, or can be applied to Christians. The Jews
clearly received not the love of the truth, but did refuse Christ, and his Salvation: And here∣in the Papists glory of an advantage of turn∣ing off this Prophecy from themselves. But the Apostle speaketh not of rejecting the truth but of not receiving the love of the truth: which is not proper to the Jews, but to false Christians. The Jews Company rejected Christ, and Antichrist was not sent to them for a punishment: but wrath came upon them to the uttermost, to the excision and cutting off their Nation. But here is rendred the reason not of other Judgments, but why men are Captives to Antichrist. Therefore it is not so to be confined. Doct. 1. The subjects of Antichrists power and seduction, are those that perish. 2. The great reason why God sent this Judgment on the Christian World, is, because they receieved not the love of the truth. 1. Doct. That the subjects of Antichrists power and seduction, are those that perish. It is a dreadful argument we are upon, yet necessary to be known for our caution, how∣ever to be handled warily. (1.) It is certainly more meet for us to have a regard of our own estate, than curiously to enquire what becom∣eth of others. The Apostle waveth judging them that are without, 1 Cor. 5.12. I know he meaneth it of the censures of the Church, which are not exercised upon Infidels, but
Christians; but so far we may apply i to this case, that we should not rashly judge of the eternal state of other persons, but rather of things wherein our selves are concerned. If the enquiry were only matter of curiosity, surely Christs rebuke would silence it, What is that to thee, Joh. 21.20. for Christ is ill pleased with curiosity about the state of other men but it is fit we should know our own duty and danger, and to that end it must be dis∣cussed. (2.) That there is a great diffiulty of the Salvation of Papists, so living and dying, if not an utter impossibility. Partly because, though it should be supposed that they retain the foundation, yet they build such Hay, and stubble upon it; so many errors in Doctrine, corruptions in Worship, and Tyranny in Go∣vernment, that if a man could be saed, he is saved but as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. and no man that hath a care of his Soul, wil either embrace Popery, or continue in it; where the way is plainest, there are difficulties enough, and the righteous are scarcely saved, and therefore in a questionable way, none should venture. Worshipping of Angels and Saints departed, and Images, are no light thing. Nor will a serious Christian chuse that way where the Doctrines of the Gospel are so exceedingly corrupted, and there is such a manifest inva∣sion of the Authority of Christ, by calleng∣ing an Universal Headship over his Church,
without his leave, and this maintained by er∣rors and persecutions. (3.) We must distinguish of those that lived under Popery, rather as Captives under this Tyranny, than voluntary Subjects of this Kingdom of Antichrist: As many holy men did in former times, groaning and mourning under the abominations, rather than countenancing and pomoting them. To these God speaketh when he said, Rev. 18.4. Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. They were his people while they were there. These were as those seven thousand in Israel that had not bowed the knee to Baal, Rom. 11.4. (4.) There is a difference to be put between those that err in the simplicity of their hearts, knowing no better; and tose that withstand the light upon carnal reasons, and will not retract their errors, though convinced of the degeneration of Christianity. For simple ig∣norance is not so damning as obstinate error. Luke 12.48. But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes, &c. and 1 Tim. 1.13. But I obtained mercy because I did it ignorantly in un∣belief. The Scriptures many times condemn a way as a way of ruine, but all in that way are not damned, as John 4.22. Salvation is of the Iews: There it is eminently dispensed, and yet therefore it followeth not, that all the Sama∣ritans were damned. Some among them though
tainted with the errors of their Country, might have such knowledge of the law of God, and love to him, as might be effectual to Salvation. (5.) We must distinguish be∣tween Papists so living, and so dying; many by Gods grace, may have repentance confer∣red upon them at death; and though they lived Papists, might die as reformed Christi∣ans seeking Salvation by Christ aloe, in the way of true Faith and Repentance, and so the Lord may manifest his compassion to them, pardoning the errors of their lives. (6.) We must distinguish Times. God might dispense with many in the times of universal darkness and Captivity, more than he doth afterwards, when the light of the Gospel breaketh forth, and his Trumpet is sounded to call them forth. Whosoever shall compare Iohn Fierus, and Iohn Calvin will find they were assisted by the same Holy Spirit of God: though the one lived and died a Papist, and the oer was n eminent instrument in reforming te Church of God; but an ignorant fear of separation from the Catholick Church, caused many to do as they did; but much more doth it hold good in the times before. Our Fathers if alive would not have condemned us, nor should we condemn them being dead, before they had these advantages which we now enjoy. Illi si reviviscerent, &c. saith Austi in a like Case. (7.) We must distinguish between Po∣pish
Errors, some are more Capital, as Adora∣tions of Images, Inovocation of Saints, Justifi∣cation by the merit of Works, Inhibition of the Scriptures, &c. others not so deadly, as when too much reverence is given to Ecclesi∣astical Orders and Constitutions, Penance, Auricular Confession, Fasting, &c. Now though the Case of a rel Papist, who is com∣pleat in this mystery of Iiuity, and refu∣seth, hateth, persecuteth the truth offered, be desperate, yet the Lord ay in tender mercy accept of other devout Souls, who yet live in that way, if they hold the head and the foundation. 1. Vse. Let us not think Popery a light thing, which the Lord so peremptorily threat∣neth. Surely, it is no lie mercy that we are freed from it. Therefore we should be thank∣ful for the light we have, and improve it well while we have it, and hold it fast. What hope soever we may have of men living in former times, and foreign Countries, where they knew no better, but after such express warnings, what hope can we have of English Papists, con∣sidering the time when Rome is not grown better but worse, and what was common opi∣nion, is now made an Article of Faith; and when the truth is taught and so clearly mani∣fested▪ so that for any by their own volun∣tary choice, to run into Popery, it is a pain defection from Christ to Antichrist; and wil∣fully
to drink that poison which will be the bane and ruine of your Souls. 2. The great reason why God sent this Judgment upon the Christian World; is to punish those that received not the love of the Tuth. Here I shall enquire, 1. How many ways men ay be said, not to receive the love of the ruth. 2. How just their punishment is fr such a sin. 1. I stating this sin, 1. It is supposed that he truth and doctrine of Christ, is made known to a people, yea cometh among them with great Evidence, Conviction and Autho∣rity. For it is not the want of means, but want of love, that it is charged on them; And the plenty of means aggravateth their fault, and maketh their Condemnation the ore just. John. 3.19. This is the Condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more than light. The truth was not for their turns, but was contrary to their lusts, and passions, and prejudices, and these they pre∣ferred before the light of the Gospel shining to them. 2. That as inevidence of doctrine was not the cause of not receiving the truth; so not bare weakness of understanding: no it is not weakness but wilfulness which is here intima∣ted, not a defect of their minds, but their hearts, Joh. 8.15. Because I tell you the truth,
ye believe me not: It was not weakness but pre∣judice hindred their believing. They despi∣sed the grace of God, yea hated it, for their lusts sake: Their lusts lie more in opposition to the truth, than speculative doubts and er∣rors: Luke 16.14. And the Pharisees, who were covetous, when they heard all these things, they derided him; the words are, blew their Noses at him. The sensual, carnal, and ungodly World scorneth heavenly doctrine, and pure Christia∣nity is distasted by false Christians. Err in mind, err in heart. 3. It is not enough to receive the truth in the light of it, but we must also receive it in the love of it, or it will do us no good. To make the truth operative, (1.) Knowledge is necessary, and also Faith; and then Love. Knowledge, for without knowledge the heart is not good, Prov. 19.2. Nothing can come to the heart but by the mind; the will is , a choice, or desre guided by reason, and the Gospel doth not work as a charm, whether it be or be not understood: No, the purport or drift of it must be known, or how can it have any effect upon us? Next to know∣ledge, to make it work, there must be Faith: when we apprehend a thing, we must judge of it, whether it be true or false, how else can it make any challenge, or lay claim to our respect? 1 Thess. 2.13. Ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is truth) the
word of God, which worketh effectually in you, as it doth in all them that believe. Faith doth inliven our actions about Religion; to hear of God, and Christ, and Heaven, doth not stir us un∣less we believe these things. Well, next to Faith there must be Love, for apprehension and dijudication are acts of the understand∣ing only, but love belongeth to the will, and we must believe with all the heart, Acts 8.37. There may be knowledge without Faith as an Heathen may understand the Christian Religi∣on, though he believe it not, profess it not: And there may be Faith without love, for there is a dead faith, James 2.20. which rests in cold opinions, without any affecion to the truth believed. Love pierceth deeper into the truth, and maketh it pierce deeper into us. As a red hot Iron though never so blunt, will run farther into an inch board, than a cold Tool, though never so sharp. And love maketh it more operative; there is notitia per visum, & notitia per gustum, A knowledge by sight, and a knowledge by tas: A man may guess at the goodness of Wine by the Co∣lour, but more by the tast, that is a more re∣freshing apprehension. And Augustine prayeth, Fac me Domine gustare per amoren quod gusto per cognitionem. Lord make me tast hat by love which I tast by knowledge. Surely we are ne∣ver sound in Christianity, till all the light that we receive, be turned into love. These
great things are revealed and represented to our Faith, not to please our minds by know∣ing them, but to quicken our Love. Faith alone is but as sight, and Faith with Love is as tast. Now it is more easy to dispute a man out of his belief, that only seeth, than it is him that tasteth, and knoweth the grace of God in truth. This is the true reason of the sted∣fastness of weak and unlearned Christians, though they have not such distinct concepti∣ons, and reasonings, as may learned men have; yet their Faith is turned into love, and a man is better held by the heart than by the head: And though they cannot dispute for Christ (as one of the Martyrs said) they can die for Christ. But alas, many receive the truth in the light thereof, but few receive it in the love of it, and so lie open to deceit. 4. This love must not be a sleight affecti∣on, for that will soon vanish, but we must be rooted and well grounded, and have a good strenght. The stony groud had some love to the word, Matth. 13.20, 21. But he that re∣ceiveth the word in stony places, the same is he that heareth the word, and anon with joy recei∣veth it; yet he hath not root in himself, but du∣reth but a while, for when Tribulation of Persecu∣tion riseth, because of the word, by and by he is offended. So also of the Thorny ground. He heareth the word, and the care of this World, and the deceitfulness of riches, choak the word,
and he becometh unfruitful, ver. 22. Now what are the defects of this love? 1. It is not ra∣dicated: A pang of Love, or flash of Zeal: whereas we should be rooted and grounded in love, Eph. 3.17. Hypocrites had a tst, Heb. 6. 4, 5. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightned, and have tasted of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the pow∣ers of the world to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance. Tasted, but did but tast; did escape , 2 Pet. 2.20 yet not having a good Consci∣ence, may make Shipwrack of Faith, 1. Tim. 1.19. 2. It is partial. The Gospel offereth great priviledges, and it is also a pure holy rule of obedience: Acts 2.41. This word of God is made up of Precepts and Promises: God offereth in the Covenant excelent bene∣fits, upon gracious terms and conditions, there must be a consent to the terms as well as an acceptation of the priviledges: The confi∣dence of the priviledges, serveth to wean us from the false happiness, therefore that must be kept up, Heb. 3.6. But Christ as a Son over his own House, whose are we, if we hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the firm un∣to the end. And the consent to the terms, bind∣eth our duty upon us, Isa. 56.4. Now as wil∣lingly as we yielded at first, we must keep up the same fervour still, Deut. 5.29. Oh that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me and keep all my Commandments always; That it might be well with them and with their Children for ever. But whole pure Christianity is not loved by false Christians; therefore when Religion crosseth their interests, and the bent of their lusts, they seek to bring Religion to their hearts, not their hearts to Religion. 3. It is not strong, and in such a prevalent degree, as to controul other affections: it is but a pas∣sion, a pleasure, and a delight they take on for a time, not the effect of solid judgment and resolution: A joy easily controuled and overcome with other delights; therefore Christ requireth a denial of all things, for a close adherence to him and his Doctrine. And hath told us, Matth. 10.37. He that loveth Father and Mother more than me, is not worthy of me, and Luke 14.26. Cannot be my Disciple. This is a love to which all other loves must give way, and be subordinate. Many love the truth a little, but love other things more, will be at no cost for it. Solomon giveth ad∣vice, Prov. 23.23. Buy the truth and sell it not. In lesser points we must do nothing against the truth, for though the matter contended for be never so small, yet sincerity is a great point; but in the greater truths we should purchase the knowledge of them at any rate, and be faithful to Christ what ever it cost us. 4. This slight love may arise from Worldly
respects. Now in the Text, it is said, they re∣ceived not the love of the truth that they might be saved. It should arise upon eternal reasons and considerations of the other World which only produce abiding affections; Heb. 10.39. We are not of them that draw back to erdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. In closing with Christianity, that must be fixed as our scope, not to spare he flesh, but to save the Soul: and to save the Soul with the loss of other things, and that will make us true to Christ. But there are many foreign reasons for which men may sew some love to Religion. As first, Policy▪ as Ieh took up Ionadab into the Chariot with him, 2 Kings 10.15. there is his complement to him: Ionadab was a good man, and this ho∣noured him before the people, to see Iehu and Ionadab so well acquainted. Sometimes re∣spect to others upon whom we deped: many seem to be good because they dare not dis∣please others that have authority over them, or an interest in them: as Ioash was religious all the days of Iehoiada, for he stood in awe of him, 1 Chron. 24.2. Now such sorry Reli∣gion dependeth on foreign accidents, The life of others or presence of others, and therefore it cannot be durable: whereas in presence or absence we should work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. other∣wise men only keep within compass for a
while, but they have the root of sin within them still. Or it may be novelty; as our Lord telleth the Jews: Iohn was a burning and shi∣ning light; and ye were willing to rejoice in his light for a season. Iohn was an eminent man for pureness of Doctrine, and vigour of Zeal and the more corrupt sort of Jews, Pharisees as well as others, admired him for a while, but they soon grew weary of him, it was a fit of zeal for the present. Lastly, This love may be to the excellency of gifts, bestowed upon some Minister or Instrument, whom God rai∣seth up, or some countenance of great men given to their Ministry, may stir up some love and attendance on their Ministry, and some respect is given for their sakes, when men have no sound grace in their hearts. There is a re∣ceiving of the word, as the word of man, and a receiving of the word, as the word of God, as the Apostle intimateth, 1 Thess. 2.13. The receiving of the word as the word of man, so it worketh only an humane passion, a delight in the gifts of the Ministry used, Ezech. 33.32. Thou art to them as a lovely Song of one that hath a pleasant voice. Then there is a re∣ceiving it as the word of God, and then we receive it with much assurance and joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thess. 1.5. Our Gospel came to you, not in word, but in power, nd much assu∣rance and joy in the Holy Ghost. Now if we do not receive the truth upon Gods recommen∣dation
and confirmation, we do not love truth as truth; our contest is not who hath most wit and parts, but most grace. 5. They do not receive the love of the truth when it doth not produce its solid effects, which is a change of heart and life: And they are not brought by the Gospel to a sincere repentance and con∣version to God, or receive the truth so as to live by it: but whilst they have the names of Christians, have the lives and hearts of Athe∣ists and Infidels. These were those that de∣bauched Christianity, and meritoriè and effe∣ctivè, by their provocations and negligence, brought this degeneracy into the Church and Judgment on the Christian World. Certainly a man hateth that Religion, which he doth profess when he will not live by it: This per∣fidiousness and breach of Covenant, was that which provoked God to permit these delusi∣ons in the Church. The wordly, sensual, car∣nal Christians, that hate that life which their Religion calleth for. The Godly Christian, and the Carnal Christian, have the same Bible, the same Creed, the same Baptism, yet they hate one another as if they were of different Religions, and confound the distinction be∣tween the World and the Church, because the World is in the Church. And of sensual and godless men, we must speak as Heathens, as if they were without God, they abhor that Re∣ligion which they do profess. That is, they ab∣hor
not the name, but they abhor those that are faithful to it, and serious in it: who desire to know God in Christ, and desire to love him, and live to him. It was that Christ taxed in the Pharisees, they honoured the dead Saints, and abhorred the living, Matth. 23.29, 30, 31. Wo unto you, Scribes, and Pharisees, Hypocrites, because ye build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchres of the righteous, and say, if we had been in the days of our Fathers, we would not have been partakers with them, in the blood of the Prophets. Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the Children of them which killed the Prophets. Christ hath not worse Enemies in the World, than those that usurp his name, and pretend to be his Officers, and yet eat and drink with the drunken, and beat their fellow Servants, Matth. 24.49. Christ will disown such at the day of Judgment, Matth. 7.22, 23. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in thy name done many wonderful works, and then will I profess unto them I never knew you? Depart from me ye that work iniquity. And such do most dishonour him in the World. A righteous, sober, godly life, is the best evidence of our love to the truth. 2. How just this punishment is, (1.) Be∣cause God hath ever held this course on the Pagan World, who kept not the natural know∣ledge
of God, he gave them up to vile affections, Rom. 1.28. The Jews who rejected Christ, Joh. 5.43.I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not, another will come in his own name, and him will ye receive. When Christ cometh meerly for our benefit, the unthankful World will not make him welcome, but they will take worse in his room. So towards Chri∣stians; At first men would not receive the Gospel, while it was pure, and in its simpli∣city, as taught by Christ and his Apostles, and sealed by the blood of the Martyrs, till it was backed by a Wordly Interest, and corupted into a Wordly design; and then they had it and all manner of superstitions together, and with these strong delusions there came just damnation. So still the pure Gospel is refused, and God sendeth Popish Seducers as a just Judgment; men only prize the light as it may serve their turn (2.) The neglect and con∣tempt of the truth is so hainous a sin, that it deserveth the greatest punishment: Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salva∣tion? now it is revenged by these errrs, as a just judgment on the perverseness and unthank∣fulness of the World. The duties of the Gospel being so unquestionable, shew their perverse∣ness. The priviledges of the Gospel being so ex∣cellent, their unthankfulness is more intolerable. 1.Vse is to shew us what cause we have to fear a return of Popery: Alas, where is
this love of the truth? (1.) Some are Gos∣pel-glutted, loath Manna, a full-fed people must expect a Famine, Amos 8.2. In differen∣ces between God and Baal, Christ and Anti∣christ, few are valiant for the truth, Ier. 9.3. And they bend their tongue like their bow for lies, but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth: for they proceed from evil to evil, and they know not me, saith the Lord. Contend earn∣estly. Jude 3. It was needful for me to write un∣to you, and to exhort you, that you should earn∣estly contend for the Faith which was once deli∣vered unto the Saints. Again, (2.) There are many sensualists, unclean and carnal Gospel∣lers, to these God oweth a Judgment. Usually the Gospel is removed and given to a Nation that will bring forth the fruits thereof. They that use the truth only or principally for their own turns, hate to be reformed, God will reckon with them, Psal. 50.16, 17. But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my Statutes? or that thou shouldst take my Covenant into thy mouth? seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee. 2. Vse shews you indeed, that you love the Gospel. Carentia remedii, is a grievous mi∣sery, or else Christ had not come as a great Blessing. Neglectus remedii, is a grievous sin, to be lazy in a matter of such moment. Those that never set their hearts to obey the truth. Crassa negligentia dolus est. There should be
constant purpose, endeavour, striving, and not cease striving, till we in some measure pre∣vail; rejectio, or contemptio remedii, if we put away the word of God from us, Acts 13.46. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, it was necessary, that the word of God should first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye pu it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life; loe, we turn to the Gentiles. God will be gone, if not from the Land, from thy Soul. This is the most hainous iniquity of all, Heb. 10.28, 29. He that despised Moses his Law died with∣out mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified a unholy thing, and hath done despight unto the Spirit of grace? So Esau's despising his Birthright, Heb. 12.15. Lest there be any Fornicator, or pro∣phane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat, sold his Birthright, for ye know how that afterwards, when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it carefully with ears.
SERMON IX. 2 Thess. 2.11, 12. And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteous∣ness. WE have considered the sin of those se∣duced by Antichrist: now the Judg∣ment: It is twofold. (1.) Delusion in this World, verse 11. (2.) Damnation in the next, verse 12. 1. Delusion in this World; where, take notice of three things. 1. The Author of it, God shall send it. 2. The degree, or nature of the punishment, strong delusion. 3. The issue of it, that they should believe a lie. 2. Their punishment in the next World, That they all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighte∣ousness where take notice, (1.) Of the ter∣ribleness of it, it is no less than everlasting damnation,  for . 2. The
Justice and Equity of it: They believed not the truth, but had pleasure in righteous∣ness. 1. I begin with their Judgment in this World. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. Doct. That by Gods just Judgment there is an infatuation upon the Followers and Abet∣tors of Antichrist, that they swallow the gros∣sest errors, to their own destruction. To clear this I shall speak, 1. To the Au∣thor. 2. The degree or kind of the punish∣ment. 3. The effect and issue. 1. As to the Author, . Here a difficulty ariseth. For God is not, and cannot be the Author of sin. He that is essen∣tially good, cannot be the cause of evil. And he that is Vltor peccati, the avenger of sin, can∣not be Author peccati, the Author of it: If he should cause man to sin, how will his pu∣nishment of it be just? I Answ. As it is a sin, God hath no hand in it, but as it is a punish∣ment of sin, God hath to do in it. To clear this to you, consider, 1. He that is the supreme Lord and Gover∣nour of his Creatures, is also their Judge. For Legislation and Judgment belong to the same Authority. And therefore God is called some∣times our King, and sometimes or Judge. Gen. 18.25. Shall not the Iudge of all the earth do right? Rom. 5.6. Is God unighteous?
how then shall he judge the World? That is his Office and Prerogative. 2. Gods way of judging for the present, is either external, or internal. As for instance, there are two acts of Judicature, Reward and Punishment. In rewarding, Gods external Go∣vernment is seen: in dispensing outward Bles∣sings to his people, as the fruit of their obedi∣ence, Micah 2.7. Do not my words do good to him that walketh uprightly? His promises speak good, and as fulfilled do good: yield protecti∣on, maintenance, and such a measure of out∣ward prosperity, as supporteth and maintaineth them, during their service. David owned Gods dealing with him in this sort: Psal. 119.56. This I had because I kept thy Precepts. So as to his in∣ternal Government, in giving them peace of Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom. 14.17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. Pro. 3.17. Her ways (are) ways of pleasantness, and all her paths (are) peace. These are the internal rewards of obedience. And so also God often rewardeth grace with grace. As Isa. 58.13, 14. If tho turn away thy foot from the Sabbath (from) doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honourable, and shalt honour him, not doing thy own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking (thine own) words: Then shalt thou delight thy self in the Lord; and I
will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth: and feed thee with the heritage of Iacob thy Father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spo∣ken (it.) Psal. 31.24. Be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord. Proficiency in the same grace, is a reward of the several acts, and exercise of it. So in punishing sometimes he useth the way of external Government, by the terribe Judg∣ments exercised upon men for the breach of his Law. Rom. 1.18. For the wrath of God is re∣vealed from Heaven, against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in un∣righteousness. Heb. 2.2. Every transgression and disobedience, received a just recompence of re∣ward. Sometimes the way of internal Govern∣ment by terrors of Conscience, or punishing sin committed with sin permitted: both these parts are seen in punishing both the godly and the wicked; as for instance in the godly, in the way of external Government, 1 Cor. 11.32. But when we are judged, we are chastned of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World. In the way of internal Govern∣ment, the lesser penal withdrawings of the Spi∣rit, which Gods people find themselves af∣ter some sins and neglects of grace, are grie∣vous: But the Judgments upon the Souls of the ungodly, are most dreadful, when the sinner is either terrified or stupiied: terrified by hor∣rors of Conscience, 1 Cor. 15.56. The sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law; or stupified by being given up to their own hearts Counsels, Psal. 81.12. So I gave them up unto their own hearts lusts: and they walked in their own Counsels. So that the Sinner is left dull, and senseless, and past feeling. Eph. 4.18. Having the understanding darkened, being alie∣nated from the life of God, through the igno∣rance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: by the first, by horrors of Consci∣ence, they are made to feel Gods displeasure at the courses they walk in; but when that is long depised and men sin on still, then the other and more terrible Judgment cometh. For the giving up a Sinner to his own lusts, and his losing all remorse, is the last and sorest Judgment on this side Hell. 3. As to Gods internal Judgments, the Scripture chiefly insists upon two parts of this internal dispensation, blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, they usually go together. Blindness of mind is spoken of, Iohn 12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said again, he hath blinded their eyes, and hardned their hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should heal them. All passages are obstructed, whereby the word might enter and work Conversion unto God. It was God laid this punishment of blindness upon them. Hardness of heart, in that famous
instance, Exod. 4.21. I will harden Pharaohs heart. God doth not make them that see, blind; nor them that are soft, hard; but leaveth them to their own prejudice, obstinacy, and unper∣swadeableness, and that when highly provoked. The former is under our consideration. 4. To understand Gods concurrence as a Judge, we must not say too much of it, nor too little. We must not say too much of it, lest we leave a stain nd blemish upon the di∣vine Glory; God infuseth no sin, no blind∣ness nor hardness into the hearts of men, all influences from Heaven are good; he convey∣eth no deceit into the minds of men imme∣diately, nor doth he command or perswade men to oppose the truth. Nor doth he impe or excite their inward propensions so to do. All this belongeth not to God, but either to man or Sathan. Nor must we say too little; as for instance, God is not said to blind or har∣den by bare prescience or foresight that they will be blinded or hardned; because God foreseeth other things, and yet they are not ascribed unto God: as that men will kill, or steal, or do wrong, and yet God is not said to kill, or steal, as he is said to blind and har∣den; and therefore there is a difference be∣tween Gods concurrence to this effect, and other sins. Nor only by way of manifestation, as if this were all the sense that in the course of his Providence God doth in the issue declare
how blind and hard they are. That some other thing is meant by it, is seen in the Prayers by which we deprecate this heavy Judgment; As when the Saints pray, Isa. 63.17. Lord harden not our hearts from thy fear, or David, Psal. 119.19. Lord hide not thy Command∣ments from me. They mean not thus, Lord shew not to the World how hard and blind I am, but cure my blindness and hardness of heart: keep back this Judgment from me. Again we must not say, that all that God doth, is a bare, naked, and idle permission, as if it happened besides his will and intention, and God had no more to do in it, than a man that standeth on the shore, and seeth a Ship ready to be drowned, he might have heped it, but permitted it. No, besides all this, there is not a bare permission only, but a permissive intention, and a judicial sentence, which is seconded by an active Providence. Many things concur to the blinding of the mind, and hardning of the heart, all which God wil∣leth but justly. The wicked take occasions of their own accord, to blind and harden them∣selves. Sathan tempteth of his own maice, but all this could not be done with effect and success, without the will of God. There is a supreme power over-ruling, and ordering all that is done in the World. 5. Gods concurrence may be stated by these things. (1.) His withdrawing, or taking away
the light and direction of his Holy Spirit, Deut. 29.4. The Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear▪ unto this day. Now when God lets them loose to their own hearts Counsels, then they fall into dam∣nable errors. A Greyhound held in by a slip or Collar, runneth violently after the Hare, when it is in sight: as soon as the slip and Collar is taken away, the restraint is gone, and his inbred disposition carryeth him. So men that are greedy of Worldly things, are powerfully drawn into errors, countenanced by the World, when God taketh off the re∣straint of his Grace, and giveth them up to their own lusts. Now herein God is not to be blamed: for he is Debtor to none, and the grace of his Spirit is forfeited by their not re∣ceiving the love of the truth. He is so far from being bound to give grace, that he seem∣eth to be bound in Justice to withdraw what is given already, by mens wickedness and in∣gratitude. Voluntary blindness bringeth pe∣nal blindness; And because men will not see, they shall not see. And when they wink hard, and shut their eyes against the light of the Gospel; it is just with God in this manner to smite them with blindness: And since they had no love to the truth, they are given up to errors and deceits: And because they de∣spise the Holy Scriptures, they doat on vain Fables: And would not take up a course of
sound Godliness and Holiness, he suffereth them to weary themselves with sundry super∣stitions. 2. Not only by desertion, but by tradition, delivering them up to the power of Sathan, 2 Cor 4.4. The God of this world hath blin∣ded their eyes. Sathan as the Executioner of Gods Curse, worketh upon the corrupt na∣ture of man, and deceiveth them. It is said, 1 Chron. 21.1. Sathan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number Israel. But it is said, 2 Sam. 24.1. And the Anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, to say, go, number Israel and Iudah. How shall we reconcile these two places? God gave him over to be tempted by Sathan. By God, as a Judge; by Sathan, as an Execu∣tioner. Temptations to sin come immediately from the Devil, but they are governed by God, for holy and righteous ends. So again, 1 King 22.22. The evil Spirit had leave and Commission, to be a lying Spirit in Ahabs Pro∣phets, Go forth and do so, and thou shalt pre∣vail with him. There is a permissive inten∣tion, not an effective: when they grieve his Spirit, God withdraweth and leaveth them to the evil Spirit, who works by their fleshly and worldly lusts, and then they are easily sedu∣ced, who prefer Worldly things before Hea∣venly. 3. There is an active providence which rai∣seth
such instruments, and propoundeth such objects, as meeting with a naughty heart, do sore blind it. (1.) For instruments, Iob 22.16. The deceived and the deceiver are hi. Take it in Worldly, or take it in Religious matters, mans deceiving others, or being deceived by others, it is of God; for it is said, both are his; not only his Creatures, but subject to the government and disposal of providence, how and whom they shall deceive, and how far they shall deceive. So Ezech. 14.9. If the Prophet be deceived that hath spoken a thing, I the Lord have deceived him. This is a great transaction in the World, a sad judgment not to be cavilled, but trembled at. For mans in∣gratitude, God raiseth up false Prophets to se∣duce them that delight in lies, rather than in the truths of God. (2.) For objects, wicked instruments varnish and dress up this cause▪ with all the art they can, to make it a po∣werful deceit, and then it is befriended and countenanced by the powers of the World, and so easily prevaileth with them, who are moved either with worldly hopes or fears, and have debauched their Conscience by worldly respects. God saith, Jer. 6.21. I will lay stum∣bling blocks before this people. If we will find the sin, God will find the occasion: If Iudas hath a mind to buy his Master, he shall not want Chapmen to bargain with him; the Priests were consulting to destroy Christ at the
same time that the Devil put it into his heart, Matth. 26.3 being Alarmed by the Miracle of raising Lazarus. Birds and Fishes are easily deceived with such baits as they greedily catch at, so God by his just vengeance order∣eth such occurences and occasions as take with a naughty and carnal heart. 2. The degree or kind of the punishment, , we render it strong delusion, or the efficacy of error, that is, such delusion as shall have a most efficacious force to deceive them. The prevalency and strength of the de∣lusion is seen in two things. 1. The absurdity of the errors. 2. The obstinacy wherewith they cleave to them. 1. The absurdity of the errors. I will in∣stance in three things. False Image worship and Bread worship, Invocation of Saints, and supererogation of works. 1. Adoration of Images. Idolaters are usu∣ally represented as sottish, as Psal. 115.8. They that make them are like unto them (so) is every one that trusteth in them. He had described the senselesness of the Idols before; They have mouths, but they speak not: Eyes have they, but they see not: they have ears, but they hear not: Noses have they, but they smell not, &c. Now as Idols are senseless, so the Idolaters are bruitish. That is, the makers, Worshippers, and Servers of them, as void of true Wisdom, as the Images are of sense and
motion, Isa. 44.18. They have not known, nor understood, for he hath shut their eyes, that they cnnot see, and their hearts that they cannot un∣derstand. There is a fatal obduration upon them all along there: their senselesness is set forth from ver. 9. to ver. 20. they that wor∣ship the work of their own hands, are them∣selves but stocks and stones, being blined by the just Judgment of God. If it be said this is meant of the Idols of the Gentiles, not of the Images of God, and Christ, and Virgin Mary, and Saints: But God will not be worshipped by an Idol, and there is no difference between the Images of the Papists, and the Heathens, but only in the name. 2. The other thing that I will instance in is, the Invocation of Saints, a sottish error, and respect payed to them that are so far out of the reach of our Commerce; and a thing not only without precept, promise, or president in Scripture, but also against Scripture which always directeth to God by one Mediator, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Scripture saith, Go to God if you lack any thing, and they say, Go to the Saints; if they say not as Authors of Grace, or any Divine Blessing, yet as Inter∣cessors; though that be not true, yet that derogateth from Christ, whose Office it is to intercede with the Father. So that this is to put the Creature in the place of God. But it is not only contrary to Scripture, but the very
motion and inclination of the Spirit, when he stirreth us or moveth us to pray, Rom. 8.15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father. Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba Father; he inclineth us to come to God, and yet this they will leave. 3. A third Error that I shall instance in is, that man may supererogate, not only merit for himself, but lay in an overplus to encrease the treasure of the Church; when the Scripture telleth us that our best works are imperfect, yea polluted; and our Lord himself hath told us, that when we have done all, say ye we are unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10. But what will not men believe, that can believe these things? There are other absurdities as gross as these, but this sufficeth for a tast. 2. The obstinacy wherewith they cleave to them: Nothing will reclaim them; not Scri∣pture, nor reason, nor evidence of truth, but they still cry the opinion of the Church, and the Faith of their Forefathers, and will in∣vent any paltry shift and distinction; rather recede from any thing than once admit that the Church hath erred. Like the obstinate Jews in Christs time, that denied apparent matter of fact, Joh. 8.33. We were never in bondage to any man, though they were in E∣gypt and Babylon, and were now under servi∣tude,
and the power of the Romans. Though we prove they have erred and do err still, the Church cannot err; or rather like the Elder Jews in the Prophet Ieremiahs time, Ier. 44.16, 17, 18, 19. As for the word that thou hast spo∣ken unto us in the name of the Lord, we will not hearken to thee, but we will certainly do whatso∣ever goeth out of our own mouth: To burn in∣cense unto the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink-offerings to her, as we have done; we, and our Fathers, and our Kings, and our Prin∣ces, for then we had plenty of Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil: But since we have left off burning incense to the Queen of Heaven, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the Sword and the Famine. Such sottish obstinacy is there in men, that doat upon their own in∣vented Superstitious and Idolatrous Services. Custom, Antiquity, practice of their Ance∣stors, the Authority and usage of their great ones, their Rulers, the generality of obser∣vance. This is their knot of Arguments, by which they confirm themselves; just as the Papists plead for their Superstitions at this day; and to make the Mess more compleat, they add the plenty and prosperity they enjoyed; what a merry World it was before the new Gospel came in: when they had nothing but Mass and Mattins. And all the Calamities that have faln out, they impute not to their own sins, but to the Gospel. Now when a people
are thus obstinate, and measure Religion not by reasons of Conscience, but the interests of the Belly, it is a sign that they are under the power of delusion; and error hath more effi∣cacy with such corrupt minds than the truth. 3. The Causes of it shew the efficacy of error. (1.) The sinning of their learned, to keep out all instructions; allowing the vul∣gar only Prayers in a strange tongue, and the Scriptures in no tongue, and teaching them implicitely to believe as the Church believeth. When the Lord permitteth such guides to or∣der the affairs of his Church, his great Judg∣ment of occecation and obduration is upon them, Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophesie falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means, and my people love (to have it) so. (2.) When gain, in∣terests, and ambition move them thereunto. As those Masters in the Acts exclaim against Paul and Silas, when they saw their hope of gain was gone, Acts 16.19, 20, 21. These men do exceedingly trouble the City. And Demetrius Acts 18.25. Ye know by this craft we have our wealth. This is a tender point to touch inter∣est, and when once it cometh to this, they will proceed in their foly, and defend one falshood with another; for the great Idol of the World is gain, or love of money, 1 Tim. 6.10. For the love of money, is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith. It were an happiness if
such kind of Arguments did only prevail with us to embrace a Religion, that might convince others, that it was Religion it self that we loved: That our interest did not keep others from their duty, and that we could embrace a Religion for the goodness of it, even to our own loss. (3.) Another cause is pride of them∣selves, and prejudice against others; lest they should seem to be in an error and wrong, and to learn of a few Novellists: shall they teach them? No, rather they will remain ignorant still. Alas, it is not easy to strike Sa, and submit to the teaching of those whom they hate: Therefore men continue those first pre∣judices they have imbibed, and will rather live and die in their errors, than give God glory by a submission to truth. Such a proud opinion and conceit have they of their own Learning and Knowledge. This cause also con∣duceth to make the resolution more strong, pre-ingagement in a contrary way. It is dis∣graceful to change, men think it is taken no∣tice of as a great wonder, Acts 6.7. That a great Company of the Priests were obedient to the Faith. But such wonder are not wrought every day, they of all men are most pertina∣cious, but God can of stones raise up Children to Abraham. Now would to God these cau∣ses of error were only found in the Antichri∣stian Estate. They are every where, bu these cause strong delusion.
3. The issue and effect, that they should be∣lieve a lie; two things must be explained. 1. The object. 2. The Act. 1. The object, a lie: that is, either 1. false Doctrines, 1 Tim. 4.2. Speaking lies in Hypocrisie. When palpable errors are taken for truths. A man given over by God to delusion, will swal∣low the grossest errors and fctions, and that in matters dangerous and destructive to Salva∣tion. False Doctrines are often called a lie in Scripture, as opposite to the truth. And yet such things are received by those from whose parts the World would expect better things. 2. False Miracles, in their Legends; a man would wonder any should have the face to obtrude such ridiculous stories, and scanda∣lous to Religion upon the World. 3. False Calumnies against those Instruments whom God employed in the reformation: Popery is a Religion supported by lies, as that Calvin was a Sodomite, and burnt in the shoulder at Noyon, for that crime, and the Popish Dea and Chapter of that place have published his Vindicate. That Luther was an Incarnate De∣vil begotten by an Incubus. I should weary you to rake in this Dunghil, but I must close it with the general observation, that Antichri∣stians will lie; some among them call them pious frauds, but they are Diabolical Forgeries. 2. The Act is, that they are given up to be∣lieve
a lie: This must be applied to their er∣roneous Doctrines, as common to them all. To their false Miracles and Calumnies, not to the Inventers, but to the seduced, who swal∣low these things. All that oppose the truth do not go apparently against Conscience, but being given up to the efficacy of error▪ they may believe that false Religion wherein they live. Let us open the Term believe. What is it to believe a thing? you may know y the opposites. Now opposite to Faith, there is first doubtfulness, when men halt between two opinions, 1 Kings 18.21. If the Lord b God, follow him, but if Baal, then follow him. This doubtfulness proceedeth from want of bring∣ing the Case to a Tryal, and thorow Hearing. 2. Conjecture, Acts 26.28. Almost perswaded, Almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian. 3. Opinion, Matth. 13.14. Hath not root in himself, but dureth for a while, &c. 4. Firm perswasion. They will censure nothing, for if of truth, Joh. 6.69. We believe and are sure, &c. if of error, Acts 26.9. I verily thought with my self that I ought to do many things con∣trary to the name of Iesus of Nazareth. 5. Re∣solved adherence, if to the truth, that is cal∣led receiving the truth in the love of it: If to error, it is seen in mens obstinacy and zeal suf∣fering in it, 1 Kings 18.28. Cutting themselves with Knives and Lances till blood gushed out. Suffering for it. For a man may give his body
to be burned for an error, a man may sacrifice a strong body to a stubborn mind: 1 Cor. 13.3. Though I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profiteth nothing. And persecu∣ting the contrary, Joh. 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you, will think that he doth God service. To apply this: Marry that live within the Kingdom of Antichrist, some are doubtful, some almost perswaded, soe espouse the com∣mon prevailing opinions, others adhere to them with much false zeal and superstition. These are those who are given up to believe a lie. Vses. 1. Information. 1. To shew us the reason why so many learned men are Captiva∣ted by Antichrist, and live yet in the Popish Religion, for this is a great scruple to many. The answer is ready, The Lord hath suffered them to be deluded by him whose coming is after the working of Sathan in all power, &c. Rev. 17.2. The inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the Wine of her Forni∣cation. It is an intoxication, the errors of that State are plausibly defended, and supported by Worldly Interests. There is the Witchery of Worldly allurements, and the intoxicating Wine of errors defended and owned within their bounds and places of their education and abode. So that men have seemed to lose their understandings, and not have that ad∣visedness
which well becomes a man: possi∣bly they may have doubts and checks of Con∣science, but the name of the Church charm∣eth them, and Worldly magnificence strangely inveagleth them. They may know that the Religion professed by Protestants, is sin∣cere, holy, and saving, but being allured by Licentiousness, or intangled by Covetousness, or puffed up with Pride, are loth to change, or are vanquished and astonished with fear of death and other inconveniencies: or it may be do not use that advised and serious delibe∣ration, which a matter of Salvation requireth. Four causes may be given. 1. Self-Confidence, God will shew the folly of those that de∣pend on the strength of their own wit, Pro. 3. 5, 6. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own understandings. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. And therefore will bring to nought the wisdom of the wise, and destroy the un∣derstanding of the prudent, when it is lifted up against the Interests of Christs Kingdom, 1 Cor. 1.19. 2. Prejudice; The Priests and Scribes could readily tell that Christ was to be born in Bethlehem, when Herod sent to con∣sult them, Matth. 2.4, 5, 6. yet who more obstinate against him, that was born there? They expected a temporal Messias, and there∣fore could not see what they saw. What was apparent to Children, was a riddle to the Rab∣bies.
So they expect some open Enemy of the Church to attacque it by power and force, lit∣tle dreaming of a Bishop, &c. 3. Pride, ma∣ny of the Jewish Church believed in Christ, but they did not profess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. Ioh. 11.42, 43. They loved the praise of men more than the praise of God. They loved not an hated opi∣nion. Many may fear the Pope to be Anti∣christ, but Pride and Interest will not let them submit to a change. 4. The Judgment of God is the great cause that men do not, or will not know Antichrist: God hath not given them eyes to see, as Christ was not received in Ierusalem, the things of their peace were hid from their Eyes, Luk. 19.42. He beheld the City and wept over it saying, If thou hadst known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace; but now they are hid from thine eyes. 2. It sheweth us, that the prevalency of this wicked one, should be no blemish to provi∣dence: for the permission of him is one of Gods dreadful providentia dispensations; That it should have such success▪ it raiseth Atheisti∣cal thoughts in weak spirits, yea, it is an of∣fence to the Godly, as it is a prejudice to the Truth; but God hereby will shew us, 1. That there are deceits and errors, as well as truth in the World: much of choice, not chance; and lest we should think this an antiquated dis∣pensation,
to try the professors of the Gospel who lived in the midst of Pagans, it cometh nearer to us. But he that condemneth all Re∣ligion on this account, judgeth one an for anothers crime, which is unjust, doth as fool∣ishly as he that thinketh there is no tre mo∣ney, because there are some counterfeit pie∣ces. 2. That God in concomitancy with the Gospel, will discover his dreadful Justice, as well as his wonderful mercy by it, that we may tremble whilst we admire grace. 3. That it is a great evil to be deceivers or active pro∣moters of delusions, and it will not wholly excuse us that we are deceived, Matth. 15.14. 4. What need all serious Christians have to pray to God, not to be led into temptation. Alas, what would become of us if left to our selves in an hour of temptation? 5. Let us fear to sleight the grace offered. Among other threatnings God threatneth to smite his peo∣ple with blindness, Deut. 18.28. The Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart. 6. What a ready way to destruction it is, to measure Religion by Worldly Interests. This bred Antichrist, kept him up in the World, and blindeth hi sedu∣ced Proselytes to this day. 2. Vse. Is caution to take heed of spiritual blindness and infatuation, that this Judgment fall not upon us: That God leave us not to our own lusts, hearts, and Counsels, without
check and restraint. It may in part befal Gods people, what shall we do to avoid it? 1. Take heed of sinning against light, either by sins of omission, or commission, Jam. 4.17. To him that knoweth to do good, and doth it not, to him it is sin. They will find it to be sin in the sad effects. 2. Take heed of Hypocrisie in the profession of the truth. God oweth the Hy∣pocrites an ill turn, and seemeth to be inga∣ged to discover him before the Congregation, Pro. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by de∣ceit, his wickedness shall be shewed before the whole Congregation; and usually it is, by gi∣ving him up to some licentious practice, or strong delusion, by which he breaketh the neck of his profession. 3. Take heed of Pride, and carnal Self-sufficiency. God may leave his people to dangerous falls, when they make their bosom their Oracle, and think to carry all by the strength of their own understanding, 2 Chro. 32.31. God left him to try him that h might know all that was in his heart: It is good to consult with God continually. 4. Take heed of following the rabble, Joh. 4.20. Our fathers worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say, that in Ierusalem is the place where men ought to worship, &c. But learn to see by your own eyes: That you may have sure evidence you are in Gods way, Pro. 24.13, 14.
SERMON X. 2 Thess. 2.12. That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighte∣ousness. 2. THeir punishment in the other World. Where first the terribleness of it, 2. The righteousness and Justice of it. 1. The terribleness, that they all might be damned. That is, filling up the measure of their obduration, they may at length fall into just condemnation. 2. The Justice and Equity of it, which is two ways expressed. 1. Negatively, they believed not the truth. That is, received not the Gospel in the sim∣plicity of it, as revealed by Christ and his A∣postles, and recorded in the Scriptures, but wilfully, and for their interests sake, gave up themselves to these corruptions. 2. Positively, had pleasure in unrighteous∣ness: in the 10th verse, it was, They received not the love of the truth. Now when the merito∣rious cause is repeated, there is something
more added. They had a love to, and delight in, other things, . Here two things must be explained. 1. What is , unrighteousness. 2. What is , taking pleasure in un∣righteousness. 1. What is  unrighteousness. Righte∣ousness is giving every one his due; and denying them their due, is unrighteousness. There is a gi∣ving man his due, and a giving God his due, Matth. 22.21. Render unto Caesar, the things which are Caesars; and unto God the things that are Gods. Righteousness is often put for giving man his due, Titus 2.12. That we should live soberly, righteously, &c. and giving God his due, which is worship and reverence, Psal. 29.2. Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name. And again, Ps. 96.8. Give unto the Lord, the glory due to his name, bring an offering and come into his Courts. Now this unrighteousness here spoken of, is principally meant in the latter sense. False ways of worship are the greatest unrighteousness that can be practised. For the duty that we owe to God is the most righteous thing in the World. Now by false worship, you withdraw the Glo∣ry of God from him, and communicate it to another. Worship is his own proper due, both by the light of nature, and Scripture: and there∣fore the Gentiles which had the light of na∣ture, are said to detain the truth, , Rom. 1.18. why? the reason is rendred in the after
Verses, 23. They changed the glory of God into an Image made like a corruptible man: Ver. 25. They changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the Creature more than the Creator. This was their , their unrigh∣teousness, or injurious dealing with God. So the Antichristians that had the light of Scrip∣ture, though under palliated pretences, chang∣ed the truth of God into a lie, loved their own errors more than simple and plain Chri∣stianity, or the true knowledge of God, and diverted the worship from himself unto an Idol. 2. They had pleasure in unrighteousness, in these things they please themselves, not lapse into it out of simple ignorance and error of mind. And so the Apostle parallels the two great Apostasies, That from the light of na∣ture, and that from the light of the Gospel. Light of nature, Rom. 1.32. Not only do these things, but have pleasure in them that do them. Light of Scripture. Have pleasure in unrighteousness, they are mad upon their I∣dols and Images; not only are Idolaters, but delight in Idolatry and Image-worship, Psal. 97.7. That boast themselves of Idols. Now to observe some things. 1. Errors of Judgment, as well as sins of practice, may bring damnation upon the Souls of men. All sins do in their own nature tend to damnation. Rom. 6.23. For the wages of sin
is death. And Errors of Judgment are sins, for they are contrary to the rule or law of God, 1 Joh. 3.4. Whosoever committeth sin, trans∣gresseth also the Law, for sin is the transgression of the Law. Any swerving from the Law is sin; And they are inductive of other sins; for if the eye be blind, the whole body is full of darkness, Matth. 6.23. It pervers our zeal. There is nothing so mischievous, wicked, and cruel, that a man blinded with error, will not at∣tempt against those that differ from him. Ioh. 16.2. They shall put you out of the Synagogues: yea the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you▪ will think that he doth God service. A blind Horse is full of metal, but ever and anon stum∣bleth. Therefore if a man be not guided by sound Judgment, his zealous affections will precipitate him into mischief. As the Jews that persecuted Christ, and his Apostles, had a zeal of God but not according to knowledge, Rom. 10.2. So the Popish Zealots, with what fury have they persecuted the innocent and sincere servants of Christ? The Papists would be an∣gry if we should not reckon St. Dominick a zealous man, and the poor Albigenses felt the bitter effects of that zeal in the destruction of many thousands, by inhumane Butcheries and Villanies about Tholouse, &c. The Lord deliver us from the furies of transported, brain∣sick Zealots! 2. Though all errors may bring damnation
upon the Souls of men, yet some more especi∣ally than others, may be said to be camning. As 2 Pet. 2.1. Some shall bring in damnable Here∣sies. Now this may be either from the matter or manner of holding them. 1. From the matter, if destructive of the way of Salvation by Christ. Some are utterly inconsistent with Salvation and eternal life, as errors in the fundamentals in Religion. As sup∣pose that a man should reject or refuse Christ, after a sufficient proposal of the Gospel to him, there is no question but this is damning unbe∣lief, Joh. 3.19. And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men lo∣ved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. But yet we are not to say that alone damneth. There are other things necessary to Salvation, contained under that general truth. The Scripture saith, Joh. 17.3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Iesus Christ whom thou hast sent. There is the sum of what is necessary to Salva∣tion. That God is to be known, loved, obey∣ed, worshipped and injoyed, and the Lord Jesus to be owned as our Redeemer and Savi∣our, to bring us home to God, and to pro∣cure for us the gifts of pardon and life, and this life to be begun here, and perfected in Heaven. Other things are of moment to clear these necessary truths, but they may be all re∣duced thereunto. The truth is, the question
about the matter to be believed, is not what divine Revelations are necessary to be belie∣ved or rejected when sufficiently proposed, for all points without exception are so; but what are simply and absolutely necessary to eternal life, and these are points of faith, and practice, and obedience. The points of Faith, are a knowledge of God in Christ, and pra∣ctice that we be regenerated, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the spirit, he can∣not enter into the Kingdom of God. And live an holy life, Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord. 2. For the manner. 1. When men profess what they believe not, and voluntarily chuse error for Worldly ends, though it be a less er∣ror against the Scripture, and consistent with the main tenour of Salvation; yet it taken up against Conscience, for by-ends, it is a matter of sad consequence; for this is living in a known sin. Some may be blinded for a time, out of terror and compassion, and their case is sad, till they express solemn repentance; but when there is a reluctation against clear light, and an obstinacy in that reluctation, this man is condemned in himself, Titus 3.11. Such a man is subverted, and sinneth, being condemned of himself. There cannot be a greater argu∣ment of a will unsubdued to God, than to stand out against conviction, out of secular
respects. This is to love darkness more than light, and argueth such pravity of heart, as is inconsistent with Faith and Salvation. Some ignorant Souls may hold dangerous errors, and which to others would be damnabe; yet they may not actually damn them, because they do not rebel against the light; and may be retracted by a general repentance, or seek∣ing of pardon for all their known or un∣known sins: Psal. 19.12, 13. Who can under∣stand his errors? Cleanse thou me from secret faults. Keep back thy servant also from presump∣tuous sins: Let them not have dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be innnocent from the great transgression. 2. When they are vented by some Professor of Christianity, to the seducing of others, and rending of the Cch, and drawing Disciples after them, this adeth a new guilt to their errors, and maketh them the more damnable, Act 20.30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them. There are properly Hereticks, and Ring∣leaders of Sects; therefore Heresies are reck∣oned among the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.20. Emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, Heresies; in∣creasing their own doom and Judgment; these under a Christian name seduce and lead away the Church from Christ; they pervert the ho∣ly ways of God, and draw his people from serving him in Spirit and Truth.
3. When though they should not err fun∣damentally, they so far debauch Christianity, as that God giveth them up to believe a lie, and to take pleasure in unrighteousness, that is, to defend and maintain apparent corrupti∣ons of Christian Doctrine and Worship. Of Doctrine, for it is here said, they believe a lie, and they believe not the truth. Of worship, for it is said, they take pleasure in unrighte∣ousness. A party thus given up by God we should shun as we would shun a Plague, or come out of Bedlam; for these men have lost their spiritual wits, and ee not that which the common light of Christianity doth disprove; however they retain the name of Christians, and make a cry of the Church, the Church, as the Jews did of the Temple of the Lord, and retain some truth among them; for such a party is here described. 4. When there is gross negligence, or not taking pains to know better. It is equivalent to reluctation, or standing out against light, Crassa negligentia dolus est; there is a deceit in laziness or affected ignorance, Joh. 3.20. They will not come to the light, lest their deeds should be reproved: 2 Pet. 3.5. They are willingly igno∣rant. Those that please themselves in the igno∣rance of any truth, err not only in their minds, but their hearts. It is the duty of Gods peo∣ple to understand what is his will, Eph. 5.7. Be not unwise but understanding what the will of
the Lord is. And it is their practice. Rom. 12.2. That ye may prove, what is the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God: Psal. 1.2. His delight is in the law of the Lord, and therein doth he meditate day and night. We should be searching still. But when men will not know what they have a mind to hate, it argueth a secret sore, and suspicion of the truth, and are loth to follow it too close, lest it cross their lusts and interests. 3. That the way and errors of Popery are damnable, and it is very unsafe living in that Society and Combination. I prove it. 1. Be∣cause they live in wilful disobedience to God: They violate the manifest Commandments of God, while they hold it lawful to worship Pictures and Images, to make Pictures of the Trinity, to invocate Saints and Angels, to deny Lay-men the Cup in the Sacrament, to adore the Sacrament, to prohibit certain Or∣ders of Men and Women to marry, to Cele∣brate the publick service in a language which ordinarily men and women that assist under∣stand not: In all these things they offer ap∣parent violence to Gods Precepts. And that their whole worship is polluted with a gross Superstition; as for instance, to worship Ima∣ges is expresly against Gods word, Psal. 97.7. Confounded be all they that worship graven Ima∣ges, that boast themselves of Idols. Worship him all ye Gods. The Scripture you see denounceth
confusion to all Worshippers of Images, and they are reckoned as Enemies of Christs King∣dom: for it is applied to Christ, Heb. 1.6. And let all the Angels of God worship him. That would set up the worship and service of them in his Church, in the exercise of their Religi∣on, especially those who glory in them, and boast of them, and set them forth as the glory of their way and worship. No, he disdaineth all this relative worship, at or before Images, which men would give unto him, and shew∣eth, that all the Powers of this World, and the other, Angels and Potentates should im∣mediately worship Christ. For the second point, picturing the Trinity. God hath not only forbidden it, but argued against it. Deut. 4.15, 16. Take therefore good heed unto your selves, for ye saw no similitude, when the Lord spake to you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: lest ye corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image, the similitude of any thing, Male or Female. See how cautelous God is, to pre∣vent this abuse, and yet how boldly men pra∣ctise it. For the third instance, the Invocation of Saints and Angels. Our Lord hath taught us how to repel that temptation, Matth. 4.10. It is written, thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve. That religious service and worship is due only to God: no Creature can claim it without Sacri∣ledge, nor can we give it to them without
Idolatry. And God being so jealous of his honour, every Christian should be careful that he doth not divert it from him. They have many distinctions to excuse themselves to the World, but I doubt how they will excuse themselves to God. For the fourth particular, adoring the Sacrament, I shall speak to again anon, that is a mean, not an object of wor∣ship. The Fifth, prohibiting certain Orders of men and women to marry, which the Apo∣stle calleth Doctrines of Devils, 1 Tim. 4.1, 2. In the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and Do∣ctrines of Devils: speaking lies in hypocrisie, having their Conscience seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to marry, &c. For the Sixth, Celebra∣ting publick Service in an unknown Tongue, it is contrary to the Apostles reasoning, 1 Cor. 14.15, 16, 17. For if I pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding is unfruitful. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understand∣ing also: I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also: else when thou shalt bless with the spirit, how shall he that occu∣pieth the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he understandeth not what thou sayest; for thou verily givest thanks well, but the other is not edified. For the Se∣venth, Communion in one kind; this is against Christs express Institution, Matth. 26.26, 27.
Iesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body: And he took the Cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. The Apostle supposeth every one that can examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.18. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, and drink of that Cup. Now for this usurping Synagogue to come as they do, with a non obstante, to the Statutes of God, Who can join with them in these corruptions and usurpations, without peril of Salvation? Secondly, That the way of Popery is dam∣nable because they deprive the people of the means of Salvation, contrary to the express Injunctions from God, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me. Col. 3.16. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one ano∣ther in Psalms and Hymns. The Saints are commended, Acts 17.11. In that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and search∣ed the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: and 2 Tim. 3.15. That he knew the Scrip∣tures which are able to make wise unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Iesus. This is the seed of Life, food of Souls, rule of Faith and Manners, our strength against temptations, 1 Joh. 2.14. I have written unto you young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abi∣deth
in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one. Now to deprive the Lords people of the Bread of Life, and Word of Life, what is it but to leave them to perish? 3. The great charge is, they have pleasure in unrighteousness, that is, delight in Idola∣try; and corrupt or false worship, which is the greatest unrighteousness man can be guilty of. To evidence this, let us enquire, 1. What is Idolatry. 2. Prove how notoriously they are guilty of it. 1. What is Idolatry? it is a worshipping of a Creature with Divine Worship, and who∣soever giveth Divine Worship to a Creature, committeth Idolatry. This Proposition is evi∣dent in the Scripture, as when the Israelites worshipped the Calf, litteral or metaphorical Idolatry, they are called Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10. 7. Neither be ye Idolaters as were some of them, as it is written, the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. And the covetous, that giveth that delight and trust to his wealth which is only due to God, is called an Idola∣ter, Eph. 5.5. Nor covetous man who is an Ido∣later; and in many other places. Secondly, Now that the Papists are guilty of this, I prove. 1. By the several kinds of their Idolatry, they have more variety of objects of worship, than any Society of men that ever lived in the World. 1. Angels are Creatures, and that
they worship Angels themselves confess. They Consecrate Churches unto them, offer solemn Prayers unto them, and own the adoring them, though an Angel forbiddeth this Ado∣ration, Rev. 19.10. And he said unto me, See, thou do it not, I am thy fellow Servant, &c. and St. Paul telleth us, that they that worship An∣gels, do not hold the head, Col. 1.18, 19. So that Angel-worship proveth to be a damnable error. Secondly, The Adoration of Saints, to whom they give religious worship, and in∣voke them as helpers, and honour them with fastings, watchings, and prayers, as Suarez acknowledgeth, and yet God is express, that he will not give his glory to another, Isa. 42. 8. they are to be honoured indeed for imita∣tion, but not adored for Religion. The third object is the Virgin Mary, to whom they pray more than they do to God. In the Rosary there is this Prayer. Beata Ma∣ria, salva omnes qui te glorificant. And we be∣seech thee to hear us good Lady. That Ad∣dress, Monstra, te esse Marem, and one divi∣ded, inter ubera & vulnera, the Breasts of the Virgin, and wounds of Christ, as if the milk of the one were as soveraign and as precious as the blood of the other. It were endless to rake in this filthy puddle: how many Books are there concluded with Laus Deo, & Virgini Deiparae? That sometimes there is a more
present relief by commemorating the name of Mary, than by calling on the name of the Lord Jesus. In their exclamations, Iesus! Ma∣ria! How often in their Te Deum, We praise thee O Lady? Fourthly, Adoration of Images; This is more foul than all the former, because direct∣ed to a more gross object. This is prophesied of Antichrist, that he and his Abettors, they shall worship Idols of Silver, and Gold, and Brass, and Wood and Stone, Rev. 9.20. Now tell a Papist of this, and they say, they do not ter∣minate their worship in the Image, but in the party whom it representeth, the same said the Pagan. Non Lapidem sed Iovem in Lapide, Iu∣lian the Apostate. But God hath forbidden bowing to, or before an Image. Fifthly, The worshipping of the Cross, not only by cuppying, bowing, cringing, but Prayers. O Crux ave spes unica hoc Passionis Tempore, auge piis justitiam reis{que} dona veniam. All hale O Cross, our only hope this time of passion, augment the Godly's Devoton, and forgive the transgression of the guilty. Sixthly, The Bread in the Sacrament, the Papists give it Cultum Latriae, that worship which is due to God; those Heathens wor∣shipped living Animals, but these ador a piece of Bread, kneel to it in their Chapels and Oratories; yea, in the midst of the Streets, when it is carried in Procession; these are the
Idols whom they worship; and what hope of Salvation is there in a Religion where the heart is turned so much from God to the Crea∣ture? 2. That they are more culpable than the Heathens. 1. As to their Hypocrisy, by distinctions and veil of Piety, wherewith they disguise all this: For this delight in un∣righteousness was called before the deceivea∣bleness of unrighteousness. They profess to abhor Idols, and yet worship Images, and make that a point of Christianity, which is directly contrary to the drift of it, which is to teach us to worship God in the Spirit. 2. As to their helps against it, the Pagans were never taught to do better, though they sinned against the light of nature, in worshipping God by Images, yet they had no Scripture, no such express prohibitions to caution them, as we have from God. They pretend to believe the Scriptures, yet how do they seek to evade the force of them by crafty distinctions, that will never satisfie Conscience; though they help to blind the mind, and harden the heart. That which I urge is this, they were never inter∣dicted this kind of worship by their Gods, but these know that it is severely forbidden by our God, and the second Commandement so stareth in their Faces, that it is expunged out of their Catechisms; and Vasquez is bold to affirm, that the second Commandement is Ceremonial. Lactantius of old said, Non est
dubium, religio nulla est ubi cujus{que} simulacrum est. 3. The Pagans did adore their Gods in their Images, but never was any so sottish among them to imagine that an Image was to be adored with the same degree of worship as God himself; but this is the corrupt Doctrine of the Papists, that an Image is to be wor∣shipped with the same worship, werewith God himself is worshipped. Imagini Christi Latria debetur. Aquinas. That is the proper worship of God. 1. Vse to shew how necessary it is, to take heed that we be not found among the follow∣ers of Antichrist; since these errors are dam∣nable. Salvation and damnation are not trifles, nor matters to be played withal: Surely we need have our eyes in our head, and not to be hood-winked, when we are upon the brink of a bottomless Gulph. Both sides lay damnation at one anothers Door; they for our departing from the Catholick Church, out of which is no Salvation as they pretend; we upon their departing from the Catholick Faith, and simplicity of the Gospel. Now external order is not of such consideration as Faith; but when they will be able to prove that Christ hath setled this order in the Church, that all his Subjects should be obedient to one univer∣sal visible head, and that this head is the Pope; and therefore when their very Order is an incroachment and usurpation; to depart
from them, is to return to Christ: Again, where is Salvation most likely to be found, ra∣ther with them who seek all their Religion in the Scriptures, ad stick there; or with those, who not contented with the Apostolical Do∣ctrine contained in the Scriptures, have brought in unwritten Traditions, as an equal rule of Faith with Scripture; and the Sacrifice of the Mass and Purgatory, the Religious Invo∣cations of Saints, and many other enormities, and uphold these Innovations with all manner of Tyranny and Cruelty exercised upon Christs faithful Servants? If men go to Hea∣ven without Prayers which they understand, and Scriptures, half Christs Sacrament, a piece of his merits, and some supestitious observan∣ces, yea plain Idolatry, then the way to Hea∣ven is sooner to be had in Popery; but he that hath but half an Eye, may soon see which is the surer side. Surely the surest way to avoid damnation, is to avoid sin. Now where are Souls so much in danger of sin, as in the Ro∣man Society, where so little is given to inter∣nal life and piety, and so much to external Pomp and Service; and where errors are so palpable, that either men do not believe them with their hearts, or if their hearts were up∣right and not perverse and obstinate, could not believe them; but just so is the way of Popery to true Christianity. Surely what∣ever it be to Papists, it would be absolutely
damnable to us, as wilfully to thrust our selves upon apparent ruine. There is a cavil or pre∣tence which I shall speak unto on this occasi∣on. That many Protestants confess Papists may be saved in their Faith; whereas they hold Protestants and other Hereticks may not be saved out of the Catholick Church. And therefore it is safe to enter into that way which is safe by the consent of both parts, Ans. 1. Mens opinions are no ground of Faith. Persons may be in a sad woful Case, that men speak well of, Luke 6.26. Wo unto you when all men shall speak well of you. It is not what Man saith, but what the word of God saith: Now the word speaketh terrible things to them. [Them that perish] and [That they all might be damned who believed not the truth] &c. Secondly, The word of God teacheth us to judge of the way, rather than persons, who stand or fall to their own Master. The way is damnable. If on the one side there be Cha∣rity to some persons, that sin of invincible ig∣norance, and are saved as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.13. which the other side will not grant to a con∣trary perswasion; it argueth Charity on one side, which hopeth all things; malice on the other, who rashly condemn men without evi∣dence, yea, against it. 3. If this argument would hold good, it had been better in Christ and the Apostles time to be a Jewish Prose∣lyte, than a Christian; Christ acknowledgeth
Salvation is of the Jews, their promises of adoption and glory, but the Jews pronounced him and his followers accursed, scourged, im∣prisoned them; yet did not get so far as Pa∣pists, to murder and butcher them. Suppose a little time that Catholicks owned Donatists as Brethren, allowed their Baptism, but Donatists are rebaptized, and upon pain of damnation require all so to be, and say, Save thy Soul, be∣come a Christian. Now a Pagan should rather by this argument join himself to Donatists than Catholicks. Lastly, The Argument may be retorted, A Protestant keepeth himself to his Bible, Baptismal Covenant, Creed, but deni∣eth many things which Papists believe and practise, as Papal Infallibility, Transubstantia∣tion, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, wor∣shipping of Images; they cannot but say Pro∣testants are in the right. 2. Vse, observe the degrees of obduration, not receiving the truth in the love of it, be∣lieving a Lie, discarding Truth, and then ta∣king pleasure in unrighteousness, and then cometh Damnation.
SERMON XI. 2 Thess. 2.13. But we are bound to give thanks always to God, for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord, because the Lord hath from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. THE Adversative Particle [But] sheweth what respect these words have to what went before; He had spoken of God's direful Judgment, of sending strong delusion on them, that had no love to the pure Truth, but sinned against Light, and had pleasure in the false worship, and superstitions, countenanced by the World. Now lest the Thessalonians should be troubled at this sad prediction, he sheweth what cause he had to bless God in their behalf. The sub∣joining of this consolation doth teach us three things: 1. That it is a great favour of God to us, to escape Antichristian Errors. They are so dangerous in their own nature, so insinuative and inveigling by plausible appeaance, and
accompanied with such worldly baits and ad∣vanges; that it is a great mercy hat God hath taught us better things. But then be sure you be in the right, out of Conscience and Evidence, not out of Faction and Interest. And that you hate Popery out of the love of the Truth, rather than because you are out of the reach of the temptation. However it is a great mercy, that God keepeth off the Temptation, till we are better setled in Religion. 2. That the Election of God giveth a Peo∣ple great advantages against Errors, especially against the impostures of Antichrist; for when he speaketh of the sad estate of those who are seduced by the Man of Sin, he presently ad∣deth, but we are bound to give thanks to God for you, for he hath chosen you to Salvation. You will say the Thessalonians received the Gospel before these corruptions were brought into the Church: but though Antichrist was not then in being, and this corrupt Christianity not then set a foot, yet there were some pre∣parations for it. The mystery of iniquity al∣ready worketh, and they were preserved from the taint of it, by the Election of God; for either God suffereth not the Elect to be decei∣ved in momentous points, or sooner or later he reduceth them: the purpose of God according to Election must stand, Rom. 9.11. & Rom. 11.7. The Election hath obtained, and the rest
were blinded. So 2 Tim. 2.18, 19. They have o∣verthrown the faith of some, nevertheless the Foundation of the Lord standeth sure. Still the Elect of God escape the seduction, and especi∣ally Antichristian Error. Rev. 13.8. The dwellers upon Earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the Lamb's Book of Life. 3. How careful we should be to support the Hearts of God's People, when we speak of his terrible Judgments on the wicked. This was the practice of the Apostles every where; as when the Author to the Hebrews, had spo∣ken of the dreadful estate of Apostates, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.9. But we are per∣swaded better things of you, and things that ac∣company Salvation, though we thus speak; he did not condemn them all as Apostates, nor would not discourage them by that terrible Threatning. So again, after another terrible passage, Heb. 10.39. But we are not of them, that draw back to perdition, but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. Once more▪ when another Apostle had spoken of the Sin unto death, which is not to be prayed for, he presently addeth, 1 Joh. 5.18, 19. Whosoever is born of God, sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. And we know that we are of God, and the whole World lieth in wickedness. Zuinglius saith, Bone Christiane, hc nihil ad
te, &c. Good Christian this is not thy porti∣on, when he had flashed the terrours of the Lord in the face of Sinners. The reasons of this are partly with respect to the Saints, who sometimes out of weakness and infirmity, and sometimes out of tenderness of Conscience, are apt to be startled, electorum corda semper ad se sollicite pudeant. Gregor. We deserve such dreadful Judgments, and therefore fear them; partly with respect to our selves that we may rightly divide the Word of Truth. 2 Tim. 2.15. Study to shew thy self approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth. Give every one his portion, not make their hearts sad, whom God would not make sad; and therefore they are much to blame who in reproving Sinners, stab a Saint at the Heart, and take the doctrine but for a colour to make a per∣verse application. The Apostle here useth more tenderness; God shall send them strong delusion: But we are bound always to give thanks for you, Brethren, beloved of the Lord; because the Lord hath from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth. In the words, are two things: 1. An acknowledgment of this obligation, to give thanks for them. But we are bound to give thanks always to God for you, Bre∣thren, &c.
2. The matter or particular cause of his thanksgiving; because the Lord hath from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, &c. First, There are, 1. the Titles he giveth: Brethren, and Beloved of the Lord, they were not only beloved of the Apostle, but the Lord himself; both with an antecedent Love, bestowing Grace upon them; and also a con∣sequent Love, they believing in his Name, living according to his Precepts, suffering for the Truth. 2. His obligation to bless God in their behalf, we are bound to give thanks to God always for you. There is first giving thanks, which sheweth his esteem of the bles∣sing. 2. Always, which seweth how deep∣ly he was affected with it. 3. , We are bound, he acknowledgeth a Debt, and bond of Duty; we must not only give thanks to God for our own Election, but the Election of others. Out of the law of Bro∣therly Love, we loving them as our own Souls; respect to the Gloy of God, which is promoted by the Salvation of others, as well as our selves. 2. The matter of the thanksgiving, their Election to Salvation, which is two ways am∣plified. 1. By the Antiquity of it, from the beginning, that is, from everlasting; for so it is taken sometimes, as Joh. 1.1. In the be∣ginning was the Word, and the Word was with God; That is, before the first point of time,
before God began to create all things. 2. From the means of its accomplishment; two are mentioned: one on God's pat, the sanctification of the Spirit. The other on ours, the belief of the Truth. From the whole observe. Doct. That the great matter of our thanks∣giving to God, is his eternal Election of us; whether for our selves, or others; This is that which leaveth a Debt, or an indispensible Obligation, always to bless and praise his Name. In pursuing this Point, I shall first consider, how Election is here set forth. 2. Give you the reasons why this is the great matter of thanksgiving. 1. How it is here set forth. 1. By the rise of it, which is the meer love of God; for he calleth these Brethren, eloved of te Lord. And that the only original cause and motive of Election is God's Love, and Grace; this is asserted in other Scriptures. As for instance in the Types of Election and Reprobation, Rom. 9.13. Iacob have I loved, and Esau hve I hated. God's respect to Ia∣cob above Esau, is ascribed to his love. So to the posterity of Iacob, whom he distingui∣shed from other Nations. Deut. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his love upon you, and choose you, because ye were more in number than any People, for ye were the fewest of all People; but
because the Lord loved you. And still the Lord's Election is an Election of Grace. There is no antecedent worthiness in the People whom he chooseth, 2 Tim. 1.9. not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose, and Grace, which was given in Christ Iesus, be∣fore the World began. Now Grace is nothing, but the Love of God working freely, and of its own Inclination. 2. The Act it self, he hath chosen you, making a distinction between them, and o∣thers. Upon them he shall send strong de∣lusion, but you hath he chosen to Salvation, through the belief of the Truth. Those whom God hath chosen, he separates from the World of the ungodly, or the corrupt heap of mankind, and consecrateth them unto him∣self. So that Election is not a taking all, but some, and passing by others; 1 Joh. 5.19. We are of God, and the whole World lyeth in wickedness. A choice, implyeth a setting apart some for Objects of his Grace, and Instru∣ments of his Glory in the World; Psal. 4.3. And the number is certain, for their Names are said to be written in the Rolls, and Re∣cords of Heaven, when others are not writ∣ten. Luk. 10.20. Rejoyce not, that the Spirits are subject unto you: but rather rejoyce because your Names are written in Heaven. Phil. 4.3. Whose Names are written in the Book of Life. And others are said not to be written.
Rev. 17.1. And they that dwell on the Earth, shall wonder, whose Names were not written in the Book of Life, from the Foundation of the World. And Rev. 20.15. And whosoever was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire. Namely those that perish by these Delusions. 3. It is set forth by the Antiquity of it, from the Beginning. Ephes. 1.4. He hath chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World. And Matth. 25.34. Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World. Namely as they belonged to his choice Ele∣ction. Love in God is of an old stnding, even from all Eternity; his thoughts and purposes of Love, were towards us, a long time before they were discovered. Surely the Ancientness of his Love should beget an honourable esteem of it in our Hearts: For who are we, that the Thoughts of God should be taken up about us so long ago? And what is from everlasting, is to everlast∣ing, Psal. 103.17. For what is from Eter∣nity is to Eternity, and dependeth not upon he accidents of Time. 4. By the means of its accomplishment. Two are mentioned, one on God's part, the other on ours. The Sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the Truth. Where note,
1. That God's Decree is both of Ends, and Means. For all his Purposes are execu∣ted by fit Means. He that hath chosen us to Salvation, hath also chosen us to be Holy, and to believe the Truth. And without the Means, the End cannot be obtained. For without Faith and Holiness, no grown Person shall see God, or escape Condemnation. As to Faith it is clear. John 3.36. He that be∣lieveth not, the Wrath of God abideth on him. And Holiness is indispensibly necessary. Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord. God had assured Paul, Acts 27.22. That there should be no loss of any Man's Life amongst them, except of the Ship; and after∣ward, Vers. 31. Paul telleth them, Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. How could the assurance given to Paul from God, and Paul's caution to the Mariners stand to∣gether? Doth the Purpose of God depend upon the will and actions of Men? I answer Not as a cause from whence it receiveth its force and strength, but as a means appointed also by God, to the execution of his Decree. For by the same Decree God appointeth the Event, what he will do, and the Means by which he will have it to be done; and the Lord revealing by his Word this Conjunction of End and Means, there is a necessity of Duty lying upon Man, to use these Means, and not to expect the End, without them,
God intended to save all in the Ship, and yet the Mariners must abide in the Ship. And therefore what God hath joyned together, let no Man separate. If we separate these things, God doth not change his Counsel, but we subvert his Order, to our own destructi∣on. The Scripture maketh it a grievous Sin, a tempting of God, to expect the End, with∣out the use of Means. In vain is the Cavil then of those, who would impeach the Do∣ctrine of God's free and unchangeable Will, concerning the salvation of the Elet, upon the pretence, that it taketh away the Duty of Man; and the necessity of our Faith, and Obedience. No, God executeth his Decree by the proper Means. And wretche is their inference, who say, If I be elected, I shall be saved; no Salvation can be obtained but by the Sanctification of the Spirit, and the be∣lief of the Truth. And worse is their confi∣dence, who profess assurance of their Electi∣on, and yet walk after the Flesh: No, till a Man purge himself from Youthful Lusts, he is not a Vessel of Honour sanctified and set a∣part for God, 2 Tim. 2.21. And in vain do we hope to go to Heaven, till we take the way that leadeth thither. Devils have been cast out thence for Unholiness, and therefore unholy Men shall never be taken in there. 2. That these things are not causes of Ele∣ction, but fruits of Election, and Means of
execution of God's Decree▪ about our Sal∣vation: Sanctification is not a Cause, but a subordinate End, or Means. Ephes. 1.4. He hath chosen us to be holy; not because we are holy, but that we might be holy. So 1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the fore-knowledg of God, through the sanctification of the Spirit, unto Obedience. Not elected for it, but through it. When God had all Mankind in his prospect and view, he freely chose out some to be sanctified and saved. We come to the possession of it, through Sanctification, that is, by it as a Means. So for the other: Faith is a fruit of Election, not a foreseen Cause. Acts 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. None cometh to the Church but those whom God draweth, and they are actually added to the Church by a profession of Faith; and such as should be saved, were as many as were or∣dained to Salvation. Acts 13.48. And as many as were ordained to Eternal Life, believed. The whole City were met together to hear, but as many as were ordained to Eternal Life, be∣lieved. It is not said as any as believed were ordained to Eternal Life, but the con∣trary; Faith is not the cause of Election, but Election is the cause of Faith. 3. That being the necessary Fruits, they are also evidences of our Election. All that are Sanctified by the Spirit, and believe the
Truth, belong to the Election of God. Ele∣ction it self, is a secret in God's Bosom, and is only manifested to us by the Effects, and what are the necessary Effects, but Sanctifi∣cation by the Spirit, and a sound belief of the Gospel. 1. The Sanctification of the Spirit, is not only an external Dedication to God, but an internal and real Change. Some ae exter∣nally dedicated, and may trample under foot the Blood of the Covenant, whereby they are sanctified. Heb. 10.29. Of how much sorer Punishment (suppose ye) shall he be thought worthy, who hath, trodden under foot the Son of God; and hath counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sancified, an unholy Thing, and hath done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? That is, were in external Covenant with God, and visibly dedicated. But there is an other Sanctification▪ which is the Fruit of the Spirit,  a real Change in them. 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are justified, in the Name of the Lord Iesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Find this, and you find a sufficient Evidence: Namely, if you become new Creatures, and be enabled to forsake Sin, and follow after that which is pleasing in the sight of God. Sancification of the Spirit, is not so much known by De∣dication and Profession, but by he real
and fixed inclination of your Souls to God and Heaven, and living accordingly; you are turned to God, and live to God. 2. Your belief of the Truth, that is, of the Gospel. Now this is meant not of a dead Faith, or such a cold Assent, as only begets an Opinion in us of the truth of Christian Religion; but such a lively Faith, as bring∣eth us under the power of it. For it is op∣posed to them that do not receive the Truth in the love of it, Ver. 10. To them that be∣lieved not the Truth, because they had pleasure in Vnrighteousness: Ver. 12. That lived un∣der the power of fleshly and worldly Lusts. And it is spoken of them who had received the Truth, so as to obey it, and suffer for it, as the Thessalonians are described all along. And in short, such a belief of the Truth, as caused them to enter into Covenant with Christ, and make conscience of their Fide∣lity to him. And here in this Verse we learn, That a bare belief of the Truth doth not save, unless accompanied with the San∣ctification of the Spirit. And therefore both must be taken together: when the Word cometh to us not in Word only, but in Power, and much assurance and joy in the Holy Ghost, it is an infallible evidence of our Election of God, 1 Thess. 1.5. Alas, many have a ge∣neral cold belief of the Gospel, that never felt the effect of it upon their Hearts.
4. Observe the necessary Connection that is between both these Means. The Sanctification of the Spirit, and the Belief of the Truth. 1. There is a necessary Connection be∣tween them, as between the Cause and the Effect: For none are powerfully drawn to believe in Christ, but such as are Sanctified by his Spirit. It is not in the power of any Creature to incline us to God, or bring us to come to him by Christ. But this Work is wholly reserved to the Spirit. And so the Lord himself doth powerfully bring to pass his own Decrees, as by Christ Redeeming, so by the Spirit Sanctifying. The Spirit is the Author both of Faith and Holiness. Sa∣ving Grace is called a New Creature. 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature. Ephes. 2.10. For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Iesus unto good Works, which God hath before ordaine, that we should walk in them. And to Create, is the Work of a Divine Power. Creatre, and Creator, are Relatives. And certainly the noblest Creature, such as the New Creature is, cannot be framed by any but God. It is called a New Birth, and the New Birth is only from the Spirit, Iohn 3.5, 6. Well then, these are fitly coupled, the Sanctifica∣tion of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. That God's Work may make way for ours, 2. There is the Connection of Concomi∣tancy
between the Gospel and the Spirit. The Spirit only goeth along with the Gospel, and no other Doctrine; and so both ex∣ternal and internal Grace, are of God. John 17.17. Sanctifie them by thy Truth, thy Word is Truth. It was fit that a Super-natural Do∣ctrine should be accompanied with a Super∣natural Operation, and Power; How else should it be known to be of God? The Truth and the Spirit are inseparable Compa∣nions. Where there is little of God known, there is little of his Spirit. As in the Natural Truth revealed to the Heathens; Somewhat God shewed unto them, Rom. 1.19. In the darker Revelation to the Iews, there is but a fainter degree of the Spirit; but Grace and Truth come by Iesus Christ. There goeth a∣long with the Doctrine of the Gospel, a mighty Spirit of Holiness; for thereby God would prove the Verity and Truth of this Religion, and suitably to the rich Mercy pre∣pared for us in Christ. 3. There is a subordination of Faith to this Work of the Spirit, by the Truth. For the greatest Things work not till they be consi∣dered and belived. 1 Thess. 2.12. Ye re∣ceived it, not as the Word of Men, but as it is in Truth the Word of God, which worketh effe∣ctually also in you that believe. A sound Belief produceth strong Affections▪ and strong Af∣fections govern our Practice and Conversa∣tion.
So that fitly are these things united as the fruits of our Election, and means of Sal∣vation. 2. Why this is the great matter of our thansgiving to God, That I shall evidence in the following considerations. 1. That Thanksgiving to God is a great and necessary duty, expresly injoin'd by him, and expected from us. 1 Thess. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God con∣cerning you, in Christ Iesus. When God hath interposed his Will, all debates are silenced. If there were nothing else in the case, this is motive enough to a gracious Heart: for the fundamental reason of all obedience, is the Will of God. Our thankfulness is no benefit to God, yet he is pleased with it, as it shew∣eth our Honesty and Ingenuity. And to us Christians, the very Life and Soul of our Re∣ligion is Thankfulness; therefore God will have us continually exercised in it. Heb. 13.15. Let us offer the Sacrifice of Praise continually, that is, the fruit of our Lips, giving thanks unto his Name. As our understanding was given us, to think of God, and know him▪ So our speech was given us to speak of God, and praise him. We praise God for all his works, we give him thanks for such as are beneficial to us. In Praise we ascribe all Honour, Ex∣cellency, and Perfection unto him: In giving thanks we express what he hath done, for our
selves, or others. Now this must be done continually, for God is continually beneficial unto us, by daily Mercies giving us new mat∣ter of Praise and Thanksgiving. Besides there are some Mercies so great, that they should never be forgotten. 2. That we are to give thanks, chiefly for Spiritual and Eternal Mercies. Eph. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual bles∣sings, in heavenly places in Christ. For we cannot give thanks rightly without a just e∣steem of the Mercy we give thanks for. But spiritual and eternal Mercies, do much excel those that are temporal and transitory. We are bound to bless the Lord for temporal Fa∣vours, and the Comforts of this Life, but a renewed Heart is most taken up with spiritual and heavenly Blessings. A Man may give thanks carnally, as well as pray carnally. A carnal Man in Prayer giveth vent to the de∣sires of the Flesh. Iames 4.3. So in Blessing God, he may speak from the relish of the Flesh: though usually carnal Men, seldom give thanks to God. Hosea 12.8. I am be∣come rich, I have found me out Substance, &c. Surely Spiritual Blessings should have the pre∣heminence, because they concern our well-be∣ing, and they discriminate us from others, which temporal Mercies do not. Eccl. 9.1, 2. For all this I considered in my Heart, even to
declare all this, that the Righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the Hand of God; no Man knoweth either Love or Hatred, by all that is before them. All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to the good, to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not; as is the Good, so is the Sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an Oah. The wicked have many of these Mercies. Psal. 17.14. From Men of the World, which have their portion in this Life, and whose Belly thou fillest with thy hid treasure: they are full of Children, and leave the rest of their Substance to their Babes. And they may own God in them as pleased, and well satisfied with the prosperity of the Flesh, or a desirous to have more. 3. That the best prospect we have of God's Goodness to us, as to those spiritual Mercies, is in Election. 1. There we see all our Blessings in their rise, fountain, and bosom-cause, which is the eternal Love, and Grace of God. Dulcius ex ipso Fonte, Waters are sweetest and freshest in their Fountain; there we see that antece∣dent Love, which provided a Redeemer for us: which should be matter of continual Love and Reverence to us. Ioh. 3.16. There we see the rich preparations of Grace, in the new Covenant; which could never have en∣tred into our Hearts, if elective love had not
provided them for us. 1 Cor. 2.9. There we see, what it was that disposed all those Provi∣dences, that conduced to our good▪ Bith, Education, Acquaintance, Relations; alas. we knew not the means of all these things, but elective Love was at work for us, to cast all circumstances, that we might be best taken in our Month. Rom. 8.28. There we see what it was that made all the means effectual to draw us unto God. Jer. 5.3. He loved u with an everlasting Love. 2. It sheweth us the Lord's distinguishing Grace, and who it was that made us differ from others, who are left to perish in their Sins. All are not called, and why we? Joh. 14.22. Iudas saith unto him, not Iscariot▪ Lord, how is it that thou wilt manifest thy self un∣to us, and not unto the World? yea, many migh∣ty and many noble are not called. 1 Cor. 1.26. God taketh not all, nor any of the highest in esteem among Men, not many wise and pru∣dent. Matth. 11.25, 26. At that time Iesus answered and said, I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast re∣vealed them unto Babes: even so Father, for so i seemed good in thy sight. Yea, many others ar left to perish by their wn delusions. The Re∣probates are Specula Iudicii Divini. Th Judgments of God on the wicked do exceed∣ingly amplify his Mercies towards us. It was
the meer elective love of God, issuing forth by his powerful and differencing Grace, that pu the distinction between us and others. Surely his peculiar Love to our selves doth most affect us. 3. There we see that Grace, tat doth take off all self-boasting. Eph. 2.8, 9. For by Grace are ye saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any Man should boast. Elective Love prevented all actual or foreseen worth in us. And from first, to last, it is carried on in a way of Grace: the Means, the Efficacy, all is of Grace. This was God's great end, that Grace might be admired and esteemed by us, and be matter of eternal Praise and Thanks∣giving. Eph. 1.6. To the praise of the Glory of his Grace, wherein he hath made us accepted in the Beloved. The whole Design is to shew us how we are beloved of God: and that we may love him again. 1. Vse. If Election be the great matter of Thanksgiving to God: Then surely this Do∣ctrine should be heard in the Church; for the Life and Soul of Christian Religion is Grati∣tude; and what feedeth Gratitude, is of great use unto us: our Gratitude doth not rise high enough, till it come to the first cause that stir∣red and set all the Whls awork, in the busi∣ness of our Salvation. Surely this is a very profitable Point.
1. To detect the pride of Man, for here we see the true and proper cause of difference between us and others. 1 Cor. 4.7. Who ma∣keth thee to differ? The diferencing Grace of God, proceeding from his Election, is the only true Grace. 2. Nothing more extoleth the Glory of God in our Salvation: For if Man can assume nothing to himself, the Glory alone redoun∣deth to God. The more reason and cause why some are chosen, and others past by, is God's good Pleasure. Matth. 11.26. Even so Father, because it pleased thee. Christ himself consents to it, giveth Thanks for it, as an act of free and undeserved Mercy. 3. No greater incentive to Holiness. For here we see the absolute necessity of it, toge∣ther with the strongest, sweetest motive to enforce it. 1. The absolute necessity of it; because it is a necessary means to bring God's purposes to pass. Eph. 1.4. He hath chosen us, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love. He hath chosen none to enjoy everlasting Glory after this Life, but such as he hath chosen to be holy here. First, they must be sanctified, and renewed by the Spirit, and then walk in all holy Conversation and God∣liness. And whatever assurance of Election is pretended unto them who lead an unholy Life, it is but a vain presumption, or ungroun∣ded Perswasion, yea a strong Delusion. Se∣condly,
Here is the sweetest and strongest Motive to enforce it, and that is the singular Love of God, which breedeth in us a sincere Love to God again, and all serious endeavours to approve our selves to him in purity of Li∣ving. There is no such constraining force in any thing, as there is in Love. 2 Cor. 5.14. For the Love of God constraineth us, &c. And no such Holiness as that which floweth from it; this is thankful and Evangelical Obedi∣ence. 4. It is the ground of our solid Comfort, in the midst of all the Calamities and Temptati∣ons of the present Life: because our final hap∣piness is appointed to us by God's electing Love. Luk. 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Fathers good Pleasure to giv you the Kingdom. And this is accompanied with his active Providence and Care over us all the way thither. So that all things are san∣ctified to us, that we may be sanctified to God. Rom. 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the Called according to his purpose. 2. It sheweth us that the Elect have cause to bless God if they be chosen to Salvation, though not to Wealth, Pleasure, and Ho∣nour. These Thessalonians endured great Af∣flictions for the Gospel sake, yet Pal looked upon himself as bound to give thanks always to God for them; because he had chosen
them to Salvation. God disperseth his Gifts variously, some are (shall I say) chosen (or con∣demned rather) to Worldly Felicity. It is the Will of God they should attain great Wealth, and Honour here; and will you envy them, and repine against Providence, though God hath reserved you for a better Estate hereaf∣ter? Compare two places, one is Ier. 17.13. All that forsake thee, shall be written in the Earth. The other is Luke 10.20. Rejoyce in this, that your Names are written in Heaven. Which is the better Privilege, to be written in Earth, or to be written in Heaven? To have a great Name in the Subsidy-Book, or to have our Names written in the Book of Life? The one is their Punishment, the other your Bles∣sedness. Second Use is Exhortation. It presseth you to two things. 1. Put in for a share and interest in this Mercy, that is to say, in the Apostle's words, 2 Pet. 1.10. Give deligence to make your Cal∣ling and election sure. God hath told us who are Elected, and who are not. Therefore our way is to accept of the general Grace of∣fered, and to devote and resign our selves to God, and to depend upon the Merits of our Redeemer, and put our selves under the Disci∣pline of his Spirit, in the use of the appointed Means, humbly waiting for his renewing and reconciling Grace, and every Day more and
more, by diligence in the holy and heavenly Life, getting your Interest more assured. For by this means do we come to know the pur∣posed Love of God, and that he hath not ap∣pointed us to Wrath, but to obtain eternal Salva∣tion by our Lord Iesus Christ. We need not say, who shall go up to Heaven to know the Mind of God? Our Election is known to us by our Vocation, and our Vocation by the Fruits, our walking before him in Holiness, and Righteousness all our Days. Surely the knowledg of our Election is a thing greatly to be desired, because our Eternal Happiness, and all Spiritual good Things depend upon it. Election is the free Love of God, by which he intendeth these Blessings to us. This is manifested by Calling, by which they be∣gin to be applied to us; then the effectual Operation which these Blessings have in us discovereth Calling, when we call on the Name of Christ, and depart from Iniquity, 2 Tim. 2.19. 2. We should praise, and admire, and esteem this glorious Grace, and shew our Thankfulness both in Word and Deed. 1. In Word, because that is a means to kindle in our Hearts the Love of God, and to stir up a Spiritual rejoycing in him. Psal. 103.1, 2, 3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his Be∣nefits.
Who forgiveth all thine Iniquities; who healeth all thy Diseases, &c. 2. But chiefly in Deed, you are more ob∣liged to live to God, than other Men; whn passing by thousands who in outward e∣spects were better than you: and you as deep in Sin as they: Not only without, but against all merit of yours, by his singular Grace set you apart for himself. Shall I sin against God, and grieve his Spirit? No: Let me glorifie him as long as I have a Day to live.
SERMON XII. 2 Thess. 2.14. Whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Iesus Christ. AFter the Doctrine of Antichrist, and God's dreadful Spiritual Jdgments on his Abetters and Followers, the Apostle interposeth some matter of Consolation to the Thessalonians: As before he comforted them from their Election, so now from their Vocation. Therefore as we saw the Doctrine of Election, set forth in the former Verse, with all its appendant Branches, and Circum∣stances: So now the Doctrine of Vocation, with what belongeth to it. Here Calling is set forth, (1.) By the Author of it, he cal∣led you; that is God, who from the begin∣ning hath chosen you to Salvation. (2.) The outward Means, by our Gospel. (3.) The End, which is double. 1. Subordinate, in the word [Whereunto?] to Faith and Holi∣ness. 2. Ultimate, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Iesus Christ. Whereunto he called you, &c. Doct. All that are Elected by God, are in
time, effectually called by Faith and Holiness, to obtain Eternal Life. 1. I shall open effectual Calling by what is said of it in the Text. 2. That all chosen by God are called in this Way. 1. Let me explain Effectual Calling. 1. The Author of it, he called you: Namely God, spoken of in the former Verse. I prove it by these two Reasons, 1. None else hath Autho∣rity to call. 2. None else hath Power to call. 1. Authority to call, either to Duties, or Priviledges; for Calling is an earnest invi∣tation to Duties, upon the offer of several Priviledges. (1.) Duties. 1. God is our proper Lord, and rightful Soveraign. He may justly challenge our Obedience; being our Creator, he is our Own∣er; and being our Owner, he is our Soveraign and Law-giver, and may enact what Laws he pleaseth. Certainly Creation giveth him an interest in us. For every Man taketh himself to have an Authority over what he hath made, to dispose of it as he pleaseth. Now he that properly made all things is God. Man is said to make a thing as he bestoweth Ar upon it, but God bestoweth Being upon it. A Potter may form his Clay into what Vessel he pleaseth, to make one Vessel unto Honour, and another unto dishonour, Rom. 9.21. that is, either a Dish for Food, or a Vessel to serve the vilest uses of Nature, for Meat, or
Excrements. But we speak of Rational Crea∣tures, that are capable of proper Govern∣ment. Surely God made us, and hath a right to govern us. Our Parents are but Instruments of his Providence, they know not how the Child is framed in the Womb, &c. Now he calleth upon us to do our Du∣ty, with Original Supreme Authority we may refuse others; if they speak not to us in his Name, they have no right over our Consciences, to impose new Duties upon us. James 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy. Now his Calling, being a powerful Excitation to do our Duty, it originally belongeth to God. (2.) As to Priviledges. The Blessings God offereth, are so great and glorious, that none else can give us a right to them but God. And the Soul can have no security that it doth not usurp, and intrude upon the po∣ssession of Things that belong not to us, till we have his Warrant: As the Apostle speak∣eth of an Office, Heb. 5.4. No Man taketh his Honour unto himself, but he that was called of God, as was Aaron. So it is true of all Prerogatives, we have no leave to assume and take the Honour of them to our selves, till we are called of God: That's our War∣rant. None came to the Wedding-Feast, till they were bidden, Matth. 22. Or went into the Vineyard till they were hired, Matth. 20.
This is the difference between Duties, and Priviledges. That any Man who will pre∣fer that Office of Charity and Love to us, may excite us to our Duties, to unquestion∣able Duties, due from the Creature to our Creator: But no Man can assure us of right to Priviledges, without the Creators leave. Man cannot make that to be a necessary Du∣ty to the Creator, which is not. But Man may warn us of our danger, when we diso∣bey God; but Man cannot assure us of our right to such Priviledges, without God's grant. Therefore certainly it is God that must call us. 2. None else can have Power: for, to Cal∣ling there is necessary not only the Invitati∣ons of the Word, but also the effectual Ope∣ration of the Spirit. None else can change the Heart. A Christian is nothing, and hath nothing, but what God is pleased to work in him by his Divine Power. 2. Pet. 1.3. Accord∣ing as his Divine Power hath given us all things, that pertain unto Life and Godliness, through the Knowledg of him that hath called us to Glory and Vertue. It is a work of an infinite Power, to give Grace to graceless Souls. To make those that are Sensual and Worldly, to become Spiritual and Heavenly; there being so much opposition to hinder that Work: For such is the corruption of Mens Hearts, the power of Satan over us, that
he keepeth possession, till a stronger than he overcometh him, Luke 11.21. Therefore it is always made the work of his Power, who calleth the things that are not, as though they were, Rom. 4.17. It is still ascribed to his creating Power: Either the illumination of the Mind; 2 Cor. 4.6. For God who com∣manded the Light to shine out of Darkness, hath shined in our Hearts, to give the light of the knowledg of the Glory of God in the Face of Iesus Christ. Or inclinations of the Heart; Ephes. 2.10. We can neither think, nor ef∣fect, nor pursue Spiritual and Heavenly Things without it. Therefore certainly it is God that calleth us. 2. The outward Means, by our Gospel. Where, 1. Consider the Means it self, The Gospel. 2. The Interest which the Apostle challengeth in it, our Gospel. 1. The Means it self, the Gospel. This God useth, (1.) Because if God will Call, and invite the Creature by his Duty, to his Happiness: It is necessary that his Call should be evident to the Creature, by some visible Sign. Now the natural Duty of Man, is much seen by the Creation. Rom. 1.19. Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God hath shewed it unto them. Psal. 19.1, 2. The Heavens declare the Glory of God▪ and the Firmament sheweth his Handy-Work▪ Day un∣to
Day uttereth Speech, and Night unto Nigh sheweth Knowledg. But this Call is made to Man fallen, as a Remedy to his lapsed Estate, which depending on the Free-Grace of God, and can only be known by his Revelation, conveyed to us by extraordinary Messengers, such as Christ, who was the principal Re∣vealer of the Doctrine of God for the saving of the World: And him God authorized and sealed to this end. John 6.27. Labour not for the Meat which perisheth, but for that Meat which endureth unto everlasting Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you; for him hath God the Father sealed. And then by the Apostles, who were instituted by Christ, and sent forth to proselyte the World to the Obedience of God; and they were also authorized from Heaven by divers Signs and Wonders, as long as it was neces∣sary to use that Dispensation, for the con∣firmation of their Message, and to shew how dangerous it was to neglect a Doctrine so useful to Mankind, and suitable to their great Necessities, and so owned by God, Heb. 2.3, 4. Therefore by the Gospel God called them to this Grace. (2.) To convince and stop their Mouths, that refuse this Calling: for the Gospel bring∣eth Grace home to us, and leaveth it upon our choice; if we will accept it, well and good: if not, we justly deserve to be rejected
for ever. Acts 13.26. To you is this Word of Salvation sent. What say you to it? God hath sent a gracious Message to you in par∣ticular, will you accept, or refuse? Acts 3.26. He hath sent him to you, to bless every one of you, &c. It doth excite all, and every Man, to look after the recovery of his lap∣sed Estate: Surely God doth you no wrong, if he severely punish your refusal after he hath invited you to his Grace in Christ. Great is the Misery of those that refuse this Call. None of those that were bidden, shall taste of my Supper, Luke 14.24. They are not only excluded from Happiness but they incur extreme Wrath and Misery. Prov. 1.24, 25, 26. Because I have Called, and ye re∣fused; I have stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded. But ye have set at nought all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your Fear cometh. (3.) Because to the Elect he will deal con∣gruously, and preserve the Liberty of his own Workmanship; and therefore dealeth with Man, as Man: Doth not compel us to be good whether we will or no, but doth at the same time teach and draw us. John 6.44, 45. No Man can come unto me, ex∣cept the Father which hath sent me, draw him: And I will raise him up at the last Day. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all
taught of God. Every Man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me. Sweetly attemperating the means to our Liberty, but accompanying them with his powerful Grace. Acts 11.21. The Hand of the Lord was with them, and a great num∣ber believed, and turned to the Lord. It is God doth all, prospering the Labours of his Ser∣vants. So Acts 16.14. God opened the Heart of Lydia, so that she attended unto the things spoken by Paul. God opened her Heart, but by the things spoken by Paul. And God lo∣veth to associate or accompany his Power with his own Means. Rom. 1.16. It is the Power of God unto Salvation. 2. The Interest the Apostle challengeth in it, [our Gospel]; Doth it not derogate from the Authority of it, to appropriate it to any Man? I answer, No. Elsewhere it is called God's Gospel, The glorious Gospel of the Blessed God, 1 Tim. 1.11. He is the Au∣thor: It is not an Invention of Man, but a Secret that came from the Bosom of God. Again, it is called Christ's Gospel. The Go∣spel of our Lord Iesus Christ, 2 Thess. 1.8. As the principal Subrevealer, who made known unto us, most fully the Mind of God. And then on the Apostles, who were Instru∣ments chosen, and intrusted by Christ to de∣clare it; to the World both by Word and
Writing. The Scripture is an Authentick Re∣cord, wherein all things are delivered to us, both concerning our Duties, and Privi∣ledges. Therefore, when he saith, our Go∣spel, he doth not mean it of principal Reve∣lation, but in regard of Dispensation, and Trust. 1 Tim. 1.11. The glorious Gospel of the Blessed God is committed to my trust. There∣fore this word (our Oospel) is, 1. A word of Fidelity, that argued the Conscience to this Duty, that owneth the Trust committed to him, and that this was his chief Work and Charge. 1 Cor. 9.17. A Dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto me. 2. It is a word of Esteem, Love, and Affection; what we love, we call ours. Rom 16.25. Now to him that is able to stablish you according to my Gospel. Paul was glad he had such Interest in it, as to be a Preacher of it. And Belie∣vers should be glad they are partakers of the benefit. Ephes. 1.13. In whom ye trusted af∣ter ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. It is theirs, and ours. Oh blessed be God for this! 3. It is a work im∣porting Diligence; our Gospel, that which he preached with so much Labour, and Ha∣zard; he followed this Work close. Acts 20.24. I count not my Life dear, that I may finish my Course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Iesus, to testi∣fie
the Gospel of the Grace of God? He was willing to die and suffer any thing for the Gospels sake. 4. The Consent and Harmony between him and the rest of the Apostles. Sometimes he calleth it, My Gospel, to as∣sert his own Apostolical Authority, as Rom. 2.16. Sometimes, Our Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.3. to note their common Consent, who were the authorized Messengers of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is our Gospel, the same jointly at∣tested by all Christ's chosen Messengers. 3. The ends of this Calling. They are either Subordinate, or Ultimate. (1.) Sub∣ordinate in the word (Whereunto he hath cal∣led you) that is, to Faith, Holiness, and Sal∣vation, we are called to all. 1. God calleth us to the Faith of the Go∣spel, he hath not only ordained us to be∣lieve, but called us to believe; without Cal∣ling there can be no Faith. Rom 10.14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? But upon Calling, there must be Faith; or else we make void the Dispen∣sation of God, which we are under. 1. There must be a belief of the Gospel in general. The voice of the Creatures calleth upon the Gentiles to believe an Infinit. Eternal Power, that made Man, and all Things: And the condemnation of the Gentle World is, that they know not God, and glorifie not God,
as God, after this Revelation made to them; but to believe in Christ is a mystery to Na∣ture, and dependeth upon God's special Re∣velation in the Gospel. Therefore the Eter∣nal and Internal Power of the Spirit, accom∣panieth it, to convince the World, that it is Sin not to believe in Christ. The External Power in Miracles, and the Internal in the Illumination of the Mind: John 16.9. The Spirit shall convince the World of Sin: because they believe not in me. That is, receive not the Faith of the Gospel, or believed not that Christ was the true Messiah, the great Pro∣phet and Doctor of the Church. 2. This Call doth aim at not only a belief of the truth of the Gospel in general, but also a particular Affiance in Christ, according to the terms of the New Covenant: General assent to the truth of the Gospel, is only considerable as it leadeth on other Things. Now that I may not wander, I will refer them to two Things. 1. A Fiducial Assent. 2. An Obediential Confidence. This is the belief of the Truth we are called unto. 1. The Assent must be Fiducial, or accom∣panied with a trust in Christ. Ephes. 1.13. In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the Gospel of your Salvation. The meaning is, the Gentiles after they heard the Gospel, and believed the Truth, they
did trust themselves in the Hands of Christ, to be brought by his Saving and Healing Me∣thods to eternal Happiness. It is a mighty thing to have such a Belief as may produce Trust, or a venturing our selves in the Hands of Christ, against all hazards; and what∣ever befalleth us, are content to save our Souls on his Terms. This breedeth holy Se∣curity, or Courage. 2 Tim. 1.12. For I know whom I have believed, and I am persua∣ded, that he is able to keep that which I have com∣mitted unto him against that Day. 2. This Confidence must be Obediential, not a devout Sloath, or Carelessness. To trust in his Mercies and neglect his Precepts, crosseth the Tenor of his Covenant. Psal. 119.60. I made haste, and delayed not, to keep thy Commandments. It is true Religion, when Faith, Love, and Hope concur. Jude ver. 20, 21. But ye, Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith, joyning in the Holy Ghost; keep your selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ, unto Eternal Life. I know there is a trusting in his Pardon for our Failings, and that Justification is a great Privilege, as well as Salvation; but Pardon is promised to the Sincere, that with an honest Heart perform their Duty: Psal. 32.2. Blessed is the Man to whom the Lord imputeth not Iniquity; and
in whose Spirit there is no guile. And Rom. 8.1. There is no Condemnation to them who are in Christ Iesus: who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit. So that still our confidence in Christ must be obediential. 2. We are called to Holiness, this is every where asserted in the Scripture. 1 Thess. 4.7. For God hath not called us to Vncleanness, but to Holiness. And it enforceth it on seve∣veral Grounds: As (1.) That there may be a likeness be∣tween the Person calling, and the Persons called. 1 Pet. 1.15. But as he that called you is Holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Con∣versation. It is true Religion, to imitate what we worship: For Knowledg and Esteem, al∣ways work an Assimulation; and therefore if we know the True God, and love him, we will study to be like him. Certainly, we have not a true knowledg of God, if we do not know him to be a Pure and Holy God; he hath shewed it in his Laws, shewed it in his Providence, and shewed it in his Gospel, by which we are called. The Gods of the Heathen taught Sin, by their own Example: Their impure Lives, are recorded by their Poets. Austin tlleth us of a Young Man, who was encited to Wantonness, by seeing the Picture of Iupiter on the Wall, commit∣ting Adultery. Quo pacto se non faceret, cum in Templo adorare cogeretur Jovem potius quam
Catonem. But our God is Pure, as appear∣eth by his Laws, which are all Holy, Just, and Good, Psal. 119.140. Surely such holy Precepts could come from none, but a Pure and Holy God. As also by the Work of his Spi∣rit on his People. Ephes. 4.24. And that ye put on the New Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. And 2 Cor. 3.18. We all, with open Face, beholding as in a Glass, the Gory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. He puts into us a Nature that is very tender and shie of Sin, troubled at it in others. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. And delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy Con∣versation of the Wicked: For that Righteous Man dwelling amongst them, in seeing and hear∣ing, vexed his righteous Soul, from day to day, with their unlawful Deeds. He that made the Eye, shall not he see? He that put into us a clean Heart, is not he Pure and Holy? This appeareth also by the dispensations of his Pro∣vidence. Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and canst not look on Iniquity: Wherefore lookest thou upon them that deal trea∣cherously, and holdest thy Tongue, when the Wicked devoureth the Man that is more Righte∣ous than he? Judgments on Sinners, so on his own People. Prov 11.31. Behold the Righ∣teous shall be recompenced in Earth, much more the Wicked and the Sinner. As for Instance in
David: The Child died, his Daughter is de∣floured, Ammon slain, Absolon is in Rebelli∣on, his Wives Ravished, himself Banished from his House and Kingdom. Eli's Sons slain, the Ark taken, his Daughter-in-Law died, himself brake his Neck. But chiefly in the very Foundation of the Gospel, the Son of God dieth a Shameful, Painful, Ac∣cursed Death, before God woud relax the Rigour of his Law, and set a-foot the Go∣spel: And all that there might be a perfect Demonstration of his Justice and Holiness, and displeasure against Sin. Rom 8.3. For what the Lw could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for Sin con∣demned Sin in the Flesh. (2.) The very nature of this Calling en∣forceth this Sanctification, or setting Man a∣part from a common to a sacred use. For it is a calling us not only from Misery to Hap∣piness, but from Sin to Holiness: and the one is indispensibly necessary to the other. For none but those who are in an holy Estate, can be in a blessed Condition. Our calling is sometimes called a Heavenly Calling, Heb. 3.1. Sometimes an Holy Calling, 2 Tim. 1.9. There∣fore the chief subordinate end, is Holiness. Rom. 1.7. Called to be Saints, from the De∣vil, the World, and the Flesh, to God. (3.) The grace and favour which is shewed
in our Calling, obligeth us to be Holy, in point of Gratitude: For when we consider in what a sinful estate God found us, how freely he loved us, and that with a discrimi∣nating differencing Love, when he passed by others worthier than we; and to what estate he is ready to advance us, to the enjoyment of himself, amongst all those that are Sancti∣fied by Faith: All these are as so many strong Bonds and Obligations upon us, to walk worthy of God, who hath called us to his King∣dom and Glory, in Iesus Christ, 1 Thess. 2.12. Worthy of his Grace in Calling; worthy of the Glory to which we are Called; that is, with the worthiness of Condecency, not of Condignity: We cannot fully answer this Grace, but we must do that which will be∣come it. (4.) This Calling enableth us to be Holy, because it giveth us all things necessary both to holiness of Heart and Life. 2 Pet. 1.3. According as his Divine Power hath given unto us all things that pertain unto Life, and Godli∣ness, through the knowledg of him that hath cal∣led us to Glory and Vertue. Now this Grace must not lie idle, otherwise we receive the Spirit in vain. 2. The Ultimate end to obtain the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. The same expres∣sion is 2 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace, who hath called us to his Eternal Glory by Christ.
Iesus. It is his Glory. Mark, 1. Here is Glory. 2. It is the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1. It is Glory for Body and Soul; the Glo∣ry is so great we cannot utter it, and conceive it. Now a little is revealed to us, but then it shall be revealed in us. (1.) The Soul, is not annihilated after Death, nor doth it sleep till the Resurrection; nor is it detained by the way from immediate passing into Glory; but assoon as it is loosed from the Body, is admitted into God's Presence, and gathered un∣to the Souls of just Men made perfect; where it seeeth God, and loveth him, and enjoyeth what it seeth and loveth. For as soon as we are loosed from the Body, we are present with the Lord. And therefore te first be∣nefit we receive in the other World, is the Salvation of the Soul. 1. Pet. 1.9. Receiving the end of your Faith, even the salvation of your Souls. It flitteth hence to God. (2.) The Body hath its glory also in due time. For when it is raised up out of the Grave, it will be another kind of Body, then we now have, both for Impassibility, Clarity, Agility. For Impassibility, called Incorruption; Clarity, cal∣led Glory; Agility, called Power; Subtilty, called a Spiritual Body, by the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption. It is sown in Disho∣honour, it is raised in Glory: It is sown a
Natural Body, it is raised a Spiritual Body. 1. Impassibility doth not only exclude Corruption, for so the Bodies of the Dam∣ned are preserved for ever, but all grievance and pain. Rev. 21.4. There shall not be any more pain. 2. For Glory, a shining Brightness. The Righteous shall shine as the Sun, in the King∣dom of the Father, Matth. 13.43. Stephen's Face shone (in this Life) as it were the Face of an Angel, Acts 6.15. And Moses his Face shone by Converse with God in the Mount, Exod. 34.30. Our Bodies shall be likened unto his glorious Body, Phil. 3.21. In the Transfiguration, His Face did shine as the Sun, and his Rayment did shine as the Light. 3. For Vigour, Activity, and Strength. It shall always be in the height and excellency of it. God preserved Moses his natural Vi∣gour for a long time, Deut. 34.7. but glori∣fied Bodies shall for ever remain in an eternal spring of Youth. 4. Subtilty, as Spiritual Body: Here we live an animal Life, after the manner of Sen∣sitive Creatures; maintained by Meat, Drink, Sleep: But hereafter the Body shall live after the manner of Spirits, having no need, or use of these things. There we are , as the Angels of God. Matth. 22.30. and 1 Cor. 6.19 Our Bodies are the Temple of the
Holy Ghost. Well then, this is the Glory put upon us. 2. Why is it called the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ? (1.) It is purchased by Christ; we were Redeemed, or bought by the prce of his Blood, that we might attain to his Glory. Ephes. 1.14. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of Sins, according to the riches of his Grace. (2.) It is promised by Christ. John 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish: All that obey this Call have Eternal Life already begun, nay, compleated. 1 John 2.25. And this is the Promise, that he hath promised us, even Eternal Life. (3.) It is Prayed for by Christ; which is a Copy of his Intercession. John 17.14. Father, I will that they also whom thu hast gi∣ven me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my Glory, which thou hast given me. 4. It is actually bestowed by Christ on his Followers and called People. He receiveth our departing Souls as soon as they fleet out of the Body. Acts. 7.59. Lord Iesus, receive my Spirit. They are with him, Pil. 1.23. and 2 Cor. 5.8. when absent from the Body, they are present with the Lord: which is a mighty comfort to us. At the last day he will solemnly introduce us into Heaven. Joh. 14.3. I will come again, and receive ou to my
self: that where I am, there ye may be also. The great Shepherd of the Sheep will lead the Flock into their everlasting fold. 5. We have not only Glory by Christ, but with Christ; we shall have the same Glory Christ now hath, but in our measure. The same Glory in kind, whereunto Christ's huma∣nity is advanced, referring to him only his priviledg in the degree. So Rom. 8.17. And if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and joint-Heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. Rev. 3.21. To him that overcometh, will I grant, to sit with me in my Trone, even as I also over∣came, and am set down with my Father in his Throne. We share with him in his own Bles∣sedness, so far as we are capable. 2. That all those who are elected and cho∣sen by God, are thus called. Election and Vo∣cation have a great respect one to another; and though we cannot say, that none are cal∣led, that are not elected, for the Lord calleth others not only by the voice of Nature, but the Gospel. Matth. 22.14. Many are called, but few are chosen. Yet we may say, that none are chosen, but they are in time called, so that Vocation is as it were actual Election, they are often put one for another, as Joh. 15.19. I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hateth you: That is, called them, or pur∣sued his choice. So 1 Cor. 1.26. Ye see your
Calling, Brethren, that not many wise Men af∣ter the Flesh, not many noble, not many mighty, are called: for God hath chosen the foolish things of the World, to confound the wise: and God hath chosen the weak things of the World, to con∣fund the things which are mighty; vers. 27. as if choosing calling were all one. So Rom. 11.28, 29, As concerning the Gospel, they are Enemies for your sake; but as touching the Ele∣ction, they are beloved for the Fathers sake: for the gifts and calling of God, are without Re∣pentance. So that Calling is an infallible conse∣quent of Election. And Rom. 8.30. Whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called. Reason sheweth it. 1. Effectual Calling is that. pow∣erful operation of God, wherein he beginneth to execute the purposes of his Grace. Rom. 8.28. And we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the Called according to his purpose . The first discovery of it to the Creature  by draw∣ing us to himself. 2. This act proceedeth imme∣diately from his Choice, as anteceding all that we can do; all worthiness of ours, or sup∣posed worthiness. 2. Tim. 1.9. Who hath sa∣ved us, and called us with an holy Clling, not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was given us in Christ Iesus. before the World began. Nothing induced God to do it, on our part, for what good thing could we do, before w were
made good by calling? 3. The effect doth in∣fallibly follow, John 6.37. All that the Father hath given me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. In due time they are Called, and are obedient to the Call, Rom. 8.28. Vses. 1. If it be so, then here is Advice to all. 1. Let us apply our selves to the Means with reverence and seriousness; because God's Power is shewn in them, in converting Souls to himself. Psal. 65.4. Blessed is the Man whom thou choosest, and causest to draw nigh un∣to thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts. It is a good thing to be in Graces way. The Means have a ministerial efficacy. Acts. 14.1. They so spake, that a great multitude of the Jews and Greeks believed. With such clearness and force, so far God is with the Minister. A Dart flung by a skilful Hand, will pierce deeper than by its own weight. But yet if you can but tarry, the Hand of the Lord may be with you also, you do not know the seasons of the Lord's Grace, all are not cal∣led at the first hour; some lie long at the Pool, but yet wait still. Ere ever you are aware, the Holy Ghost may fall upon you, and open your Hearts, that Heavenly Doctrine may have its effect upon you. 2. Let us mind not only Privileges, but Duties. We have great Priviledges, we are
called to enjoy sweet fellowship with Christ here. 1 Cor. 1.9. Faithful is he who hath cal∣led you, to the Communion of Christ Iesus our Lord; and to a glorious Estate hereafter. But we are also called to the Sanctification of the Spirit, and the belief of the Truth; and we cannot obtain the one without he other. Do not so mind Comfort, as to slight Holi∣ness; and divide one part of your Calling from the other. Comfort is consequent to Holiness, and followeth it as heat doth Fire. The Spirit is more necessarily a Sancfier, than a Comforter. For our duty and obedience to God, is a greater thing, than our own Peace. Holiness is the Image of God upon the Soul, and the blessed perfection where∣in we were created; Gen. 1.27. So God re∣ated Man in his own Image. And when it was lost by Sin, Christ came and payed our Ransom, that he might renew us by his Spi∣rit. Tit. 3.5. According to his Mery, he sa∣ved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and re∣newing of the Holy Ghost. Yea, much of our everlasting Blessedness lieth in it. For Hea∣ven is to be looked upon not only as a state of compleat Felicity, but exact Holiness. 1 John 3.2. We know that when he dth appear, we shll be like him, for we shall see him as e is. Ephes. 5.27. That he might present it to him∣self a glorious Church, not aving Spot, or wri∣kle, or any such thing; but that it should be Holy
and without Blemish. Then it is a glorious Church. Christ hath done his whole Work. Holiness is the Beauty of God himself, Exod. 15.11. and puts an Excellency on us, if we love it, and imitate it. Prov. 12.26. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neigbour: But the way of the Wicked seduceth them. We do not only excel other Men, but we are more amiable in the sight of God. Prov. 11.20. The Upright is his delight. In short, it is a part of Salvation it self, and a Means to that which remaineth. Act. 26.18.—Inhe∣ritance among them which are Sanctified by Faith in Christ Iesus. 3. Let us reflect upon our selves: Have we God's Call? Have we obeyed the Gospel? This will clear up your Election to you. 2 Pet. 1.10. Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give di∣ligence to make your Calling and Election sure: For if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. Do you find such a belief wrought in you by the Spirit, as begins in brokenness of Heart, and ends in Holiness; for Christ came to call Sinners to Repentance, Matth. 9.14 That is, Men sensible of Sin to holiness of Heart and Life, to return to God that we may first live to him, and then with him. 4. To improve the belief of the Glory promised. 1. To sweeten Obedience, or a cse of Holiness which for the present is so tedious to the Flesh. Now here is our La∣bour,
hereafter our Recompence, 1 Cor. 5.58. Every day we should grow more meet for his Glory, Col. 1.12. 2. To a contempt of all Worldly Things, good, or evil. If good, many are pleased with this World's good Things, but have no affection to Spiritual and Heavenly Things. Like the rebellous Isra∣elites, who more desired the Onions and Gar∣lick of Egypt, than the Milk and Honey of the Promised Land, or the Celestial Manna, Numb. 11.5, 6. Worse than Prodigals, that rest satisfied with Husks of Swine, than Bread which is in their Father's House. They have their good Things. Now we should remem∣ber we are called off from these Things, from dreggy Contentments, base Injoyments, to the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 3. The evils of the World, Crosses, Afflictions: Af∣ter we have suffered a while, the God of all Grace who hath called us unto his Eternal Glory by Christ Iesus, make you perfect, stablish, streng∣then, settle you. And 2 Tim. 2.11.12. It is a faithful saying: For if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him. Our Afflictions are both breves & leves, light and momentary. 2 Cor. 4.17. For our light Affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. Our sufferings are small, if compared with the Reward: The time short, if compared with Eternity.
There is a two-fold Eternity, that eternal Death which the Wicked must endure; that eternal Life which we enter into. This should sweeten all bitter Waters. 4. To dispose and prepare us for Death. The contemplation of Immortality hath left strong impressions on the Hearts of Heathens; some Burnt them∣selves, as impatient to tarry longer. If a dark view, vain hope cause this, what should a sure Promise, and Earnest of the Spirit do? 2 Vse To the Called. 1. Bless God for this Calling. The woful Estate out of which we are called, and the blessed Ette into which we are entered; compared togeth; should make us wonder. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye should shew forth the Praises of him, who hath called you out of darkness, into his marvelous Light. 2. Walk answerably, Ephes. 4.1. I therefore, the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called. And 1 Thess. 2.12. That ye would walk worthy of God, who hath called you unto his Kingdom and Glory.
SERMON XIII. 2 Thess. 2.15. Therefore, Brethren, stand fast, and hold the Traditions which ye have been taught, whe∣ther by Word, or our Epistle. THE Apostle after he had comforted the Thessalonians, he exhorteth them to con∣stancy in the Truth, what-ever temptations they had to the contrary. The Comforts he propoundeth to them were taken; 1. From their Election, vers. 13.2. From their Vo∣cation, vers. 14. His Exhortation is to Per∣severance: Therefore, Brethren, &c. In the words observe; 1. The Illative Par∣ticle (Therefore); because God hath chosen you, and called you, and given you such ad∣vantages against Error and Seduction. 2. The Duty inferred, , stand fast; It is a Military word, you have the same in other places, 1 Cor. 16.13. Watch ye, stand ye fast, &c. Ephes. 6.14. Stand therefore, having your Loins girt about with. Truth. The word intimateth Perseverance. 3. The Means of Perseverance, Hold the
Traditions which you have bin taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle. Where observe; 1. The Act. 2. The Object. 1. The Act , hold with strong hand; The word implyeth a forcible holding against Assaults, whether of Error or Perse∣cution. The Thessalonians were assaulted in both kinds; the Heathens persecuted them; and some were gone abroad that began the Mystery of Iniquity, and were ready to per∣vert them. 2. The Object; which is propounded: 1. By a common and general term, The Tra∣ditions which ye have bin taught. 2. By a di∣stribution, Whether by Word, or our Epistle. I. The common and general term, [The Traditions which ye have bin taught]; There are two sorts of Traditions; Humane, and Divine. First; Humane Traditions, are certain ex∣ternal Observances instituted by Men, and delivered from hand to hand, from Progeni∣tors to their Posterity: These may be either besides, or contrary to the Word of God. 1. Beside the Word; as the Institutions of the Family of the Rechabites, in the obser∣vance of which, from Father to Son, they were so exact and punctual, that God pro∣duceth their example to shame the disobedi∣ence of his People; Ier. 35.6, 7. Jonadab
the Son of Rechab our Father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no Wine, nor build Houses, nor plant Vineyards, &c. 2. Contra∣ry to the Word of God; such as were those of the Pharisee, Matth. 15.2 Why transgress ye the Commandment of God by your Traditions? Humane Inventions in Religion, are con∣trary to, and destructive of Divine Laws. Secondly; Traditions Divine; Are either Heavenly Doctrines revealed by God, or In∣stitutions and Ordinances appointed by him for the use of the Church. These are the Rule and Ground of our Faith, Worship, and Obedience. The whole Doctrine of the Go∣spel, is a Tradition delivered and conveyed to us by fit Messengers, such as the Apostles were; 1 Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you, Bre∣thren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the Ordinances, [Marg. Traditions] as I delivered them to you. So that holding the Traditions, is nothing else but perseverance in Apostolical Doctrine. II. The Distribution; that no Cheats might be put upon them under any pretence; there∣fore, he saith, Whether by Word, or our Epi∣stle; that is, by word of Mouth, when pre∣sent; or by Epistle, when absent: And he saith, not Epistles, but Epistle, as alluding to the former wrote unto them: They were bound to yield to both alike credence and obedience; for whether in speaking or
writing, the Apostolical Authority was the same. To improve this Verse for your bene∣fit I shall lay down several Propositions. I. That what-ever assurance we have of God's preserving us in the Truth, yet we are boud to use Diligence and Caution. II. Our Diligence and Caution is to be employed about this, That we may stand fast in the Faith of Christ, and the Pro∣fession and Practice of Godliness. III. That the Means of standing fast in the Faith of Christ, and the Profession and Practice of Godliness, is by holding the Traditions which were taught by the Holy Apostles. IV. That while the Apostles were in being, there were two ways of delivering the Truth, by word of Mouth, and Wri∣ting. V. That now when they are long since gone to God, and we cannot receive from them the Doctrine of Life by Word of Mouth; We must stick to the Scriptures or written Word. I. That what-ever assurance we have of God's preserving us in the Truth, yet we are bound to use Diligence and Caution: For the Apostle had said, That God had chosen
and called them to the belief of the Truth; and yet saith, Therefore, Brethren, Stand fast. First; Reason will tell us, That when we intend an End, we must use the Means, other∣wise the bare intention and desire would suf∣fice; And to the accomplishing of any effect, we need no more than to will it; And the Sluggard would be the wisest Man in the World, who is full of wishings and would∣ings, though his hands refuse to labour: but common experience sheweth, that the End cannot be obtain'd without a diligent use of the means. Prov. 13.4. The Soul of the Slug∣gard desireth, and hath nothing; but the Soul of the Diligent shall be made fat; that is, re∣warded with the intended benefit. Secondly; The Business in hand is, Whe∣ther God's Election, Calling, or Promise, doth so secure the End to us, as that we need not be so careful in the diligent use of Means. Such a notion or conceit there may be in the Hearts of Men, therefore et us at∣taque it a little by these Considerations. 1. God's Decree is both of End and Means, for all his Purposes are executed by fit Means. He that hath chosen us to Salvation, bringeth it about by the belief of the Truth, and sancti∣fication of the Spirit. 2 Thess. 2.13. and without Faith and Holiness no Man shall see God, and escape condemnation. God had as∣sured Paul, That there should be no loss of any
Mans Life among them, except of the Ship, Acts 27.22. And yet afterwards, vers. 31. Paul telleth them, Except these abide in the Ship, ye cannot be saved. How could that Assurance given to Paul from God, and Paul's Caution to the Mariners stand together? Doth the Purpose of God, depend upon the uncertain Will and Actions of Men? I An∣swer, Not as a Cause, from whence it re∣ceiveth its force and strength, but as a Means, appointed also by God to the execution of his Decree. For by the same Decree God Appointeth the Event, what he will do, and the Means by which he will have it to be done: And the Lord revealing by his Word this conjunction of end and Means, there is a necessity of Duty lying upon Man to use these Means, and not to expect the End with∣out them. God intended to save all in the Ship, and yet the Mariners must abide in the Ship; therefore what God hath joined toge∣ther, let no man separate: If we separate these things, God doth not change his Coun∣sel, but we pervert his Order to our own De∣struction. 2. God that hath bidden us to believe his Promises, hath forbidden us to tempt his Providence, Mat. 4.7. Now we tempt God, when we desire him to give an extraordinary proof of his care over us, when ordinary Means will serve the turn, or be useful to us.
3. Though the Means seem to have no connexion with the End, yet if God hath injoined them for that end, we must use them; As in the instance of Naaman, God was re∣solved to cure him; but Naaman must take his prescribed way, though against his own fancy and conceit; 2 King. 5.10. Wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again unto thee, and thou shalt be clean: com∣pare vers. 13. If the Prophet had bidden thee to do some great thing, &c. So Iohn 13.6, 7. Peter must submit to be washed, though he could not see the benefit of it. So Iohn 9.6, 7. The blind Man must submit to have his Eyes anointed with Clay, and wash in the Pool of Siloam; though the Clay seemed to put out his Eyes, rather than cure them; And the Pool could not wash away his blindness: but means appointed by God must be used, what-ever improbabilities are ap∣prehended by us. 4. That when God's Will is expresly de∣clared concerning the Event, yet he will have the means used: As for instance, 2 Kings 20.5, 6, 7. God was absolutely resolved to add fifteen years more to Hezekiah's Life, yet he must take  lump of Figs and lay i on the Boil: which plainly sheweth that no promise on God's part, nor assurance on ours, hin∣dreth the use of means; God will work by them, not without them.
5. In Spiritual Things, assurance of the Event is an incouragement to Industry, not a preence to Sloth; 1 John 2.27, 28. Ye shall abide in him; and now, little Children, abide in him. The promise of Perseverance doth incourage us to use endeavours that we may persevere, and quicken Diligence, rather than nourish Security, or open a gap to car∣nal Liberty; 1 Cor. 9.26. I run not as one that is uncertain: We are the more earnest, because we are assured the means shall not be uneffectual. II. Prop. Our Duty is to stand fast in the Faith of Christ, and profession of Godliness, what-ever temptations we have to the con∣trary: [stand fast] being a Military word, it alludeth to a Souldier's keeping his Ground; and is apposed to two things; 1. A coward∣ly Flight; 2. A treacherous Revolt. 1. A cowardly Flight, implyeth our being overcome in the evil Day, by the many Af∣flictions that befal us for the Truths sake; Ephes. 6.13. Wherefore take to you the whole Armour of God, that you may be able to with∣stand in the evil Day; that after ye have done all things, ye may stand. Their Temptation, was the many troubles and persecutions that befel them, called there the Evil Day. Their defence lay in the whole Armour of God; which is there made of six pieces, The Gir∣dle
of Truth or Sincerity, which is a strength to us as a Girdle to the Loins; The Breast∣plate of Righteousness, or an holy iclinati∣on and desire to perform our Duty to God in all things; And the Shield of Faith, or a sted∣fast adhering to the Truths of the Gospel, whether delivered in a way of Command, Promise, or Threatning; The Helmet of Hope, or a certain and desirous expectation of the promised Glory; The Shoe of the pre∣paration of the Gospel of Peace, which is a readiness to endure all encounters for Christ's sake, who hath made our Peace with God; And the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Now if we take this Ar∣mour, and use it in our Conflicts, what doth it serve for? to withstand and stand; The first is the Act of a Souldier; the second is the posture of a Conqueror: Here is with∣standing till the Field be won, and then stand∣ing when the Day of Evil is over. Here we make our way to Heaven by Conflict and Conquest; and hereafter we triumph. 2. A treacherous Revolt, or yielding to the Enemy, by complying with those things which are against the Interest of Christ and his Kingdom for advantage-sake; 2 Tim. 4.10. Demas hath forsaken us, and loved the present World. Back-sliders in Heart are the worst sort of Apostates, such as lose their af∣ection to God, and delight in his ways, and
esteem not of his glorious Recompences, for a little Pleasure, Profit, or Pomp of Living, sell their Birth-right for one morsel of Meat, Heb. 12.15, 16. Some fail in their Under∣standings, but most miscarry by the perverse inclination of their Wills; they are carnal worldly Hypocrites, that never throughly mortified the fleshly Mind; price things as they are commodious to the Flesh, and will save them from Sufferings. The byass of such Mens Hearts doth easily prevail against the Light of their Understandings. III. Prop. The Means of standing fast, is, by holding the Traditions which were taught by the Holy Apostles. Here I will prove; 1. That the Doctrine of Christianity taught by the Apostles is a Tradition. 2. That holding this Tradition by strong hand, when others wrest it from us, is the means of our Perseverance. 1. That the Doctrine of Christianity is a Tradition, I prove it by two Arguments; First, Matters not evident by the Light of Nature, nor immediately revealed to us by God, must be either an Invention or a Tra∣dition; an Invention is something in Religi∣on not evident by natural Light, nor agree∣able to sound Reason, but is some cunningly devised Fable, invented by one or more, and obtruded by various Artifices upon the belief
of the World. Inventions in this kind were Man's Disease, not his Remedy; Eccles. 7.29. God made Man uprigh, but they sought out many Inventions. As when the Philosopers sat abrood upon Religion, a goodly Chymaera it was they hatched and brought forth! Rom. 1.21, 22. They became vain in their Imagina∣tions, and their foolish Heart was darkned; and professing themselves to be wise, they became Fools. The Inventions little became the Na∣ture of God; nor were they profitable to Man, for still the great Sore of Nature was unhealed, which is a fear of Death, and the righteous Wrath of God, Rom. 1.32. So that neither Man's Comfort nor Duty was well provided for. Surely the Gospel is none of this fort, not an Invention of Men, but a Revelation of God; and a Revelation not made to us in Person, but brought out of the Bosom of God, by Jesus Christ, and by him manifested to chosen Witnesses, who might publish this Mystery and Secret to others. Well then, since the Gospel is not an Inven∣tion, it is a Tradition, or a delivery of the Truth upon the Testimony of one hat came from God, to instruct the World, or reduce it to him: not an Invention of Man, but a Secret brought out of the Bosom of God, by our Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore 'tis said, Heb. 2.3, 4. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, first spoken by the Lord him∣self,
and then confirmed to us by them that heard him; The Lord bearing them witness, &c. Christ delivered it to the Apostles, and the Apostles delivered it to others; 2 Tim. 2.2. Those things which thou hast heard from me among many Witnesses, the same commit thou to faith∣ful Men, who shall be able to teach others also. The Apostles received the Gospel from Christ; and the Churches and Ministers from the Apostles; and they delivered it down to others until it came to us; which is the Means of our believing the Truth, and con∣fessing the Name of Christ. This Testimony delivered and conveyed to us by the most credible means, and which we have no rea∣son to doubt of, is as binding, as if we had heard Christ and his Apostles in Person: For we have their word in writing, though we did not hear them preach and publish it with the lively Voice; their Authority is the same delivered either way. And that these are their Writings, appeareth by the constant Tradition of the Church, and the acknow∣ledgment of Friends, and Enemies, who still appeal to them as a public authentic Record: And as they have bin attested by the Church, they have bin owned by God, and blessed by him to the Conversion and Sanctifying of many Souls throughout all successions of Ages: And by this Tradition Christianity hath held up the Head againt all encounters
of Time, and the persecutions of Adverse Powers have not suppressed it; nor the dis∣putes of Enemies silenced the Profession of it; but from Age to Age it hath bin received, and transmitted to future Generations, tho sometimes at a very dear rate. And this is binding to us, though we saw no the Per∣sons, and Miracles by which they confirmed their Message, and heard not the fst report, Yet the Universal Tradition having handed it to us, is a sufficient ground of Faith; and so we believe through their Word, and are concerned in Christ's Prayers, Iohn 17.20. For with them and their Successrs (as to these necessary things) Christ hath promised to be to the end of the World, Matth. 28. 20. 2. My next Argument is; Becuse Chri∣stian Religion must needs be a Tradition, partly because matter of Fact is the Founda∣tion of it, and it is in it self matter of Faith. 1. Because it is built upon matter of Fact; That the Son of God came from God, to bring us to God; that is to say, appear'd in human Nature, instructed the World by his Doctrine and Example, and at length died for Sinners, confirming both in Life and Death the truth of his Mission, by such un∣questionable Miracles as shewed hi to be the Son of God, and the Saviour of the World. Now a Testimony, Tradition, or Report,
is necessary in matters of Fact, which of ne∣cessity must be confined to some determinate time and place. It was not fit that Christ should be always working Miracles, always dying, always rising, and ascending in every place, and in the view of every Man; but those things were to be oce done in one place of the World, in sight of some parti∣cular and competent Witnesses: But because the knowledg of them concerned all the rest of the World, they were by them to be at∣tested to others; Matters of Fact can only be proved by credible Witnesses, and this was the great Office put upon the Apostles, Acts 1.8, 21, 22. and Acts 2.32. Acts 3.15. Acts 10.39, 40, 41. 2. As it is matter of Faith, or the Doctrine built upon this Matter of Fact: We cannot propely be said to be∣lieve a thing but upon a report and testimo∣ny: I may know a thing by sense or reason, but I cannot believe it, but as it is affirmed or brought to me by credible Testimony. As we are said to see those things, which we per∣ceive by the Eye, or the sense of Seeing, and to know those things which we receive by Reason, or sure Demonstration; so we are said to believe those things which are brought to us by valuable Testimony, Tradition, and Report. As for Instance, if any one ask you, Do you believe the Sun shineth at noon Day? You will answer, I do not believe it,
but see it. So if any one ask you▪ Do you believe that twice two make four, and twice three make six? You will say, I do not be∣lieve it, but know it, because certain and evident Reason telleth me, that two is the half of four, and three of six; and every whole consisteth of two halfs or moities: But if he should ask you, Do you believe that the Sun is bigger than the Earth? You will say, I believe it; for though your Eye doth not discover it, nor doth an ignorant Man know any certain demonstration of it; yet having the authority of Learned Men, who are competent Judges in the case, you judg it a rash and foolish obstinacy not to be∣lieve it. Apply it now to the Mysteries of Godliness revealed in the Gospel, they can∣not be seen with the Eye, for they are invisi∣ble; nor found out and comprehended by any humane understanding, because they ex∣ceed the reach of Man's Reason, and depend upon the Love and Arbitrary Will of God, Iohn 3.16. yet you believe them, because God hath revealed them to the Prophets and Apostles: And God being Truth and Wis∣dom it self, cannot deceive, or be deceived; and therefore you believe them with the certainty of Divine Faith, and do no more doubt of them, than you do of those things which you see with your Eyes, and know and understand by a sure demonstra∣tion.
The sense of Seeing may be deceived, and Humane Reason may erre; but 'tis im∣possible God should deceive, or be deceived. It oftentimes falleth out, that Men do pre∣fer the authority and report of a Man whom they judg to be Wise and Good, before their own Sense and Reason. As for Instance: That Man who by his Eye judges the Sun to be less than the Earth, yet doth not obsti∣nately stand in his Opinion, when he hears a knowing and skilful Philosopher assert the contrary. Now, If we receive the witness of Men, the Witness of God is greater, 1 John 5.9. And this Testimony of God is brought to us, by his Authorized Messengers, as the ground of Faith: And what is that but Tra∣dition? We believe in God by hearing of him, and we hear by a Preacher, Rom. 10.14. Ordinary common Preachers give us notice, but Christ and his Apostles give us assurance; and by their Testimony and Tradition, our Faith ultimately resolved into the veracity of God. 2. That holding this Tradition is the great means of standing fast in the Faith of Chrit, and the Confession of his Name. For in the Word of God delivered by Christ, and his A∣postles, there is sure Direction to walk by; and sure Promises to build upon. For whatever they made known of Christ was not a Fable, but a certain Truth; for they had the Testi∣mony
of Sense, 2 Pet. 1.16, 17. 1 Iohn 1.2, 3, 4. and so could plead both the Authority of his Command, and the certainty of his Pro∣mise, and that with uncontroulable Evi∣dence; and without this relation, there can be neither Faith, nor Obedience, nor sure expectation of Happiness. For we cannot trust God for what he hath not Promised, nor obey God in what he hath not Commanded; nor in our Difficulties and Distresses, expect Happiness from him without his Warrant and Assurance. But by this Doctrine deli∣vered to us, we have all that belongeth to Faith, Obedience, and Happiness; and be∣yond that the Creature can desie no more. 1. There can be no Faith till we ave a sure Testimony of God's Revelation; for Faith is a believing such things as God hath Reveal∣ed, because he hath Revealed them. 'Tis not Faith but Fancy, to believe such things as God hath never Revealed; nr is it trust and a regular confidence to thik, that he will certainly give us what he hath never promised; this were to lay us open to all man∣ner of Delusion: And therefore we are never upon sure and stable ground, but by sticking so such a Tradition, as may justly intitle it self to God. 2. Nor Obedience; for Obedience is a doing what God hath Commanded, be∣cause he hath Commanded it. The funda∣mental reason of Obedience, is the sight of
God's Will, 1 Thess. 4.3. 1 Thess. 5.18. 1 Pet. 2.15. To do what God never Command∣ed, or not to do it upon that account, but for other reasons, is not Obedience; and in difficult cases the Soul can never be held to its Duty, till we are perswaded that so is God's Will concerning us. Now to know his Will concerning us, we are often bidden to search the Scripture; but never bidden to consult with the Church, to know what un∣written Traditions She hath in her keeping to instruct us in our Duty. 3. No certain expectation of Happiness. We are never safe till we know by what Rule Christ will judg us, that is, reward or punish Men at the last Day: Now he will judg us according to the Gospel, Rom. 2.16. 1 Thess. 1.8. Obey the Gospel, and you have a perfect Rule to guide you to Happiness; but if you neglect this great Salvation, or be unfaithful in the profession of it, this Word condemneth you, and God will ratifie the Sentence of it. IV. Prop. That whilst the Apostles were in being, there were two ways of delivering the Truth, and that is by word of Mouth, and Writing. So in the Text, Wether by Word, or our Epistle. The Apostles went up and down, and preached Christ every where; that needeth no Proof, unless you would have me to produce the whole Book of the Acts of the Apostles: But they did not Preach
only, but Write, and both by the Instinct of the Holy Spirit, who guided their Journeys, and moved them to write Epistles: For be∣ing often absent from Churhes newly Plan∣ted, and Heresies arising, or some Conten∣tions, which could not be avoided among weak Christians, God over-ruled these occa∣sions for the profit of the Church in after Ages; upon one occasion or another, they saw a necessity to write . Jude ver. 3. It was needful for me to write unto you. As in the Old Testament, God himself deli∣vered the Law with great Majesty and Ter∣rour, and afterwards caused the same to be written in Tables of Stone, for the constant use of his People. And the Prophets first ut∣tered their Prophecies, and then wrote unto them: So the Apostles first preached Evangeli∣cal Doctrine, and then consigned it to writing for the Use of all Ages. And though all things delivered by them were not delivered in one Sermon, or one Epistle; yet by degrees the Canon of the New Testament was Consti∣tuted, and made perfect by the Writings of the Evangelists and Apostles. V. Prop. That now when they are long since gone to God, and we cannot receive from them the Doctrine of Life by word of Mouth, we must stick to the Scriptures, or written Word. 1. Because we are taught
to do so by Christ and his Apostles. Christ always appealeth to the Writings of the Old Testament, both against Traditions, which he condemneth, Matth. 15.2. and against pretended Revelations; Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will be persuaded to repent, if one should come from the Dead. And the Apostles still have recourse to this Proof, Acts 26.22. Witnessing no other things than the Prophets and Moses did say should come to pass. And when they pleaded they were Eye and Ear-witnesses, and so their Testimony was valuable; yet they say ye have , a surer Word of Pro∣phecy, whereunto ye shall do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. Now how can we do better than to imitate these great Examples? 2. Because those things were written for our sakes. 1 John 1.4. These things write we unto you, that your Ioy may be full. The Apostles being to leave the World, did know the slip∣periness of Man's Memory, and the danger of corrupting Christian Doctrine, if there were not a sure authentick Record left; therefore they wrote, and so fully, that no∣thing is wanting to compleat our Joy and Happiness. 3. Because the Scriptures are perfect. The perfection of Scripture is known by its End, and intended Use, which is to give us a knowledg of those things which concern our Faith, Duty, and Hap∣piness.
1. Our Faith in Christ. If there be enough written for that end, we need not unwritten Traditions, to compleat our Rule. Now St. Iohn telleth us, he might have writ∣ten more things; But these things are written that ye might believe in the Son of God, and have Life through his Name, John 20.30, 31. Certainly, nothing is wanting to beget a Faith in Christ: The Object is sufficiently propounded; the Warrant, or Claim, is laid down in the New Covenant, and the encou∣ragements to believe it are clear and strong. What would Men have more? So that here is a perfect Rule, perfect in its kind, and for its proper use. 2. For our Duty: That is sufficiently provided for. The Apostle tel∣leth us, that the Grace of God (take it ob∣jectively for the Grace of the Gospel, or sub∣jectively for Grace in our Hearts) teacheth us: If you mean Objective Grace, it prescri∣beth, directeth: If Subjective Grace, it per∣suadeth and exciteth what to do: To live So∣berly, Righteously, Godly in the present World, Tit. 2.12. There are all the branches of Man's Duty enumerated: Sobriety relateth to self-government; Righteously to our car∣riage towards our Neighbour; Godly to our Commerce and Communion with God. What is there wanting, that belongeth either to Worship, or Justice, or Personal Holiness? Therefore certainly we need no other Rule;
for it layeth down whatsoever Men are bound to do in all Ages and places of the World, and in whatsoever Circumstances God shall put them: And so it is fit to be the Law of the Universal King, and Law-giver; yea, it is so perfect, that whatever other Way is set up, it presently dasheth against those Noti∣ons that we have, or should have of God, his Service, and Worship; or it ingeth, or perverteth the Liberty and Nature of Man. 3. For our Happiness. Tha Doctrine and Institution, which is able to make us wie un∣to Salvation, is enough for us; but so the holy Scriptures are said to do. 2. Tim. 3.15. And that from a Child thou hast known the hol Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through the Faith which is in Christ Iesus. Nay, afterwards, Ver. 17. The Man of God is by them made perfect, and throughly furnished to every good Work. If the Scriptures do throughly direct Men to know God in Christ, and save teir own Souls, why should we look any further? Now they do not only furnish every private Christian with this knowledg; but the Man of God, who is to Instruct others, he need∣eth look no further, but is furnished out of the Scripture with all things necessary to dis∣charge his Office. Therefore here we fix and rest, we have a sufficient Rule, and a full Re∣cord of all necessary Christian Doctrine.
Vse 1. The Use of all is: Let us not seek another Rule than the Word of God. Pa∣pists cry up unwritten Traditions, to be re∣ceived with equal respect and reverence, as we receive the holy Scriptues. But you, Brethren, stand fast, holding the Apostolical Tradition: You cannot have it by word of Mouth from them now; therefore you must stick to what is Written, or else you cannot preserve your selves from the Frauds and Im∣postures of Antichrist. These Apostolical Writings have been received in all Ages, and Times of the Church, from the eginning; and all Disputes among Christians have been tried by them: None were allowed good or sincere Christians, who doubted of the truth of them. But because we have to do with a People that will sacrifice all to the honour and interest of their Church, and knowing they are not able to stand before the Light of Scriptures, have, to the no little prejudice of the Christian Cause, done all they can to weaken the Authority, Sufficiency, and Per∣spicuity of them, that we migh have no Religion without the Testimony and Recom∣mendation of their Church; therefore I shall resume the Matter and declare it afresh. 1. Mankind lying in Darkness, and in the shadow of Death, it was necessary that one way or another, God should reveal his Mind to them; that we may have what belongeth to
our Duty and Happiness, for our chief good and last end. Being altered by Sin, we strangely mistake things, and put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light, Good for Evil, and Evil for Good; weighing all things in the ballance of the Flesh, which we seek to please. We confound both the names and natures of Things, and wander in a maze of a thousand Perplexities; therefore God in pity to Mankind, hath given us a sure dire∣ction in his Word, which is a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto our Paths, Psal. 119.105. Mark the words of Light and Lamps; the use of a Lamp is by Night, and in the Day we have the Light of the Sun; whether it be Day or Night with us, here we are taught how to carry our selves. Mark again the words of Path and Fee: The one sig∣nifieth our Way, and general Course; the other all our particular Actions; so far as Re∣ligion is concerned in them, we have dire∣ctions in the Word about them. Besides, Man's condition is such, that he needeth a Supernatural Remedy by a Redeemer; which depending upon the meer Love and free Grace of God, cannot be found out by Natural Light left to us: for that only can judg of things necessary, but not of such things as depend upon the meer Pleasure of God; therefore a Divine Revelation there must be.
2. Since it is necessary that God should some way or other reveal his Mind to his People; it must be done by Oracles, Visi∣ons, Dreams, or by extraordinary Messen∣gers, who by word of Mouth might convey it to us: Or else by Writing, or y ordi∣nary Teachers, whose Lips may preserve Knowledg in the Church. The former ways might sufice while God saw fit, to reveal but a few Truths, and such as do not burden the Memory, and Men were long-liv'd, and of great Simplicity, and the Church was con∣fined within a small compass of Ground, and not liable to so many Miseries and Changes, as now in the latter Ages; but when once God had spoken to us by his Son, hose ex∣traordinary Ways ceased. Heb. 1.1, 2, God who at sundry times, and in divers manners, spake in times past to the Fathers by the Pro∣phets; hath in these last Times spoken to us by his Son. As formerly God did speak , in divers manners: That is to say, by Visions, Oracles, Dreams; and so , at sundry times, by several Steps and Degrees, he acquainted the World with the Truths necessary for Man to know, delivering them out by Portions, not altogether at once, till he came who had the Spirit without measure, John 3.34. The Prophets to whom God revealed himself before, by Visions, Oracles, Dreams, or the coming of the Spirit upon
them, had the Spirit, , by measure, to fit them for some particular Errand, or Message, on which God sent them. But when God sent his Son out of his Bosom to reveal the whole Doctrine of Faith at once, and to declare his Fathers Will with full Au∣thority and Power, he fixed and closed up the Rule of Faith. So 'twas not fit that after him there should come any extraordinary Nuncio's and Embassadors from Heaven, or any other should be owned as Infallible Mes∣sengers, but such as he immediately sent a∣broad in the World to disciple the Nations. Therefore all former extaordinary ways ceased, and we are left to the ordinary Rule stated by Christ. 3. Being left to the ordinary Rule, it was necessary it should be taught, not only by word of Mouth, but committed to Writing: For Christ is ascended into Heaven, and the Apostles do not live for ever; and we have no Men now that are immediately and di∣vinely inspired: And ordinary Pastors and Teachers, cannot make more Articles of Faith, but do only build on the Apostles Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.10.. or that divinely inspired Doctrine which they delivered to the Church: Yea, that Doctrine cannot well be preserved from oblivion and corruption, without writing. Therefore God accounted this the safest way, those things that are only
delivered by word of mouth, or from hand to hand, may easily be changed, corrupted, or utterly lost. Certainly if you consider Man's Sloth, Treachery, Levity, and the many vile Affections which may easily induce him to extinguish, or corrupt the Truth, which is contrary to them; you will see that it is necessary there should be an Authentic Record, by which Truth and Error might be tried and distinguished. Yea, that the Church which is dispersed throughout the World, might have Truth at hand, and per∣ticular Believers have this Doctrine ever by them for their comfort and use; it being the property of a Blessed Man, to delight in the Law of God, and to exercise himself therein day and night, Psal. 1.2. In short, while the Apostles were living, 'twas good to take the Tradition from their Mouth; but now they are dead, we take it from their Writings. Surely if God saw some Writing necessary, when those extraordinary ways (we spake of before) were in use, and the Church of the Old Testament was in a much quieter estate than the Church of the New: I say, if some writing were necessary then, it is more necessary now, for the Christian Church is more exposed to dreadful storms of Persecu∣tion, the deceits of Heretics of all sorts, espe∣cially to the frauds of Antichrist, which we are forewarned of in this Chapter, and are
detected and discovered by their contrariety to the written Word. 4. This Truth being written, it is both a safe and a full Rule for us to walk by: It is a safe Rule, because it is written by the Apo∣stles and Evangelist, holy Men moved by the Holy Ghost. The Apostles did not lose their Infallibility, when they committed what they preached to writing: the same Spirit that assisted them in delivering the Doctrine by word of mouth, assisted them also when they delivered it by writing. And it is a full and sufficient Rule, because it containeth all things which are necessary for Men to believe and do, in order to Eternal Life. Let them name what is necessary, beyond what is re∣commended there, or may be delivered from thence. Yea, it doth contain, not on∣ly all the Essential, but also the Integral parts of the Christian Religion; and therefore no∣thing can be any part of our Religion which is not there. The Direction of old was, Isa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is be∣cause there is no Light in them. Every thing was then tried by Moses and the Prophets; every thing must be now tried by the Pro∣phets and Apostles, which is our Foundation of Faith, Worship, and Obedience, Ephes. 2.20. 5. That which we blame in the Papists, is,
That they cry up a private, unproved, un∣written Tradition of their own, as of equal authority with this safe and full Rule, which is contained in this written Word of God. Their Crime and Fault may be considered, partly with respect to the Object and Matter; that these Traditions are not indifferent Cu∣stoms, but essential Points necessary to Faith and Christian practice: And so though a Christian be never so thorow and sound in his obedience to the Word of God, and true to the Baptismal Covenant, yet if he submit∣teth not to these unwritten Traditions, he wants some Point necessary to Faith and Pra∣ctice, and so to Life eternal: which is contrary to Mark 16.16. He that believeth, and is bap∣tized, shall be saved; and he that believeth not, shall be damned. And Iohn 17.3. This is Life Eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Ie∣sus Christ whom thou hast sent. Partly as to the Subject, as they make their own Faction to be the only keepers of these things; and that nothing is to be owned as Apostolical Tradition, but what is delivered as such by their Authority; which is to leave the Church to the tyranny and usurpation of a corrupt Faction; to declare for Apostolica Tradition any thing which serveth their end and Inte∣rest, and for which no true historical Evi∣dence is produced. Now the unjust and fraudulent practices which they have used, to
promote this usurpation over the Churches of Christ, render them false Men, most unfit to be trusted in this kind. Partly with respect to the Manner, they will have these things to be received, pari reverentia & pietatis affectu, with the same reverence and pious affection with which we receive the Holy Scriptures; and so Man's Post is set by God's and unpro∣ved Traditions equall'd with Doctrines of Faith. Their Opinion is bad enough; but their Practice is worse; for there they shew they value these things more than the Scrip∣tures. As Superstition always aboundeth in its own things. Did ever any of their Doc∣tors say the same things of Traditions, which they take the boldness to say of Scrip∣ture? Did they ever call them Pen and Ink∣horn, or Parchment Divinity, a nose of Wax, a dumb Rule, an obscure and ambiguous Do∣ctrine? These Blasphemies they vent boldly against the Scriptures: but did they ever spake these of Traditions? And again com∣mon People are a thousand times better in∣structed in their Tradition, than in the Do∣ctrine of Salvation. They skill more of Lent, and Ember-weeks, &c. than they truly under∣stand the Doctrine of Man's Misery and Re∣medy. And call you this Reverence and pious Affection to the Scriptures and Tradi∣tions? Partly because they would never give us a Catalogue of unwritten Traditions, ne∣cessary
to be observed by all Christians; It may be lest they should amaze the People with the multitude of them, or else that the People may not know how many of their Doctrines are destitute of Scripture proof, and so they plainly be discovered to be Im∣posers on the belief of the Christian World. 6. Though we blame this in Papists, yet we reject not all Traditions; 1. Because Scripture it self is a Tradition, as we proved before, and is conveyed to us by the most credible means, which we have no reason to doubt of. The Scriptures of the Old Testament were preserved by the Jews, to whom were committed the Oracles of God, Rom. 3.2. Protestants received all the Books which they admitted into their Ca∣non. And for the Books of the New Tes∣tament, the Christian Church hath received them, as the Writings of those whose names they ear. And by the constant Universal Tradition of the Church they are transmit∣ted to us; and we have no more reason to doubt of them, than we do of Statutes and Laws made by Kings and Parliaments, who lived long before we had a being. Yea, we may be much more confident, as the Matter is of greater weight and consequence, and these Writings have the signature and stamp of God's Spirit on them, and have bin bles∣sed by God, to the converting and sanctify∣ing
of many Souls: And have bin delivered down to us by a succession of Believers unto this very day: And by them Christianity hath bin preserved in the World, notwith∣standing the wickedness of it, and hath held up head against all the encounter of Time. The persecutions of Adverse Powers have not suppressed it, nor the disputes of Enemies si∣lenced the profession of it; but still from Age to Age God's Truth is received and trans∣mitted to Posterity. 2. Because the truth of Christianity de∣pending upon Matter of Fact, chiefly Christ's rising from the Dead, it can only be proved by a Testimony; which in so extraordinary a case, must be made valuable, and authori∣zed to the World by the Miracles accompa∣nying it. Now the notice of these things is brought to us by Tradition, which being unquestionable, giveth us as good ground of Faith, as it did to them that lived in the Apo∣stles Time, and heard their Doctrine, and saw their Miracles. God's wonderful Works were never intended for the benefit of that Age only in which they were done; but for the benefit also of those that should hear of them, by any credible means whatsoever, Psal. 145.4. Ioel 1.3. Psal. 78.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. these things were told them that they might set their hope in God, &c.
3. Because there are some Doctrines drawn by just consequence from Scripture, but are the more confirmed to us, when they are backed with constant Church usage and pra∣ctice; as Baptism of Infants, Lord's Day, singing of Psalms in our Public Worship, &c. 4. Because there are certain words which are not found in Scripture indeed, yet agree∣able thereto, and are very useful to discover the frauds of Heretics, as Trinity, Divine Pro∣vidence, consubstantial procession of the Ho∣ly Ghost, Satisfaction, &c. 5. We reject not all Church-History, or the Records of Ancient Writers concerning the Providences of God in their Days, in owning the Gospel; which make much for our instruction in Manners, and help to incou∣rage us to put our trust in God. 6. There are certain Usages, and inno∣cent Customs, or Circumstances, common to Sacred and other Actions, which we despise not, but acknowledg and receive as far as their own variable Nature and Condition re∣quireth; not rejecting them, because anci∣ently practised; nor regarding them, when the general Law of Edification requireth the omission of them. But that whch we de∣test, is, that the Traditions of Men should be made equal in dignity and authority with the express Revelation of God: Yea, that mani∣fest Corruptions and Usurpations, as making
Rome the Mistress of other Churches, and superinducing the Pope as the Head of the Universal Visible Church, and the Vicar of Christ, without his leave and appointment, and such-like other Point, should be obtruded upon the World as Apostolical Traditions, and to be received with like religious reve∣rence, as we do Articles of Faith set down in Scripture: This is that we cannot sufficiently abhor, as apparently false, and destructive to Christianity.
SERMON XIV. 2 Thess. 2.16, 17. Now our Lord Iesus Christ himself, and God even our Father, which hath loved us, and given us everlasting Consolation, and good hope through Grace; comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work. The Apostle, 1. Giveth thanks for their Election, and Vocation, Ver. 13, 14. 2. Exhorteth them to stick fast to the Truths delivered by Epistles, or word of Mouth, Ver. 15. 3. Prayeth for them, in the words now read: So that is the third means of confirm∣ing their Faith in the Truth of the Gospel. (Prayer to God for them). Now in a Pray∣er all things are plain; we must put off our Shoes when we draw nigh to God, appear before the Lord with naked and bare Feet: Therefore here nothing of difficulty will oc∣cur; our Prayers the more simply and plainly they are exprest, the more sincere they are. In this Prayer observe,
I. The Persons to whom this Prayer is ad∣dressed; Now our Lord Iesus Christ himself, and God even our Father. II. The Ground of Audience, and suc∣cess are intimated, which are two, 1. God's Love, which hath loved us. 2. The Pledges of his Love; which are also two, 1. With∣out us. 2. Within us. 1. He hath given everlasting Conso∣lation. 2. Good hope through Grace. III. The Blessings prayed for. 1. Increase of Comfort, comfort your Hearts. 2. Perseverance, or Establishment; And stablish you in every good Word and Work: Where, by every good Word, is meant the sound Doctrine of the Gospel, by every good Work holi∣ness of Life. So that here is a great harvest of Matter, but we must gather it in by degrees; for all cannot be spoken of at once. First, We begin with the Persons to whom the Prayer is addressed, Now our Lord Iesus Christ himself, and God even our Father. That is, I beseech the Lord, our Saviour, and God our Father, to comfort and stablish you. The Observations for this Branch shall be brief and short, because the proper seat of them li∣eth else-where.
I. That Exhortations prevail little without Prayer. He had exhorted them to hold fast the Traditions, and presently addeth, Our Lord Iesus Christ, and God the Father stablish you, in every good Word and Work. It is good to observe, how all the parts of the Apostle's Discourse cohere, and agree together: He first blesseth God for their Election, and then sheweth how it is accomplished by Vo∣cation, or Effectual Calling: Yet the effectu∣ally Called need Quickning and Exhortation, that we may concur to our Salvation in that way which is proper to us. But left the bu∣siness should seem wholly to rest upon our Will, he carrieth up the Matter to God again by Prayer: Election doth not exclude God's Means, which is Vocation, nor Man's means, which is Exhortation; but that availeth lit∣tle, unless the Matter be brought before God again by Prayer. Now this Method is necessary. 1. Because all from first to last come from God, he is Alpha and Omega, First and Last, all Things are from him, through him, and to him. The business began with God in his Election, and is still carried on through God, not only by Effectual Calling, but actual Assistance, which giveth Success and Blessing, and then the Glory of all redound∣eth to him. 2. Because what cometh from God, must
be sought of God. Ezek. 36.37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do it for them. Compared with the 26 Vers. A new Heart will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you. We must express our desires to God for things agreeable to his Will, for God will not force Spiritual Bles∣sings upon us, nor give them to us, unless we desire them: Some things he gave us unask∣ed, and without our desire, consent, or know∣ledg, as a Mediator, a New Covenant, or offers of Grace, yea, the first gift of the Spirit; but in other things we are obliged to ask. 3. A great part of Man's Duty dependeth on Prayer seriously performed: There is no∣thing so conducible to the maintaining of Communion between us and God, as a daily sence of our Emptiness, and God's both Ful∣ness and readiness to supply all our Wants. 1. That it is so, that we are empty, and God is All-sufficient, otherwise there would not be a foundation for Practical Godliness. That we are empty, John 15.5. Without me ye can do nothing: Not only nihil Magnum, but Nihil. So 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are suffici∣ent of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, for our sufficiency is of God. That is we are not able to think any thing in order to the Conversion of other Men, or our selves; we cannot imagin to enter upon this
design without any hope of success without God. That there is a Fulness in God to sup∣ply all our Wants. Ephes. 3.20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly, a∣boe what we can ask, or think: that is, a∣bove what we can imagine and pray for. If any Man seriously address himself to any se∣rious Business, he is full of Imaginations, may it be effected, yea, or no? Alas, God outworketh their Thoughts and Prayers, and doth things which never entred into our Hearts to conceive: That there i a Readi∣ness in God to supply all our Wants, other∣wise our Prayers would be little encouraged, and be dead in the Mouth. Now James 1.5. If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God, who giveth to all Men liberall, and up∣braideth not. You need not make sruple, or be ashamed to consult with God upon every occasion; for he is ready, and hath not a conined Bounty like ours, who waste by gi∣ving, and give from our selves, what we im∣part to others. 2. That without this, Communion with God would be interrupted, and all Religion would die and languish. For if we had the Stock in our Hands, we would forget, and forsake our Father; but when still we must be enabled by God to every good Work, and we cannot have it unless we acknowledg Him, and seek it of him by Prayer. Ths keepeth
up a sensible dependance of the Creature up∣on God; this Dependance begets Obser∣vance, Phil. 2.12. And they that conti∣nually receive their Dole and Portion from Him, are obliged to please him in all things. Vse of Direction. When you come to wait on the Word, or receive here any quickning Exhortation, call God into the Business, that the thing may not die away in your Hearts. Make conscience of Praying, as well as Hear∣ing; you hear from Man in God's Name, but carry it again to God, that he may bless it. All Religion is carried on between the Pulpit, and the Throne of Grace. You will thrive if you conscienciously make use of both Ordinances; if you hear of Christ in the Word, and make use of him in Prayer. II. Observation. That Prayer must be made to God alone. Psal. 65.2. Oh thou that hear∣est Prayer, unto thee shall all Flesh come: The Apostle here addresseth himself to God, and so must all Flesh. I. He alone is capable of hearing Prayers. We conceive of God as an infinite Being, Wise, Powerful, and Good; as knowing all things, as able to do all things, as willing to give all things, that we can in reason and righ∣teousness ask of him. (1.) He knoweth all things, our Persons, Wants, Necessities, Prayers. Our Persons: God knoweth that there is such a Creature
in the World as thou art; for surely God knoweth whom he hath made, and whom he supporteth, and governeth. A notable Instance we have, Acts 9.11. And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the Street that is called Straight and inquire in the House of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus: for behold he prayeth. What a description is here of God's particular Providence? the City of Damascus, the Street called Straight, the House of one Iudas, the Person, a Lodger there, one Paul of Tarsus; the Action he was im∣ployed in, behold, he Prayeth! He knoweth our Wants and Necessities, Mark 6.8. Your Father knoweth what things you have need of before you ask him. He observed every weary step of David in the Wilderness, and all his Tears and Sorrows. Psal. 56.8. Thou tellest my Wandrings; put thou my Tears in thy Bottle: are they not in thy Book? He particularly took notice of all the Troubles and Sorrows of his Exile and wandring Condition, as if his Tears had been preserved in a Bottle, and his Troubles registred, or recorde in a Book. The Doctrine of the Gentiles was, Dii magna curant, parva negligunt: The great and weigh∣ty Matters the Lord took into his Care, but left other things to their own event and chance; but the Doctrine of the Scriptures is otherwise; God taketh notice of every par∣ticular Person. For our Prayers, Psal. 34.6.
This poor Man cried unto the Lord, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his Troubles. How obscure soever the Worship∣per be in the account of the World, if he depend on God, the Lord will regard him. (2.) For his Power, he is able to do all Things. Mark 14.36. Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee. (3.) For his Goodness, he relieveth all his Creatures, heareth the moans of the Beasts, much more the Prayers of the Saints. Psal. 145.15, 16. The Eyes of all things wait upon the Lord, and thou givest them their Meat in due season, &c. Now this he makes a ground of fulfilling the desires of them that fer him, and being near to all that call upon him, Vers. 18, 19. He that feedeth a Kite, will he not provide for a Child? Surely we have more reason to trust in God than they, if you think this belongeth to his common Bounty? But in Spiritual things it is otherwise, he is most pleased, when we ask Spiritual Blessings. 1 Kings 3.10. It pleased the Lord, that Solo∣mon asked this thing. Well then, since none other is capable, and God is, to him must we come. 2. The Scriptures, which are the proper Rule of Worship, direct us to no other. When Christ taught his Disciples to pray, he directeth them to God. Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Heaven.
Invovation is Divine Worship, and so done to God alone. 3. When the Spirit moveth us to pray, he inclineth us to come to God, Rom. 8.15. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. Gal. 4.5, 6. Because ye are Sons, he hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. He doth not move us to go to the Saints, but to God. The Vse. Well then, if any touble befal us, let us call on God, unbosom our selves to him; Psal. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me. If we want any Grace, let us go to the God of all Grace, in the Name of Christ; Heb. 4.16. Seeing therefore we have a great High Priest that is entred into Heaven, Iesus the Son of God, let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, tat we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help us in a time of need. We can pray to none but to him in whom we trust; Psalm. 62.8. Trust in the Lord at all times; pour out your Hearts be∣fore him. Trust is the Foundation of Prayer, they that look to God for all, will frequently apply themselves to him: Our Necessities and Wants are continual, both as to the Temporal and Spiritual Things, we need not only daily Bread, but daily Pardon, daily Strength a∣gainst Temptations; therefore let us often come to God.
III. Observation; That Jesus Christ is in∣voked together with the Father, as an Author of Grace, and thereby his God-head is pro∣ved; for he that is an Object both of Inter∣nal and External Worship, is God: Now such is Christ. Of Internal Worship, Ioh. 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Though Christ died as Man, yet he is God equal with the Father, and an Object of Faith and Trust. For External Worship or Prayer, the Text is clear; Our Lord Iesus Christ, and God even our Father. That is much for the comfort of the Faithful, that we have God to trust in, and Christ to trust in; that we that have sin∣ned with both hands earnestly, have a dou∣ble ground of our Comfort and Hope, the infinite Mercy and Power of God, and the infinite Merit of a Mediator. There is a great latitude in the Object of Faith, and so of Invocation, The Lord Iesus Christ himself, and God our Father. There is no pain so great, that God in Christ cannot remove; no Danger so dreadful, but he can prevent; no Misery so deep, but he can deliver from it; no Enemy so strong, but he can vanquis them; no Want that he cannot supply: When we have a Want that he cannot sup∣ply, or a Sickness that he cannot cure, or a Danger that he cannot prevent, or a Misery that he cannot remove, or Enemies that are
too hard for him, then we may sit down and despair, and die. I speak of both as one, for God and Christ are here joined as to the same effect, comforting their Hearts, and sta∣blishing them in every good Word an Work. IV. We can obtain nothing from God un∣less we seek it in Christ. Therefore the A∣postle beginneth his Prayer, Now our Lord Iesus Christ, and God, &c. God Alone i abundantly enough for our happiness, for there is in him more than abundantly enough to satisfy all the Capacities of the Creature; but without a Mediator, how shall we come to receive of his fulness? If Ma had kept innocent, God had been enough to us; for in Innocency there was no Mediaor, but to Man fallen a Mediator is necessary. 1. I shall state the necessity of i. Because of Distance and Difference, we are unwor∣thy to approach his Holy Presence; and God hath a Quarrel and Controversy with us; which till it be taken up, we can expect no good thing from him. (1.) Distance. We are stranged from God by the Fall, and having lost his Image, lost his Favour, and Fellowship, and all communion with him; so that God now is looked upon by us, as out of the reach of our Commerce, which hindreth our love and confidence in him; for we can hardly de∣pend
upon one so far above us, that he will take notice of us, or take care for us, so as to relieve us in our Necessities, or help us in our Miseries, and give us the Blessings we ask of him, or that we shall be welcome to him, when we come with our Prayers and Suppli∣cations. God taught the Israelites their di∣stance; and the Apostle telleth us, that all that dispensation the Holy Ghost did signify, That the way into the Holiest was not yet made anifest, wile the first Tbernacle was stand∣ing, Heb. 9.8. They could not come near God without danger of Death; he would not have them so familiar wth him. (2.) Difference, or Controversy; A Me∣diator is used only between disagreeing Par∣ties. When Man was guilty, God was angry. Conscience of Sin presents God terrible, and taketh away all confidence from us, so that we are obnoxious to his Wrath and righteous Vengeance; Who is able to stand before this Holy God? 1 Sam. 6.20. And who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? Isa. 33.14. We cannot approach God in any friendly man∣ner. 2. I shall shew what Provision God hath ade for us. The Lord Jesus took this Of∣fice at God's appointment, of reconciling God to us, and appeasing his Wrath, and us to God, by bringing us back again, our alienated
and estranged Affections to God. How so! what hath he done? 1. The Distance is in truth taken away by his very Person, he is God-Man; God and Man meet together in the Person of Christ; God doth condescend and come down to Man, and Man is incouraged to ascend to God; God in Christ is nearer to Man than he was before, that we may have more familiar thoughts of him: The pure Deity is at so vast a distance from us, that we are amazed and confounded when we think of it, and cannot conceive an hope that he should con∣cern himself in our ffairs: But the Son of God is come in our Nature; John 1.14. The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us. 1 Tim. 3.16. Grace is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh: So that he is more acceptable to us, and nearer at hand, and more readily inclined to help us, for he will not be strange to his own Flesh. 2. The Difference and Controversy is ta∣ken up by the Work of his Redemption; for God hath set him forth to be a Propitiation, or a means of appeasing his Wrath, Rom. 3. 25. and to be the Foundation of that New Covenant, wherein Pardon and Life is offer∣ed to us: It is not enough to our Recovery, that God be reconciled, but Man must be re∣newed, otherwise we remain for ever unde the displeasure of God. Now he hath pur∣chased
the Grace of the Spirit, to be dispensed by the Covenant, to bring us home to God; Titus 3.5, 6. Nor by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Iesus Christ our Savi∣our, And, Rom. 8.2. For the Law of the Spi∣rit of Life in Christ Iesus, hath made me free from the Law of Sin and Death. Vse. Let us be sensible of this unspeakable Mercy, that God hath provided a Mediator for us, that we may come to God by him: Heb. 7.25. Wherefore he is able to save unto the ttermost, all that come unto God through him, seeing he ever liveth to make Intercession for us: That the legal Exclusion is removed, and a way opened to the Father; John 14.6. I am the Wy, the Truth, and the Life; no Man cometh to the Father but by me: Otherwise we could not immediately converse with God, nor trust in him. (1.) We see God in our Nature as near at hand, and ready to help; he came down amongst us, and became one of us; was bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh: And though he hath removed his dwelling into Heaven again, it is for our sakes, he hath carried our Nature thither, to take possession of that blessed Place in our Name, if we have a mind
to follow him; Iohn 14.2. I go to prepare a Place for you. (2.) Here we see the means of appeasing God's Wrath; 2 Cor. 5.19. God as in Christ reconciling the World unto himself: There is a full Ransom paid, all that enter into God's Peace shall have the benefit of it. (3.) By him we are encouraged to come to pray for every Blessing we stand in need of; Ephes. 2.18. Through him we both have an access by one Spirit unto the Father. Liberty to approach unto God, is a priviledg which we cannot enough value; the Wall of Par∣tition between God and us, is broken down by Christ, he hath compleatly satisfied God's Justice, Heb. 10.19. He is now at the right Hand of God interceding for us: 1 Tim. 2.5. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Iesus; and remaineth with God as the great Agent of the Saints: Heb. 8.1, 2. We have such an High Priest, who is set on the right Hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens, a Mini∣ster of the Sanctuary, &c. Perfuming their Prayers with the smoke of his Incense; Rev. 8.3, 4. And another Angel came and. stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the Golden Altar which was before the Throne. And the smoke of the Incense, which came with the prayers
of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angel's hand. V. Mark the distinct Titles given to God and the Mediator; Christ is called our Lord, and God our Father: Let us see what these Titles import of Lord and Father. [1.] Christ is represented to us as the Lord, so he was set forth by the Apostles at the first preaching of the Gospel: Acts 10.36. We preach Peace by Christ Iesus, he is Lord of all. 2 Cor. 4.5. We preach Christ Iesus the Lord. Col. 2.6. If ye have received Christ Iesus the Lord, so walk in him. Christ is Lord two ways. (1.) By that right which belongeth to him as Creator, and is common and equal to him with the Father and the Spirit: Surely the Creator of the World, is the Soveraign of it; this Right continueth still, and shall con∣tinue while Man receiveth his being from God by Creation, and the continuance of his be∣ing, by daily preservation and providence. (2.) There is novum jus Dominii & Impe∣rii, a new Right of Empire and Government, which belongeth to him as Redeemer, and this accrueth to him, 1. Partly by the Donation of God; Acts 2.36. Let all the House of Israel know, that this Iesus whom ye have crucified, is made Lord and Christ. This Office of Lord is derivative
and cannot be supream, but subordinate, it is derived from God; All Power is given to me both in Heaven and Earth, Matth. 28.18 and it is reffered to him , Phil. 2.11. That every Tongue should confess, that Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. The suprem right of governing is still in God, and sbjection to him is not vacated, but established, and reserved. 2. It is acquired by his own purchase, Rom. 14, 9. For this end Christ both died, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of Dead and Living. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. Ye are not you own, for ye are bought with a price; therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are God's: He had a full right in us before, but this Lordship and Dominion which the Redeemer is possessed of, is comfortable and beneficial to us, and the end of it is to effect Man's Cure and Re∣covery. We could not by our sin make void God's Right and Title to govern us, but yet it was not comfortable to us, it was but such a Right as a Prince hath to chastise his Rebel∣lious Subjects. We forfeited our Interest in his gracious Protection, therefore was this new Interest set afoot to save and recover Fallen Man; therefore this Lordship is spo∣ken of as Medicinal, and Restorative, to re∣duce Man to the Obedience of God that made him. Acts 10.38. God anointed Iesus
of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and with Power, who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the Devil. It is a Lordship, that conduceth to make Peace be∣tween God and Man, that we may again en∣joy his Favour, and live in his Obedience. Acts 5.31. Him hath God exalted with his right Hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance unto Israel, and remission of sins. This new Lord hath made a new Law of Grace, which is, Lex Remedians, a Remedy propounded for the recovering the lapsed World of Mankind; the great benefit is, Re∣mission of Sins, the great Duty, Repen∣tance. Use 1. To perswade us to submit our selves to this Blessed Lord, by our voluntary con∣sent; Psalm. 45.11. He is thy Lord, worship thou him. There is a passive Subjection, and a voluntary Submission. By a passive Subje∣ction all Creatures are under the Power of the Son of God, and our Redeemer; And a∣mongst the rest the Devils themselves, though grievous Revolters and Rebels, are not ex∣empted; Every Knee is forced to bow to Christ. By voluntary submission, those are Christ's Subjects, and admitted into his King∣dom, who willingly give up themselves to the Redeemer, to be saved upon his own terms: 2 Cor. 8.5. They first gave their own
selves to the Lord. The Devils and wicked Men are his against their wills; bu all Christ's People are his by their own consent. Vse 2. Let us perform the Duties, which this Title calleth for: Our Obedience is the best Testimony of our subjection to him. Many seem to like Christ as a Saviour, but refuse him as a Lord; whereas Christ is not only a Saviour to Bless, but a Lord to Rule and Command. Therefore if we catch at Comforts, and neglect Duty, we o not own Christ's Authority. The Libertine yokeless Spirit is natural to all. Luke 19.14. We will not have this Man to raign over us. Psal. 12.4. With our Tongues we will prevail; our Lips are our own, who is Lord over us? Psal. 2.3. Let us break their Bands assnder, and cast away their Cords from us. Some are so in Opinion, but most in Practice. We would not be uner Command; we love Privileges, but decline Duties. But he is the Head of the Church, who is the Saviour of the Body, Ephes. 5.23. If we would have Privileges by him, we must set our selves to obey his Laws: If thou hast no care to obey him as a Lord, thy esteem of Christ is but imagi∣nary, thy knowledg but partial, thy applica∣tion of him unsound. But we wil own him as Lord: How is that understood? Will you give him an empty Title, or some superficial Complements, and Observances? Luke 6 46
And why call you me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? It is a Mockage. Or, will you please your selves with strict Opini∣ons? Matth. 6.21, 22. For where your Trea∣sure is, there will your Heart be also. The light of the Body is the Eye, if therefore thine Eye be single, thy whole Body shall be full of Light; if therefore the Light that is in thee be Darkness, how great is that Dark∣ness? No, nothing less than a through sub∣jection to his holy Laws, forsaking all other Lords. Isa. 26.13. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but by thee only will we make mention of thy Name. And then a strict Observance, Col. 1.11. strengthened with all might according to his glorious Power, unto all Patience and Long-suffering, with joyfulness. Vse 3. Depend upon Christ for the effects of his Love to you, which are the Privileges of his Kingdom, which are Pardon of Sins. Col 1.13, 14. In whom we have redemption through his Blood, the forgiveness of our Sins, the santification of the Spirit. Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant, that I will make with the House of Israel after those Days, saith the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts. Assistance in carrying on the Spirtual Life, that here surely our Lord will not desert us, but help us in our Oience to him. Finally, everlasting Life.
Heb. 5.9. And being made Perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. When the Devil and his In∣struments are cast into Hell, Christ's faithful Subjects and Servants are advanced into eter∣nal Glory and Blessedness. [2.] God is represented under the Title of a Father; and God even our Father. God is a word of Power, Father expresseth his good Will and Love; God standeth in both Rela∣tions to us, as he did also to Christ. John 20.17. I go to my God, and your God; my Father, and your Father. Both joyned together signifie his Power, and readiness to do Good. He that is our Father is true God also, and he that is true God is also our Father; and therefore we may depend on him. That which we are to open is, the term Father, which speaketh both Comforth, and Duty to us. 1. Comfort. For God's dealing with us will be very Fatherly; as a Father loveth his Children, so will God love his People. 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father to ou, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters▪ saith the Lord. (1.) He will pardon our Sins, and Frailties, and spare us and pity us, notwithstanding our ill deservings. Psal. 103.13. Like as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Mal. 3.17. They shall be
mine, saith the Lord of Hosts, in that Day when I make up my Iewels, and I will spare them, as a Man spareth his won Son that ser∣veth him. Surely this is a Grace we stand in need of, because of our manifold Infirmi∣ties, and daily Failings. (2.) He will give Grace, that we may rve him better. Luke 11.13. If ye then, bg evil, know how to give good gifts to your Chil∣dren: how much more shall your Heavenly Fa∣ther give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Do but cry to him, as an hungry Child to his Father for Bread, and God will not deny this great Gift to you. (3.) God will provide for us, and give such an allowance of Temporal Mercies as are con∣venient. Mark 6.25. Take no thought  your Life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your Body, what ye shall put on. And Ver. 32. For after all these things do the Gentiles seek, for your Heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things. The belief of Adoption and particular Pro∣vidence, kills all distrustful fears and cares at the very Root. (4.) He will protect you and preserve you against Temptations. 1 Pet. 1.3, 5. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy, he hath begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Re∣surrection of Iesus Christ from the dead, &c.
Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. (5.) He will give you the Kingdom. Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fa∣ther's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. 2. On the other side, this Relation bespeak∣th Duty. For if God be a Father, we must carry our selves as Children by our subjection to him; that is, by submission to his Disposing-Will, and obedience to his Governing Will. (1.) By an absolute submission to his Dispo∣sing-Will. For if you would enjoy the Pri∣vileges of God's Family, you must submit to the Discipline of his Family. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9. For whom God loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every Son whom he receiveth. If you endure chastening, God dealeth wit you as with Sons: for what Son is he whom the Father cha∣steneth not? But if you are without chastise∣ment, whereof all are partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons. Furtermore, we have had Fathers of our Flesh, which chastened us, and we gave them Reverence: Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live? In Heaven, where there is no danger of Sin, there is no use of the the Rod; but while we are in the Flesh, we need Correction, and if God should not give it us, we are , not Legitimate, but Degenerate Sons. But in the 10th Verse, the Apostle argueth from God's Paternal Autho∣rity,
For they verily for a few days chastened s after their own pleasure, bt he for our pro∣fit, fit, that we might be partaker of his Holiness. Children, though they take t ill to be bea∣ten by others, yet not by their Parents, who (under God) are the cause of their Be∣ing, and love them, and in correction of them seek their Good: Much more do we owe this respect to our Heavenly Father, who hath a more absolute right over us. Parents may err through want of Wisdom, their Chastisements may be arbitrary, and irregu∣lar, do much in Passion rather than Compas∣sion; but all God's Chastisements come from purest Love, and are reguated by perfect Wisdom, and tend to, and end in Holiness and Happiness. (2.) Obedience to his Governing Will. The great duty of Children is to love, please obey, and honour their Father. Mal. 1.6. A Son ho∣noureth his Father, and a Servant his Master. If I be a Father, where is mine Honour? If I be a Master, where is my Fear? 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. As obedient Children, not fasioning your selves according to the former lusts in your Igno∣rance: But as he which hath clled you is Holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. John 15.8. Herein is my Father Glorified, that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples. There should be a great tenderness upon us to do any thing that may be a breach of
God's Law, or tend to God's Dishonour. What diligent Observers were the Rechabites of the Institutions of their Family? Jer. 35.6. But they said, We will drink no Wine: for Jonadab the Son of Rechab our Father com∣manded us, saying, Ye shall drink no Wine, nei∣ther ye, nor your Sons for ever. VI. Observ. They to whom Christ is a Lord, to them God is a Father: his special Fatherly Love floweth in the Chanel of Re∣demption, and is brought about by the Go∣spel. The Lord from all Eternity, predeter∣minated some to the Adoption of Sons: Eph. 1.5. Having predestinated us to the Adoption of Children by Iesus Christ to himself▪ according to the good pleasure of his Will. But how doth he bring to pass this Decree? By the Re∣demption of Christ. It is no mean Privi∣lege, Christians, that needeth so much ado to establish it. Gal. 4.4, 5. Bu when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a Woman, made under the Law, To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Christ came to be the Foundation of a New Cove∣nant, before we could have this Privilege. Well, but whence ariseth our actual Interest? I answer: By accepting the offer of the Go∣spel, or receiving and owning Christ to the ends for which he came into the World, or
God sent him into the World. John 1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name: That is, by de∣pending on his Merits for our Reconciliation with God, and submitting to his Laws, that he might reduce us to our Primitive Obedi∣ence, and Love to them. Vse. Therefore if you would have a share in this blessed Privilege, 1. You must be Regenerated by his Spirit: for the Relative Change dependeth on the Real; our State is not changed, till our Na∣tures be changed, Iohn 1.12, 13. Being born again of the Will of God. If you would enter into God's Family, and enjoy the Pri∣vileges thereof, you must be changed by the Spirit. 2. There is required on your part, an en∣trance into the Kingdom of the Mediator by Faith and Repentance. Matth. 18.3. Except ye be Converted, and become as little Children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of God. As little Children are newly entred into the World, and beginning their Life, all things are become new to them: So those that have the priveleges of God's Children, must become as little Children, enter into a new State, carry on a new Life and Trade, with which they were not acquainted before. Our first admission is by a consent to the
New Covenant; Gal. 3.26. Ye are all made Children of God by Faih in Christ; depend∣ing on the merit of Christ's Sacrifice, and binding our selves by a solemn Word, to per∣form the Duties required of us, which we renew again in the Lord's Supper. VII. That we most comfortably come to God by Christ for Grace, when we consider our Interest in him, and Relation to him. Their Relation is here intimated, for Jesus Christ is our Lord, and God is our Father; and surely our Lord will not refuse his own Subjects, nor our Father be strange to his own Children. 1. It is certain that among Men, Relation to any Person or thing indeareth them to us, , Men love their own Children; though not so fair and good as others, yet they are their own. And is it not so as to God? See Iohn 13.1. Having loved his own that were in the World, he loved them unto the end. And Iohn 17.6. I have manifested thy Name to the Men which thou gavest me out of the World; thine they were, and thou gavest them me, and they have kept thy Word. 2. Interest giveth us more incouragement. Isa. 63.19. We are thine, thou never bearest rule over them, they were never called by thy Name: That is, we are thy People, thy
Subjects, so called, so accounted. That In∣terest giveth some hope and confidence is evi∣dent, because sometimes the Saints plead the common Relation, that they are the Work∣manship of his hands; Psalm. 119.73. Thy hands have made me, and fasioned me; give me understanding, that I may learn thy Com∣mandments: They will not quit their Interest in God, if they cannot come as his special Ser∣vants, yet as his Creatures, one way ano∣ther, they will intitle themselves to him. Vse. To direct the Servants of God, when they ask any Grace of him, to bring it to his still, Our Lord, and our Father. But how shall they do so, if they have no assurance? I answer: 1. There are some Titles which imply a claim to Benefits, and Priviledges; others that infer an obligation to Duty: these latter may be used without any usurpation, Ioh. 20.28. My Lord, and my God. 2. Resignation of your selves to him, sheweth you are his, and in time you will come to know that he is yours, if you make it good; Psalm. 119.94. I am thine, save me, for I have sought thy Precepts. Resolve to obey him, and serve him, however he deal with you. Choice of God for our Portion, and Christ for our Lord, sheweth you are re∣solved to be his.
3. Speak as the Covenant speaketh that you are under, till your sincerity be more un∣questionable; God offers himself to be our God, and Redeemer, and Father; Christ to be our Lord and Saviour: Isa. 63.16. Doubt∣less thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledg us not, thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer, thy Name is from everlasting. God offered himself to be so, and God is angry for not owning it; Jer. 3.4. Wilt thou no from this time cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my Youth?
SERMON XV. 2 Thess. 2.16, 17. —Which hath loved us, and given us everlast∣ing consolation, and good hope through Grace. VVE come now to the second Branch, The ground of Audience and Success in Prayer, Which hath loved us, and given us everlasting consolation, and good hope through Grace. Where three grounds of Ac∣ceptance are intimated. 1. The first is taken from the Rise and Foundation of all the Love of God, he hath loved us. 2. From the Matter of our Comfort, he hath given us everlasting Consolation. 3. From the Way whereby we receive it, and entertain it, and good hope through Grace. The first relateth to our Redemption by Christ. The second to the New Covenant. The third to the disposition of our Hearts, and how we are affected in the reception of
these thi as will appear more in the ex∣pli Branch. with the Rise and Founda∣race, which we expect and g of od in Prayer, He hath loved us. Doct. That God's Love to Sinners, mani∣fested in our Redemption by Christ, giveth great boldness and encouragement in Prayer. 1. I shall prove this is the Love here in∣tended. 2. That this giveth boldness in Prayer. I. That this is the Love here intended, for these Reasons. 1. This is a visible effect and demonstra∣tion of his Love to us; 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the Love of God to us, in that he layed down his life for us. And I Iohn 4.9, 10. In this was manifested the Love of God towards us, in that he sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live by him: Herein was Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent is Son to be a propitiaion for our sins. From these places I gather, that to found our Confidence and Hope, it was need∣ful that the Love God had to us, sould shew it self by some manifest and real proof. How can we tell how God's Heart standeth affected to mankind but by the Effects? What-ever benevolence or good-will he had towards us, it is not evident to us till it break forth into
some Action, and real performance of some great thing for us. Now this was fully ma∣nifested, in giving his Son to die for a sinful World, that he hath a love for us, and doth really desire our Salvation. There is an hid∣den love of God, which is his eternal Pur∣pose and Decree; and there is an open and declared Love, and that is first and most seen in our Redemption by Christ. In Predestina∣tion his Love was conceived in his Heart; in Redemption it is manifested in the Effects, that was the Rise, this the visible Demonstra∣tion and Sign of it: Now the Apostle would not reason from what was hidden and secret, but from what is open and manifest. 2. This is not only the Demonstration and visible Proof of the reality of his Love, but an ample representation and commendation of the greatness of his Love: Rom. 5.8. But God commendeth his Love to us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us. A thing may be demonstrated to be real, that yet is not commended or set forth as great and glorious: But God would express his Love in such an astonishing Instance, that we might ad∣mire the greatness, as well as believe the reality of it. John 3.16. God so loved the World, &c. that is, so unspeakably, so unconceivably would he express his Love to Mankind, as to send his Son to assume our Nature, and die for our Transgressions: He doth not tell you
how, but leaveth you to admire at it, and rejoice in it. What may we not expect from this Love, this great Love! if God loveth us at such rate, surely he is in good earnest, his Heart is set upon our Salvation, or else he would never have taken this course of giving his only Son to suffer an accursed and shame∣ful Death. Now when the Apostle saith, God hath loved us, he meaneth it of the great instance of his Love, Analogum pe se positum, stat pro suo significatu famosiori: Words not restrained by the Context, must be interpre∣ted in the most famous and known sense. 3. This is the first motive to draw our hearts to him; 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he loved us first: The first motive of our Affection is not his special Electing-Love to us above others, for that we cannot know before we love him; but his common Love and Mercy to Sinners, and that was manifested in Christ's being sent to be a Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World: This is that which is propounded to us to recover and reconcile our alienated and estranged Affecti∣ons to God; 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not im∣puting their Trespasses unto him. This Grace God offereth to us, as well as others; name∣ly, that for Christ's sake he will pardon our Sins, if we will lay down our Weapons, and
enter into his Peace. None are bound to be∣lieve that God specially loveth them, but those that are specially beloved by him; for none are bound to believe a falshood, and a falshood it is to us, till we have the sa∣ving Effects and Benefits. Therefore it is not the special, but the general Love which first draweth in our hearts to God; yea, the Saints after some Testimonies received of God's special Love, still make this to be the great ingaging Motive, Gal. 2.20. I live by Faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Well then, this is most likely to be meant by the Apostle. II. This must needs give great boldness in Prayer. 1. By this we see the God's Love is not a cold ineffectual Love, that consists only in raw wishes, but an operative active Love, that issueth forth to accomplish what he intendeth to us, though by the most costly means, and acted at the dearest rate. God is good, and doth good, Psal. 119.68. He hath a Love to us, and will do good to us. Our Love ma∣ny times goes no further than good Wishes, or good Words, Be warmed, be cloathed, but giveth not those things which are need∣ful to the Body, Iames 2.16. but God rest∣eth not in kind Wishes, but giveth a full de∣monstration of it: If Christ be needful to
he Saints, they shall have him; if God spa∣red not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? 2. It is an act of such infinite Love in God to give us Christ to die for us, such as may raise our wonder and astonishment. God's Love is an unmeasurable Love, nd so in∣largeth our expectations and capacity for the reception of other things. Ephes. 3.18, 19. That ye may comprehend with all Saints to know what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the Love of Christ, which passeth knowledg, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God. There is such an im∣mensity in the Love of Christ, as raiseth our desire and hopes to expect all other things from God, that belong to our Duty and Happiness. If God will do this, what will he not do for those whom he loveth? He that hath given the greatest Gift, will not stick at lesser things; He that hath given a Talent, shall he not give a Penny? He that hath gi∣ven Christ, will he not give pardon to cancel our Debts? Grace to do our Duty? Com∣fort to support us in Afflictions? Supplies to maintain and protect us during our Service? Finally, Will he not reward us when our Work is over? Reconciliation by his Death is propounded as more difficult, than Salva∣tion by his Life: Rom. 5.10. For if when we
were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son; much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life. 3. It is a Gift in order to other things, and therefore he will compleat that Gift. Christ came to purchase all manner of Blessings for us, the Favour of God, The ruition of God, the everlasting Fruition of God in Glo∣ry and all things by the way ncsary thereunto. There are two Argum im∣plied. (1.) That God may now do us good without any impeachment of his Honour: His Justice and Holiness is sufficiently demon∣strated, the Authority of his Law, and Truth of his Threatnings kept up. Rom. 3.25, 26. Whom God hath set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righ∣teousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this time his Righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believeth in Iesus. (2.) That after God by an antecedent bounty hath layed the Foundation so broad and deep, the consequent bounty, which is as the upper Building, for which this Foun∣dation was intended, will be laid on also. It was said of the foolish Builder, That he be∣gan and was not able to finish: Surely the wise God, if we be qualified, and put no
impediment on our part, will finish what he hath begun. 4. Because the giving of Christ sheweth how freely God will give all things to us, he gave Christ unasked, unsought to; in this instance we see his free and undeserved love: This was love to Rebels and Enemies, when the World had corrupted their way, and cast off God, then Christ died for us; a consi∣deration which serveth to support our Confi∣dence, notwithstanding the sense of our un∣worthiness. In the Covenant of Grace, great and wonderful Mercies are given out to a world of Sinners, and to our selves a∣mong the rest; we see how loth God is Sinners should perish. That sins may be par∣doned, if we will accept God's terms, that hath given such general testimony of his Love to Mankind, his Love to miserable sinners; That is willing they should be reconciled, that there is not so much difference between us and others, as between him and all. Now this incourageth us to fulfil the Conditions of the Gospel, notwithstanding our unworthi∣ness of the Privileges thereof. 1. Vse is Caution. Let us not have wrong thoughts of God, when we come to him. We think of God the Father as one that is all Wrath and Justice, and unwilling to be reconciled to Man, or brought to it with
much difficulty. No: Christ came on pur∣pose to show the Love and Loveliness of God to us; for our Redemption came first out of the Bosom of God; and Christ's mission into the World, and dying for Sinners was the fruit of his Love, and mainly for this end to give us a full Demonstration of the Love of God, and his pity to the lost World of Sinners, that when our Guilt had made him frightful to us, we might not fly from him as a Condemning God; but love Him, and serve Him, and pray to Him, as one willing to be Reconciled to us; therefore take heed what Picture of God you draw in your Minds: Light and heat are not more abun∣dant in the Sun, than Love is in God. 2. Vse of Direction to us, How to conceive of God in Prayer, as one that loveth us. We have gained a great point, when we are peuaded of this, and can come with this thought into his Presence; that I am praying to a God that loveth me, and will do me good. You will say, If I could come to that, I have gained a great point indeed: But what hindreth? There is, I confess, a two-fold Love; his General Love, and his Special Love. His General Love, which intendeth Benefits to us; and his Special Love, which hath already put us in possession of them. His General Love to the lost World, and his Love and Mercy to us in particular, putting
us in possession of the saving Benefits purcha∣sed and intended. (1.) The General Love to the lost World, that is a great thing the Devil seeketh to hide and obscure, the wonderful Love of God re∣vealed in our Redeemer, that we may still fly from God, as more willing to Punish than to Save; and many poor dark Creatures gra∣tifie his design. We are still seeking signs and tokens of God's Love, something to warrant us to come to God by Christ, and to persuade us that we shall be welcome if we do so; and because we cannot find any thing in our selves that he will admit us, we are troubled. But all this while we are but seeking the Sun with a Candle. What greater evidence of God's willingness to receive you, than the Death of Christ, than the Institutions of the Gospel? This is above all Evidences, that he sent his Son to die for us. This is like the Iews, who, when they had seen many Won∣ders wrought by Christ, would still have a new Sign; the greatest Sign is given already, Christ dying for a sinful World. Men and Angels cannot find out a Sign, Pledg, and Confirmation of the Love of God above that: Yet, if that be not enough, we have another Sign, the Promises, and Invitations of the Gospel, which show his willingness to wel∣come Sinners. Salvation is offered, but not to named, but described Persons. There∣fore
if we are willing to come under these hopes upon God's Terms, this may satisfy our scrupulous Minds, there is no Bar put to us, but what we put to our selves by our re∣fusing the Grace as God offereth it. Cer∣tainly, God's Love and Mercy to lost Man∣kind is our first motive, and his willingness to impart good things to them upon his own Terms, and surely he is well pleased with our acceptance of them. (2.) There is Special Love, where this Grace is applied to us. Ephes. 2.4, 5. But God who is rich in mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he loved us, hath quickned us, when we were dead in Trespasses and Sins. He did not begin to love us when we were conver∣ted, that is of a more ancient and eternal Rise, but when he did begin to apply his Love to us; and this is no ordinary, but great Love, when God was angry with us, and pronoun∣ced Wrath on us in the Sentence of the Law, and appeared as an Enemy in the course of his Providence, and the apprehensions of our guilty Fears, then to be Reconciled; and surely this is a great advantage to draw nigh to God as a Reconciled Father. This is the Object of our everlasting Love and Joy, Rom. 5.11. And not only so, but we also joy in God, through our Lord Iesus Christ, by whom we have now received the Atonement: And this is a prop of confidence in Prayer. Could
we once believe that he dearly loves us, and is reconciled to us, and taketh us for his Chil∣dren, that he delighteth in our Prosperity; Oh how chearfully could we come into his Pre∣sence! John 16.27. The Father himself loveth you, because you have loved me, and believe that I came out from God. They have not only his Intercession, but the Father's especial Love, which is the ground and hope of Audience. Now this particular Interest dependeth on something wrought in our Souls by the holy Spirit; our Lord mentioneth two things, their Faith in Christ, and Love to God. (1.) Faith in Christ, or a thankful acceptance of him, as our Lord and Saviour, therefore called recei∣ving Christ, and entitleth us to the Privileges of Christ's Children. John 2.12. To as ma∣ny as received him, to them gave he liberty to become the Children of God, even to as many as believe in his Name. (2.) Love to God. John 14.21. He that hath my Commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me: and be that loveth me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and manifest my self to him. And Vers. 23. If any Man love me, he will keep my Words: and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. We cannot perceive our In∣terest in the special Love of God, but by our Sincerity, Faith in Christ, and Love to God. When we see God's Love taken in our Hearts,
we may know that he loveth us, especially the latter; for by the latter, the former is ma∣nifested also. Gal. 5.6. Faith worketh by Love. Now the evidences of sincere Love to God, are seeking after God, and delighting in him; if you cannot find the latter, the former will evidence it to you. Prov. 8.17. I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me.. The desiderium unionis, the desi∣ring seeking Love, if it be serious and ear∣nest, it is sincere, though you find not such delightful apprehensions of his Grace to you. Clear that once, and when you come to Pray∣er, you may know God loveth you; and the dearest Friend we have in the World, hath not the thousandth part so much as he; yea, the highest Angel doth not love God so much as he loveth the lowest Saint. God loveth like himself, becoming the Greatness and In∣finiteness of his own Beeing, and with this persuasion pray to him. Secondly, The second ground of Audience is from the fruit of his Love, as demonstrated in the New Covenant, wherein we have the matter of everlasting Consolation. Surely this Clause respects not the effect and sense in our own Hearts, but respects the Matter and Object of our Comfort; for he prayeth for the Application of it afterwards: Comfort your Hearts, &c. And besides, nothing is more fleeting, and oftner interrupted, than our
Comfort in this Life: It would contradict plain sense to call that Comfort which Chri∣stians feel, and actually enjoy everlasting Comfort. Therefore I understand it of the Matter, and observe this Doctrine, That God hath given all true Believers solid ground of perpetual and endless Comfort. I will prove it by three Arguments. [1.] The Comforts propounded are of an everlasting Tendency and Benefit, Pardon and Life, to free us from everlasting Death, and to bring us into the possession of everlast∣ing Happiness, when our Souls and Bodies shall be for ever glorified in Heaven. Now the Consolation grounded on the promise of Eternal Life, whatever it be in our feeling, is in its causes and foundation Eternal. The Scripture often insists upon this: 1 John 2. 25. And this is the Promise that he hath pro∣mised us, even Eternal Life. Heb. 5.9. And being made Perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him. We have by Christ deliverance from Sin, and and all the Consequents of it, not only for a time, but for ever: Eternal Peace and Fe∣licity is our Portion. So it is said, Psal. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken for an Heri∣tage for ever; for they are the rejoycing of my Heart. It is not an Heritage to lean upon for a while, as all our Worldly Comforts are,
but for ever: So Psal. 73.26. God is my Por∣tion for ever: That is, when all other things fail, have spent their allowance, can afford us no more relief; then we begin to enjoy our true and proper Portion. It were endless to heap up places. Man for his Sin was cast out of Paradise: but surely in the other World, there is no change of Estate; for Men are past their Trial, and must be what they are for ever. If you could imagin (as some have had the large charity to conceit it) that the condition of the Wicked should be changed, yet there is no Reason at all why the state of the Godly should be chan∣ged, who have past the Pikes, and are tri∣umphing with God, that they should ever lose that Estate again. [2.] They depend on everlasting Founda∣tions, such as are these: 1. The everlasting Love of God. Psal. 103.17. The Mercy of the Lord is from ever∣lasting to everlasting, on them that fear him. Not only from the beginning of the World to the end of the World, but from Eternity to Eternity. It was an ordinary Form of praising God in the Old Testament, for his Mercy endureth for ever. 2. The everlasting Merit of Christ, which never loseth its force and effect. Heb. 9.12. He hath obtained eternal Redemption for us. Not that Christ is always propitiating: No, the
Work was performed in a short time, but the Virtue of it is of everlasting continu∣ance. 3. There is an eternal and unchangeable Co∣venant. Heb. 13.20. Through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant. Though the Covenant made with Israel was abolished, yet this is everlasting, and continueth for ever, and shall never be altered; because it was able to reach the end for which it was appointed, which is the eternal Salvation of Man: That was a Temporary Covenant, this Eternal. Now because this is the main Circumstance, and the next ground of our eternal Consola∣tion, the Covenant of Life and Peace that God hath made with us in Christ; I shall prove the eternal truth, and immutable con∣stancy of this Covenant. That a Promise be immutable, certain, and firm, three things are required. 1. That it be seriously and heartily made, with a purpose to perform it. 2. That he that hath promised, continue in his purpose without change of Mind. 3. That it be in the power of him that promiseth, to perform what he hath promi∣sed. Now of all these things there can be no doubt. 1. God meaneth as he speaketh, when he promiseth to give eternal Life to those that believe and obey the Gospel. There is no
question, but he is so minded, when he sent the Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven to assure us of it by his Doctrine, to die the Death to purchase it for us, and afterward to rise again and enter into that Happiness that he spake of; and assoon as he was ascended up on High, gave gifts to Men to give notice of this blessed Estate to be had upon the Terms of his New Covenant, his Spirit attesting the truth of it by divers Signs and Wonders; partly to alarm the drowzy World to regard it, and assure the incredulous World that it is no Fable; and because they live not for ever, did inspire those holy Men before they went out of the Body, to write a Book of thi Salvation, for the use of the World in all Ages. To think that God is not serious in all this; yea, to make him a Lyar indeed; yea, to establish a Falshood with the greatest so∣lemnity and demonstration, that can be of∣fered to Mankind; yea, to make a Lye ne∣cessary not only to the Governing, but San∣ctifying of the World: Surely then, there is a truth in that great Promise, which he hath promised us, even Eternal Life. 2. That God doth continue in his Purpose without change of Mind, there is no doubt of it, if we consider his Eternal, and Un∣changeable Nature. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. James 1.17. With him is no va∣riableness, neither shadow of turning. And
what should alter his Purpose? Doth he meet with any thing that he foresaw not, or knew not before? No: This is a weakness incident to Man: God doth never repent and call back his Grant, which he hath by this con∣descending Act of Grace ensured to the Heirs of Promise. 1 Sam. 15.29. The strength of Israel will not Lye, nor Repent: for he is not as Man, that he should Repent. Psal. 110.4. I have Sworn, and will not Repent; thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Christ is by Oath instated in full power of entertaining and blessing his Faithful Ser∣vants, which shall never be retracted and reversed. To take off all doubt, he hath given double Assurance, his Word, and his Oath. Heb. 6.17, 18. God being willing more abundantly to shew unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it with an Oath; That by two Immutable things, wherein it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope that it is set before us. That we might know that the New Covenant is Unchangeable and Irrevokable, and so our Comfort be the more strong, certain, and stable, God was pleased to give sincere Be∣lievers this double Assurance, by his Word, and Oath, having regard to our Infirmity, and those many Doubts, wherewith we are haun∣ted about the World to come. God hath
ever bin tender of his Word; above all that is famed, or believed of him, this is most con∣spicuous, Psal. 138.2. Thou hast magnified thy Word above all thy Name. And Matth. 24.35. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away; And an Oath is ; and the Apostle tells us, it is . It is interposed usually in∣deed in a doubtful Matter. But though here it needed not, God would shew his extraor∣dinary care for our Salvation: We see his good Will in the Promise, his solicitude in the Oath. In short, God woud never be so fast bound, but that he doth and will still con¦tinue his purpose. 3. That he is able to perform it: Faith looks to that also; for this was the ground and prop of Abraham's Faith; Rom. 4.21. Being fully persuaded, that what God had pro∣mised, he was able to perform: So must all Abraham's Children, that would give glory to God in believing. The Way of Salvation is so rare and mysterious, and so many diffi∣culties object themselves to our view, that we are soon puddered, unless we reflect upon the Power of God. God is able to find out a way, whereby Sinners may be reconciled, our corrupt Hearts sanctified, and our Sins subdued by his Spirit, whereby his Interest in us may be preserved against the Assaults and Temptations of the Devil, World and Flesh;
he is able to receive our Souls to himself after they flit out of the Body: And finally, He is able to raise our vile Bodies, after they are eaten out by Worms, and turned into Dust; Phil. 3.21. Who shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be like unto his own glorious Body; according to the working, whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself. Matters of Faith being wholly or mainly future, or to come, and difficult to be performed. And in the mean time, we being exercise with so many Trials, an express belief of God's Power is necessary to convert such an obstinate Creature as Man is: to sanctify such a sinful Creature, to preserve us in the midst of Temptations, to raise the Dead, are no slight things. [3.] It is called everlasting Consolation, be∣cause it is sufficient to do its Work: That is to say, (1.) To reduce us from temporal and flesh∣pleasing Vanities. Alas! the pleasures of Sin are but for a season, not worthy to be com∣pared to the Recompence of Reward, which Christ hath promised, Heb. 11.25, 26. Ghu∣sing rather to suffer affliction w the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures f sin for a season: Esteming the reproach of Chst greter Riches than the Treasures of Egypt;  had respect to the recompence of Reward. What∣ever is temporal, we may soon see the end of
it: All carnal Injoyments, like Flowers, wi∣ther while we smell on them; and the most shining Glory in the World is soon burnt to a Snuff: But Eternal Life, and Eternal Glo∣ry, and Eternal Pleasure, is secured to us by Christ's Promise: All the Delights in the World are but a May-game to these Eternal Pleasures, which we shall have at God's right hand for evermore. Psal. 16.11. Thou wilt shew me the Path of Life; in thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right Hand there are plea∣sures for evermore. Now will you sell your birth-right for one morsel of Meat? part with your Eternal Inheritance for a little car∣nal Satisfaction? We have Souls that will no perish; and shall we spend our whole time in seeking after things that perish in the u∣sing? Temporal things carry no proportion with an immortal Spirit. We shall live for ever, we should look after things that will abide for ever: 1 John 2.17. The World passeth away, and the Lust thereof; but he that doth the Will of God, abideth for ever. Otherwise what will you do when the Soul shall be turned out of Doors? To what Regions must the poor shiftless harbourless Soul be-take it self? Surely then this Consolation, though we feel it not always, and it be frequently interrupted, may be well clled Eternal Con∣solation; because it affordeth Argument enough to check our worldly and sensual Inclin∣tions▪
and to call us off from Time to Eter∣nity. (2.) To make us stedfast in the Truth, and chearful under Sufferings, fo he saith here, The Lord that hath given us everlasting Consolation, comfort your hearts and establish you. The great use of everlasting Consola∣tion, is to comfort and stablish us in a suffer∣ing Condition. The loss of Temporal Com∣forts is grievous; but it is recompeced with the promise of eternal Joys, revealed in the Gospel. Heb. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoil∣ing of your goods, knowing in your selves, that in Heaven ye have a better and an endu∣ing substance; cast not away theefore your Confidence, which hath great recompence of Re∣ward. And all our Pains and Afflictions are sweetned, so far as to keep us from fainting. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Our light Afflicion which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things that are seen, are temporal; but the things that are not seen, are eternal. The end of God's Covenant and Promises, is o give us strong Consolation in the midst of Temptati∣ons, Persecutions, and Trials. Woldly Joys appear and vanish in a moment, every blast of Temptation scattereth them: It is eternal Blessedness which is the cause of solid Com∣fort
in all Dangers, Storms, and Tempests: hither we retreat as to our Sanctuary, and find relief. In the World all is unstable and uncertain; but the Covenant provideth for us eternal Joy and Bliss. (3.) The third Effect, which it is to pro∣duce in us, is an increase of Holiness, to sta∣blish us in every good Word, that is not on∣ly in sound Doctrine, but in every good Work, in Holiness of Life, our Endeavours should answer our Motives and Ends; Abound in the Work of the Lord, forasmuch as your Labour is not in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58. Diligence should not be grievous to us, when there is everlasting Consolation at the back of it; surely this should put life into all our En∣deavours. Should we trifle away that time which we are to improve for Eternity? John 6.27. Labour not for the Meat that pe∣rishes, but for that which is to endure to everlasting Life. Faith in Christ joined with solid God∣liness, will lead you to eternal Life. There should be in the Saints an eternal Principle, which is the Grace of the Holy Spirit; and an eternal End, which is the pleasing, glori∣fying, and enjoying of God; and an eternal Rule, which is the Will of God: and they will have eternal Consolation and Re∣ward.
Vse of Exhortation. 1. Look upon the New Covenant as it is in it self, as containing the only solid Grounds of rejoicing; the Blessings of it are real, certain, stable, and sutable to the great ne∣cessities of Mankind. The Blessings are Par∣don and Life, they are real, no Fancies or Chimera's. The Gospel is not a Dream, or well devised Fable; but the greatest reality in the World, it speaketh much for it self, commending it self to the Conscience by ra∣tional Evidence; 2 Cor. 4.2. By manifesta∣tion of the Truth, commending or selves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God: But more by the Authority of the Son of God, who came from Heaven to shew us the way thither. And if it had not been so, he would have told us, John 14.2. For he used great plainness of Speech and Fidelity; and is more fully ratified by the Spirit; Iohn 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. He will reprove the World of Sin, of Rigteousness, and of Iudgment. They are stable and unchangeable, as appeareth by the Covenant Form, in which the Coveyance is so strong and firm, as will make a Plea in Law. 2 Sam. 23.5. He hath made an Everlasting Co∣venant with me, ordered in all things, and sure, in which is all my hope and desire. And sui∣table to many necessities. Here is a Cure for our great Sore by Pardon, and satisfaction to our Desires by a fit Happiness.
2. Let it be so to you, do you fulfil the Duties required, if there be any room for doubting, it must be of your Qualification; therefore that must be made more explicit. 1 John 3.19. Hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. We miss much of this everlasting Consolation; because we are upon such loose terms with God; never hope to have peace upon cheaper terms, than clear and undoubted Holiness. You are not to model God's Covenant, and new make it, and bring it down to your hu∣mour and liking: No, the Covenant is unal∣terable and eternal: So the Duties as well as the Priviledges. You must take it as you find it, and chuse the things that please God. Isa. 56.4. There is your claim, follow that close, —henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the Righteous Iudg, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his appearing. 3. Carry it so as those to whom God hath given grounds of everlasting Consolation. We are up when we have the World with us, but dead in the Nest when our temporal De∣pendencies are broken. The Covenant is the same still, and there should be your Hope and your Joy; 2 Cor. 1.20. All the Promises of God in him, are Yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us. 2 Sam. 23.5. Although my House be not so with God, yet he hath made
with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things, and sure: for this is all my Salvation, and all my desire, although he mae it not to grow. Heaven is where it was, the World cannot make void your Interest in it: Therefore you should rejoice in the Lord al∣ways. Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again, I say, rejoice.
SERMON XVI. 2 Thess. 2.16. —And good hope through Grace. WE now come to the third ground of Audience and Acceptance; he hath given us good hope through Grace. This shew∣eth how we entertain the everlasting Conso∣lation offered in the Gospel, with good Hope, and this wrought in us by God. Here is, 1. The Gift, good Hope. 2. The moving Cause, through Grace. Doct. That it is a great advantage, when we pray for Consolation and Confirmation in Holiness, to consider that God hath already given us the Hope of Eternal Life. Here I shall, 1. Open the Gift. 2. Shew what incouragement this is in Prayer. In the opening the Gift, let me inquire.
1. What is this good Hope mentioned, and what are the Properties of it? 2. That this is the free Gift of God? 1. What is this good Hope? Hope is some∣times put for the Object, or Thing hoped for. As Prov. 13.12. Hope deferred, maketh the Heart sad. That is, the delay of the good expected is very tedious, and trouble∣some to us. So in Christian Hope, Col. 1.5. For the Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven. Where Hope is put for the Object of it, the blessed and glorious Estate, which is reserved for us hereafter. The great objects of Hope, which yet do not exclude intervening Bles∣sings, are these: (1.) The coming of Christ to or Comfort. Tit. 2.13. Looking for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Sa∣viour Iesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loins of your Minds, and be sober, and hope to the end; for the Grace that is to be rought unto you at the Revelation of Iesus Christ. Hope is there described by its singular Object, the coming of Christ, called there the Revela∣tion of Christ. Christ is now under a Vail, his Bodily Presence being removed, and his Spiritual Glory seen, but darkly, as in a Glass; but then he shall appear in Person, and in his Glory. When Christ withdrew out of sight, our Comfort seemed o be gone with him; but he will come agin; he is
not gone in anger, but about Business, to set all things at rights against the day of solemn Espousals; and then he cometh to possess what he hath purchased, and to carry the Church into the everlasting place of her Abode: This is the great Hope of Christans, and a blessed and good Hope it is indeed. (2.) The Resurrection of the Dead. Acts 2.36. My flesh shall rest in Hope. Acts 24.15. I have hope towards God, tha there shall be a Resurrection both of the Iust and Vnjust. Acts 26.6, 7, 8. Now I stand judged for the hope of the Promise made unto the Fathers, unto which Promise our twelve Tries instantly ser∣ving God day and night, hope to come. Why should it be thought an incredible thing with you that God should raise the Dead? Death seem∣eth to make void all the Promises at once, but there is an estate after Death, the Dead shall rise; and to Men bred up in the Bosom of the Church, this should not seem incre∣dible: It is not incredible in it self, consider∣ing the Justice and Power of God. But why to you, Since all Religion tendeth to it? But it is a matter of undoubted certainty all Believers do look for, long for, and prepare for this Blessedness, otherwise why should they trouble themselves about Religion, which abridgeth us of present Delights, and expo∣seth us to great Difficulties and Sufferings: But there is another Life after this, where all
is happy and joyful; and therefore we serve God instantly day and night. (3.) The Vision of God, I Iohn 3.2. that at length we shall be admitted into his blessed Presence, and see him as he is, and be made like him both for Holiness and Happiness. (4.) Our heavenly Inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.4. An inheritance incorruptible, and unde∣filed, that fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for us. Called Eternal Life, Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal Life, which God, that cannot lie, pro∣mised us. The Glory of God, Rom. 5.2. We rejoyce in hope of the Glory of God. Well then, all this is a good Hope, if there be the things hoped for: for the object of our Hope is the chiefest Good, the eternal Vision and Fruition of God; this is that we must aim at as our Happiness. Psal. 17.15. As for me, I shall behold thy Face in Righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy Likeness; we must seek after it, and make it our con∣stant Work. Heb. 11.6. God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; this is that we must take hold of, as having a right and title to it. Heb. 6.18. Who have fled for re∣fuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before us. We challenge it by the Law of Grace, as we ful∣fil the Conditions. Our Hold is more strong, Right more evident; as we get greater mea∣sures of the First-fruits, we gain more secu∣rity and confidence in the spiritual Conflict.
Ver. 19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul sure and stedfast. By good Works we enter upon the possession of it, in part, as we get the First-fruits of the Spirit. Rom. 8.23. We our selves also, which have the First∣fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the redemption of our Body. 2 Cor. 5.5. Now he that hath wrought us for the self-same thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit. In whole, when we come to Heaven, for then we enter into our Master's Joy, Matth. 25.21. when we die, our Souls enter into that blessed place, where the Spirits of just Men are made perfect; not only preserved in manu Dei, but admitted in conspectum Dei. 1 Pet 1.9. Receiving the end of your Faith, the salvation of your Souls: But after the Resurrection and general Judg∣ment, John 14.3. I will come again, and re∣ceive you to my self; that where I am, there ye may be also. Then in Body and Soul, we en∣ter into our everlasting Mansions. 2. Sometimes Hope is put for the reasons and causes of Hoping; and so he that giveth me solid reasons of Hoping, giveth me good Hope. In this sense it is taken, Heb. 7.19. The Law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did: whereby we draw nigh to God. By the better Hope, is meant the sure and comfortable Promises of the Gospel,
depending meerly on the Grace of God, which gives Hope to lost Sinners, of reco∣vering Commerce and Communion with God: That is, solid grounds upon which they may expect the pardon of their Sins, and Eternal Life. In this sense good Hope is Hope well warranted, the solid Reasons are contained in the Word of God. Rom. 15.4. Whatsoever things were written afore-time, were written for our Learning, that we through patience and com∣fort of the Scriptures might have Hope. The great end of the Scriptures, is, that we might have a sure Hope in God: Quod agit tota Scriptura ut credamus in Deum. The busi∣ness of the Scripture is to bring us to believe in God, and wait upon him for eternal Salva∣tion: There the rule of Commerce between God and us is stated, whatever is promised is sure. There may be reason to expect some things from God's merciful Nature, though we have no Promise about them, but the sure and certain Hope is grounded on the Promise, that is, an express ground of Con∣fidence and Hope, that will never leave us a∣shamed: it is well grounded Hope, therefore good Hope built on the Promise, and Word of the Eternal God. 3. By the act or grace of Hope it self, this may be called Good; either in it self, or with respect to the Degree. (1.) In it self: It is good that a Man should
both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, Lam. 3.26. Bonum is either Hone∣stum, Iucundum, or Vtile, it is good in all regards: It is our duty to rest assured in God's Promise. It is pleasant to anticipate, and forecast a Blessing to come. Surely, it is delightful to live in the fore-sight of endless Glory: It is profitable to support our Hearts under present Difficulties and Troubles, and the uncertainties of the present Life. (2.) In respect of the Degree and Mea∣sure of it; that is good Hope, which is most able to do its Office, when it is lively Hope. 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy hath begotten us again to a live∣ly Hope. Such as doth most support and quicken us: The more serious and earnest our reflections are upon Eternal Life, the better is the Hope. Heb. 6.12. Shew the same dili∣gence to the full assurance of Hope unto the end. We should still keep up this sure and desi∣rous Expectation. Briefly, Hope the Grace is two-fold. 1. There is an Hope, which is the im∣mediate effect of Regeneration, and is a con∣stitutive part of the New Creature. Of that the Apostle speaketh, 1 Pet. 1.3. Begotten to a lively Hope. This meerly floweth from our acceptance of the New Covenant, and dependeth upon the conditional offer of Eter∣nal
Life, we take it for our Happiness, re∣solving to seek it in God's Way; without this a Man cannot be a Christian, till he hope for Eternal Life to be given him upon Christ's Terms. 2. There is an Hope, which is the fruit of Experience, and belongeth to the season∣ed and tried Christian, who hath approved his own fidelity to God, and hath much trial of God's Fidelity and Faithfulness to him: Of this it is said, Rom. 5.4. that Experience worketh Hope. It differeth from the for∣mer, because it produceth not only a con∣ditional Certainty; but an actual confidence of our own Salvation. The former is neces∣sary, for we live and act by it; the other is very comfortable, for it facilitateth all our Acts, when we know there is reserved for us a Crown of Life, which the Righteous Judg will give in that Day, and do not only be∣lieve a Resurrection both of the Just and Unjust, but our own Resurrection unto Eter∣nal Life. But now for the Effects, I shall instance in two, which suit with the Prayer in the Text, Consolation in Troubles, and Confirmation in Holiness. 1. Support in Troubles, when we are cer∣tainly persuaded of an happy issue, we are the better kept from fainting: Phil. 1.19. I
know that this shall turn to my Salvation, &c. He speaketh it of his Troubles, and the Ma∣chinations of his Adversaries; and this Know∣ledg he calleth in the 20th Verse, his earnest Expectation and his Hope. The bitterest Cross is sweetned by Hope, this carried him through his Sufferings, not only with Patience, but Comfort. As Men in a storm, when they see Land, take courage; it is but enduring a lit∣tle more Tempest, and they shall be safe on Shore. To a hoping Christian, his whole Life is a rough Voyage, but a short one. II. To encourage us in working; it is Hope sets the whole Wōrld a-work. 1 Cor. 9.10. That he that ploweth, should plow in hope; and that he that thresheth in hope, should be partake of his Hope. Certainly it is Hope sets the Christian a-work; Acts 26.7. Vnto which Promise our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and night, hope to come. Why are God's Children so hard at work for God? but ou of love to him, and hope to enjoy him for ever? Oh! let us continually be serving God; let us live always either for Heaven, as seeking it, or upon Heaven, as solacing our selves with the Hopes of it, do what ever we do in order to eternal Life, and not be taken up with Trifles, and this will put Life into our Endeavours; it is for a glorious and bles∣sed Estate, on which we employ all this labour.
2. That this is the free Gift of God; I must prove two things. 1. That good Hope is his Gift, he doth not only give us Objective Grace; this is the free and undeserved Mercy of the Gospel, or a sufficient Warrant to hope for it, which are his gracious Promises: But Subjective Grace, the Hope by which we expect this Blessed∣ness, is freely wrought in us by his Holy Spirit, which is a farther confirmation of his love to us; That he hath not only given us the Blessedness  we hope for, but the very Hope it self. The Spirit's Work is neces∣sary, (1.) By way of Illumination▪ to open the eyes of our minds, that we may see what is the hope of his Calling, Ephes. 1.18. Alas! otherwise our sight cannot pierce so far, nor discern any reality in a happiness that lieth in an unseen and an unknown World, so as to venture and forsake all that we see and love for a God and a Glory that we never saw. Nature, if it be not blind in discerning the Duty of Man, yet it is pur-blind▪ it cannot foresee the happiness of Man, which lieth a∣far off from us; 2 Pet. 1.9. But he that lack∣eth these things is blind, and cannot see afar off: A short-sighted Man cannot see things at a distance from him, not from any defect in the Object, but through the fault in his Eyes; so the natural Man, blinded by Delusions,
doth either not believe, or forget the World to come: though these things be set before him in the Promises of the Gospel, they leave no impression upon his heart. There needeth a very quick sight to be able to look from Earth to Heaven; therefore till we are en∣lightned by the Spirit, we can have no saving knowledg of those things which pertain to the Kingdom of God, or eternal Life. (2.) By way of Inclination, the Spirit doth not only open the Eyes of our Mind, but he doth also incline our hearts to mind and seek after these things as our Portion and Happiness. Acts 16.14. God opened the Heart of Lydia. There is an opening of our Mind, and an opening of our Hearts necessary; for the Wisdom of the Flesh is kneaded into our Natures, and we are prepossessed and en∣tangled with divers foolish and hurtful Lusts. Though we know these things, we regard them not, and therefore the Work of the Spi∣rit is necessary to incline us earnestly to look and long, and patiently to wait for Blessed∣ness to come; Gal. 5.5. For we through the Spirit wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith. Alas! otherwise we should never re∣gard these things, certainly we would not wait for them with so much patience and self-denial, and solace our hearts with these Hopes in the midst of all our Labours, Ad∣versities, and Troubles, when all is in Expe∣ctation,
and so little in Possession. (3.) By way of Excitation, he doth quick∣en us, and comfort us, by raising our Thoughts, Desires, and Endeavours after the promised Glory and Blessedness; Rom. 15.13. Now the God of Hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in Hope through the Power of the Holy Ghost. It is by his lively Impressions, that this Grace is acted in us with any profit; our Hope is acted and increased by his Power, blessing the Promises of the Gospel to this end. 2. That it is his free Gift. That which mov∣eth God to give us this Hope, is his meer Love and Grace. 1. The Matter of Hope is God's free un∣deserved Mercy: The Mercy of God is every where made the great invitation of Hope to the fallen Creature. Psal. 130.7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord is Mercy and plenteous Redemption. Without this there were no Hope for us, and therefore the Saints make this their Anchor-hold. Psal. 13.5. I have trusted in thy Mercy, therefore my Soul shall rejoice in thy Salvation. Let others trust in what they will, Lord, I will trust in thy Mercy. This is that which maketh Hope lift up the Head, Iude 21. —Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Iesus Christ unto eternal Life: There is our best and strongest Plea. But,
2. For the Grace of Hope, it is the mere Fruit of the Lord's Mercy; such are our un∣deservings and ill-deservings, that nothing else could incline him to give us this Hope. He was not induced by any Merits of ours, which are none; nor hindred by any deme∣rits or sins of ours, which were many and great; only his Grace moved him to bring us under the hopes of the Gospel, that we might set our selves with longing and certain expectation in the way of Holiness, to seek after the eternal enjoyment of himself: 1 Pet. 1.3. Of his abundant Mercy he hath be∣gotten us to a lively Hope. There were so ma∣ny Provocations on our part, such great pri∣vileges to be injoyed, that nothing but abun∣dant Mercy could give us this Hope. II. What incouragement is this in Prayer, if God hath given us good Hope through Grace. 1. God would not invite and raise an Hope to disappoint it. For surely the Lord will not deceive his Creature, that dependeth up∣on his Word; and therefore we are allowed to challenge him, Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy Word unto thy Servant, on which thou hast caused me to hope. The words contain a dou∣ble Argument; the Promise was of God's making, and the Hope of his operation, it is thy Word, and thou hast caused me to hope,
his Grant in the New Covenant, and his In∣fluence by the Spirit; we have a strong Tie upon him, as he giveth us the Promise, which is a ground of Hope; surely we may put his Bonds in suit, Chirographa tua tibi injiciebat, Domine; but when his Spirit hath caused us to hope, it is not with a purpose to defeat it; and therefore we may expect necessary Bles∣sings, such as are support and establishment in Holiness. Sometimes God promiseth, that we may believe, and then promiseth again because we do believe, and trust in him; Isa. 26.3. Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. Actual Hope and Trust giveth a fresh Claim, or new Interest; for God will not fail a trusting Soul, as a generous Man will not fail his Friend if he rely on him. We count this to be the strongest Bond we can lay upon another, to be mindful of us, and faithful to us, I wholy trust upon you. Now much more will God do so, when he hath sent his Work before him, he will bring this Reward with him, when he hath invited Hope by his Promise, and caused Hope by his Spirit, he will give the Mercy you hope for, for he hath prepared you for it by his preventing Grace. I remember the Prophet telleth God, Jer. 20.7. O Lord! thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; words that seem to intrench upon the Honour of God. Some interpret
them, as if they were spoken by the Prophet in a Passion; others soften them by another rendring, Thou hast persuaded me, and I was persuaded, that is, to undertake the Prophetical Office, to which I was nothing forward of my self, and have found it more troublesome than I expected. But why may not the words be spoken as a supposition, If I be deceived, thou hast deceived me? God had told him, that he would make him as a Brazen Wall, and had raised a Faith and Hope in him, that he would bear him out in his Work, and so it signifies no more, but I cannot be deceived. When you have God's Word, and a well-grounded Hope, it is not a foolish Imagination or vain Expe∣ctation. God will not deceive a poor Crea∣ture that trusts in him for necessary things, such as Perseverance and Establishment in Holiness. 2. He that giveth us Hope, will give us all things necessary to the thing hoped for ▪ therefore when God hath called us to the Hope of Eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, we may with the more confidence pray for ne∣cessary support and establishmet in the way. This Argument seemeth to be urged by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace, who called you to his Heavenly Glory by Iesus Christ, afer ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. God that called us to Eternal Glory, foresaw the
Difficulties and Troubles we should meet with by the way, and therefore provideth Grace answerable, which we are to sue out by Prayer. Surely he that called them to the possession of Everlasting Blessedness by the Mediator, did not flatter them into a vain Hope, as it will prove, if he help us not: Therefore he will assist us in these Difficul∣ties; and though he will not exempt us from the Conflict, yet he will not deny strength. When we consent to his Calling, it is a sure ground to our Faith, that he that hath called, will give us all things necessary to our Perseverance; for his Calling, when it is effectual, will not be in vain and to no purpose. 1 Cor. 1.9. God is faithful, by whom ye were called into the fellowship of his Son Iesus Christ our Lord. 1 Cor. 10.13. There hath no Temptation taken you, but what is com∣mon to Men; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye ae able; but will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. The in∣tent of his Calling, is to bring them to the possession of what he hath called them to: If he would at first take us with all our Faults, and put us under the Hopes of the Gospel when we were Sinners, he will follow the first Grace with continual aids and supports, un∣til he hath perfected his Work: and there∣fore when a People are sincere, and willing
to run all hazards for Christ, God will not only give them Glory at the end of their Journey, but bear their Expences by the way; and therefore we need not be discouraged, and say, How shall we hold out? God, that hath given such hope as to venture upon the Dif∣ficulties, will support you under them, he will add more Grace to that Grace that we have received. 3. They that have received good Hope through Grace, have God's Nature and Pro∣mise to rest upon; His Nature, as he is a gra∣cious God; and his Promise, as he is a faith∣ful God. (1.) His Nature, as he is a God merciful and gracious. That former Experience doth fully manifest, he is sufficiently inclined to do us good, and therefore will not fail us in our Necessities: He hath ever born us good Will, never discovered any backwardness to help us, thought of us before the World was, sent his Son to die for us before we were born, or had a being in the World; called us when we were unworthy; warned us of our Dan∣ger when we did not fear it; offered Happi∣ness to us when we had no thought of it; And lest we should turn our backs upon it, followed us with an earnest and uncessant im∣portunity, till we came to anxious Thoughts about Christ, and began to make it our Bu∣siness to seek after it; by the secret drawings
of his Spirit, inclined us to chuse him for our Portion, and to rejoice in the Hopes offered. How many Contradictions and struglings of Heart were we conscious to, e're we were brought to this? Ever since he hath bin ten∣der of us in the whole conduct of his Provi∣dence, afflicted us when we needed it, deli∣vered us when we were ready to sink; hath pardoned our Failings, visited us in Ordinan∣ces, supported us in Doubts, helped us in Temptations, and is still mindful of us at every turn, as if he would not lose us; and shall not we hope in him to the last? We may reason as they, Iudges 13.23. If the Lord had a mind to destroy us, he would not have re∣ceived a Sacrifice at our hands. And so if God had no mind to save us, he would not use such Methods of Grace about us. (2.) His promise; so that we must trust his faithfulness, after we come under the Hopes of the Gospel. There are two great Pro∣mises to support us, His Presence with us in the midst of our Afflictions, and our being ever present with the Lord in Eternal Glory. This is that we have hope of, all the difficulty is, How far God hath promised his Presence with us. Certainly he hath promised it, Psal. 91.15. I will be with them in troubles. And again, I will be with them in Fire and Water. And again, certain it is, That God is most with his afflicted People, as the Mo∣ther
keepeth most with the sick Child, or the blood runneth to comfort the wounded part. And again, that he will never leave us to un∣supportable Difficulties; Heb. 13.5. I will never leave you, nor forsake you, a negative Gradation. And besides, there is a general Promise, though the Particulars be  abso∣lutely made certain to us; namely, that all shall work together for good, Rom. 8.28. That giveth us but a probability of Health, and outward Protection, and Deliverance, of a ready support in every Temptation, because we are uncertain how far they are for our good; but for necessary Grace to our Pre∣servation, there is express provision in the Covenant, Ier. 32.40. I will make an ever∣lasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, &c. 4. It giveth us incouragement in Prayer, beacuse they that have this Hope are so much expos'd to the scorn of the World; because they trust in an Invisible God, and look for all their Recompence in a World to come: They think Christians are a company of cre∣dulous Fools, that please themselves with Dreams and Fancies; Psal. 22.7, 8. They laugh me to scorn, because, they say, he trusted in the Lord. 1 Tim. 4.10. We therefore la∣bour and suffer Reproach, because we trust in the living God. Christians thought their Reward sure, and therefore endured all things; but
Atheists and Infidels scoff at them, and at all their Comforts as Fanatical Illusions, and persecute them. Therefore God is in point of Honour engaged to stand by them, and to justify their Hope and Trust; not always by Temporal Deliverance, but by Spiritual Suppo and Establishment: That it may be seen te is a Spirit of God, and Glory rest∣eth upon them, that is, glorified by him, how∣ever he be evil spoken of in the World, 1 Pet. 4.14. God will do so in condescenti∣on to his People. Nothing goeth so near their Hearts, as a disappointment of their Hope in God: It is a mighty damp to their Spirits, when God doth as it were spit in their Faces, and reject their Prayers. Psal. 25.2. Oh my God! I trust in thee, let me not e ashamed. At such times the Lord seemeth to counte∣nance the slanders of their Enemies, and to cover their faces with shame. Vse 1. To persuade you to get this Hope of Eternal Life wrought in your hearts. 1. This is the Characteristic and Note of Difference betwixt God's People and others: By this we are distinguished from Pagans, who are described to be such as have no hope, and without God in the World, Ephes. 2.12. And 1 Thess. 4.13. Sorrow not as them with∣out hope. But Christians are such as have good Hope through Grace, and by this we are distinguished from temporary and slight
Believers. Heb. 3.6. His House we are, if we hold fast the confidence and rejoycing of Hope firm unto the end. So also, Ver. 14. If we hold the beginning of our confidence stedfast unto the end. Their Hope is slight and fluid, the Temporary loseth his Joy and Comfort, which he conceived in the offers of the Go∣spel, and so either casts off the profession of Godliness, or neglecteth the Power and Practice of it: But the true Christian is Se∣rious, Patient, Heavenly, and Holy; be∣cause he is alway looking to his End, and sweetneth his Work by his great Hope, keep∣eth up his Taste or lively expectation of the Mercy of Christ to everlasting Life. Nay, this differenceth the Children of God, those that are in their Conflict, from those that are in their Triumph, the Sanctified and Glorified; those that are in their Way, and those that are at Home: They that are at Home are enjoying what we expect, and in posseion of that Supreme Good, that we yet hope for; they have neither Miseries to fear, nor Blessings to desire, beyond what they do enjoy; they see what they love, and possess what they see. But the time of our Advancement is not yet come, and therefore we can only look and long for it; this is our Work and present Happiness. 2. Now the Covenant of God is contri∣ved to raise Hope in us. The Iachin and Boaz,
the two Pillars that support it are Mercy and Truth. Micah 7.20. Thou wilt perform the Truth to Jacob, and te Mercy to Abraham. Psal. 25.10. All the Paths of the Lord re Mercy and Truth unto such as keep his Covenant, and his Testimonies. And Psal. 138.2. I will praise the Name for thy loving Kindness and Truth: For thou hast magnified thy Word above all thy Name: And in many other Scrip∣tures. 1. The Mercy and Grace of the Cove∣nant. (1.) In the frame of it, where excellent Benefits are dispensed upon free Terms, that our Faith and Hope may be in God; the Lord would not leave the sinful Creature un∣der Despair, but hath provided a way how we may be Rconciled and Glorified. Psal. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayst be feared. Mercy opens the Door for us; the very offer speaks much Mercy, the terms are Mercy. So much Duty is required as is necessary, and doth arise from the na∣ture of the thing; Violence would be offer∣ed to the Reason of a serious Creature, if such things were not required. (2.) In the dispensations of th Blessings of the Covenant. Now, (Gal. 6.16.) To as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and on the Israel of God. There are many Infirmities and Fralties, but
God passeth them by when there is Sincerity. Our Faith is weak, and mingled with Doubt∣ings; our Love to God clogged with much inordinate Self-love, our Obedience often interrupted; Too much deadness and cold∣ness in holy Things, yet these do not cast us out of the favour of God, nor make void our Interest in the Covenant, where the Heart for the main is set to serve him, and please him. Mal. 3.17. I will spare them, as a Man spareth his own Son that erveth him. (3.) At the very close of all it is Grace. Hope unto the end, for the Grace that is brought unto you at the Revelation of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13. Then there will be the fullest and lar∣gest Manifestation of God's Love and free Grace: There is Grace brought to us now, by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in the Go∣spel; but when his Person shall be revealed, Grace shall be seen in all its Graciousness▪ We see his Grace in the pardon of Sins, and that measure of Sanctification, which now we attain unto, that he is pleased to pass by our Offences, and take us into his Family, and give us right to his Heavenly Kingdom, and some taste of his Love, and remote Ser∣vice. But when Pardon shall be pronoun∣ced by the Judge's Mouth, when he shall take us not only into his Family, but into his Palace, and Father's House, and give us not Right only, but Possession; and we shall be
admitted to the immediate Vision and Frui∣tion of God, and be everlastingly imployed in Heavenly Praising, and delighting in him, then Grace will be Grace indeed. 2. His Truth and Mercy openeth the Door for us. Truth keepeth it open. Mer∣cy is the Pipe, Truth is the conveyance. Now God bindeth himself by Promise, and hath ever been tender of his Word: We may see for the present, that a Covenant-Interest is no fruitless thing, he hath confir∣med this Hope to the World by Miracles; to us within the Church by the Seal and ear∣nest of his Spirit, or the impression of his Image, preparing the Hearts of the Faith∣ful for this blessed Estate. Ephes. 4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the Day of Redemption. 2 Cor. 5.5. Who hath given us the earnest of his Spi∣rit. He hath appointed Ordinances to revive our Hopes: 1 Cor. 11.26. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew the Lord's Death till he come. By daily experience, we see many of God's Children have gone out of the World chearfully, pro∣fessing this Hope; we have the same Father, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named, Ephes. 3.15. are reconciled to him by the same Christ. Col. 1.20. Ha∣ving made peace through the Blood of the Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself; by him,
I say, whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven. If he be so good to that part of the Family that is now in Heaven, he will be good to them also that are working out their Salvation with fear and trembling. 3. What an advantage is it to the Spi∣ritual Life, to have good Hope wrought in us through Grace. 1. It maketh us diligent and Serious; Christianity implieth a serious application of our Heart and Mind, to do what Christ re∣quireth, that we may obtain what he hath offered; to do it as our first work and chief business. Phil. 2.12. Work out your own Sal∣vation with fear and trembling. Heb. 4.1. Let us labour to enter into that rest. That is, im∣ply our utmost care and diligence. Now all the Executive Powers are fortified and strengthened in their Operation by Hope. 2. To be Patient and Mortified, that we subdue our Lusts, and bear the loss of our Interests with an humble and quiet Mind. Rom. 12.12. Patient in Tribulation, rejoycing in Hope. And for Lusts, 1 John 3.3. He that hath this Hope, purifieth himself even as he is Pure. 3. To be Heavenly and Holy; the one respects our End, the other our Race. For it is not a few dead lifeless Thoughts now and then, but the continual and delightful fore-sight of Eternal Bliss. What is the way
to Heaven, but Hope? And who more pure and holy, than they that look for such things? 2 Pet. 3.14. Wherefore, Belved, see∣ing ye look for such things, be diligent that ye be found of him in peace, without spot, and blame∣less. Vse 2. Well then, get this Hope. But what must we do? You will say, It is God's Gift: Yet you are bound to use the means. 1. Remove the Impediments. 1 Pet. 1.13. Be sober, and hope to the end. Draw off the Affections from Carnal Vanities, and the delights of the Senses, and consider what God offereth to you in the Gospel; there can be no certain and desirous expectation of better things, while the Mind and Heart is so occupied and thronged with Vanity, and deadned by Carnal Satisfaction. 2. Wait on all the opportunities of Pro∣fiting, and use the known means of Grace more conscionably. Certain it i, that the grace of Hope is of God, not acquired, but infused; but God will bless his own Means. The propounding of the Object, the offer∣ing of the solid Grounds, maket way for the infusing of the Grace. Tit. 1.1, 2. Paul was the Apostle to bring them to the acknow∣ledgment of the Truth, for the hope of Eternal Life. And it is called, the Hope of the Go∣spel, Col. 1.23. bse it is wroght by the Preaching of the Gospel.
SERMON XVII. 2 Thess. 2.17. —Comfort your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work. WE come now, Thirdly, to the Prayer it self. He asketh two Benefits. 1. Comfort. 2. Establishment. First, Comfort. [Comfort your Hearts.] But why doth the Apostle pray for that, which they had already? He had told them in the former Verse, That God had given them everlasting Consolation, and now he pray∣eth that God would comfort them. The Answer given by some is, That he prayeth that God would give them an increase of Comfort: By others, That God would give them the continuance of it. Rather by ever∣lasting Consolation, is meant, the solid mat∣ter of Comfort; by his Prayer, now the effectual Application of it: For though suf∣ficient
matter of Comfort be provided for us, yet God must powerfully apply it. The Gospel is a soveraign Plaister, yet God's Hand must make it stick. Observe here Doct. 1. That all true and solid, and heart-Comfort, is of God. He is called the Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort, 2 Cor. 1.3. And again, The God of Patience and Consolation, Rom. 15.5. His Spirit taketh an Office upon him to accomplish this Effect in us, there∣fore called the Comforter. 1. I shall enquire what Comfort is. 2. Shew why it is of God. 3. What Advantage we have thereby. I. What Comfort is, Three thigs are to be Explained. (1.) Comfort. (2.) Comforting. (3.) In what sence it is of God. II. What Comfort is. We call Two things by that Name. 1. Our natural Refreshment. 2. Our support in Troubles.
1. Our natural Refreshment, or the bene∣fit that we have by the Creatures, for the support of Nature. We cannot enjoy our Temporal Mercies with any delight and plea∣sure, without God's leave and Blessing: As to eat and drink with Comfort, that the Soul may enjoy good by its Labour. In one place it is said, it is by the Hand of God, Eccles. 2.24. In another place it is said, to be the Gift of God, Eccles. 3.13. It is by his Power and his Grace, that the Comfort of the Crea∣ture is not in Man's Hands, but God's: Nor can the Creature yield to us any Comfort without his Gift, or Grant. And because of our forfeiture by Sin; we have neither these Mercies from our selves, nor the use, nor the natural benefit from the bare Creature, which is Health, Strength, and Chearfulness. All Goodness resideth chiefly in God, and it is to be found in the Creatures only by Participa∣tion, and that at his Pleasure. Acts 14.17. He gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Sea∣sons, filling our Hearts with Food and Glad∣ness. That is, the comfortable use of Food. We must still look to the Giver. But the Apostle here doth not speak of the Comfort of the Creatures, but the Comfort of the Scriptures; not the supply of the Body, but the support of the Soul. 2. Comfort is taken for Support in Trou∣bles. The Thessalonians were now under
great Persecutions. Comfort is a streng∣thening of the Mind, when it is in danger to be weakened by Fears, and Sorrows, or the strength and stay of the Heart in Trou∣ble. Psal. 119.50. This is my Comfort in my Afflictions, thy Word hath quickned me. And 2 Cor. 1.4. Who comforteth us in all our Tri∣bulations, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any Trouble, by the Comfort where∣with we are comforted of God. As Cordials are for a Fainting-time, so are Comforts for a time of Afflictions. Indeed Spiritual Com∣fort is never out of Season; because we are now in the House of our Pilgrimage, and our chief Good is at a distance from us: And because of the labours and difficulties of the Spiritual Life: Therefore it is said, Acts 9.31. When the Churches had rest, thy walked in the fear of God, and the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. But the great need of Comfort is in our Afflictions, therefore here I shall shew Three things: 1. That God can give his People Com∣fort in the greatest Tribulation: His Favour is enough to support them against the Frowns of all the World. Isa. 51.12. I, even I am he that comforteth thee. Who art thou that thou shouldest be afraid of Man that shall die, and the Son of Man that shall be made as the Grass? As long as we have the Almighty and Im∣mortal God to stand by us, and te Promise
of Eternal Life, it will counterballance all our Trouble. Rom. 5.2, 3. We rejoyce in hope of the Glory of God. And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations. Also 2 Cor. 4.17. This light Affliction which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and ternal weight of Glory. There is everlasting joy a∣gainst a heaviness for a Season; and everlast∣ing ease and rest against a little present pain; there is enough to out-weigh all that we can suffer for, and from God. So the pardon of Sin, Isa. 40.1, 2. Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, saith my God. Why? Because her Iniquity is pardoned. Matth. 9.2. Be of good cheer, thy Sin is forgiven thee. Here is sound Comfort, the Sting of all our Troubles is taken away. Well then: This the People of God have to support them in all their Tribulation. They can set God against the Creature, Heaven against Earth, Pardon of Sins against all the bitterness they meet with in the World. 2. That there is a special allowance of Comfort for God's Children in their Afflicti∣ons. The Lord is more tender of his People then, when they want Comfort, than at another time; they have a more plentiful measure of the supporting Operations of his Spirit then: As 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproach∣ed for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory, and of God resteth upon you.
As the Mother keepeth most with the sick Child, so God looketh to the Afflicted. This is the difference between God and the World: The World ever runneth most after those that are Prosperous, and flourish, and rejoyce, as Rivers into the Sea, where there is Water enough; but forsaketh those that are in Poverty, Disgrace, and Want: But God is most mindful of his Afflicted People, visiteth them most, vouchsafeth most of his comfortable Presence to those, that holily and meekly bear the Afflictions he layeth upon them. He comforteth us in all our Tribulati∣ons, 2 Cor. 1.4. The Soul is the more ca∣pable of Spiritual Comforts, because their Taste is more purged and refined from the dregs of Sense; and Grace is more lively and exercised now; the more Grace, the more Comfort. And Prayers are more frequent: And Prayers are seldom in vain. 3. That our Comforts carry proportion with our Sorrows. 2 Cor. 1.5. As our Afflictions abound, so do our Consolations. This cometh from the Wisdom of God, that the Evil may not be greater than our Support, and from the Faithfulness of God, who will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to bear, 1 Cor. 10.13. And there∣fore if he bring on heavy Troubles, he puts a suitable measure of Comfort, and chearful∣ness into our Hearts. This is Comfort.
2. What it is to have our Hearts Comfor∣ted. It sheweth that the Heart is the pro∣per seat of Spiritual Comfort. Psal. 4.7. Thou hast put gladness into my Heart. God's Comfort is like a soaking Showre, that goes to the Root, and refresheth the Plants of the Earth, more than a Morning dew, that wets only the Surface. Other Comforts tickle the Senses, and refresh the outward Man, but this penetrateth to the very Heart. Christ prayeth, John 17.13. That they may have my Ioy fulfilled in themselves. Christ's Comforts are not reported to the Ear only, but felt in the Heart: The joy of the World maketh a great noise, but in the midst of it the Heart is sorrowful: Bu God feasts his Children with hidden Manna; they have Meat and Drink, which the World know∣eth not of. In their outward Man, they are exposed to great Difficulties, but their Hearts are filled with joy unspeakable, and full of Glo∣ry. The joy of the Carnal in outward things is foraign; and as much as their Senses are pleased, their Hearts are full of tormenting Fears, and secret Disgusts. They may put a good face upon it, but dig the most jovial of them to the bottom, they have their in∣ward stings, and secret horrours of Consci∣ence. But in comforting his Children, God chiefly deals with the Heart. Rom. 5.5. The Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts, by
the Holy Ghost given unto us. And 2 Cor. 1.22. He hath given us the earnest of the Spirit in our Hearts. In establishing this Comfort, God doth immediately work upon he Soul; he useth Means indeed: As the Word, Rom. 15.4. That you through Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures, might have Hope. There we have the grounds of Comfort set forth, Christ's Redemption, the Promis of the Gospel, both of Pardon and Life; and the Ordinances, as the Sacraments; as the Eu∣nuch after his Baptism, Acts 8.39. He went away rejoycing. So in the Lord's Supper, we come to eat of Christ's Peace-offerings, that we may rejoyce in God. Psal. 22.26. The meek shall eat be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him: your Heart shall live for ever. But his Spirit worketh immediate∣ly upon the Soul. Either (1.) By opening the Understanding to see the grounds and reasons of Comfort. Rom. 15.13. Now the God of Peace fill you with all Ioy and Peace in believing, that you may abound in Hope, through the Power of the Holy Ghost. Or (2.) By raising the Heart to the lively at of Joy. Acts 13.52. The Disciples were filled with Ioy, and with the Holy Ghost. Certainly, God comforteth the Heart both ways, by seeing the Grounds; as he worketh Faith. Man is a reasonable Creature, and it is not ima∣ginable that the Holy Ghost shoud comfort
us we know not why; he revealeth indeed Supernatural grounds of Comfort, but if they be not evident to Reason, they are evi∣dent to Faith: But then the very Joy is exe∣cuted by the efficacy of his Impression. But of that more anon. 3. In what sence Comfort may be said to be of God. I answer, Three ways. 1. When it is allowed by him. 2. When the Matter is provided by him. 3. When it is wrought by him. 1. When it is allowed by him, and war∣ranted by him. Every Man affects Comfort and Oblectation of Mind; for otherwise they could never be pleased in that condition they are in, nor satisfie themselves. It would much undeceive the Carnal World, and make them see the folly of their unreasona∣ble joy and quiet, if they would put Con∣science to the question, Is our Joy from God, or no? that is, Doth God allow it me? Certainly, God doth allow us to re∣joyce in our outward Portion. Eccles. 5.18. It is good and comely for one to eat and drink, and to enjoy the good of all his Labours that he taketh under the Sun, all the days of his Life, which God giveth him; for it is his Por∣tion. But so that his Favour may be the
matter of our chief Joy; for otherwise it is exceeding Folly, and gross Carnality, to re∣joyce in the Creature apart from God. And in the midst of the greatest Soul-dangers, you must first enquire, Are all things right between God and me? It is a mighty con∣tempt of God, yea, brutish Atheism, to sit down contented with any thing on this side God, Luke 12.19. and to say, Soul, take thine ease, thou hast Goods laid up for many years. To sing Lullabies to our Souls, when God is angry for Sin, this Comfort is not allowed by God: There is no peace, saith my God, to the Wicked, Isa. 57.21. It is Spirti∣tual Madness to dance about the brink of Hell. 2. When the Matter is provided by him. God in the New Covenant hath propound∣ed excellent grounds of Comfort: John 14.1. Let not your Hearts be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in me. The two great gene∣ral grounds of support against Heart-Trou∣ble, are God's merciful Nature, and Christ's Mediation; more particular in the New Covenant, the promises of Pardon and Life. Of Pardon of Sin, Rom. 5.1, 2, 3. There∣fore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Iesus Christ, &c. And of Life Eternal, 1 Thess. 4.18. And so shall we ever be with the Lord; wherefore comfort one another with these words. It is good to see
what Comforts we live upon, and propound to our selves, and others, more expressly as to Afflictions, God's particular Providence, that nothing falleth out without God's Ap∣pointment. 1 Thess. 3.3. That no Man should be moved with these Afflictions, for your selves know that we were appointed thereunto. It is not Chance, or a natural Accident, but that which God hath appointed. If any Shimei rail, the Lord hath bid him curse: If any evil come to us, is it without God's Fatherly care over his People, who ordereth all things for their Profit? Heb. 12.10 They verily for a few days chastened us after their own plea∣sure:, but He for our profit, that we might be par∣takers of his Holiness. And his unchangeable Love, which doth not vary, and alter with our Condition: Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every Son whom he receiveth. He is our God still, though he seemeth to deal hardly with us. We learn of Christ on the very Cross to cry, My God, Matth. 27.46 and if we cannot find enough in him, when the Creatures and our natural Comforts fail, it is meet we should lose them. Heb. 3.18. Though the Fig-tree should not blossom, &c. yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my Salvation. This is the sum of God's Comforts; and when these things are suggested to us, God com∣forteth our Hearts.
3. When by these means God worketh Comfort in us. Joy is often called the Com∣fort of the Spirit, and Ioy in the Holy Ghost, Rom 14.17. Now all the Spirit's. Works are singular, and do much exceed the natu∣ral Work of Man's Heart: The groans which he stirreth up in Prayer are unutterable, Rom. 8.26. His Joys unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.8. The Heathens counted that Fire more sit and pure for their Altars, whic was in∣kindled by a Sun-beam, rather than a Coal taken from a common Hearth. So this Com∣fort which is raised in us by the Holy Ghost, is more Rich and Glorious, and Affective, than that which is the fruit of our bare Rea∣son, or the meer working of our Human Spirit, even in the common grounds of Chri∣stian Comfort. Or as Elementary Fire dif∣fereth from Culinary and Kitchin Fire, and is much more pure: So doth this Joy, which is immediately wrought in us by he Spirit, from all Joy that we can work by our selves, out of the Scriptural Grounds of Comfort. Carnal Men have their Joy at the second or third Hand, as God blesseth the order and influence of Inferiour Causes, it comes to them from Creature to Creature, so as they discern not the Work of God in it; yea, the Joy of common Christians in the proper grounds of Comfort is not strong, as that which is rai∣sed in us by the immediat impression of the Comforting Spirit.
II. Why this is of God. 1. Because God challegeth this as his own Right, to comfort the Heart of Man: and therefore whatever the Means of the comfort be, God will be owned as the Spring and Fountain of it. He keepeth this as his great Bridle upon the World, to govern the Hearts of Men. Job 34.29. When he giveth Quietness, who then can make Trouble? And when he hideth his Face, who then can behold him? Whether it be done against a Nation, or against a Man only. Our Peace and Trou∣ble is in God's Hands, and at his disposing. It is true, he exerciseth his Soveraignty ac∣cording to Law, and in his Internal Govern∣ment according to the Law of Grace, penal∣ly withdrawing his Comforting Spirit, and leaving us to our Doubts, and Troubles, and Fears; by the rewarding our Obedience and Faithfulness with the manifest Tokens of his Love, as the Matter shall require. It is e∣nough for the Point in hand, that God alone doth powerfully dispence Peace, or Trouble. And when he will give Comfort; none can make his Gift void; for it is at his Command: and in both, a Nation is all one with a par∣ticular Person, as to any ability to resist God. 2. Though grounds of Comfort be never so clear, yet if God concur not, we find not
the effect; therefore it is his Spirit, that can only comfort the Heart. To have God's Warrant for our comfort is much, but to have his Impression is more; both mus concur, or the Soul will not be comforted. It fal∣leth out many ways, sometimes out of Igno∣rance. When a Well of Comfort was near, poor Hagar saw it not, and was almost famish∣ed with thirst, until God opened her Eyes, and she saw a Well of Water, Gen. 21.19. We know not the grounds of our comfort. Sometimes out of Passion: Grief is obstinate, and will ad∣mit no Remedy; as Rachel would not be com∣forted, Jer. 31.15. They are so peevishly addicted to their Worldly Comforts, that if they be crossed in them, they will not admit of God's Comforts, though they are evident, clear, and pertinent. Sometimes out of Forgetfulness, Heb. 12.5. Ye have forgotten the Exhortation, which speaketh unto you as un∣to Children. And Oblivion is an Ignorance for the present. Had they remembred, they would not have fainted, and waxed weary. It is a great Work of the Spirit to bring to Remembrance, sometimes questioning their interest in Comfort; besids, that there are general Comforts, when Interest is not clear. Now the Spirit, that sheweth us he things given us of God, doth also reveal and evi∣dence our Right to them. What is wrought in our Hearts, that is to say, by quickning
us to exercise Grace, he evidenceth the truth of Grace; and in our Afflictions by Patience maketh out our Comfort. Rom. 5.3, 4, 5. We glory in Tribulations, knowing that Tribu∣lation worketh Patience; and Patience Experi∣ence; and Experience Hope: And Hope maketh not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. From the whole, there can be no true solid Comfort, but what God be∣stoweth, his Favour, and our Interest in his Favaour is manifested to us by his Spirit. III. What advantages we have by this, that all solid Comfort is of God. 1. It assureth us of God's readiness to comfort poor afflicted Creatures, that hum∣bly submit to him. He that is the God of all Comfort, is also the Father of Mercies, his Mercy and Compassion inclineth him to comfort us. God hath his Name from this effect; Nomina sunt à notioribus, God that comforteth those that are cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. He is very tender of all Afflicted Creatures, much more of his People. 2. God's Comforts come with more Au∣thority, and silence all our Doubts and Fears. Psal. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my Soul: We have many intricate perplexing thoughts, out of which we cannot disentangle our selves; no comforts come with such Authority and
Power, as God's Comforts. In the Comfort we have, it is good to consider whence it com∣eth: Is it God's Comfort, or a Fany of our own? If it be made up by our own Fancy, it will be like a Spider's Web, that is weaved out of its own Bowels, but is gone and swept away with the least turn of a Be∣som: but God's Comforts are more durable, they flow from the true Fountain of Com∣fort, upon whose Frowns, or Smiles, our happiness and misery dependeth. There is lit∣tle warmth in a Fire of our own kindling. God's Comforts are built on his Covenant, and have a commanding force and over-po∣wering efficacy on the Soul. God in his Word speaketh by Soveraign Authority, in our Hearts he worketh by powerfl Efficacy. The Authority of his Word we own, when we speak to others, or to our selves, when we know trouble, but in supposition, or imagi∣nation: The Efficacy of his Grace we feel, when Trouble comes actually upon us; ma∣ny that strengthen others, when it cometh upon them faint themselves. Job 4.4, 5. Thy Words have upholden im that is falling, and thou hast strengthened the feeble Knees. But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest: it toucheth theè, and thou art troubled. Which sheweth, that not only the matter of Com∣fort, but the effectual Blessing cometh from God, or Comforting of Souls is his Work.
3. That God's Comforts are full and strong: For he worketh like himself, and therefore can and will support his Pople in the greatest Difficulties. It is sometimes represented as full, Acts 13.52. The Disciples were filled with Ioy, and with the Holy Ghost. And, I am filled with Comfort, and am exceed∣ing joyful in all our Tribulations, 2 Cor. 7.4. . And our Lord Jesus, when he took care for our Comfort, took care for our full Comfort: John 15.11. These things have I spoken, that my Ioy may re∣main in you, and your joy might be full. Thus we see the joy of Believers is a full Joy, that no other Joy needeth to be added to it; it is a full Joy to bear us out under all Discou∣ragements. For what is wanting to them, who have God for their Portion, and the promised Glory for their Inheritance, and God's Providence engaged for their Prote∣ction, Safety, and Comfort, while they are here by the way. And it is Strong as well as Full, Heb. 6.18. That by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lye, we might have strong Consolation. Other Com∣forts are weak and of little force, they are not Affliction-proof, much less are they Death-proof, and Judgment-proof, they can∣not stand before a few serious, sober thoughts of the World to come. The Comforts of the World cannot stay and revive the Heart;
for every blast of a Temptation scattereth them. Vse 1. To reprove Christians for their overmuch dejection and fainting in Troubles. Why are we so much cast down? Is there no Balm in Gilead, nor Comfort in God? Why hath God taken the Name upo him, of being the God of all Comfort, and put this Office upon his Spirit to be the Comfor∣ter? Hath he not made sufficient provision in the New Covenant? Is there any evil, which the promise of Eternal Life cannot countervail? Is God backward to give you Comfort? Why then did he send Christ, write Scriptures, appoint a Ministry, and Or∣dinances, seek to prepare you for it, by the seal and earnest of his Spirit, and invite you so earnestly to trust in him, to cast all your care upon him, and so often forbid your Fear and Sorrow? 2. If all Comfort be of God, let us go to God for it. But then take these three Di∣rections. 1. See you be qualified for it. Com∣fort follows Holiness, as Heat doth Fire; the Spirit is first a Sanctifier, and then a Comfor∣ter: And according to God's Promise, is more necessarily a Sanctifier than a Comfor∣ter. Ephes. 1.13, 14. In whom ye also trusted after that ye heard the Word of Truth, the
Gel of your Salvation. O whom alone after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of our Inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his Glory. Comfort is our Happiness, but we are made Holy before Happy: Hereafter we enter into our Master's Joy, we have a taste of it in the World; But who have this Taste, but the sanctified and self-denying Christi∣ans? The Work of Sanctification is carried on more certainly, but his Comforting Work is many times obscure and interrupte. Do your Work throughly and faithfull, nd you may refer your selves to God for om∣fort. Vse 2. Expect not a singular way of Com∣fort besides the Word: It was Eliphas's Charge upon Iob, Chap. 15.11. Are the Consolations of God small with thee? Is there any secret thing with thee? The Charge is, that he undervalued the common Consolation of God, and looked for some secret way peculi∣ar to himself, of getting Comfort, besides humbling of himself, and turning unto God: No, God hath sufficiently provided for the Comfort of his People; and we must not ex∣pect singular manifestations of his Love, and special Signs and Tokens, beyond the com∣mon
allowance given to the whole Family. It is a thousand to one but it is some false Con∣solation, and Dream of Comfort which they affect and cry up, beyond or besides the usual Comforts of his Word. Vse 3. Do not compare lower Discove∣ries of God, with that great Revelation he hath made of his Mind in the Word, for the Comfort of his People; for this argueth great unthankfulness, and a secret desire to set up Man's Comfort against those which are unque∣stiobly of the Lord. Sure it is, that what∣ever good is in Nature, is from God; but it is mingled with so many weaknesses, that what is of God can scarce be seen in it. I speak of those that cry up Heathen Philoso∣phy, to he disparagement of the Word of God: As if it were a better Institution to quiet the Mind, and fortify it against all Troubles, than Christianity: But alas! they neither know the true ground of Misery, which is Sin, nor the true ground of Com∣fort, which is Christ. And that which mere Man offereth, can neither come with such Authority and Blessing, as what cometh im∣mediately from God. This is a Moon-Light that rotteth things before it ripeneth them. In short, Philosophers were never acquainted with Christ, the foundation of Comfort; nor
the Spirit, the efficient cause of Comfort; nor the promise of Pardon and Life, which is the matter of Comfort; nor Faith, which is the Light, by which we know things that de∣pend upon Divine Revelation, and so the proper Instrument of Comfort. This I thought good to say, because Comfort and Rest for Souls, is one of the great Benefits of our Religion. Jer. 6.16. Stand in the way and see, and ask for the old Pahs, where is the good Way, and walk therein; and ye shall find rest for your Souls. Mat. 11.28, 29. Come unto me all ye that labour, and are heavy dn, and I will give you Rest. Vse 4. Seek it in the use of Means and Ordinances, which God hath appointed for the raising of Comfort in us, as the Word, Prayer, and the Lord's Supper. In solemn Duties God reneweth the pledges of his Love to us, exciteth Grace, and by Grace Comfort; it must needs be so, because then the grounds of Comfort are anew laid in the view of Conscience: Graces are in their lively Exercise, and God is not wanting to his own Institution. Take all these three toge∣ther, and the reverend use of the Lord's Sup∣per must needs increase our Comfort. The Ground of Comfort is Reconciliation with God, by Christ. Rom. 5.11. We joy in God
through our Lord Iesus Christ, by wom we have now received the Atonement. And here we raise up your Faith and Love, Cant. 1.4. The King hath brought me into his Chambers; we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remem∣ber thy Love more than Wine; the Vpright love thee. God's Ordinances are not empty, there is some participation; 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Commu∣nion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we brake, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? Vse 5. Consider the ends why God giveth us Comfort; it is to fortify us against the Enemies of our Salvation, so far as they are vexing and troubling, and molesting us in the way to Heaven. The Spirit hath two great Offices, to be a Sanctifier, and Comfor∣ter, and both serve all the needs of Christi∣ans. When we are inticed to Sin, he helps us as a Santifyer; when we are discouraged in God's Service, he helps us as a Comforter. And therefore Christians are to consider their condition, and what their present state re∣quireth; for God dispenseth his Grace ac∣cording to the Assaults made upon them by the Enemies of their Salvation. As for in∣stance, Our Enemies are the Devil, the World and the Flesh, these we renounced in Bap∣tism:
And in the progress of Christianity these are those with whom we conflict, and must overcome. As for instance; The De∣vil is a tempting Devil, who seeketh to draw away the Saints from God; and by the love of the Flesh, to weaken our Love and Obe∣dience to our proper and our rightful Lord. Now what are we to do in this case, to beg Comfort and Peace, that we may not be troubled, though we yield unto his Tempta∣tions? Alas! this were to turn the Grace of God into Wantonness: No, we are to be so∣ber and watchful, 1 Pet. 5.8. to use all the Rules of Sobriety and Vigilancy, that our Worldly Comforts may not be a snare to us. Sobriety is an Holy Moderation in the use of all earthly things. Vigilancy is an Holy Di∣ligence, and seriousness in the use of Means; and also add to both, the help of the Sanctify∣ing Spirit, that we may keep up our Love to God, and be faitful in our Obedience to him. But the Devil is not only a tempting Devil, but a vexing and disquieting Devil, who accuseth us before God day and night, Rev. 12.10. raiseth in us many troublesome Fears, to make our Service uncomfortable, and tire us, and clog us. What is our Duty then? to beg the help of the Comforter, not only to shew Love to God, but that we may have some persuasion of his Love to us, and quench
his fiery Darts, that we may go on chearful∣ly in our Work, because the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shorly, Rom. 16.20. So for the World; The World is a tempting World, drawing our Affections from God and Heaven, to present things; and when it smileth on us, in incroaches upon our Heart more and more. 2 Tim. 4.10. Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this pre∣sent World. Now what is our business then, to beg comfort and assurance of God's Love? No, that would be our Bane, there is work for the Sanctifier rather than the Comforter, that the worldly Spirit may be subdued in us; there is need of Mortification rather than Assurance, that we may be crucified to the World, Gal. 6.14. But sometimes the World is a Persecuting World, and reproacheth and troubleth us with all manner of vexations, then there is work for the Comforter, to seal up to our Souls the Love of God, or Inte∣rest in Christ: John 16.33. These things have I spoken to you, that in me ye ight have peace, in the World ye shall have tribulation: but be of good chear, I have overcome the World; and to become to our Souls the Earnest of eternal Glory. Comfort is for Tribulation; at other times we are glutted with it, but then it is our great support. When all tings fail, we feel the great necessity of the Joys of
Faith: It is good to time well our Duties; David saith, Psal. 56.3. What time I am a∣fraid, I will trust in thee. So for the Flesh, it inticeth us, Iames 1.14. Every Man is temp∣ted, when he is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed. Many times it draweth to Actual Sin by indulgence to its desires; yea, disposeth us often to Apostacy and falseness of Heart: for Apostacy usually begins at falseness of Heart, when the fleshly Mind and Interest is not throughly overcome. Well, when we are conscious to this, what shall we do in such a case? Certainly the great and proper Work, is to beg the Spirit, and implore the Spirit as a Sanctifier, and to be more obedient to his sanctifying Motions; Comfort will come in time. Well, but the Flesh is not only inticing, but troublesom and grievous to the Saints; witness Paul's groans, Rom. 7.24. Oh wretched Man that I am; who shall deliver me from the body of this Death? We are quite wearied, and tired out with the importunity of its motions; we would serve God more purely and perfect∣ly: Then there is work for the Comforter, and confidence in his Operations to help the faithful Soul; Phil. 1.6. Being confident of this very thing, that he which hath begun a good Work in you, will perform it unto the day of Iesus Christ. Then it is seasonable to remem∣ber
the Covenant we are under. Rom. 6.14. For Sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under the Law, but under Grace. The serious striving Soul will not be left de∣stitute. Thus must we expect Comfort. Vse 6. Remember that Comfort hath a latitude in it, and is expressed by divers words. 1. Sometimes by it, Support is implied, when the sense of Sin, and fear of God's Wrath, is not altogether removed and taken away, but so mitigated and abated, that Hope doth more easily prevail in the Soul than Fear: And we resolve to wait on God, though we cannot so fully clear up our Inte∣rest in him. You have many Conflicts and Fears, yet some Hope and Expectation to∣wards God: Jonah 2.4, 5. I am cast out of thy sight, yet will I look again to thy Holy Temple. Resolute adherence giveth great support. Job 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him; I will maintain my own ways before him. He dependeth merely on the Covenant. 2. Peace, or some rest from Troubles, and accusations of Conscience, there is some calm and quiet of Soul; Rom. 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, Peace
be on them, and Mercy: Assaulted with none or light Fears, Iohn 16.33. In me ye shall have Peace. I will give you Peace, though not full Spiritual Suavities. 3. The third word is Joy, 1 Pet. 1.8. Ye rejoice with Ioy unspeakable, and full of Glory. In Peace all things are quiet, they have no anxious Thoughts; but in Joy there is a sensible motion of Pleasure and Delight, they are feasted with the pleasures of Faith, Love, and Hope. Let us then bless God for any degree of Comfort.
SERMON XVIII. 2 Thess. 2.17. —And stablish you in every good Word and Work. VVE come now to the Apostle's se∣cond Request for them, and sta∣blish you in every good Word and Work: By every good Word, is meant sound Doctrine; by every good Work, holiness of Life. Doct. Establishment in Faith and Holiness, is a needful Blessing, and earnestly to be sought of God. 1. What this Establishment is. 2. How needful. 3. Why it is to be sought of God. I. What this Establishment is? Answ. Con∣firmation in the Grace that we have received. Now this Confirmation must be distinguish∣ed. 1. With respect to the Power wherewith
we are assisted; there is Habitual Confirma∣tion, and Actual Confirmation. (1.) The Habitual Confirmation is, when the habits of Grace are more setled and in∣creased; 1 Pet. 5.10. The God of all Grace Strengthen, Stablish, Settle you. God hath effe∣ctually called and converted them, and he beggeth the strengthning of the Grace which they had received. Now thus we are esta∣blished, when Faith, Love, and Hope, are increased in us; for these are the Principles of all Spiritual Operations; and when they have gotten good strength in us, a Christian is more established. (1.) Faith is necessary, for we stand by Faith; Rom. 11.20. Because of unbelief they were broken off, but thou stand∣est by Faith: We do not only live by it, but stand by it, and are kept by it; 1 Pet. 1.5. Who are kept by the Power of God through Faith un∣to Salvation. He is strong, that is, strong in Faith, as Abraham was, that believeth the Gospel, and can venture his All upon it, and trust himself in God's hands whatever befal∣leth him. Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not. That was the Grace likely to be assaulted, and would most keep him: had he bin persuaded that Jesus was the Son of God, would he have denied him with Oaths and Execrations? (2.) Love is strong; We are told, Cant. 8.6. That Love is as strong as Death; many Waters cannot quench it; If a man
would give all the substance of his House, it would utterly be contemned. It will not be bribed, or quenched. Our Backsliding cometh from losing our complacency in, or desire of God. There is an averseness from Sin, and zeal against it, as long as we have a sense of our Obligations to God, and a value and esteem of his Grace in Christ; then we con∣tinue in delightful obedience to him, and level and direct our actions to his Glory. (3.) Hope is necessary to stablish the Soul on the promise of Eternal Life. For this is the sure and stedfast Anchor of the Soul. Heb. 6.19. Which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and stedfast: If Hope be strong and lively, present things do not greatly move us. (2.) Actual Establishment, when these Habits are fortified and quickned by the actual Influence of God. As God doth esta∣blish by these habitual Principles, so by the actual motions of his Spirit; for otherwise neither the stability of our Resolutions, nor of Gracious Habits will support us. Not stabi∣lity of Resolutions; Psal. 73.2. As for me, my Feet were almost gone, my steps had well nigh slipt. Not Habits; Rev. 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen those things which remain, that are ready to die. It is true, God ordinarily worketh most strongly with strongest Graces, because their Hearts are most prepared; yet
sometimes weak Christians have gone through great Temptations, when strong ones have failed. Rev. 3.8. Thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my Word, and hast not denied my Name. Sometimes the strong Christian stum∣bleth and falleth, when the weak standeth: God may in an instant confirm a weak Per∣son in some particular Temptation, by his free Assistance, but ordinarily concurreth with the strongest Grace. Thus with respect to the Power, wherewith we are assisted. 2. With respect to the Object, or Matter about which it is conversant; stablished in every good Word and Work; stability in the Doctrine of Faith, and Practice of God∣liness. (1.) In the Doctrine of Faith. It is a great advantage in the Spiritual Life, to have a sound Judgment: Some Men are never well grounded in the Truth, and in the na∣ture and reasons of that Religion which they do profess, and then are always left to a wan∣dering uncertainty, because they resolve not upon Evidence: as Men ordinarily abide not in the place to which they are driven by a Tem∣pest, or the current of the Tides, rather than by aim and choice, though they take shelter there for the present. 1 Thess. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Cer∣tainly Religion in the general must be ta∣ken up by Choice, and not by Chance; not be∣cause
we know no other, but because we know no better: As Jer. 6.16. Stand ye in the Ways and see, and ask for the old Paths, where is the good Way, and walk therein. And the same is true of particular Opinions and Con∣troversies about Religion, till we have , our own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. We stand by the stedfastness of others, when we profess the Truth, meerly because of Company; and when the Chain s broken, we all fall to pieces. Now we ought to be well settled, left we appear to the World with a various Face, which breedeth Atheism in others, and Shame to our selves. It is pos∣sible in particular things, future Light may disprove present Practice; but then we must be able to give a very sufficient account of it. Luther, when he was charged with Apo∣stacy, Consitetu se esse Apostatam, sed beatum & sanctum, qui sidem Diabolo datam non ser∣vavit. While we cry up Constancy, we must not cherish stubborn Prejudice, which shuts the Door upon Truth: However▪ to avoid the opinion of Lightness, before Religious Persons profess any thing, their warrant need to be very clear, both for the World's sake and their own, that they may not make need∣less Troubles, and afterwards change their Mind to the scandalizing of others: And their own sake , James 1.8. A double-minded Man is unstable in all his ways.
And we had need to take care to be right, because every error hath an influence upon the Heart, and Practice: Upon the Heart, as it weakeneth Faith and Love, and Pra∣ctice. Some Opinions have no malignity in themselves, yet the profession of them may divide the Church, and make us by Con∣tentions, Enemies of the growth and pro∣gress of Christ's Kingdom. Now if we would be established in the Truth, we must see what Influence every Truth hath upon the new Nature, either as it worketh to∣wards God by Faith, to keep up our re∣spects to him, or Men by Love, as it fur∣thereth our Duties to them. A Man will not easily let go Truth, that is wont to turn it into Practice, and to live as he believeth. Once more we need to be established in the present Truth; it is no zeal to fight with Ghosts, and antiquated Errors, but take God's part in our time; but usually the Or∣thodoxy of the World, is an Age too short, Men please themselves in things received. (2.) In every good Work, or in holi∣ness of Life. Here needeth the greatest establishment, that we may hold on our course to Heaven; and the usual Apostacy, and Backsliding that Men are guilty of, is from the practice of Religion. It is ill when the Mind is tainted, but worse when the Heart is alineated from God; and commonly
it is the perverse inclination to the Will, that tainteth the Mind: Therefore the great Esta∣blishment, is to be settled in a course of Godliness. 1 Thess. 3.13. That he may esta∣blsh your Hearts unblameable in Holiness before God, even our Father, until the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ, with all his Sains. Now this Establishment is very difficult. First, Because of the contrariety of the Principles that are within us. Gal. 5.17. For the Flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary one to the other; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would. The Garison is not free from Danger, that hath an Enemy lodged within. The love of the World and the Flesh, was in the Heart, before the love of God and Holi∣ness, and these are not wholly rooted out; yea, these are natural to us, whereas Grace is a Plant planted in us, contrary to nature: And the Ground that bringeth forth Weeds and Thistles of its own accord, but the Flow∣ers and good Herbs, with mush Tllage and Cultivation; if it be neglected, the Weeds will soon overgrow the Flowers. Secondly, Because it is more hard to con∣tinue in Conversion, than to covert our selves at first. In our first Conversion we are more passive, it is God that converteth us, and draweth us to himself, and quickens, and plants us into Christ; but in Perseve∣rance,
and fulfilling our Covenanting Duty, we are more active; it is our Work, though we perform it by God's Grace. An Infant in the Mother's Womb is nourished by the nourishment of the Mothr, but afterwards he must suck, and seek his own Nourish∣ment; and the elder he groweth, the more care of his Life is devolved upon himself. Now that which is more our work, is more difficult. It is true, that God that hath be∣gun a good Work, doth perfect it, but not without our care, Phil. 1.6. When we are fitted and prepared unto good Works, God expecteth from us, that we should walk in them. God establisheth us in the Text, but it is in every good Work. Beside, in Con∣version we make Covenant with God, but by Perseverance we keep Covenant with him. Now it is easier to consent to Condi∣tions, than it is to fulfil them; the Ceremo∣nies at first consent of Marriage are not so difficult, as to perform the duties of the Mar∣riage Covenant: It is more easie to build a Castle in time of Peace, than to keep it in a time of War. Peter more easily consent∣ed to come to Christ upon the Water, but when he begun to try it, his Feet were rea∣dy to sink, Mat. 14.29, 30. When Winds and Waves are against us, alas, how soon do we fail? Therefore a good Spring doth not al∣ways foreshew a fruitful Harvest, nor plenty
of Blossoms store of Fruit. We are carried on with great Life and Earnestness for a while, in the profession of Religion, we consent to follow Christ; but when we meet with Dif∣ficulies not foreseen, or allowed for, we faint and are discourage. Thirdly, With respect to the Subject in which it is seated, which is the Soul with its faculties. The strength of the Body is known by Experience rather than by De∣scription; but the strength of the Soul must be determined by its right constitution to∣wards Good and Evil. The Faculties of the Soul are either the Understanding, wherein lieth the Directive Councel, or the Will, wherein lieth the Imperial Power, or the Affections, wherein lieth the Executive Pow∣er of the Soul. 1. The Mind, or Understanding, is established, when we have a clear, certain, and full Apprehenon of the truth of the Gospel, it is called Knowledg; the sure, and sound, and certain apprehension of them, is called Faith, or Intellectual Assent, or the full assurance of Vnderstanding, Col. 2.2. when there is a due knowledg of what God hath revealed, with a certain persuasion of the truth of it wrought in us by the Holy Spirit. Now the more clearly, and orderly, and certainly we know these things, the more powerfully do they affect the Heart, and
the more we are established. He that hath little Knowledg, and little Certainty, is cal∣led weak in the Faith. Rom. 14.1. Him that is weak in the Faith receive, but not to doubtful Disputations. And those that have a clearer Understanding, are called strong. As Rom. 15.1. We that are srong, ought to bear the Infirmities of the Weak; meaning strong in Knowledg: So also for certainty of Per∣suasion, it is said, Rom. 4.20. Abraham was strong in Faith, giving glory to God. When in all his Trials, he bore up himself upon the Confidence of God's Word and Promise. Well then, the Mind is confirmed and esta∣blished, when we have a good stock of Know∣ledg, and do firmly believe what we know of God and Christ, and eternal Salvation: But alas, how few Truths do many Christi∣ans know, especially in their order, and as to their worth and weight, and certainty, and so that if we know these things, we know them not as we ought to know them. 1 Cor. 8.2. If any Man think that he knoweth any thing, he knoweth nothing yet as he ought to know them. If we know them Speculative∣ly, we know them not Practically: If we are able to discourse of these things, we do not live by them: If we know them gene∣rally, we do not know them particularly, to direct us in all Cases, wherein they concern us, but are blinded with Temptations: If
we know them comprehensively, so as to look about the compass of them, yet not certain∣ly, John 17.8. and have knwn surely, that I came out from thee, so as to venture our Interests upon them. If we know them darkly, and with an half light, we do not know them clearly and with a full light. There is many times conviction in the Ore, which is not refined into a clear, and distinct knowledg, such as may awe the Heart; if we know these things habitually, we know them not actually, when we should remember them in their season; and Oblivion is a sort of Igno∣rance. Hence come the many doubts we are assaulted with, and all the unevenness and uncertainty of our Lives, so that the Mind needeth to be established in Grace. 2. The Will, which is the Imperial pow∣er of the Soul. Now the Wills establishment is known by its firm and through resolution for God, and against Sin. For God: as Acts 11.23. Barnabas when he had seen the Grace of God, was very glad, and exhorted them all, that with full purpose of Heart they would cleave to the Lord. First choosing, then cleaving, and this with full purpose, when the Will is so fixed in the Knowledg and Faith of the Gospel, that they resolve to abide by their choice: Psal. 27.4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, this will I seek after. When Spiritual Resolution carrieth the force
and authority of a principle in the Soul, and nothing can break it. 1 Pet. 4.1. Arm your selves with the same Mind. As constantly as Christ persevered in the work of Mediation, so be you in the work of Obedience, not∣withstanding the difficulties of it. This pow∣erful Will, that beareth down Oppositions and Temptations, and the greatest Impedi∣ments in the way to Heaven, So that you rather make advantage of Opposition, than are discouraged by it, when sensual, or car∣nal Good is of little force to you, and you can dispise the most pleasing baits of Sin. 3. The Affections are the executive power, and do excite and stir us up to do what the Mind is convinced of, and the Will resolved upon, as to the necessary Duties of the Gospel in order to Eternal Happiness. There is a Backwardness within, and many Temptations without; but an holy Delight overcometh the unwilling backwardness with∣in, and over ballanceth either Worldly Fear, or Wordly Hope without, that the Soul is carried on powerfully towards God. We never work better, than when we work in the strength of some eminent Affection, when the Heart is enlarged. Psal. 119.32. I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shalt inlarge my Heart. Either Love, or Hope. Love filleth us with delight, overcoming our natural slackness and sluggishness in the Ways
of God. Psal. 40.8. I delight to do thy Will, O my God, yea, thy Love is within my Heart. 1 John 5.3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Command∣ments are not grievous. Psal. 112.1. Blessed is the Man that feareth the Lord, that delight∣eth greatly in his Commandments. Hope bear∣eth us up in contempt of present delights, and terrors of Sense. Heb. 3.6. Whose House are we, if we hold fast the considene, and re∣joycing of Hope firm unto the end. So that we serve God with vigour and alacrity. When our Affections are damped, Grace falleth in∣to a consumption; and if you lose your taste, your Practice will languish, your Service of God will not be so uniform. It is a great part of our establishment to keep up the vi∣gour and fervency of our Affections. 4. With respect to the Uses for which it serveth, as to Duties, Sufferings, Con∣flicts. (1.) Doing the Will of God, or dischar∣ging our Doings with Delight, Chearfulness, and Constancy: for all strength is for Work. Ephes. 3.16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner Man. That we may do our work with that readiness of Mind, which becomes Faith in Christ, and Love to God. This is often spoken of in Scripture, Phil. 2.13. For it is God that
worketh in you, both to will and to do, of his good pleasure, . And Heb. 13.21. Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you what is well pleasing in his sight. It is of great use to our establishment, that the Soul be kept doing; for as Wells are the sweeter for draining, so are we the more lively for exercise. Frequent omission of good Duties, or seldom exercise of Grace, necessarily produceth a decay: As a Key rusteth that is seldom turned in the Lock, thereby we lose the life and comfort of Religion, and at length cast it off as a need∣less and unprofitable thing. (2.) For bearing Afflictions, and passing through all conditions with Honour to God, and safety to our selves. Phil 4.13. I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me. Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all Might, according to his glorious Power, with all Pati∣ence. The great use of Establishment, is to fortifie us against all the evils and inconveni∣encies of the present Life; that we may hold on our Course to Heaven in fair Way, or foul, and not be greatly moved by any thing that befalleth us within time. (3.) For Conflicts with Temptations from the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. The World is round about us, and we are accu∣stomed to these enveigling Objects, whose importunity prevaileth at length; the Devil
seeketh to work upon our Affections and In∣clinations, and the Flesh urgeth us to gratifie them; How then is a Christian safe? God establisheth him. Ephes. 6.10. Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his Might. A Christian here is in a Military State, and we of our selves left unto our selves, are like Reeds shaken with every Wind; we have need of establishment in regard of our own Feebleness, and the force of our Enemies. We must be established against the Devil soliciting; against the World, the silent Argument, by which he soliciteth us, and draweth us from God and Heaven; against the Flesh, the rebelling Principle, which is apt to be wrought upon by Satan. Well then, this establishment is that Grace, which enableth us to carry on the Duties of Religion with constancy, frequency, and de∣light; to bear all the inconveniencies of Re∣ligion with Patience and Fortitde; to be more deaf and resolute against all the sug∣gestions of the Devil, or the machinations of the Flesh, stirred up by the World. 5. With respect to the Degree, it is such a strengthning of the Soul, as doth prevent not only our Fall, but our shaking. Before falling away, or our being drawn to Aposta∣cy, there may be a shaking, a doubtfulness, and wavering of mind with respect to the Truth, and much inconstancy and uneven∣ness
of Life with respect to practice. Now Christians, as they must not draw back to Perdition, so they must not be always fluctu∣ating and unfixed, either in Matters of Opi∣nion, but setled in the Truth; or in matters of Practice, there must be a strength and sta∣bility of holy Inclinations, and Resolutions for God and the World to come, still kept up, or else there will be no evenness or unifor∣mity in the course of our Lives; and though we avoid Apostacy, yet we cannot avoid Scandal; though there be no falling back▪ there is a stepping out into By-Paths: 1 Cor. 15.58. Be stedfast and unmoveable, always a∣bounding in the Work of the Lord. And Ephes. 3.17. That ye being rootd and grounded in Love, &c. And Col. 1.23. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and setled, and be not moved away from the Hope of the Gospel. If we do not look to the Degree, our weakness and instability groweth upon us: As in mat∣ters of Opinion, some have an unsetled Head of a vertiginous Spirit, Ephes. 4.14. carried about with every wind of Doctrine: They ne∣ver were well grounded in the Truth, nor took up the ways they are engaged in upon sufficient Evidence; and therefore by their own weakness, and the cunning and diligence of the Seducers, are drawn into Error. Light Chass is blown up and down by every Wind, when solid Grain hitcheth in, and
resteth in the Floor where it is winnowed. An half light maketh us uncertain in our Course. For Matter of Practice, if we al∣low our selves in our first Declnings, the Evil will grow upon us, when the Judgment reasoneth more remisly against Sin than it did before, and the Will doth oppose it with less resolution, or with greater faintness and in∣differency, or when Opposition doth more discourage us. No, there must be a resolved conquest of Temptations that wold pervert you, this will only serve our turn. Heb. 12.3. Consider him that endured such Contradictions, lest ye be weary, and faint in your minds. Wea∣riness is a lesser degree of Deficiency. Many a Man is weary, that is not faint or quite spent: So the practice of Godliness, when the Heart beginning to be alinated and estranged from God, and the Lif of Duty doth decay; when our first Love is gone, our first Works will in a great measure cease. Rev. 2.4, 5. Nevertheless I have something a∣gainst thee, because thou hast left thy first Love. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do thy first Works. Well then, the Degree must be minded, for though a Man may be stedfast in the main, yet he may be somewhat moved and shaken; But a Chri∣stian should not only be stedfast, but un∣moveable, otherwise we shall be very uncer∣tain in our Motions.
2ly; How needful it is, this is in a great measure shewed already. But yet more ful∣ly. (1.) Man at best is but a Creature; the New Creation doth carry a great correspon∣dence with the Old and First Creation: 'Tis not enough that the Creature be, but he must be sustained in Being; we have our Being in God still, Acts 17.28. For in him we live, and move, and have our Being. As Providence is a continual Creation, so stablishing Grace is the continuance of the New Creation. The same Grace that sets us in the state of the New Creation, the same stablisheth us. God found no stability in the Angels, therefore it is said he trusteth them not, Iob 15.15. Be∣hold, he putteth no trust in his Saints; yea, the Heavens are not clean in his sight. They stand by the Grace and Favour of God. Take the best Creatures even as Creatures, they are de∣fective and unstable in themselves; for God will have the Creature, as a Creature, to be a dependent thing on the Creator, who only is a Being of himself. Man at his best estate was but an unstable Creature, for Adam gave out at the first assault, and since we are very unstable, blown down with the blast of every little Temptation. Even in the State of Grace, we are like a Glass without a bot∣tom, broken as soon as out of hand; and therefore God alone is able to make us stand,
and persevere in this Grace that we ave re∣ceived. 2 Cor. 1.21. Now e tha stablisheth us with you in Christ, is God. After we are in Christ, our stability is in God alone. (2.) The Indisposition of our Natures both to every good Word and Work. 1. To every good Word. The Truths of the Gospel are supernatural: Now things that are plan∣ted in us contrary to Nature, can ardly sub∣sist and maintain themselves. We have some Seeds of the Law yet left in our Hearts, Rom. 2.14. But the Gospel deendeth on sure Revelation; therefore are thre so many Heresies against the Gospel, but none against the Law: Therefore as they depend upon a Divine Revelation, they must b setled in our Hearts by a Divine Power, and by a Divine Power preserved there; that as the Doctrine is supernatural, so the Grace may be also by which we do receive it. Faith is the Gift of God, Ephes. 2.8. For y Grace ye are saved through Faith; and that not of your slves, it is the Gift of God; both as to its be∣ginning, so to its preservation and inrease. 2. To every good Work. There is not only slowness and backwardness o Heart to the Duties of the Gospel, but somewhat of the old enmity and averseness remaineth still. Our Hearts are not only inconstant and un∣stld, but very wayward, Ier. 14.10. Tus ith the Lord to this Peple, Thus ave tey lo∣ved
to wander. Psal. 95.10. It is a People that do err in their Heart. Moses was no sooner gone aside wth God in the Mount, but the Israelites after thei so∣lemn Covenant fel to Idolatry. Before the Law could be written, they brake it. Now we that have a war∣ring Principle within, how can we and unless God etablish us? There is a bck-byass, there are the Seds of Wantonness, Anger, Revenge, Envy, Impatience, Worldliness, Ambition, and Sensuality. God knoweth how little the flshly Mind and Inte∣rest is conquered in us; and therefore if he did not establish us, we should soon shew our selves (3.) In regard of those Oppositions that are made against us after once we be in Christ. It is not enough that we are brought out of the Kingdom of Satan, but after we are rescued out of his Hand and Power, he pursueth us with continual malice; therefore there must be the same power to stablish us still in Grace, that first brought us into the tate of Grace: Col. 1.13. Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translted us into the Kingdom of hs dear Son: compared with 1 Iohn 4.4. Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them: because greate is he that is in you, than he tht is in the World. The World runneth a quite contrary course thn those do that set their faces Heavenward, and therefore ma∣lign them, and pursue them with Reproaches and Troubles. 1 Pet. 4 4, 5. Wherin they think it strange tht you run not with them to the sam excess of Riot, speaking evil of you; who shll give account to him that is ready to judg the quick and the dead. And most commonly our Supports are invisible, and we have no temporal Interet to lean to. But, 2 Tim. 1.17. For the which cause I also suffr thse things, nevetheless I am not ashamed; for I know whom I have believed, and I am perdd he is able to keep that which I have com∣mitted
unto him against that day. We bear these Afflictions by the Power of God. 4ly; We see here the Saints miscarry when God withdraweth his supporting Grace but in part; as Peter, David. Peter was in the state of Grace, and Christ prayed that his Faith might not utterly fail; yt when God did not estblish him, you see what Sins he was guilty of in that combat: David was a Man after God's own Heart, but how did he fall when God upheld him not? Psal. 51. Hezekiah,  Cron. 42.31. Howbeit in the business of the Ambassadors of the Princes of Babylon, who sent unto him to enquire of the Wonder that was done in the Land, God left him to ry him, that he might know all that was in his Heart. Thus is God fain for to hum∣ble his Children, to teach them Dependnce; and to put them in ind that thy do not stand by their own strength. 3. Why it is to be sought of God? (1.) He only is able, Rom. 16.25. Now to him that is of power to establish you according to my Gospel, and the preaching of Iesus Christ, &c. Surely God never made a Creature too hard for himself. He is able to dfat the Power of Enemies, and to preserve is People in the midst of Temptations. So Iude v. 24. To him that is able to keep you from falling, &c. And, He is able to keep that which I have committed to h, 2 Tim. 1.12. The Saints gather much com∣or from this: or it is a relief to their thoughts against the dreadul and powerful opposiion of the World; they have no reason to doubt of their Fa∣thr's Love. That whih surprizeth thein, is to see all the World against them. It is the dreadfulness of power in the Temptation, and sense of their own weaknss, therefore the power of God is a fit relief to them.
(2.) God is not very forward to cast you off, when he hath a just cause to do it. Your constant experience evidenceth this; If he here had done so, what had become of you long ago? For you have given him abundant occasion, you have wearied him with your Sins, abused his Mercies; and yet he hath not cast you off: He hath not utterly forsaken you, when you have turned the back upon him, and have been ready to forsake him, but hath kept you from Dangers, and in Dangers; yea, called you to his Grace, confirmed you hitherto, why should you doubt of his Grace for the future? 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deli∣ver: in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us, 2 Tim. 4.17, 18. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion. And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil Work, and will pre∣serve me unto his Heavenly Kingdom: To whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen. (3.) He hath made Promises of Sustentation, and eservation: Psal. 73.23. Nevertheless, I am continually with thee, thou hast holden me by my right∣hand. Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for God upholdeth him with his Hand. If God hath promid to preserve that Grac which he hath once given, should not we pray or the continuance of it with the ore encouagement? (4.) The experience of the Saints. Psal. 9.18. When I said my foot slippeth, thy Mercy O Lord, held me up. God's Manutenancy is there asserted. Vse. Is to press us at all times, to look up to God for establishment: But especially in two Sa∣sons.
(1.) When we begin to dcline, and grow more remiss and indifferent in the practice of God∣liness. If Grace be weak, you must get it streng∣thened. When you grow bolder in Sin, and more strange to God and Jesus Christ, and have little con∣verse with him in the Spirit; Oh! it is time to be insant and earne with God, that he would reco∣ver you: Though you have embezled your Strength, yet you have to do with  Merciful God; go to him for Help. Psal. 17.5. Hold up my oings in thy Path, that my foot-steps sip not. You have orfeited the more plentiful aids o Grace; but beg hm not to forsake you utterly. You must confess the Sin, but God must remedy the vil. Psal. 119.133. Order my steps in thy Word: and let not any Iniquity have dominion over me. Lord, I am apt to be led away with worldy Allurements, my Spiritual Tae is disempered with carnal Vanities: But, let not Iniqui∣ty have dominion over me. (2.) In unsettled Times, when we are full of Fears, and think we shall never hol out in a holy Course; God that keepeth us in times of Peace, will hold us up in times of Trouble. Psal. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. FINIS. ADVERTISEMENT. THere is lately Printed, Twenty Select Sermons, Preached by the late Reverend and Learned Divine, Doctor Thomas Manton, in Quarto, pub∣lished by Dr. William Bates.
