O729 12297468 59078
A Continuation OF THE EXPOSITION OF THE EPISTLE OF Paul the Apostle TO THE HEBREWS. Viz. ON THE Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, and Tenth Chapters. WHEREIN Together with the Explication of the Text and Context. The Priesthood of Christ as Typed by those of Melchisedek and Aaron, with an Account of their distinct Offices, The Nature and Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, as Typed by all the Sacrifices of the Law, The Erection of the Tabernacle according to the Heavenly Pattern; with the Institution of all its Utensils and Services, their especial Signification and End, The Nature and Differences of the Two Covenants, the Old and the New, with the preference of the latter above the former, The Reasons and Necessity of the taking away and Abolishing of the Old Legal Worship annexed unto the Covenant of Sinai; & the Means whereby it was removed, The Glorious Administration of the Mediatory Office of Christ in Heaven; and sundry other Evangelical Truths of the highest Importance, WITH The Duty of Believers in hearing the Word in Times of Trial and Persecution; the Means and danger of Apostacy from the Profession of the Gospel, Are Declared, Explained and Confirmed. As also; The Pleas of the Jews for the Continuance and Perpetuity of their Legal Worship; with the Do∣ctrine of the principal Writers of the Socinians about these things, are Examined and Dis∣proved. By J. Owen. D. D. John 5. 39.Search the Scriptures. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Ponder, at the Sign of the Peacock in the Poultry, near the Church, 1680.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. I have so fully in my former Discourses on this subject, declared the general design, scope and end of this Epistle, the pro∣per way and means of its Interpretation, with the method of the present Exposition, which is the same throughout, that I shall not at all here detain the Reader with a renewed Declaration of any of them. Onely some few things which immediately concern that part of the Exposition which is now presented unto him, and my labour therein, may be mentioned (as I suppose) unto some usefulness. 1. And it may not be amiss in the first place to take notice of an Objection the present endeavour seems liable and obnoxious unto; and this is the Unseasonableness of it. We live in times that are for∣tifyed against the use of Discourses of this nature, especially such as are so long and bulky. The world, and the minds of men therein, are filled with disorder and confusion, and the most are at their wits end with looking after the things that are come and coming on the Earth. They have enough to do, in hearing, telling and reading, real or pretended News of publick affairs, so as to divert them from inga∣ging their time, and industry in the perusal and study of such discour∣ses. Besides, there is not any thing in this now published to condite it unto the Palate of the present Age, in personal contests and re∣flections, in pleading for or against any party of men or especial way in the profession of Religion; only the fundamental Truths of the Gospel are occasionally contended for. These and the like conside∣rations, might possibly in the judgment of some, have shut up this
whole discourse in darkness upon the account of its being unseason∣able. I shall briefly acquaint the Reader with what Relieved me against this objection, and gave me satisfaction in the publishing of this part of the Exposition, after it was finished. For I could not but re∣member that the times and seasons where in the former parts of it were published, were very little more setled and quiet, than are these which are now urgent on us: yet did not this hinder but they have been of some use and benefit unto the Church of God in this Nation and others also. And who knows but this may have the same blessing ac∣companying of it? He who hath supplyed seed to the sower, can mul∣tiply the seed sown, and encrease the Fruits of it. And although at present the most are really unconcerned in things of this nature, yet not a few from many parts both at home and abroad, have earnestly solicited the continuation of the Exposition, at least unto that period whereunto it is arrived. Besides, in labours and endeavours of this nature, respect is not had meerly unto the present Generation, especially as many are filled with prejudices and causeless enmity against the Author of them. We have our selves more benefit and advantage by the writings of sun∣dry persons in former Ages, than they received by them who lived in their own days. Pascitur in Vivis Livor, post Fata quiescit. It is therefore the Duty of some in every Age to commit over unto those that shall survive in the Church of God and profession of the Truth, their Knowledge in the Mysteries of the Gospel, whereby spiritual light may be more and more encreased unto the perfect day. On these and the like Considerations I have wholly left these times and seasons in his hand who hath the sole disposal of them; and will not so far observe the present blustering Wind and Clouds as not to sow this seed, or despair of reaping Fruits thereby. 2. The Reader will find no Exercitations prefixed unto this Vo∣lume, as there are unto the former. And this is so fallen out, not because there were no things of weight or moment occurring in these Chapters, deserving a separate, peculiar handling and consideration; But for other reasons which made the omission of them necessary and unavoidable. For indeed continued informities and weaknesses in my near Approach unto the Grave, rendred me insufficient for that la∣bour,
especially considering what other duties have been and yet are incumbent on me. And yet also my Choice was compliant with this Necessity. For I found that this part of the Exposition comprizing so many Chapters, and those all of them filled with glorious Mysteries, and things of the highest importance unto our Faith and Obedience, would arise unto a greatness disproportinate unto the former, had it been accompanied with the like Exercitations. Whereas therefore I foresaw from the beginning that they must be omitted, I did treat somewhat more fully of those things which should have been the sub∣ject of them, than otherwise the nature of an exposition doth require. Such are the Person and Office of Melchisedek, The nature of the Aaronical Priesthood, and of the Priesthood of Christ as typed thereby, The framing of the Tabernacle with all its Vessels and U∣tensils with their use and signification, The solemnity of the Cove∣nant made at Sinai, with the difference between the two Covenants, the Old and the New; The manner of the Service of the High Priest on the Day of Expiation, with his entrance into the most Ho∣ly place, The cessation, expiration or abrogation of the first Cove∣nant, with all the services thereunto belonging; with sundry other things of the like importance. Whereas therefore these must have been the subject of such Exercitations, as might have been prefixed un∣to this part of the Exposition, the Reader will find them handled somewhat at large in the respective places wherein they do occur in the Epistle it self. 3. Concerning the subject matter of these Chapters I desire the Reader to take notice. 1. That the whole substance of the Doctrinal part of the Epistle is contained in them; so as that there is nothing of difficulty in the whole case managed by the Apostle, but is largely treated of in these Chapters. 2. That they do contain a full declaration of that Mystery which from the beginning of the World was hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ; to the intent that even unto the Principali∣ties and Powers in Heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God. In particular, 1. The Wisdom and Grace of God in the Constitution and mak∣ing of the Covenant at Sinai; in the Institutions of all the Worship and Divine services thereunto belonging; in the Holy Fabricks, offer∣ings and sacrifices of the Priests and Church of Israel, are declared and manifested therein. For all these things in themselves were car∣nal, and so used by the generality of the People, in a way unworthy of the Wisdom and Holiness of God.
But the Apostle declares and makes it evident in these Chapters, that in the design and intention of God, they had all of them an End and Use far more glorious than what appeared in their outward Ad∣ministration; As also what intimations God made unto the Church of this end of them, and his intention in them. 2. There is therefore in these Chapters an absolute, infallible In∣terpretation of the whole Law, without which it would be a Sealed Book, and of no use unto us. But as the intention and mind of God in those legal Institutions is here declared, there is nothing in the whole Scripture that tends more to the illumination of our Minds, and the strengthning of our Faith, than doth the Law of these Institutions, as is manifested on all occasions in our Exposition. By vertue hereof there is not the meanest Christian Believer, but doth or may understand more of the Books of Exodus and Leviticus, see more of the Wisdom, Holiness and Grace of God in them, and know more of the nature and use of these legal Institutions, not only than all the present Jews, and their Teachers, but than was ever distinctly known in the Church of Israel, of Old. 3. The wisdom, righteousness and faithfulness of God in the Re∣moval of the Old Covenant, with all the services thereunto belonging, are herein abundantly vindicated. This is the stone of stumbling unto this day to all the Jews. This they quarrel and contend with God and Man about; seeming to be resolved that if they may not enjoy their old Institutions, they will part with and leave even God himself. Neither indeed is it God, but a shadow of their old carnal Ordinances, which at present they cleave unto, worship and adore. Wherefore the Apostle by all sorts of Arguments doth in these Chapters manifest that before them, under them, by them, in them, God by various ways taught the Church, that they were not to be continued, that they were never ap∣pointed for their own sakes, that they only fore-signifyed the introdu∣ction of a better and more perfect Church State, than what they could attain unto, or be of use in; as also that their very Nature was such as rendred them obnoxious unto a removal in the appointed season. Yea, he demonstrates that without their Abolition, God could never have accomplished the design of his Love and Grace towards the Church, which he had declared in his promises from the Foundation of the World. And this absolutely determined the controversie between the two Churches, that of the Old, and that of the New Testament, with their Different worship and services, which was then a matter of fierce contention in the whole World. Wherefore, 4. The work of the Apostle in these Chapters is to shew the Har∣mony
between the Law and the Gospel, their different Ends and Uses, to take off all seeming Repugnancy and Contradiction between them, to declare the same Grace, Truth and Faithfulness of God in them both, notwithstanding their inconsistent institutions of Divine Worship. Nay he makes it evident not only that there is an Harmony between them, but also an utter impossibility that either of them should be true or pro∣ceed from God, without the other. 5. Herein a glorious account is given of the Representation that was made of the Person and Incarnation of Christ, with the whole Of∣fice of his Mediation, according as it was granted unto the Church in its infant-state. Some have called it the infant-state of Christ as unto his Incarnation, and affirmed that the Ceremonies of the Law were as his swadling Bands. But things are quite otherwise. The glorious state of Christ and his Office is represented unto the Church in its in∣fant-State, when it had no apprehension of spiritual things, but such as Children have of the objects of Reason. In particular, how the An∣tient Church was instructed in the Nature and blessed Efficacy of his Sacrifice, the Foundation of its Salvation, is made gloriously to appear. 6. Directions are given herein unto all unto whom the Gospel is preached, or by whom it is professed, how to behave themselves as unto what God requireth of them, expressed in clear Instructions and pathetical Exhortations, accompanied with glorious Promises on the one hand, and severe Threatnings on the other. Scarcely in the whole book of God such an exact description of the Nature and Work of Faith, the Motives unto it, and Advantages of it; of the deceitful actings of Unbelief, with the ways of its prevalency in the Minds, and over the Souls of men; of the End of true Believers on one hand, and of Hypocrites and Apostates on the other: as is in this discourse of the Apostle. Such a graphical Description and account of these things is given us in the sixth Chapter and the later part of the Tenth, as cannot but greatly affect the minds of all who are spiritually enlight∣ned to behold things of this nature. A blessed glass is represented unto us, wherein we may see the true image and portraiture of Belie∣vers and Unbelievers, their different Ways, Actings and Ends. In the whole there is made a most holy Revelation and Representa∣tion of the Wisdom of God, of the Glory of Christ, of the mystery of Grace in the Recovery of fallen man, and the Salvation of the Church, with the future Judgement, so as that they have a greater Lustre, Light and Glory in them unto such as have the Eyes of their under∣standings opened to behold spiritual things, than is in the Sun shining in
its Strength and Beauty unto the Eyes of Flesh, unto which it is sweet and pleasant to behold the Light. These are the Holy Sayings of God, the Glorious Discoveries of himself and his Grace, the Glass wherein we may behold the Glory of Christ, until we are transformed into the same image from Glory to Glory. What in the Exposition of these things, and others of an alike nature God hath enabled me to attain unto, is left unto the Use of the Church, and the Judgement of every learned, pious, and candid Reader. London April 17th. 1680. J. Owen.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE SIXTH CHAPTER Of the EPISTLE of PAUL the Apostle UNTO THE HEBREWS. CHAP. VI. THis whole Chapter is a continuation of the Digression which the Apostle had occasionally entred into, in the Eleventh Verse of the preceding Chapter. For upon the consideration of the Greatness of the Mystery, and Difficulty of the Doctrine which he designed to instruct these Hebrews in, and his fear of their Disability or Unpreparedness (at least of some) to receive it in a due manner unto their Edification, he engageth into a new Discourse, filled up with Reasons and Arguments to excite them unto a diligent Attendance. And this he so doth, as in the very last words of this Chapter, to return by an Artificial connexion of his Dis∣course unto what he had asserted in the Tenth Verse of that foregoing. There are Four general parts of this Chapter. (1) The Proposition of what he intended to do, or discourse concerning; with an opposition thereunto of what was by him to be omitted: v. 1, 2, 3. (2) An Excitation of the Hebrews unto singular diligence in at∣tending unto the most perfect Doctrines of Christianity, and making a progress in the Knowledge of Christ. And this he doth from the consideration of the greatness of the Sin, and inevitableness of the Destruction of Apostates. For this sort of Persons do commonly arise from among such, as having received the Truth, and made a Profession thereof, do not diligently endeavour a Progress towards Perfection, according to their Duty. V. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. (3) A Lenifying of the severity of this Commination in respect of its Application unto these Hebrews. For he expresseth his hope that it did not so belong unto them, or that the Sin condemned should be found in them; or the Punishment threat∣ned fall on them. But the warning it self contained in the Commination, was, as he shews, Good, Wholsome and Seasonable. And of this his Hope and Judgment con∣cerning the Hebrews, he expresseth his Grounds taken from the Righteousness of God, their own Faith and Love, which he prays they may persevere in. V. 9, 10, 11, 12. (4) An Encouragement unto Faith and Perseverance, from the Example of Abraham,
who first received the Promises; from the Nature of the Promises themselves; and their Confirmation by the Oath of God, with the Assistance we may have by our Hope in Christ. thereby. V. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. which last Discourse he issueth in the prin∣cipal matter he intended to insist upon, whereunto he now returns again, having di∣gressed necessarily into those Exhortations and Arguings from the first Proposals of it in the Eleventh Verse of the foregoing Chapter. In the first part of the Chapter comprised in the three first Verses, there are three things considerable; (1) A general Proposition of the Apostles Resolution to proceed unto the more perfect Doctrines of the Gospel, as also of his passing over the first Principles of Christianity: v. 1. (2) An Amplication of this Proposition, by an Annumeration of those Doctrines which he thought meet at present to pass by the handling of: v. 1, 2. (3) A Renovation of his Resolution to pursue his Proposition, with a Submission to the Will and good Pleasure of God, as to the Execution of his Purpose; the Expression whereof, the present state of these Hebrews peculiarly called him unto. V. 4. Ver. 1. . ; ideo; quapropter; propterea: wherefore; , intermittentes, Ari. vul. Lat. Rhem. . intermitting; as though the Apostle laid these things aside only for the present, with a Resolution to take them up again in this Epistle. But neither doth the word signifie any such thing, nor doth he so do. Relinquentes, Bez. leaving Syr.  emittamus; or de∣mittamus; dismissing; properly , Arias; Sermonem initii Christi. Vul. inchoationis Christi; the word of the Beginning of Christ, as the Rhemists; very ob∣scurely in Latin; and in our Language. Erasm. Omisso qui in Christo rudes inchoat Sermone. The word that entreth those that are unskilful, or Beginners in Christ. So also Beza. We; The Principles of the Doctrine of Christ. Syr: The Beginning of the word of Christ; For, the word of the Beginning of Christ. The word of; or that which concerns the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; , feramur, Let us be car∣ried on. Syr.  let us come to; Arab. let us lift up our selves. Rhem. let us proceed. Ours, let us go on to Perfection. Wherefore leaving the Doctrine of the Beginning of Christ, let us be carried on to Perfection. Ver. 1. ; Wherefore. This Illative manifests that there is a Dependance in what ensues, on what was discoursed of before. That which follows, may be either an Inference from it, or be the Effect of a Resolution occasioned by it. Wherefore; that is, either this Duty will hence follow; or seeing it is so, I am thus resolved to do. And this Connexion is variously apprehended on the account of the Ambiguity of the Expression in the Plural Number and first Person.  we leaving, let us go on. For in this kind of Expression there is a Rhetorical Communication. And the Apostle either assumes the Hebrews unto himself, as to his work, or joins himself with them as to their Duty. For if the words be taken the first way, they declare his Resolution in Teaching; if in the latter, their Duty in Learning. And if we take the words in the first way, as expressing the Apostles Resolution as to his own Work, the Inference seems to have an immediate dependance on the Twelfth Verse of the preceding Chapter, passing by the Discourse of the following Verses as a Digression to be as it were included in a Parenthesis. Of whom we have many things to say and hard to be uttered, seeing you are dull in hearing; I shall there∣fore for your future Instruction, leave the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and go on unto more sublime mysteries, or the Wisdom that we speak among them that are Perfect. For although he had blamed them for their dulness and backwardness in Learning, yet he doth not declare them, at least not all of them, to be such as were uncapable of these myste∣ries, so as that he ought not to communicate them unto them. This is the meaning of the words, if the Apostle assume the Hebrews unto himself, and if it be his work that is intended. Secondly, If in the latter way the Apostle join himself unto the Hebrews, and it is their Duty which is intended, namely, that they should not always dwell on the first Prin∣ciples or Lessons of Christianity, but press on unto Perfection, then (1) This Illative  seems to have respect unto the Time in the first Place, which these Hebrews had enjoyed under the means of growth in the Knowledge of Christ; on the account whereof he affirms that
it might be justly expected concerning them, that they should be Teachers of others. Therefore, saith he, or on the consideration hereof, it is just and equal that you should go on towards Perfection; which that they would do, he expresseth his Hopes concerning them, v. 9. (2) It respects also that Negligence and Sloth, and backwardness to learn, which he had reproved in them. As if he had said, Seeing therefore you have hitherto been so careless in the Improvement of the means which you have enjoyed, which hath been no small Fault or Evil in you, but that which hath tended greatly to your disad∣vantage, now at last stir up your selves unto your Duty, and go on to Perfection. We need not precisely to determine this Connexion, so as to Exclude either Intention. Yea it may be the Apostle having respect unto the preceding Discourse, and considering thereon both the present condition of the Hebrews, as also the necessity that there was of in∣structing them in the mystery of the Priesthood of Christ, without the Knowledge whereof they could not be freed from their entanglements unto the Aaronical Priesthood and Ceremo∣nies which were yet in Use and Exercise among them, doth intend in this Inference from thence, both his own Duty and theirs; that he should proceed unto their farther Instruction, and that they should stir up themselves to learn and profit accordingly. This the Duty of his Office and Care of them, and this their Advantage and Edification required. For this alone was the great means and expedient to bring them off in a due manner and upon right grounds, from that compliance with Judaisme, which God would now no longer con∣nive at, nor tolerate the practice of, as that which was inconsistent with the Nature and Design of the Gospel. And it is apparent that before the writing of this Epistle, they were not sufficiently convinced that there was an absolute End put unto all Mosaical In∣stitutions. For notwithstanding their Profession of the Gospel, they still thought it their Duty to abide in the Observation of them. But now the Apostle designs their Instruction in that mystery, which particularly evinceth their Inconsistency with Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, and Obedience unto him. , Omittentes, relinquentes; we, leaving;  is sometimes dimitto, to dismiss, . to discharge, or let go, sometimes omitto, missum facio, to omit; to pass by; And it is used with respect unto Speech of things that have been already mentioned, , in Lucian; omitting these Discourses; laying aside farther Speech concerning these things. So is it here used by our Apostle. But the signification of the word is to be limited unto the present occasion. For consider the things here spoken of absolutely, and they are never to be left either by Teachers or Hearers. There is a Necessity that Teachers should often insist on the Rudiments, or first Principles of Religion. And this not only with respect unto them who are continually to be trained up in Knowledge from their Infancy, or unto such as may be newly converted; but also they are occasionally to be inculcated on the minds of those who have made a farther Progress in Knowledge. And this course we find our Apostle to have steered in all his Epistles. Nor are any Hearers so to leave these Principles, as to forget them, or not duely to make use of them. Cast aside a constant regard unto them in their proper Place, and no Progress can be made in Knowledge, no more than a Building can be carried on, when the Foundation is ta∣ken away. But respect is had on both sides, unto the present Occasion. Let us not always dwell upon the Teaching and Learning of these things, but omitting them for a Season, as things that you are, or might be well acquainted withall, let us proceed unto what is farther necessary for you. It is the Duty of Ministers of the Gospel to take care not only that their Doctrine they Preach Obs. 1. be true, but also that it be seasonable with respect unto the State and Condition of their Hearers. Herein consists no small part of that Wisdom which is required in the Dispensation of the word. Truths unseasonable, are like Showers in Harvest. It is a word spoken in Sea∣son, that is Beautiful and Useful. Prov. 25. 11. Yea, every thing is beautiful in its own Time, and not else. Ecclesiast. 3. 11. And two things are especially to be considered by him who would order his Doctrine aright, that his words may be fit, meet, and season∣able. First the Condition of his Hearers, as to their present Knowledge and Capacity. Suppose them to be persons as the Apostle speaks, of full Age, such as can receive and digest strong meat, that have already attained some good Acquaintance with the mysteries of the Gospel. In Preaching unto such an Auditory, if men through want of Ability to do otherwise, or want of Wisdom to know when they ought to do otherwise, shall constantly treat of first Principles, or things common and obvious, it will not only be unuseful unto their Edification, but also at length make them weary of the Ordinance it self. And there will be no better Effect on the other side, where the Hearers being mostly
weak, the more abstruse mysteries of Truth are insisted on, without a prudent accommo∣dation of matters suited unto their capacity. It is therefore the Duty of Stewards in the House of God, to give unto his Houshold their proper Portion. This is the blessed Advice our Apostle gives to Timothy. 2 Tim. 2. 15. Study to shew thy self approved unto God, a Work-man that needeth not to be ashamed, , rightly cutting out the word of Truth. This is that whereby a Minister may evince himself to be a Work-man that needeth not to be ashamed. If as when the Beasts that were Sacrificed being cut into Pieces, the Priest according to the Law, disposed of the Parts of it unto the Altar, himself, and him that brought it, that each in the Division might have his proper and Legal Portion; so he give out a due and proper part unto his Hearers, he is an approved Work-man. Others cast all things into Confusion and Disorder, which will at length redound unto their own shame. Now whereas in all Churches, Audito∣ries, or Congregations, there is so great a variety of Hearers with respect unto their pre∣sent Attainments, Knowledge and Capacities, so that it is impossible that any one should always, or indeed very frequently accommodate his matter and way of Instruction to them all; it were greatly to be desired that there might be, as there was in the Primitive Church, a Distribution made of Hearers, into several Orders or Ranks, according as their Age, or means of Knowledge do sort them, that so the Edification of all might be distinctly provided for. So would it be, if it were the work of some separately to Instruct those who yet stand in need to be taught the first Principles of the Oracles of God; and of others to build up towards Perfection those who have already made some Progress in the Knowledge of the Gospel; or the same work may be done by the same persons at several Seasons. Nor doth any thing hinder, but that those who are strong, may be occasionally present at the Instructions of the weak; and the latter at the Teach∣ings of the former, both to their great Advantage. In the mean time, until this can be attained, it is the Duty and Wisdom of a Minister, to apply himself in the Doctrine he Preacheth, and the manner of his Delivery, unto the more general State of his Hearers, as by him it is apprehended or known. And as it will be a trouble unto him who esteems it his Duty to go forward in the Declaration of the mysteries of the Gospel, to fear that many stay behind, as being unable to receive and digest the Food he hath provided; so it should be a shame to them, who can make no Provision but of things trite, ordinary and common, when many perhaps among their Hearers, are capable of feeding on better or more solid Provision. Again, (2) The Circumstances of the present Time are duely to be considered by them who would Preach Doctrine that should be Seasonable unto their Hearers. And these are many, not here to be particularly insisted on. But those espe∣cially of known publick Temptations, of prevalent Errors, and Heresies, of especial Oppo∣sition and hatred unto any important Truths, are always to be regarded. For I could easily manifest that the Apostle in his Epistles, hath continually an especial respect unto them all. Neither was a due consideration hereof ever more necessary, than it is in the Dayes wherein we live. And other things may be added of the like Nature unto this purpose. Again; Some important Doctrines of Truth may in the Preaching of the Gospel, be omitted for a Season; but none must ever be forgotten or neglected. So deals the Apostle in this Place, and Light hath been sufficiently given us hereinto, by what hath already been discoursed. 2. That which is passed over here, he calls,  Sermonem de Christo initiantem. Sermo exordij Christi. Sermo quo instituuntur rudes in Christo. We say, . the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ; I fear somewhat improperly. For the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ indefinitely, must include all, at least the most principal of those which are so:  the word; that is, the Word Preached. So  is fre∣quently used. 1 Cor. 1. 18. And the Name Christ, is not taken here Personally, neither efficiently, as though, of Christ, should be whereof Christ is the Author, nor Objectively concerning Christ; but it is taken Metonymically for the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Profession of that Religion which was taught by him. So that the word of Christ is no more but the Doctrine of the Gospel as Preached and Taught.  containeth a Limitation of this Doctrine with respect unto some parts of it. That is, those which men usually and ordinarily were first instructed in; and which from their own Nature it was necessary that so they should be. These are here called the word of the Beginning of Christ. And what these Doctrines are, the Apostle declares particularly in the End of this Verse, and in the next, where we shall enquire into them. They are the same with the first Principles of the Oracles of God, whereof mention was made before. Having
declared what for the present he would omit and pass by, although there was some ap∣pearance of a necessity to the contrary, the Apostle expresseth what his present design in general was, and what was the End which therein he aimed at. Now this was that, not being retarded by the Repetition or Reinculcation of the things which he would there∣fore omit, they might, he in Teaching, they in Learning, go on to Perfection. And two things must be considered. (1) The End intended; (2) The manner of pressing to∣wards it. The End is , Perfection. That is, such a knowledge of the mysterious and . sublime Doctrines of the Gospel, as those who were compleatly initiated, and throughly instructed, were partakers of. Of this he says , 1 Cor. 2. 6. we speak wisdom among the Perfect; or declare the deep mysteries of the Gospel, the Wisdom of God in a mystery, unto them that are capable of them. It is then a Per∣fection that the Apostle aims at; but such as comes under a double Limitation. (1) From the Nature of the thing its self. It is only an intellectual Perfection, a Perfection of the mind, in Knowledge, that is intended. And this may be where there is not a moral, gracious, sinless Perfection. Yea men may have great Light in their Minds, whilst their Wills and Affections are very much depraved, and their Lives unreformed. (2) It is a Comparative, and not an absolute Perfection. An absolute Perfection in the Comprehen∣sion of the whole mystery of God in Christ, is not by us attainable in this Life. The Apostle denies it concerning himself, Phil. 3. 12. But such a degree and measure as God is pleased to Communicate to Believers in the ordinary use of means, is that which is intended. See Ephes. 4. 12, 13. Take therefore the Perfection here aimed at, objectively, and it is, the more sublime mysteries of the Gospel which it expresseth; take it subjective∣ly, it is such a clear Perception of them, especially of those which concern the Person and Offices of Christ, and particularly his Priesthood, as grown Believers do usually at∣tain unto. The manner of arriving at this End, he expresseth by , and in this word is  the Rhetorical Communication mentioned. For either he ascribes that unto himself with them, which belonged only unto them; or that unto them which belonged only unto him; or what belonged unto them both, but in a different way; namely, unto him in Teaching, unto them in Learning. Let us be carried on. The word is emphatical, inti∣mating such a kind of progress as a Ship makes when it is under Sail. Let us be carried on; that is with the full bent of our Minds and Affections, with the utmost Endeavours of our whole Souls. We have abode long enough by the Shore; let us now hoist our Sails and launch forth into the Deep. And we may hence learn: (1) That it is a necessary Duty of the Dispensers of the Gospel, to excite their Hearers, by all pressing Considerations, to make a Progress in the Knowledge of the Truth. Thus dealeth our Apostle with these Hebrews. He would not have them always stand at the Porch, but enter into the Sanctuary, and behold the hidden Glories of the House of God. Else∣where he complains of them who are always Learning, that is in the way of it, under the means of it, but yet by reason of their negligence and carelesness in the Application of their minds unto them, do never come , 2 Tim. 3. 4. to a clear Knowledge, and acknowledgment of the Truth. And in the same Spirit he com∣plains of his Corinthians, for their want of Proficiency in spiritual things, so that he was forced in his dealing with them to dwell still on the Rudiments of Religion. 1 Cor. 3. 1, 2. In all his Epistles he is continually as it were pressing this on the Churches, that they should labour to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; and that they might do so, was the principal matter of his Prayers for them. Ephes. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Chap. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19. Col. 2. 1, 2. And they are utter Strangers to his Spirit and Example who are careless in this matter, especially such as perswade and even compel others so to be. Wherefore this Duty is necessary unto Dispensers of the Gospel on sundry Accounts. 1. Because their Hearers do greatly need the Exercise of it. They are apt to be slothful and weary; many begin to run well, but are quickly ready to faint. There is no rec∣koning up the occasions hereof, they are so many and various. Weariness of the Flesh, self-conceit of having attained what is sufficient, perhaps more than others, curiosity and itching ears, in attending unto Novelties, dislike of that Holiness and Fruitfulness of Life, with which an increase of Knowledge openly tends unto; mispending on the one hand, or Covetousness of time for the Occasions of Life on the other; any prevailing Corrup∣tion of Mind or Affections; the Difficulty that is in coming to the Knowledge of the Truth in a due manner, making the Sluggard cry there is a Lion in the Streets, with other
things innumerable, are ready, and able to retard, hinder and discourage men in their progress. And if there be none to excite, warn and admonish them, to discover the variety of the Pretences whereby men in this matter deceive themselves, to lay open the Snares and Dangers which hereby they cast themselves into, to mind them of the Excel∣lency of the things of the Gospel and the Knowledge of them, which are proposed be∣fore them, it cannot be but that by these means, their spiritual Condition will be preju∣diced, if not their Souls ruined. Yea sometimes men are so captivated under the power of these Temptations and Seductions, and are furnished with such Pleas in the Defence of their own Sloth and Negligence, as that they must be dealt wisely and gently withal in Admonitions concerning them, lest they be provoked, or discouraged. Hence our Apostle having dealt Effectually with these Hebrews about these things, shuts up his Dis∣course with that blessed Expression of Love and Condescension towards them; Chap. 13. 22. I beseech you Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation, . So bear with it, as that which however it may be contrary to your present Inclinations, yet proceeds out of tender Love to your Souls, and hath no other End, but your spiritual Advantage. Neither ought this to abate herein the Endeavours of Faithful Ministers, but only give them far∣ther occasion to stir up and exercise their Prudence and Diligence. 2. The Advantages which Professors have by a Progress in the Knowledge of spiritual things, makes it a necessary Duty, to stir them up, and lead them on therein, unto them who are obliged in all things to watch for the good of their Souls. And these Advan∣tages also present themselves in so much variety, that they cannot be here recounted. Mention may be made of some few in a way of Instance. As (1) Hereon in a way of an Effectual means, depends the security of men from seduction into Heresies, noisome and noxious Errors. Of what sort are they whom we see seduced every day? Are they not persons who either are bruitishly ignorant of the very Nature of Christian Religion, and the first Principles of it, with which sort the Papists fill the Rolls of their Converts; or such as having obtained a little superficiary Knowledge, and Confidence therein, without ever laying a firm foundation, or carrying on an orderly superstruction thereon in Wisdom and Obedience; which sort of men fill up the Assemblies of the Quakers. The Foun∣dation of God standeth sure at all times, God knoweth who are his; and he will so pre∣serve his Elect, as to render their total seduction impossible. But in an ordinary way, it will be very difficult in such a time as this wherein Seducers abound, false Doctrines are divulged, and speciously obtruded, wherein there are so many Wolves abroad in Sheeps cloathing, and so great an opposition is on all hands made to the Truth of the Gospel, for any to hold out firm and unshaken unto the End, if their minds be not inlaid and fortified with a sound well grounded Knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel. It is the Teaching of the Spirit, the Unction of the Holy One, whereby we know all necessary Truths, that must preserve us in such a Season. 1 Joh. 2. 27. (2) Proportionable unto our growth in Knowledge, will be our encrease in Holiness and Obedience. If this at any time fall out otherwise, it is from the sins and wickedness of the persons in whom it is; in the Nature of the things themselves, they thus depend on one another. See Ephes. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24. Rom. 12. 2. That Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, is a Maxime that came from Hell to fetch the Souls of men, and carried back multi∣tudes with it, where let it abide. Now the reason why the Improvement of Know∣ledge, doth tend unto the Improvement of Holiness and Obedience, is because Faith acts its self on Christ only in and by the things which we know, where∣by spiritual strength is derived unto us, and we are enabled unto them. (3) Use∣fulness in the Church, unto our Families, and amongst all men depends hereon. This needs no other Confirmation than what the Experience of every man will suggest unto him. And if I should design to go over but the principal Advantages which we attain, or may do so, in the growth of spiritual Light and Knowledge, there is not any thing wherein our Faith or Obedience is concerned, nothing that belongs unto our Graces, Duties, or Communion with God, in them or by them, nothing wherein we are con∣cerned in Temptations, Afflictions or Consolation, but might justly be called in to give Testimony thereunto. If therefore the Ministers of the Gospel have any Care for, or any Love unto the Souls of their Hearers; if they understand any thing of the Nature, of the Office and Work which they have taken on themselves, or the Account they must one day give of the Discharge of it, they cannot but esteem it among the most necessary Duties incumbent on them, to Excite, Provoke, Perswade, and carry on those who are under their Charge, towards the Perfection before described.
There is therefore nothing in the whole Combination against Christ and the Gospel which is found in the Papacy, of a more pernicious Nature and Tendency, than is the Design of keeping the People in Ignorance. So far are they from promoting the Know∣ledge of Christ in the Members of their Communion, as that they endeavour by all means to obstruct it. For not to mention their numerous Errors and Heresies, every one whereof is a diversion from the Truth, and an hindrance from coming to an Acquaintance with it, they do directly keep from them the use of those means whereby alone its Know∣ledge may be attained. What else means their Prohibition of the People from reading the Scripture in a Language they understand? The most expeditious Course for the rendring of all Streams unuseful, is by stopping of the Fountain. And whereas all means of the increase of Knowledge are but Emanations from the Scripture, the Prohibition of the use thereof doth effectually evacuate them all. Was this spirit in our Apostle? Had he this Design? It is evident to all how openly and frequently he expresseth himself to the con∣trary. And to his Example ought we to conform our selves. Whatever other occasion of writing he had, the principal subject of his Epistles, is constantly the increase of Light and Knowledge in the Churches, which he knew to be so necessary for them. We may therefore add, 2. The Case of that People is deplorable and dangerous, whose Teachers are not able to carry them on, in the knowledge of the mysteries of the Gospel. The Key of Knowledge may be taken away by Ignorance as well as Malice. And so it is with many. And when Know∣ledge is perished from their Lips who should preserve it, the People must perish for want of that Knowledge. Hos. 4. 6. Math. 15. 14. 3. In our Progress towards an increase in Knowledge, we ought to go on with Diligence and the full bent of our Wills and Affections. I intend hereby to express the sense of . It is of a passive signification denoting the Effect; Let us be acied, carried on; but it in∣cludes the active use of means for the producing that Effect. And the Duties on our part intended may be reduced unto these Heads. (1) Diligence in an Application unto the use of the best means for this End. Hos. 6. 7. Those that would be carried on towards Perfection, must not be careless, or regardless of opportunities of Instruction, nor be detained from them by Sloth or Vanity, nor di∣verted by the businesses and occasions of this world. Both industry in their pursuit, and choice in the preferring of them before secular Advantages and Avocations, are required hereunto. (2) Intention of mind in the attending unto them. Such persons are neither to be care∣less of them, nor careless under them. There are who will take no small pains to enjoy the means of Instruction, and will scarce miss an opportunity, that they can reach unto. But when they have so done, there they sit down and rest. It is a shame to consider how little they stir up their minds and understandings, to conceive aright, and apprehend the things wherein they are instructed. So do they continue to hear from day to day, and from year to year, but are not carried on one step towards Perfection. If both heart and head be not set at work, and the utmost Endeavours of our minds improved, in searching, weighing, pondering, learning, treasuring up the Truths that we are taught by any means of Divine Appointment, we shall never make the Progress intended. (3) There is required hereunto, that our Wills and Affections be sincerely inclined un∣to, and fixed on the things themselves that we are Taught. These are the principal wings or sails of our Souls, whereby we are or may be carried on in our Voyage. Without this all that we do will amount to nothing, or that which is no better. To love the Truth, the things proposed unto us in the Doctrine of it, to delight in them, to find a goodness, desirableness, excellency, and suitableness unto the condition of our Souls in them, and therefore to adhere and cleave unto them, is that which will make us prosper in our Pro∣gress. He that knows but a little and loves much, will quickly know and love more. And he that hath much Knowledge but little Love, will find that he labours in the Fire, for the increase of the one or other. When in the diligent use of means, our Wills and Affections do adhere and cleave with Delight unto the things wherein we are instructed, then are we in our right course; then if the Holy Gales of the Spirit of God do breath on us, are we in a blessed tendency towards Perfection. 2 Thes. 2. 10. (4) The diligent practice of what we know is no less necessary unto the Duty pressed on us. This is the next and immediate End of all Teaching and all Learning. This is that which renders our Knowledge our Happiness. If you know these things, happy are ye if you do them. Doing what we know is the great Key to give us an Entrance into knowing what we do not. If we do the will of Christ, we shall know of his word, Joh. 7. 17.
And (5) all these are to be managed, with a certain design, and prospect toward this End of growing in Grace and Knowledge, and that until we arrive at the measure of our Perfection appointed unto us in Jesus Christ. In these ways and by these means, we may attain the Effect directly expressed of being carried on in the increase of spiritual Light and Knowledge, and not without them. Verse 1, 2. In the remainder of the first Verse and the next that follows, the Apostle declares in particular Instances, what were the things and Doctrines, which he called in general be∣fore the Beginning of the Doctrine of Christ, whose farther handling he thought meet at present to omit. . The Syriack Translation proposeth these words in the way of an Interrogation, Will you again lay another Foundation? And the Aethiopick, omitting the first Clause; in the way of a Precept; Attend therefore again to the Foundation that you dispute not concerning Repen∣tance from dead works, in the Faith of God. But neither the Text nor Scope of the Apo∣stle will bear either of these Interpretations. , Syr.  an numquid rursum; or whether again; All others; non rursum, non iterum; Arab: nec amplius, not again; not any more. , Syr.  will you lay another Foundation; that term of Another, is both needless because of Again that went before, and corrupts the sense, as though a Foundation different from what was formerly laid, were intended. Besides that is made an Expostulation with the Hebrews, which is indeed expressive of the Apo∣stles Intention, fundamentum jacientes; laying the Foundation. , Syr: unto Repentance from dead works; and so in all the following Instances. There is no difference among Translators about the rest of the words. Only the Aethio∣pick, reads Baptism in the singular number, as the Syriack doth, and placeth Doctrine distinctly by way of Apposition. Baptism, Doctrine, and the Imposition of hands.  the Syriack renders by an Hebraisme  the Resurrection that is from the House of the dead; that is the Grave, the common dwelling place of the dead; as also  by  the Judgement which is for ever; the Sentence whereof is eternally irrevocable, and whose Execution endures always. Not laying again the foundation of Repentance from dead works▪ and of Faith towards God, of Baptisms, Doctrine, and the laying on of hands, of the Resurrection of the Dead, and Ver. 1, 2. Eternal Judgement. There are two things in these words added concerning the Doctrine of the Principles of Christ, or the first Doctrines of Christianity. (1) Their general Nature with respect to the whole Truth of the Gospel, metaphorically expressed; They are the Foundation. (2) Their Nature in particular is declared in sundry Instances; not that all of them are mentioned, but these Instances are chosen out to shew of what kind they were. In the first two things are proposed, (1) The expression of the thing it self intended, which is the Foundation. (2) The Apostles design with respect unto it, not laying it again. is as was said in this matter Metaphori∣cal; including an allusion unto an Architect, and his Building. First he lays the Foun∣dation; . and he is a most foolish Builder who either doth not so, or who rests therein, or who is always setting it up and pulling it down, without making a Pro∣gress. Indeed that Foundation which is all the Building, which hath not an Edifice erected on it, is no Foundation; for that which is materially so, becomes so formally only with respect unto the Building upon it. And those who receive the Doctrines of Christ here called the Foundation, if they build not on them, they will prove none unto them whatever they are in themselves. There are two properties of a Foundation. (1) That it is that which is first laid in every Building. This the natural order of every Building requires. (2) It is that which bears the whole weight of the superstructure; the whole and all the parts of it being laid
upon it, and firmly united unto it. With respect unto the one or other of these pro∣perties, or both, are the Doctrines intended called the Foundation. But in the latter sense they cannot be so. It is Christ himself, and he only, who is so the Foundation as to bear the weight, and to support the whole Building of the Church of God. Isa. 28. 16. Math. 16. 18. 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11. Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. He is so Personally; the Life and Being of the Church consisting in its spiritual Union unto his person; 1 Cor. 12. 12. and Doctrinally, in that all Truth is resolved into what is taught concerning him. 1 Cor. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13. Wherefore it is in allusion unto a Foundation with respect un∣to its first Property, namely, that it is first laid in the Building, that these Doctrines are called the Foundation. So the Jews term the general principles of their Profession  the Foundations of the Law; or the principal Doctrines taught therein. The first Doctrines which are necessary to be received and professed at mens first entrance into Christianity. And the Apostle intends the same things by the threefold expression which he maketh use of. (1) , Chap. 5. 12. The first Princi∣ples of the Oracles of God. (2) , Chap. 6. 1. and (3)  the Beginning of the Doctrine of Christ, and the Foundation. Concerning these things he says, , not laying it again. His saying that he would not lay it again, doth not infer that he himself had laid it before . amongst them, but only, that it was so laid before by some or other For it was not by him that they received their first Instruction, nor doth he mention any such thing in the whole Epistle. Whereas he frequently pleads it unto those Churches which were planted by himself. 1 Cor. 3. 5, 6, 10. Chap. 4. 15. And it is known from the Story that his Ministry was not used in their first Conversion. But he knew that they had faithful In∣structors, who would not leave them unacquainted with these necessary things, and that they would not have been initiated by Baptism, nor admitted into the Church without a Profession of them. Besides they were such, as in general they owned in their former Church State. He might therefore well say, that he would not lay this Foundation again. These things, saith he, you have already been instructed in by others, and therefore I will not, (as also on other considerations) go over them again. Wherefore, Let the Hearers of the Gospel carefully look to it, that they learn those things whereof they have had sufficient Instruction; for if any Evil ensue from their Ignorance of them, they must themselves answer for it. Such Ignorance is their sin, as well as their disadvantage. Preachers may take it for granted, that what they have sedulously and sufficiently instru∣cted their Hearers in, they have also received and learned, because it is through their sinful Negligence if they have not so done. And they are not bound always to wait on some in their Negligences to the disadvantage of others. Secondly, The Apostle declares in particular what were those Doctrinal Principles which he had in general so described, which were taught unto them who were first ini∣tiated into Christianity, and which he will not now again insist upon. Repentance from dead works, &c. We must first consider the Order of these words, and then their sense, or the things themselves intended. Some here reckon up six Principles, some make them seven, some but four, and by some they are reduced unto three. The two first are plain and distinct. Repentance from dead works, and Faith towards God. The next that follow are disputed as to their coherence and sense. (1) , some read these words with a note of distinction be∣tween them, , both the Genitive Cases being regulated by ; The foundation of Baptisms, and of Doctrine, which are put together by Apposition, not depending one upon another.  is the Preaching of the word. And this was one of the first things wherein Believers were to be instructed, namely, that they were to abide , Acts 2. 42. in a constant attendance unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, when preached unto them. And as I shall not assert this Exposition, so I dare not positively reject it, as not seeing any reason cogent to that purpose. But another sense is more probable. Take the words in conjunction, so as that one of them should depend on, and be re∣gulated by the other, and then (1) we may consider them in their order as they lye in the Original. . supposing the first to be regula∣ted by , and both the latter by it. The Baptisms of Doctrine and imposition of hands. There were two things peculiar to the Gospel, the Doctrine of it, and the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Doctrine is compared to, and called Baptism. Deut. 32. 2. Hence the People were said to be Baptized unto Moses, when they were ini∣tiated
into his Doctrines. 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. The Baptism of John was his Doctrine; Acts 19. 3. And the Baptism of Christ was the Doctrine of Christ, wherewith he was to sprinkle many Nations. Isa. 52. 15. This is the first Baptism of the Gospel, even its Doctrine. The other was the Communication of the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Acts 1. 5. That this and this alone is intended by the laying on of hands, I shall prove fully after∣wards. And then the sense would be the foundation of Gospel Baptisms, namely, Preach∣ing and the Gifts of the Holy Ghost. And I know but one Argument against this sense, namely, that it is new and singular. To avoid this, Secondly, The order of-the words must be inverted in their Exposition. Not the Baptisms of Doctrine, but the Doctrine of Baptisms must be intended. But then two things must be observed. (1) That , Baptisms, is not immediately regulated by  the foundation; and so Bap∣tisms are not asserted absolutely to be a Foundation, as is Repentance from dead works, but only the Doctrine about it is so. (2) It cannot be readily conceived why  Do∣ctrine, should be prefixed unto Baptisms alone, and not to Repentance and Faith, the Doctrines whereof also are intended. For it is not the Grace of Repentance and Faith, but the Do∣ctrine concerning them which the Apostle hath respect unto. There is therefore some pecu∣liar reason why Doctrine should be thus peculiarly prefixed unto Baptisms and the laying on of hands, and not to the other things mentioned. For that Imposition of hands is placed in the same order with Baptisms, the conjunctive Particle doth manifest , The following Instances are plain, only some would reduce them unto one Principle; namely, the Resurrection of All unto Judgement. There is therefore in these words, nothing peculiar, nor difficult, but only whatcon∣cerns Baptisms, and the Imposition of hands, the Doctrine whereof is specified. Now I cannot discover any just reason hereof, unless it be, that by Baptisms, and the Imposition of hands, the Apostle intendeth none of those Rudiments of Christian Religion wherein men were to be first instructed, but those Rites whereof they were made Partakers who were so instructed. As if the Apostle had said, These Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, namely, Repentance, Faith, the Resurrection and Judgement, are those Doctrines where∣in they are to be instructed, who are to be Baptized, and to have hands laid on them. According to this sense, the words are to be read as in a Parenthesis. Not laying again the Foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith towards God, (namely, the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of the Imposition of hands) of the Resurrection from the Dead, and Eternal Judgement. When men began to attend unto the Gospel, and thereon to give up their Names to the Church, there were certain Doctrines that they were throughly to be instructed in, before they were admitted unto Baptism; see Gal. 6. 6. These being the Catechetical Rudiments of Christian Religion, are called here , or the Doctrines that were to be taught in order unto the Administration of those Rites. Taking this for the design of the Apostle in the words, as is most probable, there are four Instances given of those principal Rudiments of Christian Religion, wherein all men were to be instructed before they were admitted unto Baptism, who came thereunto in their own personal Right, having not been made Partakers thereof by their Covenant Right through the Profession of their Parents in their Infancy. These were persons to be fully instructed in before their solemn Initiation; the Doctrine concerning them being thence called the Doctrine of Baptisms and of the Imposition of hands, because previously necessary unto the Administration of these Rites. There is a difficulty I confess that this Exposition is pressed with, from the use of the word in the Plural number,  of Baptisms; but this equally concerns all other Expositions, and shall be spoken unto in its proper place. And this I take to be the sense of the words, which the design of the place and manner of expression lead us unto. But yet because sundry Learned Men are otherwise minded, I shall so explain the words, as that their meaning may be apprehen∣ded, supposing distinct heads of Doctrine to be contained in them. Our next work is to consider the particular Instances in their order. And the first is . Repentance from dead works. This was taught in the first place unto all those who would give up themselves to the Discipline of Christ and the  Gospel. And in the Teaching hereof, both the Nature and Necessity of the Duty were regarded. And in the Nature of it two things were declared, and are to be considered. (1) What were dead works; and (2) what is Repentance from them. This expression of dead works, is peculiar unto our Apostle, and unto this Epistle. It . is no where used but in this place, and Chap. 9. 14. And he useth it in Answer unto what he elsewhere declares, concerning mens being dead in Sin by Nature. Ephes. 2. 1, 5.
Col. 2. 13. That which he there ascribes unto their persons, here he attributeth unto their works. These Peter calls mens old Sins; namely, which they lived in before their Con∣version: 2 Pet. 1. 9. , forgetting that he was purged from his old sins. He hath respect unto what is here intended. They were before their Initiation, instructed in the Necessity of forsaking the sins wherein they lived before their Conversion; which he calls their old or former Sins; which he hath also respect unto 1 Epist. Chap. 4. 3. For the Time past of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we walked in Lasciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquettings, and abominable Idolatries. The necessity of Repentance from these and the like sins, was taught them, and which they made Profession of before they were admit∣ted unto Baptism; wherein they received a Token of their being purged from them. And a relapse into these sins, which men had openly professed their Repentance, and Relin∣quishment of, was ever esteemed dangerous, and by some absolutely pernicious, whereon great Contests in the Church did ensue. For the Controversie was not whether men falling into any sin, yea any open or known sin after Baptism, might repent, which none was ever so foolishly proud as to deny: But the Question was about mens open falling again into those sins, suppose Idolatry, which they had made a publick Profession of their Repentance from, before their Baptism. And it came at last to this; not whether such men might savingly Repent, obtain Pardon of their sins and be saved; but whether the Church had Power to admit them a second time to a publick Profession of their Repen∣tance of these sins, and so take them again into full Communion. For some pleaded, that the Profession of Repentance for these sins, and the Renunciation of them, being indispensably necessary antecedently unto Baptism, in them that were adult; the obliga∣tion not to live in them at all being on them who were Baptised in their Infancy, Bap∣tism alone was the only Pledge the Church could give of the Remission of such sins; and therefore where men fell again into those sins, seeing Baptism was not to be repeated, they were to be left unto the mercy of God, the Church could receive them no more. But whereas the numbers were very great, of those who in time of Persecution fell back into Idolatry, who yet afterwards returned and professed their Repentance, the major part, who always are for the many, agreed that they were to be received, and reflected with no small severity on those that were otherwise minded. But whereas both parties in this difference run into Extreams, the Event was pernicious on both sides, the one in the Issue losing the Truth and Peace, the other the Purity of the Church. The sins of unregenerate persons whereof Repentance was to be expressed before Bap∣tism, are called dead works, in respect of their Nature and their End. For as to their Nature they proceed from a principle under the Power of Spiritual death; they are the works of Persons dead in Trespasses and Sins. All the moral actings of such Persons with respect unto a supernatural End are dead works, being not enlivened by a vital Principle of spiritual Life. And it is necessary that a Person be spiritually living before his works will be so. Our walking in Holy Obedience is called the Life of God. Ephes. 4. 18. That is the Life which God requires, which by his especial Grace he worketh in us, whose Acts have him for their Object and their End. Where this Life is not, persons are dead, and so are their works, even all that they do with respect unto the Living God. And they are called so, 2dly, with respect unto their End; they are mortua because mor∣tifera; dead because deadly; they procure death and end in death. Sin when it is finished bringeth forth Death. Jam. 1. 15. They proceed from death Spiritual, and end in death Eternal. On the same account are they called unfruitful works of Darkness. Ephes. 5. 11. They proceed from a principle of Spiritual Darkness, and end in Darkness Ever∣lasting. We may therefore know what was taught them concerning these dead works; namely, their Nature and their Merit. And this includes the whole Doctrine of the Law, with Conviction of sin thereby. They were taught that they were sinners by Nature, dead in sins, and thence Children of wrath. Ephes. 2. 1, 2, 3. That in that Estate the Law of God condemned both them and their works, denouncing Death and Eternal destru∣ction against them. And in this sense with respect unto the Law of God, these dead works do comprise their whole course in this world, as they did, their best as well as their worst. But yet there is no doubt an especial respect unto those great outward Enormities which they lived in during their Judaisme, even after the manner of the Gentiles. For such the Apostle Peter writing unto these Hebrews describes their Conversation to have been, 1 Pet. 3. 3. as we shewed before. And from thence he describes what a blessed Deliverance they had by the Gospel. 1 Pet 1. 18, 20, 21. And when he declares the Apo∣stacy of some to their former courses, he shews it to be like the returning of a Dog to his
Vomit, after they had escaped them that live in Error, and the Pollutions that are in the world through Lust. 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. These were the works which Converts were taught to abandon, and a Profession of Repentance for them was required of all before their Initiation into Christian Religion, or they were received into the Church. For it was not then as now, that any one might be admitted into the Society of the Faithful, and yet continue to live in open sins unre∣pented of. Secondly, That which is required, and which they were taught with respect unto . these Dead works, is , Repentance. Repentance from dead works is the first thing required of them who take upon them the Profession of the Gospel, and conse∣quently the first Principle of the Doctrine of Christ as it is here placed by the Apostle. Without this whatever is attempted or attained therein, is only a Dishonour to Christ, and a Disappointment unto men. This is the method of Preaching, confirmed by the Exam∣ple and Command of Christ himself. Repent and believe the Gospel, Math. 4. 17. Mark 1. 15. And almost all the Sermons that we find, not only of John the Baptist in a way of preparation for the declaration of the Gospel, as Math. 3. 2. but of the Apostles also in pres∣sing the actual Reception of it on the Jews and Gentiles, laid this as their first Principle, namely, the Necessity of Repentance. Acts 2. 38. Chap. 3. 19. Acts 14. 15. Thence in the Preaching of the Gospel it is said, that God Commandeth all men to repent, Acts 17. 30. And when the Gentiles had received the Gospel, the Church at Hierusalem glorified God saying, Then hath Grd also to the Gentiles granted Repentance unto Life, Acts 11. 18. Again this is expressed as the first issue of Grace and Mercy from God towards men by Jesus Christ, which is therefore first to be proposed unto them. God exalted him and made him a Prince and a Saviour to give Repentance unto Israel, Acts 5. 31. And because it is the first, it is put Synecdochically, for the whole work of Gods Grace by Christ. God having raised up his Son Jesus hath sent him to bless you, in turning every one of you from his Iniquities, Acts 3. 26. It is therefore evident that this was the first Doctrinal principle as to their own Duty which was pressed on, and fixed in the minds of men, on their first Instruction in the Gospel. And in the Testimonies produced, both the Causes of it, and its general Nature are expressed. For (1) Its supream original Cause is the good Will, Grace, and Bounty of God. He grants, and gives it to whom he pleaseth of his own good Pleasure. Acts 11. 18. (2) It is immediately collated on the Souls of men by Jesus Christ, as a fruit of his Death, and an effect of that All Power in Heaven and Earth which was bestowed on Him by the Father. He gives Repentance to Israel; Acts 3. 31. The Soveraign disposal of it is from the Will of the Father, and the actual Collation of it, is an Effect of the Grace of the Son. And (3) the Nature of it is expressed in the Conversion of the Gentiles. It is unto Life, Acts 11. 18. The Repentance required of men in the first Preaching of the Gospel, and the Necessity whereof was pressed on them, was unto Life; that is such as had saving Conversion unto God accompanying of it. This kind of Repentance is required unto our Initiation in the Gospel state. Not an empty Profession of any kind of Repentance, but real Conversion unto God, is required of such persons. But moreover we must consider this , or Repentance, in its own Nature, at least in general, that we may the better understand this first Principle of Catechetical Do∣ctrine. In this sense it respects; (1) The Mind and Judgement; (2) The Will and Affections, And (3) The Life or Conversation of men. 1. It respects the Mind and Judgement, according to the Notation of the word, which signifies a Change of Mind, or an after Consideration and Judgement. Men whilst they live in dead works, under the Power of Sin, do never make a right Judgement, con∣cerning either their Nature, their Guilt, or their End. Hence are they so often called to remember and consider things aright, to deal about them with the Reason of men, and for want thereof are said to be Foolish, Bruitish, Sottish, and to have no Understanding. The Mind is practically deceived about them. There are Degrees in this Deceit, but all sinners are actually more or less deceived. No men whilst the Natural Principle of Con∣science remains in them, can cast off all the Convictions of sin. Rom. 2. 14, 15. That it is the Judgement of God, that those who commit such things are worthy of death. Rom. 1. 32. But yet some there are who so far despise these Convictions, as to give up themselves unto all sin with Delight and Greediness. See Ephes. 4. 17, 18, 19. Practi∣cally they call Good Evil, and Evil Good; and do judge either that there is not that Evil in sin which is pretended; or however, that it is better to enjoy the Pleasures of it for a Season, than to relinguish or forego it on other Considerations. Others there are
who have some farther sense of those Dead works. In particular they judge them Evil, but they are so intangled in them, as that they see not the Greatness of that Evil, nor do make such a Judgement concerning it, as whereon a Reliquishment of them should ne∣cessarily ensue. Unto these two heads in various Degrees may all Impenitent sinners be reduced. They are such as despising their Convictions, go on in an unbridled course of Licentiousness, as not judging the Voyce, Language and Mind of them worth enquiring into; Others do in some measure attend unto them, but yet practically they refuse them, and embrace motives unto Sin, turning the Scale on that side, as Occasion, Opportuni∣ties, and Temptations do occur. Wherefore the first thing in this Repentance, is a through Change of the Mind and Judgement concerning these Dead works. The Mind by the Light and Conviction of saving Truth, determines clearly and steadily, concer∣ning the true Nature of Sin, and its demerit; that it is an Evil thing and bitter to have forsaken God thereby. Casting on tall Prejudices, laying aside all Pleas, Excuses, and Palliations, it finally concludes, Sin, that is, all and every Sin, every thing that hath the Nature of Sin, to be universally evil; Evil in its Self, Evil to the Sinner, Evil in its present Effects, and future Consequents, Evil in every kind, shamefully Evil, incompa∣rably Evil, yea the only Evil, or all that is Evil in the world. And this Judgement it makes with respect unto the Nature and Law of God, to its own Primitive and present depraved Condition, unto present Duty, and future Judgement. This is the first thing required unto Repentance, and where this is not there is nothing of it. 2. It respects the Will and Affections. It is our Turning unto God; our turning from him being in the bent and inclination of our Wills and Affections unto Sin. The Change of the Will, or the taking away of the Will of sinning, is the principal part of Repentance. It is with respect unto our Wills that we are said to be dead in Sin, and alienated from the Life of God. And by this Change of the Will, do we become dead unto Sin. Rom. 6. 2. That is, whatever remainder of Lust or Corruption there may be in us, yet the Will of sinning is taken away. And for the Affections it works that Change in the Soul, as that quite contrary Affections shall be sub∣stituted and set at work with respect unto the same Object. There are Pleasures in Sin, and also it hath its wages. With respect unto these, those that live in dead works, both delight in Sin, and have complacency in the Accomplishment of it. These are the Affe∣ctions which the Soul exerciseth about Sin committed, or to be committed. Instead of them, Repentance, by which they are utterly banished, sets at work Sorrow, Grief, Abhorrency, Self detestation, Revenge, and the like Afflictive Passions of mind. No∣thing stirs but they affect the Soul with respect unto Sin. 3. It respects the course of Life or Conversation. It is a Repentance from dead works, that is in the Relinquishment of them. Without this no profession of Repentance is of any worth or use. To profess a Repentance of Sin, and to live in Sin, is to mock God, deride his Law, and deceive our own Souls. This is that Change which alone doth or can evidence the other internal Changes of the Mind, Will and Affections to be real and sincere. Prov. 28. 13. Whatever without this is pretended, is false and Hypocritical; like the Repentance of Judah, not with the whole heart but feignedly. Jerem. 3. 10.  There was a lye in it; for their works answered not their words. Neither is there any mention of Repentance in the Scripture wherein this Change in an actual Re∣linquishment of dead works is not expresly required. And hereunto three things are necessary. (1) A full Purpose of Heart for the Relinquishment of every Sin. This is cleaving un∣to the Lord with Purpose of Heart. Acts 11. 23. Psal. 14. 3. To manifest the stability and stedfastness which is required herein, David confirmed it with an Oath. Psal. 119. 106. Every thing that will either live or thrive must have a Root, on which it grows, and whence it springs. Other things may occasionally bud and put forth, but they wither immediately. And such is a Relinquishment of Sin from occasional Resolutions. Upon some smart of Conviction, from Danger, Sickness, Trouble, Fear, Affliction, there blooms in the minds of many a suddain Resolution to forsake Sin, and as suddainly for the most part it fades again. True Repentance firms a steady and unshaken resolu∣tion in the Heart, which respects the forsaking of all Sin, and at all Times or Oc∣casions. (2) Constant Endeavours to actuate and fulfill this purpose. And these Endeavours respect all the Means, Causes, Occasions, Temptations, leading unto Sin, that they may be avoided, opposed, and Deliverance obtained from them; as also all means, ad∣vantages, and furtherance of those Graces and Duties which are opposed to these Dead
works that they may be improved. An Heartless unactive Purpose, is that which many take up withall and ruine their Souls by. Where therefore there is not a sedulous En∣deavour by Watchfulness and Diligence, in the constant use of all means to avoid all dead works in all their concerns from their first Rise and Principle to their finishing or Consum∣mation, there is no True Repentance from them. (3) An actual Relinquishment of all sins in the course of our walking before God. And hereunto is required (1) not an absolute freedom from all Sin, for there is no man living who doth good and sinneth not. (2) No absolute and precise deliverance even from great Sins, whereinto the Soul may be surprized by the Power of Temptations. Exam∣ples to the contrary abound in the Scripture. But yet such Sins, when any is overtaken with them, ought (1) to put the Sinner upon a severe enquiry whether his Repentance were sincere and saving. For where it is, usually the Soul is preserved from such Falls. 2 Pet. 1. 10. And (2) put him upon the renewing his Repentance, with the same Care, Diligence, Sorrow and Humiliation as at the first. But (1) it is required that this property of Repentance be prevalent against the common sins of the world, mens old Sins which they lived in before their Conversion. Those Sins which are expresly declared in the Gospel to be inconsistent with the Profession, Ends and Glory of it, it wholly ex∣cludes. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1 Joh. 3. 14, 15. And (2) against a course in any Sin or Sins, either spiritual or fleshly, internal or external. 1 Joh. 3. 9. Rom. 6. 2. (3) For the most part against all outward Sins in the course of our Conversation in the world, in which things our Sincerity or Perfection is exercised. And these things were necessary to be touched on, to manifest the Nature of this first Principle wherein men are to be instructed. There is no Interest in Christ or Christian Religion to be obtained, without Repentance from Obser. Dead works; nor any orderly entrance into a Gospel Church State, without a credible Profession thereof. This was one of the first things that was preached unto Sinners, as was before declared; and without a compliance herewith they were not further to be treated with. For (1) The Lord Christ came not only to save men from their Sins, but to turn them from their Sins; to turn them from their Sins, that they may be saved from them; when he comes out of Sion as a Redeemer, a Deliverer, a Saviour, he turns away ungodliness from Jacob; that is, he turns Jacob from ungodliness, Rom. 11. 26. namely by Repentance. This was one principal End of the Birth, Life, Death, and Exaltation of Christ. His work in all these was to make Peace and Reconciliation between God and Man. Hereunto belongeth the Slaying, Destruction, or removal of the Enmity that was between them. This with respect unto God, was done by the Attonement he made, the Sacrifice he of∣fered, and the Price of Redemption that he paid. 2 Cor. 5. 21. But the whole work is not hereby compleated. The Enmity on our part also must be taken away, or Reconci∣liation will not be finished. Now we were Enemies in our minds by wicked works, Col. 1. 21. and thereby alienated from the Life of God, Ephes. 4. 18. The removal hereof consists in this Repentance. For that is our turning unto God, upon the Terms of Peace tendred unto us. They therefore do but deceive their own Souls, who trust unto Peace with God on the Mediation of Christ, who are not at Peace with God in their own Souls by Re∣pentance; For the one is not without the other. As he who is at Peace with God on his own part by Repentance, shall never fail of Peace from God by the Attonement; for he that so lays hold on his Arm and Strength that he may have Peace shall be sure to obtain it, Isa. 27. 3. So without this whatever Notions men may have of Reconciliation with God, they will find him in the issue as devouring Fire, or Everlasting Burnings. All Doctrines, Notions, or Perswasions, that tend to alleviate the necessity of that personal Repentance which was before described, or would substitute any outward Pennance, or Corporeal, pecuniary poenal Satisfaction in the room thereof, are pernicious to the Souls of men. And there is nothing so much to be dreaded or abhorred as a pretence taken unto Sin, unto any Sin without Repentance, from the Grace or Doctrine of the Gospel. Shall we continue in Sin, saith our Apostle, that Grace may abound? God forbid. Those who do so and thereby turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness, are among the number of them whose Damnation sleepeth not. (2) That any person living in Sin without Repentance, should have an Interest in Christ or Christian Religion, is inconsistent with the Glory of God, the Honour of Jesus Christ, and would render the Gospel, if taught therein, a Doctrine fit to be rejected by all men. For where is the Glory of the Righte∣ousness or Holiness of God, if impenitent Sinners may be accepted with him? Besides that it is contrary unto the whole Declaration of himself, that he will not acquit the
Guilty, that he will not justifie the wicked, nor accept the ungodly, it hath an absolute inconsistency with the especial Righteousness of his Nature, and which he exerciseth as the supream Rector and Judge of all, that any such persons should approach before him, or stand in his sight. Psal. 5. 4, 5, 6. Rom. 1. 32. And for the Lord Jesus Christ, it would plainly make him the Minister of Sin, the thought whereof our Apostle so detests. Gal. 2. 17. Nay a supposition hereof would make the coming of Christ, to be the greatest means of letting in, and increasing Sin on the world, that ever was since the fall of Adam. And the Gospel must then be looked on as a Doctrine meet to be abandoned by all wise and sober persons, as that which would tend unavoidably to the debauching of mankind, and the ruine of humane Society. For whereas it doth openly and avowedly propose and declare the Pardon and remission of Sin, of all sorts of Sin, to all sorts of persons that shall believe and obey it, if it did this without annexing unto its Promise, the Condition of Repentance, never was there, nor can there be so great an Encouragement unto all sorts of Sin and Wickedness. There is much to that purpose in the Doctrines of Purgatory, Pennances, and Satisfactions, whereby men are taught that they may come off from their Sins, at a cheaper rate than Eternal Ruine, without that Repentance which is necessary. But this is nothing in comparison to the mischief which the Gospel would produce if it did not require Repentance from dead works. For besides those innumerable Advan∣tages that otherwise it hath to evidence it self to be from God, whereas these other pre∣tences are such as wise and considering men may easily look through their daubing and see their ground of falshood, the Gospel doth certainly propose its Pardon freely without money and without price; and so on this supposition would lay the Reins absolutely free on the Neck of Sin and Wickedness, whereas those other Fancies are burdened and charged with such inconveniencies, as may lay some Curb upon them in easie and carnal minds. Wherefore, I say, on such a false and cursed supposition it would be the Interest of wise and sober men, to oppose and reject the Gospel, as the most effectual means of overflowing the world with Sin and Ungodliness. But it doth not more fully condemn Idolatry, or that the Devil is to be worshipped, than it doth any such Notion or Appre∣hension. It cannot be denied but that some men may, and it is justly to be feared that some men do abuse the Doctrine of the Gospel to countenance themselves in a vain ex∣pectation of Mercy and Pardon, whilst they willingly live in a course of Sin. But as this in their management is the principal means of their Ruine, so in the Righteous Judge∣ment of God it will be the greatest Aggravation of their Condemnation. And whereas some have charged the Preachers of Gospel Grace, as those who thereby give Countenance unto this presumption, it is an Accusation that hath more of the hatred of Grace in it, than of the Love of Holiness. For none do, nor can press the Relinquishment of Sin, and Repentance of it, upon such assured grounds and with such cogent arguments, as those by whom the Grace of Jesus Christ in the Gospel is fully opened and de∣clared. From what hath been discoursed, we may enquire after our own Interest in this great and necessary Duty; to assist us wherein, I shall yet add some farther Directions. As, 1. Repentance is twofold; (1) Initial, (2) Continued in our whole course; and our Enquiry is to be after our Interest in both of them. The former is that whose general Nature we have before described, which is the door of entrance into a Gospel state, or a Condition of Acceptance with God in and through Christ. And concerning it we may observe sundry things. 1. That as to the Properties of it; it is, (1) Solemn; a Duty that in all its circumstances is to be fixed and stated. It is not to be mixed only with other Duties, but we are to set our selves on purpose, and engage our selves singularly unto it. I will not say, this is so essential unto it, that he can in no sense be said sincerely to have repented, who hath not separately and distinctly been exer∣cised herein for some season; yet I will say, that the Repentance of such a one will scarce be ever well cleared up unto his own Soul. When the Spirit of Grace is poured out on men, they shall mourn apart, Zach. 12. 12, 13, 14. That is, they shall peculiarly and solemnly separate themselves to the right discharge of this Duty between God and their Souls. And those who have hitherto neglected it, or failed herein, may be advised so∣lemnly to address themselves unto it, whatever hopes they may have, that they have been carried through it already. There is no loss of Time, Grace, nor Comfort, in the so∣lemn Renovation of initial Repentance.
(2) Universal, as to the object of it. It respects all Sin, and every Sin, every crooked path, and every step therein. It absolutely excludes all reserves for any Sin. To profess Repentance, and yet with an express reserve for any Sin, approacheth very near the great Sin of Lying to the Holy Ghost. It is like Ananias his keeping back part of the Price when the whole was devoted. And these Soul-destroying Reserves which absolutely over∣throw the whole Nature of Repentance, do commonly arise from one of these pretences or occasions. (1) That the Sin reserved is small, and of no great importance. It is a little one. But true Repentance respects the Nature of Sin, which is in every Sin equally, the least as well as the greatest. The least reserve for Vanity, Pride, Conformity to the world, in∣ordinate Desires or Affections, utterly overthrow the Truth of Repentance, and all the benefits of it. (2) That it is so useful as that, at least at present, it cannot be parted withall. So Naaman would reserve his bowing before the King in the House of Rimmon, because his Honours and Preferments depended thereon. So is it with many in their course of Life, or Trading in the world; some advantages by crooked ways seem as useful to them as their right hand, which they cannot as yet cut off and cas from them. This therefore they have a secret reserve for, though it may not be express, yet real and effectual. But he who in this case will not part with a right Eye, or a right hand, must be content to go with them both into Hell fire. (3) Secresie. That which is hidden from every Eye, may be left behind. Some sweet morsel of this kind, may yet be rolled under the Tongue. But this is an Evidence of the grossest Hypocrisie, and the highest Contempt of God who seeth in secret. (4) Uncertainty of some things whether they are Sins or no. It may be some think, such neglects of Duty, such compliances with the World, are not Sins; and whereas themselves have not so full a Gonviction of their being sinful, as they have of other Sins which are notorious and against the Light of Nature, only they have just reason to fear they are Evil, this they will break through, and indulge themselves in them. But this also impeacheth the Truth of Repentance. Where it is sincere, it engageth the Soul against all Appearance of Evil. And one that is truly humbled, hath no more certain Rule in his walking, than not to do what he hath just cause to doubt whether it be lawful or no. True Repentance therefore is universal and inconsistent with all these reserves. Secondly, Unto the same End, that we may be acquainted with our own Interest in this initiating Repentance, We must consider the Season when it is wrought. And this is, (1) Upon the first Communication of Gospel Light unto us by the Holy Ghost. Christ sends him to convince us of Sin and Righteousness and Judgement, Joh. 16. 8. And if upon the first participation of Light and Conviction by the Holy Ghost, this Repentance is not wrought in us, it is to be feared that we have missed our Season. And so it falls out with many. They receive Light and Convictions but use them unto other ends. They put them it may be upon a Profession and a Relinquishment of some ways, and parties of men, but farther they use them not. Their first proper end is to work our own Souls unto saving Repentance, and if we miss their first Impressions, their power and efficacy for that end is hardly recoverable. (2) It never fails on the first saving view of Iesus Christ as crucified, Zech. 12. 10. It is impossible that any one should have a saving view of Christ crucified, and not be sa∣vingly humbled for Sin. And there is no one single Trial of our Faith in Christ whether it be genuine or no, that is more natural than this; What have been the effects of it, as to Humiliation and Repentance? Where these ensue not upon what we account our Be∣lieving, there we have not had a saving view of Christ crucified. Thirdly, Whereas we call this Repentance initial, we must consider that it differs not in Nature and Kind from that which we ought to be exercised in whilst we are in this world, whereof afterwards. That which we intend thereby is the Use of Repentance in our first admission into an Interest in a Gospel State. And with respect hereunto its du∣ration may be considered; concerning which we may observe, (1) That with some, especially in extraordinary cases, this Work and Duty may be over in a day as to its initiating use and efficacy. So was it with many Primitive Converts, who at the same time were savingly humbled and comforted by the Promises of the Go∣spel. Acts 2. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Acts 16. 31, 32, 33, 34. Now although in such persons the things we have ascribed unto this Repentance, are not wrought formally and distinctly, yet are they all wrought virtually and radically, and do act themselves on all future oc∣casions.
(2) Some are held longer unto this Duty as it is initiating. Not only did Paul conti∣nue three days and nights under his sore distress without relief, but others are kept days and weeks and months oft-times in the discharge of this Duty, before they have a refreshing entrance given them thereby into an Estate of Spiritual Rest in the Gospel. There is therefore no measure of Time to be allotted unto the solemn attendance unto this Duty, but only this, that none faint under it, wax weary of it, or give it over, before there be thereby administred unto them an entrance into the Kingdom of God. And these confiderations of the Nature of Repentance from dead works as it is initiating, may give us some direction in that necessary enquiry concerning our own personal In∣terest in it. Now there are several ways whereby men miss their Duty with respect unto this first Principle, and thereby ruine their Souls Eternally. (1) Some utterly despise it. Such are the presumptuous Sinners mentioned, Deut. 29. 19, 20. As they disregard the Curse of the Law, so they do also the Promise of the Go∣spel, as unto any Repentance or Relinquishment of Sin with respect unto them. Such Folly and bruitish Foolishness possesseth the minds of multitudes, that they will have some expectation of benefit by the Gospel, and will give it an outward compliance, but will not touch on the very first thing which it indispensibly requireth of all that intend any con∣cernment in it. It were easie to open and aggravate this deplorable folly; but I must not stay on these things. (2) Some will repent in their dead works but not from them. That is, upon Convicti∣ons, Afflictions, Dangers, they will be troubled for their Sins, make confession of them, be grieved that they have contracted such guilt and danger, with Resolutions to forgo them. But yet they will abide in their Sins and dead works still. So Pharaoh more than once repented him in his Sins, but never had Repentance from them. And so it was ex∣presly with the Israelites themselves, Psal. 78. 34, 35, 36, 37. And this kind of Repen∣tance ruines not fewer Souls than the former total contempt of it. There are not a few unto whom this kind of Repentance stands in the same stead all their days, as Con∣fession and Absolution doth to the Papists, it gives them present ease, that they may re∣turn to their former Sins. (3) Some repent from dead works in some sense, but they repent not off them. They will come through the Power of their Convictions to a Relinquishment of many of their old Sins, as Herod did upon the Preaching of John Baptist, but are never truly and sa∣vingly humbled for Sin absolutely. Their Lives are changed, but their Hearts are not re∣newed. And their renunciation of Sin is always partial, whereof before. There are many other ways whereby men deceive their Souls in this matter, which I must not now insist upon. Secondly, This Repentance in the Nature and Kind of it, is a Duty to be continued in the whole course of our Lives. It ceaseth as unto those especial Acts which belong unto our Initiation into a Gospel state, but it abides as too our orderly preservation therein. There must be no End of Repentance, until there is a full End of Sin. All Tears will not be wiped from our Eyes, until all Sin is perfectly removed from our Souls. Now Re∣pentance in this sense may be considered two ways. (1) As it is a stated constant Duty of the Gospel; (2) As it is Occasional. 1. As it is stated, it is our humble mournful walking with God under a sense of Sin, continually manifesting its self in our Natures and Infirmities. And the Acts of this Repentance in us, are of two sorts: (1) Direct and immediate; (2) Consequential and dependant. The former may be referred unto two Heads. (1) Confession. (2) Humilia∣tion. These a truly penitent Soul will be continually exercised in. He whose Heart is so lifted up on any pretence, as not to abide in the constant exercise of these acts of Repen∣tance, is one whom the Soul of God hath no delight in. The other which are imme∣diate acts of Faith, but inseparable from these, are (1) Supplications for the Pardon of Sin, (2) Diligent watchfulness against Sin. It is evident how great a share of our walk∣ing with God consists in these things, which yet I must not enlarge upon. 2. This continued Repentance is Occasional when it is heightned unto a singular so∣lemnity. And these occasions may be referred unto three heads: (1) A Personal surprisal into any great actual Sin. Such an occasion is not to be passed over with the ordinary actings of Repentance. David upon his fall, brings his renewed Repentance into that solemnity as if it had been his first Conversion to God. On that account he deduceth his personal Sins from the Sin of his Nature, Psal. 51. 5. besides many other circumstances whereby he gave it an extraordinary Solemnity. So Peter
upon the denial of his Master wept bitterly, which with his following Humiliation and the Renovation of his Faith, our Saviour calls his Conversion, Luke 22. 23. A new Conver∣sion of him who was before really converted. There is nothing more dangerous unto our Spiritual state, than to pass by particular Instances of Sin, with the general Duties of Repentance. (2) The Sin or Sins of the Family or Church whereunto we are related, calls unto us to give a Solemnity unto this Duty. 2 Cor. 7. 11. The Church having failed in the bu∣siness of the incestuous offender, when they were convinced by the Apostle of their sinful miscarriage therein, most solemnly renew their Repentance towards God. (3) Afflictions and sore Trials call for this Duty, as we may see in the issue of all things between God and Job, Chap. 42. 6. And lastly, We may observe that this Repentance is a Grace of the Spirit of Christ, a Gospel Grace, and therefore whatever unpleasantness there may be in its Exercise unto the Flesh, it is sweet, refreshing, satisfactory, and secretly pleasant unto the inner man. Let us not be deterred from abiding and abounding in this Duty. It is not a morose, tetrical, severe self-maceration, but an humble, gracious, mournful walking with God, wherein the Soul finds rest, sweetness, joy and peace, being rendred thereby compliant with the Will of God, benigne, useful, kind, compassionate towards men, as might be declared. The necessity of a profession of this Repentance from dead works, in order unto an Admission into the Society of the Church, that an evidence be given of the Power and Efficacy of the Doctrine of Christ in the Souls of men, that his Disciples may be visibly separated by their own profession from the world that lies in Evil, and be fitted for Com∣munion among themselves in love, hath been elsewhere spoken unto. The second instance of the Doctrinal Foundation supposed to be laid among the He∣brews, . is of Faith towards God. And this principle with that foregoing, are coupled to∣gether by the conjunctive particle , of Repentance and of Faith. Neither ought they to . be, nor can they be severed. Where the one is, there is the other, and where either is not, there is neither, whatever be pretended. He repenteth not, who hath not Faith towards God: and he hath no Faith towards God who repenteth not. And in this expression where Repentance is first placed and Faith in God afterwards, only the distincti∣on that is between them, but neither an order of Nature in the things themselves, nor a ne∣cessary order in the teaching of them is intended. For in order of Nature Faith towards God must precede Repentance from dead works. No man can use any Argument to prevail with others unto Repentance, but it must be taken from the Word of the Law or the Gospel, the Precepts, Promises and Threatnings of them. If there be no Faith towards God with respect unto these things, whence should Repentance from dead works arise, or how can the necessity of it be demonstrated? Besides, that the order of nature among the things themselves is not here intended, is evident from hence, in that the very last principles mentioned concerning the Resurrection from the dead and Eternal Judgement, are the principal Motives and Arguments unto the very first of them, or the necessity of Re∣pentance, as our Apostle declares fully Acts 1. 30, 31. But there is some kind of order between these things with respect unto profession, intended. For no man can, or ought to be esteemed to make a due profession of Faith towards God, who doth not first declare his Repentance from dead works. Nor can any other have the comfort of Faith in God, but such as have in themselves some evidence of the sincerity of their Repentance. Wherefore omitting any farther consideration of the order of these things, we must enquire what is here intended by Faith in God. Now this cannot be Faith in the most general notion of it, because it is reckoned as a principle of the Doctrine of Christ. But Faith in God absolutely taken, is a Duty of the Law of Nature. Upon an acknowledg∣ment of the Being of God, it is thereby required that we believe in him as the first Eter∣nal Truth, that we submit unto him and trust in him, as the Soveraign Lord, the Judge and Rewarder of all. And a defect herein was the beginning of Adam's transgression. Wherefore Faith in this sense cannot be called a principle of the Doctrine of Christ, which wholly consists in supernatural Revelations. Nor can it be so termed with respect unto the Jews in particular. For in their Judaisme they were sufficiently taught Faith in God, and needed not to have been instructed therein as a part of the Doctrine of Christ. And there is a distinction put by our Saviour himself, between that Faith in God which they had, and the peculiar Faith in himself which he required, Joh. 14. 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Besides, where these two Repentance and Faith are elsewhere joyned together, as they are frequently, it is an especial sort of Faith in God that is intended. See Luke 24. 46, 47. Acts 19. 4. Chap. 20. 21.
It is therefore Faith in God as accomplishing the promise unto Abraham in sending Jesus Christ, and granting pardon or remission of Sins by him, that is intended. The whole is ex∣pressed by, Repent and believe the Gospel, Mark 1. 15. That is the tidings of the Accom∣plishment of the Promise made to the Fathers, for the deliverance of us from all our Sins by Jesus Christ. This is that which was pressed on the Hebrews by Peter in his first Ser∣mon unto them; Acts 2. 30, 39. Chap. 3. 25, 26. Hence these two principles are ex∣pressed, by Repentance towards God, and Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. As Repentance is here described by the terminus a quo; it is Repentance from dead works; so there it is described by its terminus ad quem; it is Repentance towards God, in our turning unto him. For those who live in their Lusts and Sins, do it not only against the command of God, but also they place them, as to their affections and expectation of satisfaction, in the stead of God. And this Faith in God is there called by way of Explication, Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ; that is, as he in whose giving and sending the Truth of God was fulfilled, and by whom we believe in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. This therefore is the Faith in God here intended; namely, that whereby we believe the Accomplishment of his promise, in sending his Son Jesus Christ to dye for us, and to save us from our Sins. And this the Lord Christ testified unto in his own personal Ministry. Hence our Apostle says, that he was the Minister of the Circum∣cision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers, Rom. 15. 8. And this he testified unto them, Joh. 8. 24. I said therefore unto you, that you shall dye in your sins; for if you believe not that I am be, you shall dye in your sins; and that because they rejected the promise of God made unto the Fathers concerning him, which was the only foundation of Salvation. And this was the first thing that ordinarily our Apostle preached in his dispensation of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 15. 3. For I delivered unto you first of all, how that Christ dyed for our sins according to the Scriptures. He taught the thing it self, and the re∣lation it had unto the promise of God recorded in the Scripture. That this is the Faith in God here intended, I prove by these Reasons: (1) Because this indeed was that Faith in particular which in the first preaching of the Gospel unto these Hebrews they were taught and instructed in. And therefore with respect unto it our Apostle says, that he would not lay again the foundation. The first calling of the Church among them was by the Sermons of Peter and the rest of the Apostles; Acts 2. 3, 4, 5. Now consult those Sermons, and you shall find the principal thing insisted on in them, was the accom∣plishment of the promises made to Abraham and David, which they exhorted them to believe. This therefore was that Faith in God which was first taught them, and which our Apostle hath respect unto. (2) Because it was the want of this Faith which proved the ruine of that Church. As in the Wilderness, the unbelief which they perished for, respected the Faithfulness of God in the accomplishment of his promise with respect to the Land Canaan; so the Unbelief which the body of the people now perished for, dying in their Sins and for them, respected the accomplishment of the great Promise of sending Jesus Christ, which things the Apostle compares at large Chap. 3. This then was that which he here minds the Hebrews of, as the principal foundation of that profession of the Gospel which they had taken on them. And we may observe, that Faith in God, as to the accomplishing of the great Promise in sending his Son Jesus Christ to Obs. 2. save us from our Sins, is the great fundamental Principle of our Interest in and Profession of the Gospel. Faith in God under this formal consideration, not only that he hath sent and given Jesus Christ his Son, but that he did it in the Accomplishment of his Promise, is re∣quired of us. For whereas he hath chosen to glorifie all the Properties of his Nature in the Person and Mediation of Christ, he doth not only declare his Grace in giving him, but also his Truth in sending him according unto his word. And this was that which holy persons of old did glorifie God in an especial manner upon the account of, Luke 1. 54, 55. ver. 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. And there is nothing in the Gospel that God himself, our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Holy Apostles do more insist upon than this, that God had fulfilled his Promise in sending his Son into the world. On this one thing depends all Religion, the Truth of the Bible, and all our Salvation. If it be not evident that God hath accomplished his Promise, the whole Bible may pass for a Fable; for it is all built on this supposition, that God gave and hath accomplished it; the first being the foundation of the Old Testament, and the latter of the New. And there are sundry things that signalize our Faith in God with respect hereunto. As 1. This promise of sending Jesus Christ was the first express ingagement that God ever made of his Faithfulness and Veracity unto any Creatures. He is Essentially faithful and true; but he had not ingaged himself to act according unto those properties in his dealing with
us in a way of Love and Grace, calling for Trust and Confidence in us, before he gave the promise concerning Christ, Gen. 3. 15. This therefore was the spring and measure of all other subsequent promises. They are all of them but new assurances thereof, and ac∣cording as it fares with that, so it must do with all the rest. God gave out this Promise as that whereon he would depend the Honour and Glory of his Fidelity in all other Pro∣mises that he should make. As we find him true or failing herein, so he expects our Faith and Trust in all his other Promises should be. Hence this was the first and imme∣diate object of Faith in man after the Fall. The first thing proposed unto him, was to believe in God, with respect unto his faith∣fulness in the future accomplishment of this Promise; and Faith concerning its actual ac∣complishment is the first thing required of us. Besides this Promise hung longest on the File before its Accomplishment. There was not less than four thousand years between its giving and its performance. And many things happened during that season, whereby both its self, and Faith on God thereon, were greatly signalized. For (1) More and greater Objections against the Truth of it, more Tempta∣tions against it were raised and managed, than against all other Promises whatever. This long suspension of its fulfilling gave such Advantages to Sathan in his opposition unto it, that he prevailed against every expectation, but that of Faith tried and more precious than Gold. And the Saints themselves had a great exercise in the disappointments which many of them fell into, as to the time of its accomplishment. It is not unlikely that most of them looked for it in their own days; great therefore was the Trials of all sorts about it. (2) It was All that the true Church of God had to live upon during that long season, the sole foundation of its Faith, Obedience and Consolation. It is true, in progress of time God added other Promises, Precepts and Institutions, for the direction and instru∣ction of the Church; but they were all built on this one Promise, and all resolved into it. This gave life and signification unto them, therewith were they to stand and fall. (3) This was that the world broke off from God upon, and by rejecting it, fell into all confusion and misery. The Promise being given unto Adam was indefinitely given to mankind. And it was suited unto the Reparation of their lost condition, yea their in∣vestiture into a better state. And this increased the wrath and malice of Sathan. He saw that if they applied themselves to the Faith hereof, his former success against them was utterly frustrated. Wherefore he again attempts them to turn them off from the relief provided against the misery he had cast them into. And as to the generality of mankind he prevailed in his attempt. By a Relinquishment of this Promise, not believing of it, not retaining it in their minds, they fell into a second Apostasie from God. And what disorder, darkness, confusion, yea what an Hell of horror and misery they cast them∣selves into, is known. And this consideration greatly signalizes Faith in God with re∣spect to this Promise. (4) The whole Church of the Jews, rejecting the Accomplish∣ment of this Promise, utterly perished thereon. This was the Sin which that Church died for, and that indeed which is the foundation of the ruine of all Unbelievers who perish under the Dispensation of the Gospel. It will be said, it may be, that this Promise being now actually accomplished, and that ta∣ken for granted, we have not the like concern in it, as they had who lived before the said Accomplishment. But there is a mistake herein. No man believes aright that the Son of God is come in the Flesh, but he who believes that he came in the Accomplishment of the Promise of God, unto the Glory of his Truth and Faithfulness. And it is from hence that we know aright both the occasion, original, cause, and end of his coming: which whoso considereth not, his pretended Faith is in vain. 2. This is the greatest Promise that God ever gave to the Children of men, and there∣fore Faith in him with respect hereunto, is both necessary unto us, and greatly tends unto his Glory. Indeed all the concernments of Gods glory in the Church, and our Eternal welfare are wrapped up herein. But I must not enlarge hereon. Only we must add, that the consideration of the Accomplishment of this Promise is a great incouragement and supportment unto Faith with respect unto all other Promises of God. Never was any kept so long in Abeyance, the state of the Church and design of God requiring it. None ever had such opposition made to its Accomplishment. Never was any more likely to be defeated by the Unbelief of men; all Faith in it being at length renounced by Jews and Gentiles, which if any thing, or had it been suspended on any condition, might have disappointed its event. And shall we think that God will leave any other of his Promises unaccomplished? That he will not in due time ingage his omnipotent Power and infinite Wisdom in the discharge of his Truth and Faithfulness? Hath he sent his Son after
four thousand years expectation, and will he not in due time destroy Antichrist, call again the Jews, set up the Kingdom of Christ gloriously in the world, and finally save the Souls of all that sincerely believe? This great instance of Divine Fidelity, leaves no room for the Objections of Unbelief as unto any other Promises under the same assurance. Thirdly, The third principle according to the order and sense of the words laid . down before, is, the Resurrection of the dead. And this was a fundamental principle of the Judaical Church, indeed of all Religions properly so called in the world. The twelve Articles of the Creed of the present Jews, is,  the days of the Messiah; that is, the time will come when God will send the Messiah and restore all things by him. This under the Old Testament respected that Faith in God which we before discoursed concerning. But the present Jews notwithstanding this profession, have no interest herein. For not to believe the Accomplishment of a Promise when it is fulfilled, as also sufficiently revealed and testified unto to be fulfilled, is to reject all Faith in God concerning that Promise. But this they still retain an appearance and profession of. And their thirteenth Article is,  the Revivisication or Resurrection from the dead. And the Faith hereof being explained and confirmed in the Gospel, as also sealed by the great Seal of the Resurrection of Christ, it was ever esteemed as a chief Prin∣ciple of Christianity, and that whose admittance is indispensably necessary unto all Reli∣gion whatever. And I shall first briefly shew how it is a fundamental Principle of all Reli∣gion, and then evidence its especial relation unto that taught by Jesus Christ, or declare how it is a fundamental Principle of the Gospel. And, as to the first, it is evident that without its Acknowledgment, all Religion whatever would be abolished. For if it be once supposed or granted that men were made only for a frail mortal life in this world, that they have no other continuance assigned to their Being, but what is common to them with the Beasts that perish; there would be no more Religion amongst them, than there is among the Beasts themselves. For as they would never be able to solve the difficulties of present temporary Dispensations of Providence, which will not be reduced unto any such known visible rule of Righteousness, abstracting from the compleatment of them hereafter, as of themselves to give a firm apprehension of a Divine, Holy, Righteous Power in the government of the Universe; so take away all consideration of future Re∣wards and Punishments, which are equally asserted in this and the ensuing Principle; and the Lusts of men would quickly obliterate all those notions of a Deity, as also of good and evil in their practice, which should preserve them from Atheism and Bestiality. Neither do we ever see any man giving himself up to the unbelief of these things, but that im∣mediately he casts off all considerations of any publick or private good, but what is cen∣tred in himself, and the satisfaction of his Lusts. But it will be asked, whether the belief of the Immortality of the Soul be not sufficient to secure Religion, without the addition of this Article of the Resurrection. This indeed some among the ancient Heathens had faint apprehensions of, without any guess at the Resurrection of the body. And some of them also who were most steady in that per∣swasion, had some thoughts also of such a Restauration of all things as wherein the bo∣dies of men should have their share. But as their thoughts of these things were fluctua∣ting and uncertain, so was all their Religion also, and so it must be on this Principle. For there can be no Reconciliation of the Doctrine of future Rewards and Punishments to be righteously administred, unto a supposition of the separate everlasting subsistence of the Soul only. That is, Eternal Judgment cannot be on satisfactory grounds believed, with∣out an antecedent acknowledgment of the Resurrection of the dead. For what Justice is it, that the whole of blessedness or misery should fall on the Soul only, where the body hath had a great share in the procurement of the one, or the other? or that, where∣as both concur unto the doing of Good or Evil, the Soul only should be rewarded or punished? especially considering what influence the body hath into all that is Evil, how the satisfaction of the flesh is the great inducement unto Sin on the one hand, and what it often undergoeth and suffereth for that which is good? Shall we think that God gave Bodies to the holy Martyrs, only to endure unexpressible Tortures and Miseries to death for the sake of Christ, and then to perish for ever? And this manifesteth the great degene∣racy the Jewish Church was now fallen into; For a great number of them were Aposta∣tized into the Atheisme of denying the Resurrection of the dead. And so confident were they in their Infidelity, as that they would needs argue and dispute with our Saviour about it, by whom they were confounded; but after the manner of obstinate Infidels, not converted, Math. 22. 23, 24. &c. This was the principal Heresie of the Sadducees, which drew along with it those other foolish Opinions, of denying Angels and Spirits,
or the subsistence of the Souls of men in a separate condition. Acts 23. 8. For they con∣cluded well enough, that the continuance of the Souls of men would answer no design of Providence or Justice, if their bodies were not raised again. And whereas God had now given the most illustrious testimony unto this truth in the Resurrection of Christ himself, the Sadducees became the most inveterate Enemies unto him and Opposers of him. For they not only acted against him, and those who professed to believe in him, from that Infidelity which was common unto them with most of their Country-men; but also because their peculiar Heresie was everted and condemned thereby. And it is usual with men of corrupt minds to prefer such peculiar errors above all other concerns of Re∣ligion whatever, and to have their Lusts inflamed by them into the utmost intemperance. They therefore were the first stirrers up and fiercest pursuers of the Primitive persecutions, Acts 4. 1, 2. The Sadducees came upon the Apostles, being grieved that they taught the people, and preached through Jesus the Resurrection from the dead. The overthrow of their private Heresie was that which enraged them, Chap. 5. 17, 18. Then the High Priest rose up, and all that were with him, which is the Sect of the Sadducees, and were filled with indignation, and laid their hands on the Apostles and put them in the common Prison. And an alike rage were the Pharisees put into about their Ceremonies, wherein they placed their especial interest and glory. And our Apostle did wisely make an advantage of this difference about the Resurrection between those two great Sects, to divide them in their Counsels and Actings, who were before agreed on his destruction on the common account of his preaching Jesus Christ, Acts 23. 6, 7, 8, 9. This Principle therefore both upon the account of its importance in its self, as also of the opposition made unto it among the Jews by the Sadducees, the Apostle took care to settle and establish in the first place, As those truths are in an especial manner to be con∣firmed, which are at any time peculiarly opposed. And they had reason thus to do; for all they had to preach unto the world turned on this hinge, that Christ was raised from the dead, whereon our Resurrection doth unavoidably follow, so as that they confessed that without an eviction and acknowledgment hereof, all their preaching was in vain, and all their Faith who believed therein was so also, 1 Cor. 15. 12, 13, 14. This there∣fore was always one of the first Principles which our Apostle insisted on in the preaching of the Gospel; a signal instance whereof we have in his discourse at his first coming unto Athens. First he reproves their Sins and Idolatries, declaring that God by him called them to Repentance from those dead works. Then taught them Faith in that God who so called them by Jesus Christ; confirming the necessity of both by the Doctrine of the Resur∣rection from the dead, and future judgement, Acts 17. 18, 23, 24, 30, 31. He seems there∣fore here directly and summarily to lay down those principles in the order which he constantly preached them in his first declaration of the Gospel. And this was necessary to be spoken concerning the nature and necessity of this Principle. , The Resurrection of the dead. It is usually expressed by , the Resurrection only, Mark 12. 18. Luke 20. 27, 33. Joh. 11. 24. Math. 22. 23, 28. For by this single expression, the whole was sufficiently known and apprehended. And so we commonly call it the Resurrection without any addition. Sometimes it is termed , Acts 4. 2. The Resurrection from the dead, that is, the state of the dead. Our Apostle hath a peculiar expression, Chap. 11. 35. , They received their dead from the Resurrection; that is, by virtue thereof, they being raised to Life again. And sometimes it is distinguished with respect unto its consequents, in different persons, the good and the bad. The Resurrection of the former is called , John 5. 29. the Resurrection of Life, that is, which is unto Life Eternal, the means of entrance into it. This is called , the Resurrection of the Just, Luke 14. 14. And so  the Life of the dead, or the Resurrection of the dead, was used to express the whole blessed estate which ensued thereon to Believers. If by any means I might attain, , the Resurrection of the dead. This is , a living again; as it is said of the Lord Christ distinctly, , Rom. 14. 9. He rose and lived again, or he arose to life. With respect unto wicked men it is called , the Resurrection of Judgement, or unto Judgement, Joh. 5. 29. Some shall be raised again to have Judgement pronounced against them, to be sentenced unto punishment. Reserve the unjust against the day of Judgement to be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. And both these are put together, Dan. 12. 2. And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to Everlasting Life, and some to shame and Everlasting contempt.
This truth being of so great importance, as that nothing in Religion can subsist with∣out it, the Apostles very diligently confirmed it in the first Churches. And for the same cause it was early assaulted by Sathan, denied and opposed by many. And this was done two ways. (1) By an open denial of any such thing, 1 Cor. 15. 12. How say some among you, that there is no Resurrection of the dead. They wholly denied it as a thing improbable and impossible, as is evident from the whole ensuing disputation of the Apostle on that subject. (2) Others there were, who not daring to oppose themselves directly unto a prin∣ciple so generally received in the Church, they would still allow the expression, but put an Allegorical Exposition upon it, whereby they plainly overthrew the thing intended. They said the Resurrection was past already, 2 Tim. 2. 18. It is generally thought that these men Hymeneus and Philetus placed the Resurrection in Conversion, or Reformation of Life, as the Marcionits did afterwards. What some imagine about the Gnosticks is vain. And that the reviving of a new Light in us, is the Resurrection intended in the Scripture, some begin to mutter among our selves. But, that as Death is a separation or sejunction of the Soul and the Body, so that the Resurrection is a re-union of them in and unto Life, the Scripture is too express for any one to deny, and not virtually to reject it wholly. And it may be observed, that our Apostle in both these cases, doth not only condemn these Errors as false, but declares positively that their admission overthrows the Faith, and renders the preaching of the Gospel vain and useless. Now this Resurrection of the dead, is the Restauration by the Power of God, of the same numerical body which died, in all the essential and integral parts of it, rendring it, in a re-union of or with the Soul, immortal, or of an Eternal duration in blessedness or misery. And, The Doctrine of this Resurrection is a fundamental principle of the Gospel, the Faith whereof Obser. is indispensibly necessary unto the Obedience and Consolation of all that profess it. I call it a principle of the Gospel, not because it was absolutely first revealed therein. It was made known under the old Testament, and was virtually included in the first promise. In the Faith of it, the Patriarchs lived and died, and it is testified unto in the Psalms and Pro∣phets. With respect hereunto did the Ancients confess that they were Strangers and Pil∣grims in this world, seeking another City and Country, wherein they should live with God for ever; They desired and looked for an heavenly Country, wherein their persons should dwell, Heb. 11. 16. And this was with Relation to Gods Covenant with them, wherein, as it follows, God was not ashamed to be called their God. That is, their God in Covenant, which Relation could never be broken; and therefore our Saviour proves the Resurrection from thence, because if the dead rise not again, the Covenant Relation be∣tween God and his people must cease, Math. 22. 31, 32. Hence also did they take espe∣cial care about their dead bodies, and their burial, not meerly out of respect unto natural order and decency, but to express their Faith of the Resurrection. So our Apostle says, that by Faith Joseph gave commandment concerning his bones, Chap. 11. 12. And their dispo∣sal into a burying place is rehearsed by Stephen as one fruit of their Faith, Acts 7. 15, 16. Job gives testimony unto his Faith herein, Chap. 19. 25, 26. So doth David also, Psal. 15. 17. and in sundry other places. And Isaiah is express to the same purpose, Chap. 26. 19. Thy dead shall live, together with my dead body shall they arise: awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the dead. This God proposeth for the comfort of the Prophet, and all those who were either per∣secuted or slain in those days for Righteousness sake. Their Resurrection is both directly and emphatically expressed. And whereas some would wrest the words to signifie no more but the deliverance and exaltation of those who were in great distress, yet they must acknowledge that it is expressed in allusion to the Resurrection of the dead, which is therefore asserted in the words, and was believed in the Church. The same also is taught in Ezekiels vision of the vivification of dry bones, Chap. 37. which although it de∣clared the Restauration of Israel from their distressed condition, yet it did so with allusion to the Resurrection at the last day, without a supposition of the faith whereof, the visi∣on had not been instructive. And many other testimonies to the same purpose might be insisted on. I do not therefore reckon this a principle of the Doctrine of the Gospel, abso∣lutely and exclusively unto the Revelations of the Old Testament, but on three other reasons. 1. Because it is most clearly, evidently and fully taught and declared therein. It was as sundry other important truths, made known under the Old Testament, sparingly and ob∣scurely. But Life and Immortality with this great means of them both, were brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. 10. all things concerning them being made plain, clear and evident.
2. Because of that solemn confirmation and pledge of it which was given in the Resurrection of Christ from the dead. This was wanting under the Old Testament, and therefore the Faith of men might oft-times be greatly shaken about it. For whereas death seized on all men, and that penally in the execution of the sentence of the Law, whence they were for fear of it, obnoxious to bondage all their days, Heb. 2. 14, 15. they had not received any pledge or instance of a recovery from its power, or the taking off that sentence and penalty. But Christ dying for us, and that directly under the Sentence and Curse of the Law, yet conquering both Death and Law, being raised again, the pains or bonds of death being loosed, hath given a full confirmation and absolute assurance of our Resur∣rection. And thus it is said, that he brought Life and Immortality to light by abolishing of death, 2 Tim. 1. 10. that is, the power of it, that it should not hold us for ever under its dominion, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. 3. Because it hath a peculiar influence into our Obedience under the Gospel. Under the Old Testament the Church had sundry motives unto Obedience taken from temporal things, namely, prosperity and peace in the Land of Canaan, with deliverance out of troubles and distresses. Promises hereof made unto them the Scripture abounds withal, and thereon presseth them unto Obedience, and diligence in the Worship of God. But we are now left unto promises of Invisible and Eternal things, which cannot be fully en∣joyed but by virtue of the Resurrection from the dead. And therefore these promises are made unspeakably more clear and evident, as also the things promised unto us, than they were unto them, and so our motives and incouragements unto Obedience, are unspeaka∣bly advanced above theirs. This may well therefore be esteemed as an especial principle of the Doctrine of the Gospel. And 1. It is an animating principle of Gospel Obedience, because we are assured thereby that nothing we do therein shall be lost. In general the Apostle proposeth this as our great encouragement, That God is not unrighteous to forget our work and labour of love, ver. 10. and shews us the especial way whereby it shall be remembred. Nothing is more fatal unto any endeavours, than an apprehension that men do in them spend their strength in vain, and their labour for nought. This makes the Hands of men weak, their Knees feeble, and their Hearts fearful. Nor can any thing deliver us from a slothful despon∣dency, but an assurance that the fruit of our endeavours shall be called over again. And this is given us alone by the Faith of the Resurrection of the dead, when they shall awake again, and sing, who dwell in the dust; and then shall the Righteous be had in everlasting remembrance. Let no man fear the loss of his work, unless it be such as the Fire will con∣sume, when it will be to his advantage to suffer that loss, and to have it so consumed. Not a good thought, word or work, but shall have a new Life given unto it, and have as it were a share in the Resurrection. 2. We are assured hereby that such things shall not only be remembred, but also rewar∣ded. It is unto the Righteous, as we have observed, not only a Resurrection from the dead, but a Resurrection unto Life, that is Eternal, as their Reward. And this is that which either doth or ought to give Life and Diligence unto our Obedience. So Moses in what he did and suffered for Christ, had respect unto the recompence of reward, Heb. 11. 26. God hath put this declaration hereof into the foundation of all our Obedience in the Cove∣nant. I am thy exceeding great reward, Gen. 15. 1. And at the close of it, the Lord Jesus doth not think it enough to declare that he will come himself, but also that his reward is with him, Rev. 22. 12. Some have foolishly supposed that this Reward from God must needs infer Merit in our selves, whereas Eternal Life is the Gift of God through Jesus Christ, and not the wages of our works, as Sin is of death, Rom. 6. 23. It is such reward as is absolutely a free gift, a gift of Grace; and if it be by Grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise Grace is no more Grace, and if it be of works, then it is no more Grace, otherwise work is no more work, Rom. 11. 6. The same thing cannot be of Works and Grace also, of our own Merit, and of the free Gift of God. And others, it is to be feared, under a mistaken pretence of Grace, do keep off themselves from a due respect unto this gracious reward, which the Lord Christ hath appointed as the blessed issue and end of our Obedi∣ence. But hereby they deprive themselves of one great motive and encouragement there∣unto, especially of an endeavour that their Obedience may be such, and the fruits of it so abound, that the Lord Christ may be signally glorified in giving out a gracious reward unto them at the last day. For whereas he hath designed in his own Grace and Bounty to give us such a glorious Reward, and intendeth by the Operation of his Spirit to make us fit to receive it, or meet for the Inheritance of Saints in Light, Col. 1. 12. our prin∣cipal respect unto this Reward, is, that we may receive it with an advantage of Glory
and Honour unto our Lord Jesus. And the consideration hereof, which is conveyed unto us through the Faith of the Resurrection, is a chief animating principle of our Obedience. 2. It hath the same respect unto our Consolation, For if in this Life only we have hope in Christ, then are we of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. that is, if we regard only outward things in this world, Reproaches, Scornings, Revilings, Troubles, Persecutions, have been the Lot of most of them who so hoped in Christ. But is this all which we shall have from him or by him? probably as to outward things it will prove so to most of us in this world, if it come not to greater extremities: Then are we of all men most mise∣rable; But stay awhile. These things will be all called over again, at the Resurrection, (and that is time enough) and all things be put into another posture. See 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. We have therefore no reason to despond for what may befall us in this life, nor at what distress this flesh we carry about us may be put unto. We are it may be sometimes ready to faint, or to think much of the pains we put our selves unto in Religious Duties, especially when our bodies being weak and crazie, would willingly be spared, or of what we may endure and undergo; but the day is coming that will recompence and make up all. This very flesh which we now thus employ under its weaknesses, in a constant course of the most difficult duties, shall be raised out of the dust, purified from all its infirmities, freed from all its weaknesses, made incorruptible and immortal, to enjoy rest and glory unto Eternity. And we may comfort our selves with these words, 1 Thes. 4. 18. Fourthly, The fourth principle mentioned is . This is the immediate consequent of the Resurrection of the dead. Men shall not be raised again to live ano∣ther . Life in this world, and as it were therein to make a new adventure, but it is to give an account of what is past, and to receive what they have done in the body whether it be good or evil. And because there are no outward visible transactions between God and the Souls of men after their departure out of this world, nor any alteration to be made as to their Eternal state and condition, this Judgement is spoken of as that which immediately succeeds death its self, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed to all men once to dye, and after this the Judgement. This Judgement is sure, and there is nothing between death and it, that it takes notice of. But as to some there may be a very long space of time between the one and the other; neither shall Judgement be administred until after the Resurrecti∣on from the dead, and by means thereof: And when all the race of mankind appointed thereunto have lived and died according to their allotted seasons, then shall Judgement ensue on them all.  is commonly used for a condemnatory Sentence. Therefore some think that it is only the Judgement of wicked and ungodly men that is intended.  And indeed the day of Judgement is most frequently spoken of in the Scripture with re∣spect thereunto. See 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. Jude 14, 15. 2 Pet. 2. 4. And this is part∣ly because the remembrance of it is suited to put an awe upon the fierceness, pride and rage of the spirits of men, rushing into Sin as the Horse into the battel; and partly that it might be a relief unto the godly under all, either their persecutions from their cruelty, or temptations from their prosperity. But in reality the Judgement is general, and all men both good and bad must stand in their lot therein. We shall all stand before the Judge∣ment-seat of Christ; as it is written, As I live saith the Lord every knee shall bow to me, Rom. 14. 10, 11. And this is that which is here intended. As the Resurrection of the dead that precedes belongs to all, so doth the Judgement that follows. And this our Apostle ex∣presseth by , a word of the same original and signification with . This  or Judgement is said to be  is the eleventh funda∣mental Article of the Jewish present Creed. Two of the Targums as a supplement of  that Speech which they suppose defective,  Gen. 4. 8. And Cain said to his brother Abel, add a disputation between the Brothers about Eternal Judge∣ment, with Rewards and Punishments, which they suppose Cain to have denied and Abel to have asserted. And as there is no doubt but that it was one principal Article of the Faith of the Church before the Flood, so it is probable that it was much opposed and derided by that corrupt, violent, and wicked generation which afterwards perished in their Sins. Hence Enochs Prophecy and Preaching among them was to confirm the Faith of the Church therein, Jude 14, 15. And probably the hard speeches which are specified as those which God would severely revenge, were their contemptuous mockings and despisings of Gods coming to Judgement, as Peter plainly intimates, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5. This seems to be the great controversie which the Church before the Flood had with that ungodly generation, namely, whether there were a future Judgement or no; in the con∣tempt whereof the world fell into all profligacy of abominable wickednesses. And as
God gave testimony to the truth in the Prophecy of Enoch, so he visibly determined the whole matter on the side of the Church in the Flood, which was an open pledge of Eter∣nal Judgement. And hence those words, the Lord cometh, became the Appeal of the Church in all Ages, 1 Cor. 16. 22.  respects not the duration of this Judgement, but its d and effect. For it shall not be of a perpetual duration and continuance, which to fancy, is both absurd in nature, and inconsistent with the proper end of it, which is, to deliver men over into their everlasting Lot and Portion. And it is both curious, need∣less and unwarrantable to enquire of what continuance it shall be, seeing God hath given no Revelation thereof. Neither is the mind of man capable of making any tolerable conjecture concerning the process of the infinite wisdom of Christ in this matter. Nei∣ther do we know, as to time or continuance what will be necessary therein, to the con∣viction and confusion of impenitent sinners, or as to the demonstration of his own Righ∣teousness and Glory. It may be esteemed an easie, but will be found our safest wisdom to silence even our thoughts and enquiries in all things of this nature, where we cannot trace the express foot-steps of Divine Revelation. And this Judgement is called Eternal; (1) In opposition to the temporal Judgements which are, or have been passed on men in this world, which will be all then called over again and revised. Especially it is so with respect unto a threefold Judgement. First, That which passed upon the Lord Christ him∣self, when he was condemned as a Malefactor and Blasphemer. He never suffered that sentence to take place quietly in the world, but from the first he sent his Spirit to argue, reason, and plead his cause in the world, Joh. 16. 9, 10, 11. This he ever did and ever will maintain by his Church. Yet is there no absolute determination of the case. But when this day shall come, then shall he condemn every tongue that was against him in Judgement, and all his Adversaries shall be confounded. 2ly, All those condemnatory sentences whether unto death or other punishments, which almost in all Ages have been given against his Disciples or true Believers. With the thoughts and prospect hereof, did they always relieve themselves under false Judgements and cruel Executions. For they have had Trials of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bond and imprison∣ment; they have been stoued and sawn in sunder, tempted and slain with the Sword, have wandred about in Sheep-skins and Goat-skins, being destitate, afflicted, tormented, not accept∣ing deliverance, (upon the worlds terms) that they might obtain a better Resurrection; as Heb. 11. 35, 36, 37. In all these things they possessed their Souls in patience, following the example of their Master, committing themselves unto him that judgeth righteously, 1 Pet. 2. 23. 3ly, The false sentences which under their provocations professors have passed on one another, see 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5. (2) Because it is Judicium inevitabile, an unavoidable sentence which all men must stand or fall by. For it is appointed unto all men once to dye, and after that is the Judgement. This Judgement is no more avoid∣able unto any than death it self, from which the experience of some thousands of years leaves unto men no hope of escape. (3) Because in it and by it an unchangeable deter∣mination of all mens estate and condition is made for Eternity. The Judgement which disposeth of men unalterably into their Eternal estate, whether of Blessedness or of Misery. Two things must be yet farther spoken unto, to clear this great principle of our Faith. First the general nature of this Eternal Judgement, and then the Evidences we have of its truth and certainty. 1. The general concerns of this Eternal Judgement are all of them plainly expressed in the Scripture, which declare the nature of it. (1) As to its time, there is a determined and unalterable day fixed for it; God hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in Righteousness, Acts 17. 31. And this time is commonly called the day of Judgement, Matth. 10. 15. Chap. 11. 22, 24. Chap. 12. 32. Mark 6. 11. 2 Pet. 2. 9. 1 Joh. 4. 17. And this day being fixed in the foreknowledge and determinate counsel of God, can no more be either hastened or deferred, than God himself can be changed. Until this ap∣pointed time comes, whatever falls out, he will satisfie his Wisdom and Glory in his or∣dinary government of the world, enterwoven with some occasional extraordinary Judge∣ments, and therein he calls all his own people to be satisfied. For this precise time, the knowledge of it is among the principal secrets of his Soveraignty, which he hath for reasons suited to his infinite Wisdom, laid up in his own Eternal bosom. Hence is that of our Saviour, Of that day and hour knoweth no man, no not the Angels that are in Hea∣ven, neither the Son, (that is in and by the humane nature) but the Father, Mark 13. 32. which is the highest expression of an unrevealable divine secret. God hath not only not revealed it, but he hath decreed not to reveal it. All enquiries about it are not only sin∣fully
curious, but foolish and impious. Then it is certain, when all things foretold in the Scripture are accomplished, when the Obedience of all the Elect is compleated, and the measure allotted unto the wickedness of the world in the patience of God is filled up, then and not before, the End shall be. In the mean time when we see a man old, weak, diseased, nature being decayed and infirmities abounding, we may judge that his death is not far off, though we know not when he will die; so seeing the world come to that state and condition, so weakened and decayed as unto its principal end, that it is scarce any longer able to bear the weight of its own wickedness, nor supply the sinful Lusts of its inhabitants; seeing all sorts of Sins, new and old, heard and unheard of perpe∣trated every where in the light of the Sun, and countenanced with Atheistical security; as also considering that the Gospel seems to have finished its work where it is preached, with all sorts of signs of the like nature, we may safely conclude that the end of all things is approaching. 2. There is the Judge, which is Jesus Christ. Originally and absolutely this is the Judgement of God, of him who made the world. And therefore is it often said that God shall judge the world, Deut. 32. 35, 36. Ecclesiast. 12. 14. God the Judge of all, Heb. 12. 23. But the actual Administration of it is committed unto Jesus Christ alone to be exercised visibly in his humane nature, Rom. 14. 11. Dan. 7. 13. Matth. 16. 27. Chap. 19. 28. Joh. 5. 22. 27. Acts 17. 31. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 1 Thes. 4. 16. 2 Thes. 1. 7. and many other places. And herein, in the same individual person, he shall act the proper∣ties of both his Natures. For as he shall visibly and gloriously appear in his humane Na∣ture exalted in the supream place of Judicature, and invested with Soveraign Power and Authority over all Flesh, Dan. 7. 13. Matth. 24. 30. 1 Thes. 4. 16. Rom. 14. 10. so he shall act the Power and Omniscience of his Deity in upholding the whole state of the Creation in Judgement, and in the discovery of the hearts, and comprehension of the words, thoughts, and actions of all the Children of men from the beginning of the world unto the end thereof. And herein as all the holy Angels shall accompany him, and attend upon him, as Ministers, Assistants, and Witnesses unto his Righteous Judgements, Mark 25. 31. Luke 9. 26. Jude 12. Dan. 7. 10. so also in the Judgement of fallen An∣gels and the reprobate world, the Saints, acquitted, justified, glorified in the first place, shall concur with him in this Judgement, by applauding his Righteousness and Holiness with their unanimous suffrage, Isa. 3. 14. Matth. 19. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. For 3. As to the outward manner of this Judgement it shall be with solemnity and great glory, 2 Thes. 11. 7, 8, 9, 10. Jude 14, 15. Dan. 7. 9. Rev. 20. 4, 5. And this shall be partly for the demonstration of the Glory and Honour of Jesus Christ, who hath been so de∣spised, reproached, persecuted in the world, and partly to fill the hearts of sinners with dread and terror, as Rev. 6. 17, 18, where this Judgement is represented. And the Order of this Judgement will be, that all the Elect shall first be acquitted and pronounced blessed. For they join in with the Lord Christ in the Judgement of the world, which they could not do, if themselves were not first freed and exalted. (2) The Devil and his Angels, and that on three general heads: 1. Of their original Apostasie. 2. Of the death of Christ. 3. Of Persecution. (3) The world of wicked men; probably 1. Hy∣pocrites in the Church. 2. All others without. For 4. The persons to be judged are (1) fallen Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 3. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude 6. Matth. 25. 41. (2) All men universally without exception, Isa. 45. 23. Rom. 14. 9, 10. Matth. 25. 31. In especial (1) All the Godly, all such as have believed and obeyed the Gospel shall be judged, Luke 21. 36. Rom. 14. 12. 2 Tim. 4. 8. whether all their Sins shall be then called over and made known unto others, seeing they are known to him who is more in himself and unto us than all the world besides, I question. (2) All the un∣godly and impenitent sinners, Deut. 32. 35. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Jude 15. 5. The Rule whereby all men shall be judged is the Law of their Obedience made known unto them. As (1) The Gentiles before the coming of Christ shall be judged by the Law of Nature, which all of them openly transgressed, Rom. 2. 12, 13, 14. (2) The Jews of the same time by the Law, and the Light into Redemption from Sin, superadded there∣unto; that is, by the Rule, Doctrine, Precepts, and Promises of the Law and Prophets. (3) The Gospel unto all men unto whom it hath been offered or preached, Rom. 2. 16. The Rule of Judgement at the last day, neither is nor shall be any other, but what is preached every day in the dispensation of the Gospel. No man shall be able to complain of a surprizal, or pretend ignorance of the Law whereby he was to be judged. The sentence of it is proposed unto them continually. In the word of the Gospel is the
Eternal condition of all the Sons of men positively determined and declared. And all these things are at large insisted on by others. Secondly, The Evidence which God hath given concerning this future Judgement, whereon the certainty of it as to us doth depend, may also be considered. And 1. God hath planted a presumption and sense of it on the minds and hearts of men by nature, from whence it is absolutely and eternally inseparable. Conscience is nothing but that judgement which men do make and which they cannot but make of their moral actions with reference unto the su∣pream future Judgement of God. Hence the Apostle treating of this future Judgement, Rom. 2. 12. 16. diverts to shew what Evidence all mankind had in the mean time that such a Judgement there should be, ver. 14, 15. And this he declares to consist in their own unavoidable thoughts concerning their own actions good or evil. This in the mean while accused them, and forced them to own a Judgement to come. Yea this is the proper Language of Conscience unto sinners on all occasions. And so effectual was this Evi∣dence in the minds of the Heathen, that they generally consented into a perswasion, that by one or other, some where or other, a future Judgement would be exercised with respect unto things done in this world. Fabulous inventions and traditions they mixed in abun∣dance with this Conviction, as Rom. 1. 21. but yet they made up the principal notions whereby a Reverence unto a Divine Being was preserved in their minds. And those who were wise and sober among them thought it sufficient to brand a person as impious and wicked, to deny an unseen judgement of mens actions out of this world, wherewith Cato reproached Caesar in the business of Catilin. This sense being that which keeps mankind within some tolerable bounds in Sin, the Psalmist prays that it may be increased in them, Psal. 19. 13. see Gen. 20. 11. 2. The working of Reason on the consideration of the state of all things in this world, complies with the innate principles and dictates of Conscience in this testimony. We sup∣pose those concerning whom we treat do own the Being of God, and his Providence in the government of the world. Others deserve not the least of our consideration. Now those who are under the power of that Acknowledgement and Perswasion, must and do believe that God is infinitely Just and Righteous, infinitely Wise and Holy, and that he cannot otherwise be. But yet when they come to consider how these Divine Properties are exerted in the providential government of the world, which all Ages, Persons and Places must of necessity be subject unto, and disposed by, they are at a loss. The final impunity of flagitious sinners in this world, the unrelieved oppressions, afflictions, and miseries of the best, the prosperity of wicked Devilish designs, the defeating and over∣throw of Holy, Just, Righteous undertakings and endeavours, promiscuous accidents to all sorts of persons, however differenced by Piety and Impiety, the prosperous course of men proud and blasphemous, who oppose God in Principles and Conversation no more than they are able, the secret undiscovered murthers of Martyrs and Innocents in Inquisitions and Dungeons, the extream confusion that seems to be in all things here below, with other things of the like kind innumerable, are ready to gravel and perplex the minds of men in this matter. They have greatly exercised the thoughts even of the Saints of God, and tried their Faith, as is evident, Psal. 73. ver. 4. to 17. Jer. 12. 1, 2. Habb. 1. 3, 4, 13. Job 21. 5, 6, 7, 8. &c. And the consideration hereof turned some of the wisest Heathens into Atheisme or outragious Blasphemies at their dying hours. But in this state even Reason rightly exerted will lead men to conclude, that upon the supposition of a Divine Being and Providence, it must needs be, that all these things shall be called over again, and then receive a final decision and determination, whereof in this world they are not capable. And among the Heathens there were proverbial Speeches which they uttered on occasion of great distresses which signified no less. As, Est profecto Deus qui haec videt. For (1) Upon a due examination it will quickly appear, that the moral actions of men with respect unto God, in the way of Sin and Obedience, are such as that it is utterly im∣possible that Judgement should be finally exercised towards them, in things visible and temporal, or that in this world they should receive a just recompence of reward. For whereas they have an aspect unto mens utmost end which is Eternal, they cannot be justly or rightly stated but under punishments or rewards Eternal, Rom. 1. 32. 2 Thes. 1. 6. Seeing therefore no full Judgement can possibly pass upon the Sins of men in this world, because all that can befall them is infinitely short of their demerit, even reason it self can∣not but be satisfied, that God in his infinite Wisdom and Soveraignty should put off the whole Judgement unto that day, wherein all penalties shall be equalled to their Crimes, and
Rewards unto Obedience. So when our Apostle reasoned before Felix about Righteous∣ness and Temperance, knowing how unavailable his Arguments would be without it, against the Countrey Sins and Evils, from the impunity and prosperity of such sinners in the world, to make them effectual he adds the consideration of the Judgement to come, Acts 24. 25. Here Reason may relieve it self in the midst of all cross occurrences of Pro∣vidence, and such as are not only contrary to our desires, but directly opposite unto our judgements, as to what is suitable to infinite Justice and Wisdom. The final determina∣tion of things is not made here nor is it possible it should so be, on the ground before assigned. (2) Should God take men off from a respect unto future Eternal Judgement, and con∣stantly dispense Rewards and Punishments in this world, according unto what the wisest of men can apprehend just and equal, (which if any thing, must satisfie without a regard to Eternal Judgement) as it would be most unequal and unrighteous, so it might be an occasion of greater wickedness than the world is yet pestered withall. Unrighteous and unequal it must be unavoidably, because the Judgement supposed must pass according unto what men are able to discern and judge upon, that is, outward actions only. Now this were unrighteous in God, who sees and knows the heart, and knows that actions have their Good and Evil, if not solely yet principally from their respect thereunto. The Lord is a God of knowledge and by him actions are weighed, said Hannah, when Eli judged her drunk, but God saw that she prayed, 1 Sam. 2. 3. There is nothing more evident than that it is inconsistent with, and destructive of all Divine perfections, that God should pass a decretory sentence on the actions of men, according to what appears unto us to be just and equal. This therefore God declines, namely, to judge according to a Rule that we can comprehend, Isa. 11. 3. Rom. 2. 2. But (3) Suppose that God should in this world distribute Rewards and Punishments constantly according to what he sees in the hearts and inward dispositions of the minds of men, it is no less evident that it would fill all men with unspeakable confusions, and pre∣vail with them to judge that indeed there is no certain Rule of Judgement, no unmove∣able bounds and limits of Good and Evil; seeing it would be absolutely impossible that by them the Judgements of God should be reduced unto any such Rules or Bounds; the Reasons of them being altogether unknown. This the Scripture plainly owns, Psal. 77. 19. Psal. 36. 6. Wherefore (4) Should God visibly and constantly have dispensed Rewards and Punish∣ments in this world, according to the Rule of mens knowledge, comprehension and judgement, which alone hath an appearance of being satisfactory, it would have been a principle or at least the occasion of a worse kind of Atheisme, than any yet the Earth hath been pestered withall. For it could not have been, but that the most would have made the judgement of men the only Rule of all that they did, which God must be obliged to comply withall, or be unrighteous; which is absolutely to dethrone him, and leave him only to be the Executioner of the Wills and Reasons of men. But from all these and the like perplexities, Reason it self may quietly take sanctuary in submission unto Soveraign Wisdom as to present dispensations, in a satisfaction that it is not only suitable unto, but necessary on the account of Divine Justice, that there should be a future Eternal Judge∣ment, to pass according to truth upon all the ways and actions of men. And hereby doth God keep up in the hearts of men a testimony unto this great principle of our pro∣fession. Therefore when our Apostle reasoned before Felix concerning such Duties and Sins, as were discoverable by the Light of Nature, namely, Righteousness and Tempe∣rance, with respect to both which he was openly and flagitiously guilty, he adds this prin∣ciple concerning Judgement to come, the truth whereof the Conscience and Reason of the wretch himself could not but comply withall, Acts 24. 25. 3. God hath given Testimony hereunto in all the extraordinary Judgements which he hath executed since the foundation of the world. It is not for nothing that he doth some∣times, that he doth so frequently go out of or besides the common beaten tracts and paths of Providence. He doth it to intimate unto the world, that things are not always to pass at their present rate, but are one day to be called to another account. In great Judge∣ments the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against the ungodliness of men, Rom. 1. 18. and an intimation is given of what he will farther do hereafter. For as he leaves not himself without witness in respect of his goodness and patience, in that he doth good and giveth rain from Heaven and fruitful seasons filling mens hearts with food and gladness, Acts 14. 17. so he gives testimony to his Righteousness and Holiness, in the Judgements that he executes, Psal. 9. 16. For whereas goodness and mercy are the works wherein God is
as it were delighted, he gives Testimony unto them together with his patience and long∣suffering in the ordinary course of his Dispensations. But Judgement in severity he calls his strange work, that which he proceeds not unto, but on great provocations, Isa. 28. 21. he satisfieth his holy Wisdom with some extraordinary necessary instances of it. And thus he hath himself singled out some particular instances, which he gave on purpose that they might be as pledges of the future Judgement, and hath given us a rule in them, how we are to judge of all his extraordinary acts of the same kind. Such was the Flood whereby the world was destroyed in the days of Noah, which Peter affirms expresly was a Type to shadow out the severity of God in the last final Judgement, 2 Pet. 2. 5. Chap. 3. 5, 6, 7. Of the like nature was his turning the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into Ashes, condemning them with an overthrow, making them an example unto those that after should live ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 6. He made them a terrifying example, that others should hear and fear and do no more so presumptuously. But now whereas God hath not in the space of four thousand years, brought any such Judgement on any other places or persons, if this Example had respect only unto this world, it must needs have lost all its force and efficacy upon the minds of Sinners. Wherefore it did nearly respect the Judgement to come, God giving therein an instance what obstinate and profligate Sinners are to look for at that great day. Wherefore Jude says expresly, they are set forth for an Example suffering the vengeance of Eternal Fire, ver. 7. And this is the Language of all Gods extraordinary Judgements either on persons or places in the world. Let mens Sins be what they will, God can endure in his long-suffering the Sins of one as well as another, among the Vessels of wrath that are fitted for destruction, and so he doth ordinarily, or for the most part. But yet he will sometimes reach out his hand from Heaven in an extraordinary instance of Vengeance, on purpose that men may know that things shall not for ever be passed over in such a promiscuous manner, but that he hath appointed another day wherein he will judge the world in Righteousness. And for this reason such signal Judgements as are Evidences of the future Eternal Judgement of God, are in the Scripture expressed in words that seem to declare that Judgement it self, rather than the Types of it, Isa. 34. 4. Rev. 6. 13, 14. Dan. 7. 9, 10. Math. 24. 29, 30. But 4. God hath not absolutely intrusted the evidence and preservation of this im∣portant truth which is the Foundation of all Religion, unto the remainders of innate light in the Minds and Consciences of men, which may be variously obscured, until it be al∣most utterly extinguished; nor yet unto the exercise of Reason on the consideration of the present Administration of Providence in this world, which is oft-times corrupted, de∣praved, and rendred useless; nor yet unto the influence which extraordinary Judgements may have upon the minds of men, which some fortifie themselves against by their obsti∣nacy in Sin and Security: but he hath abundantly testified unto it by express Revelation from the beginning of the world, now recorded in his word, by which all men must be tried whether they will or no. It may not be doubted but that Adam was acquainted with this truth immediately from God himself. He was so indeed in the Commination given against Sin at first, especially as it was explained in the Curse after he had actually sinned. And this was that which was taught him in the threatning, and which his Eyes were open to see clearly after his fall, where he immediately became afraid of God as his Judge, Gen. 3. 10. Nor can it be doubted but that he communicated the knowledge of it unto his posterity. But whereas they quickly in that profligacy in all wickedness which they gave themselves unto, had together with all other sacred Truths, lost the remem∣brance of it, or at least practically despised and scoffed at the instruction which they had received therein, God knowing the necessity of it, either to restrain them in their flagi∣tious courses, or to give them a warning that might leave them without excuse, makes a new express Revelation of it unto Enoch, and by him to mankind, Jude 14, 15. For Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord cometh with ten thou∣sand of his Saints, to execute Judgement upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their hard speeches, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. And this is the second New Reve∣lation that is recorded before the Flood. There were two Revelations that were the foun∣dation of the Church, the one concerning future Judgement in the Threatning, the other concerning the Recovery and Restauration of mankind in the Promise. Both seem to have been equally neglected by that cursed generation. But God solemnly revived them both, the first by Enoch, the latter by Noah, who was the Preacher of Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2. 5. in whom the Spirit of Christ preached unto them who are now in prison, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. And this Old Prophecy was revived by the Holy Ghost, partly that we might
know, that God from the beginning of the world gave publick testimony unto and warning of his future Eternal Judgement, and partly to acquait us, that in the latter days men would break out into an excess, and outrage in sin and wickedness, like that of those before the Flood, wherein it would be necessary that day should be restrained, or terrified or warned, by preaching unto them this truth of the Judgement to come. After this the testimonies given unto it in the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testaments do so abound and are so obvious to all, that it is no way needful particularly to produce them. This principle being thus cleared and confirmed, it may not be amiss to shew what practical improvement it doth require. And it is manifest that there is no Duty in Religion that is not, or ought not to be influenced by the consideration of it. I shall only name some of them whereunto it is in an especial manner applied by the Holy Ghost himself. First, Ministers of the Gospel ought to dwell greatly on the consideration of it, as it is repre∣sented in its terror and glory, that they may be excited and stirred up to deal effectually with the Souls of men, that they fall not under the Vengeance of that day. So our Apostle affirms that it was with himself; for having asserted the truth and certainty hereof, in those words, For we must all appear before the Judgement-seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body according to that he hath done, he adds thereunto, Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we perswade men, 2 Cor. 5. 10, 11. Duely considering what will be the state of things with all men in that day, how dreadful the Lord Christ will be there∣in unto impenitent sinners, and what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, I use all diligence to prevail with men to get such an interest in the Peace and Re∣conciliation tendred in the Gospel, that they may be accounted worthy to stand in that day. See Col. 1. 28. And without a continual due apprehension hereof, it cannot be but that men will grow cold, and dead, and formal in their Ministry. If the Judgement∣seat of Jesus Christ be not continually in our eye, whatever other motives we may have unto diligence in our work, we shall have little regard to the Souls of men whether they live or die in their Sins or no; without which, whatever we do is of no accep∣tance with God. 2. The consideration of it is peculiarly applied by the Holy Ghost against security in worldly enjoyments, and those Evils wherewith it is usually accompanied. So it is made use of by our blessed Saviour, Luke 21. 34, 35, 36. And so by our Apostle, 1 Thes. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. And this also is expressed in the Type of it, or the Flood in the days of Noah, no∣thing in it was more terrible unto men than that they were surprised in the midst of their enjoyments and employments, Matth. 24. 38, 39. 3. It is in like manner frequently applied unto the consolation of Believers, under the trou∣bles, difficulties, and persecutions, which in this life they undergo, 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. even the terror and the glory of it, with the Vengeance which shall be executed in it, are proposed as the matter of highest consolation unto Believers, as indeed they are, on many accounts not here to be insisted on. See Isa. 35. 3, 4. Luke 21. 31. Rev. 19. 7. 2 Tim. 4. 8. Rev. 22. 17. And therefore are we required to look for, long for, and what lies in us hasten to this day of the Lord, when on all accounts our Joy shall be full. 4. It is in like manner every where applied to the terror of ungodly and impenitent sin∣ners, 1 Thes. 5. 2, 3. 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8. Jude 14, 15. and in many other places not to be numbred. And unto these ends in an especial manner is the consideration of it to be by us improved. These therefore (that we may return to the Text) are those fundamental principles of Christian Religion which the Apostle calls the Doctrine of Baptismes and the laying on of hands. This was a summary of that Doctrine wherein they were to be instructed who were to be baptized, and to have Imposition of hands thereon. But there occurs no small difficulty from the use of the word Baptismes in the plural number. For it is not any where else in the Scripture so used, when the Baptism of the Gospel is intended, and the Jewish washings are often so expressed. The Syriack Inter∣preter which is our most ancient translation, renders it in the singular number, Baptism. But because there is a full agreement in all Original Copies, and the ancient Expositions also concur therein, none have yet adventured to leave the Original, and follow that tran∣slation; but all generally who have commented on the place, have considered how the word may be understood and explained. And herein they have fallen into such various conjectures, as I shall not spend time in the consideration and refutation of, but content my self with the naming of them, that the Reader may use his own judgement about
them. Some therefore suppose that mention is made of Baptisms because of the Baptism of John and Christ, which as they judge were not only distinct but different. But the Jews were indifferently baptized by the one or the other; and it was but one Ordinance unto them. Some because of the many Baptisms or washings among the Jews, into the room of all which the mystery of our Baptism doth succeed. But this of all other con∣jectures is the least probable; and if any respect could be had thereunto, it would have been necessary to have mentioned Baptism in the singular number. Some think respect is had unto the several sorts of Gospel Baptism, which are usually referred unto three heads, fluminis, flaminis, sanguinis, of the Water by external washing, of the Spirit by internal purifying, of Afflictions unto blood by both. And thus the Apostle should not only intend the Baptism of Water, but also the whole spiritual cleansing of the Soul and Conscience, which was required of men at their initiation into Christian Religion, called , 1 Pet. 3. 21. with a purpose to seal their Confession with their Blood if called thereunto, and therein being baptized with the Baptism where∣with the Lord Christ in his suffering was baptized, Matth. 20. 23. And this hath in it much of probability, and which next unto what I have fixed on, I should embrace. Some suppose, regard may be had unto the stated times of Baptism, which were fixed and observed in the Primitive Church, when they baptized persons publickly, but twice or thrice in the year. But it is certain that this custom was not then introduced. Some be take themselves unto an Enalogie of number, which indeed is not unusual, but there is nothing here in the Tet to give countenance unto a supposition of it. Wherefore the most general interpretation of the words, and meaning of the Apostle is, that although Baptism be but one and the same, never to be repeated or reiterated on the same subject, nor is there any other Baptism or Washing of the same kind; yet be∣cause the Subjects of it, or those who were baptized were many, every one of them being made partakers of the same Baptism in special, that of them all is called Baptisms, or the Baptism of the many. All persons who began to attend unto the Gospel were diligently instructed in the fore-mentioned principles with others of an alike nature, (for they are mentioned only as instances) before they were admitted unto a participation of this Ordinance with impo∣sition of hands that ensued thereon; these therefore are called the Doctrine of Baptisms or the Catechetical fundamental truths, wherein those to be baptized were instructed, as being the things whereof they were to make a solemn profession. But if we shall follow the other interpretation, and suppose that this Doctrine of Baptisms is an epression of a distinct principle by it self, then cannot the word by any means be re∣strained unto the Baptism by Water only. For although this be an important head of Christian Doctrine, namely, the declaration, use and end of our Sacramental Initiation into Christ and the Profession of the Gospel, yet no reason can be given why that should be called Baptisms, seeing it hath respect only to the thing it self, and not to the persons who are made partakers of it. Admit therefore of this sense, that it is the Doctrine concerning Baptisms which is in∣tended; and then the whole of what is taught or the substnace of it concerning the San∣ctification and Purification of the Souls of men in their Insition into, and Union with Christ, outwardly epressed in the Sign of Baptism, and wrought inwardly by the Spirit and Grace of God, through the efficacy of the Doctrine of the Gospel, in opposition to all the legal and carnal washings among the Jews, is intended hereby. So the Lord Christ loved the Church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctifie and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, Ephes. 5. 26. And indeed the Doctrine hereof is among the Ru∣diments of Christian Religion. But I yet adhere to the former Eposition, and that also because unto Baptisms, Imposition of hands, whose nature we must netly enquire into, is added. Some suppose that by this Imposition of hands that Rite in the Church which was af∣terward called Confirmation, is intended. For whereas there were two sorts of persons  that were baptized, namely, those that were adult at their first hearing of the Gospel, and the infant Children of Believers who were admitted to be members of the Church; the first sort were instructed in the principles mentioned before they were admitted unto Baptism, by the profession whereof they laid the foundation of their own personal Right thereunto. But the other being received as a part and branches of a Family whereupon the blessing of Abraham was come, and to whom the Promise of the Covenant was ex∣tended, being thereon baptized in their Infancy, were to be instructed in them, as they grew up unto years of understanding. Afterwards when they were established in the
knowledge of these necessary truths, and had resolved on personal Obedience unto the Gospel, they were offered unto the fellowship of the Faithful. And hereon giving the same account of their Faith and Repentance which others had done before they were bap∣tized, they were admitted into the Communion of the Church, the Elders thereof laying their hands on them in token of their Acceptation, and praying for their Confirmation in the Faith. Hence the same Doctrines became previously necessary unto both these Rites, before Baptism to them that were adult, and towards them who were baptized in Infancy before the Imposition of hands. And I do acknowledge that this was the state of things in the Apostolical Churches, and that it ought to be so in all others. Persons bap∣tized in their Infancy ought to be instructed in the fundamental principles of Religion, and make profession of their own Faith and Repentance before they are admitted into the Society of the Church. But that in those first days of the first Churches, persons were ordinarily after Baptism admitted into their Societies by Imposition of hands, is no where intimated in the Scripture. And the whole business of Confirmation is of a much later date, so that it cannot be here intended. For it must have respect unto, and express somewhat that was then in common use. Now there is mention in the Scripture of a fourfold Imposition of hands used by the Lord Christ and his Apostles. The first was peculiar unto his own person in the way of Autho∣ritative Benediction. Thus when he owned little Children to belong to his Covenant and Kingdom, He laid his hands on them, and blessed them, Mark 10. 16. But this was pe∣culiar to himself, who had all blessings in his Power, and hereof this is the only instance. Secondly, This Rite was used in the healing of Diseases. They laid their hands on sick, weak and impotent people, healing them in a miraculous manner, Luke 4. 40. Mark 16. 18. Acts 28. 8. This was the sign of the Communication of healing virtue from the Lord Christ by their Ministry. Thirdly, Imposition of hands was used in the setting apart of persons to the office and work of the Ministry, 1 Tim. 4. 14. Chap. 5. 22. Acts 6. 6. the Rite herein was derived from the Old Testament, Numb. 8. 11. the whole Congregation laid hands on the Levites in their Consecration. And it was of old of common use among the Jews in the dedication of their Rulers, Rabbi's or Teachers, being called by them . Fourthly, It was used by the Apostles in the collation of the supernatu∣ral spiritual Gifts of the Holy Ghost unto them who were baptized, Acts. 8. 17. Acts 19. 6. In no other Duties of Religion was this Rite made use of, as to any mention that is made thereof in the New Testament, or Records concerning the practice of the Primitive Churches. The first of these as we observed was only a personal action of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that in one single instance, so not here intended. The second was extraordi∣nary also, and that wherein the generality of Christians was not concerned, nor can any reason be given, why the mention of a thing extraordinary, occasional and temporary, should be here inserted. The third was a Rite of standing use in the Church, and that wherein Church Order is much concerned. But as to the use of it one sort of persons on∣ly was concerned therein. And no just reason can be given why the Apostle from the Doctrine of the first intrants of Christian Religion, should proceed to the Ordination of Ministers, omitting all other Rites of the Church, especially that of the Supper of the Lord, wherein so great a part of the Worship of the Church consisted. Besides there is no ground to give a probability that the Apostle should insert the obser∣vation of this Rite or the Doctrine concerning it, in the same order and under the same necessity with those great fundamentals of Faith, Repentance, the Resurrection, and Eternal Judgement. Wherefore the Imposition of hands in the last sense mentioned, is that which most pro∣bably is intended by our Apostle. For (1) adhering to our first interpretation as the most solid and firm, the Imposition of hands intended, is a description of the persons that were to be instructed in the other fundamental principles, but is no principle its self. And this is not appliable unto any other of the uses of this Rite. For (2) This laying on of hands did commonly if not constantly in those days accompany or immediately follow Baptism, Acts 8. 14, 15, 16, 17. Acts 19. 6. And a thing this was of singular present use, wherein the Glory of the Gospel and its propagation were highly concerned. This was the state of things in the world. When upon the preaching of the Gospel any were converted unto Christ, and upon their profession of Faith and Repentance were bap∣tized, the Apostles present, (or if near unto them they came on that purpose) laid their hands on them, whereon they received the Holy Ghost in a supernatural Communication of Evangelical Gifts. And this, next to the preaching of the word, was the great means which the Lord Christ made use of in the propagation of the Gospel. By the Word he
wrought internally on the Minds and Consciences of men, and by these miraculous gifts he turned the thoughts of men to the consideration of what was preached, by what in an extraordinary manner was objected to their external senses. And this was not con∣fined unto a few Ministers of the word and the like, but as it appears from sundry places of Scripture was common almost unto all Believers that were baptized, Gal. 3. 2. 1 Cor. 14. (3) In the Verse following mention is made of those who were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, that is, of his miraculous gifts and operations which were communi∣cated by this Imposition of hands, which therefore refers unto the same. After these times, this Rite was made use of in other occasions of the Church, in imitation no doubt of this extraordinary action of the Apostles, but there is no mention of it in the Scripture nor was in use in those days, and therefore cannot be here intended. And this is the most genuine interpretation of this place. These mentioned were the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, wherein among others of the same importance they were to be well instructed, who were to be baptized and thereon to have hands laid on them, whereby the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost were communicated unto them. But we shall allow a room also for that other Exposition of the words, which is more generally received, and in the exclusion whereof, because it complies with the Analogie of Faith, I dare not be peremptory. And this is, that the Doctrine of laying on of hands maketh one distinct principle of Christianity by its self. But then the thing signified is principally intended, namely, the Communication of the Holy Ghost unto Believers in his Gifts and Graces ordinary and extraordinary, whereof this Rite was the external Sign. And as this was peculiar to the Gospel, so it contained the principal verification of it. And this it did sundry ways: (1) Because the Promises of the Lord Christ for the sending of him were eminently and visibly accomplished. It is known that when he was leaving the world he filled his Disciples with an expectation of his sending the Holy Ghost unto them. And he did not only propose this Promise as their great supportment during his absence, but also suspended on its accomplishment, all the Duty which he required from them in the Office he had called them unto. Therefore he commanded them to abide quietly at Hierusalem without any publick engagement into their work, until they had received the Promise of the Spirit, Acts 1. 4, 8. And when this was done, it gave a full and glorious testimony, not only unto his truth in what he had told them in this world, but also unto his present exaltation and acceptation with God, as Peter declares, Acts 2. 33. (2) His Gifts themselves were such, many of them, as consisted in miraculous operations, whereby God himself gave immediate testimony to the truth of the Gospel, Heb. 2. 3, 4. God himself bearing witness (to the preachers of it) with signs and wonders, and with miracles and gifts of the Holy Ghost. This made the Doctrine concerning them of unconceivable impor∣tance unto Believers of those days, as that whereby their Faith and Profession was emi∣nently justified in the face of the world. (3) This Dispensation of the Holy Ghost was peculiar to the times of the Gospel, and was in its self a sufficient proof of the cessation of all Legal Ordinances. For it was the principal Prophecy and Promise under the Old Testament, that in the days of the Messiah the Holy Ghost should be so poured out, as I have at large elsewhere declared. And it was to be a consequent of his Glorification, Job. 7. 38, 39. Hence by the argument of their receiving the Spirit, our Apostle proves to the Galatians their freedom from the Law, Gal. 3. 2. Wherefore (4) The Doctrine concerning this Dispensation of the Spirit was peculiar to the Gospel, and so might be esteemed an especial principle of its Doctrine. For although the Church of the Jews be∣lieved the Holy Ghost as one Person in the Trinity, after their obscure manner of appre∣hension, yet they were Strangers unto this Dispensation of him in his Gifts, though promised under the Old Testament, because not to be accomplished but under the New. Yea John the Baptist who in light into the Mystery of the Gospel, outwent all the Prophets that were before him, yet had not the Knowledge hereof communicated unto him. For those who were only baptized with his Baptism and initiated thereby into the Doctrine of Repentance for the forgiveness of Sins, had not so much as heard whether there were an Holy Ghost, that is, as unto this dispensation of him, Acts 19. 2, 3. Hereupon our Apostle instructing them in the Doctrine of the Gospel he made use of this Rite of the Imposition of hands, whereon the Holy Ghost came on them, and they spake with Tongues and prophesied, ver. 6. This therefore being so great and important a concern of the Gospel, and this being the Rite appointed to represent it by, the Doctrine concerning it, namely, the Promise of Christ to send the Holy Ghost, with the nature, use, and end of the Gifts which he wrought in Believers, is expressed, and reckoned among the first principles of Christian Religion. But the Reader is at liberty to follow whether of these interpretations
he pleaseth. And from the whole of what hath been discoursed we may take the en∣suing observations. 1. Persons to be admitted into the Church, and unto a participation of all the holy Ordi∣nances thereof had need be well instructed in the important Principles of the Gospel. We have here the Rule of the Apostle and Example of the Primitive Churches for the ground of this Doctrine. And it is necessary that such persons should be so instructed on their own part, as also on the part of the Church it self. On their own part, because without it the Ordinances themselves will be of little use unto them. For what benefit can any receive from that whose nature and properties he is unacquainted withall? And neither the nature nor use of the Ordinances of the Church, can be understood without a previous comprehension of the fundamental principles of the Gospel, as might be easily demonstrated. And it is so on the part of the Church. For the neglect hereof was the chiefest occasion of the de∣generacy of most Churches in the world. By this means were the Societies of them filled with ignorant and consequently profane persons, by whom all their Administrations were defiled, and themselves corrupted, as I have shewed elsewhere. When once the care and diligence of the first Churches, in the instruction of those whom they admitted into their Communion, were laid aside, and an empty form taken up in the room of sedulous teach∣ing, the Churches themselves hastened into a fatal Apostasie. 2. It is not the outward Sign but the inward Grace that is principally to be considered in those Ordinances or Observances of the Church which visibly consist in Rites and Ceremonies, or have them accompanying of them. As in the Rite of Imposition of hands, the dispensation of the Holy Ghost was principally to be considered. Verse 3. . And this will we do, if so be that God permit. Ver. 3. These words contain two things. (1) The Resolution of the Apostle as to the matter and occasion before him. And this will we do. (2) A limitation of that resolution by an express submission to the will and pleasure of God, if so be that God permit. As to the sense of the first, it is plain that the Apostle in the foregoing Verses had pro∣posed  or mentioned two things of very divers natures. The first hereof is, going on to perfection, ver. 1. and the other, the laying again of the foundation, ver. 2. Hence it is doubted and enquired, whether of these it be that the Apostle hath respect unto in these words, And this we will do. This we will do, that is, either we will go on to perfection, which was exhorted unto ver. 1. and so is the more remote antecedent; or this will we do, laying again the foundation, which is the next antecedent, whereunto  seems to relate. And this sundry Expo∣sitors adhere unto. But there are some things which make it evident, that respect is had herein to the former and more remote antecedent, namely, going on to perfection. And they are, first what the Apostle saith, and then what he doth. In what he saith, his manner of ex∣pressing these things is considerable; for as to the latter he twice intimates his intention to omit their farther handling. Therefore leaving, or at present omitting the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, and, not laying again the foundation, ver. 1. Hereunto if we re∣fer these words, And this will we do if God permit, they rather signifie the present leaving of them, than their farther handling. And he not only declares his resolution to omit them, but also gives a sufficient reason why he would do so. And this is expressed in the last Verses of the Chapter foregoing. They had already had both time and means sufficient for their instruction in these principles so that to inculcate them on those by whom they were learned and received was needless; and for those, who had either not received them, or rejected them, it was to no purpose farther to treat with them about these things, which he confirms with a severe reason and dreadful consideration, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But things are otherwise expressed concerning the other antecedent. He speaks of it positively as that which was in his purpose and design, Let us, saith he, go on to perfection, I in teaching, ye in learning, and this will we do if God permit. (2) His intention is no less evident from what he doth in this Epistle; There is indeed in this Chapter, and the last Chapter of it, mention made about Repentance, Faith, Patience, Obedience, the Worship of God, and the like; but not as principles of Doctrine, to be laid as foundation, but as Graces to be practised in the course of their Edification. But the main business he undertakes, and
the work which he pursues, is the carrying on of these Hebrews to perfection by the declara∣tion of the most sublime mysteries of the Gospel, especially that which is among the chiefest of them, namely, the Priesthood of Christ and the Prefiguration of it by that of Melchisedeck. (3) The whole series of this discourse depends on Chap. 5. ver. 10, 11. Having declared unto them that he had many things to instruct them concerning the Priesthood of Christ, as shadowed out in the Person and Office of Melchisedeck, he lets them know that he had also sundry discouragements in his design, which yet were not such, but that he would break through them and pursue his intention. Only to make his way as smooth and plain as conveniently he could, he deals with them a while about the removal of those hinderances which lay in his way on their part, and then returneth di∣rectly to his first proposal, and the handling of it in the last Verse of this Chapter. This therefore is the sense of these words. For the reasons before insisted on, and afterwards to be added, I will proceed unto the declaration of the principal mysteries of the Gospel, especially those which concern the Priesthood of Christ, and thereby raise up the building of your Faith and Profession upon the foundation that hath been laid, whereby through the Grace of God, you may be carried on to perfection, and become skilful in the word of Righteousness. No discouragements should deter the Ministers of the Gospel from proceeding in the declaration Obser. of the mysteries of Christ, whose dispensation is committed unto them, when they are called there∣unto. Among the various discouragements they meet withall, the least is not what ariseth from the dulness of them that hear. This our Apostle had now in his eye in a particular manner, yet resolved to break through the consideration of it, in the discharge of his Duty, So it is with many still. Neither is any thing more irksome and grievous unto faithful preachers than the incapacity of their Hearers to receive Gospel mysteries through their own negligence and sloth. But in this condition they have here an exam∣ple for their guidance and direction. And these things lie plain therein. (1) That they use all means, by warnings, per∣swasions, incouragements, and threatnings to stir up their people out of their slothful, care∣less frame and temper. So doth our Apostle with the Hebrews in this Chapter, leaving nothing unsaid that might excite them unto diligence and a due improvement of the means of knowledge which they enjoyed. So will they do with them that watch for their Souls as those who must give an account, and Ministers of another sort have no con∣cern in these matters. (2) As occasion offers it self, to proceed in their work. And that (1) Because there are among their Hearers some concerning whom they are perswa∣ded of better things, and such as accompany Salvation, as our Apostle speaks verse 9. whose Edification is not to be neglected, for the sinful sloth and ignorance of others. (2) God is pleased sometimes to convey saving Light to the minds of men, before very dark and ignorant, in and by the dispensation of the deepest mysteries of the Gospel, without such preparatory instruction in the more obvious principles of it, as is ordinarily required. Not knowing therefore by what ways or means, how or when God will work upon the Souls of men, it is their Duty to proceed in the declaration of the whole counsel of God committed unto them, and leave the success of all unto him by whom they are employed. Secondly, The Limitation of this Resolution is expressed in those words, , . if God permit. There may be a threefold occasion of these words, or a respect unto three things in the Will of God, and consequently a threefold Exposition of them. For, 1. Respect may be had meerly and solely unto the unknown Soveraign will and pleasure of God, and so no more is intended but that general limitation and expression of our ab∣solute dependance on him, which we ought to bound all our resolutions withall. This our nature, and the nature of all our affairs, as they are in the hand of God, and at his disposal, do require of us. And therefore also it is expresly enjoyned us as a Duty to be continually minded in all we undertake or do, Jam. 4. 13, 14, 15. If this be intended (as it is also, if not only) then it is as if he had said, If he in whose hand is my life and breath and all my ways, whose I am, whom I serve, and to whose disposal I willingly submit my self in all things, see good and be pleased to continue my life, opportunity, his assistance and all other things necessary to this work, I will proceed with my design and purpose to acquaint you with and instruct you in the great mysteries of the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ. See 1 Cor. 16. 7.
2. Respect may be had unto the condition of the Hebrews whose sloth and negligence in hearing the word he hath now under reproof, and the Will or Purpose of God concerning them. For he seems to intimate unto them, that there may be some fear lest God should be so provoked by their former miscarriages, as that he would not afford them the means of farther instruction. For this is a thing which God often threatens, and which falls out oftner than we are aware of, yea most Nations of the Earth are examples of this se∣verity of God. So a word of the same importance is used unto this purpose, as to the turning away of the Gospel from any persons or people, Acts 16. 7. They assayed to go into Bythinia but the Spirit suffered them not, he permitted it not; which is the same, with forbidding them to preach the word in Asia, ver. 6 And so the sense of the expression amounts to this; If God, whom I fear you have much provoked by your negligence and con∣tempt of his word, will yet exercise patience and long-suffering towards you, and not cast you out of his care by forbidding me to proceed in my design, or depriving me of my opportunity, if God hinder me not by reason of your unworthiness, but be graciously pleased to be with me in my designed work. 3. There is a  in the words, wherein a farther respect unto the Will of God is included than expressed. For it is not a meer naked permission in God that the Apostle in∣tends, as if he should have said, if God let me alone, and as it were wink at what I am doing. But there is a supposition in it of the continuance of Gods gracious assistance and especial presence with him, without which he frequently declared that he could neither undertake nor accomplish any thing that lay before him. God can in the beginning or middle of an Epistle, or a Sermon, take us off when he pleaseth, if he do but withdraw his assistance from us. And all these respects unto the Will of God, are not only con∣sistent, so as that the closing with one excludeth not another, but they are all of them plainly included in the Apostles intention, and are necessary to be taken in, unto the right understanding of his words. As it is our Duty to submit our selves in all our undertakings unto the Will of God, so Obser. especially in those wherein his Glory is immediately concerned. In general we have a Rule given us as to the most ordinary occasions of Life, Jam. 4. 13, 14, 15. Not to do it is to disavow our dependance on God; a fruit of carnal wisdom and security, which God greatly abhorreth. Neither is there any thing which will so fill our lives with dis∣appointment and vexation. For in vain shall any man, be his condition at present what it will, seek for rest or peace in any thing but the Will of God. But especially is this required of us in these things wherein the Glory of God himself is immediately con∣cerned. Such are those here with respect whereunto our Apostle makes this deference unto the Soveraign pleasure of God. This will we do if God permit; namely, the things which concern the instruction and edification of the Church, which regards the Glory of God in an especial manner. For (1) All these things are under the especial care of God, and are ordered by peculiar Wisdom. Not to submit our selves absolutely in these things unto him, is to take his own things out of his hand, and to exalt our wisdom against his, as though we knew better what belonged unto his affairs than himself. (2) We come not to have any concernment in the things of God but upon his call, and hold it at his pleasure. That is the rise and tenour of our Ministry in the Church whatever it be. And is it not just and equal that we should wholly submit in our work unto his Will, and rest in his Pleasure? It may be we have many things in our view that are desirable unto us, many things we would think meet to engage our endeavours in, as supposing them to have a great tendency to the Glory of God, in all which he hath determined contrary to our desires and aymes. All our Satisfaction lies in, and all our Duty is to be bounded by this submission. Let them who are entrusted with means of Light, Knowledge, and Grace, improve them Obs. 2. with diligence, lest upon their neglect, God suffer not his Ministers farther to instruct them.
Verse 4, 5, 6. . . Impossibile enim, that is, est, it is impossible, Syr.  But they cannot. This respects the Power of the Persons themselves, and not the Event of things, it may be not improperly as to the sense. Beza and Erasmus, fieri non potest, it cannot be. The same with impossibile. But the use of the word  in the New Testament, which signifies sometimes only what is very difficult, not what is absolutely denied, makes it useful to retain the same word, as in our Translation; For it is im∣possible. Syr. Those who one time, or once descended unto Baptism; of which interpretation we must speak afterwards. All others, qui semel fuerint Illuminati, who were once Illuminated. Only the Aethiopick follows the Syriack; some read Illustrati to the same purpose. , vul. Lat. Gustaverant etiam donum coeleste; etiam for &. Others express the Article by the Pronoun, by reason of its Reduplication. Et gustaverint donum illud coeleste; and have tasted of that Heavenly Gift. Syr. The Gift that is from Heaven. And this the Emphasis in the Original seems to require. And have tasted of that Heavenly Gift. . Et participes facti sunt spiritus sancti. Vul. Lat. And are made partakers of the Holy Ghost. All others, facti fuerint, have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost; Syr.  the Spirit of Ho∣liness. . Vul. Lat. Et gustaverunt nihilominus bonum Dei ver∣bum. Rhem. Have moreover tasted the good word of God. But moreover doth not express nihilominus; and have notwithstanding, which hath no place here, , verbum pulchrum. . Virtutes{que} seculi futuri. Syr.  Virtutem; the Power. Vul. seculi venturi. We cannot in our Language distinguish between futu∣rum and venturum, and so render it, the world to come. ; Vul. Et prolapsi sunt. Rhem. And are fallen. Others, si prola∣bantur; which the sense requires; if they fall, that is, away, as our Translation, pro∣perly. Syr. , That sin again, somewhat dangerously: for it is one kind of sinning only that is included and expressed. . Vul. rursus renovari ad poenitentiam, to be renewed again to Repentance, rendring the active verb passively. So Beza also, ut denuo renoventur ad resipiscentiam; that they should again be renewed to Repentance. The word is active as rendered by ours, to renew them again to Repentance. . Rursum crucifigentes sibimetipsis filium Dei. . Vul. Et ostentui habentes; Rhem. And making him a mockery. Eras. ludibrio habentes. Beza, ignominiae exponentes. One of late, ad exemplum Judaeorum excruciant; torment him as did the Jews. For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the Heavenly Gift, V. 4, 5, 6. and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the Powers of the world to come, if they fall away (for' any) to renew them again to Repen∣tance; seeing they crucifie again to themselves the Son of God, and put him unto open shame, (or treat him ignominiously.) That this passage in our Apostles discourse hath been looked upon as accompanied with great difficulties, is known to all. And many have the Differences been about its Inter∣pretation. For both Doctrinally and Practically, sundry have here stumbled and mis∣carried. It is almost generally agreed upon, that from these words, and the colourable but indeed perverse Interpretation and Application made of them by some in the Primi∣tive times, occasioned by the then present circumstances of things, to be mentioned
afterwards, the Latin Church was so backward in receiving the Epistle it self, that it had not absolutely prevailed therein in the days of Hierome, as we have elsewhere declared. Wherefore it is necessary, that we should a little enquire into the occasion of the great contests which have been in the Church almost in all Ages, about the sense of this place. It is known that the Primitive Church according to its Duty, was carefully watchful about the Holiness and upright walking of all that were admitted into the Society and Fellowship of it. Hence upon every known and visible failing, they required an open Repentance from the Offenders, before they would admit them into a participation of the sacred mysteries. But upon flagitious and scandalous crimes, such as Murder, Adul∣tery, or Idolatry, in many Churches they would never admit those who had been guilty of them into their Communion any more. Their greatest and most signal trial, was with respect unto them, who through fear of death complied with the Gentiles in their Ido∣latrous Worship, in the time of Persecution. For they had fixed no certain general Rules whereby they should unanimously proceed, but every Church exercised severity or lenity, according as they saw cause, upon the circumstances of particular instances. Hence Cyprian in his banishment would not positively determine concerning those of the Church in Carthage, who had so sinned and fallen, but deferr'd his thoughts until his return; when he resolved to advise with the whole Church, and settle all things according to the counsel that should be agreed on amongst them. Yea many of his Epistles are on this subject peculiarly; and in them all, if compared together, it is evi∣dent, that there was no Rule agreed upon herein, nor was he himself resolved in his own mind, though strictly on all occasions opposing Novatianus, wherein it had been well if his Arguments had answered his Zeal. Before this the Church of Rome was esteemed in particular more remiss in their Discipline, and more than other Churches in their re-admission unto Communion, of notorious Offenders. Hence Tertullian in his Book de Poenitentia, reflects on Zepherinus the Bishop of Rome, that he had admitted Adul∣terers unto Repentance, and thereby unto the Communion of the Church. But that Church proceeding in her Lenity, and every day enlarging her Charity, Novatus and Novatianus taking offence thereat, advanced an Opinion on the contrary extream. For they denied all hope of Church-pardon, or of a Return unto Ecclesiastical Communion, unto them who had fallen into open sin after Baptism, and in especial peremptorily excluded all persons whatsoever who had outwardly complied with Idolatrous Worship in time of Persecution, without respect unto any distinguishing circumstances. Yea they seem to have excluded them from all expectation of forgiveness from God himself. But their followers terrified with the uncharitableness and horror of this Perswasion, tempered it so far, as leaving all persons absolutely to the mercy of God upon their Repentance, they only denied such as we mentioned before a re-admission into Church-Communion, as Acsius speaks expresly in Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 7. Now this Opinion they endeavoured to confirm, as from the nature and use of Baptism, which was not to be reiterated; where∣on they judged that no pardon was to be granted unto them, who fell into those sins which they lived in before, and were cleansed from at their Baptism; so principally from this place of our Apostle, wherein they thought their whole Opinion was taught and con∣firmed. And so usually doth it fall out very unhappily with men, who think they see some peculiar Opinion or Perswasion, in some singular Text of Scripture, and will not bring their Interpretations of it unto the Analogie of Faith, whereby they might see how contrary it is to the whole design and current of the word in other places. But the Church of Rome on the other side judging rightly from other directions given in the Scrip∣ture, that the Novatians transgressed the Rule of Charity and Gospel-Discipline in their severities; yet as it should seem, and is very probable, knew not how to answer the Objection from this place of our Apostle. Therefore did they rather choose for a season, to suspend their assent unto the Authority of the whole Epistle, than to prejudice the Church by its Admission. And well was it that some learned men afterward, by their sober Interpretations of the words, plainly evince that no countenance was given in them unto the errors of the Novatians; for without this it is much to be feared that would have preferred their Interest in their present controversie, before the Authority of it, which would in the issue have proved ruinous to the Truth it self. For the Epistle being designed of God unto the common Edification of the Church, would have at length prevailed, whatever sense men through their prejudices and ignorance should put upon any passages of it. But this controversie is long since buried; the generality of the Churches in the world, being sufficiently remote from that which was truly the mistake of the Novatians, yea the most of them do bear peaceably in their Communion,
without the least exercise of Gospel-discipline towards them, such persons as concerning whom the dispute was of old, whether they should ever in this world be admitted into the Communion of the Church, although upon their open and professed Repen∣tance. We shall not therefore at present need to labour in this controversie. But the sense of these words hath been the subject of great contests, on other occa∣sions also. For some do suppose, and contend, that they are real and true Believers, who are decyphered by the Apostle, and that their Character is given us in and by sundry in∣separable Adjuncts, and properties of such persons. Hence they conclude, that such Be∣lievers may totally and finally fall from Grace, and perish Eternally. Yea it is evident that this Hypothesis of the final Apostasie of true Believers, is that which influenceth their Minds and Judgements to suppose that such are here intended. Wherefore others who will not admit that according to the tenor of the Covenant of Grace in Christ Jesus, true Believers can perish Everlastingly, do say, that either they are not here intended, or if they are, the words are only comminatory, wherein although the consequence in them in a way of arguing be true, namely, that on the supposition laid down, the inference is certain, yet the supposition is not asserted in order unto a certain consequent, whence it should follow that true Believers might so really fall away, and absolutely perish. And these things have been the matter of many contests among learned men. Again, There have been sundry mistakes in the practical Application of the intention of these words unto the Consciences of men, mostly made by themselves who are con∣cerned. For whereas by reason of sin, they have been surprized with terrors and trou∣bles of Conscience, they have withall in their darkness and distress, supposed themselves to be fallen into the condition here described by our Apostle, and consequently to be irre∣coverably lost. And these Apprehensions usually befall men on two occasions. For some having been overtaken with some great actual sin, against the Second Table after they have made a Profession of the Gospel, and having their Consciences harrassed with a sense of their Guilt, (as it will fall out where men are not greatly hardned through the deceitfulness of sin) they judge that they are fallen under the sentence denounced in this Scripture against such sinners, as they suppose themselves to be, whereby their state is irrecoverable. Others do make the same Judgement of themselves, because they have fallen from that constant compliance with their Convictions, which formerly led them unto a strict performance of Duties, and this in some course of long continuance. Now whereas it is certain, that the Apostle in this discourse gives no countenance unto the severity of the Novatians, whereby they excluded Offenders everlastingly from the Peace and Communion of the Church, nor to the final Apostasie of true Believers, which he testifieth against in this very Chapter, in compliance with innumerable other Testimonies of Scripture to the same purpose; nor doth he teach any thing whereby the Conscience of any sinner, who desires to return to God and to find acceptance with him, should be discouraged or disheartened; we must attend unto the Exposition of the words in the first place, so as not to break in upon the boundaries of other Truths, nor transgress against the Analogie of Faith. And we shall find that this whole discourse compared with other Scriptures, and freed from the prejudices that men have brought unto it, is both remote from administring any just occasion to the mistakes before-mentioned, and is a needful wholesome commination, duely to be considered by all Professors of the Gospel. In the words we consider, (1) The connexion of them unto those foregoing, intima∣ting the occasion of the Introduction of this whole discourse. (2) The subject descri∣bed in them, or the Persons spoken of, under sundry qualifications, which may be en∣quired into joyntly and severally. (3) What is supposed concerning them. (4) What is affirmed of them on that supposition. 1. The connexion of the word sis included in the causal connexion; , For. It re∣spects the Introduction of Reason for what had been before discoursed, as also of the li∣mitation . which the Apostle added expresly unto his purpose of making a progress in their farther Instruction, if God permit. And he doth not herein express his judgement that they to whom he wrote were such as he describes, for he afterwards declares that he hoped better things concerning them, only it was necessary to give them this caution, that they might take due care not to be such. And whereas he had manifested that they were slow as to the making of a progress in knowledge and a suitable practice; he lets them here know the danger that there was in continuing in that slothful condition. For not to proceed in the ways of the Gospel and Obedience thereunto, is an untoward entrance into a total relinquishment of the one and the other. That therefore they might be acquainted with
the danger hereof, and be stirred up to avoid that danger, he gives them an account of those who after a Profession of the Gospel, beginning at a non-proficiency under it, do end in Apostasie from it. And we may see, That the severest Comminations are not only useful in the Preaching of the Gospel, but exceeding necessary towards persons that are observed to be slothful in their Profession. 2. The description of the Persons that are the subject spoken of, is given in five In∣stances of the Evangelical Priviledges whereof they were made partakers, notwithstanding all which, and against their obliging efficacy to the contrary, it is supposed that they may wholly desert the Gospel it self. And some things we may observe concerning this description of them in general. As (1) The Apostle designing to express the fearful state and judgement of these Persons, describes them by such things as may fully evidence them to be, as unavoidable, so righteous and equal. Those things must be some evident Priviledges and Advantages, whereof they were made partakers by the Gospel. These being despised in their Apostasie, do proclaim their destruction from God to be rightly deserved. (2) That all these Priviledges do consist in certain especial operations of the Holy Ghost, which were peculiar unto the Dispensation of the Gospel, such as they nei∣ther were, nor could be made partakers of in their Judaisme. For the Spirit in this sense, was not received by the works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith, Gal. 3. 2. And this was a Testimony unto them, that they were delivered from the bondage of the Law, namely, by a participation of that Spirit which was the great Priviledge of the Gospel. (3) Here is no express mention of any Covenant Grace or Mercy, in them or towards them, nor of any Duty of Faith or Obedience which they had performed. Nothing of Justification, Sanctification, or Adoption, is expresly assigned unto them. Afterwards when he comes to declare his hopes and perswasion concerning these He∣brews, that they were not such as those whom he had before described, nor such as would so fall away unto perdition, He doth it upon three grounds, whereon they were diffe∣renced from them. As (1) That they had such things as did accompany Salvation, that is, such as Salvation is inseparable from. None of these things therefore had he ascribed unto those whom he describeth in this place; for if he had so done, they would not have been unto him an Argument and Evidence of a contrary end, that these should not fall away and perish as well as those. Wherefore he ascribes nothing to these here in the Text, that doth peculiarly accompany Salvation, ver. 9. (2) He describes them by their Duties of Obedience and fruits of Faith. This was their work and labour of Love towards the name of God, ver. 10. And hereby also doth he difference them from those in the Text, concerning whom he supposeth that they may perish eternally; which these fruits of saving Faith and sincere Love cannot do. (3) He adds, that in the Preservation of those there mentioned, the Faithfulness of God was concerned; God is not unrighteous to forget. For they were such (he intended) as were interested in the Covenant of Grace, with respect whereunto alone, there is any engagement on the Faithfulness or Righteous∣ness of God, to preserve men from Apostasie and Ruine; and there is so with an equal respect unto all who are so taken into the Covenant. But of these in the Text, he supposeth no such thing, and thereupon doth not intimate that either the Righteousness or Faithfulness of God were any way engaged for their preservation, but rather the contra∣ry. The whole description therefore refers unto some especial Gospel Priviledges, which Pro∣fessors in those days were promiscuously made partakers of, and what they were in par∣ticular we must in the next place enquire. The first thing in the Description is, that they were , once enlightened, . saith the Syriack Translation, as we observed, once baptized; It is very certain that early in the Church, Baptism was called , Illumination; and , to en∣lighten was used for to Baptize. And the set times wherein they solemnly administred that Ordinance, were called , the days of Light. Hereunto the Syriack Interpreter seems to have had respect. And the word  once, may give countenance hereunto. Baptism was once only to be celebrated, according to the constant Faith of the Churches in all Ages. And they called Baptism, Illumination, because it being one Or∣dinance of the Initiation of Persons into a participation of all the mysteries of the Church, they were thereby translated out of the Kingdom of Darkness into that of Grace and Light. And it seems to give further countenance hereunto, in that Baptism really was the beginning and foundation of a participation of all the other spiritual Priviledges that are mentioned afterwards. For it was usual in those times, that upon the baptizing of Persons, the Holy Ghost came upon them, and endowed with extraordinary Gifts pecu∣liar to the days of the Gospel, as we have shewed in our consideration of the order be∣tween
Baptism and Imposition of hands. And this Opinion hath so much of probability in it, having nothing therewithall unsuited to the Analogie of Faith, or design of the place, that I should embrace it, if the word it self as here used, did not require ano∣ther Interpretation. For it was a good while after the writing of this Epistle, and all other parts of the New Testament, at least an Age or two, if not more, before this word was used mystically to express Baptism. In the whole Scripture it hath another sense, de∣noting an inward operation of the Spirit, and not the outward Administration of an Ordinance. And it is too much boldness to take a word in a peculiar sense in one single place, diverse from its proper signification and constant use, if there be no circumstances in the Text forcing us thereunto, as here are not. And for the word , once, it is not to be restrained unto this particular, but refers equally unto all the Instances that fol∣low, signifying no more but that those mentioned were really and truly partakers of them. , is to give Light or Knowledge by teaching; the same with  which therefore is so translated oft-times by the Greeks. As by Aquila, Exod. 4. 12. Psal. 119. 33. Prov. 4. 4. Isa. 27. 11. as Drustus observes. And it is so by the LXX. Judg. 13. 8. 2 Kings 12. 2. chap. 17. 27. Our Apostle useth it for to make manifest, that is, bring to light, 1 Cor. 4. 5. 2 Tim. 1. 10. And the meaning of it, Joh. 1. 9. where we render it lighteth, is to teach. And  is Knowledge upon Instruction, 2 Cor. 4. 4. , that the Light of the Gospel should not shine into them; that is, the Knowledge of it, so ver. 6. . The Light of the Knowledge. Wherefore to be enlightened in this place, is to be instructed in the Doctrine of the Gospel, so as to have a spiritual apprehension thereof. And this is so termed on a double account. 1. Of the Object, or the things known and apprehended. For Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. 10. Hence it is called Light. The Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And the state which men are thereby brought into, is so called in op∣position to the Darkness that is in the world without it, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The world with∣out the Gospel is the Kingdom of Sathan; , 1 Joh. 5. 19. The whole of the world, and all that belongs unto it, in distinction and opposition unto the new Creation, is under the Power of the wicked one, the Prince of the Power of Darkness, and so is full of Darkness, it is , 2 Pet. 1. a dark place, wherein ignorance, folly, error, and superstition do dwell and reign. By the Power and Efficacy of this Darkness are men kept at a distance from God, and know not whither they go. This is called walking in Darkness, 1 Joh. 1. 6. whereunto walk∣ing in the Light, that is, the Knowledge of God in Christ by the Gospel, is opposed, ver. 7. On this account is our Instruction in the Knowledge of the Gospel called Illumi∣nation, because it self is Light. 2. On the account of the Subject, or the Mind it self, whereby the Gospel is appre∣hended. For the Knowledge which is received thereby, expels that Darkness, Igno∣rance and Confusion, which the mind before was filled and possessed withal. The Knowledge, I say, of the Doctrine of the Gospel, concerning the Person of Christ, of Gods being in him reconciling the world unto himself, of his Offices, Work and Media∣tion, and the like heads of Divine Revelation, doth set up a spiritual Light in the minds of men, enabling them to discern what before was utterly hid from them, whilst aliena∣ted from the Life of God through their Ignorance. Of this Light and Knowledge there are several degrees, according to the means of Instruction which they do enjoy, the capacity they have to receive it, and the diligence they use to that purpose. But a com∣petent measure of the Knowledge of the fundamental and most material Principles or Doctrines of the Gospel is required unto all that may thence be said to be illuminated; that is, freed from the Darkness and Ignorance they once lived in, 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. This is the first Property whereby the Persons intended are described; they are such as were illu∣minated by the Instruction they had received in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the im∣pression made thereby on their minds by the Holy Ghost; for this is a common work of his, and is here so reckoned. And the Apostle would have us know, that 1. It is great Mercy, a great Priviledge, to be enlightened with the Doctrine of the Gospel' by the effectual working of the Holy Ghost. But 2. It is such a Priviledge as may be lost, and end in the aggravation of the sin, and condem∣nation of those who were made partakers of it. And 3. Where there is a total neglect of the due improvement of this Priviledge and Mercy, the condition of such Persons is hazardous, as inclining towards Apostasie.
Thus much lies open and manifest in the Text. But that we may more particularly discover the nature of this first part of the character of Apostates, for their sakes who may look after their own concernment therein, we may yet a little more distinctly express the nature of that Illumination and Knowledge which is ascribed unto them; and how it is lost in Apostasie, will afterwards appear. And 1. There is a Knowledge of spiritual things, that is purely Natural and Disciplinary, attainable and attained without any especial Aid or Assistance of the Holy Ghost. As this is evident in common experience, so especially among such, as casting themselves on the study of spiritual things, are yet utter strangers unto all spiritual Gifts. Some Know∣ledge of the Scripture and the things contained in it, is attainable at the same rate of pains and study with that of any other Art or Science. 2. The Illumination intended, being a Gift of the Holy Ghost, differs from, and is ex∣alted above this Knowledge that is purely natural. For it makes nearer approaches unto the Light of spiritual things in their own nature, than the other doth. Notwithstanding the utmost improvement of scientifical notions that are purely natural, the things of the Gospel in their own nature are not only unsuited to the Wills and Affections of Persons endued with them, but are really foolishness unto their minds. And as unto that good∣ness and excellency which give desireableness unto spiritual things, this knowledge dis∣covers so little of them, that most men hate the things which they profess to believe. But this spiritual Illumination gives the mind some satisfaction with Delight and Joy in the things that are known. By that Beam whereby it shines into Darkness, although it be not fully comprehended, yet it represents the way of the Gospel as a way of Righteous∣ness, 2 Pet. 2. 21. which reflects a peculiar regard of it on the mind. Moreover the Knowledge that is meerly natural, hath little or no power upon the Soul, either to keep it from sin or to constrain it unto Obedience. There is not a more secure and profligate Generation of sinners in the world, than those who are under the sole conduct of it. But the Illumination here intended, is attended with efficacy, doth effectually press in the Conscience and whole Soul, unto an abstinence from sin, and the performance of all known Duties. Hence Persons under the Power of it and its Con∣victions, do oft-times walk blamelesly and uprightly in the world, so as not with the other to contribute unto the contempt of Christianity. Besides, there is such an Alliance between spiritual Gifts, that where any one of them doth reside, it hath assuredly other accompanying of it, or one way or other belonging unto its train, as is manifest in this place. Even a single Talent is made up of many pounds. But the Light and Know∣ledge which is of a meer natural acquirement, is solitary, destitute of the society and countenance of any spiritual Gift whatever. And these things are exemplified unto common observation every day. 3. There is a saving, sanctifying Light and Knowledge, which this spiritual Illumina∣tion riseth not up unto. For though it transiently affect the mind with some glances of the Beauty, Glory, and Excellency of spiritual things, yet it doth not give that direct, steady, intuitive insight into them, which is obtained by Grace. See 2 Cor. 3. 18. chap. 4. 4, 6. Neither doth it renew, change, or transform the Soul into a conformity unto the things known, by planting of them in the Will and Affections, as a gracious saving Light doth, 2 Cor. 3. 18. Rom. 6. 17. Rom. 12. 1. These things I judged necessary to be added, to clear the nature of the first character of Apostates. The second thing asserted in the description of them, is, that they have tasted of the  Heavenly Gift; : The doubling of the Article gives Emphasis to the expression. And we must enquire (1) what is meant by the Hea∣venly Gift. And (2) what by tasting of it. First, The Gift of God; , is either , donatio, or , donum. Some∣times it is taken for the Grant or giving it self, and sometimes for the thing given. In the first sense it is used, 2 Cor. 9. 15. Thanks be to God, , for his Gift that cannot be declared, that is, fully or sufficiently. Now this Gift was his Grant of a free, charitable and bountiful Spirit to the Corinthians, in ministring unto the poor Saints. The Grant hereof is called Gods Gift. So is the Gift of Christ used also, Ephes. 4. 7. according to the measure of the Gift of Christ, that is, according as he is pleased to give and grant of the fruits of the Spirit unto men; see Rom. 5. 15, 17. Ephes. 3. 7. sometimes it is taken for the thing given; properly  or , as Jam. 1. 17. so it is used Joh. 4. 10. If thou knewest the Gift of God, , The Gift of God, that is, the thing given by him, or to be given by him. It is, as many judge, the Person of Christ himself in that place, which is intended. But the context makes it
plain, that it is the Holy Ghost; For he is the Living water which the Lord Jesus pro∣miseth in that place to bestow. And so far as I can observe , the Gift, with respect unto God as denoting the thing given, is no where used but only to signifie the Holy Ghost. And if it be so, the sense of this place is determined, Acts 2. 38. Ye shall receive , the Gift of the Holy Ghost; not that which he gives, but that which he is, Chap. 8. 20. Thou hast thought , that the Gift of God may be purchased with money, that is, the Power of the Holy Ghost in miraculous Ope∣rations. So expresly, chap. 10. 45. chap. 11. 17. Elsewhere, , so far as I can ob∣serve, when respecting God, doth not signifie the thing given, but the grant it self. The Holy Spirit is signally the Gift of God under the New Testament. And he is said to be , heavenly, or from Heaven. This may have respect . unto his work and effect, they are heavenly as opposed to carnal and earthly. But prin∣cipally it regards his Mission by Christ after his Ascension into Heaven, Acts 2. 33. Being exalted and having received the Promise of the Father, he sent the Spirit. The Promise of him was, that he should be sent from Heaven, or from above, as God is said to be above, which is the same with Heavenly, Deut. 4. 39. 2 Chron. 5. 23. Job 31. 2, 8. Isa. 2. 2, 15. and chap. 45. 8. When he came upon the Lord Christ to anoint him for his work, the Heavens were opened, and he came from above, Matth. 3. 16. so Acts 2. 2. At his first coming on the Apostles, there came a sound from Heaven. Hence he is said to be , that is, to be , sent from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Wherefore although he may be said to be Heavenly upon other ac∣counts also, which therefore are not absolutely to be excluded, yet his being sent from Heaven by Christ, after his Ascension thither, and exaltation there, is principally here regarded. He therefore is this , the heavenly Gift here intended, though not absolutely, but with respect to an especial work. That which riseth up against this Interpretation, is, that the Holy Ghost is expresly mentioned in the next clause, And were made partakers of the Holy Ghost. It is not there∣fore probable that He should be here also intended. Answ. (1) It is ordinary to have the same thing twice expressed in various words, to quicken the sense of them; and it is necessary it should be so, when there are divers re∣spects unto the same thing, as there are in this place. (2) The following clause may be exegetical of this, declaring more fully and plainly what is here intended which is usual also in the Scrptures; so that nothing is cogent from this consideration, to disprove an Interpretation so suited to the sense of the place, and which the constant use of the word makes necessary to be embraced. But, (3) The Holy Ghost is here mentioned as the great Gift of the Gospel times, as coming down from Heaven, not absolutely, not as unto his Person, but with respect unto an espe∣cial work, namely, the change of the whole state of Religious Worship in the Church of God; Whereas we shall see in the next words, he is spoken of only with respect unto external actual operations. But he was the great, the promised Heavenly Gift, to be bestowed under the New Testament, by whom God would institute and ordain a new way, and new Rites of Worship, upon the Revelation of himself and Will in Christ. Unto him was committed the Reformation of all things in the Church, whose time was now come, Chap. 9. 10. The Lord Christ when he ascended into Heaven, left all things standing and continuing in Religious Worship, as they had done from the days of Moses, though he had virtually put an end unto it. And he commanded his Disciples that they should attempt no alteration therein, until the Holy Ghost were sent from Heaven to enable them thereunto, Acts 1. 4, 5. But when he came as the great Gift of God, promised under the New Testament, he removes all the carnal Worship and Ordinances of Moses, and that by the full Revelation of the Accomplishment of all that was signified by them, and appoints the new, holy, spiritual Worship of the Gospel, that was to succeed in their room. The Spirit of God therefore, as bestowed for the introduction of the New Gospel state, in Truth and Worship, is the Heavenly Gift here intended. Thus our Apostle warneth these Hebrews, that they turn not away from him who speaketh from Heaven, chap. 12. 25. that is, Jesus Christ speaking in the Dispensation of the Gospel by the Holy Ghost sent from Heaven. And there is an Antithesis included herein, between the Law and the Gospel; the former being given on Earth, the latter being immediately from Heaven. God in the giving of the Law made use of the Ministry of Angels, and that on the Earth; but he gave the Gospel Church state, by that Spirit which although he worketh on men in Earth, and is said in every Act or Work to be sent from Heaven, yet is he still in Heaven, and always speaketh from thence; as
our Savour said of himself, with respect unto his Divine Nature, Joh. 3. 13. Secondly, We may enquire what it is to taste of this Heavenly Gift. The expression . of tasting is metaphorical, and signifies no more but to make a Trial or Experiment; For so we do by tasting, naturally and properly of that which is tendred unto us to eat. We taste such things by the sense given us naturally to discern our food, and then either re∣ceive or refuse them as we find occasion. It doth not therefore include eating, much less Digestion and turning into nourishment of what is so tasted. For its nature being only thereby discerned, it may be refused, yea though we like its relish and savour upon some other consideration. Some have observed that to taste is as much as to eat, as 2 Sam. 3. 35. I will not taste bread, or ought else. But the meaning is, I will not so much as taste it, whence it was impossible he should eat it. And when Jonathan says he only tasted a little of the Honey, 1 Sam. 14. 29. it was an excuse and extenuation of what he had done. But it is unquestionably used for some kind of experience of the nature of things, Prov. 31. 18. she tasteth that her merchandize is good, or hath experience of it, from its increase, Psal. 34. 8. O taste and see that the Lord is good; which Peter respects, 1 Epist. 2. 3. If so be that ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious, or found it so by experience. It is therefore properly to make an experiment or trial of any thing, whether it be received or refused; and is sometimes opposed to eating and digestion, as Matth. 27. 34. That therefore which is ascribed unto these Persons, is, that they had an experience of the Power of the Holy Ghost, that Gift of God, in the Dispensation of the Gospel, the Revelation of the Truth, and Institution of the spiritual Worship of it; of this state and of the excellency of it, they had made some trial, and had some experi∣ence; a Priviledge which all men were not made partakers of. And by this taste they were convinced, that it was far more excellent than what they had been before accustomed unto, although now they had a mind to leave the finest Wheat for their old Acorns. Wherefore although tasting contain a Diminution in it, if compared with that spiritual eating and drinking, with that Digestion of Gospel Truths, turning them into nourish∣ment, which are in true Believers; yet absolutely considered it denotes that Apprehen∣sion and Experience of the excellency of the Gospel as administred by the Spirit, which is a great Priviledge and spiritual Advantage, the contempt whereof will prove an un∣speakable Aggravation of the Sin, and the remediless ruine of Apostates. The meaning then of this Character given concerning these Apostates is, that they had some experience of the Power and Efficacy of the Holy Spirit from Heaven, in Gospel Administrations and Worship. For what some say of Faith, it hath here no place; and what others affirm of Christ, and his being the Gift of God, comes in the issue unto what we have proposed. And we may observe, farther to clear the Design of the Apostle in this Commination, 1. That all the Gifts of God under the Gospel are peculiarly Heavenly, Joh. 3. 12. Ephes. 1. 3. and that in opposition, (1) To earthly things, Col. 3. 11, 12. (2) To carnal Or∣dinances, Heb. 9. 23. let them beware by whom they are despised. 2. The Holy Ghost for the Revelation of the mysteries of the Gospel, and the Institution of the Ordinances of spiritual Worship, is the great Gift of God under the New Testa∣ment. 3. There is a Goodness and Excellency in this Heavenly Gift, which may be tasted or expe∣rienced in some measure by such as never receive him, in their life, power and efficacy. They may taste, (1) Of the Word in its Truth, not its Power; (2) Of the Worship of the Church in its outward Order, not its inward Beauty; (3) Of the Gifts of the Church, not its Graces. 4. A Rejection of the Gospel, its Truth and Worship, after some experience had of their worth and excellency, is an high Aggravation of Sin, and a certain presage of De∣struction. The Third Property whereby these Persons are described is added in those words, ; and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost. . This is placed in the middle or centre of the Priviledges enumerated, two preceding it, and two following after, as that which is the root and animating Principle of them all. They all are effects of the Holy Ghost, in his Gifts or his Graces, and so do depend on the participation of him. Now men do so partake of the Holy Ghost, as they do receive him. And he may be received either as unto personal Inhabitation, or as unto spiritual Operations. In the first way the world cannot receive him, Joh. 14. 17. where the world is opposed unto true Believers, and therefore these here intended were not in that sense partakers of him. His Operations respect his Gifts. So to partake of him is to have a
share, part or portion in what he distributes by way of spiritual Gifts; in answer unto that expression; All these worketh that one and self-same Spirit, dividing unto every one se∣verally as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. So Peter told Simon the Magician, that he had no part in spiritual Gifts, he was not partaker of the Holy Ghost, Acts 8. 21. Wherefore to be par∣taker of the Holy Ghost, is to have a share in and benefit of his spiritual Ope∣rations. But whereas the other things mentioned are also Gifts or Operations of the Holy Ghost, on what Ground or for what Reason is this mentioned here in particular, that they were made Partakers of him, which if his Operations only be intended, seems to be expressed in the other Instances? Answ. (1) It is, as we observed before, no unusual thing in the Scripture, to express the same thing under various notions, the more effectually to impress a con∣sideration and sense of it in our mind; especially where an expression hath a singu∣lar Emphasis in it, as this hath here used; For it is an exceeding Aggravation of the sins of these Apostates, that in these things they were Partakers of the Holy Ghost. (2) As was before intimated also, this participation of the Holy Ghost, is placed it may be in the midst of the several parts of this Description, as that whereon they do all depend, and they are all but Instances of it. They were partakers of the Holy Ghost, in that they were once enlightened, and so of the rest. (3) It expresseth their own personal Interest in these things. They had an interest in the things mentioned not only Objectively, as they were proposed and presented to them in the Church, but Subjectively they themselves in their own Persons were made partakers of them. It is one thing for a man to have a share in, and benefit by the Gifts of the Church, another to be personally himself endowed with them. (4) To mind them in an especial manner of the Priviledges they enjoyed under the Gospel, above what they had in their Judaisme. For, whereas then they had not so much as heard that there was an Holy Ghost, that is, a blessed Dispensation of him in spiritual Gifts, Acts 19. 2. now they themselves in their own persons were made Par∣takers of him, than which there could be no greater Aggravation of their Apostasie: And we may observe in our way, that The Holy Ghost is present with many as unto powerful Operations, with whom he is not present as to gracious Inhabitation: Or many are made Partakers of him in his spi∣ritual Gifts, who are never made Partakers of him in his saving Graces, Matth. 7. 22, 23. Fourthly, It is added in the Description, that they had tasted , The Good Word of God. And we must enquire, (1) What is meant by the Word of God. . (2) How it is said to be Good; and (3) In what sense they taste of it. 1.  is properly, verbum dictum, a word spoken; and although it be sometimes used in another sense by our Apostle, and by him alone, chap. 1. 3. chap. 11. 3. where it denotes the effectual active power of God; yet both the signification of the word, and its principal use elsewhere, denotes words spoken, and when applied unto God, his word as preached and declared. See Rom. 10. 17. Joh. 6. 68. The Word of God, that is, the Word of the Gospel as preached, is that which they thus tasted of. But it may be said, that they enjoyed the Word of God in their state of Judaisme; They did so, as to the written word; for unto them were committed the Oracles of God, Rom. 3. 2. But it is the word of God as preached in the Dispensation of the Gospel that is eminently thus called, and concerning which such excellent things are spoken, Rom. 1. 16. Acts 20. 32. Jam. 1. 21. 2. The word is said to be , good, desireable, amiable, as the word here used signifieth. Wherein it is so, we shall see immediately. But whereas the Word of God preached under the Dispensation of the Gospel may be considered two ways; (1) In general, as to the whole systeme of Truths contained therein; and (2) In especial, for the Declaration made of the Accomplishment of the Promise in sending Jesus Christ for the Redemption of the Church; it is here especially intended in this latter sense. This is emphatically called , 1 Pet. 1. 25. So the Promise of God in particular is called his Good word; Jer. 29. 10. After seventy years I will visit you and perform my good word towards you; as he calls it the Good thing that he had promised, chap. 33. 14. The Gospel is the good tiding of Peace and Salvation by Jesus Christ, Isa. 52. 7.
3. Hereof they are said to taste, as they were before of the Heavenly Gift. The Apo∣stle as it were studiously keeps himself to this expression, on purpose to manifest that he intendeth not those, who by Faith do readily receive food, and live on Jesus Christ, as tendered in the word of the Gospel, Joh. 6. 35, 49, 50, 51, 54, 55. It is, as if he had said, I speak not of those who have received and digested the spiritual Food of their Souls, and turned it into spiritual nourishment, but of such as have so far tasted of it, as that they ought to have desired it as sincere milk, to have grown thereby; But they had received such an experiment of its Divine Truth and Power, as that it had various effects upon them. And for the further Explication of these words, and therein of the De∣scription of the state of these supposed Apostates, we may consider the ensuing Obser∣vations, which declare the sense of the words, or what is contained in them. 1. There is a Goodness and Excellency in the Word of God, able to attract and affect the minds of men, who yet never arrive at sincere Obedience unto it. 2. There is an especial Goodness in the Word of the Promise concerning Jesus Christ, and the Declaration of its Accomplishment. Lastly, It is added, ; And the Powers of the world to . come,  are ; the mighty great miraculous Operations and Works of the Holy Ghost. What they were and how they were wrought among these Hebrews, hath been declared in our Exposition on chap. 2. 4. whither I shall refer the Reader; and they are known from the Acts of the Apostles, where sundry Instances of them are recorded. I have also proved on that Chapter, that by the world to come, our Apostle in this Epistle intends the days of the Messiah, that being the usual name of it in the Church at that time, as the new world which God had promised to create. Wherefore these Powers of the world to come, were the Gifts whereby those signs, won∣ders, and mighty works, were then wrought by the Holy Ghost, according as it was foretold by the Prophets, that they should be so. See Joel 2. compared with Acts 2. These the Persons spoken of, are supposed to have tasted, for the particle  refers to  foregoing. Either they had been wrought in and by themselves, or by others in their sight, whereby they had an experience of the glorious and powerful working of the Holy Ghost in the confirmation of the Gospel. Yea, I do judge that themselves in their own persons were Partakers of these Powers in the Gifts of Tongues, and other mi∣raculous Operations, which was the highest Aggravation possible of their Apostasie, and that which peculiarly rendered their recovery impossible. For there is not in the Scrip∣ture an impossibility put upon the recovery of any, but such as peculiarly sin against the Holy Ghost; and although that Guilt may be otherwise contracted, yet in none so sig∣nally as this of rejecting that Truth which was confirmed by his mighty Operations in them that rejected it, which could not be done without an Ascription of his Divine Power unto the Devil. Yet would I not fix on those extraordinary Gifts exclusively un∣to those that are ordinary. They also are of the Powers of the world to come. So is every thing that belongs to the Erection or Preservation of the New world or the Kingdom of Christ. To the first setting up of a Kingdom, great and mighty Power is required; but being set up, the ordinary Dispensation of Power will preserve it; so is it in this matter. The extraordinary miraculous Gifts of the Spirit were used in the Erection of Christs Kingdom, but it is continued by ordinary Gifts, which therefore also belong unto the Powers of the world to come. From the consideration of this Description, in all the parts of it, we may understand what sort of Persons it is, that is intended here by the Apostle. And it appears, yea is evident, 1. That the Persons here intended, are not true and sincere Believers in the strict and proper sense of that name, at least they are not described here as such; so that from hence nothing can be concluded concerning them that are so, as to the possibility of their total and final Apostasie. For (1) There is in their full and large Description no mention of Faith or Believing, either expresly, or in terms equivalent. And in no other place in the Scripture are such intended, but they are mentioned by what belongs essentially to their state. And (2) There is not any thing ascribed to these persons, that is peculiar to them as such, or discriminative of them, as taken either from their especial Relation unto God in Christ, or any such Property of their own, as is not communicable unto others. For instance, they are not said to be called according to Gods purpose, to be born again not of the Will of Man, nor of the Will of Flesh, but of God, not to be justified, or sanctified, or united unto Christ, or to be the Sons of God by Adoption, nor have they any other characteristical note of true Believers ascribed to them. (3) They are in the
following Verses compared to the Ground, on which the rain often falls, and beareth no∣thing but Thorns and Briars. But this is not so with true Believers. For Faith it self is an Herb peculiar to the inclosed Garden of Christ, and meet for him by whom we are dressed. (4) The Apostle afterwards discoursing of true Believers, doth in many parti∣culars distinguish them from such as may be Apostates, which is supposed of the Persons here intended, as was before declared. For (1) He ascribeth unto them in general better things, and such as accompany Salvation, ver. 9. (2) He ascribes a work and labour of Love, as it is true Faith alone which worketh by Love, ver. 10. whereof he speaks not one word concerning these. (3) He asserts their Preservation, (1) On the account of the Righteousness and Faithfulness of God, ver. 11. (2) Of the Immutability of his counsel concerning them, ver. 17, 18. In all these and sundry other Instances doth he put a difference between these Apostates and true Believers. And whereas the Apostle in∣tends to declare the Aggravation of their sin in falling away by the principal Priviledges whereof they were made partakers, here is not one word in name or thing of those which he expresly assigns to be the chief priviledges of true Believers, Rom. 8. 27, 28, 29, 30. 2. Our next enquiry is more particularly whom he doth intend. And (1) They were such who not long before were converted from Judaisme unto Christianity, upon the evi∣dence of the Truth of its Doctrine, and the miraculous Operations wherewith its Dis∣pensation was accompanied. (2) He intends not the common sort of them, but such as had obtained especial Priviledges among them. For they had received extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost, as speaking with Tongues or working Miracles. And (3) They had found in themselves and other convincing evidences, that the Kingdom of God and the Messiah, which they called the world to come, was come unto them, and had satis∣faction in the Glories of it. (4) Such Persons as these, as they have a work of Light on their minds, so according to the efficacy of their Convictions may have such a change wrought upon their Affections and in their Conversation, as that they may be of great esteem among Professors; and such these here intended might be. Now it must needs be some horrible frame of spirit, some malitious enmity against the Truth and Holiness of Christ and the Gospel, some violent Love of sin and the world, that could turn off such Persons as these from the Faith, and blot out all that Light and Conviction of Truth, which they had received. But the least Grace is a better security for Heaven, than the greatest Gifts and Priviledges whatever. These are the Persons concerning whom our Apostle discourseth, and of whom it is supposed by him, that they may fall away, . The especial nature of the . sin here intended is afterwards declared in two Instances or aggravating circumstances. This word expresseth the respect it had to the state and condition of the sinners them∣selves; they fall away, do that whereby they do so. I think we have well expressed the word, if they shall fall away. Our old Translations render it only, if they shall fall, which expressed not the sense of the word, and was liable to a sense not at all intended. For he doth not say, if they shall fall into sin, this or that or any sin whatever that can be named, suppose the greatest sin imaginable, namely, the denial of Christ in the time of Danger or Persecution. This was that sin (as we intimated before) about which so many contests were raised of old, and so many Canons were multiplied about the order∣ing of them who had contracted the Guilt thereof. But one example well considered, had been a better guide for them than all their own Arbitrary Rules and Imaginations: When Peter fell into this sin, and yet was renewed again to Repentance, and that spee∣dily. Wherefore we may lay down this in the first place as to the sense of the words; There is no particular sin that any man may fall into occasionally through the Power of Temptation, that can cast the sinner under this Commination, so that it should be im∣possible to renew him to Repentance. It must therefore (secondly) be a course of sin or sinning that is intended. But there are various degrees herein also, yea there are divers kinds of such courses in sin. A man may so fall into a way of sin, as still to retain in his mind such a Principle of Light and Conviction that may be suitable to his Recovery. To exclude such from all hopes of Repentance, is expresly contrary to Ezek. 18. 21. Isa. 55. 7. yea and the whole sense of the Scripture. Wherefore men after some Con∣viction and Reformation of Life, may fall into corrupt and wicked courses and make a long abode or continuance in them. Examples hereof we have every day amongst us, al∣though it may be none to parallel that of Manasseh; consider the nature of his Education under his Father Hezekiah, the greatness of his sins, the length of his continuance in them, with his following Recovery, and he is a great Instance in this case. Whilst
there is in such persons any seed of Light or Conviction of Truth which is capable of an Excitation or Revival, so as to put forth its Power and Efficacy in their Souls, they cannot be looked on to be in the condition intended, though their case be dangerous. 3. Our Apostle makes a distinction between  and , Rom. 11. 11. between stumbling and falling, and would not allow that the unbelieving Jews of those days, were come so far as , that is, to fall absolutely, . I say then have they stumbled, that they should fall? God forbid; that is, absolutely and irrecoverably. So therefore doth that word signifie in this place. And  encreaseth the signification, either as to perverseness in the manner of the fall, or as to violence in the fall its self. From what hath been discoursed it will appear, what falling away it is that the Apostle here intendeth. And, (1) It is not a falling into this or that actual sin, be it of what nature it will, which may be, and yet not be a falling away. (2) It is not a falling upon temptation or surprisal, for concerning such fallings we have rules of another kind given us in sundry places, and those exempli∣fied in especial Instances; but it is that which is premeditated, of Deliberation and Choice. (3) It is not a falling by a Relinquishment or Renunciation of some though very material Principles of Christian Religion by Error or Seduction, as the Corinthians fell, in denying the Resurrection of the dead, and the Galatians by denying Ju∣stification by Faith in Christ alone. Wherefore, (4) It must consist in a total Renunciation of all the constitutent Principles and Do∣ctrines of Christianity, whence it is denominated. Such was the sin of them who relinquished the Gospel to return unto Judaisme, as it was then stated, in opposi∣tion unto it, and hatred of it. This it was, and not any kind of actual sins, that the Apostle manifestly discourseth concerning. (5) For the compleating of this falling away according to the intention of the Apostle, it is required that this Renunciation be avowed and professed; as, when a man forsaketh the Profession of the Gospel, and falls into Judaisme or Mahumatisme, or Gentilisme, in Perswasion and Practice. For the Apostle discourseth concerning Faith and Obedience as professed, and so therefore also of their contraries. And this avowment of a Relinquishment of the Gospel hath many provoking Aggrava∣tions attending it. And yet whereas some men may in their hearts and minds ut∣terly renounce the Gospel, but upon some outward secular considerations, either dare not or will not profess that inward Renunciation, their falling away is compleat and total in the sight of God; and all they do to cover their Apostasie in an exter∣nal compliance with Christian Religion, is in the sight of God but a mocking of him, and the highest Aggravation of their sin. This is the falling away intended by the Apostle; A voluntary resolved Re∣linquishment of, and Apostasie from the Gospel, the Faith, Rule, and Obedi∣ence thereof, which cannot be without casting the highest reproach and con∣tumely imaginable upon the Person of Christ himself, as is afterwards ex∣pressed. Concerning these Persons and their thus falling away, two things are to be con∣sidered in the Text. (1) What is affirmed of them. (2) The Reason of that Affirmation. The first is, That it is impossible to renew them again to Repentance. The thing in∣tended is negative; to renew them again to Repentance, this is denied of them; but the modification of that negation, turns the Proposition into an Affirmation; It is impossible so to do. . The Importance of the word is dubious; some think an abso∣lute, . and others a moral Impossibility is intended thereby. This latter most fix upon, so that it is a matter rare, difficult, and seldom to be expected, that is in∣tended, and not that which is absolutely impossible. Considerable Reasons and In∣stances are produced for either Interpretation. But we must look farther into the meaning of it.
All future events depend on God, who alone doth necessarily exist. Other things may be or may not be, as they respect him or his will. And so things that are future may be said to be impossible, or be so, either with respect unto the nature of God, or his Decrees, or his moral Rule, Order and Law. Things are im∣possible with respect unto the Nature of God, either absolutely as being incon∣sistent with his Being and Essential Properties; so it is impossible, that God should lye; or on some supposition, so it is impossible, that God should forgive sin without satisfaction, on the supposition of his Law, and the Sanction of it. In this sense the Repentance of these Apostates it may be is not impossible. I say, it may be; It may be there is nothing in it contrary to any Essential Properties of the Nature of God, either directly or reductively. But I will not be positive herein. For the things ascribed unto these Apostates are such, namely, their crucifying the Son of God afresh, and putting him unto open shame, as that I know not but that it may be con∣trary to the Holiness and Righteousness and Glory of God, as the supream Ruler of the world, to have any more Mercy on them than on the Devils themselves, or those that are in Hell. But I will not assert this to be the meaning of the place. Again, Things possible in themselves, and with respect unto the Nature of God, are rendered impossible by Gods Decree and Purpose: He hath absolutely deter∣mined, that they shall never be. So it was impossible that Saul and his Posterity should be preserved in the Kingdom of Israel. It was not contrary to the Nature of God, but God had decreed that so it should not be, 1 Sam. 15. 28, 29. But the Decrees of God respecting Persons in particular, and not Qualifications in the first place, they cannot be here intended; because they are free acts of his Will, not revealed neither in particular, nor by virtue of any general Rule, as they are Soveraign, making differences between Persons in the same condition, Rom. 9. 11, 12. What is possible or impossible with respect unto the Nature of God, we may know in some good measure from the certain knowledge we may have of his Being and Essential Properties. But what is so one way or other with respect unto his Decrees or Purposes, which are Soveraign free Acts of his Will, knoweth no man, not the Angels in Heaven, Isa. 40. 13, 14. Rom. 11. 34. Thirdly, Things are possible or impossible with respect unto the Rule and Order of all things that God hath appointed. When in things of Duty God hath nei∣ther expresly commanded them, nor appointed means for the Performance of them, then are we to look upon them as impossible, and then with respect unto us they are so absolutely, and so to be esteemed. And this is the Impossibility here principally in∣tended. It is a thing that God hath neither commanded us to endeavour, nor ap∣pointed means to attain it, nor promised to assist us in it. It is therefore that which we have no reason to look after, attempt or expect, as being not possible by any Law, Rule, or Constitution of God. The Apostle instructs us no farther in the nature of future events, but as our own Duty is concerned in them. It is not for us either to look or hope, or pray for, or endeavour the Renewal of such Persons unto Repentance. God gives Law un∣to us in these things, not unto himself. It may be possible with God for ought we know, if there be not a contradiction in it unto any of the Holy Properties of his Nature; only he will not have us to expect any such things from him, nor hath he appointed any means for us to endeavour it. What he shall do, we ought thankfully to accept; but our own Duty towards such persons is absolutely at an end. And indeed they put themselves wholly out of our reach. That which is said to be thus impossible with respect unto these Persons, is , to renew them again to Repentance,  in . the New Testament with respect unto God, signifies a gracious change of mind on Gospel Principles and Promises, leading the whole Soul into Conversion unto God. This is the beginning and entrance of our turning unto God, without which, neither the Will nor the Affections will be engaged unto him, nor is it possible for sinners to find acceptance with him. It is impossible , to renew. The construction of the word is de∣fective, . and must be supplied;  may be added, to renew themselves; it is not possible they should do so, or , that some should, that any should renew them,
and this I judge to be intended. For the impossibility mentioned respects the Duty and Endeavours of others. In vain shall any attempt their recovery by the use of any means whatever. And we must enquire what it is to be Renewed, and what it is to be Renewed again. Now our , is the Renovation of the Image of God in our natures, whereby we are dedicated again unto him. For as we had lost the Image of God . by sin, and were separated from him as things prophane, this  respects both the Restauration of our Nature, and the Dedication of our Persons to God. And it is twofold. First, Real and internal in Regeneration and effectual Sanctification. The wash∣ing of Regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. 1 Thes. 5. 23. But this is not that which is here intended. For this these Apostates never had, and so cannot be said to be renewed again unto it. For no man can be renewed again unto that which he never had. Secondly, It is outward in the Profession and Pledge of it. Wherefore Renova∣tion in this sense consists in the solemn confession of Faith and Repentance by Jesus Christ, with the seal of Baptism received thereon. For thus it was with all those who were converted unto the Gospel. Upon their Profession of Repentance to∣wards God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, they received the Baptismal Pledge of an inward Renovation, though really they were not Partakers thereof. But this estate was their , their Renovation. From this state they fell totally, renouncing Him who is the Author of it, his Grace which is the Cause of it, and the Ordinance which is the Pledge thereof. Hence it appears what it is, , to renew them again. It is to bring them again into this state of Profession by a second Renovation, and a second Baptism as a Pledge thereof. This is determined impossible, and so unwarrantable for any to attempt. And for the most part such persons do openly fall into such Blasphemies against, and engage (if they have power) into such Persecution of the Truth, as that they give themselves sufficient Direction how others should be∣have themselves towards them. So the ancient Church was satisfied in the case of Julian. This is the sum concerning what is affirmed of these Apostates, namely, that it is impossible to renew them unto Repentance, that is, so to act towards them as to bring them to that Repentance whereby they may be enstated in their former condition. Hence sundry things may be observed for the clearing the Apostles Design in this Discourse. As, (1) Here is nothing said concerning the Acceptance or Refusal of any upon Re∣pentance or the Profession thereof after any sin, to be made by the Church, whose Judgement is to be determined by other rules and circumstances. And this per∣fectly excludes the pretence of the Novatians from any countenance in these words. For whereas they would have drawn their warranty from hence for the utter ex∣clusion from Church Communion of all those who had denied the Faith in times of Persecution, although they expressed a Repentance whose sincerity they could not evince; Those only are intended, who neither do, nor can come to Repen∣tance it self, nor make a Profession of it, with whom the Church had no more to do. It is not said, that men who ever thus fell away, shall not upon their Repen∣tance be admitted into their former state in the Church; But that such is the se∣verity of God against them that he will not again give them Repentance unto Life. (2) Here is nothing that may be brought in bar against such as having fallen in∣to any great sin, or any course in sinning, and that after Light, Convictions, and Gifts received and exercised, who desire to repent of their sins and endeavour after sincerity therein. Yea such a desire and endeavour exempts any one from the Judgement here threatened. There is therefore in it that which tends greatly to the encouragement of such sinners. For, whereas it is here declared concerning those who are thus rejected of God, that it is impossible to renew them, or to do any thing towards that which shall have a tendency to Repentance; those who are not satisfied that they do yet savingly repent, but only are sincerely exercised how they may attain thereunto, have no concernment in this Commination, but evidently have the door of mercy
still opened unto them. For it is shut against those who shall never endeavour to turn by Repentance. And although Persons so rejected of God, may fall under Convictions of their sin attended with despair, which is unto them a foresight of their future condition; yet as unto the least attempt after Repentance on the terms of the Gospel, they do never rise up unto it. Wherefore the Impossibility intended of what sort soever it be, respects the severity of God, not in refusing or rejecting the greatest sinners which seek after and would be renewed unto Repentance, which is contrary unto innumerable of his Promises; but in the giving up such sinners as these are here mentioned, unto that obdurateness and obstinacy in sinning, that blindness of mind, and hardness of heart, as that they neither can nor shall ever sincerely seek after Repentance, nor may any means according to the mind of God be used to bring them thereunto. And the Righteousness of the exercise of this severity is taken from the nature of this sin or what is contained in it, which the Apostle declares in the ensuing Instances. VERSE 7, 8. What the Apostle had Doctrinally instructed the Hebrews in before, in these Verses he layeth before them under an apposite similitude. For his Design herein is to re∣present the condition of all sorts of Persons who profess the Gospel, and live under the Dispensation of its Truths, with the various Events that do befall them. He had before treated directly only of unfruitful and Apostatizing Professors, whom here he represents by unprofitable Ground, and Gods dealing with them as men do with such Ground when they have Tilled it in vain. For the Church is a Vine or Vineyard, and God is the Husbandman, Joh. 15. 1. Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3. But here moreover for the greater Illustration of what he affirms concerning such Persons, he compriseth in his similitude the contrary state of sound Believers and fruitful Professors, with the acceptance they have with, and blessing they receive from God. And contraries thus compared do illustrate one another, as also the Design of him who treateth concerning them. We need not therefore engage into a particular Enquiry what it is which the word For, whereby these Verses are annexed and continued unto the precedent, doth peculiarly and immediately respect, concerning which there is some difference among Expositors. Some suppose it is the dealing of God with Apostates before laid down which the Apostle regards, and in these Verses gives an account of the Reason of it, or whence it is they come unto such a woful End. Others observing that in his wholle ensuing Discourse he insists principally if not only on the state of sound Believers and their acceptance with God, suppose he hath immediate respect unto what he hath declared in the beginning of the Chapter, ver. 1, 3. concerning his Design to carry them on unto Perfection. But there is no need that we should restrain his purpose to either of these intentions exclusively unto the other; yea it is contrary to the plain scope of his Discourse so to do. For he compriseth both sorts of Professors and gives a lively representation of their condi∣tion, of Gods dealing with them, and the Event thereof. The Reason therefore that he gives is not to be confined to either sort exclusively, but extends it self equally to the whole subject treated of. Ver. 7, 8. There is not any thing materially to be observed concerning these words in any Translations ancient or modern; They all agree unless one or two that openly de∣part from the Text, and which therefore are of no consideration. Only  is by the Syriack rendred  propter quos, for whom; all others read per quos, or a quibus, by whom; only ours mark for whom in the Margin, which indeed is the more usual signification of  with an Accusative Case. But that is not in∣frequently put for the Genitive. And although this be not usual in other Authors, yet unquestionable Instances of it may be given, and amongst them that of De∣mosten. Olint. 1. is eminent.
And seeth the way whereby (by which) Philip who at first was weak became so great. But into the proper sense of this Expression in this place we must enquire afterwards. For the Earth which drinketh in the Rain, that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth Blessing from God. But that which beareth Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose End is to be burned. Some things must be observed concerning this similitude in general, before we enquire into the particular parts of it. (1) The  or Application of it, is left included in the , or proposition of the similitude it self, and is not ex∣pressed. A Description is given of the Earth by its Culture, Fruit or Barrenness, but nothing is especially added of the things signified hereby, although those are principally intended. And the way of Reasoning herein, as it is compendious, so it is plain and instructive, because the Analogie between the things produced in the similitude, and the things signified, is plain and evident, both in it self and from the whole discourse of the Apostle. (2) There is a common subject of the whole similitude branched out into distinct parts, with very different Events ascribed unto them. We must therefore consider, both what is that common subject, as also wherein the distinct parts whereinto it is branched, do agree on the one hand, and differ on the other. (1) The common subject is the Earth; of the nature whereof both Branches are equally participant. Originally and naturally they differ not, they are both the Earth. (2) On this common subject in both Branches of it, the Rain equally falls; not upon one more and the other less, not upon one sooner and the other later. (3) It is equally dressed, tilled, or manured by or for the use of some. One part doth not lie neg∣lected, whilst the other is cared for. In these things there is an Agreement, and all is equal in both Branches of the common subject. But hereon a partition is made or a Distribution of this common subject into two parts or sorts with a double difference between them; and that (1) On their own part, (2) Of Gods dealing with them. For (1) The one part brings forth Herbs which are described by their usefulness, they are meet for them by whom they are dressed. The other bare Thorns and Briars, things not only of no use or advantage, but moreover noxious and hurtful. (2) They differ in the conse∣quent, on the part of God, for the first sort receiveth Blessing from God, the other in opposition unto this Blessing from God, (whence we may also learn what is contained therein) is first rejected, then cursed, then burned. Before I proceed to the particular Explication of the words, Enquiry must be made into the especial Design of the Apostle in them with respect unto these Hebrews. For here is not only a Threatening of what might come to pass, but a particular prediction of what would come to pass, and a Declaration of what was already in part accomplished. For by the Earth he understands in an especial manner the Church and Nation of the Jews. This was Gods Vineyard, Isa. 5. 7, 8. Hereunto he sent all his Ministers and last of all his Son, Matth. 21. 35. Jer. 2. 21. And to them he calls, O Earth, Earth, Earth hear the word of the Lord, Jer. 22. 29. Upon this Earth the Rain often fell in the Ministerial Dispensation of the Word unto that Church and People. With respect hereunto Christ says unto them , how often would I have gathered thy Children, Matth. 23. 37. as here the Rain is said to fall , often upon it. This was the Earth wherein were the Plants of Gods especial planting. And these were all now distributed into two parts. (1) Those who Believing and Obeying the Gospel brought forth the fruits of Repentance, Faith and new Obe∣dience. These being effectually wrought upon by the Power of God in the new Creation, our Apostle compares to the Earth in the old Creation, when it was first made by God and blessed of him. Then in the first place it brought forth  that is, , as the Lxx. render the word, Herb meet for him that made and blessed it, Gen. 1. 11. And these were still to be continued the Vineyard of God, a Field which he cared for. This was that Gospel Church gathered of the He∣brews which brought forth fruit to the Glory of God, and was blessed of him.
This was the Remnant among them according to the Election of Grace, which obtained mercy when the rest were blinded, Rom. 11. 5, 7. For (2) the remainder of this People, the residue of this Earth, it was made up of two sorts, which are both of them here cast under the same lot and condition. There were obstinate unbelievers on the one hand, who pertinaciously rejected Christ and the Gospel, with Hypocritical Apostates on the other, who having for a season embraced its Profession, fell off again unto their Judaisme. All these the Apostle compares unto the Earth when the Covenant of God with the Creation was broken by the sin of man and it was put under the Curse. Hereof it is said , Gen. 3. 18. , as the Lxx ren∣ders it, the very words here used by the Apostle, it beareth Thorns and Briars. Such was this Church and People now they had broken and rejected the Covenant of God by their Unbelief, Earth that brought forth Thorns and Briars. The best of them was as a Briar and the most upright of them as a Thorn Hedge, then was the Day of their Prophets nigh, the Day of their Visitation foretold by the Prophets their Watchmen, Micah 7. 4. So God threatened that when he rejected his Vineyard it should bring forth Briars and Thorns, Isa. 5. 6. And of these unbelieving and Apostate Hebrews of this barren Earth, the Apostle affirmeth three things. (1) That it was , rejected, or not approved, that is of God. Hereof they boasted, and herein they continued yet to pride themselves, that God owned them, that they were his People, and preferred them above all others. But although God was pleased yet to exercise patience towards them, yet he had pronounced concerning them in general, that they were not his People, that he owned them not. Thorns and Briars were come upon their Altars, so that both their Persons and Wor∣ship were rejected of God. (2) It was nigh unto Cursing. And this Curse which it was now very nigh unto had in it (1) Barrenness; and (2) an unalterable and irrevocable Destination unto Destruction. (1) It had in it Barrenness. For this Church of the Jews made up now of Infidels and Apostates was represented by the Figg-tree cursed by our Savi∣our, Matth. 21. 19. He said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever, and presently the Figg-tree withered away. After this time the Gospel having been sufficiently tendred unto them, and rejected by them, there was no more of saving Faith, Repentance, or Obedience, nothing that was acceptable unto God, in Ho∣liness or Worship ever found amongst them to this Day. Many Jews were after this converted, but the Church of the Jews never bare any more Fruits unto God. And (2) they were devoted unto Destruction. The close of the Old Testament, and therein of the immediate solemn Revelation of God unto that Church was, that if they received not the Lord Christ after the coming and Ministry of Elijah, that is, of John the Baptist, that God would come and smite the whole Earth with a Curse, Mal. ult. He would make it a thing anathematized or sacredly devoted unto Destruction, . When God first brought them into his Land, which was to be the seat of his Ordinances and solemn Worship, the first Town that they came unto was Jericho. This therefore God anathematized or devoted to perpetual Destruction, with a Curse upon him that should attempt its Re-edification, Joh. 6. 17. The whole Land there∣by was alienated from its former possessors, and devoted unto another use, and the place it self utterly destroyed. Jerusalem, and consequently the whole Church was now to be made as Jericho; and the Curse denounced was now speedily to be put in Execution, wherein the Land was to be alienated from their Right unto it, and be devoted to Desolation. (3) The End of all this was that this Earth should be burned. An universal Desolation according to the Prediction of our Saviour by Fire and Sword, repre∣senting the Eternal Vengeance they were liable unto was to come upon them. This was now approaching, namely, the End of their Church and State in the De∣struction of the City, Temple and Nation. This was the especial Design of the Apostle with respect unto these Hebrews; And he adds this Scheme or Dclineation of the present and approaching Condition of that Apostatized Church, to give Terror unto the Commination that he gave unto unprofitable Professors. But whereas all things unto the very last happened
unto them in Types, and the Condition of the Churches of the Gospel is repre∣sented in their sin and punishment; and whereas the things reflected on are such as it is the common and constant concernment of all Professors heedfully to consider, I shall open the words in the whole latitude of their signification, as they are pecu∣liarly instructive unto us. 1. The Subject of the proposition in the similitude, is the Earth; and that which is represented thereby, is the Hearts and Minds of all those to whom the Gospel . is preached. So it is explained in that Parable of our Saviour, wherein he ex∣pressed the Word of the Gospel as preached by Seed, and compares the Hearers of it unto several sorts of Ground whereinto that Seed is cast. And the Allusion is wonderful apposite and instructive. For (1) Seed is the principle of all things living; of all things that having any kind of natural Life, are capable of natural increase, growth, and furit. And whatever they arrive unto, it is but the actuating of the vital seed from whence they do proceed. So is the Word of the Gospel unto all spiritual Life, 1 Pet. 1. 23. And Believers because of their growth, increase, and fruit, from this vital princi∣ple or seed of the Word, are called Vines, Plants of Gods planting, and the like. (2) The Earth is the only fit and proper subject for seed to be put into, and alone is capable of the Culture or Husbandry that is to be used about it. God hath made no other matter or subject to receive the seeds of things that may bring forth fruit; no man casts Seed into the Air or Water. It was of the Earth alone that God said, Let it bring forth Grass, the Herb yielding Seed, and the Fruit-tree yielding Fruit after its kind, whose Seed is in it self upon the Earth, Gen. 1. 11, 12. The Earth alone hath a passive power to be made fruitful, it hath that matter in it which being cultivated, disposed, excited, sowed, planted, blessed, may bring forth Fruit. So it is with the Souls of men with respect unto the Seed of the Word. Their Minds, and they alone, are a subject capable of receiving of it, and improving it. They are the only meet Object of Divine Care and Culture. The faculties of our Souls, our Minds, Wills and Affections are meet to entertain the Gospel, and to bring forth the Fruits of it, whereof nothing is found in any other Creatures on the Earth. Hence we are , 1 Cor. 3. 9. Gods Husbandry, the Ground or Field that he tilleth. As Christ mystical comprising all Professors is the Vine, and his Father is the Husbandmam, Joh. 15. 1. by whom it is dressed and pruned. (3) The Earth by and of it self, in the state wherein it is, brings forth nothing that is good or useful. Upon its first Creation it was inlaid and impregnated by the Blessing of God with all Seeds of useful Herbs and Fruits. But after the en∣trance of Sin, its Womb was cursed with Barrenness as unto its first usefulness, and brings forth nothing of it self but Thorns, Briars, and noxious Weeds, at least those in such abundance as to choke and corrupt all the Remainders of useful Seeds and Plants in it. It is like the Field of the slothful grown over with Thorns, and Nettles cover the face thereof. Especially it is condemned to utter Barrenness, if the Rain fall not on it; whereof afterwards. And such are the Hearts and Minds of men by nature. They are dark, barren, unprofitable, and which without Di∣vine Culture will bring forth no Fruits of Righteousness that are acceptable unto God. All that of themselves they can bring forth are noxious Weeds. Among the Weeds of unmanured Earth some are painted with alluring Colours, but they are but Weeds still; and among the Fruits of unsanctified Minds some may carry a more specious appearance than others; but they are all, spiritually consi∣dered, Sins and Vices still. So then the common subject of the similitude is plain and instructive. And we may in our passage observe that, The Minds of all men by Nature are universally and equally barren with respect unto Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness, meet for and acceptable unto God. They are all Obser. as the Earth under the Curse. There is a natural Difference among men as unto their Intellectual Abilities. Some are of a far more piercing and sagacious Under∣standing, and of a sounder judgement than others. Some have a natural temper and inclination disposing them unto Gentleness, Sobriety and Modesty; when others from their constitution are Morose, Passionate and Perverse.
And hereon some make a good progress in Morality, and usefulness in the world, whist others lay immersed in all vitious Abominations. There are therefore on these and the like Accounts great Differences among men, wherein some are incompara∣bly to be preferred above others. But as to the Fruits of spiritual Holiness and Righ∣teousness all men by nature are equal and alike. For our Nature as unto a princi∣ple of living unto God is equally corrupted in all. There are no more Sparks or Reliques of Grace in one than another. All spiritual Differences between men are from the Power and Grace of God in the Dispensation of the Word. But we must proceed. Of this Earth it is said, that it drinks in the Rain that comes often upon it. Some∣thing is wanting, something must be done to this Barren Earth to make it fruitful. . And this is done by Rain. And that is described, by (1) its Communication or ap∣plication unto the Earth; it falls upon it; (2) An especial Adjunct thereof in its frequency, it falls often on it. (3) By that Reception which the Earth is naturally fitted and suited to give unto it; it drinketh it in. The thing it self is Rain. This is that whereby alone the Earth otherwise dry and barren is impregnated and made fruitful. For there is therein a Communica∣tion of moisture absolutely requisite to apply the nourishing virtue of the Earth unto the radical principles of all fruits whatever, and therefore before any Rain did fall God caused a vapour to arise which supplied the use of it and watered the Earth, Gen. 2. 6. So the Poet expresseth it, Tum Pater omnipotens foecundis imbribus Aether, Conjugis in gremium late descendit & omnes Magnus alit, magno commistus corpore, foetus. Georg. 2. And  is a wetting shower, not a Storm, not a violence of Rain causing an inundation, which tends to Barrenness and Sterility, nor such as is unseasonable and spoils the Fruits of the Earth, but a plentiful shower is intended; for  exceeds , as Aristotle observes. (2) This Rain falls on the Ground. And (3) It is said to fall often or frequen∣ly, iteratis vicibus. The Land of Canaan is commended that it was not like the Land of Aegypt where the Seed was sowed and watered with the Foot; but that it was a Land of Hills and Valleys and did drink water of the Rain of Heaven, Deut. 11. 10, 11. And they had commonly two seasons of it, the former whereof they called  Joreh, and the latter  Malcosh, Deut. 11. 14. The former fell about October in the beginning of their year, when their Seed was cast into the Ground, and the Earth as it were taught thereby (as the Word signifies) to apply it self unto the Seed, and to become fruitful. The other fell about March when their Corn was grown up, filling the Straw and Ear for the Harvest, as the word probably signifies. Hence it is said that Jordan overfloweth all his Banks at the time of Harvest, Josh. 3. 15. 1 Chron. 12. 15. which was occasioned by the fall∣ing of Malcosh or this latter Rain. And that this was in the first Month or March, which was the entrance of their Harvest, it is evident from hence, in that immediately after they had passed over Jordan during the swelling of its waters, they kept the Passeover at Gilgal on the fourteenth of that first Month, chap. 5. 10. Whilst they had these Rains in their proper seasons, the Land was fruitful; and it was by with-holding of them that God punished them with the Barrenness of the Earth, and Famine thereon ensuing. Besides these, in good seasons, they had many other occasional showers; as mention is made of the showers on the mown Grass. Hence it is here supposed that the Rain falls , often on this Earth. Again, The Earth is said to drink in the Rain. The Expression is Metaphorical but common. . And the Allusion is taken from living Crea∣tures, who by drinking take in water into their inward parts and bowels. To do thus is peculiar unto the Earth. If the Rain falls upon Rocks or Stones, it runs off from them, it hath no admission into them. But into the Earth it soaks more or less, according as the condition of the Ground is more or less receptive of it. And it is the nature of the Earth as it were to suck in these moistening Rains that fall upon it, until it be even inebriated, Psal. 65. 10. Thou visitest the Earth. and
watereth it, thou waterest the Ridges thereof abundantly, thou setlest the Furrows there∣of.  thou inebriatest or makest drunk the Furrows thereof. This is the  or proposition of the similitude. The  is inclu∣ded in it, that is, the Application of it unto the matter in hand. (1) That by the Earth, the Minds and Consciences of men are intended, was before declared; and it is as evident what is meant by the Rain. Yet some suppose that the Gifts of the Holy Ghost before treated of may be designed by the Apostle. For in the communication of them the Holy Spirit is frequently said to be poured out, that is, as Water or Rain. But this Rain is said to fall often on the Earth, (yea upon that Earth which continueth utterly barren) in one shower after another. And this can be no way accommodated unto the Dispensation of the Gifts of the Spirit. For they being once communicated, if they be not exercised and improved, God gives no more showers of them. It is therefore the Administration of the Word that, is in∣tended. And in other places the Doctrine of the Scripture is frequently compared unto Rain and watering, Deut. 32. 2. My Doctrine shall drop as the Rain, my Speech shall distill as the Dew, as the small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as the Showers upon the Grass. And where God denies his Word unto any people, he says, upon them there shall be no Rain, Zech. 14. 17. And hence  to drop as the Rain doth is an expression for Prophesying or Preaching, Ezek. 21. 2. Amos 7. 16. the showers whereof are sometimes more soft and gentle, sometimes more earnest and pressing. And those words,  Psal. 84. 7. because of the ambi∣guity of the words, and the proportion that is between the things, are rendred by some, the Rain also filleth the Pools, and by others, the Teachers shall be filled with Blessings. This is that whereby God watereth and refresheth the barren Souls of men; that whereby he communicates unto them all things that may enable them to be fruitful; in brief, not to enlarge on the Allegory, the Word of the Gospel is every way unto the Souls of men, as the Rain to the barren Earth. 2. This Rain is said to fall often on the Earth. And this may be considered either with respect unto the especial concernment of these Hebrews which was laid open before, or unto the ordinary dispensation of the Gospel. In the first way it re∣gards and expresseth the frequent addresses made unto the People of the Jews in the Ministry of the Word for their healing and recovery from those ways of Ruine wherein they were ingaged. And so it may include the Ministry of the Prophets, with the close put unto it by that of Christ himself, concerning which see our Ex∣position on Chap. 1. 1. And concerning this whole Ministry it is, that our Saviour so expostulates with them, Matth. 23. 37. How often would I have gathered your Children. And this also he at large represents in the Parable of the Housholder and his Vineyard, with the Servants that he sent unto it, from time to time to seek for fruit, and last of all his Son, Matth. 21. 33, 34, 35, 36. Take it in the latter way for the Dispensation of the word in general, and the manner of it with frequency and urgency is included in this expression. Where the Lord Christ sends the Gospel to be preached, it is his will that it should be so, instantly in season and out of season, that it may come as abundant showers of Rain on the Earth. 3. This Rain is said to be drunk in; the Earth drinketh in the Rain. There is no more intended in this expression, but the outward hearing of the Word, a naked assent unto it. For it is ascribed unto them who continue utterly barren and un∣healed, who are therefore left unto Fire and Destruction. But as it is the natural property of the Earth to receive in the Water that is poured on it; so men do in some sense drink in the Doctrine of the Gospel, when the natural faculties of their Souls do apprehend it and assent unto it, though it works not upon them, though it produce no effects in them. There are indeed in the Earth Rocks and Stones on which the Rain makes no impression, but they are considered in common with the rest of the Earth, and there needs no particular exception on their account. Some there are who when the Word is preached unto them, do obstinately refuse and reject it; but the Hearers in common are said to drink it in; and the other sort shall not escape the judgement which is appointed for them. And thus far things are spoken in general, what is common unto both those sorts of Hearers which he afterwards distinctly insists upon. The Word of the Gospel in the preaching of it being compared unto Rain we may observe that,
The Dispensation of it unto men is an effect of the Soveraign Power and Pleasure of God, as is the giving of Rain unto the Earth. There is nothing in Nature that God assumeth more into his Prerogative than this of giving Rain. The first men∣tion of it in the World, is in these words, The Lord God had not caused it to Rain upon the Earth, Gen. 2. 8. All Rain is from the Lord God, who causeth it to Rain or not to Rain at his pleasure. And the giving of it he pleads as a great pledge of his Providence and Goodness. He left not himself of old without witness, in that he did good and gave Rain from Heaven, Acts 14. 17. Our Saviour also makes it an Argument of his Goodness that he causeth his Rain to fall, Matth. 5. 45. And whatever thoughts we have of the commonness of it, and whatever acquaintance men suppose they have with its causes, yet God distinguisheth himself as to his Al∣mighty Power, from all the Idols of the world that none of them can give Rain. He calls his People to say in their Hearts, Let us fear the Lord who giveth Rain, Jer. 5. 24. Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause Rain, or can the Heavens give showers, Jer. 14 22. And he exerciseth his Soveraignty in the giving of it, Amos 4. 7, 8. I caused it to Rain upon one City, and not to Rain upon another, one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not withered, so two or three Cities wandered unto one City to drink water. And thus is it absolutely unto the Di∣spensation of the Gospel to Nations, Cities, Places, Persons; it is Gods disposal alone, and he useth a distinguishing Soveraignty therein. He sendeth his Word un∣to one People and not to another, to one City and not to another, at one time and not at another, and these are those matters of his, whereof he giveth no account. Only some things we may consider which give us a prospect into the Glory of his Wis∣dom and Grace herein; And this I shall do in two Instances, first in the principle of his Dispensation; secondly in the outward means of it. As (1) The principal End which he designeth in his disposal of the Dispensation of the Gospel in that great variety wherein we do behold it, is the Conversion, Edi∣fication, and Salvation of his Elect. This is that which he aimeth to accomplish thereby, and therefore his Will and Purpose herein is that which gives Rule and Measure unto the actings of his Providence concerning it. Wherever there are any of his Elect to be called, or in what time soever, there and then will he cause the Gospel to be preached; For the purpose of God which is according to Election must stand, whatever Difficulties lie in the way, Rom. 9. 11. And the Election must obtain, Chap. 11. 5, 6. So the Lord Christ prayed that he would take care of all those that he had given unto him, which were his own by Election (thine they were and thou gavest them unto me) and sanctifie them by his Word, Joh. 17. 17. In pursuit of his own purpose, and in answer unto that prayer of our Lord Jesus, he will send his Word to find them out wherever they are, that so not one grain of his chosen Israel shall be lost or fall to the Ground. So he appointed our Apostle to stay and Preach at Corinth, notwithstanding the difficulties and oppositions he met withall, be∣cause he had much people in that City, Acts 19. 9, 10. They were his People by Eternal Designation, antecedently unto their effectual Vocation, and therefore he will have the Word preached unto them. And in the hard work of his Ministry the same Apo∣stle who knew the End of it, affirms that he endured all things for the Elects sake, 2 Tim. 2. 10. That they might be called and saved was the work he was sent upon. For whom he doth predestinate, them he also calleth, Rom. 8. 30. Predestination is the Rule of effectual Vocation, all and only they are so called by the Word, who are predestinate. So speaks our Saviour also, I have other Sheep which are not of this Fold, them also I must bring and they shall hear my Voice, Joh. 10. 16. He had some Sheep in that Fold of the Church of the Jews, to them therefore he preached the Word, that they might be gathered unto him. But he had other Sheep also, even all his Elect among the Gentiles, and saith he, them must I gather also. There is a necessity of it upon the account of the purpose of God concerning them, and they are to be gathered by hearing of his Voice, or the preaching of the Word. In that Soveraignty therefore which God useth in the disposal thereof, causing the Rain of the Doctrine of his Word to fall upon one place and not upon another, at one time and not at another, he hath still this certain End before him; and the actings of his Providence are regulated by the purposes of his Grace. In what place or Na∣tion soever, in what Time or Age soever he hath any of his Elect to be brought forth in the world, he will provide that the Gospel of Peace be preached unto
them. I will not say that in every individual place where the Gospel is preached, there are always some of the Elect to be saved. For the Enjoyments of one place may be occasioned by the Work that is to be done in another, wherewith it is in some kind of conjunction: Or the Word may be preached in a place for the sake of some that are there only accidentally. As when Paul first preached at Philippi, Lydia only was converted, who was a stranger in those parts, belonging to the City of Thyatira in Asia, Acts 16. 14, 15. And an whole Country may fare the better for one City, and an whole City for some part of it, as Micah 5. 7. God concealeth this secret Design under promiscuous outward Dispensations. For he obligeth those by whom the Word is preached to declare his mind therein unto all men indefinitely, leaving the effectual work of his Grace in the pursuit of his pur∣pose unto himself; whence they believe who are ordained to Eternal Life, and those are added to the Church that are to be saved, Acts 2. 47. Acts 13. 48. Besides God hath other Ends also in the sending of his Word, though this be the principal. For by it he puts a Restraint unto Sin in the World, gives a visible control to the King∣dom of Sathan, and relieves mankind by sending Light into those dark places of the Earth, which are filled with Habitations of Cruelty. And by the Convictions that he brings thereby on the Minds and Consciences of men, he makes way for the manifestation of the Glory of his Justice in their Condemnation. Coming and speaking unto them he leaves them without pretence or excuse, Joh. 15. 22. Yet will I not say that God sends the Word for any continuance for these Ends and Designs only. For a short time he may do so, as our Saviour sending forth his Disciples to Preach, supposeth that in some place their message may be totally rejected; and thereon appointeth them to shake off the dust of their feet as a Testimony against them, or their being left without excuse. But these are but secondary and accidental Ends of the Word where it is constantly preached. Wherefore God doth not so send it for their sakes alone. But on the other side, I dare say, that where God doth not by any means nor in any degree send his Word, there are none of his Flect to be saved; for without the Word they can neither be called nor sanctified. And if any of them are in any such place, as whereunto he will not grant his Word, he will by one providence or other, snatch them like Brands out of the Fire, and convey them under the showers of it. And this we find verified by experience every day. The Gospel therefore doth not pass up and down the world by chance, as we know in how great variety it hath visited and left Nations and People, Ages and Times; nor is the disposal of it regulated by the Wisdom and Contrivance of men, what∣ever their Work and Duty may be in the Dispensation of it; but all this like the falling of the Rain is regulated by the Soveraign Wisdom and Pleasure of God, wherein he hath respect only unto the Purpose of his own Eternal Grace. 2. He doth according to his Soveraign pleasure call and send persons to the Preaching of it, unto those to whom he will grant the Priviledge thereof. Every man may not upon his own Head, nor can any man upon his own abilities undertake and discharge that work. This is the Eternal Rule and Law of the Gospel. Who∣soever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved. But how shall men call on him in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a Preacher? And how shall they Preach except they be sent? Rom. 10. 13, 14, 15. that is, by God himself; for neither doth the Apostle discourse, nor hath he any occasion in that place to discourse concerning the ordinary call of Persons unto an Office in the Church, whereunto the Ministry of the Church it self is required. But he treats of Preaching the Gospel in general unto all or any parts of the world, and of the love and care of God in sending of men unto that purpose, whereby others coming to hear of him may believe in him, call upon his name, and be saved. Hence he compares the Work of God herein unto that of his sending forth Light and natural Instructions unto all the World by the Luminaries of Heaven wherein the Ministry of Men hath no place, verse 18. Wherefore the Preaching of the Gospel depends absolutely on the Soveraign plea∣sure of God in sending men unto that work; for how should they Preach except they be sent? And he doth send them, first, by endowing them with spiritual Gifts, enabling them unto that Work and Duty. The Gospel is the Ministration of the Spirit; nor is it to be administred but by virtue of the Gifts of the Spirit. These God gives unto them whom he sends by Jesus Christ, Ephes. 4. 7, 8, &c. And
these Gifts are a sort of especial, peculiar, yea supernatural Abilities, whereby men are fitted to, and enabled for the Dispensation of the Gospel. It is sad to consider what woful work they make who undertake this Duty, and yet unfurnished with these Abilities, that is, such who are sent of men, but are not sent of God. They harness themselves with external Order, Ecclesiastical Mission according to some Rules agreed upon among themselves, with some other implements and Ornamen∣tal Accoutrements, whereon they undertake to be Preachers of the Gospel, as it were whether God will or no. But these vanities of the Gentiles cannot give Rain, the Preaching of the Gospel as unto its proper Ends, depends on Gods sending alone. When they betake themselves to their work, they find themselves at a loss for Gods Mission, at least they do so unto whom they pretend to be sent. I speak it not, as though outward order and a due call were not necessary in a Church un∣to the Office of a Teacher; but only to shew that all Order without a concurrence of the Divine Vocation is of no validity nor efficacy. Now the Dispensation of these spiritual Gifts without which the Rain of the Doctrine of the Gospel falleth not, depends solely on the Soveraignty of God. The Spirit divideth unto every one as he pleaseth, 1 Cor. 12. 11. And it is evident that he doth not herein follow the Rule of any humane preparation. For whereas it is most certain, that the improve∣ment of mens intellectual Abilities in Wisdom, Learning, Oratory and the like, are exceedingly subservient unto the use and exercise of these spiritual Gifts, yet it is evident that God doth not always and regularly communicate them unto those who are so prepared; no though they were acquired in a rational way, in order unto the work of the Ministry. For how many may we see so qualified, and yet destitute of all Relish of spiritual Gifts, God preferring before them persons, it may be, be∣hind and beneath them in those Qualifications. As it was whilst all these affairs were transacted in an extraordinary manner at the first planting of the Gospel. He did not chuse out eminently, the Philosophers, the Wise, the Learned, the Scribes, the Disputers of this world, to communicate spiritual Gifts unto, but generally fixed on persons of another condition and more ordinary capacity. Some were so that none might think themselves excluded because of their Wisdom and Learning, things excellent in themselves; but many of this sort, as our Apostle informs us, were not called and chosen unto this work. So something in proportion here∣unto may yet be observed in the distribution of the ordinary Gifts of the Spirit. At least it is evident that herein God obligeth himself to no Rules of such prepara∣tions or qualifications on our part. Nay which is yet farther, he walks not herein, in the steps of his own sanctifying and saving Grace. But as he worketh that Grace in the Hearts of many on whom he bestows not those Gifts which are needful to enable men unto the Dispensation of the Gospel, so he bestows those Gifts on many, unto whom he will not vouchsafe his sanctifying Grace. And these things make evident that Soveraignty which God is pleased to exercise in his sending of persons unto the work of preaching the Gospel, manifesting that the whole of it depends like the giving of Rain, absolutely on his pleasure. And when men exclusively un∣to this part of Gods Call will keep up a Ministry, and so make a preaching of the Gospel, it is but a lifeless Image of the true Dispensation of it. Secondly, This Communication of Gifts unto men is ordinarily accompanied with a powerful and effectual inclination of the minds of men, to undertake the work and ingage in it against those Objections, Discouragements, Oppositions and Dif∣ficulties, which present themselves unto them in their undertaking. There is so I say ordinarily, for there are more Instances than one, of those who having the word of Prophecy committed unto them, instead of going to Niniveh, do consult their own Reputation, Ease and Advantage, and so tack about to Tarshish. And there are not a few who hide and napkin up their Talents, which are given them to Trade withall, though represented unto us under one Instance only. But these must one day answer for their Disobedience unto the Heavenly Call. But ordina∣rily that Inclination and Disposition unto this Work, which accompanies the com∣munication of spiritual Gifts, is prevalent and effectual, so that the minds of men are fortified by it against the Lions that are in the way, or whatever may rise up to deter them from it. So our Apostle affirms that upon the Revelation of Christ unto him, and his Call thereby to Preach the Gospel, immediately he conferred not with Flesh and Blood, but went into Arabia about his Work, Gal. 1. 16, 17. He would not
so much as attend or hearken unto Cavils and Exceptions against the Work where∣unto he was inclined and disposed, which is the way of a well grounded firm Re∣solution. And something in proportion hereunto is wrought in the minds of them, who undertake this Work upon an ordinary Call of God. And where this is not, much success is not to be expected in the work of any, nor any great Blessing of God upon it. When men go out hereunto in their own Strength, without a sup∣ply of spiritual Gifts, and engage in their Work meerly upon external considerati∣ons, without this Divine Inclination of their Hearts and Minds, they may seem to cast out Water as out of an Engine by violent compression, they will never be like Clouds to pour forth showers of Rain. This therefore also is from the Lord. Again, 2. God ordereth things in his Soveraign unsearchable Providence, so as that the Gospel shall be sent unto, and in the Administration of it, shall find Admittance in what places, and at what times seems good unto himself, even as he orders the Rain to fall on one place and not on another. We have not Wisdom to search into the Causes, Reasons, and Ends of Gods providential Works in the world; and individual persons seldom live to see the issue of those which are on the Wheel in their own days. But we have ground enough in the Scripture to conclude, that the principal works of Di∣vine Providence in the World, and among the Nations of the Earth, do respect the Dispensation of the Gospel, either in the granting of it, or the taking of it away. It were an easie matter to evince by evident Instances that the principal Na∣tional Revolutions which have been in the Earth, have been all of them subservient unto the counsel and purpose of God in this matter. And there are Examples also manifesting how small occasions he hath turned unto great and signal use herein. But what hath been spoken may suffice to evince who is the Father and Author of this Rain. And how this consideration may be improved unto the exercise of Faith, Prayer and Thankfulness, is manifest. This Rain is said to fall often upon the Earth, which respects the actual Dispen∣sation of the Word, by them unto whom it is committed. And we may thence Obs. 3. observe, That It is the Duty of those unto whom the Dispensation of the Word is com∣mitted of God, to be diligent, watchful, instant in their Work, that their Doctrine may as it were continually drop and distill upon their Hearers; that the Rain may fall often on the Earth. So hath God provided that the Ridges of it may be watered abundantly, to make it soft (or dissolve it) with showers and so he blesseth the springing thereof, Psal. 65. 10. In an hot, parching and dry season, one or two showers do but in∣crease the vehemency of the Heat and Drouth, giving matter of new Exhalations which are accompanied with some of the remaining moisture of the Earth. Of no other use is that dead and lazie kind of Preaching wherewith some satisfie them∣selves and would force others to be contented. The Apostles when this Work was committed unto them, would not be diverted from a constant Attendance unto it, by any other Duty, much less any other occa∣sion of Life, Acts 6. 4. See what a Charge our Apostle gives unto Timothy to this purpose, 2 Tim. 4. 1, 2, 3. And a great Example hereof we have in the account he gives concerning his own Ministry in Asia, Acts 20. (1) He declares when he began his Work and Ministry, the first day he came into Asia, ver. 18. that is, on the first opportunity; he omitted no season that he could possibly lay hold upon, but engaged into his Work, as his manner was in every place, that he came unto. And (2) in what manner did he teach? He did it (1) publickly in all Assemblies of the Church, and others also where he might have a quiet opportunity of speaking. And (2) privately from house to house, ver. 20. All places were alike to him and all Assemblies small or great, so he might have advantage of communicating unto them the knowledge of God in Christ. And (3) what did he so declare unto them, or instruct them in? It was the whole counsel of God, ver. 27. The Gospel of the Grace of God, ver. 24. all things that were profitable unto them, ver. 20. in sum, Repentance towards God and Faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 21. And (4) How did he dispense the Word unto them? It was by a Declaration of the Will of God, ver. 27. by testifying the necessity of Gospel Duties, ver. 21. by constant Warnings and Admonitions to stir men up unto diligence in Obedience, and to caution them of their dangers, ver. 31. And (5) When, or at what season did he thus lay out
himself in the discharge of this Duty? He did it night and day, ver. 31. that is, continually upon all occasions and advantages. He was one by whom God watered his Vineyard every moment. And (6) in what outward condition was he, and with what frame of Spirit did he attend his work? He was in many Temptations which befell him by the laying in wait of the Jews, ver. 19. or in continual danger of his Life by the Persecutions they stirred up against him. And as unto himself and the frame of his heart in this work, he carried it on with all humility of Mind and with many Tears, ver. 19, 31. He was not lifted up with conceits of the Glory, Greatness and Power of his Office, of the Authority over all the Churches committed unto him by Christ; but with lowliness of mind, and meekness was as the Servant of them all; with that love, tenderness, compassion and fervency as he could not but testifie by many Tears. Here is the great Example for Dispensers of the Gospel. We have not his Grace, we have not his Gifts, we have not his ability or assi∣stance, and so are not able to come up unto him; but yet certainly it is our Duty to follow him though haud passibus aequis, and to conform our selves unto him according to our Opportunity and Ability. I confess I cannot but admire to think, what some men conceive concerning him or themselves? Can they say that from the first day of their coming into their Diocesses or Dignities, or Parishes or Places, they have thus behaved themselves? Have they so taught, so preached, so warned, and that with Tears, night and day all sorts of persons, whom they suppose themselves to relate unto? Have they made it their work to declare the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the whole counsel of God, and this both publickly and privately, night and day according to their Opportunities? It will be said indeed that these things belonged unto the Duty and Office of the Apostles, but those that succeed them as ordinary Overseers of the Church, may live in another manner, and have other work to do. If they should carry it with that humility of mind as he did, and use entreaties with Tears as he did, and Preach continually as he did, they should have little joy of their Office, and besides they should be even despised of the People. These things therefore they suppose not to belong unto them. Yea but our Apostle gives this whole Account concerning himself unto the ordinary Bishops of the Church of Ephe∣sus, ver. 17, 28. And in the close of it tells them, that he hath shewed them all things how they ought to do, ver. 35. And what he apprehended to be the Duty of all to whom the Dispensation of the Word is committed, he manifests in his last solemn charge that he left with his Son Timothy a little before his Death, 2 Tim. 4. 1, 2. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom, Preach the Word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine; so ver. 5. He did no more himself than what he requires in Timothy according to the proportion of his Abilities. And the Discharge of this work is not to be mea∣sured by particular Instances of the frequency of Preaching, but by that purpose, design and frame of Heart which ought to be in Ministers, of laying out them∣selves to the utmost in the work of the Ministry on all occasions, resolving to spend and to be spent therein. I could easily shew on how many accounts frequency and urgency in preaching of the Word, is indispensably required of those unto whom the Work is committed, that therein the Rain may fall oft upon the Earth. But I must not too far digress. The Command of God, the Love and Care of Christ towards his Church, the Ends of Gods patience and long-suffering, the future manifestation of his Glory in the Salvation of Belicvers and the Condemnation of those that are disobedient, the Necessities of the Souls of men, the nature and kind of the way whereby God gives spiritual supplies by the Ministry of the Word, the weakness of our natural faculties of the mind in receiving, Heb. 4. 11. Isa. 28. 9, 10. and of the memory in retaining spiritual things, Heb. 2. 1. chap. 12. 5. the weakness of Grace, Rev. 7. 2. requiring continual refreshments, Isa. 27. 3. The frequency and variety of Temptations, interrupting our peace with God, not otherwise to be repelled, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19. the design of Christ to bring us gradually unto Perfection, might all be pleaded in this case. But the Law of this Duty is in some measure written in the hearts of all faithful Ministers, and those who are otherwise shall bear their own Burdens.
Again, It is common to the whole Earth often to drink in the Rain that falls upon it, though but some parts only of it prove fruitful, as it will appear in the following distribution of them. Whence we may observe, that Attendance unto the Word preached, hearing of it with some diligence, and giving of Obs. 4. it some kind of Reception, make no great difference among men; for this is common unto them who never become fruitful. This is so plainly exemplified by our Sa∣viour in the Parable of the several sorts of Ground that receive the Seed of the Word, yet on various occasions lose the power of it, and never come to fruit∣bearing, that it needs no farther consideration. And I intend not those only who meerly hear the Word and no more. Such persons are like Stones, which when the Rain falleth on them it makes no impression into them, they drink it not in at all. It is no otherwise I say with many Hearers, who seem not to have the least sense of what customarily they attend unto. But those are intended in the Text and Proposition who in some measure receive it, and drink it in. They give it an Entrance into their Understandings, where they become Doctrinally acquainted with the Truth of the Gospel. And they give it some entrance into their Affections, whence they are said to receive the Word with joy. And moreover they allow it some in∣fluence on their Conversations, as even Herod did who heard the preachings of John Baptist gladly and did many things thereon. All these things men may do, and yet at length prove to be that part of the Earth which drinks in the Rain, and yet absolutely is barren, and brings forth Thorns and Briars. There is yet wanting the receiving of it in a good and honest Heart, which what it includes, will afterwards appear. And again, we may observe, that God is pleased to exercise much patience towards those whom he once grants the Mercy Obs. 5. and the Priviledge of his Word unto. He doth not presently proceed against them for and on their Barrenness, but stays until the Rain hath often fallen upon the Ground. But there is an appointed season and period of time, beyond which he will not wait for them any more, as we shall see. The Distribution of this Earth into several parts, with the different Lots and Events of them, is nextly to be considered. The first sort the Apostle describes two ways. (1) By its fruitfulness; (2) By its acceptation with God. And this fruit∣fulness he farther manifests; (1) From the fruit it self which it bears, it is Herb, or Herbs; (2) From the Nature and Use of that Fruit, it is meet for them by whom it is dressed. (3) The manner of it, it brings it forth. These things we must a little open in their Order, as they be in the Text. 1. , it bringeth forth. . This word properly signifies the bringing forth of a Woman that hath conceived with Child, , Luke 1. 31. And so it is constantly used in the New Testament, and not otherwise but only in this place, and James 1. 15. , in an elegant similitude he compareth the work of Lust in Temptation unto an Adulterous conception in the Womb of the Adulteress, when at length actual sin is brought forth. The Seeds of it are cast into the Mind and Will by Temptation, where after they are warmed, fomented and cherished, Sin that ugly Monster comes forth in the World. So is this Earth said to bring forth, as a Womb that is naturally and kindly impregnated, in its appointed season. And therefore when the Apostle speaks of the other sort, he changeth his Expression for such a word as may suit a deformed and monstrous Production. But the Native power of the Earth being cherished by the Rain that falls on it, brings forth as from a teeming Womb, the Fruits of those Seeds it is possessed withall. 2. It brings forth , Generans herbam; The Rhemists render it Grass, causelesly and amiss. The word signifies such green herbs as are usually produced . by careful Culture, Tilling or Dressing; such as are for the proper and immediate use of men, and not of their Cattel. The same with  Gen. 1. 11. All sorts of useful green Herbs, whether Medicinal or for Food, or Beauty and Orna∣ment. 3. The nature of this Herbal fruit is, that it is . Some render it by opportuna, and some by accommoda; meet answers both. Those that use the former . word, seem to respect the season wherein it brings forth the Fruit. And this is the
commendation of it, that it makes no delays but brings forth in its proper time and season, when its Owners and Tillers have just ground and reason to expect and look for it. And it's an especial commendation of any thing that beareth Fruit; and what is out of season is despised, Psal 14. The latter word intends the usefulness and profitableness of the Fruit brought forth in what season soever it be. We may comprise both senses, and justly suppose both of them to be intended. The Syriack expresseth it by a general word,  which is or may be of use. And the fruits of the Earth, are not profitable unless they are seasonable. So James calls it, , the precious Fruit of the Earth, which the Husbandman waiteth for, until the Earth hath received the former and latter Rain, Jam. 1. 7. Lastly, These Herbs thus brought forth are meet, , . unto them by whom it is Tilled, or even by whom; or by whom it is also Tilled. The particle , is not superfluous or insignificant. It declares an Addition of Cul∣ture unto the Rain. For besides the falling of Rain on the Earth, there is likewise need of further Culture that it may be made fruitful or bring forth Herbs seasonably which shall be profitable unto men. For if only the Rain fall upon it, it will bring forth many things indeed; but if it be not tilled withall, for one useful Herb, it will bring forth many Weeds. As he speaks in the case of Husbandry, Quod nisi & assiduis terram insectabere rastris, Et sonitu terrebis aves, & ruris opaci Falce premes umbras, votis{que} vocaveris Imbrem, Heu magnum alterius frustra spectabis Acervum. The Earth must be Tilled from its nature and the Law of its Creation. And there∣fore Adam was to have Tilled and Wrought the Ground in the Garden even before the Fall, Gen. 2. 16. And this is the principal concernment of him that intends to live on the Field. The falling of Rain upon the Earth is common unto the whole. That which gives a Field a peculiar Relation unto any, is, that he dresseth and fenceth and tilleth it. Unto these dressers the Herbs that are brought forth are said to be meet; they belong unto them and are useful for them;  may be rendered for whom, or by whom. In the first way, the chief Owner of the Ground, the Lord of the Field or Vineyard, is signified. The Ground is Tilled or Manured for his use, and he eats of the Fruits of it. In the latter sense, those who immediately work about the Ground in the Tilling of it are intended. But there is no need to distinguish in this place between Owner and Dresser. For God as he is the great Husbandman is both. He is the Lord of the Vineyard, it is his, and he dresseth and pruneth the Vines that they may bring forth Fruit, Joh. 15. Thirdly, The Ground thus made fruitful receiveth Blessing of God. And the . Blessing of God with respect unto a fruitful Field is twofold. (1) Antecedent, in the communication of Goodness, or fruit-causing virtue unto it. The smell of my Son, is as the smell of a Field which the Lord hath blessed, Gen. 27. 27. A Field that abounds with Blossoms, Flowers and Fruits yielding a sweet Savour, being so made fruitful by the singular blessing of God. But this is not the Blessing here in∣tended. For it is supposed that this Field is already made fruitful, so as to bring forth useful Herbs, and therefore must be antecedently interested in this kind of Blessing, without which nothing can thrive or prosper. Wherefore (2) Gods Be∣nediction is taken for a consequent acceptation, or approbation, with care and watch∣fulness for a farther improvement. The Blessing of God is at large described, Isa. 27. 2, 3. And there are three things included in this Blessing of a fruitful Field. (1) The Owning, Acceptation or Approbation of it. Such a Field God owns, and is not ashamed that it should be looked on as his. And this is opposed to the Re∣jection of the barren Ground afterwards mentioned; is rejected. (3) The Care, Watchfulness and Diligence that is used about it. God watcheth over such a Field or Vineyard to keep it night and day that none should hurt it, watering it every mo∣ment and purging the Branches of its Vines, to make them yet more fruitful; op∣posed to being nigh unto Cursing, that is wholly neglected or left unto Salt and Barrenness. (3) A final preservation from all Evil, opposed to the burning up of the barren Earth with the Thorns and Briars that grow upon it.
These things being spoken only of the Ground whence the comparison is taken, the application of them though not expressed unto the spiritual things intended is plain and easie. For, 1. The Ground thus dressed, thus bearing Fruit and blessed of God, are true and sound Believers. So our Saviour declares it to be in the interpretation of his own Parable to this purpose, Matth. 13. They are such as receive the Word of God in good and honest Hearts, and bring forth Fruits of it in several Degrees. Such as having been Ministerially planted and watered, have an increase wrought in them by the Grace of God, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. 2. There is included herein the manner how they bring forth the Fruits intended. And that is, that they bring forth in their lives what was before conceived and cherished in their Hearts. They have the Root in themselves of what they bring forth. So doth the word here used signifie, namely, to bring forth the Fruit of an inward Conception. The Doctrine of the Gospel as cast into their Hearts, is not only Rain but Seed also. This is cherished by Grace, as precious Seed, and as from a natural Root or Principle in the Heart, brings forth precious Fruit. And herein consists the difference between the Fruit-bearing of true Believers, and the works of Hypocrites or false Professors. These latter bring forth Fruits like Mushromes, they come up suddenly, have oft-times a great bulk and goodly appearance, but they are only a forced Excrescency, they have no natural Seed or Root in the Earth. They do not proceed from a living principle of them in their Hearts. The other sort do first conceive, cherish and foment them in their Hearts and Minds, whence they bring them forth as from a genuine and natural principle. This is on either side fully declared by our Saviour himself, Luke 6. 43, 44, 45. 3. There are the Herbs or Fruits intended. These are they which elsewhere in the Scripture are called the Fruits of the Spirit, the Fruits of Righteousness, of Holi∣ness and the like. All that we do in compliance with the Will of God, in the course of our Profession and Obedience, is of this kind. All effects of Faith and Love, of Mortification and Sanctification, that are holy in themselves, and useful to others, whereby we express the Truth and Power of that Doctrine of the Gospel which we do profess, are the Fruits and Herbs intended. When our Hearts are made Holy, and our Lives useful by the Gospel, then are we fruitful. 4. These Herbs are said to be meet for them by whom or for whom the Earth is dressed. As it is neither useful nor safe to press similitudes beyond their principal scope and intention, and to bring in every minute circumstance into the compari∣son; so we must not neglect what is fairly instructive in them, especially if the Application of things one to another, have countenance and guidance given it in other places of the Scripture, as it is in this case. Wherefore to clear the Appli∣cation of this part of the similitude, we may observe, 1. That God himself is the great Husbandman, Joh. 15. 1. And all Believers are Gods Husbandry, 1 Cor. 3. 9. He is so the Husbandman as to be the Soveraign Lord and Owner of this Field or Vineyard, and he puts workmen into it to dress it. This our Saviout sets out at large in his Parable, Matth. 21. 33, &c. Hence he calls his people, his Portion, and the Lot of his Inheritance, Deut. 32. 9. He speaks as though he had given up all the world besides into the possession of others, and kept his people only unto himself. And so he hath, as to the especial blessed Relation which he intendeth. 2. It is God himself who taketh care for the watering and dressing of this Field. He dealeth with it as a man doth with a Field that is his own; This he expresseth, Isa. 5. 2. Matth. 21. 33, 34. The Dispensation of the Word, and the Communi∣cation of the Spirit unto the Church, with all other means of Light, Grace, and Growth depend all on his care, and are all supreamly from him, as was shewed before. To this End he employeth his Servants to work and dress it under him, who are Labourers together with God, 1 Cor. 3. 9. because they are employed by him, do his work, and have the same End with him. 3. This Tilling or Dressing of the Earth which is superadded to the Rain, or the meer Preaching of the Gospel denoted thereby, may be referred unto three Heads. (1) The Ministerial Application of the Word unto the Souls and Consciences of men, in the Dispensation of all the Ordinances of the Gospel. This is the second great
End of the Ministry, as the Dispensation of the Word in general, as the Rain, is the first. (2) The Administration of the Censures and Discipline of the Church. This belongs unto the dressing and purging of Gods Vineyard, and of singular use it is unto that End, where it is rightly and duely attended unto. And those who under pretence hereof instead of purging the Vineyard endeavour to digg up the Vines, will have little thanks from him for their Diligence and Pains. (3) Affli∣ctions and Trials. By these he purgeth his Vine that it may bring forth yet more Fruit; that is, he trieth, exerciseth, and thereby improveth the Faith and Graces of Believers. 1 Pet. 1. 7. Rom. 5. 3, 4, 5. Jam. 1. 2, 3, 4. 4. God expecteth Fruit from this Field, which is so his own, and which he so careth for. I looked for Grapes, Isa. 5. 2. He sends his Servants to receive the Fruits of it, Matth. 21. 34. Though he stand in no need of us or our Goodness, it ex∣tends not to him, we cannot profit him, as a man may profit his Neighbour, nor will he grow rich with our substance, yet he is graciously pleased to esteem of the Fruits of Gospel Obedience, the Fruits of Faith and Love, of Righteousness and Holiness, and by them will he be glorified; Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much Fruit, Joh. 15. 8. Matth. 5. 16. 5. These Fruits when they are brought forth, God approveth of, accepteth, and farther blesseth them that bear them, which is the last thing in the words. Some think there is no use of these Fruits unless they are meritorious of Grace and Glory. But Gods Acceptation of them here, is called his Benediction, his Blessing of them that bring them forth. Now a Blessing cannot be merited; it is an act of Bounty and Authority, and hath the nature of a free Gift, that cannot be deserved. What doth a Field merit of him by whom it is watered and tilled when it bringeth forth Herbs meet for his use; they are all but the Fruits of his own Labour, Cost and Pains. The Field is only the subject that he hath wrought upon, and it is his own. All the Fruits of our Obedience are but the Effects of his Grace in us. We are a subject that he hath graciously pleased to work upon. Only he is pleased in a way of infinite condescension to own in us, what is his own, and to pardon what is ours. Wherefore the Blessing of God on Fruit-bearing Believers, consists in three things. (1) His Approbation and gracious Acceptance of them. So it is said that he had respect unto Abel and his Offering, Gen. 4. 4. He graciously accepted both of his Person and of his Sacrifice, owning and approving of him, when Cain and his were rejected. So he smelt a savour of Rest from the Sacrifice of Noah, Gen. 8. 21. And to testifie his being well pleased therewith, he thence took occasion to renew and establish his Covenant with him and his Seed. (2) It is by increasing their fruit∣fulness; Every Branch in the Vine that beareth Fruit, he purgeth that it may bring forth more Fruit, Joh. 15. 2. He multiplies the Seed that is sown, and increaseth the Fruits of their Righteousness, 2 Cor. 9. 10. This is the constant way of God in his Covenant dealings, with thriving fruitful Christians; he so blesseth them as that their Graces and Fruits shall more and more abound, so as that they shall be flou∣rishing even in Age, and bring forth more Fruit unto the End. (3) He blesseth them in the preparation he hath made for to give them an everlasting Reward. A Reward it is indeed of Grace and Bounty, but it is still a Reward, a recompence of Reward. For although it be no way merited or deserved, and although there be no proportion between our Works, Duties, or Fruits and it, yet because they shall be owned in it, shall not be lost nor forgotten, and God therein testifies his Accep∣tance of them, it is their Reward. Where God grants Means, there he expects Fruit. Few men consider what is the state of things with them, whilst the Gospel is preached unto them. Some utterly disregard it any farther than as it is suited unto their carnal Interests and Advan∣tages. Obser. For the Gospel is at present so stated in the World, at least many parts of it, that great multitudes make more benefit by a pretence of it or what belongs un∣to it, and have greater secular Advancements and Advantages thereby, than they could possibly by the utmost of their Diligence and Ability in any other way, honest or dishonest, attain unto. These esteem it according to their worldly interests, and for the most part no otherwise; they are Merchants of Souls, Rev. 18. 11, 12, 13. 2 Pet. 2. 3. Some look upon it as that wherein they are really concerned, and they will both take upon themselves the profession of it, and make use of it in their
Consciences as occasion doth require. But few there are who do seriously consider what is the Errand that it comes upon, and what the Work is God hath in hand thereby. In brief, he is by it, watering, manuring, cultivating the Souls of men, that they may bring forth Fruit unto his Praise and Glory. His business by it, is to make men holy, humble, self-denying, righteous, useful, upright, pure in heart and life, to abound in good works, or to be like himself in all things. To effect these Ends, is this holy means suited, and therefore God is justly said to expect these Fruits where he grants this Means. And if these be not found in us, all the Ends of Gods Husbandry are lost towards us, which what a doleful issue it will have the next Verse declares. This therefore ought to be always in our minds whilst God is treating with us by the Dispensation of the Gospel. It is Fruit he aims at, it is Fruit he looks for, and if we fail herein, the Advantage of the whole, both as unto our Good and his Glory, is utterly lost, which we must unavoidably account for. For this Fruit God both expecteth, and will require. This is the work and effect of the Gospel, Col. 1. 6. And the Fruit of it is threefold. (1) Of Persons in their Conversion unto God, Rom. 15. 16. (2) Of Real internal Holiness in them or the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22, 23. (3) The outward Fruits of Rigteousness and Charity, 2 Cor. 9. 10. Phil. 1. 11. These God looketh to, Isa. 5. 4. Luke 13. 7. And he will not always bear with a frustration. A good Husbandman will suffer Thorns and other barren Trees to grow in the Field. But if a Vine or Figg-tree be barren in his Garden, he will cut it down and cast it into the Fire. However God will not always continue this Husbandry, Isa. 28. Amos 6. 12. Duties of Gospel Obedience are Fruits meet for God, things that have a proper and Obser. 2. especial tendency unto his Glory. As the precious Fruits of the Earth which the Hus∣bandman waiteth for, are meet for his use, that is, such as supply his wants, satisfie his occasions, answer his labour and charge, nourish and enrich him; So do these Duties of Gospel Obedience, answer all the Ends of Gods Glory which he hath designed unto it in the world. Hereby, saith our Saviour, is my Father glorified, if ye bring forth much Fruit. And we must enquire how these Fruits are meet for God. For (1) they are not so, as though he stood in any need of them unto his Glory. Our Goodness extends not unto him, Psal. 16. 2. It doth not so, as though he had need of it, or put any value on it for its own sake. Hence he rejecteth all those multiplied outward Ser∣vices which men trusted unto, as if they obliged him by them, because without them or their Services he is the Soveraign Possessor of all created Beings and their Effects, Psal. 50. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. All thoughts hereof are to be rejected; see Job 22. 2, 3. chap. 35. 7, 8. (2) They are not meet for God, as if they perfectly answered his Law. For with respect thereunto, all our Righteousnesses are as filtby Raggs, most unmeet to be presented unto him, Isa. 64. 6. And if he should mark what is amiss in us or them, who should stand, Psal. 130. 3. Much less (3) are they so meet for him, as that by them we should merit any thing at his hand. This foolish Presumption is contrary to the very nature of God and Man, with that Relation between them which necessarily ensues on their very Beings. For what can a poor worm of the Earth who is nothing, who hath nothing, who doth nothing that is good, but what it receives wholly from Divine Grace, Favour, and Bounty, merit of him who from his Being and Nature can be under no Obligation thereunto, but what is meerly from his own Soveraign pleasure and goodness? They are therefore no otherwise meet for God but in and through Christ, accord∣ing to the infinite condescension which he is pleased to exercise in the Covenant of Grace. Therein doth the Lord Christ (1) Make our persons accepted, as was that of Abel through Faith in him, which was the foundation of the Acceptation of his Offering, Gen. 4. 4. Heb. 11. 4. And this is of Grace also; It is to the praise of his glorious Grace wherein he makes us accepted in the Beloved, Ephes. 1. 6. And (2) He bears and takes away the iniquity that cleaves unto them as they proceed from us, which renders them unmeet for God. This was typed out by the plate of God, wherein was inscribed Holiness to the Lord, that was on the forehead of the High Priest. It was that he might bear the Iniquity of the Holy things of the people, Exod. 28. 36, 37, 38. He bare it in the Expiation he made of all sin; and takes it away in the sight of God. And (3) He adds of the Incense of his own Mediation unto
them, that they may have a sweet savour in their Offering to God, Rev. 8. 3. On this foundation it is that God hath graciously designed them unto sundry Ends of his Glory, and accepts them accordingly. For (1) The Will of his Command is fulfilled thereby; and this tends to the Glory of his Rule and Government, Matth. 7. 21. We are to pray that the Will of God may be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. The Glory that God hath in Hea∣ven from the Ministry of all his holy Angels, consists in this, that they always, with all readiness and chearfulness do observe his Commands and do his Will, esteeming their doing so to be their Honour and Blessedness. For hereby is the Rule and Au∣thority of God owned, avouched, exalted; a neglect whereof was the Sin and Ruine of the Apostate Angels. In like manner our Fruits of Obedience are the only Acknowledgements that we do or can make to the supream Authority and Rule of God over us, as the one Law-giver, who hath power to kill and keep alive. The Glory of an Earthly King consists principally in the willing Obedience which his Subjects give unto his Laws. For hereby they expresly acknowledge that they esteem his Laws. wise, just, equal, useful to mankind, and also reverence his Au∣thority. And it is the Glory of God, when the Subjects of his Kingdom, do testi∣fie unto all, their willing chearful Subjection unto all his Laws, as holy, righteous, and good, by the Fruits of their Obedience; as also that it is their principal Ho∣nour and Happiness to be ingaged in his Service, Joh. 15. 14. Hereby is our Hea∣venly Father glorified, as he is our great King and Law-giver. (2) There is in the Fruits of Obedience an Expression of the nature, power and efficacy of the Grace of God, whereby also he is glorified, for he doth all things to the praise of the Glory of his Grace, Ephes. 1. 6. In all the actings of Lust and Sin, in the drouth and dust of Barrenness, we represent an Enmity against him, and contrariety unto him, acting over the principle of the first Rebellion and Apostasie from him. These things in their own nature tend greatly to his dishonour, Ezek. 36. 20. But these Fruits of Obedience are all effects of his Grace, wherein he worketh in us to will and to do of his own good pleasure. And hereby are both the power and nature of that Grace, manifested and glorified. The power of it in making fruitful the barren Soils of our Hearts, which as under the Curse, would of themselves bring forth nothing but Thorns and Briars. Wherefore to cause our Hearts to abound in the Fruits of Faith, Love, Meekness, and all holy Evangelical Obedience, is that wherein the power of Gods Grace is both manifested and magnified, Isa. 11. 5, 6, 7, 8. And they also declare the nature of God. For they are all of them things good, benigne, beau∣tiful, useful to mankind, such as give Peace, Quietness, and Blessedness unto the Souls of them in whom they are, as tend to the Restauration of all things in their proper Order; and unto the relief of the Universe labouring under its confusion and vanity, Phil. 4. 8. Such I say are all the Fruits of holy Obedience in Believers; such is their nature and tendency, whereby they declare what that Grace is from which they do proceed and whose effects they are, Tit. 2. 11, 12. And hereby is God greatly glorified in the world. (3) They are meet for God and tend unto his Glory in that they express and manifest the efficacy of the Mediation of the Lord Christ in the Obedience of his Life, and the Sacrifice of his Death. These he aimed at in them, Tit. 2. 14. Ephes. 5. 25, 26, 27. It is in Jesus Christ that God will be glorified. And this is manifested in the Effects of his Wisdom and Love in his Mediation. For hereby do we declare and shew forth , the virtues of him who hath called us, 1 Pet. 2. 9. or the efficacious power of the Mediation of Christ, which these Fruits are the Effects and Products of. We do not only de∣clare the Excellency and Holiness of his Doctrine, which teacheth these things, but also the Power and Efficacy of his Blood and Intercession, which procure them for us and work them in us. God is glorified hereby in that some Return is made unto his Goodness and Love. That a Creature should make any return unto God, an∣swerable or proportionable unto the Effects of his Goodness, Love and Bounty to∣wards it, is utterly impossible. And yet this men ought to take care about and sa∣tisfie before they talk of a farther merit. For what can we properly merit at his hands, whose precedent Bounty we come infinitely short of answering or satisfying, in all that we can do? But this of Fruitfulness in Obedience is the way which God hath appointed, whereby we may testifie our sense of Divine Love and Goodness, and express our Gratitude. And hereby do our Fruits of Righteousness redound
unto the Glory of God. (4) God in and by them doth extend his care, goodness and love unto others. It is his Will and Pleasure that many who belong unto himself in an especial way, and others also among the community of mankind, should some∣times be cast into, and it may be always to be in a condition of wants and streights in this world. To take care of them, to provide for them, to relieve them, so as they also may have an especial sense of his Goodness, and be instrumental in setting forth his Praise, is incumbent on him who is the great provider for all. Now one signal way whereby he will do this, is by the Fruits of Obedience brought forth in others. Their Charity, their Compassion, their Love, their Bounty, shall help and relieve them that are in wants, streights, sorrows, poverty, imprisonment, exile, or the like. And so it is in all other cases; Their meekness, their patience, their sorbearance, which are of these Fruits, shall be useful unto others, under their weak∣nesses and temptations. Their Zeal, their Labour of Love in teaching and instruct∣ing, or preaching the Word, shall be the means of the Conviction and Conversion of others. So doth it please God by these Fruits of Obedience in some, to com∣municate of his own Goodness and Love, unto the help, relief, succour and re∣dress of others. For those so relieved do, or at least ought, to look on all as coming directly from God. For it is he who not only commands those who are the means of their Conveyance unto them, to do what they do, but he directly works it in them by his Grace, without which, it would not be. And all this redound∣eth unto the Glory of God. This our Apostle expresseth at large, 2 Cor. 9. 12, 13, 14, 15. For the Administration of this service (that is, the Charitable and boun∣tiful Contribution of the Corinthians unto the Poor of the Church of Hierusalem) not only supplieth the wants of the Saints themselves, (the thought whereof might give great satisfaction to the minds of men benign and compassionate, namely, that they have been able to relieve others) but it is abundant also by many Thanks∣givings unto God; It hath this Effect upon the minds of all that are concerned in it, or do know of it, to cause them to abound in thanks and praise unto God. And he sheweth both the Grounds whereon, and the Way whereby this Praise is so returned unto God. For (1) They consider not meerly what is done, but the principle from whence it doth proceed. Whilst by the Experience of this Ministration they glo∣rifie God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel. This in the first place affects them greatly, that whereas before they had only heard it may be a Report, that you or some of you were converted unto the Faith of the Gospel, they had now by this Ministration, that is, the Relief of Bounty communicated unto them, such an Evidence and Assurance, that with one consent they gave Praise and Glory to God for the Work of his Grace towards them. And indeed this usually is the first thing which affects the minds of any of the Saints of God in any relief that God is pleased to hand out unto them by the means of others. They admire and bless God in and for his Grace towards them by whose Kindness and Compassion they are relieved. So is God glorified by these Fruits. And the second ground of their Praises was, the liberal Distribution unto themselves, as they found by Experience, and unto all men, as they were informed and believed. The Ministration its self testified their Faith and Obedience unto the Gospel, but the Nature of it, that it was liberal and bountiful, evidenced the since∣rity and fruitfulness of their Faith, or the exceeding Grace of God in them, v. 14. they saw hereby that there was not an ordinary or common work only of Grace on these Corinthians engaging them into a Common Profession, and the Duties of it, which yet was a matter of great thankfulness unto God; but that indeed the Grace of God exceedingly abounded in them, which produced these Fruits of it in so plen∣tiful a manner. And with respect hereunto also was Praise peculiarly rendred un∣to God. Hereunto also the Apostle adds a double way whereby God was glorified distinct from the direct Attribution of Praises unto him. And by their prayer for you, which long after you, for the exceeding Grace of God in you; That is, by both these ways they glorifie God, both in their prayers for a supply of Divine Grace and Bounty to them by whom they were relieved, and in their enflamed love towards them, and longing after them, which was occasioned only by their Relief; but the real Cause, Motive, and Object of it, was the exceeding Grace of God in them, which was evidenced thereby. And by both these Duties, God is greatly Glorified. Hence the Apostle concludes the whole with that  of triumphant Praises to God,
Thanks be to God for his unspeakable Gift. This, saith he, is a Gift that cannot be sufficiently declared amongst men, and therefore God is more to be admired in it. And the Apostle presseth the occasion of their joynt thankfulness in a word that may include both the Grace of God given unto the Corinthians enabling them to their Duty, and the Fruit of that Grace in the Bounty conferred on the poor Saints; both of them were the Gift of God, and in both of them was he glorified. And in this regard especially, are the Fruits of our Obedience unto the Gospel, meet for him by whom we are dressed; that is, have an especial tendency unto the Glory of God. Hence is that Caution of the Apostle, Chap. 13. 16. But to do good and communicate, forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Our Prayers and Praises also, as he declares in the Verse foregoing, are Sacrifices unto God, and accepted with him, ver. 15. Our whole Obedience is our reasonable Sacrifice, is a Sacrifice accep∣table unto God, Rom. 12. 1. yea but in these Fruits of Benignity, Bounty, Cha∣rity, doing good, and Communicating largely and liberally, God is in a peculiar man∣ner well pleased and satisfied, as smelling a savour of Rest through Christ in such Sacrifices. And I might here justly take occasion at large to press men unto an abundant fruitfulness in this especial kind of Fruit-bearing, but that the nature of our discourse will not admit it. (6) They are meet for God, because they are as the first-fruits unto him from the Creation. When God took and rescued the Land of Canaan, which he made his own in a peculiar manner, out of the hands of his Adversaries, and gave it unto his own people to possess and inherit, he required of them that on their first Entrance thereunto, they should come and present him with the first of all the Fruits of the Earth, as an acknowledgement of his right to the Land, and his Bounty unto them, Deut. 26. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. &c. The whole Creation did by sin as it were go out of the possession of God, not of his Right and Power but of his Love and Favour: Sathan became the god of this world, and the whole of it lay under the Power of Evil. By Jesus Christ he rescueth it again from its Slavery and Bondage unto Sathan. But this he will not do all at once, only he will have some first-fruits offered unto him as an acknowledgement of his Right, and as a pledge of his En∣tring on the possession of the whole. And God is greatly glorified in the present∣ing of these first-fruits, at the recovery of the Creation unto himself, which is a certain pledge of vindicating the whole from its present Bondage: And it is Be∣lievers that are these Fruits unto God, Jam. 1. 18. Of his own Will begat he us, with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of first-fruits of his Creatures. But we are not so, but in our fruitfulness. Thereby it is that there is a Revenue of Glory and Praise returned unto God from this lower part of the Creation, without which it bears nothing but Thorns and Briars in his sight. In these therefore and the like things consists the meetness of our Fruits of Obedience unto God, or his Glory. Again, Where ever there are any sincere Fruits of Faith and Obedience found in the Hearts and Lives of Professors, God graciously accepts and blesseth them. Nothing is so small, Obser. 3. but that if it be sincere he will accept; and nothing so great but he hath an over∣flowing Reward for it. Nothing shall be lost that is done for God, A Cup of cold water, the least refreshment given unto any for his sake, shall be had in remembrance. All we have and are, is antecedently due to him, so as that there can be no Merit in any thing we do. But we must take heed lest whilst we deny the Pride of Merit, we lose not the Comfort of Faith as to Acceptance of our Duties. It is a Fruit of the Mediation of Jesus Christ that we may serve God without fear in Righ∣teousness and Holiness all our days. But if we are always anxious and solicitous about what we do, whether it be accepted with God or no; how do we serve him without fear? This is the worst kind of fear we are obnoxious unto, most disho∣norable unto God, and discouraging unto our own Souls, 1 Joh. 4. 18. For how can we dishonour God more than by judging that when we do our utmost in since∣rity in the way of his Service, yet he is not well pleased with us, nor doth accept of our Obedience? Is not this to suppose him severe, angry, always displeased, ready to take advantage, one whom nothing will satisfie? Such thoughts are the marks of the wicked Servant in the Parable, Luke 19. 20, 21, 22. where then is that in∣finite
Goodness, Grace, Condescension, Love, Compassion, which are so Essen∣tial to his Nature, and which he hath declared himself so to abound in? And if it be so, what use is there of the Mediation and Intercession of Jesus Christ? what be∣nefit in the promises of the Covenant? And what is there remaining that can en∣courage us in and unto Duties of Obedience? Meerly to perform them because we cannot, we dare not do otherwise, a Servile Compliance with our Conviction, is neither acceptable unto God, nor any ways comfortable unto our own Souls. Who would willingly lead such a life in this world, to be always labouring and endea∣vouring, without the least satisfaction that what he does will either please them by whom he is set on work, or any way turn to his own account? Yet such a life do men lead who are not perswaded that God graciously accepts of what they sin∣cerely perform. A suspicion to the contrary ariseth up in opposition unto the fun∣damental principle of all Religion, He that cometh unto God must believe that he is, and that he is the Rewarder of all them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11. This is the first Principle and Foundation of all Religious Worship, which if it be not well and firmly laid in our hearts, all our supplication will be in vain. Now unless we do believe that he doth accept and bless our Duties, we cannot believe that he is such a Rewarder, or as he expressed it in the Covenant with Abraham, an exceeding great reward. But he hath descended to the lowest instances, of a little Goats hair to the Tabernacle, a Mite into the Treasury, a Cup of water to a Disci∣ple; to assure us that he despiseth not the meanest of our sincere Services. But this must be spoken unto again on ver. 9. and therefore I shall not here farther con∣firm it. Some perhaps will say, that their best Fruits are so corrupted, their best Duties so defiled, that they cannot see how they can find Acceptance with so holy a God? Every thing that proceeds from them is so weak and infirm that they fear they shall suffer loss in all. And this very Apprehension deprives them of all that Consolation in the Lord which they might take in a course of holy Obedience. I answer (1) This consideration of the defilements of sin that adhere to the best of our Works or Du∣ties, excludes all Merit whatever, and it is right it should do so. For indeed that cursed Notion of the Merit of good Works, hath been the most pernicious Engine for the ruine of mens Souls, that ever Sathan made use of; for on the one hand many have been so swollen and puffed up with it, as that they would not deign in any thing to be beholding to the Grace of God, but have thought Heaven and Glory as due to them for their Works, as Hell is to other men for their Sin, or the wages of an Hireling to him for his Labour, which cries to Heaven against the Injustice of them that detain it. Hence a total neglect of Christ hath ensued. Others con∣vinced of the Pride and Folly of this presumption, and notwithstanding the encourage∣ment unto fruitful Obedience which lies in Gods gracious Acceptation and Reward∣ing of our Duties, have been discouraged in their Attendance unto them. It is well therefore where this Notion is utterly discarded by the consideration of the sinful Imperfection of our best Duties: so it is done by the Church, Isa. 64. 6. Rom. 2. 21. (2) This consideration excludes all hopes or expectation of Acceptance with God upon the account of strict Justice. If we consider God only as a Judge pronoun∣cing Sentence concerning us and our Duties according to the Law, neither we nor any thing we do can either be accepted with him or approved by him. For as the Psalmist says concerning our Persons, If thou Lord mark what is done amiss, O Lord who can stand! and prays, Enter not into Judgement with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no Flesh living be justified. So it is with respect unto all our Works and Duties of Obedience, not any one of them can endure the Trial of God as judging by the Law, but would appear as a filthy thing. Whilst therefore persons are only under the power of their Convictions, and are not able by Faith to take another view of God and his dealings with them, but by the Law, it is impossible that they should have any comfortable Expectation of the Approbation of their Obe∣dience. Wherefore that we may be perswaded of the gracious Acceptation of all our Du∣ties, even the least and meanest that we do in sincerity, and with a single Eye to the Glory of God, and that our Labour in the Lord should not be lost, we are al∣ways to have two things in the Eye and View of our Faith: (1) The tenor of the Covenant wherein we walk with God; God hath abolished and taken away the
Covenant of Works by substituting a new one in the room thereof, and the reason why he did so, was because of a double insufficiency in the Law of that Covenant unto his great end of Glorifying himself in the Salvation of sinners. For (1) It could not expiate and take away sin, which must be done indispensably, or that End could not be obtained: this our Apostle asserts as one reason of it, Rom. 8. 3. and proves at large in this Epistle afterwards. (2) Because it neither did nor could ap∣prove of such an Obedience, as poor sanctified sinners were able to yield unto God; for it required Perfection, when the best which they can attain unto in this Life is but Sincerity. What then! do we make void the Law by Faith? doth not God re∣quire perfect Righteousness of us? the Righteousness which the Law originally prescribed? yes he doth do, and without it the Curse of the Law will come upon all men whatever. But this also being that which in our selves we can never attain unto, is provided for in the new Covenant, by the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto them that do believe. So the Apostle expresly states the matter, Rom. 10. 3, 4, 5, 6. On this supposition, God in this Covenant hath provided for the Acceptance of sincere though imperfect Obedience, which the Law had no respect un∣to. The sum is, That his Acceptance now shall be suited unto the operation of his Grace. He will Crown and reward all the actings of his own Grace in us; what∣ever Duty therefore is principles by Grace, and done in sincerity, is accepted with God according to the Tenour of this Covenant. This therefore we are always to eye and consider as the bottom of the Acceptance of our imperfect, weak, unworthy Services. (2) Unto the same End is the Mediation of Christ to be considered in an especial manner; without respect unto him, neither we nor any thing we do is ap∣proved of God. And a double regard is in this matter always to be had unto him and his Mediation; (1) That by one Sacrifice he takes away all that is evil or sinful in our Duties; whatever is of real defilement, disorder, self in them, whereby any guilt might be contracted or is so, he hath born it and taken it as unto its legal, all away. Whatever therefore of guilt doth unavoidably adhere unto or accompanieth our Duties, we may by Faith look upon it as so removed out of the way by the Sacrifice and Mediation of Christ, as that it shall be no hindrance or obstruction to the gracious Acceptation of them. (2) Whereas all that we do, when we have used our utmost endeavours by the Assistance of Grace, and setting aside the consi∣deration of what is evil and sinful from the principle of corrupted Nature remain∣ing in us, is yet so weak and imperfect, and will be so whilst we are but Dust and Ashes dwelling in Tabernacles of Clay, as that we cannot apprehend how the good∣ness which is in our Obedience should extend its self to God, reach unto the Throne of his Holiness, or be regarded by him, the Merit of our Lord Jesus Christ doth so make way for them, put such a value on them in the sight of God, as that they receive approbation and blessing from him; for in Jesus Christ we are compleat, and God makes both us and our Duties accepted in the beloved. The considera∣tion hereof added to the former, may firmly assure the Mind and Conscience of every true Believer concerning the gracious Acceptation of the least of their holy Duties, that are performed in sincerity. And this they have in such a way as (1) To exclude Merit and Boasting; (2) To keep them in an holy Admiration of Gods Grace and Condescension: (3) To make them continually thankeful for Christ and his Mediation. (4) To yield unto themselves Comfort in their Duties and Encouragement unto them.
VERSE 8. But that which beareth Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose End is to be burned. In the foregoing Verse the Apostle shewed how it would be and fall out with that part of the Judaical Church which embraced the Gospel, and brought forth the Fruits of Faith and Obedience. God would Accept of them, own them, pre∣serve and bless them; and this blessing of God consisted in four things: (1) In his gracious Acceptance of them in Christ and the Approbation of their Obedience, ver. 9. (2) In delivering them from that dreadful Curse and Judgement which not long after consumed the whole Remainder of that People. (3) In making use of multitudes of them to be the means of Communicating the Knowledge and Grace of the Gospel unto other Persons and Nations; a greater blessing and honour than which, they could not in this world be made partakers of. (4) In their Eternal Salvation. This being laid down, he proceeds in his Parable to declare the state and condition of the other sort of them, namely, of Unbelievers, Apostates from and Opposers of the Gospel: And this he doth in compliance with the Symbolical Action of our Saviour in cursing the barren Figg-tree, whereby the same thing was represented, Matth. 21. 19. for it was the Apostate, persecuting, unbelieving Church of the Jews, whose Estate, and what would become of them, which our Saviour in∣tended to expose in that Figg-tree. He had now almost finished his Ministry among them; and seeing they brought no Fruit thereon, he intimates that the Curse was coming on them, whose principal Effect would be perpetual barrenness. They would not before bear any Fruit, and they shall not hereafter, being hardened by the just Judgement of God unto their Everlasting Ruine. So was fulfilled what was long before foretold, Isa. 6. 9, 10. as our Apostle declares, Acts 28. 26, 27. In Answer hereunto, our Apostle in this Verse gives this account of their Barrenness, and De∣scription of their End through Gods Cursing and Destroying of them. And here∣in also the Estate and Condition of all Apostates, Unfruitful Professors, Hypocrites and Unbelievers, to whom the Gospel hath been dispens'd, is declared and expressed. And, as it was necessary unto his Design, the Apostle pursues his former Simi∣litude, making an Application of it unto this sort of men. And (1) He supposeth them to be Earth, as the other sort are: , that is, , That Earth, that part of the Earth. So it is, and no more, It is neither better nor worse, than that which proves fruitful and is blessed. All men to whom the Go∣spel is preached are every way by Nature in the same State and Condition: All the difference between them is made by the Gospel its self. None of them have any reason to boast, nor do they in any thing make themselves differ from others. (2) It is supposed that the Rain falls often on this Ground also. Those who live unprofita∣bly under the means of Grace, have oft-times the preaching of the Word as plen∣tifully, and as long continued unto them, as they that are most thriving and fruit∣ful in Obedience. And herein lies no small Evidence that these things will be called over again another day, to the Glory of Gods Grace and Righteousness. On these suppositions two things are considerable in what is ascribed unto this Earth: (1) What it brings forth: (2) How. First it bringeth forth, , Thorns and Briars: See the open∣ing of the words before. In general, I doubt not but all sorts of sins are hereby . intended, all unfruitful Works of Righteousness, Rom. 6. 21. Ephes. 5. 11. And the principal reason why they are here compared unto Thorns and Briars, is with respect unto the Curse that came on the Earth by Sin. Cursed be the Ground, Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth unto thee, Gen. 3. 17, 18. whereunto barrenness or unapt∣ness for better Fruits is added, Gen. 4. 12. from this Curse the Earth of its self and untilled, would bring forth nothing but Thorns and Briars, at least they would be absolutely prevalent in and over all the products of it; so the heart of man by nature is wholly over-run with evil sinful Imaginations, and his Life with vicious sinful Actions, Gen. 6. 5. Rom. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13. (2) Wherefore the bringing
forth of Thorns and Briars, is abounding in such actings and works as proceed from the principle of corrupted Nature under the Curse. In opposition hereunto, all good actions, all acts of Faith and Obedience, are called He rbs and Fruit, be∣cause they are the Fruits of the Spirit; and such Works are compared to, and called Thorns and Briars from a community of Properties with them. For (1) They are in their kind unprofitable, things of no use, but meet to be cast out, that room may be made for better. When a man hath a Field overgrown with Thorns and Briars, he finds he hath no benefit by them: Wherefore he resolves to digg them up or burn them. Of such and no other use, are the sins of men in the world. All the works of darkness are unfruitful, Ephes. 5. 11. The world is no way benefited by them, never was any man the better for his own or another mans sin. (2) Because, they are hurtful and noxious, choaking and hindering good Fruits, that otherwise would thrive in the Field. So are Thorns and Briars represented in the Scripture as grieving, piercing and hurtful, and things that are so called by their name, Ezck. 28. 24. Mic. 4. 4. Isa. 7. 25. Such are all the sins of men. All the confusion, dis∣orders, devastations that are in the world, are from them alone. In general there∣fore it is all sorts of sins, works of darkness, works of the flesh, that are intended by these Thorns and Briars. But yet I presume that the Apostle hath regard unto the sins which the obstinate Jews were then in an especial manner guilty of, and which would be the case of their sudden destruction. Now those as it appeareth from this whole Epistle and matter of Fact in the story, were Unbelief, Impenitency and Apo∣stasie. The Thorns and Briars which were the Fuel wherein was kindled the Fire of Gods indignation unto their Consumption, were their sins against the Gospel. Either they would not give their Assent unto its Truth, or would not amend their Lives according to its Doctrine, or would not abide with constancy in its profession. These are the especial sins, which cast those Hebrews, and will cast all that are like unto them, into the condition of Danger and Perdition here described. Secondly, The manner of bringing forth these Thorns and Briars is expressed by  . Chrysostome puts a great remark upon the difference of the words used by the Apostle; that which he applieth to the production of good Fruit, is , which denotes a natural conception and production of any thing in due order, time and season. But this , applied to the barren cursed Ground, denotes a casting of them out in abundance, not only without the use of means, but against it. The Heart of man needs not to be impregnated with any adventitious Seed, to make it thrust forth all sorts of sins, or to make it fruitful in Unbelief and Impenitency: the Womb of sin will on its own accord be continually teeming with these things. Matters being thus stated with this ground, the Apostle affirms three things con∣cerning it. First it is . That is said to be , whereof Trial hath been made,  whether by the Application of suitable means unto it, it will be made useful unto any certain end,  is to try, to make an Experiment what any thing is, and of what use; especially it is applied to the trial that is made of Gold and Silver by Fire. , Isocrat. We try Gold in the Fire; that is, whether it be true and pure. Fire is the great trier and discoverer of Metals, of what sort they are, 1 Cor. 3. 13, 14, 15. And hence the Lord Christ in the trial of his Church, is compared to a Refiner with Fire, Matth. 3. 2. so Faith is tried, 1 Pet. 1. 7. And it is the word which our Apostle useth when he enjoyns us to try and search our selves as unto our sincerity in Faith and Obedience, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Gal. 6. 4. as also to make a due enquiry into the true nature of spiritual things, Rom. 12. 2. Ephes. 5. 10. not contenting our selves with a bare notion of them, but endeavouring after an Experience of their power in our own Hearts.  is often used by our Apostle for an Experience upon trial, Rom. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 2. 9. Phil. 2. 22. as  by Peter, 1 Epist. 1. 7. Hence is , one that upon trial is approved, found sound, and therefore is accepted, 1 Cor. 11. 19. 2 Cor. 10. 15. 2 Tim. 2. 15. Jam. 1. 12. , Rom. 14. 18. Accepted with God, and approved with men. Hence  is one rejected, disproved upon trial, reprobate, 1 Cor. 9. 27. 2 Cor. 13. 5, 6. Tit. 1. 16. The whole is expressed, Jer. 6. 29, 30. The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire, the Founder melteth in vain, Reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them. All means were used to try to the utmost whether they were any
true sincere mettal in them. After all they were found , refuse Silver, meer dross, which was therefore rejected as of no use. This ground there∣fore is supposed to have had a trial made of it, and all proper means to have been used, for to make it fruitful; but whereas nothing succeeded, it is to be , rejected, disapproved, laid aside as to any further endeavours to make it successful; such a piece of Ground the Husband-man leaves caring for, he will lay out no more charge about it, nor take any more pains with it, for he finds in trial that it is incurable. Secondly, It is said to be, , nigh unto a Curse. The Husband-man doth not presently destroy such a piece of Ground, but neglecting of it, lets it lye, . further to discover its own barrenness and unprofitableness. But this he doth, so as to declare his resolution to lay it wast, and so to cast it out of the bounds of his possession; and he doth it three ways: (1) By gathering out of it all the good Plants and Herbs that yet remain in it, by transplanting them into a better Soil. (2) By casting down its Fences, and laying it wast, that all the Beasts of the Field shall lodge in it and prey upon it. (3) By with-holding all means of doing it good, by wa∣tering or manuring of it. And hereby it becomes like to the barren Wilderness as it lies under the Curse, which no man careth for; It is nigh to that condition wherein it shall not be known that it was ever own'd by him or did ever belong un∣to his possession. So is it unto Cursing. For as Blessing of any thing is an Addi∣tion of good, so Cursing implies the taking off all kindness and all effects thereof, and therewithall the devoting of it unto Destruction. Lastly, It is added, , whose End is unto burning, or to be burned, Fire makes a total and dreadful Destruction of all combustible things . whereunto it is applied. Thence such Desolations are said to be Firing or Burning by what means soever they are effected. Things are consumed as if they were burned up with Fire. There is a burning of Ground which is used to make it fruit∣ful, as the Poet expresseth it in his Georgicks, Saepe etiam steriles incendere profuit agros, At{que} levem stipulam crepitantibus urere flammis. But it is a burning of another kind that is here intended, and this is an act of positive Indignation. He will not only shew his dissatisfaction in such barren Ground, by a neglect of it, but his Vengeance in its Destruction. And it is thus expressed, to intimate both the temporal destruction of the obstinate Jews, and the External destruction of all Unbelievers, both by Fire of several kinds. Thus therefore the Apostle declares, that God the great Husbandman and Owner of the Vineyard, would deal with the impenitent and incredulous Hebrews. First, He tried them, and that for a long season, by the Preaching of the Gospel. The Rain fell oft upon them, and that for the space now of 36 years or thereabouts. God did as it were Essay by outward means to make them fruitful, to bring them to Faith, Repentance and Obedience; but after this long trial, it appeared that they multiplied, as it were, under his hand the Thorns and Briars of their Unbelief, and all sorts of provoking sins. Wherefore God rejects them, declares that his Soul had no pleasure in them, that he would be at no further cost about them. And twice did our Apostle mind his Country-men in other places, that God would speedily so deal with them, Acts 11. 40, 41, 46. chap. 28. 25, 26, 27, 28. as our Saviour had often threatened them, that the Kingdom of God should be taken from them, they should no longer enjoy the means of saving Knowledge or Repentance. God laid them aside as a Field no longer fit to be Till'd. And this he did about the writing of this Epistle; for immediately hereon he began utterly to forsake them who were obstinate in their Judaisme, and all those who Apostatized thereunto from Christia∣nity. And thus also in proportion he deals with all other unprofitable Hearers and Apostates. There is a time after which he casts them out of his Care, will feed them no more; provide no more that they be rained on or dressed; And if they do any more enjoy the Word, it is by accident, for the sake of some who are ap∣proved, but they shall receive no Advantage by it, seeing they are no longer Gods Husbandry.
Secondly, On this rejection of them, they were nigh unto Cursing; that is, they were so ordered and disposed of, as that the destroying Curse of Gods Might came upon them; God had now Anathematized them, or devoted them to Destruction; and hereupon he gave them up unto all those ways and means whereby it might be hastened and infallibly overtake them. For (1) He gathered all the good Plants from amongst them; he called out and separated from them, all true Believers, and planted them in the Christian Church; so he deals with all Apostate Churches before their utter Destruction, Rev. 18. 4. (2) He took away their Fences, casting them out of his Protection, insomuch that when they were destroyed, the General of the Roman Army acknowledged that God had infatuated them, that their impregnable Holds and Forts were of no use unto them. (3) He granted them no more use of means for their Conversion. Thenceforwards they fell into all manner of sins, confusions, disorders, tumults, which ocasioned their Ruine. After the same manner will God deal with any other people whom he rejects for their rejection of the Gospel. And the World hath no small reason to tremble at the Apprehension of such a con∣dition at this day. Thirdly, In the End, this whole barren Earth was burned up: In the first place, this respects the Destruction of Hierusalem which ensued not long after, when Temple and City, and People and Countrey were all devoured by Fire and Sword, Matth. 4. 1. But yet this, like the Destruction of Sodom, was but an Emblem of the future Judgement. Hypocrites, Unbelievers, Apostates are to have another End, than what they fall into in this World. An End they shall have, wherein their Eternal condition shall be immutably stated. And this End is that they must have, to the Fire, the Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, they shall be gathered together and burned with a Fire that shall never be quenched, Joh. 15. 3, 4. And this final Destru∣ction of all unprofitable Hearers, Unbelievers and Apostates, is that which is prin∣cipally intended in the words. And we must not let this wholsome Admonition pass without some Observations from it. Whilst the Gospel is preached unto men, they are under their great trial for Eternity. Obser. 1. The Application that is made unto them is for an Experiment how they will prove. If they acquit themselves in Faith and Obedience, they receive the Blessing of Eter∣nal Life from God. If they prove barren and unprofitable, they are rejected of God and cursed by him. Nor shall they ever have any other Trial, nor shall ever any other Experiment be made of them, Heb. 10. Their Season of the enjoyment of the Gospel is their day; When that is past the Night comes on them wherein they cannot work. When these Bellows are burnt, and the Lead is consumed, the Founder Founding in vain, men are rejected as Reprobate Silver, never to be tried any more. Men do but deceive themselves in their reserve of a Purgatory when they are gone out of this world. If they are cast under their Trial here, so they must abide to Eternity. And we may do well to consider these things distinctly because our concernment in them, is very great. To this purpose observe, 1. That we are all made for an Eternal State and Condition in blessedness or wo. Men may live like Beasts, and therefore wish that they might dye like them also; But we are all made with another design, and must all of us stand in our Eternal Lot at the end of the days, Dan. 12. 13. 2. That the unchangeable determination of our Eternal state depends on what we do in this Life. There is neither Wisdom, nor Knowledge, Duty, nor Obe∣dience in the Grave whither we are going. As the Tree falls, so it must lye; It is appointed for all men once to dye and after that is the Judgement. Nothing interposeth to alter our state and condition between Death and Judgement. The contrivance of Purgatory when we are gone hence, was an Invention of Sathan to delude the Souls of men with hopes of relief, when all means and ways of it were past and ir∣recoverable. 3. The Trial of our future state is made by the Preaching of the Gospel unto us; and our compliance with it, or rejection of it. This is that which the Text declares on the one hand and the other; the barren Ground is rejected on this Trial. 4. It was a Fruit of Infinite Grace, Condescension and Mercy to grant a new Trial unto Sinners, under the Curse we had all cast our selves into. There God
might have left us. So he dealt with the sinning Angels whom he spared not. And had he dealt so with all mankind, who could say unto him, what dost thou? And it is that which we must all answer for, namely, that when we were lost and fallen under the Sentence of the Holy and Righteous Law, God would propose any terms of Peace and Reconciliation unto us and give us a second Trial thereon. 5. That the especial way of this Trial doth most eminently set out this Grace and Mercy. A way it is full of infinite Wisdom, Goodness, Love, Mercy and Grace. Such as wherein all the Divine Perfections will be Eternally glorified, whether it be accepted or refused. 6. When the Gospel is preached unto any, God telleth sinners, that although they have destroyed themselves and are ready every moment to sink into Eternal Misery, yet he will out of infinite Grace and Compassion try them once more, and that by the holy terms of the Gospel. And in the preaching of the Word he doth it accordingly. And although the season of this Trial be determined with God, yet it is unto us uncertain on many Accounts: for (1) the continuance of our Lives, during which alone we are capable of enjoying it, is so; (2) We see that the Preaching of the Gospel is so also. The Lord Christ doth oft-times remove the Candle∣sticks whilst they continue alive in the world among whom it was once fixed: And (3) there is a time when a Period is put unto the Efficacy of the Word for the Con∣version of some, although the outward Dispensation be continued unto them, Isa. 6. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore the present season and present enjoyment of the Gospel are our Duty to consider and improve: for what is the work that therein God hath in hand towards us? Is it not to give us our Trial in the use of means as to what shall be our future condition? He hath therein undertaken us as his Vineyard, as his Husbandry, and causeth the Rain to fall upon us, and hath done so often and long; And who almost doth consider aright how great his concernment is herein? would men be so careless, negligent, formal, slothful, as they are for the most part, under the hearing of the Word, if they duely remember'd that it is their Trial for Eternity? and they know not how soon it may be over. If we lose this season, we are gone for ever. It is therefore our Wisdom to know whether our fruitfulness in Faith, Repentance and Obedience, do answer the Rain and Dressing we have had by the Dispensation of the Word. The Axe is laid at the Root of the Tree, if we bring not forth good Fruit, we shall e're long be hewed down and cast into the Fire. It is true, there is none of us do answer as we ought the Love and Care of God to∣wards us herein, nor can we so do; When we have done our utmost, we are but unprofitable Servants. But there is a wide difference between a defect in degrees of Obedience, and the neglect of the whole. Where the first is, we ought to walk humbly in the sense of it, and labour after more Perfection. And if this defect be great and notable, such as is occasioned by our Lusts indulged unto, or by sloth and negligence, as we can have no evidence of our being approved of God, so it is high time to recover our selves, by new diligence and holy endeavours, or we may be cast in our Trial. But where the latter is, where men bring no Fruit meet for Re∣pentance, what can they expect but to be finally and totally rejected of God. Whereas therefore we have been long most of us under this Trial, it is assuredly high time that we call our selves unto a strict account, with respect unto it. And if upon enquiry we find our selves at a loss which sort of Ground we do belong unto, because of our barrenness and leanness, unless we are hardened by the deceitfulness of sin, we will give our selves no rest until we have better Evidences of our Fruit∣bearing. We may do well to remember, that though the Earth on which the Rain falls, is here distributed by the Apostle into two sorts like Jeremiah's Figgs, very good, and the very bad, to one of which every one at last must be joyned, yet as to present Effects and Appearances, the Ground whereunto the Seed of the Gospel is cast, is distributed by our Saviour into four sorts, whereof one only brings forth Fruit meet for him by whom it is dressed, Matth. 13. There are several ways whereby we may miscarry under our Trial, one only whereby we may be accepted, namely, Fruitfulness of Heart and Life. Barrenness under the Dispensation of the Gospel is always accompanied with an in∣crease of sin. The Ground which brings not forth Herbs, meet for them by whom it Obser. 2. is dressed, thrusts forth Thorns and Briars. Let it be observed that spiritual barren∣ness
never goes alone. Abounding in sin will accompany it, and doth so. It may be it doth not so openly and visibly for a season, but all things will tend thereunto, and at last it will discover it self. Yea there are no sinners like them, nor sin like theirs, by whom the means of Grace are rejected, or not improved. The first Ge∣neration of great provoking sinners, were those of the old World before the Flood. Unto these Noah had been a Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 5. In his Ministry did the Spirit of Christ strive with them, until God affirmed it should do so no more, Gen. 6. 3. but they were disobedient and barren, 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20. And this issued in those provoking sins, which God could not bear withall but brought the Flood upon the world of ungodly. The next was these Hebrews, unto whom the Gospel had been preached; And they proved a Generation no less wicked than that before the Flood, insomuch as their own Historian affirms that he verily believed, that if the Romans had not come and destroyed them, God would have poured Fire and Brim∣stone on them from Heaven as he did upon Sodom. And the third Generation of the same kind are the Apostate Christian Churches, whose condition and state is described in the Revelation. This is the issue of Barrenness, under Gods Culture and Water∣ing, and it will be so; For, (1) When men have rejected the last means of their spiritual healing, and restraint of sin, what can be expected from them but an outrage in sinning? There are three ways whereby God puts a restraint upon sin. The first is by the light of a natural Conscience. This is born with men in the principle of it, and grows into exercise, in the improvement of Reason. And where the natural workings of it are not prevented and suffocated by the horrible example of Parents and Relations living in Cursing, Lying, and all manner of Prophaneness, it is very useful in Youth to re∣strain persons from sundry sins. It is so I say, until Corruptions getting strength, and Temptations abounding, Custom in sinning takes away the Edge of it, and weakens it in its Operation. Wherefore (2) when this Restraint is broken through, God sets up the Hedge of the Law before the minds of men to deter them from sin. And this also hath a great Efficacy with many unto this End, at least for a season. But neither will meer Conviction from the Law, always give Bounds unto the Lusts of men. Wherefore (3) the Gospel comes with a different design from them both. The utmost of their Aim and Work is but to restrain sin, but the Gospel comes to Convert the sinner; Their work is to set a damm before the Streams of sin, that of the Gospel is to dry up the Spring. But if this also as it is in this case be rejected and despised, what remains to set any Bounds unto the Lusts of men? They will find themselves at liberty to act their own inclinations to the utmost, as having cast off all regard to God in all the ways whereby he hath revealed himself. Hence you may find more honesty, and uprightness, a more conscientious abstinence from sin, wrongs, and injuries, more effects of Moral Virtue among Heathens and Ma∣humetans, than among professed Christians; or persons who being unprofitable un∣der the Gospel do thereby tacitely reject it. No Fields in the world are fuller of Thorns and Briars, than those of People, Nations, Churches, who profess them∣selves to be Christians and are not: Suppose two Fields equally barren, let one of them be tilled and dressed, and the other be let alone, left unto its own state and con∣dition. When the Field that hath been tilled shall be forsaken for its barrenness, trash of all sorts incomparably above that which was never tilled will rise up in it. This is that which at this day is such a scandal to Christianity, which hath broken up the Flood-gates of Atheism and let in a Deluge of Prophaneness on the world. No sinners like unto barren-Christians. Heathens would blush, and Infidels stand asto∣nished, at the things they practise in the Light of the Sun. There was sleeping in the Bed of Uncleanness and Drunkenness among the Heathens. But our Apostle who well enough knew their course, affirms of them, That they who sleep, sleep in the Night, and they who are drunken, are drunken in the Night, 1 Thes. 5. 7. They did their shameful things in darkness and in secret, Ephes. 5. 11, 12. But alas! among Christians who have directly and wilfully despised the healing power and virtue of the Gospel; these are works of the day, proclaimed as in Sodom, and the perpetration of them is the business of mens Lives. If you would see the greatest Representation of Hell upon the Earth, go into an Apostate Church, or to persons that have had the Word preached unto them, or have heard of it sufficiently for
their Conviction, but are not healed. The Face of all things in Christianity at this day is on this account dreadful and terrible, and bespeaks Desolation to lye at the door: the ground whereunto the waters of the Sanctuary do come, and it is not healed, is left unto Salt and Barrenness for ever. (2) It is a Righteous thing with God Judicially to give up such persons unto all manner of filthy sins and wicked∣ness, that it may be an Aggravation of their Condemnation at the last day. It is the way of God to do so when more inferiour manifestation of himself, his Word and Will are rejected, or not improved. So he dealt with the Gentiles for their abuse of the Light of Nature, with the Revelation made of him by the works of Crea∣tion and Providence, Rom. 1. 24, 26, 28. And shall not we think that he will, that he doth so deal with persons upon their unprofitableness under, and rejection of the highest and most glorious Revelation of himself, that ever he did make, or ever will in this world unto any of the Sons of men? It may be asked, how doth God thus Judicially give up persons despising the Gospel unto their own Hearts Lusts to do the things that are not convenient? I answer he doth it, (1) By leaving them wholly to themselves, taking off all effectual restraint from them, so spake our blessed Saviour of the Pharisees, Let them alone, saith he, they are blind leaders of the blind, Matth. 15. 14. Reprove them not, help them not, hinder them not, let them alone to take their own course; so saith God, of Israel now given up to sin and ruine, Ephraim is joyned to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4. 14. Ezek. 29. 13. And it is the same Judgement which he denounceth against unprofitable Hearers of the Gospel, Rev. 22. 11. He which is unjust let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy let him be filthy still; go on now in your sins and filthiness without restraint. Now when men are thus left unto themselves, as there is a time when God will so leave Gospel despi∣sers, that he will lay no more restraint upon them, but with-hold the influence of all consideration that should give them any effectual check or control; It were not to be conceived, what an outrage and excess of sin, the cursed corrupted nature of man will run out into, but that the world is filled with the fruits and tokens of it. And God doth Righteously thus withdraw himself more absolutely from Gospel despisers, than he doth from Pagans and Infidels, whom by various actings of his Providence he keeps within bounds of sinning subservient unto his holy Ends. (2) God pours out upon such persons a spirit of slumber, or gives them up to a pro∣found security, so as that they take notice of nothing in the Works or Word of God that should stir them up to amendment, or restrain them from sin. So he dealt with these unbelieving Jews, Rom. 11. 8. God hath given them a Spirit of slumber, Eyes that they should not see. Although it be so come to pass, that many there are, whom Gods Soul loatheth, and they abhor him also, as he speaks, 2 Cor. 11. 8. so that he will have no more to do with them, yet he doth and will continue his Word in the world, and the Works of his Providence in the Government thereof. Now as in the Word there are several warnings, and dreadful threatenings against sinners, so in the Works of God there are Judgements full of Evidences of Gods displeasure against sin, Rom. 1. 18. Both these in their own Nature are suited to awaken men, to bring them to a due consideration of themselves, and so to restrain them from sin. But as to this sort of persons, God sends a Spirit of slumber upon them, that nothing shall rouze them up, or awaken them from their sins. Though it Thunder over their Heads, and the Tempest of Judgement falls so near them, as if they were personally concerned, yet do they cry peace, peace. When the Word is preached to them, or they hear by any means the Curse of the Law, yet they bless themselves as those who are altogether unconcerned in it, God gives them up unto all ways and means whereby they may be fortified in their Security. Love of sin, Contempt and Scorn of them by whom the Word of God is declared, or the Judgements of God are dreaded, carnal confidence carrying towards Atheism, the Society of other presumptuous sinners, strengthening their hands in their Abo∣minations; a present supply for their Lusts, in the pleasant things of this world, I mean which are so to the Flesh, shall all of them contribute to their Security. (3) God absolutely and irrecoverably gives them up to extream obstinacy, to final hardness and impenitency, Isa. 6. 8, 9, 10. This is no place to treat of the nature of Divine Induration. It is enough to observe at present, that where provoking sin∣ners do fall under it, they are totally blinded and hardened in sin, unto their Eternal Ruine. Now when God doth thus deal with men who will not, and because they
will not be healed and reformed by the Preaching of the Gospel, can any thing else ensue but that they will give up themselves unto all wickedness and filthiness with delight and greediness? And this wrath seems to be come upon multitudes in the world unto the utmost. So the Apostle describes this condition in the Jews when they were under it, 1 Thes. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding us to speak unto the Gentiles that they might be saved, to fill up their sins al∣way, for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. And they are even blind them∣selves who see not this to be the condition of many in the world at this day. (3) There are especial sins that are peculiar to this sort of barren Persons, and so also Aggravations of sins that others contract not the Guilt of. Now this state and condition, at least the utmost and highest Danger of it, is so written on the Foreheads of most that are called Christians in the world, that there is no need of making any Application of it unto them. And although it be not for us to know times and seasons, or to set bounds and limits to the Patience of Christ, yet have we just reason to dread the speedy breaking forth of his severity in Judgement Spiritual or Tem∣poral, upon most Nations and Churches that are called by his Name. But the Duty it is of those who make profession of the Gospel, in a peculiar manner to enquire dili∣gentl, ywhether there be not growing in their own Hearts and Ways any such sins as are usually consequent unto Barrenness under the Word. If it prove so upon search, they may justly fear that God is beginning to revenge upon them the neglect of the Gospel, and unprofitableness under it. There are Degrees of this sin and its con∣sequents, as we shall shew afterwards, that the Evidences and Effects of Gods dis∣pleasure against it are progressive and gradual also. From some of these the sinner is recoverable by Grace, from some of them he is not, at least ordinarily, but is in∣evitably bound over to the Judgement of the great day. But the last Degree is such as men ought to tremble at, who have the least care for, or love unto their immortal Souls. For whatever issue of things God may have provided in the purpose of his Grace, the Danger unto us is inexpressible. And there neither is nor can be unto any, the least Evidence, Token, or Hope that God designs them any Relief, whilst themselves are careless and negligent in the use of means for their own deliverance. It may therefore be enquired by what sort of sins this con∣dition may be known in more strict Professors than the common sort of Christians in the world, and how their Barrenness under the Gospel may be discovered there∣by, as the Cause by its Effects and inseparable consequents. I shall therefore name some of those sins and ways with respect whereunto such Persons ought to be ex∣ceeding jealous over themselves. As (1) An Indulgence unto some secret, pleasant, or profitable Lust or Sin, with an Allowance of themselves therein. That this may be∣fall such persons, we have too open Evidence in the frequent Eruptions and Disco∣veries of such Evils in sundry of them. Some through a long continuance in a course of the practice of private sins, are either surprised into such Acts and Works of it as are made publick whether they will or no, being hardened in them do turn off to their avowed Practice. Some under Terrors of mind from God, fierce Reflections of Conscience, especially in great Afflictions and Probabilities of Death, do voluntarily acknowledge the secret Evils of their Hearts and Lives. And some by strange and unexpected Providences, God brings to Light, discovering the hidden works of Darkness wherein men have taken delight. Such things therefore there may be amongst them who make a more than ordinary Profession in the world. For there are or may be Hypocrites among them, Vessels in the House of God of Wood and Stone. And some who are sincere and upright may yet be long captivated un∣der the power of their Corruptions and Temptations. And for the sake of such it is principally that this warning is designed. Take heed lest there be in any of you a growing secret Lust or Sin wherein you indulge your selves, or which you approve. If there be so, it may be there is more in it than you are aware of; nor will your delivery from it be so easie as you may imagine. God seldom gives up men unto such a way, but it is an Effect of his displeasure against their Barren∣ness. He declares therein that he doth not approve of their Profession. Take heed lest it prove an Entrance into the dreadful Judgement ensuing. Whatever there∣fore it be, let it not seem small in your Eyes. There is more Evil in the least allowed sin of a Professor, I mean that is willingly continued in, than in the
loud and great provocations of open sinners. For besides other Aggravations, it includes a mocking of God. And this very Caution I now insist upon, is frequently pressed on all Professors by our Apostle in this very Epistle, chap. 3. 11. chap. 12. 15, 16. (2) Constant neglect of private secret Duties. This also may be justly feared lest it be an Effect of the same cause. Now by this Neglect I mean not that which is Universal. For it is sure, hard to meet with any one who hath so much Light and Conviction as to make Profession of Religion in any way, but that he will and doth pray and perform other secret Duties at one time or another. Even the worst of men will do so in Afflictions, Fears, Dangers, with Surprisals and the like. Nor do I intend interruptions of Duties upon unjustifiable occasions, which though a sin which men ought greatly to be humbled for, and which discovers a superfluity of Naughtiness yet remaining in them, yet is it not of so destructive a Nature as that which we treat about. I intend therefore such an Omission of Duties as is general; where men do seldom or never perform them but when they are excited and pressed by outward Accidents or Occasions. That this may befall Professors the Prophet declares, Isa. 43. 22, 23. And it argues much Hypocrisie in them. The principal Character of an Hypocrite being, that he will not pray always. Nor can there be any greater Evidence of a personal barrenness than this Neglect. A man may have a Mi∣nisterial fruitfulness and a Personal barrenness, so he may have a Family usefulness and a Personal thriftlesness. And hereof Negligence in private Duties is the greatest Evidence. Men also may know when those sins are consequences of their Barren∣ness, and to be reckoned among the Thorns and Briars intended in the Text. They may do it I say by the difficulty they will meet withall in their Recovery, if it be so. Have their failings and negligence been occasional, meerly from the Impression of present Temptations, a through watering of their Minds and Consciences from the Word, will enable them to cast off their snares and to recover themselves unto a due performance of their Duties. But if these things proceed from Gods Dereliction of them because of their barrenness, whatever they may think and resolve, their Reco∣very will not be so facile. God will make them sensible how foolish and evil a thing it is to forsake him under the means of fruitful Obedience. They may think like Sampson, to go forth and do as at other times. But they will quickly find their Locks cut, and their Spiritual strength so decayed, as that they have no power for what they thought would prove so easie unto them at any time. They will find their Wills and Affections so intangled and engaged, that without a fresh supply of Grace, scarce less than that administred in their first Conversion, they cannot be delivered. So is it with all Lusts, Sins, and Negligences that are consequences of a provoking bar∣renness under the Gospel. (3) A total want of some Graces both in their principle and exercise, is a great Evidence of such a Condition. Where there is any true sa∣ving Grace, there is the Root and Principle of all. Some Graces may be more tried and exercised than others, and so be made more evident and conspicuous; For the occasions of their Exercise may much more frequently occur. But yet where there is any true Grace, at least where it is kept unrusty, vigorous and active as it ought to be in all profiting hearers of the Word; there every Grace of the Spirit is so far kept alive as to be in some readiness for exercise when occasion and opportunity do occur. But if in any there are some Graces that are totally wanting, that no occa∣sion doth excite or draw forth to Exercise, they have just reason to fear that either those Graces which they seem to have are not genuine and saving, but meer com∣mon Effects of Illumination; or that if they are true they are under a dangerous declension on the Account of their unanswerableness unto the Dispensation of the Gospel. For instance, suppose a man to satisfie himself that he hath the Graces of Faith and Prayer, and the like, but yet cannot find that he hath any grain of true Zeal for the Glory of God, nor any readiness for Works of Charity with an Eye to Gods Glory, and Love to his Commands; he hath great reason to fear lest his other Graces are false and perishing; or at least that he is signally fallen under the sin of barrenness: for in common Grace, one single Grace may appear very evident and win great honour to the Profession of them in whom it is, whilst there is a total want of all or many others; but in saving Grace it is not so; For though different Graces may exceedingly differ in their Exercise, yet all of them are equal in their Root and Principle. By these and the like considerations may Professors try their own con∣cernment in this Commination.
Ordinarily God proceeds to the rejection and destruction of barren Professors by degrees; Obser. 1. although they are seldom sensible of it until they fall irrecoverably into ruine. This ground here is first disapproved or rejected, then it is nigh to Cursing, the Curse ensues; after which it is burned. And God doth thus proceed with them, (1) In compli∣ance with his own Patience, Goodness, and long-suffering, whereby they ought to be lead unto Repentance. This is the natural tendency of the goodness and patience of God towards sinners though it be often abused, Rom. 2. 4, 5. let men and their sin be what they will, God will not deal otherwise with them, than as becomes his own goodness and patience. And this is that Property of God, without a due Con∣ception whereof we can never understand aright his Righteousness in the Govern∣ment of the world. Ignorance of the Nature of it and how Essential it is unto the Divine Being, is the occasion of Security in sinning and Atheism unto ungodly men, Ecclesiast. 8. 11, 12, 13. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. And a great Temptation it is oft∣times unto them that are godly, Habb. 1. 12, 13. Jer. 12. 1, 2. Psal. 73. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22. Wherefore to direct our minds unto a due posture herein we may consider (1) That the Patience of God never came to a general issue with mankind but once since the Creation, and that was in the Flood, 1 Pet. 3. 20. And this one Example God will have to be a sufficient warning unto all ungodly sin∣ners, of the certainty and severity of his future Judgement, so that no men have just Reason to be secure in their sin, 2 Pet. 3. 5, 6, 7. and therefore he hath engaged himself by promise, that he will no more deal so with mankind, be their sins what they will, until the Consummation of all things shall come, Gen. 8. 21, 22. While the Earth remaineth there shall be no more such a Curse. But there is a limited time contained therein. The Earth it self shall at length cease, and then he will exe∣cute his Judgements fully on the world of Ungodly sinners. Blessed be God for that publick record of his Purpose and Patience, without which, his continuance of mankind in the world would be matter of Astonishment. (2) The Patience of God shall not come to an Issue with any Apostate Church or Nation until he himself de∣clares and determines that all due means have been used for their Recovery. And the Judgement hereof, he will not leave unto the best of men, he would not do so unto Elijab himself, 2 Chron. 36. 15, 16, 17. (3) It is a difficult, glorious and great Fruit or Effect of Faith, not to repine at, but to glorifie God in his Patience towards a wicked, provoking Generation of sinners. Even the Souls of the Saints in Heaven seem to express a little too much haste in this matter, Rev. 6. 9, 10, 11. The thing which they desired was suited unto the Holiness, Righteousness, and Faithfulness of God, and wherein he had designed to Glorifie himself in his ap∣pointed season, Rev. 19. 1, 2, 3. but the time of it seemed long unto them; where∣fore to Glorifie God herein is a Fruit of Faith, Rev. 13. 10. The Faith and Patience of the Saints is most eminent in waiting quietly until the time of the Destruction of the Enemies of the Church be fully come. And it is so (1) Because it is accompanied with self-denial, as unto all our interest in this world, and all the desires of Nature. (2) Because the Apprehension is most true and infallible that the Righ∣teousness, Holiness and Faithfulness of God, will be exceedingly glorified in the De∣struction of Apostate, provoking and ungodly sinners; and this will be in particular in the Ruine of Babylon and its whole interest in the world. And this may make our desires inordinate, if not regulated by Faith. It is therefore an eminent act of Faith to give Glory unto God in the exercise of his Patience towards Apostate, barren Professors, and that which alone can in these latter days of the world give Rest and Peace unto our own Souls. (2) God will do so to evince the Righteousness of his Judgements, both in the Hearts and Consciences of them who shall be finally destroyed, whose End is to be burned; as also of all others who shall wisely consider of his ways. God endureth all things from the world that he may be justified in his sayings and may overcome when he is judged, Rom. 3. 4. that is, not only that all he doth shall be Righteous and Holy, which is necessary from his own Essential Righteousness, whence he will not, whence he cannot do Evil; but his Works shall be so wrought, so accom∣plished, as that the Righteousness of them shall be eminent and pleadable by his peo∣ple against all sayings and reflections of ungodly men. Especially every thing shall be plain and visibly Righteous that he doth in this way towards barren unprofitable
Churches which he hath formerly owned and blessed. In his dealing with them, he will leave no colour of calling his Goodness and Faithfulness into question, but will as it were refer the Righteousness of his proceedings unto all, even unto themselves. So he doth as to his dealing with the Church of the Jews when it was grown utterly barren, Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. So did our Lord Jesus Christ in his Parable, com∣pel the wicked Jews to subscribe unto the Righteousness of God in that miserable de∣struction which was coming on themselves, Matth. 21. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40. And this God doth principally by his gradual procedure with them. His pre∣cedent warnings and first degrees of Judgements Spiritual or Temporal, shall bear witness unto the Righteousness of their total ruine. Men at present through their blindness, hardness of heart, love of sin, do not it may be take notice of Gods dealing with them, and are therefore apt to complain when they are surprised with the fatal Evil. But the day will come, when their Consciences shall be awakened unto a dreadful Remembrance of all the warnings God gave them, and how slowly he proceeded in his Judgements; when their Mouths shall be stopp'd, and their Faces filled with Confusion. (3) Gods dealings with barren Apostates being principally in spiritual Judge∣ments, the issue whereof is the total removal of the Gospel from them, he will not do it at once, because others may be yet mixed among them unto whom he will have the means of Grace continued. This Abraham laid down in temporal Judge∣ments as an unquestionable maxime of Divine Right, That God would not destroy the Righteous with the wicked, Gen. 18. 23, 25. which Rule yet by the way, is consined unto that kind of destruction which was to be a standing token, and pledge of the last final Judgement, and the Damnation of all ungodly men. For in other cases it will admit of some extraordinary exception, but this is the general way of Gods procedure in all Judgements Spiritual and Temporal. Now if when men openly manifest their barrenness, and daily bring forth Thorns and Briars, if God should immediately remove the Word, whilst there are amongst them a People also that are really fruitful unto his Glory; it cannot be, but that in an ordinary course of his Providence they must suffer with the rest, and that before God hath fulfilled the whole works of his Grace towards them. This was that wherewith he satisfied and quieted the mind of Elijah when in a transport of Zeal, he complains of the horrible Apostasie of the Church of Israel, making, as the Apostle speaks, intercession against them; and applieth it unto all other seasons of the Church, Rom. 11. 2, 3, 4, 5. And we are taught in that example, that when the Patience of God towards an highly provoking people, seems to in∣terfere with his threatening and the ordinary course of his Providence, to believe that there are yet among them many whose hearts are sincere for God, though for many reasons they are unknown to us. And this should stir us up unto continual prayers for the whole world. When the long-suffering of God is abused by the most, and turned into an increase of their security, yet he hath a blessed End in it, towards his own among them, 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 9. And this was the state of Gods present Dispensation towards those Hebrews. The most of them were obstinate Unbe∣lievers, and many of them barren Apostates. But yet God continued for a while to exercise Patience towards them, and to tender the Gospel unto them. And this he did because there was a Remnant amongst them according to the Election of Grace, which were to obtain whilst the rest were hardened, as our Apostle declares, Rom. 11. And this Patience of God, the hardened wretches despised and scoffed at. But yet still God went on in his way and method, because of those amongst them, whom through that patience and long-suffering he intended to bring to Repentance and the acknowledgement of the Truth. Further to clear up this whole matter, it may be enquired what are those Degrees in Spiritual Judgements whereby God doth ordinarily proceed against barren Pro∣fessors, which are here intimated in general. And (1) In such cases God doth usually restrain the Influence of mens Light upon their own Consciences and Affecti∣ons. Their Light and Knowledge which they have attained may in their Notions remain with them, but they are not at all affected with what they know, or guided by it as unto their practice. There is a time when Light and Knowledge not im∣proved, do lose all their efficacy. God suffers such an interposition to be made be∣tween it and their Consciences by the acting and pride of their Lusts, that it is of
no use unto them. Whereas formerly under their Convictions, every thing they knew of the Mind of God or the Gospel pressed on them to endeavour after some conformity unto it, now it hath no power upon them, but only flotes in their Fancies and Memories. And this we see accomplished every day. Men under a barren Apostatizing state, do yet retain some of their Light and Notions of Truth, which they are sensible of no power from, nor have any use of, unless it be to en∣able them to be the greater scoffers and deriders of others. Now although this comes to pass through their own sin and lusts as the immediate cause of it, yet it is a Spi∣ritual Judgement of God also upon them for their sins. For he with-holdeth all the working of his Spirit in and by that Light which alone renders it effectual. His Spirit shall not strive any more therein, and then it is easie for them to rebel against the Light they have, as he speaks Job 24. 13. And let all men hence take heed, when they begin to find, that their Light and Convictions from the Word have not the same Power with them and Efficacy upon them as formerly they have had. For it is greatly to be feared lest it be a beginning of Gods displeasure upon them: See Hos. 9. 12. (2) God deprives them of all the Gifts which formerly they received. Gifts are an Ability for the due Exercise of Gospel Light and Knowledge in the Duties of a publick concern. These they may be made partakers of, who yet prove barren and Apostates. But God will not suffer them to be long retained under a course of Back∣siding. As men neglect their Exercise, so God deprives them of them, and makes that very neglect a means of Executing this Judgement on them. The Talent that was but laid up in a Napkin was taken away. And this we see exemplified both in whole Churches and in particular Persons. They lose, or are deprived of the Gifts which they had, or were among them, and are commonly filled with En∣mity unto and scorn of them by whom they are reclaimed. And in these two things consists the first Act of Gods Judgement in the Rejection of the barren Ground. Here∣by he evidenceth that it is , and such as he will regard no more. The next is, that they make Approaches towards the Curse, and this is done two ways: (1) God having evidenced his Rejection of them, he gives them up unto the Temptation of the world, and the Society of ungodly men, whereunto they are engaged by their pleasures or profit. Men gather them, saith our Saviour, Joh. 15. 6. Their Lusts being let loose from under the Power of their Light and Convictions, especially their Love unto the world, they cast themselves into the Society of pro∣phane and wicked men. Among them they wax worse and worse every day, and learn in an especial manner to hate, despise, and blaspheme the good ways of God, which before they had known, owned and professed. And God will so order things in his Providence, as that Temptations suited unto their most prevalent Lusts shall on all occasions be presented unto them, whereby they shall be further ensnared. (2) God casts them out of the Hearts and Prayers of his People. This of all other things they least value, yea they most despise. But it is one of the greatest Effects of Gods Severity towards them. So he commanded his Prophets not to pray for the People when his heart would not to be towards them, Jer. 7. 16. chap. 11. 14. chap. 14. 11. And in like cases, though not by express Command yet by his secret Providence he takes off the Hearts of his People from them whom he hath designed to ruine for their sins. And we may observe, that our Apostle himself who a long time laboured with unspeakable Zeal and most fervent supplications to God for the Incredulous Hebrews, as he expresseth himself, Rom. 9. 2, 3. chap. 10. 11. at length speaks of them as those whom he no more regarded, but looked on as Enemies of Christ only, 1 Thes. 2. 14, 15, 16. And this sets them forward in their way to∣wards the fatal Curse. (3) The Curse it self ensues, which consists in three things; For (1) God takes off their Natural restraints from sin. The rebukes of a Natural Conscience, fear, shame, and the like Afflictive Affections, shall have no more power on them. So he dealt with them that sinned against the Light of Nae, Rom. 1. 26, 27. and they became like those described Ephes. 4. 18, 19. No men are so visibly under Gods Curse as those who having broken through the Bonds of Nature, Modesty, Fear, and Shame, do give up themselves unto open sinning in the face of the Sun. (2) God Judicially bardens them; which contains the Life and Power of the Curse here intended; for hereby are men secured unto their final de∣struction and burning. (3) Oft-times God signifies this Curse in the world, by
wholly casting out such persons from any Interest in the Dispensation of the Word. He doth either utterly take away the Preaching of the Gospel from them, or give them up unto the conduct of those who under a pretence thereof, shall cause them to err with Lies and Delusions, which further seals them up unto their future ruine, 2 Thes. 2. 11, 12. And these are some of the ways whereby God dealeth with bar∣ren Ground, with fruitless and provoking Professors, even whilst they are in this world. It is true these Judgements being Spiritual, and they being now become wholly Carnal, they are for the most part little sensible of them. God indeed doth some∣times cause the Dread and Terror of his Wrath so to fall upon the Consciences of some of them, as that in this world they are made a spectacle of Divine Vengeance. But for the most part being filled with their Lusts and Sins, and Pleasures, they carry it out bravingly to the End. Howbeit few of them escape such reflections on them∣selves as makes them sometimes to shrink and groan. But suppose they should be able to carry it out stoutly in this world, so that themselves should neither much feel, nor others much observe the Curse of God upon them here, yet the day is hasten∣ing wherein actual Burning and that for ever, will be their Portion. VERSES 9, 10, 11, 12. Expositors generally agree in giving these Verses as an Instance of the great Wis∣dom and Prudence used by the Apostle in his dealing with these Hebrews. Chry∣sostome in especial insists upon it, making observations unto that purpose on all the considerable passages on the Context. What is really of that nature will occur un∣to us, and shall be observed in our Progress. His Design in general is twofold. First, To mollifie the Severity of the preceding Commination and Prediction contained therein, that it might not have an Effect on their minds beyond his Intention. He knew that all Circumstances considered, it was necessary for him to make use of it. But withall he was careful that none of them who were sincere should be ter∣rified or discouraged. For if men are disanimated in the way wherein they are en∣gaged by those on whose guidance they depend, and unto whose Judgement they are to submit, it makes them despond and give over thoughts of a chearful pro∣gress. Wherefore in all cases our Apostle was exceeding careful, not in any thing to make heavy or sorrowful the hearts of his Disciples, unless it were in case of ex∣tream Necessity. Hence is his Apologie or Excuse as it were, to the Corinthians for having put them to sorrow by some severe reproofs in his former Letter to them, 2 Cor. 2. 1, 2. But I determined this with my self, that I would not come again unto you in heaviness. For if I make you sorry, who is he then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made sorry by me. He lets them know, that whatever sorrow he had put them to, it was so unto himself, no less than unto them, seeing they were the chiefest causes of his Joy and Gladness. And thus dealeth he in this place with the Hebrews. Lest they should be amazed with the terror of the preceding Com∣mination, and the Prediction therein contained, of the inevitable and dreadful ruine of slothful Apostates and Hypocrites, he lets them know that he did no way therein determine or pass a Judgement on them, their state and condition. But having far other thoughts and hopes concerning them, and the End of their Pro∣fession, he yet judged it necessary to excite them unto that Diligence which some among them had neglected to use, by declaring the miserable End of those who al∣ways abide unfruitful under, or do Apostatize from the profession of the Gospel. Herein doth he steer a direct and equal course between the Extreams in Admonition. For he neither useth so much lenity as to enervate his Reproof and Warning; nor so much severity as to discourage or provoke those who are warned by him. In a word, he layeth weight upon things and spareth persons, the contrary whereunto is the bane of all Spiritual Admonition. Secondly, He maketh use of this Discourse for a Tran∣sition unto the second part of his Design. And this was to propose unto them who were true Believers, such encouragements and grounds of Consolation, as might con∣firm and establish them in their Faith and Obedience, which are the subjects of the remaining part of this Chapter. Wherefore as to make way for the severe Threat∣nings which he hath used, it was necessary for him to describe the persons unto whom
they did in an especial manner belong, so it was no less requisite that he should de∣scribe those also unto whom the ensuing Promises and Consolations do pertain, which he doth in these Verses. VERSE 9. . , Persuasi sumus, confidimus; Bez. persuasimus nobis, we are perswaded. , Syr.  My Brethren, Vul. Dilectissimi. Rhem. We confidently trust of you my best beloved. , Meliora, Syr.  ea quae sunt bona, pulchra, The things that are good or comely; , Syr.  and such as draw near to Life, that is, Eternal. Vul. lat. Et viciniora Saluti: Rhem. and nearer to Salvation: others generally, Et cum salute conjuncta: Ours, and such as accompany Salvation; very properly. VERSE 9. But we are perswaded of you, Beloved, better things, and such as accompany Salva∣tion, although we thus speak. The especial design of the Apostle in this and the following Verses, is to de∣clare his good-will towards the Hebrews, his Judgement of their state and condition, the Reasons and Grounds of that Judgement, with the proper use and End of the Commination before laid down, that neither that might be neglected, nor them∣selves discouraged. This Verse contains, (1) An Expression of his Love and good∣will towards them. (2) His Judgement of them. (3) The Reasons of his pre∣sent declaration of both these, with respect unto what he had spoken before unto them, namely, that although he had spoke it unto them, he did not speak it of them. 1. His Love and good-will he testifies in his Compellation, , Beloved. It is an Expression of most entire Affection, and is never used in the Gospel but to express the Love of God the Father unto his Son Jesus Christ, Matth. 3. 17. chap. . 12. 18. chap. 17. 5. Mark 1. 11. chap. 9. 7. chap. 12. 16. Luke 3. 22. chap. 9. 35. chap. 20. 13. By the Apostles in their Epistles it is frequently applied unto Believers, especially by Paul, in all those written by him: we might therefore pass it over, as that word which it was usual with him to express his sincere Affections by towards all Saints. But there seems to be a twofold reason of its especial Introduction in this place, both of them respected in the Wisdom of our Apostle. (1) Perhaps, these Hebrews were ready enough to entertain Jealousies concerning him, that he had not that Affection for them which he had for others. For he had now spent a long time with and among the Gentiles for their Conversion and Edification. Among them he had planted very many Churches, and that in one Point contrary to the Judgement of most of these Hebrews, namely, in a Liberty from the Law and the Ceremonies of Moses. In this long converse and work, they might suspect that he had lost his natural Love to his Country-men, as is usual in such cases, and as he was much accused to have done. To root this evil surmise out of their minds, as he useth frequently other affectionate Compellations in this Epistle, so he here calls them his Beloved, than which he had used no Expression of greater En∣dearment towards any of his Gentile Converts. And notwithstanding all the Pro∣vocations and Injuries he had received from them, he gave on all occasions the highest Demonstration of the most intense Affection towards them; never opposing them nor reflecting on them with any severity, but only then and wherein they opposed the Gospel, and the Liberty thereof. This Affection was such for them as his Country-men and Kinsmen in the Flesh, as that he could willingly have died that they might be saved, Rom. 9. 2, 3. And for this he prayed continually, chap. 10. 1. And the Addition of Love that was made in him upon their Conversion cannot be expressed. (2) He hath respect unto his preceding severe Expressions, as is plain from the close of this Verse, though we thus speak. As if he had said, Notwithstan∣ding
this severe Admonition, which I have upon the consideration of all Circumstances been forced to use, yet my Heart stands no otherwise affected towards you, but as towards my Country-men, Brethren, and Saints of God. And thus, It is the Duty of the Dispensers of the Gospel to satisfie their Hearers, in and of their Love in Jesus Christ to their Souls and Persons. Obser. 1. 2. The Apostle expresseth his Judgement concerning these Hebrews, We are per∣swaded better things of you, and such as accompany Salvation; wherein we have . (1) The Act of his mind in this matter, , we are perswaded, Chrysostome insists much on the force of this word. The Apostle, as he observes, doth not say we think or we hope, but he was fully perswaded. He lets them know that he was fully satisfied in this matter. And he useth not this word any where in his Epistles, (as he useth it often) but he intends a full and prevalent perswasion. Now this a man may have in spiritual things on three grounds. (1) By especial Revelation; so he was certain of the truth of the Gospel that was revealed unto him which he discourseth of, Gal. 1. 7, 8. (2) By the Evidence of Faith when any thing is be∣lieved on grounds infallible, namely, the Revelation of the mind of God in the Scripture, or the Promises of the Gospel. So he useth this word, Rom. 8. 34. , for I am perswaded that neither Death nor Life, &c. This he be∣lieved, and had an infallible certainty thereof, because God hath so promised. So also, 2 Tim. 1. 12. , I know whom I have believed, and am perswaded that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him. He useth the same Expression in matter of Faith, Rom. 14. 14. (3) There is a certain perswasion of mind, that is founded on moral Arguments, such as may bring a man to a full satisfaction in his mind, but yet so, as it is possible he may be deceived. Of this Nature is that per∣swasion, that Trust or Confidence which we have of the good condition of other men. So our Apostle speaks of Timothy and his Faith, 2 Tim. 1. 5. The Faith that dwelt in thy Mother Eunice, , and I am perswaded in thee also. He was not perswaded of any sincere Faith in Timothy by especial Revelation, nor was it the object of his Faith from any express word of Scripture, but he was satisfied in it upon such unquestionable Grounds and Motives as left no room for doubt about it. Some urge to the same purpose, Phil. 1. 6. , being confident of this very thing, perswaded of it, that he who hath begun a good work in you will perform it to the day of Christ. But this perswasion being built on a sup∣position that a good work was begun in them, was an act of Faith Infallible, built on the Promises of God, and the unchangeableness of his Covenant. His perswasion here concerning the Hebrews was of this latter kind, even that which he had sa∣tisfactory reasons and grounds for, which prevailed against all contrary Objections. In like manner he speaks of the Romans, chap. 5. v. 14. , And I my self am perswaded of you my Brethren, that ye are full of Goodness. The Grounds of this perswasion with re∣spect unto the Hebrews, he expresseth in the next Verse, where we shall consider them. It is our Duty to come unto the best satisfaction we may in the Spiritual Condition of Obser. 2. them with whom we are to have Spiritual Communion. There is not any thing of our mutual Duties, that the Gospel more presseth, or more supposeth. And it is necessary both unto Ministers and private Christians. For the former, they are con∣cerned in the Advice of the Wise man, Prov. 27. 23. Be thou diligent to know the state of thy Flock. They are not only to provide good pasture, and feeding for them, but they must know their State and Condition, that what they provide for them may be suitable and seasonable. And unto this End there were at first some in the Church, who had the immediate inspection of the state and walking of the members of it, and were thereby enabled, as Moses said to his Father in Law, Numb. 10. 31. to be instead of Eyes unto the Teachers to look into the condition of all sorts of per∣sons. Nor can they without it discharge any one Duty of their Office in a due manner. For Ministers to walk towards their people at peradventure, and to fight uncertainly as men beating the Air, without an Acquaintance with their state, and
especial consideration of their condition, and what therein is suited unto their Edification, as is the manner of many, will leave them at a great uncertainty how to give up their account. See Heb. 13. 14. Unless a man have some good satis∣faction, concerning the Spiritual condition of those that are committed unto his charge, he can never approve himself among them, A workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth, to give unto all their proportion. And the work of the Ministry is not by any means more evacuated and rendered ineffectual, than when men have not a certain design to deal with their Hearers ac∣cording unto what they are perswaded that their Spiritual state doth require. How shall they Instruct, How shall they warn, How shall they comfort any, but on a sup∣position of an Acquaintance with the state and condition wherein they are? A ge∣neral preaching at random without a special scope directed by the perswasion menti∣oned, turns the whole work for the most part both in Preachers and Hearers into an useless formality. In brief, this perswasion principally regulates the whole work of the Ministry. He that is a Physician unto the bodies of men, must acquaint him∣self with the especial state and condition of his Patients, as also of their distempers, wherein his Skill and Judgement is especially to be exercised. Without that let him be furnished with the greatest store of good Medicines, if he gives them out pro∣miscuously unto all comers, all that he doth will be of little use. It may be his Medicines being safe, they will do no harm; And it is as probable they will do as little good. Nor will it be otherwise with the Physicians of Souls in the like case. Four things are required to make the Dispensation of the Word proper and pro∣fitable. A good Spring, a safe Rule, a distinct Design, and enlivening Affections. The first is the Dispensers own Light and Experience. He is to see in his work with his own Eyes, and not those of other men. And when he is by own Light as a Scribe unto the Kingdom of God, it is out of the good treasure of his own Heart, that he is to bring forth good things, new, and old. (2) His safe Rule is the infallible word of Truth. This must be the Touchstone of his Light and Experience. And it is suited unto his whole work, unto all the Duties of it, 2 Tim. 3. 16, 17. In nothing but what is regulated hereby are any to be attended unto, Isa. 8. 20. (3) His distinct Design lies in the due consideration of the Spiritual state and condi∣tion of them unto whom the Word is to be dispensed. And herein consists the greatest part of the Ministerial skill. This is that which secretly differenceth the constant Ministerial Dispensation of the Word, from the occasional exercise of the gifts of any. And this doth God make use of, to convey unexpected relief or repose unto the Souls of men wherewith they are surprised and affected. If we have not this scope continually before us, we may run apace, but never know whether we are in or out of the way. (4) The enlivening Affections that ought to accompany the Dispensation of the Word, are Zeal for the Glory of God, and Compassion for the Souls of men. But these things must not here be insisted on. And for private Christians among themselves, their mutual Duties are referred unto Love, and the Fruits of it. That special Love which ought to be among the Disciples of Christ, as such, takes up in the Description, Injunctions and Directions of it, a great part of the Writings of the New Testament. Nothing doth the Lord Christ himself, nor his Apostles so urge upon them as this of mutual love. Upon the right discharge of this Duty he frequently declares that his honour in them and by them in this world doth principally depend. And whatever we have besides this, our Apostle declares that it is nothing, or of no use in the Church of God, 1 Cor. 13. And the greatest Evidence of the Degeneracy of Christianity in the world, consists in the open loss of this Love amongst those who make profession thereof. Now this Love is founded in our perswasion concerning the Spiritual state and condition of each other. I mean, that especial mutual Love is so, which ought to be among the Disciples of Christ as such. For although we are on other grounds, obliged unto a Love to∣wards all mankind, whether Friends or Enemies, yet that peculiar Love which the Gospel so chargeth on the Disciples of Christ is an effect of, and built upon their common and mutual Interest in Christ. They are to love one another as Members of the same mystical Body, and united unto the same Spiritual Head. Whatever Love there may be on other accounts among any of them which doth not arise from this Spring and Fountain, it is not that Gospel Love which ought to be
among Believers. And how can this be in us, unless we have a good perswasion con∣cerning our mutual Interest and In-being in Christ? God forbid that any should press that peculiar intense Love, that ought to be among the Members of the Body of Christ, to take off, or derogate from that general Love and usefulness which not only the Law of our Creation, but the Gospel also requireth of us in an especial manner towards all men. Yea he who professeth Love unto the Saints, that pecu∣liar Love which is required towards them, and doth not exercise Love in general towards all men, much more if he make the pretence of Brotherly Love, the ground of alienating his Affection from the residue of mankind, can have no assurance that the Love he so professeth is sincere, incorrupt, genuine, and without dissimula∣tion. But this special Love is the special Duty of us all, if we believe the Gospel, and without which foundation well laid, we can rightly discharge no other mu∣tual Duty whatever. Now this, as is evident, we cannot have, unless we have a perswasion of the only ground of this Love, which is our mutual Relation unto Jesus Christ. And to act this Love aright as to its object as grounded on this per∣swasion, take heed of evil surmises, these are the bane of Evangelical Love, though some seem to make them their Duties. Those concerning whom we hear that they make profession of Faith and Obedience towards our Lord Jesus Christ, and know not that they any way contradict their Profession by wicked works, we are obliged to bear the same Love towards, as if we knew them sincere. For Charity hopeth all things, namely, that are good, if we have no certain evidence to the contrary. And thus in general we may have this perswasion concerning all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours. We have no obligation in∣deed hereunto, towards such as visibly and evidently walk unworthy of that high Calling whereby we are called. For concerning such our Apostle assures us, that whatever they profess, they are Enemies of the Cross of Christ, whose end is destru∣ction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3. 18, 19. It is a dishonour, a reproach to Christ and the Gospel that we should perswade our selves that they are his Disciples, and Members of his mystical Body, whom we see to walk after the manner of the world, and to have their Conversation in the Lusts of the Flesh. These we are still to Love as those who once had, (and are yet capable of the renovation of) the Image of God upon them. But they proclaim themselves destitute of all those qualifications which are the formal object and reason of this peculiar Love. (2) The Lord Christ hath by his Institution secured us as to a certain rule of this perswasion and love by the disposal of his Disciples into Church Societies upon such grounds as are a sufficient warranty for it. Thus our Apostle in all his Epistles un∣to the Churches, Salutes, Esteems, Judgeth them all to be Saints and called in Christ Jesus. For although some of them might not be so really, and in the sight of God, yet his perswasion, and his Love being directed according to the Rule, were acceptable unto Christ. And whereas our Lord Jesus hath commanded that all his Disciples should joyn themselves unto, and walk in such Societies, were there not great confusion brought into the world in and about Gospel institutions, we should not be at a loss about this perswasion and love; for we should be obliged unto them towards all that are called Christians, until they had openly declared themselves to be Enemies of the Cross of Christ. But we are yet suffering under the confusion of a fatal Apostasie, which God in his good time will deliver his Churches from. (3) As we cannot direct our Love aright without this perswasion, no more can we exercise any of the Duties or Fruits of it in a due manner. The Fruits of mu∣tual love among Christians are either in things Spiritual which concern Edification, or in things Temporal which concern outward Relief. Of the first sort, are Admo∣nition, Exhortation, Instructions, and Consolations mutually administred. Now how can any man order or make use of these in a right manner unless he have some directive perswasion of the Spiritual condition of them unto whom he doth admini∣ster? It is true he may sometimes be therein mistaken, yet it is far better so to be, than never to consider what is meet and requisite with respect thereunto. And as for the Fruits of the same Love in outward things, although they ought to be brought forth in the temporal supplies of all according to our Opportunities and Abilities, yet without this perswasion they will want the quickening form and soul of them, which is a design to place our love in them ultimately on Jesus Christ.
We may as occasions require publickly testifie that good perswasion which we have con∣cerning Obser. 3. the Spiritual condition of others, and that unto themselves. Our Apostle here acquaints these Hebrews with his good perswasion concerning them; and likewise in all his Epistles he still declares his hopes and confidence of their blessed Interest in Christ, unto whom he wrote; and spares not to give them all the Titles which really belong only to Elect Believers. Now as this is not to be done lightly, not in a way of flattering Compliance, not but upon just and firm grounds from Scripture, least of all to give Countenance unto any to continue in an evil way or practice; yet in three cases it is warrantable and requisite, (1) When it is done for their due encou∣ragement. Gracious persons through their Temptations, Fears, and sense of sin, yea whole Churches upon occasion of Trials, Distresses, and Back-slidings among them, may so be cast down and despond, as to be discouraged in their Duties and Progress. In this case it is not only lawful but expedient, yea necessary that we should testifie unto them that good perswasion which we have concerning their state and condition with the grounds thereof, as the Apostle doth in this place. So in like case testified our Saviour himself concerning, and unto the Church of Smyrna; I know thy Poverty, what thou complainest of, and art ready to sink under, but thou art rich, Rev. 2. (2) It may and ought to be done for their Just Vindication. The Disciples and Churches of Christ may be falsly accused and charged, and yet it may be with so much probability or at least appearance of evil, as that they may greatly suffer in their Just Reputation, whereby the holy Name of the Lord Christ is also dishonoured. He who falsly accuseth all the Brethren before God continually, wants not Instruments to fix Calumnies upon them among men here below. In such a case it is our indispensible Duty to testifie our good perswasion concerning them, be they Persons or Churches who are so traduced. And if we do it not, we have a Copartnership in the guilt of their Enemies false Accusations. (3) When we have any necessary Duty to discharge towards them, which this testification of our perswa∣sion concerning them may render more effectual, or prevent it having another end, than what we aim at, or remove any prejudice out of its way. This was the very case wherein the Apostle testifieth his perswasion concerning them unto these Hebrews. His design was to admonish them of some faults, sins and miscarriages, that had already been among them; and moreover to charge them with a Care about Apostafie from the Gospel, which the way wherein some of them were, seemed to have a tendency unto. But lest this his dealing with them which had an appearance of much severity, should have begotten prejudices in their minds against his Person and Ministry on the one hand, or too much dejected and cast them down on the other, he secures his procedure on both sides with this testification of his confidence concerning their Spiritual condition, thereby at once assuring them of his Love, and evidencing the Necessity of his Ad∣monition. And herein hath he in the Example of the Wisdom bestowed on him for this End, given us an inviolable Rule of our proceeding in like cases. The best perswasion we can arrive unto concerning the Spiritual condition of any, leaves yet room, yea makes way for, Gospel Threatenings, Warnings, Exhortations, and En∣couragements. Obser. 4. There is nothing more common then to charge the ways of some, than that by perswading men of their Regeneration and Saintship, they render them secure, and the threatenings of the Gospel in an especial manner unuseful unto them. Neither is there any question but that this, as all other ways of God, and his Grace, may be abused. But those who manage the Charge in general may do well to fix it in the first place on the Apostles. For there is not any of them, but testifie the same perswasion concerning all them to whom they wrote, and there is no doubt but that their way of Preaching and Writing was the same. But yet this hindered them not from the use of all sorts of Evangelical Comminations, Exhortations and Incouragements, from whence we are to take our Example and Warranty for the same practice. This therefore lies evident in their procedure which is our In∣struction and Rule, namely, that looking on men as Believers, or being perswaded of their good Spiritual condition, we yet ought to apply unto them all the means ap∣pointed by Christ for the begetting, increase and continuance of Grace in them. And the reasons hereof are evident, for (1) Although that perswasion which men may have of their Spiritual condition, or which others may have or declare con∣cerning them, may strengthen their peace, yet it neither doth nor ought to incline them unto security. Thou standest by Faith, saith the Apostle, be not high minded
but fear, Rom. 11. 20. Take the peace and comfort of thy Faith, but be neither proud nor secure. Where there is any such effect hereof towards a Laodicean security, there is a just ground to suspect that the perswasion it self is a pernicious mistake. And it is the Duty of all Professors to give heed diligently lest any such root of bitterness spring up amongst them and desile them. If once a perswasion of this good condition be∣gins to influence towards Security, and a neglect of Duty, then ought they to be in the highest Jealousie concerning their condition its self. (2) Whatever mens state and condition be under the Gospel, they are still obliged unto the means appointed for their Edification and preservation. Amongst all the vain Imaginations about Religious things vented in these latter days, there is none savours more rankly of Sathanical Pride, and Humane folly, than that of such a state of Perfection attainable in this Life, wherein as it is phrased, men should be above Ordinances, that is, should be vainly pussed up in their fleshly minds, above the Authority, and Wisdom and Truth of God. Whilst we are in the way under the conduct of the Gospel, we need all the Advantages it affords in our progress. Of this sort are all the Threatenings, Promises, Exhortations, Incouragements contained in it. And the proper use of Gospel Threatenings in particular, such as that here insisted on by our Apostle, I have declared at large on the first and second Verses of the fourth Chapter, and shall not here again insist thereon. It followeth hence: (1) That whatever be the state and condition of them un∣to whom we dispense the Word, or whatever we may conceive it to be, that we are not with respect thereunto to balk or wave the delivery and pressing of any Evan∣gelical warning, or the severest Threatening contained in the Gospel, much less Encouragements and Motives unto Faith and Obedience, though we are perswaded they both believe and obey. For as it is not impossible but that both they and we may be mistaken in their condition, and that the severest Menaces may be their pro∣per portion in the World; so be their condition what it will, all these things have not only their proper use towards them, but are necessary for them in their several kinds. For although they every one of them as singly laid down, are of the same signification in themselves, yet in their Application unto men they have a sense suited unto their condition: for Instance; The same Threatening as applied unto Unbe∣lievers, tends to beget Dread, Terror, and fear of Wrath in them, to fill them with Evidences of Gods displeasure. As applied unto Believers it tends only to fill them with Reverential Fear of God, Care to avoid the sin threatened, and to excite diligence in the use of means for its avoidance. All of them are good for all. As therefore if we should always in the Dispensation of the Word insist on the Threa∣tenings of the Law and Gospel, whose Denunciation multitudes do certainly stand in need of, we might weaken and discourage those whom God would not have to be discouraged: So on the other hand if out of an Apprehension that our People or Congregations are made up of Believers, we should continually insist on the Pro∣mises of the Gospel, with the like Springs of Consolation, seldom or never pressing on them the Threatenings and severe Menaces thereof, we should certainly defraud them of a blessed means which God hath ordained for their Edification and Pre∣servation in Faith. The holy intermixture of all these things in the Scripture it self, is to be our Rule and not any Imagination of our own. (2) That others should not think themselves severely dealt with, when they are pressed on and urged with the severest Threatenings of the Gospel. Let them not say or think in their Hearts, this Preacher looks upon us as persons Unregenerate, or Hypocrites, perhaps out of ill-will unto us. It is certain that on such occasions, men are apt to give place to such surmises. For an Apprehension thereof, is the reason why the Apostle maketh as it were this Apology for the use of the severe foregoing Commination. As if he had said, Do not you entertain any hard thoughts or evil surmises concerning me or my dealing with you in this matter. There are other reasons of my thus dealing with you; for as unto your personal interest in the Grace of Christ, I have as yet a good perswasion, although I thus speak. And let others take heed lest they fall into any such apprehension, which will certainly defeat them of the wholsome Fruit of the Word. Sharp Frosts are needful to make the Ground fruitful, as well as the clearest Sun-shine. And if a Tree be not sometimes pressed on by the Wind, it will never well firm its Roots in the Ground. Sharp Reproofs, and earnestness in pressing Gospel Comminations are sometimes as needful for the
best of us, as the Administration of the richest and most precious Promises, Hos. 10. 11. Having considered in general the good perswasion of the Apostle concerning those Hebrews, we may consider in especial, his Expression of the things which he was so perswaded to be in them; And this is double, (1) , better things; (2) , such as accompany Salvation. (1) He was perswaded concerning them, , Better things. There  seems to be a comparison included in this expression, and not only an opposition unto what was spoken. If so, then there is a supposition of some good things granted unto those treated of. This therefore cannot refer unto the Verses immediately be∣fore, which express only their Barrenness and Destruction, but it must relate unto ver. 4, 5, 6. where the Spiritual Gifts collated on them are enumerated. They are Good things in themselves, but yet such Good things as may perish and they also on whom they are bestowed. Those who enjoy them may yet be barren Ground, and so cursed and burned. But the Apostle is perswaded better things of those to whom he speaks, namely, such things as accompany Salvation, such as whosoever is made partaker of shall never perish Eternally. Or  may be put for  Good things as Chrysostome supposeth. But yet neither is there any need of sup∣posing an impropriety in the expression. For it is usual to express excellent things in words of the comparative Degree, although no comparison be included; espe∣cially when they are made mention of with respect unto others who have no inte∣rest in them. However here is certainly an opposition unto what was before affirmed concerning others; And that may be reduced unto two Heads. (1) That they were barren and destitute of all saving Grace and Fruits. (2) That they should in the End be destroyed. These better things must be opposed to the one, or other of these, or unto them both. If they are opposed unto the first, then especial saving Grace and Fruit-bearing, such as are peculiar unto Gods Elect proceeding from the real San∣ctification of the Spirit, such as no perishing gifted Hypocrites can be partakers of, are intended. If unto this latter, then those better thing respect not their Qualifi∣cation but their Condition; that is, freedom from the Curse and Wrath of God, and from perishing under them. I am perswaded it will go better with you, than with such Apostates. It may be both are included: but the first is certainly in∣tended, namely, that these Hebrews were not barren but such as brought forth the saving Fruits of the Spirit of Grace. For of these things it is added, . Such as accompany Solva∣tion; literally, such as have Salvation, that is, such as have saving Grace in them,  and Eternal Salvation infallibly annexed unto them. Things that are not bestowed on any, such as are not wrought in any but those that shall be saved. That is, in brief, true Faith and sincere Obedience. For in whosoever these are found, they shall be saved by virtue of the Faithfulness of God in the Covenant of Grace. And we may observe hence, (1) That among Professors of the Gospel some are Partakers of better things than others. They were all Professors concerning whom the Apostle discourseth in this and the preceding Verses. And yet notwithstanding any Good things that some might have had, or might be supposed to have had, others of them had better things than they. And this Difference may be observed, first in the Degrees, and secondly in the Kinds of the things intended. Spiritual Gifts are of one kind. For although there are several sorts of them, yet they have all the same general nature, they are all Gifts and no more. The difference therefore that is amongst them being not to be taken from their own especial nature, but their use and tendency un∣to the common end of them all, I take it only to be gradual. For instance, to speak with Tongues and to Prophesie, are two Gifts of different sorts; But whereas they are both Gifts of the Spirit, and are designed unto the furtherance of the Go∣spel and Edification of the Church, the true Difference between them is to be ta∣ken from their usefulness unto this End. Those therefore who have only Gifts in the Church, as they have different Gifts, so they have some of them Better Gifts than others, some as to the especial kinds of Gifts, but mostly as to the Degrees of their usefulness unto their proper End. Hence our Apostle having reckoned up the various and manifold Gifts of the Spirit, adds this Advice unto the Corinthians
upon the consideration of them, , 1 Cor. 12. 31. Covet earnestly the best Gifts. Those that tend most to the Edification of the Church. Thus ever it was, and ever it will be in the Church of God, some have had, and some have better Gifts than others. And as the whole Church is hence to learn to acquiesce in, and submit to the Soveraignty of the Spirit of God, who divideth unto every man severally as he will; so those who have received these better and differing Gifts either in their especial Nature or Degrees of usefulness, have some Duties singularly incumbent on them, and whose discharge will be required at their hands. As (1) To walk humbly with a constant care, that a sense of their Gifts and Abilities do not in their minds puff them up, fill them with conceits of them∣selves as though they were somewhat, and so make them exalt themselves above their Brethren. In the Apostolical and Primitive Church, when there was nothing of that secular Grandeur, Promotion, Preferments, Dignities amongst the Ministers of the Church, as now a days fill the world with Pride and Domination, all the Danger of an hurtful Elation of mind in one above another, was from the eminency of Gifts which some had received above others. And it cannot be denied but that the abuse hereof laid the foundation of all that swelling secular Pride, and cursed Domination or Lordly Rule which afterwards pestered the Church. The two things which the Apostle Peter in one place cautions and chargeth the Elders and Guides of the Church against became their Ruine, namely, filthy Lucre, and Love of Domination over the Lords Heritage, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. And indeed it is a very hard and difficult matter for men totally to suppress those insinuations of a good conceit of themselves, and preferring themselves before others, which Gifts singular in their use and kind will suggest. Neither will it be effected without a constant exercise of Grace. For this cause the Apostle would not have a Novice called to the Mini∣stry or publick exercise of Spiritual Gifts, namely, lest he be puffed up with Pride and fall into the Condemnation of the Devil, 1 Tim. 3. 6. Afflictions and Temptations for the most part, are a needful Ballance for eminent Gifts. This therefore the Scripture hath provided against, both warning us, that knowledge, which is the matter of all spiritual Gifts, will puff up, and forbidding us to boast in them, be∣cause they are things which are freely bestowed on us, without respect unto any thing of good or worth in our selves, 1 Cor. 4. 7. And if we reckon aright those of us whose Gifts are inferiour unto those of other men, provided we use and improve what we have received unto the best advantage we are able, have no reason to envy them whose Gifts out-shine ours. For if they are gracious, they have work enough cut out for them to keep them watchful over themselves unto Humility, where yet it is to be feared that things do not always so well succeed, but that by sinful sur∣prisals of self elating Imaginations, there is work made for Repentance and Trouble. Yea he who is eminently gifted, if he be not eminently humble hath but an unquiet life within doors. And if such a Person be not truly gracious, he is in the ready way to fall into the condemnation of the Devil. Such a Person is a prey to every Temptation, and will also seduce himself into all evil. (2) It is required of such persons as to be humble, so in an especial manner to be thankful. The things whereof they are partakers are Gifts, and not to be thank∣ful for Gifts, is the most proper ingratitude. (3) A Fruitfulness proportionable unto the excellency of their Gifts. He who had received five Talents was not only obliged to Trade with them, but to get five Ta∣lents more. The increase of one or two Talents would not have served his turn. To whom much is given, of him not somewhat, but much is required. The hiding of many Talents is a sin whereof there is no Instance in the Scripture; it is a sin that hath a greatness in it not to be supposed; and those who may be concerned in it, ought to tremble with the Apprehensions of it. Our Lord is coming, and alas there is none of us who have traded with his Talents as we ought to have done. We hope that in his infinite mercy and compassion he will spare and pardon, and accept of that little which we have endeavoured after in sincerity; but in the mean time we ought always to consider that labour and fruitfulness ought to be pro∣portioned unto what we have received. But yet these are not the Better things here directly intended. For from them, or any thing that is in the best of them, no such conclusion can be made as that here by our Apostle, seeing he had shewed be∣fore, that they might all perish and be lost.
Secondly, There are Spiritual things which differ in their whole kind and nature from other things, and are better than they as to their Essence and Being. Such is all saving Grace, with all the Fruits of it. I shall not now stay to prove that true saving Grace differs specifically from all common Grace however advanced in its ex∣ercise by the company and help of Spiritual Gifts, much less to wrangle about what doth formally constitute a specifical difference between things. But this I say plainly, which I can prove assuredly, that true Gospel Faith and sincere Obedience are better things than the most glorious Hypocrite or most reformed unregenerate Person was ever made partaker of. In the visible professing Church all things outwardly seem to be equal. There are the same Ordinances administred unto all, the same Pro∣fession of Faith is made by all, the same outward Duties are attended unto, and scandalous offences are by all avoided. But yet things are not internally equal. Many are called but few are chosen; In a great House there are Vessels of Wood and Stone, as well as of Gold and Silver. All that eat outwardly in Ordinances of the Bread of Life, do not feed on the hidden Manna. All that have their names enrolled in the Churches Book may not yet have them written in the Lambs Book. There are yet better things than Gifts, Profession, Participation of Ordinances and what∣ever is of the like nature. And the use hereof in one word is to warn all sorts of Persons, that they rest not in, that they take not up with an Interest in, or Parti∣cipation of the Priviledges of the Church, with a common Profession, which may give them a name to live; seeing they may be dead or in a perithing condition in the mean time. There are according to the Tenour of the Covenant of Grace, such things bestowed on some persons, as Salvation doth infallibly accompany and ensue upon. Better things and Obser. 2. such as have Salvation accompanying of them. This Assertion is founded on the nature of the Covenant of Grace, in the first Covenant it was not so. The best things bestowed by virtue of it, might perish and did so. Many excellent things were bestowed on us when we were created in the Image of God. But they were all such things as we might lose, and did lose, and thereby came short of that Glory of God, which we were created for. But in the Covenant of Grace, there is such a disposal and concatenation of Spiritual things, that a real participation of some of them, doth infallibly conclude unto an indefeazable Interest in them all. This did the Apostle assure us in an express annumeration of them, Rom. 8. 29, 30. For instance, there is a saving Faith of this nature. For (1) It is an effect of Gods immutable purpose of Election. If that therefore cannot be changed, this cannot utterly fail and be lost. Whom he predestinates them he calls, that is, to saving Faith by Jesus Christ. Faith is of Gods Elect, and they only believe truly who are or∣dained to Eternal Life. (2) The Lord Christ intercedeth that this Faith may never fail, or be utterly lost, Joh. 17. 8, 11, 15. &c. (3) The Power of God is engaged in the preservation of it, 2 Pet. 1. 3. 1 Pet. 1. 5. Ephes. 1. 19, 20. (4) The Pro∣mises of the Covenant are expresly multiplied unto this purpose, Jer. 31. 32, 33. chap. 32. 38, 39, 40. And the like may be said of all other saving Graces. And on this Ground doth the Apostle call those better things that these Hebrews were made partakers of, such as accompany Salvation. It is the Duty of all Professors strictly to examine themselves concerning their Partici∣pation of those better things which accompany Salvation. Their condition is deplora∣ble Obser. 3. who under an outward Profession do satisfie themselves with those common Gifts, Graces, and Duties, which are separable from Salvation. Yet that it is so with many in the world who thereon cry Peace, Peace, whilst suddain Destruction is coming upon them, is openly manifest. See the Advice of the Apostle express to this pur∣pose, 2 Cor. 13. 8. We may yet farther observe how variously the Apostle treats these Hebrews. Some∣times he stiles them Holy Brethren, affirming them to be Partakers of the Heavenly Calling; so also that they had those better things in them which accompany Salva∣tion. Sometimes he tells them that they were dull and slothful, and had need be taught again what are the Principles of the Oracles of God; and sets before them the final Destruction of Apostates to ingenerate a fear and apprehension of the Terror of the Lord in them. Now this variety in the Apostles treating of them
proceeds not from present Commotions, not from any Rhetorical Artifice, but from a regular and steady Judgement concerning the condition of the whole Church. For (1) There were indeed several sorts of Professors among them answering the several Descriptions he gives of them. He spake therefore to the whole community indefinitely, leaving the especial Application of what he speaks unto themselves in particular, according as their different conditions did require. And this is the only safe and prudent way for Ministers to deal with their Flocks. For when any conceive themselves by other circumstances to be singled out for Reproof and Threatening, they commonly draw forth disadvantage to themselves thereby. (2) The best of the Hearers of the Gospel may have much to be blamed in them, although their sincerity in general ought to be highly approved. (3) Severe Threa∣tenings in the Dispensation of the Gospel, are usually proposed unto them, who yet are not absolutely liable to the Penalty threatened. They do not predict what will come to pass, but warn what is to be avoided. VERSE 10. . The Syriack renders  by  perversus, iniquus, it omitteth  also as doth the vulgar Latine, but expresseth  emphatically,  and that your Love. Other material differences among Translators there is not. For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and the labour of that Love which you have (evidently) shewed towards his name, in that you have ministred to the Saints and do minister. The Expositors of the Roman Church do greatly perplex themselves and others in their Comments on this Text. They generally agree in an endeavour from hence to prove the merit of works against Protestants, because the Council of Trent applies this Text to that purpose. And none are more confident herein than our Rhemists, who after their usual Reproaches of Protestants, affirm, That good works are meritorious and the very cause of Salvation, so that God should be unjust if he ren∣dered not Heaven for the same. But they are greatly divided among themselves about the state of the persons and kind of the Works here intended. Some contend that the Apostle speaks to, and of such as were fallen out of a state of Justification into a state of deadly sin. And the works of which it is said that God will not for∣get them, are those which they wrought in that estate from whence they were now supposed to be fallen. For on the account of those former works, God will spare them and not destroy them. And although there be no present merit in these works, whilst those who wrought them are in a state of deadly sin, yet when they shall be recovered by Penance, these works which were before mortified by their falling from Grace, and so became of no use as to present merit, shall recover their former meri∣torious virtue, as if they had never been forfeited by deadly sin. This therefore is the sense which these persons would affix unto these words. Where any have been in a state of Justification, and have wrought good works therein, meritorious of Eternal Life, if they fall into deadly sin, they immediately lose all the merit and be∣nefit of those works. But notwithstanding God in his Righteousness keeps the Remembrance of these works, so that when such sinners return again by Penance into their first estate, these works shall revive into a condition of merit. This sense is opposed by others. For they think those mentioned are justified persons, and the Apostle expresseth the merit of their present works, with respect unto the Righteous∣ness of God. The Reader who desires to see such Chaffe tossed up and down, may find these things debated in Aquinas, Adamus, Estius, A Lapide, Ribera, Maldonat, de Tena, and others of them on the place. How Forraign these Discourses are to the Text and Context is evident to every impartial considerer of it. They are only Chimera's hatched out of the proud
Imaginations of the merit of their works that these mens minds are prepossessed withall. For (1) Our Apostle treats of those whom he supposeth and judgeth to be in a present good Spiritual Condition. For with respect thereunto he ascribeth unto them things that accompany Salvation, and prescribeth no other Duty unto them for the actual enjoyment of it, but only those of Faith and Love and Ministration unto the Saints, which at present he commendeth in them. What they did formerly that he affirms them to continue in the performance of, You have ministred and you do mini∣ster. (2) The Apostle expresly distinguisheth them concerning whom he now speaks, from those who were now fallen off from the Profession of the Gospel, or that state of Justification which the Romanists suppose. (3) He doth not direct these persons to seek after a Recovery out of the Condition wherein they were, but incourageth them unto a continuance therein, and to shew the same Diligence unto that purpose, as formerly, to the End, ver. 12. Nothing therefore is more fond than to suppose that any thing is here taught concerning the mortification of good works as to their merit by deadly sin, and their recovery thereof by Penance, a fiction which these men dream of to no purpose. 2ly. Neither is countenance given unto the other Imagination in general con∣cerning the merit of works in these words. For (1) The Design of the Apostle is only to let them know that their Labour in the work of the Lord, that their Obe∣dience unto the Gospel should not be lost or be in vain. And hereof he gives them assurance from the Nature of God with whom they had to do, with respect unto that Covenant whereinto he takes them that do believe. They had been sedulous in the discharge of the great Duty of ministring unto the Saints, in particular upon the account of the Name of Jesus Christ that was upon them. These Duties had been attended with trouble, danger and charge. And it was needful to confirm them in a perswasion that they should not-be lost. This they might be two ways. (1) If themselves should fall away and not persist in their course unto the end. (2) If God should overlook, or forget as it were all that they had done. Against both these Apprehensions the Apostle secures them. From the first in that the works mentioned having been truly gracious works, proceeding from Faith and Love, they evidence their Persons to be in that state of Grace wherein they should be effectually preserved unto the End, by virtue of Gods Faithfulness in Covenant, which he further pursues towards the end of the Chapter. Nor secondly, had they the least reason to doubt of their future Reward. For who was it that called them to these Duties, and on what account? Is it not God and that according un∣to the Tenour of the Covenant of Grace? and hath he not therein promised to accept their Persons and their Duties by Jesus Christ? If now he should not do so, would he not be unrighteous, must he not deny himself, and not remember his Promise? Wherefore the Righteousness of God here intended in his Faithfulness in the Promises of the Covenant. And he is not said to be Righteous in rewarding or not rewarding, but in not forgetting. He is not unrighteous to forget. Now to forget any thing doth not reflect immediately on distributive Justice, but upon Fidelity in making good of some ingagement. But not to ingage into Disputations in this place, let men acknowledge that the new Covenant is a Covenant of Grace, that the Constitution of a Reward unto the Obedience required therein is of Grace, that this Obedience is not accepted on its own account, but of the Mediation of Christ, that all mens good works will not make a Compensation for one sin; that we are to place our Trust and Confidence in Christ alone for Life and Salvation, because he is the End of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do believe; and let them please themselves for a while, in the fancy of the merit of their works, at least of the high and necessary place which they hold in their Justification before God; after all their wrangling Disputes it will be Christ and Grace alone that they will betake themselves unto, or their case will be deplorable. These things I have premised that we may have no cause to divert unto them, in the ensuing Exposition of the words. The Apostle in this Verse gives an account of the Grounds of his Perswasion concerning these Hebrews, expressed in the Verse foregoing. And these he declares unto them partly for Encouragement, and partly that they might be satisfied in his Sincerity, and that he did not give them fair words to entice or allure them by. And the reasons he gives to this purpose may be reduced unto two Heads.
1. The Observation which he had made concerning their Faith and Love, with the Fruits of them. 2. The Faithfulness of God in Covenant, whereon the final preservation of all true Believers doth depend. These are the Grounds of that perswasion concerning their state and condition which he expressed in the foregoing words. Hence that perswasion of his was of a mixt nature, and had something in it of a Divine Faith, and somewhat only of a moral certainty. As he drew his conclusion from, or built his perswasion on Gods Faithfulness or Righteousness, so there was in it an infallible Assurance of Faith that could not deceive him. For what we believe concerning God as he hath re∣vealed himself, is infallible. But as his Perswasion had respect unto the Faith, Love and Obedience which he had observed in them, so it was only a moral Assurance, and such as in its own nature might fail. For God only is ; and we who judge by the outward evidences of invisible things may be deceived. The Proposition from Gods Faithfulness is of infallible Truth; the Application of it unto these Hebrews of moral Evidence only. Such a Perswasion we may have in this case, which is prevalent against all Objections, a certain Rule for the performance of all Duties on our parts towards others; and such had the Apostle concerning these Hebrews. That which in the first place he confirms his Perswasion with is, , their work. God is not unrighteous to forget your work. It is not any singular work, but  a course in working which he intends. And what that work is, is declared in that parallel place of the same Apostle, 1 Thes. 1. 3. ; the same expressions with those in this place, which may be reckoned unto the multitude of other Instances of Coincidences of expressions in this and the other Epistles of the same Writer, all peculiar unto him∣self, arguing him to be the Author of this also. Remembring your Work of Faith and Labour of Love. The Work here intended is the Work of Faith; The whole Work of Obedience to God, whereof Faith is the principle, and that which moves us thereunto. Hence it is called the Obedience of Faith, Rom. 1. 5. And this Obedience of Faith according to the Gospel is called there, , their work. (1) Because it was their chief employment, their Calling lay in it. They did not attend unto it occasionally, or when they had nothing else to do, as is the manner of some. Religion was their business, and Gospel Obedience their daily work. This was their whole, even to fear God and keep his Commandments, as it is expressed under the Old Testament. (2) Because there is work and labour in it, or great pains to be taken about it. For hereunto our Apostle in the next Verse requires their diligence, ver. 11. as Peter doth all diligence, 2 Epist. 1. 11. And we may observe in our way, That Faith, if it be a living Faith, will be a working Faith. It is the work Obser. 1; of Faith which the Apostle here commends. This case is so stated by James that it needs no farther confirmation, Chap. 2. 20. Wilt thou know, or knowest thou not, O vain man, that Faith without works is dead? He is a most vain man who thinks otherwise, who hopes for any Benefit by that Faith which doth not work by Love. Sathan hath no greater design in the world than to abuse Gospel Truths. When the Doctrine of free Justification by Faith, through the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ, was first fully revealed and declared, his great Design then was to per∣swade men that there was no need of Obedience, and so they could attain any manner of perswasion of the Truth of the Gospel, or make profession thereof, they might live in sin as they pleased, and neglect all good Works and Duties of Obe∣dience. And although this be now condemned by all, yet indeed is it no more but what upon the matter most do practise according unto. For they suppose that by being of this or that Religion, Papists or Protestants, or the like, they shall be saved whatever their ways and works are. So Papists, for Instance, are indeed the greatest Solifidians in the world. For to own the Faith of the Church, is enough with them to secure the Salvation of any. This Abomination having been early started was seasonably suppressed by the writing of James and John. For the former directly and plainly lays open the Vanity of this pretence, declaring, that that Faith which they professed and boasted of, was not the Faith whereby any
should be justified before God, nor of the same kind with it. For this Faith is living, operative, and fruitful, and evidenceth it self unto all by its Works and Fruits. Whereas that Faith whereof vain men living in their sins did boast, was so far from being a Grace of the Spirit of God, that it was no other but what was in the Devils themselves, and which they could not rid themselves of if they would. The latter without expressing the occasion of it, spends his Epistle in, declaring the necessity of Love and Obedience, or keeping the Commandments of Christ. Wherefore the enemy of our Salvation being defeated in this Attempt, he betook himself unto the other extream; contending that the works of Faith had the same place in our Justification with Faith it self. And why should they not? are not Faith and they equally Acts of Obedience in us? are not Faith and they equally required by the Gospel? why may they not be supposed to have an equal influence into our Justification? at least in the same kind, though Faith on some considerations may have the pre-eminence? I say these things are speciously plea∣ded; but in short the Design is not to advance works into an Equality with Faith, but to advance them into the room of Christ and his Righteousness. For when we say, we are justified by Faith only, we do not say that Faith is our Righteousness, but as it apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, as he is the End of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do believe. And this is the use that God hath de∣signed Faith unto, and which in its own nature it is suited for. But bring in the works of Obedience into the same place, and they are of no use but to be imputed unto us for Righteousness, and so to possess the place of Christ and his Righteous∣ness in our Justification unto their Exclusion. But all this trouble might have been spared, if men had not been too ready and prone to receive Impressions from the crafty actings of Sathan against the purity and simplicity of the Gospel. For nothing is more evidently expressed and taught therein than are these two things. (1) That we are justified freely by Faith through the Redemption that is in the Blood of Christ, and so the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us. (2) That the Faith which hath this effect, which is of this use, is living, operative, fruitful, and will evidence it self by works in Obedience unto the Commands of God. And this is that which here we contend for, namely, that a living Faith will be a working Faith. And he is a vain man that deceives himself with any thing else in the room thereof. And yet this is the course of multitudes. But yet men do not deceive themselves herein notionally but practically. I never yet met with any man in my life who professed it as his Judgement, that so he believed aright, he might live as he pleased, follow his Lusts and neglect all good Works or holy Duties of Obedience. For this implies a contradiction. So to believe, is so far from believing aright, as that it contains in it a total Rejection of the Gospel. But practically we see that the generality of men content themselves with that know∣ledge they have of Religion, and that Faith which they suppose they have in Christ, without once endeavouring after amendment of life or fruitfulness in good works. Now this is not from any conclusions they draw from any Doctrines which they profess to believe, but from the power of Darkness and the deceitful∣ness of Sin that ruleth in them. And it is no otherwise among them who are taught to believe that they are justified by their works. For there is not a race of greater and more flagitious sinners, than (for the most part) are the men of that Perswasion. Only for their Relief, their Leaders have provided them with a Com∣mutation of some other things instead of their good works which shall do the deed for them, as Penances, Pardons, Purgatory, Confessions, Pilgrimages, and the like. But be mens Perswasion what it will, right or wrong, where sin is predominant they will be wicked, and whatever be the Object of their Faith, if it be not living in the subject, it cannot work, nor be fruitful. We ought to look on Obedience as our work; which will admit neither of sloth nor negligence. Here lies the occasion of the ruine of the Souls of men who profels the Obser. 2. Gospel. The Duties of Profession are a thing of course unto them, and that which lies without the compass of their principal work and business in the world. This makes their Profession serve to no other end, but to make them secure in a perishing condition. Now that our Obedience may indeed be our work, it is required, (1) That the carrying of it on, the attendance unto it, and furtherance of it in
order unto the Glory of God, be our principal design in the world. That is a mans , his proper work which is so. God severely threateneth those which walk with him at peradventures, Levit. 26. 21.  if you shall walk with me fortuito, at hap hazard, that is, without making it your principal de∣sign, and using your utmost diligence and care to proceed in it in a right manner;  ver. 24. then will even I my self walk with you at all adventures; though I continue with you, as one walking with you in my out∣ward Ordinances and Institutions; yet will I have no regard unto you, as to do you any good, yea I will sorely punish you notwithstanding the Appearance of our walk∣ing together, as it follows in the place. Yet is this the course of many who please themselves in their condition. They walk with God in outward appearance by the performance of Duties in their Times, Course, and Order; but they walk at all Adventures, as unto any especial design of their minds about it. Barnabas exhorted the Disciples at Antioch, that with purpose of Heart they would cleave unto the Lord, Acts 11. 23. , that is, with a firm Resolution to abide in, and pursue the Obedience they were called unto. So Paul tells Timothy, that he knew his Doctrine, manner of life and purpose, 2 Tim. 3. 10. namely, how his principal aim, design and resolution was to abide in and carry on his course of Faith and Obedience. And then is any thing the object of our purpose and prin∣cipal design; (1) When we subordinate all other things and occasions unto it, that they may not justle nor enterfere, nor stand in competition with it, when to us, to live is Christ, or he is the chief end of our life. When men do usually and ordi∣narily suffer other things to divert them from Duties of Obedience in their season, Obedience is not their principal design. (2) When it possesseth the chiefest place in our valuation and esteem. And this it doth absolutely where we attain that frame, that whilst the work of Faith and Obedience thrives in our Hearts and Lives, we are not much moved with whatever else befalls us in this world. This was the frame of our Apostle, Acts 21. 13. Phil. 3. 7, 8. But because of the weakness, and ingagement of our natural affections unto the lawful comforts of this Life, some are not able to rise unto that height of the undervaluation and contempt of these things whilst the work of our Obedience goes on, which we ought all to aim at; yet we must say, that if there be any sincerity in making our Obedience the princi∣pal design of our lives, there will be a constant preference of it unto all other things. As when a man hath many particular losses, he may be allowed to be sensible of them, yet if he have that still remaining wherein his main stock and wealth doth consist, he will not only be relieved or refreshed but satisfied therewith. But if a man who pretends much unto a great Stock and Trade in another Country, gives up all for lost upon some damages he receiveth at home in his House or Shop, it is plain he hath no great confidence in the other Treasure that he pretended unto. No more have men any especial Interest in the work of Obedience, which whilst they suppose it to be safe, do yet lose all their comforts in the loss of other things. (3) When any thing is the object of our chief design, the principal contrivances of our minds will be concerning it. And this makes the great difference in Profession and Duties. Men may multiply Duties in a course of them, and yet their Spirits not be ingaged in and about them as their business. Consider how most men are con∣versant about their secular affairs: They do not only do the things that are to be done, but they beat as we say their Heads and Minds about them. And it is ob∣served that however industrious in their way many men may be, yet if they have not a good contrivance and projection about their Affairs, they seldom prosper in them. It is so also in things Spiritual. The Fear of the Lord is our Wisdom; it is our Wisdom to keep his Commandments and walk in his ways. Now the principal work of Wisdom is in contriving and disposing the ways and methods whereby any end we aim at may be obtained. And where this is not exercised, there Obedi∣ence is not our work. How Temptations may be avoided, how Corruptions may be subdued, how Graces may be increased and strengthened, how Opportunities may be improved, how Duties may be performed to the Glory of God, how Spiritual Life may be strengthened, Peace with God maintained, and Acquaintance with Jesus Christ increased, are the daily thoughts and contrivances of him who makes Obedience his work. (2) Actual Diligence and Watchfulness is required in our Obedience, if we do make it our work. And (3) A due consideration of what
doth and will rise up in opposition unto it, or unto us in it, which things being com∣monly spoken unto I shall not here enlarge upon them. The second thing whereon the Apostle grounds his confidence concerning these He∣brews is their labour of Love, . For the words express a distinct . Grace and its excrcise, and are, not exegetical of the preceding expressions. It is not your work, that is, your Labour of Love. But this Labour of Love is distinguished from their work in general, as an eminent part or instance of it. This the copulative Conjun∣ction after  evinceth. ; of your work, that is, of Obedience in general, the work of Faith, and of your Labour of Love, namely, in particular and eminently, , as we observed, is passed by in some Translations, but without cause; The original Copies are uniform in it, and the parallel place doth expresly require it, 1 Thes. 1. 3. There is in the remaining part of this Verse, which depends on these words; 1. What the Apostle ascribes unto these Hebrews, which is the Labour of Love. 2. The way whereby they evidenced this Labour of Love; they shewed it. 3. The object of it, and that is the Saints. 4. The formal reason and principal motive unto it, which is the name of God; for his names sake. 5. The way of its exercise; it was by ministration, both past and present, in that you have ministred and do minister. In the first of these the Apostle observes the Grace it self, and its exercise, their Love and its Labour. This Grace or Duty being excellent and rare, and its exercise in Labour being highly necessary and greatly neglected, and both in conjunction being a principal Evidence of a good Spiritual condition, of an Interest in those Better things which accompany Salvation, I shall a little divert unto the especial consideration of them. , Love is the second great Duty of the Life of God, which is brought to light by the Gospel. It is Faith that gives Glory to God on high, and Love that . brings Peace on the Earth, wherein the Angels comprised the substance of our Deliverance by Jesus Christ, Luke 2. 14. Neither is there any thing of it in the whole world but what is derived from the Gospel. All things were at first made in a state of Love. That Rectitude, Order, Peace and Harmony which was in the whole Creation was an Impression from, and an Expression of the Love of God. And our Love towards him was the Bond of that Perfection, and the Stability of that State and Condition. The whole Beauty of the Creation below consisted in this, namely, in mans loving God above all, and all other things in him and for him, according as they did participate of and express his Glory and Properties. This represented that Love which was in God to∣wards all his Creatures, which he testified by declaring them to be all very good. When man by sin had broken the first link of this Chain of Love, when thereby we lost the Love of God to us, and renounced our own Love unto him, all things fell into disorder and confusion in the whole Creation; all things were filled with mutual Enmity and Hatred. The first Instance of mutual Love among the Creatures was that between Angels and Men, as those which were in the nearest Alliance, and made for the same End of the Glory of God. For as the Angels rejoiced in the whole Creation of God, when those morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for joy, Job 38. 7. so man being the most capable object of their Love, was their especial Delight. And man being made to love God above all, and all other things in him and for him, his principal Love must be fixed on those who had the most of the Image, and made the most glorious Representation of God. But the Bond of Love being dissolved, mutual Enmity succeeded in the room thereof. And the first Act of Angelical Obedience we read of, was their keeping man from a return into Eden, and eating of the Tree of Life, Gen. 3. 24. and men could look on them only as flaming Swords, ready to execute the wrath of God and the Curse upon him. And this state would have continued unto Eternity, had not God gathered all things again into one, both which are in Heaven and which are in Earth, even in Christ
Jesus, Ephes. 1. to. There could never more have been any Love, nor any Duties of Love between Angels and Men, had not God restored all things by Jesus Christ. This is the only foundation of the whole Ministry of Angels in Love, Heb. 1. 14. For men themselves, mutual Enmity and hatred possessed them. And he who first acted in that frame and spirit which came upon them was a murderer, and slew his Brother. And this the Apostle proposeth as the Instance and Example of that Hatred and Enmity which is among men under the Curse, 1 Joh. 3. 11, 12. And there is no greater Evidence of any persons being uninterested in the Restauration of all things by Christ, than the want of that Love which was again introduced thereby. So the Apostle describing the condition of men in their unregenerate condition, affirms that they live in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. There ensued also an Enmity between man and all the Creation here below. The sin of man had brought all things into a Condition of Vanity and Bondage, which they groan to be delivered from, Rom. 8. 20, 21, 22. And the Earth the common Mother of them all, as it were to revenge it self on men, brings forth nothing but Thorns and Thistles, Gen. 3. 18. and yields not her strength to his labour, Gen. 4. 12. Hence is all that vanity, vexation, and sore travail which the life of man is filled withall. After the entrance of this disorder and confusion, there was nothing of true original Love in the world, nor was it by any means attainable. For it all arose from the Love of God, and was animated by our Love unto him. But now all things were filled with Tokens and Evidences of the Anger, Displea∣sure, and Curse of God for sin. And men were wholly alienated from the Life of God. No new Spring or Life can be given unto Love, but by a new discovery, that God was Love, and had a Love for us. For so the Apostle tells us, Herein is Love, not that we loved God but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation of our sins, 1 Joh. 4. 10. But if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, ver. 11. No Love could there be, until a fresh Revelation was made that God is Love; for the first which he had made in the Creation was utterly lost. And this was done by Jesus Christ. There was some step made unto that confusion which ensued on the loss of this universal Love by the first Promise; without which, the whole lower Creation would have been an Hell, and nothing else. This was the spring of all that Love which was in the Old Testament, because it was a new discovery that there was yet Love in God towards fallen mankind. And whatever in the world may pretend thereunto, yet if it proceed not from the new Revelation and Discovery that God is Love, it is nothing of that Divine Love which is required of us. And this is only in Christ; In him alone the  and , the Benignity and Love of God unto mankind appeared, Tit. 3. 4. And here is a foundation laid and a spring opened of a Love far more excellent than that which our Nature was furnished and adorned withall in the first Creation. For the Love of God being the cause and fountain of ours, which is a compliance with the manifestation of it, the more eminently the Love of God is manifested, the more eminent is that Love which is the fruit thereof. And Gods Love is far more gloriously displayed in Christ than it was in all the works of his hands. In him alone we know not only that God hath Love, but that he is Love; that he hath Love for sinners, and that such a Love, as in the spring, means, and effects of it, is every way ineffable and incom∣prehensible. The whole of what I intend is expressed by the Apostle John, 1 Epist. cap. 4. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Beloved let us love one another, for love is of God, and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God; He that loveth not, knoweth not God, for God is Love. In this was manifested the Love of God towards us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins; Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another; No man hath seen God at any time, if we love one another, God dwelleth in us and his Love is per∣fected in us. All that we have before affirmed and much more, is here declared by the Apo∣stle. It is Gods being Love himself which is the Eternal Spring of all Love in us. Neither could we have any thing of it, or interest in it, without some glorious effect and manifestation of the Love of God, which he also gave in sending his Son
to be a Propitiation for our sins. And the Love which proceeds from hence, hath all the glorious Properties here ascribed unto it. Wherefore there is no such way and means whereby we may express the distinguishing Light, Grace and Power of the Gospel, no such Evidence of the reality of our Interest in God, as Love, or in the Love of God by Christ, as by and in our own Love to him and his. The Mystical Body of Christ is the second great mystery of the Gospel. The first is his Person, that great mystery of Godliness God manifest in the Flesh. In this mystical Body we have Communion with the Head, and with all the Members; with the Head by Faith, and with the Members by Love. Neither will the first compleat our Interest in that Body without the latter. Hence are they frequently conjoyned by our Apostle, not only as those which are necessary unto, but as those which Es∣sentially constitute the Union of the whole mystical Body and Communion therein, Gal. 5. 6. Ephes. 6. 23. 1 Thes. 1. 3. 1 Tim. 1. 14. chap. 1. 11. 2 Tim. 1. 13. chap. 2. 22. Wherefore without Love we do no more belong to the Body of Christ, than without Faith it self. And in one place he so transposeth them in his ex∣pression to manifest their inseparable connexion and use unto the Union and Com∣munion of the whole Body, as that it requires some care in their distribution unto their peculiar objects, Philem. 5. Hearing of thy Love and Faith which thou hast to∣wards the Lord Jesus, and towards all Saints. Both these Graces are spoken of as if they were exercised in the same manner towards both their Objects, Christ and the Saints. But although Christ be the Object of our Love also, and not of our Faith only, yet are not the Saints so the Object of our Love, as to be the Object of our Faith also. We believe a Communion with them, but place not our Trust in them. There is therefore a variation in the Prepositions prefixed unto the respective Objects of these Graces. , and ; And this directs us unto a distribution of these Graces in their Operations unto their distinct Objects, Faith towards the Lord Jesus and Love to the Saints. But they are so mixed here to declare the infallible connexion that is between them, in the constitution of the mystical Body of Christ. This therefore is the form, life, and soul of all mutual Duties between the Members of Christs mystical Body. Whatever passeth between them in outward works wherein they may be useful and beneficial unto one another, if it spring not from this principle of Love, if it be not quickened and animated thereby, there is nothing of Evangelical Communion in it. Whereas therefore this Grace and Duty is the peculiar Effect and Glory of the Gospel, the form and life of the mystical Body of Christ, the pledge and evidence of our Interest in those better things which accompany Salvation, I shall briefly de∣clare the nature of it, and shew the reason of the necessity of its diligent ex∣ercise. Mutual love among Believers, is a fruit of the Spirit of Holiness, and effect of Faith, whereby being knit together in the Bond of entire Spiritual Affection, on the account of their joynt Interest in Christ, and participation of the same new, divine, spiritual Nature from God, do value, delight, and rejoyce in one another, and are mutually helpful in a constant discharge of all those Duties, whereby their eternal, spiritual and temporal Good may be promoted. 1. It is a fruit of the Spirit of Holiness, of the Spirit of Christ, Gal. 5. 22. It is no more of our selves than Faith is, it is the Gift of God. Natural Affections are in-laid in the constitution of our Beings. Carnal Affections are grown inseparable from our nature as corrupted. Both excited by various Objects, Relations, Occa∣sions, and Interest, do exert themselves in many outward effects of Love. But this Love hath no root in our selves until it be planted in us by the Holy Ghost. And as it is so, it is the principal part of the Renovation of our natures into the Image of God, who is Love. This Love is of God; And every one that loveth is born of God, 1 Joh. 4. 7. You are taught of God to love one another. 2. It is an effect of Faith. Faith worketh by Love, Gal. 5. 6. Hence as we ob∣served before, Love to the Saints is so frequently added unto Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, as the effect and pledge of it. And although it proceeds in general from Faith as it respects the Commands and Promises of God, yet it derives immediately from Faith as acted on the Lord Jesus Christ. For he being the Head of the whole mystical Body, it is Faith in him that acts it self by Love towards all the Members. Holding him the Head by Faith, the whole Body edifies it self in Love, Ephes. 4.
15, 18. And the more sincere, active and firm our Faith in Christ is, the more abundant will our Love be towards all his Saints. For Faith in Christ doth first ex∣cite Love unto him, from whom, as it were, it descends unto all that it finds of him in any others. And our Love of the Saints, is but the Love of Christ repre∣sented and exhibited unto us in them. The Papists tell us that Love or Charity is the form or life of Faith, without which it is dead. It is so far true, that accor∣ding to the Apostle James, where it is not, there Faith is dead. Not that it is the life of Faith, but that Faith wherever it is living will work by Love. Faith there∣fore is the life, the quickening, animating principle of Love, and not on the con∣trary. And that Love which proceedeth not from, which is not the effect of, which is not enlivened by Faith, is not that which the Gospel requireth. 3. Believers are knit together in an entire Affection. This is that Cement whereby the whole mystical Body of Christ is fitly joyned together and compacted, Ephes. 4. 16. This mutual adherence is by the uniting, cementing efflux of Love. It is but an Image of the Body, or a dead carkass that men set up, where they would make a Bond for Professors of Christianity, consisting of outward Order, Rules, and Methods of Duties. A Church without it, is an heap of dead stones, and not living stones fitly compacted and built up a Temple unto God. Break this Bond of Perfection, and all spiritual Church Order ceaseth; for what remains is carnal and worldly. There may be Churches constituted in an outward humane Order, on supposed prudential Principles of Union, and external Duties of Communion, which may continue in their Order, such as it is, where there is no Spiritual Evangelical Love in exercise among the Members of them. But where Churches have no other Order, nor Bond of Communion but what is appointed by Christ, wherever this Love faileth, their whole Order will dissolve. 4. This mutual Love among Believers, springs from and is animated by their mu∣tual Interest in Christ, with their Participation of the same Divine Nature thereby. It is from their Union in Christ the Head, that all the Members of the Body do mutually contribute what they derive from him unto the edification of the whole, in the exercise of Love. Hereby are they all brought into the nearest Relation to one another, which is the most effectual motive and powerful attractive unto Love. For as the Lord Christ saith of every one that doth the will of God, the same is my Brother and Sister, and Mother, Matth. 12. 18. he is dearly beloved by him, as standing in the nearest Relation unto him; so are all Believers by virtue of their common Interest in Christ their Head, as Brothers, Sisters, and Mothers to each other; as Members of the same Body which is yet nearer, whence the most intense Affection must arise. And they have thereby the same new spiritual nature in them all. In Love natural, he that doth most love and prize himself, commonly doth least love and prize others. And the reason is, because he loves not himself for any thing which is common unto him with others, but his self-love is the ordering and centring of all things unto his own satisfaction. But with this Spiritual Love he that Loves himself most, that is, doth most prize and value the Image of God in himself, doth most Love others in whom it is. And we may know whether we cherish and improve Grace in our own Hearts, by that Love which we have unto them in whom it doth manifest it self. 1 Joh. 5. 1. 5. This Love in the first place acts it self by valuation, esteem, and delight. So the Psalmist affirms, that all his delight was in the Saints and in the excellent in the Earth, Psal. 16. 3. The Apostle carries this unto the height in that Instance, wherein we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, 1 Joh. 3. 16. For whereas Life is comprehensive of all that is dear or useful unto us in this world, what we ought if called thereunto to part with our lives for, we value and esteem above them all. It is true, the cases wherein this is actually required in us, do not frequently occur; And they are such alone wherein the Glory and Interest of Christ are in an especial manner concerned. But such a Love as will always dispose, and when we are called enable us unto this Duty, is required to be in us if we are Disciples of Christ. So are we to prize and value them, as at least to be ready to share with them in all their conditions. For, 6. This Love acts it self by all means, in all ways and Duties whereby the Eternal, Spiritual and Temporal good of others may be promoted. And it would require a long discourse to go over but the principal Heads of those Ways and Duties which are
required unto this End. Something will be spoken afterwards to that purpose. At present I have aimed only at such a Description of this Love, as may distinguish it from that cold, formal pretence of it in some outward Duties, which the most sa∣tisfie themselves withall. This is that Love which the Gospel so earnestly commendeth unto, and so in∣dispensibly requireth in all the Disciples of Christ. This with its exercise and effects, its Labour and Fruits, is the Glory, Life and Honour of our Profession, without which no other Duties are accepted with God. And the reason is manifest from what hath been spoken why the Apostle giveth this as a ground of his good Perswasion concerning these Hebrews, as that they had an especial Interest in those Better things from which Salvation is inseparable. For if this Love in general be so a Grace of the Gospel, if it so spring and arise from the Love of God in Christ, as that there neither ever was, nor can be the least of it in the world which is not an Emanation from that Love; and if in its especial nature it so particularly relates unto the Spirit of Christ, and our Union with him, it must needs be among the principal Evidences of a good spiritual condition. And the same will yet farther appear if we consider the grounds whereon it is inforced in the Gospel, which are principally these that follow. 1. As the Head of all other considerations the Lord Christ expresseth it as that which was to be the great Evidence unto the world of the Truth and Power of the Gospel, as also of his own being sent of God, Joh. 17. 21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may be∣lieve that thou hast sent me. It is true there is another especial principle of the Union of Believers as they are one in God and Christ. This is that one Spirit where∣by they are all united unto him as their mystical Head. But this alone is not here intended, as being that which the world can no way discern, nor consequently be convinced by. He intends therefore their Unity among themselves, the Life and Spirit and Bond whereof is this Love, as hath been declared. There is no other kind of Unity which may be among Christians, that carrieth the least conviction with it, of the Divine Mission, Truth and Power of Christ. For they may be all carnal, from carnal Principles, and for carnal Ends, wherein the world can see nothing ex∣traordinary, as having many such Unities of its own. Herein therefore doth the Testimony consist which we give to the world, that Jesus Christ was sent of God. And if we fail herein, we do what we can to harden the world in its impenitency and unbelief. To see Believers live in Love according to the nature, and acting the Duties of it before mentioned, was in ancient times a great means of the Con∣viction of the world concerning the Truth and Power of the Gospel, and will be so again when God shall afresh pour down abundantly that Spirit of Light and Love which we pray for. And in some measure it doth so at present. For who∣soever shall consider the true Church of Christ aright, will find the Evidences of a Divine Power in this matter. For it doth and ever did consist of all sorts of per∣sons in all Nations and Languages whatever. High and low, rich and poor, Jews, Greeks, Barbarians, Scythians, men of all Interests, Humours, Oppositions, dividing Circumstances, at distances as far as the East from the West, do constitute this Body, this Society. Yet is there among all these, known to each other or unknown, an ineffable Love ready to work and exercise it self on all occasions in all the ways before insisted on. And this can be from no other Principle but the Spirit and Divine Power of God, giving Testimony thereby unto the Lord Christ whose Disciples they are. 2. Our Right unto, our Priviledge in, and Evidence of our being the Disciples of Christ, depends on our mutual Love, Joh. 14. 34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one ano∣ther. By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples if you have love one to ano∣ther. This especial Commandment of Christ concerning mutual love among his Disciples is here and elsewhere called a new Commandment. When mankind by sin fell off from the love of God, and out of it, from loving him and being loved of him, they fell into all manner of discord and enmity among themselves, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another, Tit. 3. 3. And from the same root still springs all contention. From whence come Wars and Fightings, come they not hence, even from your Lusts, Jam. 4. 1. In the former Revelations of the Will of
God as in the Law, there was mutual Love commanded, Envy, Hatred, and Re∣venge being forbidden. But yet there was a great defect and weakness in this matter, partly in the obscurity of the Law, partly out of some forbearances which God was pleased to exercise towards that carnal people by reason of the hardness of their hearts; and partly out of their darkness that they did not understand the Spirituality and Holiness of the Commands. But the principal Imperfection of the Law in this matter was, that it gave no Example of that Love which is necessary to restore us into that condition of the Love of God and one another which we fell from. This was reserved for Christ that in all things he might have the pre-emi∣nence. Until he set us the example of it in his inexpressible Love to us which is so frequently proposed unto our imitation, we could not know what kind of Love it was wherewith we ought to love one another. So saith he here, That you love one another as I have loved you; see Joh. 3. 16. Hence the Commandment of Love becomes a new Commandment; not only because it was newly revived by Christ in an especial manner, when the Doctrine of the Duties of it was cast under Phari∣saical corruptions, Matth. 5. and the practice of it in the wickedness of the world, nor only because it was more plainly and clearly given by him than it had been un∣der the Law, or only because he had revealed the Love of God unto us; but prin∣cipally because it was now founded, established, and animated by the Example of the Love of Christ himself, which gave it a new life and nature, making it a new Commandment. And the first Observation of it is the first Evidence of the Reno∣vation of all things by Jesus Christ. He came to restore and renew all things; but the work whereby he doth it, is for the most part secret and invisible in the Souls of men. What Evidence and Token of this great work is there given unto the World? It is principally this, the bringing forth of the practice of that Love, which is in a manner the fulfilling of that Original Law of our Creation which we broke and from which we fell. For so he adds, By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if you have Love one for another, The great Example which I have set you being that of Love, the new Commandment which I have given you being that of Love; the design I have to accomplish in and by you being the Reno∣vation of Love, how shall or can men otherwise know you to be my Disciples but by your mutual love? Without this therefore we can no way evidence our selves to be the Disciples of Christ. And this one consideration is of more weight with me, than a thousand wrangling Disputes that would furiously drive men into such outward forms and compliances which they call Love. 3. This mutual Love is that wherein the Communion of Saints doth consist. How great a thing that Communion is, appears from the place which the acknowledge∣ment of it hath always had in the ancient Creeds of the Church. I do not say this Communion doth consist solely therein. There belongs unto it a common participa∣tion of the same sanctifying Spirit, and a common Interest in the same spiritual Head Christ Jesus, as to its principles, and common participation of the same Ordinances as to its exercise. But herein doth this Communion among themselves principally consist. That it hath no concernment in an outward compliance with certain Rites and Ceremonies that are invented not for the life of Unity, but for a shew of Uniformity, I suppose all men are well enough satisfied. But this is the Order of the Communion of Saints. The foundation of it is laid in a joynt par∣ticipation of the same quickening Spirit, and Union with Christ thereby. It is acted and exercised by Love arising from this Spring; and it is expressed in our joynt participation of the same Ordinances of Worship. Hence it is apparent that where this Love is not, there is no Communion of Saints nor any thing belonging there∣unto. For our participation together in the same Ordinances is no part thereof, unless the influence of our Original Communion in the participation of the same Spirit, be conveyed thereunto by Love, by which alone it is acted. This the Apo∣stle fully expresseth; Ephes. 4. 15, 16. But speaking the Truth in Love we may grow up into him in all things which is the Head even Christ; from whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joynt supplieth, according to the effe∣ctual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the Body unto the edifying of it self in Love. There is not a more eminent description of the Communion of Saints, especially as united in Church Order, in the whole Scripture. And we see that it begins and ends in Love, and so is carried on from first unto last. The
Spring and Fountain of it lies in our Relation unto, and Union with Christ the Head. And we are said to grow up into him in all things, when we expresly de∣rive all from him, and direct all to him, when in the increase of every Grace, our Union with him is more express and confirmed, and our likeness with, nearness to him is enlarged. From him as from the Head, the whole Body and every Mem∣ber thereof, hath all those spiritual supplies, whereby their Union with him is ex∣pressed, and their Communion among themselves is acted and carried on. For the Union and Communion of the Church doth not consist in things of outward Or∣der, and supposed Decency, but in the fit joyning and compacting of all the Mem∣bers in the same Body, by an effectual communication of spiritual Supplies from Christ the Head which do naturally cast every part of the Body into that place and use which is designed unto them. But what do the Saints themselves as Members of this Body? why every joynt, every principal person on the account of Gifts, Grace, or Office, yea every part, every member, contributes to the Edification of the whole, and the increase of Grace in it, which is the end of all this Communion. But how is this done, how is their part acted? saith the Apostle, it is done by Love. The foundation of it lies in their speaking the Truth in Love, , holding, believing, professing the Truth, so as to exercise mutual Love thereby. In whatsoever we manage the Truth, in all that we have to do in the Profession of it, in speaking, preaching, conference, instruction, it is all to be managed in Love to the whole Body, or we had as good let it alone. And the End of all is Edification in Love; that is, either by Love,  for , which is frequent; or in Love, seeing in the increase or inlargement thereof doth our Edification principally consist. For as Love edifieth, 1 Cor. 8. 1. is the principal means of the Edification of the Church; so it is it self in its increase a principal part of Edification. A Church abounding in Love, is a Church well built up in its Faith. And this also farther evinceth the necessity of this Duty and Grace. The Communion of Saints in any thing else with∣out this is a deceitful figment. 4. Without this Love we are of no use in the Church of God. Some men seem to be very useful by their Gifts, and I wish that none do pride themselves in them, or bear themselves high upon them. For of themselves they are apt to puff us up. But the very Truth is, that without this Love, and the constant exercise of it, they are of little or no use unto the true spiritual Edification of the Church. This our Apostle doth not only plainly affirm, but also so largely argue, as we need not fur∣ther insist upon it, 1 Cor. 13. For he doth not only compare the most excellent Gifts of the Spirit with it, preferring it above them all; but also declares that with∣out it, no man by virtue of those Gifts is of any better use in the Church, than a little sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal, ver. 1, 2, 3. Wherefore we may consider, 5. That whatever Grace any man seem to have, whatever Profession he make, of whatever use he appear to be, if he have not this Love, if he live not in the ex∣ercise of it, he hath indeed no Grace in Truth, nor any real Interest in the Benefits of the Gospel. Faith where it is sincere worketh by Love, Gal. 4. and that which doth not so is vain, dead, and useless, Jam. 2. 14, 15, 16. If we love one ano∣ther, we are born of God, and know God; if we do not, we know not God, whatever we pretend, for God is Love, 1 Joh. 4. 7, 8. And many other considerati∣ons of the like nature might be called over, from whence it is manifest what ground the Apostle had to lay so great weight as he doth on that Love which he hath observed among the Hebrews. I cannot pass by this subject wholly without a little farther pressing the necessity of the obtaining and due exercise of this Grace. I know not how it comes to pass, but so it is, that men are harrassed continually about want of Love, with Writings keen and invective, yet little Fruits do we see to come thereof. And the plain reason of it is, because the Love which men so contend for, is confined to that practice in, and of Ecclesiastical Communion, whose measures they have fixed to themselves. If you will do thus and thus, go in such or such ways, so or so far, leave off such ways of Fellowship in the Gospel as you have embraced and think according unto the mind of God, then you have Love, else you have none at all. How little either Unity or Love hath been promoted by such Principles and Pra∣ctices, is now evident; yea how much Divisions, Animosities, and mutual Alie∣nations
of minds and affections have been increased by them. For my part I should be sorry that any man living should out-go me in earnest desires that all the people of God were agreed and united, as in Faith and Love, so also in the same way of Worship, in all things; However I know my desires unto that End are sincere. But that there can be no Love, or no due exercise of it, until that be accomplished, I am not perswaded, I do not believe; yea I judge that if ever it be, it will rather be the effect and fruit of Love; than the cause of it. Let us therefore all lay hold on the present season, and not lose the exercise of Love whilst we contend about it. I know no way wherein I judge that any who fear God in the world do walk at this day, that is in and of it self inconsistent with Gospel Love, or a real Obstru∣ction to the exercise of it. If any such there be, it is really to be abhorred. And the more semblance there is of such an Evil in any opinion, way, or practice, the more it is to be suspected. But to charge this upon the gathering of Professors of the Gospel and Obedience unto Christ, into particular Congregations, or especial Societies for Church Administrations, hath an appearance at least of Envy, Ill-will, and Ignorance. For none of the Institutions of Christ, such as this is, can either directly or by any just consequences, obstruct that Love which he requireth of his Disciples, and which indeed they are all suited to promote. And this of parti∣cular Churches is an effect of the Wisdom of Christ providing a way for the con∣stant and due exercise of that Love towards some which is to be extended unto all as opportunities are offered. And those who would perswade us to forsake these Assemblies, and to break up their Societies, that returning into the larger Commu∣nion of the many, we may have and exercise Love, do but perswade us to cast away our Food that we may be strong, and to throw away our Cloathes that we may be warm. Let us therefore not wait for other seasons, nor think any outward thing previ∣ously necessary unto the due discharge of this great Duty of the Gospel. We are in our way, let us go about our work. And I shall only at present give a few Cauti∣ons against the common hinderances of it, because it must yet be spoken unto again immediately. 1. Take heed of a froward natural temper. Wherever this is predominant, it either weakens Love, or sullies the Glory of its exercise. Some good persons have naturally so much of the Nabal in them, that a man scarce knows how to converse with them. They mingle all the sweet fruits of Love with so much harshness and sowrness, as makes them ungrateful unto those who most need them. I think it is a mistake, that Grace only subdues our sinful corruptions; it will if cared for and used as it ought, cure our natural Dispositions, so far as any evil, or occasion of evil is as it were incorporated with them. If it maketh not the froward, meek, the angry, patient, the peevish and morose, sweet and compliant, how doth it make the Leopard lye down with the Kid, and the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, Isa. 11. 6. And it is not enough considered how great a Lustre is put upon the exercise of Love, when it is accompanied with a natural condescension, compliance and be∣nignity. 2. Watch against the disadvantages of an outward condition. Those of high degree are usually encompassed with so many circumstances of distance, that they know not how to break through them unto that familiarity of Love that ought to be among Believers. But as the Gospel on all civil or secular accounts leaves unto men all their Advantages of Birth, Education, Offices, Power, manner of converse, free and entire, so with respect unto things purely Spiritual it lays all level among Believers. In Jesus Christ there is neither Jew nor Greek, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free, but all are one in Christ, and it is the new Creature alone that makes the difference. Hence in all affairs of the Church we are forbid to have any re∣spect unto the outward state and condition of men, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. We all serve the same common Lord and Master, who when he was rich, for our sakes became poor. And if we for his sake lay not aside the consideration of all our Riches with that distance of mind and conversation from the poorest Saints, his Disciples. I speak not now of the laying out of mens wealth for the use of the poor, but of lowliness of mind in condescending unto a Brotherly Communion in Love with the meanest of them. Let therefore the greatest know, that there is no Duty of Spiritual Love that unbecomes them. And if their state and condition keep them
from that Communion of Love which is required of all Believers, it is their Snare and Temptation. If they converse not familiarly with the lowest of them as they have occasion, if they visit them not when it is requisite, if they bear them not in their Hearts and Minds as their especial Church Relation requires, they sin against the Law of this holy Love. 3. Watch against provocations. Whilst we and others are encompassed with the Body of our Infirmities, we shall meet with what we may be prone so to esteem. Where men are apt to turn every Infirmity, every failing, every neglect, and it may be every mistake, into a provocation and to take offence thereat, never expect any thing of Love from such Persons. For as their frame is a fruit of pride, and self-conceit, so it is diametrically opposite unto all the principal actings of Love de∣scribed by our Apostle, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. 4. Take heed of resting satisfied in the outward Duties of Love, without the inward workings of it, as also in an apprehension of inward Affections without outward Fruits. Men may have a Conviction that all the outward Duties of Love, in warning, admonishing, comforting, relieving with outward supplies are to be at∣tended unto, and may accordingly be exercised in them, and yet exercise little real Love in them all. Hence our Apostle supposeth that a man may give all his Goods to feed the poor, and yet have no Charity, 1 Cor. 13. 2. All Fruit partakes of the nature of the Root. If the good we do in these kinds proceed only from Conviction of Duty, and not from fervent Love, they will prove but Hay and Stub∣ble that will burn in their Trial. Secondly, With this Love as an eminent Adjunct of it, the Apostle expresseth . the labour of it, the labour of Love, ; laboriosa charitas; laborious Love, saith Beza. Laboris ex charitate suscepti, Eras. the labour undergone on the account of Love, that is, in the exercise of it.  is such a kind of labour as is at∣tended with much difficulty and trouble, a painful labour. A lazie Love like that described by the Apostle, Jam. 2. 15, 16. and which most men satisfie themselves withall, is no evidence of a saving Faith. But we are here taught, that Love if it be true is laborious and diligent: or, Great and difficult labour is required unto Love in its due exercise. It is not unto Love it self absolutely but unto its exercise that this labour is required; yet this exercise is such as is inseparable from the Grace it self. And this is necessary upon the account of the Difficulties that lye in its way, and the Oppositions that it meets withall. These make a work laborious and painful. Faith and Love are generally looked on as easie and common things; But it is by them who have them not. As they are the only Springs of all Obedience towards God, and Usefulness towards men, so they meet with the greatest oppositions from within and from without. I shall name some few of those which are most effectual, and least taken notice of. As, 1. Self-love; This is diametrically opposed unto it. Self-love is the making a mans self his own Centre, the beginning and ending of all that he doth. It makes men grudge every drop of good that falls besides themselves; and whoever is under the power of it, will not willingly and chearfully do that for another, which he thinks he can do for himself. This is the measure of self; whatever is added unto it, it doth not satisfie; it would still have more: and whatever goeth from it, on one account or other it is too much, it doth not please. Unless this be in some good measure subdued, mortified, and cast out, there can be no exercise of Love. And hereunto labour is required. For man being turned off from God is wholly turned into himself. And without an holy violence unto all our Affections as naturally de∣praved, we can never be freed from an inclination to centre all in self. And these things are directly contradictory. Self-love, and Love of the Saints, are like two Buckets, proportionably unto the rising of the one, the other goeth down. Look unto what degree soever we arise in self-love, whatever else we do, and what∣ever our works may be, to the same proportion do we sink in Christian Love. 2. Evil surmises rise up with no small efficacy against the exercise of Love. And they are apt on various accounts to insinuate themselves into the minds of men when they are called unto the discharge of this Duty. One thing or other from this depraved Affection which our nature is obnoxious unto, shall be sug∣gested to weaken our hearts and hands in what we are about. And it requires no
small spiritual labour to cast out all such surmises, and to give up our selves to the conduct of that Charity which suffereth long and is kind, which bear∣eth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, endureth all things, 1 Cor. 13. 3. Distrust of Gods Promises as to supplies for our selves. Men are afraid that if they should inlarge themselves in a way of Bounty towards others, which is one Duty of Love, they may in time be brought even to want themselves, at least, as unto that proportion of supplies which they judge necessary. It were endless to recount the sacred Promises which give assurance of the contrary. Nor can any one Instance in the whole world be produced unto this purpose. But these are looked upon as good words by the most, but are not really believed. Yea men are apt to deceive their Souls in supposing they believe the free Promises of God con∣cerning Grace and Mercy, whilst they believe not those which are annexed unto Duty. For he who believeth not any Promises of the Gospel, believeth none. Faith doth as equally respect all Gods Promises, as Obedience doth all his Commands. And it was a good design in a Reverend Person who wrote a Discourse to prove from the Scripture and Experience, That largeness in Charity is the best and safest way of thriving in this world. 4. Where the Objects of this exercise of Love are multiplied, Weariness is apt to befall us, and insensibly to take us off from the whole. The Wisdom and Pro∣vidence of God do multiply Objects of Love and Charity to excite us to more acts of Duty; and the corruption of our Hearts with self-love useth the consideration of them, to make us weary of all. Men would be glad to see an end of the trouble and charge of their Love, when that only is true which is endless. Hence our Apo∣stle in the next Verse expresseth his desire that these Hebrews should not faint in their work, but shew the same diligence unto the full assurance of hope unto the end. See Gal. 6. 9. And if we faint in spiritual Duties because of the increase of their oc∣casions, it is a sign that what we have done already, did not spring from the proper Root of Faith and Love. What is done in the strength of Nature and Con∣viction, howsoever vigorous it may be for a season, in process of time will decay and give out. And this is the reason why so many fail in the course of their Profession. All Springs of Obedience that lye in Convictions and the improvement of natural Abilities under them, will at one time or other fade and dry up. And where we find our selves to faint or decay in any Duties, our first enquiry should be after the nature of their spring and principle. Only the Spirit of God is living water that never fails. So the Prophet tells us, that even the Youths shall faint and be weary, and the Young men shall utterly fail, Isa. 40. 30. They who seem to be the strongest and most vigorous in the performance of any Duties, yet if they have nothing but their own strength, the Ability of nature under Convictions to trust unto, they will and shall faint and utterly fail. For that such are intended is ma∣nifest from the opposition in the next words; But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not faint, ver. 31. If our Strength and Duties be de∣rived by Faith from God, the more we engage in them, the more it will be in∣creased. The way of the Lord is strength to the upright, Prov. 10. 29. Where we are upright in the way of God, the very way it self will supply us with new strength continually. And we shall go from strength unto strength, Psal. 84. 7. from one strengthening Duty unto another, and not be weary. But hereunto diligence and labour also is required. From these and the like considerations it is that the Apostle here mentioneth the industrious labour of Love that was in the Hebrews, as an evidence of their saving Faith and Sincerity. The next thing expressed in these words is the Evidence they gave of this labour of Love, and the means whereby the Apostle came to know it. They shewed it,  , ye have shewed or manifested it. The same word that James useth in the same case, , chap. 2. 18. shew me thy Faith by thy works, declare it, make it manifest. And a man may shew a thing two ways: (1) By the doing of it. (2) By declaring what he hath done. He that works visibly in his calling shews his work by what he doth. And he who works in secret may declare it as he hath occasion. It is in the first sense that the Hebrews shewed their labour of Love,
and that James requires us to shew our Faith and Works. The things themselves are intended which cannot but be manifest in their due performance. To shew the labour of Love is to labour in the Duties of it, as that it shall be evident. Yet this self-evidencing power of the works of Love, is a peculiar property of those that are some way eminent. When we abound in them, and when the Duties of them are above the ordinary sort and rate, then are we said to shew them, that is, they become conspicuous and eminent. To that purpose is the command of our Sa∣viour, Matth. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good works and glorifie your Father which is in Heaven. Not only let it shine, but let it so shine, which respects the measure and degree of our Obedience; and herein are we required so to abound that our works may be evident unto all. If they will take no notice of them for their good, if they will revile us and reproach us for our good works, as though they were evil works, which is the way of the world to∣wards most Duties of Gospel Obedience, they themselves must answer for their Blindness; our Duty it is so to abound in them, as that they may be discerned and seen of all who do not either shut their Eyes out of prejudice against what we are, or turn their faces from them out of dislike of what we do. Nothing is to be done by us that it may be seen; but what may be seen is to be done that God may be glorified. Wherefore these Hebrews shewed the work of Faith, and the labour of Love, by a diligent attendance unto, and an abundant performance of the one and the other. 3. The End, or Reason, or Cause of their performance of these Duties, which . gives them spirit and life, rendring them truly Christian and acceptable unto God, is added, , towards his name. Some would have , to be put for , in his name; which also may bear the sense here in∣tended. But towards his name is more emphatical. And we may observe (1) That in this place it respects not the whole work of these Hebrews, the work of Faith be∣fore mentioned, but it is peculiarly annexed unto the labour of Love, The labour of Love towards his name. (2) That it was the Saints that were the immediate object of that Love; as is declared in the words ensuing, in that you have ministred to the Saints and do minister. Wherefore it is a Love unto the Saints on the account of the name of God that is intended. And this Love unto the Saints is towards the name of God on three accounts: (1) Objectively: Because the name of God is upon them; They are the Family that is called after his name. Of him the whole Family of them in Heaven and Earth is named, Ephes. 3. 15. They are the Family of God, or Houshold of God, chap. 2. 19. The Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 27. The Name of God is upon them, and therefore what is done unto them is done towards the Name of God whether it be good or evil. (2) Formally; because their Relation unto God is the Reason why they laboured in Love towards them. This is that which gives this Love its especial nature, when it is exercised towards any, meerly on the account of their Relation unto God, because they are his, be∣cause his name is called on them. (3) Efficiently; The Name of God is his Au∣thority and Will; God requires this labour of Love of us; it is his Will and Command; and therefore whatever we do in the discharge of it, we do it towards his Name, that is, with a due reverence of, and regard unto his Will and Autho∣rity. The whole therefore of this Duty rightly performed begins and ends with the name of God. Hence we may observe; That, It is a due regard unto the Name of God that gives Life, Spirituality and Acceptance Obser. 1. unto all the Duties of Love which we perform towards others. Great things have been done in the world, with a great appearance of Love, which yet have been all lost as to the Glory of God, and the spiritual Advantage of them by whom they have been done. Some have been lost from a principle of Superstition, some from a de∣sign of Merit, some from vain Glory or a desire of Reputation, by being seen of men. And many other ways there are whereby men may lose the benefit of what they have wrought. Now whereas this labour of Love is a Duty which hath so many difficulties attending it as we have before declared, it is of the highest con∣cernment unto us to take care that what we do therein be not lost. Unless it be done with respect unto the Command of God, and so be a part of the Obedience of Faith, unless it be influenced with a regard of their Relation unto God, and his
peculiar concernment in them towards whom our Love is exercised, it will not endure the Trial, when the Fire of it shall consume all Hay and Stubble. What we do in this kind is so to be done as that the Lord Christ may own it as done un∣to himself in the first place. Again, There is the Object of this Love in its exercise, and they are , the Saints. And they are considered either as to their general condition and qualification, which is expressed, they are Saints; or as unto their particular state and circumstances, they are such as stand in need to be ministred unto. 1. They are Saints. There is nothing more evident than that all true Believers, and all those who upon their Profession are presumed so to be, are in the New Testament stiled Saints. For  are the same with , Rom. 1. 7. , Heb. 2. , 1 Cor. 1. 2. Saints are the same with called and sanctified in Jesus Christ. Every Believer is sanctified; and every one who is not sanctified, is no true Believer; so that Believers and Saints are the same. But the Atheism of this Age hath made it a Reproach among many once to use the name; and with some this Appellation is restrained unto such as are canonized or deified by themselves. Chrysostome is express to our purpose on this place. . Hearing these things, I beseech you let us minister unto the Saints. For every Believer, in as much as he is a Believer, is a Saint. Although he be a secular person (which he mentions in opposition to their Imagination who confined Saintship unto Monks) he is a Saint; which he proves by Testimonies that they are sanctified. These Saints therefore were the Disciples of Christ, Pro∣fessors of the Gospel, presumed in Charity to be true Believers and therefore real Saints. 2. They are supposed to be in such an outward condition as to stand in need of being administred unto; they were in some kind of wants or distresses. And such was in an especial manner the condition of the Saints at that time among the Hebrews. Their Poverty was such as that our Apostle in many places, perhaps in all where the Gospel had success, made collations for them. And as he pressed the Gentile Believers unto a contribution unto this purpose, with weighty Arguments, Rom. 15. 25, 26, 27. so he looked on his Duty herein of so great importance that he earnestly requests that his discharge of it might be accepted with God and by the poor Saints themselves, ver. 30, 31. And where any Churches had largely mini∣stred in this kind, he rejoyceth in it, as that which would tend unto the unspeak∣able advancement of the Glory of Gods Grace, 2 Cor. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And this Duty was the Apostle most careful in, as that wherein he gave a Testimony unto the change of the Church Estate of the Old Testament. All the Jews before all the world over did send their Oblations in things dedicated, Silver and Gold, unto the Temple. And if they made any Proselytes among the Gentiles, the first thing they did was to cause them to acknowledge their Obedience by sending Gifts to the Treasury of the Temple; and that this was done from all parts of the Ro∣man Empire was known and complained of. Wherefore our Apostle declares that the Old Church state was now changed, and that the believing Saints were become the only Temple of God. And therefore from all those whom he made Proselytes of, or won to the Faith of Christ, he calleth a Benevolence for that Temple or the poor Saints in Judea. This therefore was an eminent Duty in that place and at that season. For this Poverty and these Exigencies they were cast under on many accounts. For at that time they were under great Oppressions, and Deva∣stations by the Covetousness and Rapine of their Rulers, or the Roman Gover∣nours of them. And the whole Nation was every day vexed by seditious persons and prevailing multitudes of Robbers. And these things were common unto them with others. But moreover, they were exposed in particular for the profession of the Gospel unto great persecution, wherein in an especial manner their Goods were spoiled, and their persons brought under various distressing Calamities, as our Apostle declares, chap. 10. 32, 33, 34. Besides generally those who gave up their names unto Christ were of the lower sort of the people, the poor among them re∣ceiving the Gospel. All these things declare their wants to have been great, besides other incidents of life that might befall them unto their distress. These were
they unto whom the Hebrews ministred, whose condition put an eminency on that Duty. But it may be said, That if this were their state, how could any of them, or how could the Church in general thus labour in Love, by administring unto the wants of others, when they themselves were even overwhelmed with their own? I answer, (1) We do not I fear sufficiently understand what was the frame and spirit of those first Believers; and out of how very little of their own they would admi∣nister unto the greater necessities of others, that there might be no lack in the Body. So the Apostle tells us that in the Church of Macedonia, when they were under Trials, Afflictions, Persecutions, their deep Poverty abounded with the Riches of Libera∣lity, 2 Cor. 5. 2. In their own great Poverty and under Persecution they contributed largely unto the necessity of others. For us who are apt to think that there are so many things necessary that we may minister unto the poor Saints, as so much wealth at least, so much provision for our own Families, peace and some kind of quietness in what we enjoy, it is no wonder if we cannot so easily understand what is affirmed of that labour of Love which was among the Primitive Believers. They gave freely and liberally out of their Poverty and amidst their Troubles, we can scarce part with superfluities in Peace. (2) It is not improbable but that there might be some in the Church who escaping the common calamities of the most, were able to contribute bountifully to the necessity of others; and their discharge of Duty is reckoned by the Apostle unto the whole Church, whilst in the rest there was a willing mind, whence they were judged and accepted according to what they had, and not according to what they had not. And those who have Ability in any Church should do well to consider the Honour and Reputation of the whole Church in the sight of God and man depends much on their Diligence and Bounty in the discharge of this Duty. Hence is that peculiar direction of our Apostle unto Timothy with respect unto this sort of persons; Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not high-minded, or trust in uncertain Riches, but in the living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Tim. 6. 17, 18. (3) The contribution of outward things is but one way of ministration unto the Saints, but one part of this Duty. There are spiritual Aids and Assistances in visiting, exhorting, com∣forting that belong thereunto. And herein all may be sedulously conversaut, though poor and low in the world. (4) It is very probable that the whole Church was very careful and diligent in looking out for help and assistance where it was needed, beyond what they had Ability to supply. And hereby did they no less exercise their Love, than in what they did personally themselves. For it is an Ordinance of Christ, that where Churches are disenabled through persecution or poverty to minister unto the necessities of the poor among them, they should seek for relief from other Persons or Churches walking in the same Profession of the Faith and Order of the Gospel with themselves. Wherefore (5) The intendment of this Expression is, that they industriously exercised Love towards all the Saints, every one according to his Ability and Capacity, and more is not re∣quired. Lastly, The especial manner of the exercise of this labour of Love is called Ministration, and the especial Object thereof is the Saints, of whom we have spo∣ken already. And concerning this Ministration the Apostle ascribes it unto them with respect unto what was past, and what they did at present, both which were ne∣cessary to found the Judgement on which he made concerning them; You have mi∣nistered and you do minister. is a laborious and industrious Ministry. And this in the Church is twofold. (1) Of Especial Office. (2) Of Common Love and Charity. The rise, occasion and institution of an especial Office or Ministry towards the poor is at large declared, Acts 6. and mentioned afterwards by our Apostle as an abiding Ordinance, Rom. 12. 7. 1 Tim. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And this Ministration is comprised herein though not solely intended. For what is done by these Deacons, being done in the name and by the appointment, and out of the Charity of the Church, is to be esteemed the Ministration of the Church it self. And though there be a peculiar Faithfulness and Diligence required in the persons called unto this Ministration, yet the Ministration it self will abound or be straitened according
as the whole Church dischargeth its Duty. But the common Ministration of Bro∣therly Love, what every one doth or ought to do in his own person is here in∣tended. And therein six things may be considered not here to be insisted on. As (1) The Root, Spring, and Cause of it, which is Love. (2) The manner of its performance, which is with labour and diligence. (3) The Object of it, or the Saints in wants, troubles, straights, or necessities. (4) The acts of it which are many and various; the chief whereof are, (1) Visiting of them. (2) Advice and Counsel. (3) Consolation. (4) Supplies of their wants by outward things. (5) Endeavours in the use of means for their full relief: (1) With God in con∣tinual Prayers and Supplications, (2) With men according unto our Interests and Advantages, not being ashamed or afraid to own them in their poverty, distresses, and sufferings. (6) The Rule of this Ministration is every mans (1) Opportu∣nity, (2) Ability, (3) Especial call by objective circumstances. But these things I must not here enlarge upon. This is that on the Observation whereof the Apostle grounds his perswasion con∣cerning these Hebrews expressed in the Verse foregoing. And herein he gives us the true character of a Church of sound Believers. They are such a Society as being called into the Fellowship and Order of the Gospel do walk in Faith, ex∣pressing it in Fruits of Obedience, carefully and diligently exercising Love towards one another, on the account of the name of God, especially with a continual re∣gard unto them who suffer or are in any distress. These are the things indeed which accompany Salvation. And we may observe in our passage, That it is the Will and Pleasure of God that many of his Saints be in a condi∣tion Obser. 1. in this world, wherein they stand in need of being ministred unto. Hereof as to the distinction of persons, why these shall be poor, afflicted, tempted, tried in the Fire and not others, no direct reason can be given but the Soveraignty of God which is to be submitted unto. And those whose especial Lot it is to be thus exercised, may do well to consider always; (1) That this Will and Pleasure of God is ac∣companied with infinite Wisdom and Holiness, so as that there is no unrighteous∣ness therein. (2) That they shall not be final losers by their poor afflicted condi∣tion. God will make all up unto them both here and to Eternity. And if there were no more in it but this, that they are brough thereby unto a clearer foresight of, and more earnest longings after Eternal Rest and Glory, they have a sufficient recompence in their hands for all their sufferings. (3) That God might have put them with others into such Pastures here only to have been fatted against the day of slaughter. Let them but consider how much Spiritual and Eternal Mercies wherein they are interested do exceed things Temporal, they will find they have no cause to com∣plain. (4) Whereas it is for the Glory of God and the Benefit of the Church that some should be peculiarly in an afflicted condition, they ought even to rejoyce that God hath chosen them to use them as he pleaseth unto those Ends. But for the thing it self the Reasons of it are revealed and manifest. For (1) God hereby gives Testimony unto all, that the good things as they are esteemed of this world, are no Tokens or Pledges of his Love, and that he hath better things in store for them whom he careth for. He doth hereby cast contempt on the desirable things of the world, and testifieth that there are better things to be received even in this life, than whatever is of the number of them. For had not God better things to bestow on his Saints in this world than any the world can afford, he would not with-hold these from them, so far at least as that they should be straightened in their want. Wherefore in this Dispensation of his Providence he doth testifie unto all, that internal spiritual mercies, such as his Saints enjoy, are incomparably to be preferred above all things of that kind wherein he keeps them short, 2 Sam. 23. 5. (2) He maketh way hereby for the vigorous fruitful exercise of all the Graces of his Spirit, namely, in the various conditions whereinto the Members of the Church are cast. And let every one look to it and know, that according unto his outward condition in the world, whether it be of want or abundance, there is peculiar exercise of Grace unto the Glory of God required of him. It is expected from all that are high or low, rich or poor, free or in di∣stress, not only that they live in the exercise of all Grace in general, but also that they diligently endeavour an abounding fruitfulness in those Graces, whose exercise their especial condition calleth for. And secondly we are here taught that,
The great Trial of our Love consists in our regard unto the Saints that are in distress. Obser. 2. That is the Foundation of the commendation of the Love of these Hebrews; they ministred unto them. Either Love or at least an appearance of Love will be easily preserved where we have little or no need of one another. But when the exercise of it proves costly, when it puts us unto charge or trouble, or into danger, as it doth more or less when it is exercised towards them that are in distress, then is it brought unto its trial. And in such a season we have experience that the Love of many is so far from bringing forth more fruit, as that the very leaves of it fall off, and they give over its profession. Wherefore, It is the Glory and Honour of a Church, the principal Evidence of its spiritual Life, Obser. 3. when it is diligent and abounds in those Duties of Faith and Love which are attended with the greatest difficulties. From hence doth the Apostle commend these Hebrews, and firmly perswades himself that they were endued with those better things which accompany Salvation. For hereby, as we might shew, (1) God is singularly glo∣rified, (2) The Gospel is peculiarly promoted; (3) An especial lustre is put upon the Graces of the Spirit, and (4) All the Ends of Sathan and the World in their Persecutions, are utterly frustrated. And these things have we spoken concerning the first ground of the Apostles per∣swasion of the good spiritual estate at present of these Hebrews, and their future Eternal safety, namely, that work of Faith and labour of Love which he had ob∣served in them. The other ground of his Perswasion is taken from the Righteousness of God; God is not unrighteous to forget your work. I intimated before that the word used  by the Apostle to express the frame of his mind in this matter, , we are perswaded, ver. 9. is applied sometimes to denote the infallible certainty of Faith, and sometimes the moral certainty of Charity. In this place it hath respect unto a double object or reason. (1) What was in the professing Hebrews, their Faith and Love. Hereof he could have no assurance or certainty beyond a moral perswasion, or the satisfaction of a charitable Judgement. But on this supposition his perswa∣sion had another object, namely, the Righteousness of God in the stability of his Promises, whence he had infallible assurance, or did conclude infallibly unto what he was perswaded of. The Righteousness of God sometimes denotes the absolute Rectitude and perfect Goodness of his Nature; and hereunto all other Acceptations of the Word as ap∣plied unto God are to be reduced. Sometimes the Equity of the holy Dispen∣sations of his Justice, whereby he renders unto every one what is their due, accor∣ding unto the nature of things and his holy Appointments, is so called. And sometimes particularly his Vindictive Justice whereby he avengeth sin, and punisheth sinners is so expressed. Sometimes, yea frequently, the Fidelity of God in keeping and accomplishing his Promises, is called his Righteousness. For it belongeth un∣to the absolute Rectitude of his nature so to do. So saith the Apostle, If we con∣fess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 Joh. 1. 9. The forgive∣ness of sins is on all accounts an Act of mercy which is contradistinguished unto Righteousness in Judgement strictly so called, Jam. 2. 13. Wherefore that Righ∣teousness which is exercised in the pardon of sin, is no other but the Faithfulness of God in the Promises of the Covenant; He hath promised that he who confesseth and forsaketh his sins shall find mercy. Hence it is just with God to forgive their sins who do so. And this is the Righteousness that is here principally intended. For the Righteousness whereby God rewardeth the works that are wrought in men by his own Grace, is the same with that whereby he forgiveth their sins, equally respecting the Covenant and the Promises thereof. For without the consideration hereof, strict or exact Righteousness, could he neither pardon sin, nor reward our works, which being imperfect do no way answer the Rule which it doth or can proceed by. In this sense is God here said, not to be unrighteous to forget their work, that is, to be Righteous so as not to forget it; He will have that respect unto it which he hath graciously promised in the Covenant, because he is Righteous, that is, Faithful in his Promises. And that no other Righteousness can be here intended, is evident from hence, because no work of ours doth answer the Rule of any other Righteousness in God.
Again, We must enquire what it is, not to forget their work. And this  may respect either the preserving of it for the present or the future rewarding of it. (1) It is not an unfrequent Temptation unto Believers, that God so far dis∣regards them as not to take care of Graces or Duties in them, to cherish and pre∣serve them. See the complaints of the Church to this purpose, Isa. 40. 27, 28. chap. 49. 14. God hath forgotten me. This is here denied; God is not unrighteous to forget us or our work, so as not to cherish and preserve it. So the Apostle expresseth the same Perswasion concerning the Philippians as he doth here of the Hebrews, chap. 1. 6. Being confident of this very thing that he which hath begun a good work in you, will preserve it until the day of Jesus Christ; He is not unrighteous to forget it. God hath in the Covenant of Grace promised to preserve the Faith and Love of his People, that they should not perish nor be lost. Wherefore having begun a good work, and you having made some good progress in compliance with his Grace, he is not unrighteous so as to forget his Covenant Ingagement, but will preserve you and your Graces in you unto the End; which is the sum of that great Prayer of the Apostle for all Believers, 1 Pet. 5. 10. 2. Respect may be had herein to the future and final Reward of the Faith, Love, and Works of Believers. For this also belongs unto Gods Covenant. And it is so of Grace, as that the Righteousness of God wherein it is due unto us, can be no other but that of his Faithfulness in his Promises. For neither we nor our works are capable of an Eternal Reward by the way of merit, i. e. that the Reward should be reckoned unto us not of Grace but of Debt, Rom. 4. 4. And that which utterly overthrows such an Apprehension is, that God himself is our Eternal Re∣ward, Gen. 15. 1. And I leave it unto others to consider how they can deserve that Reward. Whether of these senses he will embrace, the Reader is left to de∣termine for himself. The former seems to me more suited to the design of the Apostle, and scope of the place. For he is satisfying these Hebrews that he made another Judgement of them, than of those Apostates whose condition he had be∣fore described. And this he doth on two Grounds. First, That they were actually made Partakers of sincere saving Grace, and therein things that accom∣pany Salvation; and then that God in his Faithfulness would preserve and secure that Grace in them against all Oppositions unto the End. Following this sense of the words we may learn that Our Perseverance in Faith and Obedience though it require our Duty and Constancy therein, yet it depends not on them absolutely, but on the Righteousness of God in his Obser. 4. Promises. Or if we had rather embrace the other sense of the words, then are we sufficiently instructed, That Nothing shall be lost that is done for God or in Obedience unto him. He is not unjust to forget our labour of Love. And, The certainty of our future Reward depending on the Righteousness of God, is a great Encouragement unto present Obedience.
VERSE 11. . There is not much difficulty as to the signification of these words, and therefore both ancient and modern Translations generally are agreed in the Interpretation of them. The Vul. Lat. renders , by ostentare sollicitudinem. But ostentare is most frequently used for ostendere gloriandi causa, as Festus saith, though properly it seem to be a frequentative, to shew often, and is improper in this place. Nor doth sollicitudinem well answer , which the Syriack renders by ; Sedulity, Diligence, Industry. Studium ostendere say most, and most properly. . Syr.  ad complementum, to the compleating or perfection of Hope. Vul. Lat. Ad expletionem Spei, which our Rhemists render by, the Accomplishing of Hope; the fulfilling of Hope. Bez. Ad certam spei persuasionem, whereunto answers our Translation, to the full assurance of Hope. Others, ad plenam spei certitudinem, most properly. , is earnestly to desire; whence is , concupiscence, libido, an earnest,  and mostly an impetuous desire. So the Philosopher defined , that it was , which Cicero renders, Ira, libido puniendi; both from the Original de∣rivation of it; a desire that invades the mind, an earnest vehement desire. , We render and: and we desire; but yet, or moreover. The same with  what is more largely expressed, 2 Pet. 1. 5. , and besides all this, besides what is past. , to manifest, that is, evince it unto all by the same performance of  Duties; that no decay in Faith or Love might be observed in them, or suspected of them. is rendered study, diligence, endeavour. But it is such a Diligence as hath  an earnestness accompanying it: that is, as it were making haste in pressing towards the End and Accomplishment of any thing or business. And it doth always de∣note great and earnest diligence with study and desire. It is used to this purpose, 2 Pet. 1. 5. , is, saith Hesychius, , firmitas, certitudo; stability. It is plena fides, plena persuasio, certa fides. A sure, stable, firm, certain Faith, or per∣swasion.  The Vulgar Latine constantly renders this word, as also the Verb , by some word denoting filling or compleating, taking its signification from the first part in the Composition. But whatever be the native signification of the single words whereof it is compounded, or with respect unto what Allusion soever the signification was first fixed, it is certain that in the best Authors as in the Scripture, it expresseth a full satisfactory perswasion of mind, or the highest assurance in any thing which from the nature of it we are capable of. And we (earnestly) desire that every one of you do manifest the same diligence, unto the full assurance of Hope unto the End. Ver. 11. Although the Apostle in these words and those ensuing, as is usual with him, taketh a prospect towards his further progress, making way by them and in them unto his discourse concerning Melchisedec, which he hath intermitted, whence some would here begin the third part of the Chapter; yet he plainly pursues his former Argument and gives an express account of his whole design therein. For first he manifests directly what was his intention in proposing unto them that terrible Com∣mination and prediction concerning Apostates, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Although for cer∣tain ends he spoke those things unto them, yet he lets them know that he spake them not of them. He thought not that they were such at present as he had described, nor that that would be their future Lot or Portion, which he had threatened and foretold. As he had freed them from any fears or apprehensions of that nature in the two Verses foregoing, so in these he declareth what was his certain purpose and intention in the use of that Commination. Now this was solely thereby to
excite and provoke them unto a diligent persevering continuance in Faith and Love with their fruits and effects, which is the first and principal End whereunto the proposal of such Threatenings is designed and sanctified of God. All that I have said, is unto this End. Again, He had newly given an account of his real thoughts and Judgement con∣cerning them and their spiritual condition. And upon his satisfaction therein, as that which was attended with things which accompany Salvation, he had given them assurance of a blessed Issue of their Faith and Profession, from the Faithfulness of God, making therein an Application of the Promises of the Gospel unto them. Hereon he lets them know what by the Appointment of God and the Law of our Obedience, is required of them, that they might answer the Judgement which he had made concerning them, and bring them unto the enjoyment of the Promises proposed unto them. And this was that diligent progress in Faith and Obedience un∣to the end which he describes in this and the next Verse. And herein the Apostle with great Wisdom acquaints these Hebrews with the proper end and use of Gospel Threatenings and Promises, wherein men are apt to be mistaken and so to abuse the one and the other. For Threatenings have been looked on, as if they had no other end or use but to terrifie the minds of men, and to cause them to despond, as if the things threatened must unavoidably come upon them. Hence some have fancied that they belong not unto the Dispensation of the Gospel as it is to be preached unto Believers; and few have known how to make a due Application of them unto their Consciences. And it is to be feared that the end and use of Gods Promises hath been so far mistaken, as some have suf∣fered themselves to be imposed on by the deceitfulness of sin, and to be influenced by the consideration of them, into carelesness and security, as though, do what they would, no evil could befall them. But our Apostle here discovereth the joynt end of them both towards Believers or Professors of the Gospel, which is to stir up and encourage them unto their utmost constant persevering diligence in all Duties of Obedience. And it is no small part of the Duty and Wisdom of the Ministers of the Gospel to instruct their Hearers in, and press upon them the proper use and due improvement of the Promises and Threatenings of God. In this Verse, or the words of it which are an Exhortation unto Duty, we may observe, (1) The connexion of it unto the former discourse; And (2) The Duty ex∣horted unto, The same diligence. (3) The manner of its performance; That they would manifest or shew it. (4) The end aimed at in that Duty, The full assurance of Hope. (5) The continuation of it, unto the end. (6) The manner of his Exhorta∣tion unto it, we desire. But though the words may be thus resolved, I shall open the parts of them in that order wherein they lye in the Text. 1. For the connexion of these words with the foregoing, and therein the occasion of this discourse in the particle , it hath been spoken unto already.  It is not here adversative but rather illative, as was before declared. 2. The next thing occurring in the words is the manner of the Exhortation, , we desire. Chrysostome is large in this place in the consideration of this  word, and the wisdom of the Apostle in the use of it. From him Oecumenius ob∣serves a difference between  and . For they suppose that the word here used includeth both intense Affections, and earnest, diligent, actual desire. And that it doth intend an earnest desire, we shewed in the consideration of the word foregoing. And the word is never used in the New Testament, but either in a bad sense, to express the impetuous acting of Lust, as Matth. 5. 28. Gal. 5. 17. Rom. 1. 1. or a most fervent desiring of any thing that is good, Luke 15. 16. Luke 16. 21. chap. 17. 22. chap. 22. 15. And such ought to be the desire of Mini∣sters towards the profiting of their people. There will be a dead, cold, lifeless Ad∣ministration of the Word, where Ministers have not ardent desires after the profiting and stability of the Hearers. How were it to be wished that all who are called unto the care and charge of the Souls of men, would continually propose unto them∣selves the example of this Apostle! Do we think that the care, solicitude, watch∣fulness, tender Love and Affections, earnest and fervent desires of their good, ex∣pressed in Prayers, Tears, Travails and Dangers, which he every where testifieth towards all the Churches under his care, were Duties prescribed unto him alone, or Graces necessary for him only? Do we not think that they are all of them required
of us, according unto our measure, and the extent of our employment? The Lord help men and open their Eyes before it be too late, for either the Gospel is not true, or there are few who in a due manner discharge that Ministry which they take upon them. I say without this earnest and fervent desire after the profiting and Salvation of our people, we shall have a cold and ineffectual Ministry among them. Neither is it our sedulity or earnestness in Preaching that will relieve us, if that be absent. And this desire proceeds from three Principles, and that which pretends thereto and doth not so, is but an Image and counterfeit of it. And these are, (1) Zeal for the Glory of God in Christ. (2) Real Compassion for the Souls of men. (3) An espe∣cial Conscientious regard unto our Duty and Office with respect unto its Nature, Trust, End and Reward. These are the Principles that both kindle and supply fuel unto those servent desires for the good of our people, which oyle the Wheels of all other Duties and speed them in their course. According as these Principles flourish or decay in our minds, so will be the acceptable exercise of our Ministry in the sight of Christ, and the profitable discharge of it towards the Church. And we have as much need to labour for this frame in our Hearts, as for any thing in the outward discharge of our Duty. We must in the first place take heed unto our selves, if we intend to take heed to the Flock as we ought, Acts 20. 28. And herein especially do we, as we are charged, take heed to the Ministry we have received that we do fulfill it, Col. 4. 17. 3. The Persons exhorted unto the Duty following, are expressed by , . every one of you. He had so a care of the whole Flock, as to be solicitous for the good of every individual person among them. As our Lord Jesus Christ gives an account unto his Father, that of all those who were committed unto his per∣sonal Ministry in this world, he had not lost any one; only the Son of Perdition, he who was designed to Destruction; so our Apostle laboured that if it were possible not one of those whom he watched over should miscarry. And it is of great advantage when we can so mannage our Ministry that no one of those that are com∣mitted unto us, may have any just cause to think themselves disregarded. And moreover he shews hereby that the Argument here insisted on concerned them all. For he doth not suppose that any one of them were in such a condition of security and perfection, as not to stand in need of the utmost diligence for their preservation and progress; nor any to have so fallen under decays, but that in the use of diligence they might be recovered. So should the Love and Care of Ministers be extended unto all the Individuals of their Flocks, with an especial regard unto their respective Conditions, that none on the one hand grow secure, nor any on the other hand de∣spond or be discouraged. 4. The Duty exhorted unto, wherewith we must take, . 5. The manner of its performance, is, that they would shew the same diligence. , Ostentare: V. L. that is, to make shew of, ostendere, to shew forth, to manifest. Praestare, Eras. to act, to perform; so the word is sometimes used, Joh. 10. 32. , many good things have I shewed you: that is, wrought and performed among you. 2 Tim. 4. 14. , Alexander the Copper-smith shewed me many evils: did me much evil. It is so to do any thing as that the doing of it may be evident and manifest. And the Apostle respects not only the Duty it self but the Evidence of its Performance whereon his Judgement and Perswasion of them was grounded. Continue in the performance of these Duties to give the same evidence of your state and condition as formerly. And the Duty it self he expresseth by , idem studium, the same di∣ligent . endeavour. Chrysostome much insists on the Apostles Wisdom in this ex∣pression, the same diligence: for by it he both insinuates his approbation of what they had done already, and manifests that he required nothing of them to secure their future condition, but what they had already experience of. You have used diligence in this matter, continue so to do, which yet is not so to be interpreted as though the Apostle limited them unto their former measures. But warning them to remit in nothing which before they had ingaged into, he encourageth them to proceed and grow therein. That indeed which the Apostle approves in them and exhorts them unto a continuance in, is the work of Faith and labour of Love in ministring unto
the Saints. But here he expresseth the manner wherein they had attended unto those Duties, and which they must continue in unless they intended to desert the Duties themselues; namely, with diligence and alacrity of mind. For such were the Oppositions and Difficulties that they would assuredly meet withall, as we have before declared, that unless they used all diligence and watchfulness, they would more or less faint in their Duty. And we may observe that, Our Profession will not be preserved, nor the work of Faith and Love carried on unto the Glory of God and our own Salvation, without a constant studious diligence in the pre∣servation Obser. 1▪ of the one and the exercise of the other. The Reasons hereof are manifest from what hath been discoursed before concerning the greatness and difficulty of this work, and the opposition that is made unto it. Our Apostle knew nothing of that lazie kind of Profession which satisfies the generality of Christians at this day. They can shew all diligence in their Trades, in their Callings, in their Studies, it may be in their Pleasures, and sometimes in the pursuit of their Lusts: But for a watchful diligence, an earnest, studious endeavour in and about the Du∣ties of Religion, the work of Faith and Love, they are strangers unto it, yea cannot be perswaded that any such thing is required of them or expected from them. For the Duties of Divine Worship, they will attend unto them out of Cu∣stom or Conviction. For some Acts of Charity they may perhaps be sometimes drawn unto, or for their Reputation they may do like others of their Quality in the world. But to project and design in their minds how they may Glorifie God in the Duties of Faith and Love, as the liberal man deviseth liberal things, to keep up an earnest bent and warmth of Spirit in them, to lay hold on, and rejoice in all Opportunities for them, all which are required unto this diligence, they utterly reject all such thoughts. But what do we imagine? Is there another way for us to go to Heaven than what was prescribed unto the Primitive Believers? Will God deal with us on more easie terms; or such as have a farther compliance with carnal ease and the flesh, than those that were given to them of Old? We shall but fool∣ishly deceive our selves with such Imaginations? But let no man mistake; These two Principles are as certain and as sacred as any thing in the Gospel. (1) Unless there be in us a work of Faith in personal Holiness and a labour of Love towards others, there is nothing in us that accompanies Salvation or will ever bring us thereunto. Let pro∣phane persons deride it whilst they please, and worldlings neglect it, and careless Professors fancy to themselves an easier way unto a blessed Eternity, this will be found to be the Rule whereby they must all stand or fall for ever. (2) That this work of Faith and labour of Love will not be persisted in nor carried on without studious diligence and earnest endeavours. Now unto this diligence is required; (1) The ex∣ercise of our minds with respect unto the Duties of Faith and Love. (2) In study∣ing the Rule of them, which is the word of God, wherein alone the matter of them all and the manner of their performance are declared. (2) In studying and obser∣ving the occasions and opportunities for their exercise. (2) Watchfulness against Op∣positions, Difficulties and Temptations, is also a part of this Duty; for the rea∣sons whereof our Observations on the preceding Verse may be considered. (3) Rea∣diness to conflict with, and to go through the dangers and troubles which we may meet withall in the discharge of these Duties. And, as it is evident, all these ar∣gue a frame of mind continually intent upon a design to Glorifie God, and to come unto the end of our course in Rest with him. That nominal Christianity which despiseth these things, will perish with the real Author of it, which is the Devil. Again, The Apostle exhorts them to shew the same diligence which they had done and which they continued in the exercise of; whence it appears that, Ministerial Exhortation unto Duty is needful even unto them who are sincere in the practice of it, that they may abide and continue therein. It is not easie to be appre∣hended Obser. 2. how Gods Institutions are despised by some, neglected by others, and by how few duly improved; all for want of taking right measures of them. Some there are who being profoundly ignorant are yet ready to say, that they know as much as the Minister can teach them, and therefore it is to no purpose to attend
unto Preaching. These are the thoughts, and this is too often the Language of per∣sons prophane and profligate, who know little, and practise nothing of Christia∣nity. Some think that Exhortations unto Duties belong only unto them who are negligent and careless in their performance; and unto them indeed they do belong, but not unto them only as the whole Scripture testifieth. And some it may be like well to be exhorted unto what they do, and do find satisfaction therein. But how few are there who look upon it as an Ordinance of God whereby they are enabled for, and kept up unto their Duty, wherein indeed their use and benefit doth con∣sist. They do not only direct unto Duty, but through the Appointment of God, they are means of communicating Grace unto us for the due performance of Duties. 4. The immediate end of the exercise of this diligence is, that we may attain ,  to the full assurance of Hope. And three things we must consider to come unto the mind of the Apostle in these words. (1) What is that Hope which he intends. (2) What is the full assurance of this Hope. (3) How it is attainable in the exercise of this diligence. 1. The Hope here intended, is a certain assured expectation of good things pro∣mised, through the accomplishment of those Promises, accompanied with a love, desire and valuation of them. Faith respects the Promise, Hope the thing promised; where∣fore it is a fruit and effect of Faith; it being the proper acting of the Soul to∣wards things believed as good, absent and certain. Wherefore where our Faith be∣gets no Hope, it is to be feared it is not genuine; and where our Hope exceeds the evidence or assurance of our Faith, it is but presumption. Now this Hope con∣cerns things absent and future, for as our Apostle saith, if we already enjoy any thing why do we hope for it. And this is the order of these things. God hath in his Promises declared his Goodness, Purpose and Grace in the great things he will do unto all Eternity for Believers; namely, that they shall be perfectly delivered from every thing that is grievous or evil in sin or trouble, and be brought into the full enjoyment of Everlasting Glory with himself. In these Promises Faith resteth on the veracity and power of God. Hereon the Soul considereth those good things which are so promised and now secured by Faith, as yet absent and unenjoyed. And the actings of the Soul towards them in desire, love, valuation, and a certain expectation of them as believed, is this Hope. There may be a pretence of great Hope where there is no Faith as it is with the most. And there may be a profession of great Faith, where there is no true Hope, as it is with many. But in them∣selves these things are inseparable and proportionable. It is impossible we should believe the Promises aright, but that we shall hope for the things promised. Nor can we hope for the things promised, unless we believe the Promises. And this discards most of that pretended Hope that is in the world. It doth not proceed from, it is not resolved into Faith in the Promises, and therefore is presumption. Yea none have greater hopes for the most part than such as have no Faith at all. The great use, benefit and advantage which Believers have by this Grace, is the supporting of their Souls under the troubles and difficulties which they meet withall upon the account of the Profession of what they do believe, Rom. 5. 4, 5. 1 Cor. 15. 19. 1 Thes. 1. 3. Hence in our Christian Armour it is called the Helmet, Ephes. 6. 17. The Helmet of Salvation, that is, the Hope of Salvation, as it is expounded 1 Thes. 5. 8. And for an Helmet the Hope of Salvation. And this is because it bears off and keeps us from being wounded with the sharpness and weight of those stroaks, which do and will befall us in Troubles, Persecutions and Afflictions. And hence it is manifest that a valuation and esteem of the things hoped for, are of the Essence of Hope. For whatever expectation we have of them, if we do not so value them, as to find a satisfactory relief in them in all our Troubles, and that which may out∣ballance our present sufferings, Hope is not genuine and truly Evangelical. And this was now the condition of the Hebrews. They were exposed unto much Tri∣bulation upon the account of the Profession of the Gospel. And the Apostle fore∣saw that they were yet to be exercised with things more grievous and terrible. That which they had to relieve themselves in this condition, to lay in the Ballance against all the evils they suffered or had to conflict withall, were the things that were promised by Christ unto them that believe and obey him. Wherefore an
assured expectation of these things so infinitely above and beyond what they lost or underwent at present, was absolutely necessary as to their supportment, so unto their encouragement unto a continuance in their Profession. This alone was able to preserve them from fainting and despondencies under a confluence of evils, which also God himself directs unto, Isa. 35. 3, 4. Wherefore this Duty our Apostle fre∣quently exhorts the Hebrews unto in this Epistle, as that which was peculiarly suited unto them, and necessary for them in their present condition. And he lets them know that in its due exercise, it would not only relieve and support them, but enable them in the midst of all their troubles to rejoyce and glory; as hath been declared on chap. 3. 6. 2. There is the  of this Hope. The full assurance of it. Hope hath its degrees as Faith hath also. There is a weak, or a little Faith, and a strong or great  Faith. So there is an imperfect and a more perfect Hope. This full assurance is not of the Nature or Essence of it, but an especial degree of it in its improvement. A weak imperfect Hope will give but weak and imperfect Relief under Trouble. But that which riseth up unto the full assurance, will compleat our Relief. Where∣fore as Hope it self is necessary, so is this degree of it especially where Trials do abound. Yet neither is Hope in this degree absolute, or absolutely perfect. Our minds in this world are not capable of such a degree of assurance in spiritual things, as to free us from Assaults to the contrary, and impressions of Fear sometimes from those Assaults. But there is such a degree attainable as is always victorious, which will give the Soul peace at all times, and sometimes fill it with joy. This therefore is the assurance of Hope here intended. Such a fixed, constant, prevailing Perswasion proceeding from Faith in the Promises, concerning the good things promised, our Interest in them, and certain enjoyment of them, as will support us and carry us com∣fortably through all the difficulties and troubles we have to conflict withall. And with∣out this it is not possible that we should carry on our Profession to the Glory of God and the Gospel in the times of Affliction and Persecution. For although the least degree of sincere hope will preserve from utter Apostasie, yet unless it be confirmed and fortified, and so wrought up unto this full assurance, it cannot be, but that great and sore Trials, Temptations and Persecutions will at one time or other take such impressions on our minds, as to cause a manifold failing in the Du∣ties of Profession, either as to matter or manner; as it hath fallen out with not a few sincere Believers in all Ages. 3. It is to be enquired how the diligence before described tends unto this assurance of Hope. And it doth so three ways. (1) It hath its efficacy unto this purpose from Gods Institution. God hath appointed this as the way and means whereby we shall come to this assurance. So is his Will declared, 2 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, for if you do these things you shall never fall; For so an entrance shall be administred unto you abundantly into the everlasting King∣dom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. It is the same diligence with that here in the Text which is intended, as is evident by the Verses foregoing. And this hath God appointed as the means to secure unto our selves our Calling and Election which the good things we hope for do infallibly accompany. And hereby we shall be carried through all difficulties into the Kingdom of God and of Glory. (2) It hath a proper and natural tendency unto this end. For by the use of this diligence, Grace is increased in us, whereby our evidences of an Interest in the Promises of the Gospel are cleared and strengthened. And herein doth our assurance of Hope con∣sist. (3) By our diligent attendance unto the Duties of Faith and Love, every sin will be prevented whereby our Hope would be weakened or impaired. 5. The last thing expressed in the words is the continuance in this Duty, which  is required of us; and that is , unto the end. For these words belong not unto them that go immediately before, namely, the assurance of Hope, which some supposing have rendered them harshly and improperly, unto its perfection. The assurance of Hope unto perfection, or until it be perfected. But the words plainly belong unto the precept it self, shewing the same diligence unto the end. There is no time nor season wherein we may be discharged from this Duty; no condition to be attained in this life wherein this diligence will not be necessary for us. We must therefore attend unto it until we are absolutely discharged of this whole warfare. And he who is discouraged because he cannot have a Dispensation
from this Duty in this world, he hath an Heart that draweth back and his Soul is not upright in him. And we may observe, Whereas there are degrees in spiritual saving Graces and their Operations, we ought Obser. 1. continually to press towards the most perfect of them. Not only are we to have Hope, but we are to labour for the assurance of Hope. It is one of the best evidences that any Grace is true and saving in its nature and kind, when we labour to thrive and grow in it, or to have it do so in us. This the nature of the new Creature, whereof it is a part, inclineth unto; This is the end of all the Ordinances and Institutions of the Gospel, Ephes. 4. 13. Hereby alone do we bring Glory to God, adorn the Gospel, grow up into conformity with Christ, and secure our own Eter∣nal welfare. Hope being improved by the due exercise of Faith and Love, will grow up into such an Obser. 2. assurance of Rest, Life, Immortality and Glory as shall outweigh all the Troubles and Persecutions that in this world may befall us, on the account of our Profession or other ways. There is nothing in the world so vain as that common Hope whereby men living in their sins do make a Reserve of Heaven when they can continue here no longer. The more it thrives in the minds of any, the more desperate is their condition; it being only an endless Spring of Encouragements unto sin. Its beginnings are usually indeed but small and weak; but when it hath been so far cherished as to be able to defeat the power of Convictions, it quickly grows up into Presumption and Security. But this Hope which is the Daughter, Sister and Companion of Faith, the more it grows up, and is strengthened, the more useful is it unto the Soul, as being a living Spring of Encouragements unto stability in Obedience. For it being once fully confirmed it will on every occasion of Trial or Temptation give such a present existence in the mind unto future certain Glories, as shall deliver it from snares and fears, and confirm it in its Duty. But this also must be spoken unto after∣wards. VERSE 12. . segnes, slothful, dull; , sitis, efficiamini, be or become, or be made. Syr.  ut non praecidatur, ut non abscindatur; that it be not cut off; which Interpreters refer unto the diligence before mentioned. The Translation in the Polyglott renders it, ne{que} torpescatis, as following the Translation in the Jayan Bibles without choice or alteration. Inded  is used sometimes in the same sense with  to be weary, to loath; to be affected with trouble, Hab. 2. 3. whence sloth and neglect of diligence ensues. But its proper and usual significa∣tion is to cut off; the same with the Hebrew , That you be not slothful. ; imitatores; and so the Rhemists render it, imitatores; which being a word not much in use among us, and when it is used commonly taken in an ill sense, Followers doth better as yet with us express what is intended. Who by Faith, ; Syr.  in length of Spirit; Longanimitatem, pa∣tientiam, patientem animum, lenitatem. Longanimity, Patience, a patient mind, for∣bearance; It is plain that the same Grace is intended in all these various expressions, whose nature we shall enquire into, . Syr.  fuerunt Haeredes Promissionis; were Heirs of the Promise; refer∣ing it to Believers under the Old Testament. Vul. Lat. Haereditahunt Promissiones, who shall inherit the Promises, which must respect present, sincere, persevering Be∣lievers. Beza, Haereditario jure obtinent Promissionem. Others, Obtinent promissam Haereditatem; and, Haereditatem accipiunt promissionis, which Schmidius chooseth as most exact, though without reason. That of Beza is proper, for , is, jure Haereditario obtinere; see our Exposition on chap. 1. 4. We, inherit the Promises.
Verse 12. That you be not slothful, but followers of them, (their Example) who through Faith and patient long-suffering inherit the Promises. This Verse puts a full close to the former Exhortation built on the description given of unprofitable and Apostate Professors. And here is withall an entrance made into a discourse of somewhat another nature, but intended and applied un∣to the same end and purpose. We may therefore consider it as a continuation of the former Exhortation, inforced with a new Argument of great importance. For, 1. The Apostle gives a Caution against an Evil or Vice directly opposite unto the Duty he had been pressing unto, and which if admitted, would obstruct its dis∣charge, That you be not slothful. And therein the series of that discourse hath its connexion with the beginning of ver. 11. We desire, that you be diligent, and that you be not slothful; diligence and sloth being the opposite virtue and vice which are the matter of his Exhortation. 2. He gives a new direction and encouragement unto them for the performance of the Duty exhorted unto, which also guides them in the manner of its perfor∣mance. And herein he coucheth an Introduction to a discourse of another nature which immediately ensues, as was observed. But be ye followers. 3. This direction and encouragement consists in the proposal of an Example of others unto them, who performed the Duty which he exhorts them unto. And as for their direction he declares unto them how they did it, even by Faith and Pati∣ence; so for their Encouragement he minds them of what they obtained thereby, or do so, they inherited the Promises of God. 1. The Apostle cautions the Hebrews against that which would, if admitted, frustrate his Exhortation and effectually keep them off from the Duty exhorted un∣to. . , that you be not segnes, molles, ignavi, heavy and slothful. He had before charged them that they were , chap. 5. 11. dull or slothful in hearing, not absolutely but comparatively, they were not so diligent or industrious therein as they ought to have been; or the Reproof concerned some of them only. Here he warns them not to be , slothful in works or working in practical Duties. We are slothful in hearing when we do not learn the Truths of the Gospel with diligence and industry, when we do not take them into our minds and understandings by the diligent use of the means appointed unto that end. And we are slothful in practice when we do not stir up our selves unto the due exercise of those Graces, and discharge of those Duties, which the Truth wherein we are instructed directs unto, and requires of us. And this sloth is opposed , ver. 11. a diligent and sedulous endeavour in the performance of our Duty. Shew diligence, and be not slothful. And this Vice our Holy Apostle according to his great wisdom and care frequently warns the Hebrews against in this Epistle. For he knew that the utmost intension of our spirits, the utmost dili∣gence of our minds and endeavours of our whole Souls are required unto an useful continuance in our Profession and Obedience. This God requireth of us, this the nature of the things themselves about which we are conversant deserveth, and necessary it is unto the end which we aim at. If we faint or grow negligent in our Duty, if careless or slothful, we shall never hold out unto the end; or if we do continue in such a formal course as will consist with this sloth, we shall never come to the blessed end which we expect or look for. The Oppositions and Difficulties which we shall assuredly meet withall from within and without, will not give way unto faint and languid endeavours. Nor will the holy God prostitute Eternal Rewards unto those who have no more regard unto them, but to give up them∣selves unto sloth in their pursuit. Our course of Obedience is called running in a Race, and fighting as in a Battel, and those who are  on such occasions, will never be crowned with Victory. Wherefore upon a due compliance with this caution, depends our present Perseverance and our future Salvation. For,
Spiritual Sloth is ruinous of any Profession though otherwise never so hopeful. The Obser. 1. Apostle was perswaded of good things and such as accompany Salvation concerning these Hebrews; but yet he lets them know that if they intended to enjoy them, they must not be slothful. Sloth is a vicious Affection, and one of the worst that the mind of man is subject unto. For where it takes place and is prevalent, there is no good Principle or Habit abiding. There is not any thing, any Vice amongst men, that the Heathen who built their Directions on the light of Nature, and the Observation of the ways of men in the world, do more severely give in Cautions against. And indeed it were easie to manifest that nothing more increaseth the degeneracy of mankind than this depraved Affection, as being an in-let unto all sordid Nices, and a perfect obstruction unto all virtuous and laudable Enterprizes. But what shall he say who comes after the King? Solomon hath so graphically de∣scribed this Affection with its vile nature and ruinous effects, in sundry passages of the Proverbs, that nothing need or can be added thereunto. Besides it is Spiritual Sloth only that we have occasion to speak unto. Spiritual Sloth is an habitual indisposition of mind unto Spiritual Duties in their proper time and season, arising from unbelief and carnal Affections, producing a neglect of Duties, and Dangers, Remisness, Carelesness or Formality in attendance unto them or the performance of them. The beginning of it is prejudicing negligence, and the end of it is ruining security. 1. It is in general an indisposition and unreadiness of mind, and so opposed unto the entire principle of our spiritual warfare. Fervency in Spirit, Alacrity of mind, Preparation with the whole Armour of God; and therein girding up the Loins of our minds, endeavouring to cast off every weight and the sin that doth so easily be∣set us, are required to be in us constantly in the course of our Obedience. But this Sloth is that which gives us an indisposition of mind in direct opposition unto them all. So it is described, Prov. 26. 15. A Person under the power of this vicious Distemper of mind, is indisposed to every Duty, which makes them grievous unto him. 2. When it comes unto the height of it, it is habitual. There is no man but may be occasionally indisposed unto spiritual Duties. The most healthy and athletick constitution is subject unto the incursion of some distempers. Sometimes bodily Infirmities may indispose us, sometimes present Temptations may do so. Such was the Indisposition which befell the Disciples in the Mount, Matth. 26. 40, 41. which yet was not without their sin, for which they were reproved by our Saviour. But where these things are occasional, when those occasions are endeavoured to be pre∣vented or removed, persons overtaken with them may not be said to be ab∣solutely slothful. There may be many actual Faults where there is not an ha∣bitual Vice. 3. But there is this Sloth in a dangerous degree, 1. When this is generally the frame of the mind, when it hath such an unrea∣diness unto holy Duties as that it either neglects them, or is cold and formal in the performance of them. This was the temper of Laodicea, Rev. 3. 15. She did enough outwardly to satisfie her self; but in such a way and manner as all that she did was disapproved by Christ. Lukewarmness is the soul and form of sloth. 2. When Persons are generally uncompliant with such outward means as they can∣not but acknowledge do contain warning from this, and Invitation unto another frame. So the Spouse acknowledgeth, that it was the Voice of her beloved that knocked, saying, Open to me my Spouse, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, for my Head is filled with with dew, and my Locks with the drops of the night, Can. 5. 2. Both the Voice, and the Love, and the long waiting of Christ were manifest unto her, and she com∣plies not with him but makes her excuses, ver. 2, 3. And the sloth of Persons will be reckoned in proportion unto the means of diligence which they do enjoy. Some may not be sleepy, worldly, careless, slothful at as cheap a rate of Guilt as others, though it be great in all. 3. When Persons are as it were glad of such occasions as may justifie and satisfie their minds in the omissions of Duties or opportunities for them. This casts off the Duty prescribed unto us, Heb. 12. 1. which yet is indispensably necessary unto the
attaining of the end of our Faith. When men will not only readily embrace occa∣sions offered unto them to divert them from Duty, but will be apt to seek out and invent shifts, whereby they may, as they suppose, be excused from it, which cor∣rupt nature is exceedingly prone unto, they are under the power of this vicious habit. Especially is this so, when men are apt to approve of such Reasons to this end, which being examined by the Rules of Duty, with the tenders of the Love of Christ, are lighter than vanity. So it is added of the slothful Person, who hides his hand in his bosom; that he is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can ren∣der a reason, Prov. 26 15, 16. He pleaseth himself with his foolish pretences for his sloth, above all the reasons that can be given him to the contrary. And such is the reason pleaded by the Spouse when overtaken with this frame for a season, Cant. 5. 3. 4. When there is a great neglect of our own prayers, when at any time we have been enabled to make them. So the Spouse in whom we have an Instance of a surprisal in∣to this evil, prays earnestly for the coming and approach of Christ unto her, chap. 4. 16. in the holy Dispensations of his Spirit. But when he tenders himself unto her desire, she puts off the entertainment of him. So do men pray for Grace and Mercy sometimes. But when the seasons of the communication of them do come, they are wholly regardless in looking after them. They put off things unto another season, and meet oft-times with the success mentioned Cant. 5. 6. 5. When in conflicts about Duties the Scale is often turned on the side of the flesh and unbelief. Sometimes it is so when Duties are considered as future, and sometimes as present. When Duties are considered as future, Difficulties and Objections against them, as for matter or manner, time or season, or degree, one thing or other will be suggested by the Flesh. Grace in Believers will move for an absolute com∣pliance. If the contrary reasons, insinuations and objections prevail, the Soul consults with flesh and blood, and is under the power of spiritual sloth. And so are men by frivolous pretences and arguings from self and the world, kept off from the most important Duties. And sometimes there is a conflict in the entrance of the Duties of Gods Worship, as praying, hearing the word, and the like. Grace stirs up the Soul to diligence, spirituality, and vigour of spirit. The Flesh in all things is contrary unto it. Usually to give place unto the Flesh so as to be brought under the power of a cold formality is an evidence of a prevalent sloth. 2. Although this sloth may have various causes and occasions, yet the principal of them are those which I have mentioned, namely, Unbelief and Carnal Affe∣ctions. (1) Unbelief is the principal cause of it, as Faith is of that Diligence and Watchfulness which are opposed unto it. Yea by Faith alone are we excited unto the acting of all other Graces, and the performance of all other Duties. As it is in its nature to quicken us unto them, so it alone takes in all other motives unto vigorous Obedience. Wherefore all Indispositions unto Duty arise from Unbelief. This weakens the efficacy of every thing that should excite us unto it, and increaseth every difficulty that lies in the way of it. As Faith will remove Mountains out of our way or help us to conquer the greatest Oppositions, so Unbelief will make Mountains of Mole-hills, it will make every hindrance like an unconquerable diffi∣culty. The Soul made slothful by it, cries, there is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the Streets, Prov. 26. 13. And its whole way is as an Hedge of Thorns, chap. 15. 19. that is, so grievous and troublesome that he cares not to take one step in it. Hence is the opposition in these words, that, ye be not slothful, but followers of them who through Faith, &c. If we grow slothful it is an assured Evidence of the decay of Faith. (2) Carnal Affections do variously promote this evil frame of mind. Love of ease, wealth, profit, pleasure, will quickly make men spiritually slothful. Where these are prevalent, every thing in the way of Holiness and Obedience is difficult and irksome. Strange Representations will be made unto the mind of all Duties, if not in general, yet in all instances that offer themselves. They are difficult, or tedi∣ous, or unseasonable, or needless, or the loss we make at present may be retrieved at another time. Every prevalent Carnal Affection will be heard in the case, and hath something to offer to deter the mind from its Duty. And the secret aversa∣tion of the flesh from Communion with Christ in Duties, works in all of them.
Wherefore if we see a man slothful, negligent, careless in the Duties of Reli∣gion, we may be sure that one carnal Affection or other is powerful in him. 3. As to the general effects of this spiritual Sloth they may be reduced unto these three Heads. (1) A neglect of known Duties in matter or manner. Known Duties of Professors are either publick or private; And I call them known because they are both acknow∣ledged by all so to be, and themselves are under the Conviction of their so being. But where this sloth is predominant, clear Duties will be debated. What more clear Duty, than that we should open our hearts unto Christ when he knocketh; or diligently receive those Intimations of his Love and his Mind which he tender∣eth in his Ordinances? Yet this will a Soul dispute about and debate on, when it is under the power of sloth, Cant. 5. 2, 3. And it doth so actually when it doth not take diligent heed unto the Dispensation of the word. Wherefore omission of Duties in their seasons and opportunities, whether publick or private, whether of Piety or Charity, of Faith or Love, or the performance of them without life and delight, meerly to comply with custom, or satisfie Convictions, is an evidence of a Soul growing up under a sinful sloth, unto a ruining security. (2) Regardlesness of Temptations and Dangers by them, is another general effect hereof. These beset us on every hand; especially they do so with reference unto all Duties of Obedience. In watchfulness against them, a conflict with them and prevalency over them, doth our warfare principally consist. And without a due regard unto them we can neither preserve the Life, nor bring forth the fruits of Faith. Herein spiritual sloth will make us careless. When men begin to walk as if they had no Enemies, as if in their course of life, their converse, their callings and occasions, there were no Snares nor Temptations, Spiritual sloth hath possessed their minds. (3) Weariness and heartless despondencies in a time of Troubles and Difficulties, is another effect hereof. And unto these Heads may all its particular pernicious effects and consequences be reduced. And this brief Description of Spiritual sloth in its Nature, Causes and Effects, is a sufficient Eviction of our Assertion, so that I need no farther con∣firmation. Secondly, In the positive Directions given, and the Encouragement adjoyned, . there is an Example proposed, and a Duty enjoyned with respect thereunto. The Persons whose Example is prescribed are mentioned here only indefinitely, be fol∣lowers of them, which in the ensuing Verse, he brings down to the Instance of Abraham. For dealing with them who greatly gloried in having Abraham for their Father, no example more pertinent and cogent could be proposed unto them, to let them know that Abraham himself obtained not the Promises any other way, than what he now proposeth unto them. And as our Saviour had told them, that if they would be the Children of Abraham they must do the works of Abraham, otherwise their boast of his being their Father would stand them in no stead; so our Apostle shews them the like necessity of his Faith and Patience in particular. Besides, he was in the next Chapter of necessity to prefer Melchisedec as a Type of Christ, before him, and above him. Andtherefore as he had in an alike case before dealt with Moses, he would take the advantage hereof giving him his due commendation, that he might not seem to derogate any thing from him. And this he doth in that Instance where∣in he becameto have his greatest honour, or to become the Father of the faithful. The Persons therefore included in the particle , are the . Patriarchs of the Old Testament. It is true, it is so expressed as that those who were at present real, sincere, sound Believers might be intended, or those who had fallen asleep in the Faith of the Gospel. But as he deals on all occasions with these Hebrews with Instances and Examples out of the Old Testament, as we have seen and considered it at large in the third Chapter, so his immediate expressing of Abraham as the principal of those which he intended, confines his Design unto those under that Dispensation. Plainly he designs them, whom unto the same purpose he enumerates afterwards in particular with the Instances of their Faith, chap. 11. Nor is there any difficulty in the variety of his expressions concerning them. Of those in the Eleventh Chapter he says, that all died in Faith and obtained
a good report on the account thereof, but received not the Promises, ver. 13, 39. Of those in this place, that through Faith and Patience they inherited the Promises. But it is one thing to receive the Promises, and another to inherit the Promises. By receiving the Pro∣mises, chap. 11. the Apostle respects the actual Accomplishment of the great Promise concerning the exhibition of Christ in the Flesh. This they neither did nor could receive who died before his Incarnation. But the inheriting of the Promises here in∣tended, is a real participation of the Grace and Mercy proposed in them with Eternal Glory. This they all received, being saved by Faith even as we, Acts 15. 10, 11. Heb. 4. 2. Concerning these Persons he proposeth to them the way that they took, and the end that they attained. The way they took, was by Faith and Patience, or long∣suffering. Some think that here is an ; and that a constant enduring Faith is . only intended. But their Faith and the constant exercise of it against oppositions is rather proposed unto them under the name of Faith. For that by  a distinct Grace or Duty is intended, is manifest from ver. 15. where Abrahams car∣riage upon his believing and receiving the Blessing is expressed by , after he had patiently endured. What was that Faith, or of what kind which is here ascribed unto the Patri∣archs, is evident from the Context. For it was that Faith which had the especial Promise of God in Christ for its Object. Not a general, not a common Faith, but that which respected the Promise given from the foundation of the world, and ex∣presly renewed unto Abraham. Some amongst us wholly deny this kind of Faith, and beyond the belief of the truth or veracity of God in general, will not allow an especial Faith with respect unto the Covenant and the Promise of Grace in Christ Jesus, whereas indeed there is no other Faith true, useful, saving, and pro∣perly so called in the world. It is true, this especial Faith in the Promise, sup∣poseth Faith in general with respect unto the truth and veracity of God, nor can be without it. But this may be, and is in many where the other is not, yea where it is despised. This therefore was the Faith which was here recommended and proposed unto us. The especial Object of it was the Messiah, or Christ him∣self as a Saviour from sin, with this especial limitation, as to come afterwards. The formal reason of it was the Truth of God in his Promises, with his unchange∣ableness and infinite power to give them an Accomplishment. And the means of ingenerating this Faith in them was the Promise it self. By this Faith were they justified and saved, Gen. 15. 6. But it may be enquired how this Faith could be proposed unto us for an Example, seeing it respected the future Exhibition of Christ, and we are to respect him as long since come in the Flesh. But this circumstance changeth nothing in the nature of the things themselves: For although as to the actual Exhibition of the Messiah they looked on it as future, yet as to the Benefits of his Mediation, they were made present and effectual unto them by the Promise. And the Faith required of us doth in like manner respect the Lord Christ and the Benefits of his Mediation; and by his actual Exhibition in the Flesh, is not changed in its nature from what theirs was, though it be exceedingly advantaged as to its Light. The next thing ascribed unto them is . Patience, say we, that is, ; but these Graces are expresly distinguished, 2 Tim. 3. 10. ; . Faith, Long-suffering, Patience; so plainly Col. 1. 11. ; unto all patience and long-suffering. And in very many places it is recommended as a special Grace and Duty, 2 Cor. 6. 6. Gal. 5. 22. Ephes. 4. 2. Col. 3. 12. And it is often also ascribed unto God, Rom. 2. 4. chap. 9. 22. to Christ, 1 Tim. 1. 16.  is properly  longanimis; or as James speaks, , chap. 1. 19. slow to anger, op∣posed unto , hasty, soon angry, bitter in Spirit. It is a gracious sedate frame of Soul, a tranquillity of mind on holy spiritual grounds of Faith, not subject to take provocations, not to be wearied with opposition. Wherefore although the Apostle saith in like manner in another place, that we have need of Patience, that after we have done the will of God we may receive the Promise, chap. 10. 36. yet the longanimity here intended is distinct from it. For as Patience is a gracious submissive quietness of mind in undergoing present troubles and miseries; so this , or longani∣mity,
forbearance, tolerance or long-suffering, is a sedate, gracious disposition of mind to encounter a series of Difficulties and Provocations, without being exasperated by them so as to desert, or cease from the course wherein we are ingaged. So where it is ascribed unto God, it signifies that goodness of his Nature, and purpose of his Will, that notwithstanding their manifold provocations, and as it were, daily new surprisals, yet he will bear with sinners, and not divert from his course of good∣ness and mercy towards them. And with us it hath a twofold object. For (1) In the course of our Faith and Profession we shall meet with many Difficulties and Op∣positions, with many Scandals and Offences. These men are apt to take distast at, to dislike, and so to be provoked, as to leave the way wherein they meet with them. Upon various surprising occasions, they fret themselves to do evil, Psal. 37. 8. So David was , very short spirited when upon the breach that God Righ∣teously made on Uzza, it is said that the thing which God had done displeased David. But this is that Grace whereby the Soul of a Believer is kept from taking offence, or admitting sinful provocations from cross Accidents, Oppositions, Injuries, Scandals, Disappointments. So is the Duty of it prescribed unto us in particular with respect unto one another, Ephes. 4. 2. Besides (2) There are sundry things in the Promises of God whereof Believers earnestly desire if it were possible, a pre∣sent Accomplishment, or a greater degree of evidence in their Accomplishment, or a greater speed towards it. Such are the full subduing of their Corruptions, suc∣cess against or freedom from Temptations, deliverance of ehe Church from Trou∣bles and the like. Now when these things are delayed, when the Heart is ready to be made sick by the deferring of its hopes, the Soul is apt to despond, to give over its expectations, and if it do so, it will quickly also forsake its Duties. The Grace which keeps us up in a quiet waiting upon God for the fulfilling of all that concerns us in his own time and season, that preserves us from fainting and sinful despondencies, is this , this long-suffering or forbearance. These were the ways whereby they came to inherit the Promises. The Heathen of old fancied that their Hero's or Patriarchs by great, and as they were called, Heroick Actions, by Valour, Courage, the Slaughter and Conquest of their Ene∣mies, usually attended with Pride, Cruelty and Oppression, made their way into Heaven. The way of Gods Hero's, of the Patriarchs of his Church and People unto their Rest and Glory, unto the enjoyment of the Divine Promises, was by Faith, Patience, Long-suffering, Humility, enduring Persecution, self-denial, and the spiritual Virtues generally reckoned in the world unto pusillanimity, and so de∣spised. So contrary are the Judgements and Ways of God and men even about what is good and praise-worthy. Observe as we pass on, That Faith and patient long-suffering are the only way whereby Professors of the Gospel may attain Rest with God in the Accomplishment of the Promises. It is a sad conside∣ration which way and by what means some men think to come to Heaven, or carry themselves as if they did so. They are but few who think so much as a naked Profession of these things to be necessary thereunto. But living avowedly in all sorts of sins, they yet suppose they shall inherit the Promises of God. But this was not the way of the holy men of old, whose example is proposed to us. Some think Faith at least to be necessary hereunto. But by Faith they understand little more than that they profess the true Religion, about which there are so many contests in the world. This was not the Faith of Abraham, that is, this alone was not so. Wherein it consisted and how it was acted we shall have occasion afterwards to declare. But what do men think of the long-suffering before described? Their Relief against it, is to trust in such a Faith as stands in no need of it. For that common Faith which most men content themselves withall, seldom or never puts them upon the exer∣cise of patient long-suffering. It is against the actings of a lively Faith that those Oppositions arise which the exercise of that other Grace is needful to conflict with∣all. And I shall give some few instances of it wherein the necessity of it will be made to appear. For if I should handle it at large, all the Difficulties that lye in the way of our Profession would fall under consideration: Of Faith we shall treat afterwards. And, 1. It is necessary with respect unto those Reproaches which the Profession of a saving Faith will expose men unto. It hath done so always, and will do so whilst
this world continues. And they are usually cast on Believers in so great variety on all sorts of occasions, as that it would be a long work to call over the principal of them. For they are the chief effects of the Endeavours of Sathan as he is the accuser of the Brethren. I shall instance only in those of one kind. And they are those which on their Straights, Difficulties and Temptations, the world reflects upon, as if their Profession of Faith in God were vain, false and hypocritical. When men said unto David, Where is now thy God? or what is become of thy Religion and Profession, thy pretended Trust in God? he says, it was a killing Sword in his Bones, it pierced deep and pained greatly, Psal. 42. 10. And it is spo∣ken in the Person of our Saviour, Reproaches have broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness, Psal. 69. 20. And this was the Reproach that was cast upon him on the Cross, as the next words manifest, They gave me Gall for my meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink, ver. 21. And this Reproach was that which we In∣stance in, They shook the Head at him, saying, He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him, let him deliver him seeing he delighted in him, Psal. 22. 118. Matth. 27. 43. And what befell the Lord Christ on the Cross, teacheth the Church what it is to expect under it. In this condition patient long-suffering is our only Relief. If that be not in exercise, we shall either faint and despond, or fret our selves to do evil, or say in our hearts, we will do unto others what they have done unto us. But hereby is the Soul delivered. It is not made stupid and senseless of the sharpness and evil of them; David was not so, nor was Christ himself; nor is it the Will of God that we should put them off with a careless regardlesness. The Glory and Honour of God and the Gospel are so far concerned in them, and God so designs them for the exercise of our Faith, as that they are not to be despised. But it will give a quietness and evenness of Spirit under them, so that no Duty shall be obstructed, nor that satisfaction which we have in the ways of God be any way impeded. And in this case this patient long-suffering worketh three ways. (1) By committing our whole cause to God; as it did in Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 23. (2) By patient waiting for the pleading of our Cause under a sense of our own sin, and an acknowledgement of the Righteousness of God, Mic. 7. 9, 10. (3) By supporting the Soul with a testi∣mony of its own sincerity, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. 2. With respect unto Violence and Persecutions. These also, that Faith which tends to the enjoyment of the Promises, will expose men unto. And they prove great trials, sometimes from their violence and sometimes from their continuance. Some come with the fury of a Storm, as if they would bear down all before them; Such were the Primitive Persecutions, and that at this day in many places under the Papal Power. Others by their long duration in wasting, vexing, consuming Trou∣bles, are designed gradually to wear out the Saints of the most high, Dan. 7. 25. And what havock hath been made in all Ages by them of the one sort and of the other, is known unto all. The number of Apostates in such seasons hath for the most part exceeded that of Martyrs. And many have insensibly withered and grown utterly weary, under Troubles of a long duration, when they could apprehend no end of them. Here we have need of patient long-suffering, if we intend to inherit the Promises. This is that Grace which calmeth and supporteth the Soul under all these pressures. (1) By keeping and preserving it from darkening, disturbing Affections, and passions of Anger, worldly sorrow, carnal fear, and the inordinate Love of present things. Hereby in patience we possess our Souls, Luke 21. 19. which if dis∣orderly Affections do as it were once carry out of our power, and possess the con∣duct of them, we shall quickly be at a loss in our Profession. (2) By enabling us to take a sedate prospect of Eternal things, of the good things promised, and their glorious excellency in comparison unto what here we suffer in, 2 Cor. 4. 16, 17, 18. (3) By preserving of us from all irregular ways and attempts for deliverance. For without this Grace we shall choose either not to suffer, and so disinherit our selves of the Promises; or shall not suffer in a due manner unto the Glory of God or our own advantage; or shall turn aside unto unlawful Reliefs. 3. It is necessary with respect unto our waiting for the Accomplishment of many great Promises concerning the Kingdom of Christ and Interest of the Gospel in this world. That there are such Promises on record in the Scripture, and as yet unfulfilled, is I suppose generally granted. However I speak of them who are satisfied in their
minds beyond all hesitation, that such there are; and of such as lived before the Accomplishment of some of them, who are proposed for our Example. For so did the Fathers under the Old Testament who lived before the coming of Christ in the Flesh. In these Promises and their Accomplishment Believers find themselves greatly concerned; and those who are not so, do disavow an Interest in the spiri∣tual Body of Christ and his Glory in the world. Now because their Accomplish∣ment is deferred beyond the desires and expectations of men, as was of old the Promise of the coming of Christ, many Temptations do ensue thereon. And not a few have there been on the one hand who have in sad Instances made haste and an∣tedated the Accomplishment in unwarrantable Practices; pretending unto Faith, they have renounced patient long-suffering; and not fewer have cast away all ex∣pectation of them on the other hand, as though they would never be fulfilled. Herein therefore we have also need of patient long-suffering. Without it we shall fall into one of the extreams mentioned, both of which are attended with dangers ruinous unto Profession: See Habbak. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. With respect unto these things the days of the Gospel are the time of the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1. 9. He hath begun to set up his Kingdom, and it shall never be prevailed against, Dan. 7. 27. But yet many things that belong thereunto, especially unto its tranquillity and extent are as yet unfulfilled, and whilst they are so, many out∣rages are committed in the world against his Rule and Interest. Wherefore it is at present the Time of his Patience as well as of his Raign. And therefore are we re∣quired to keep the word of his Patience, Rev. 3. 10. or to abide in the Faith of those things concerning which he exerciseth Patience in the world. So is it said with respect unto the Judgements which God in his own time will execute on the Antichristian persecuting world. He that leadeth into Captivity, shall go into Captivity; he that killeth with the Soword, must be killed with the Sword; here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints, Rev. 13. 10. While these things are accomplishing, and until they are accomplished, during that large season, until their end be, the Saints must exercise patient long-suffering, added unto Faith in the Promises, or they will not see the end of them. And this patient long-suffering with respect unto the Accom∣plishment of these Promises produceth these four effects. (1) A quiet resignation of all times and seasons unto the Soveraignty of God. The Soul possessed of it, quiets it self with this; it is not for me to know the times and seasons which God hath put in his own hand, Deut. 29. 29. (2) A due valuation of present enjoyments, which is especially required since the coming of Christ in the Flesh. (3) A ready Appli∣cation of mind unto present Duties, Joh. 21. 22. (4) Waiting in Prayer for what we have not yet received. 4. It is necessary also with respect unto our own personal Obedience and all the principal concerns of it. There are three things which Believers principally aim at in the course of their Obedience. (1) That their corruptions may be throughly sub∣dued. (2) That their Graces may be quickened and strengthened unto all fruitfulness. (3) That Temptations being removed their spiritual Consolations may abound. These are the things which they are continually pressing after, longing for, and endea∣vouring. And sometimes in some, if not all of them, they seem to have made so great a progress as to be ready for an entrance into perfect Rest. But yet again they find new Storms arise; Corruptions grow strong, and Grace is under Decays, Temptations abound, and Consolations are far away. Yea and it may be they are frequently exercised with these changes and disappointments. This fills them with many perplexities and oft-times makes them ready to faint. Unless this patient long-suffering accompany us in our whole course, we shall not finish it with Glory to God, or Comfort to our own Souls. But it may be enquired on what Grounds, and for what Reasons the Apostle doth propose unto these Hebrews the Example of their Predecessors in this matter. Wherefore he doth it, or he might do it for these ends: (1) That they might know that he exhorted them unto nothing, but what was found in them who went before them whom they so loved and admired. And this he afterwards unto the same end confirms with many Instances. (2) Unto nothing but what was needful unto all who were to inherit the Promises. For if these things were required of their Progenitors, persons so high in the Love and Favour of God unto that end, how could they imagine that they might be dispensed withall as to their obser∣vance.
(3) To nothing but what was practicable, which others had done, and was therefore possible, yea easie for them through the Grace of Christ to com∣ply withall. Thirdly, The Apostle for their encouragement unto the Duties mentioned, ex∣presseth . the end which those others attained in the practice of them. ; who inherit the Promises. It speaks in the present Tense, but principally intends those who lived before, as we have declared. And the Apostle here expresseth the way whereby in the use of the means we come to the enjoyment of the Promises. And this is by Inheritance. We neither merit it, nor purchase it, but inherit it. And how come we to inherit it? By the same way as any other comes to an Inheritance, namely, by being the true Heirs unto it. And how do we become Heirs of this Inheritance? meerly by Gods gratuitous Adoption; so our Apostle declareth fully this whole matter, Rom. 8. 15, 16, 17. Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father; The Spirit it self beareth witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of God. And if Children then Heirs of God, and joynt Heirs with Christ. God by free and gratuitous Adoption makes us his Children. All Gods Children are Heirs; he hath an Inheritance for them all. This Inheritance is promised unto them; and therefore their enjoyment of it is called inheriting of the Promises. Wherefore the Grace of Adoption is the Foun∣dation, cause, and way of our receiving promised Grace and Glory. And with respect hereunto it is that God is said not to be unrighteous in our Reward, ver. 10. For having freely adopted us and made us Heirs, it belongs unto his Faithfulness and Righteousness to preserve us unto our Inheritance. Only we are such Heirs as have means assigned unto us for the attaining of our Inheritance, which it is our Duty to apply our selves unto. They inherited , the Promises. Camero and Grotius on this Text ob∣serve, that where the Fathers under the Old Testament are spoken of in this mat∣ter, there the Promises are mentioned; But where Believers under the New Testa∣ment are spoken of, there it is called the Promise in the singular number. I shall not give their Reasons why it is so, because they are certainly mistaken in their Obser∣vation. For both is the Promise on the one hand mentioned with respect unto them, as Heb. 11. 39. and the Promises frequently with respect unto us, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Wherefore those expressions are used promiscuously, as is evident by our Apostle, chap. 11. ver. 13, and 39. Because they all sprang from one Original Promise, and all centred in him, in whom and by whom they were to be accom∣plished and made effectual, being all yea and Amen in him; and because that one which concerned his Person and Mediation did virtually include all the rest, they are all of them frequently intended and included under the name of the Promise in the singular number. But because God was pleased to let out as it were sundry Ri∣vulets of Grace and Bounty, originally stored in the first great Promise, by several particular grants and instances, partly for the Representation of that fulness of Grace which he intended to exhibit thereby; partly for the Encouragement of our Faith and its Direction in the Application of the Grace promised, on various particular occasions; And because he was pleased frequently to renew the same great original Promise, as to Abraham and David; there are many of them, and are called the Promises; and by reason of their Union in the same Covenant whoever is really in∣terested in any one of them, is so in all. By the Promises here the things promised are intended. To inherit the Promises, is to be made partaker of the things promised. And the matter of these Promises was all Grace and Glory. That which is here especially regarded is their full complement in Everlasting glorious Rest with God by Christ. This is proposed unto the Hebrews, and they are encouraged to expect it by the Ex∣amples of those who went before them in Faith and Patience. Wherefore he requires, Lastly, That they should be , imitatores eorum. Imitatores is not used . in our Language, and when it is, it rather signifies mimicks, or contains some re∣flection of blame or weakness, than what it is here applied unto. Wherefore we render it followers, that is, in doing what they did, treading and walking in their steps, as our Apostle expresseth it, Rom. 4. 12. as we are to follow the steps of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 21. It is to think we hear them saying unto us what Abimelech
did to his Soldiers, Judges 9. 48. What you have seen us do make haste and do as we have done. All Believers, all the Children of God have a right unto an Inheritance. How they came by this right was before declared: It is by that Adoption whereby they are Obser. 1. made Children of God, and all Gods Children are Heirs, as the Apostle affirms. And this Inheritance is the best and the greatest on the account of security and value. (1) Let an Inheritance be never so excellent and valuable, yet if it be not secure, if a mans Title unto it be not firm and unquestionable, if he may be defeated of it by fraud or force, which things all Earthly Right and Titles are obnoxious unto, it takes off the worth of it. But this Inheritance is conveyed, settled, and secured by the Promise, Covenant, and Oath of God, 2 Sam. 23. 5. Rom. 4. 16. These secure this Inheritance from all possibility of our being defeated of it. (2) The value of it is inexpressible. It is a Kingdom, Matth. 25. 34. Jam. 2. 5. Salvation. Ileh. 1. 14. The Grace of Life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Eternal Life. Tit. 3. 7. God himself who hath promised to be our Reward, Rom. 8. 17. The providing of Examples for us in the Scripture which we ought to imitate and follow, is an effectual way of teaching and a great fruit of the care and kindness of God Obser. 2. towards us. The use of Examples to be avoided in sin and punishment the Apostle declared and insisted on in the third Chapter, which we have also improved as we are able. Here he proposeth those which we are to comply with, and conform our selves unto, which afterwards, chap. 11. he farther presseth in very many particular Instances. And as there is a great efficacy in Examples in general which hath been spoken uoto on chap. 3. so there are many advantages in those which are proposed unto our Imitation in the Wisdom of the holy Spirit. For (1) the things and Duties which we are exhorted unto are represented unto us as possible, and that on terms not uneasie or grievous. Considering all the Difficulties and Oppositions from within and without that we have to conflict withall, we may be ready to think it impossible that we should successfully go through with them, and come off safely at the last. To obviate this despondency is the design of the Apostle in that long series of Examples which he gives us chap. 11. For he undeniably demonstrates by Instances of all sorts, that Faith will infallibly carry men through the greatest difficulties they can possibly meet with in the Profession and Obedience of it. There is no more required of us, than such and such persons by the Testimony of God himself, have successfully passed through. And if we follow them not, it is no∣thing but Spiritual Sloth, or the Love of the world and sin, that retards us. (2) Great Examples do naturally stir up and animate the minds of men who have any thing of the same Spirit with them by whom they were performed, to do like them, yea to out-do them if it be possible. So Themistocles said that Miltiades's Victory against the Persians would not let him sleep. Being a person of the same kind of courage with him, it stirred him up in a noble emulation, to equal him in an hazar∣dous and successful defence of his Country. But then it is required, that there be the same Spirit in us as was in them, whose Examples are proposed unto us. Let the examples of persons Valiant and Heroical, in their great and noble Actions be set before men of a weak and pusil∣lanimous nature or temper, and you will amaze or affright but not at all encourage them. Now the Spirit and Principle wherewith the Worthies of God, whose Ex∣ample is set before us were acted withall, was that of Faith. In vain should we encourage any unto a following or imitation of them, who hath not the same Spirit and Principle. This the Apostle requireth hereunto, 2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same Spirit of Faith according as it is written, I believed and therefore have I spoken; we also believe and therefore speak. Had we not the same Spirit of Faith with them, we could not do as they did. And we may take a Trial hereby whether our Faith be genuine or no. For if their Examples move us not, excite us not, unto the like Duties of Obedience with them, it is an evidence that we have not the same Spirit of Faith with them. As the Courage of a Valiant man is enflamed by a noble Example, when a Coward shrinks back and trembles at it. On this supposition there is great force in that direction, Jam. 5. 10. Take my Brethren the Prophets who have spoken in the name of the Lord for an Example of Suffering,
Affliction and Patience. Let a Minister of the Gospel who is made partaker in his measure of the same Spirit, conside how Elijah, Jeremiah, Peter, Paul, and the rest of those Holy Souls who spake in the name of the Lord, carried themselves under their Afflictions and Trials, and it will inflame his Heart to ingage chearfully in the like Conflicts. (3) These Examples are so repre∣sented unto us, as plainly to discover and point out where our Dangers lye on the one hand, and where our Assistance and Relief lye on the other. These two rightly considered and understood in all our Duties, will give us the best directions we can possibly receive. When we know our Dangers and our Reliefs aright, we are half way through our Difficulties. When these are out of mind, when we know them not, on every occasion we fall under surprisals and troubles. Now in the Examples proposed unto us, there is with∣all through the wisdom and care of the Spirit of God, represented unto us, the Temptations which befell those who are so our patterns, the Occasions of them, their Advantages, Power or Prevalency, wherein they missed it, or failed, exposing themselves unto the power of their Spiritual Enemies; and on the other hand what course they took for Relief, what Application they made unto God in their Difficulties and Distresses, and wherein alone they reposed their confidence of success. These things might be confirmed by ma∣nifold Instances. (4) There is in them also made known what Interveniences and Disturbances in our course of Obedience may befall us, which yet ought not to make us utterly despond, and give over our Profession as fruitless and hopeless. I confess great Wisdom and Caution is to be used in the conside∣ration of the sins and falls of the Saints under the Old Testament, that they be no way abused to give countenance unto sin, either before or after its Commission. We know not their Circumstances, their Light, their Grace, their Temptations, their Repentance, nor what was the Indulgence of God towards sin∣ners, before the fulness of the Dispensation of Grace came by Jesus Christ. But this is certain in general, that if every great sin or fall, when any is overtaken therein by the overpowering of Temptations, were absolutely in∣consistent with that course of Obedience which leads unto the Inheritance of the Promises, the Holy Ghost would not without any particular exception as to their persons, have recorded such things in the lives of them whom he proposeth for our Example. (5) The certain end of a Course of Holy Obedience is in them proposed unto us. All those holy Souls that are now at rest with God in Glory, as having inherited the Promises, were sometimes as we are, conflicting with Corruptions and Temptations, undergoing Reproaches and Per∣secutions, labouring in Duties and a constant course of Obedience unto God. If therefore we follow them in their Work, we shall not fail to partake with them in their Reward.
VERSE 13, 14, 15, 16. In the close of the foregoing Verse the Apostle expresseth the end of all his Ex∣hortations, what they tended unto, and what would be the advantage of all that complied with them in Faith and Obedience. And this was the Inheriting of the Promises, or the enjoyment of the things promised by God, unto them that believe and obey. Of all that entercourse that is between God and sinners, the Promise on the part of God is the sole Foundation. Thereby doth God express his Good∣ness, Grace, Truth, and Soveraign Power unto men. Herein all supernatural Re∣ligion and all our concernments therein, are founded, and not on any thing in us. And on our part the Inheritance of the Promises in the effects of those holy Pro∣perties of God towards us, is the end of what we look for and aim at in all our Obedience. Wherefore the Apostle having arrived in the series of his Discourse unto the mention of this great period of his whole design, he stays awhile to con∣sider and explain it in these Verses. . . Syr.  When he promised unto him. V. L. Abrahae nam{que} promittens; For promising to Abraham. Most, Deus enim pollicitus Abrahae: for God promising unto Abraham, which expresseth the sense in∣tended; and that word, when, which we add, is included in . ; Ad verbum; quoniam per neminem ha∣buit majorem jurare. Seeing by none he had a greater to swear. V. L. Quoniam neminem habuit, per quem juraret majorem. Rhem. Because he had none greater by whom he might swear. Erasm. Bez. Cum non possit per quemquam majorem jurare. Ours: Be∣cause he could swear by no greater:  is rather quum than quoniam. To make up the sense, se may be added, none greater than himself. And so the Syriack reads,  quoniam non erat ipsi qui major prae se ut juraret per illum; or in the Neuter Gender, majus and illud. Seeing there was no∣thing to him greater than himself that he might swear by it. All to the same purpose. , juravit per semet ipsum. Syr. ; He sware by his Soul; which though it may be an Hebraisme, yet we shall find that God sometimes in his Oath makes mention of his Soul. ; The Syriack omits the particles , which yet are the only note of Asseveration in the words. The Vulgar Lat. renders it by nisi; unless, which is retained by Erasmus, the sense whereof we shall afterwards enquire into. Certe, surely; Arab. I have sworn assuredly. Benedicens, or benedicendo benedicam, blessing, I will bless. ; Syr. ; he restrained his Spirit; preserved himself by Faith from being hasty, or making haste. ; adeptus est, nactus est, assequutus est, obtinuit, con∣secutus est; all which words are used by Interpreters. Syr.  he received. Pro∣missum, promissionem, repromissionem; He obtained the Promise. ; Syr.  the Sons of men; men of all sorts. . Vul. Lat. Per majorem sui. Sui is added if not needlesly, yet barba∣rously. ; Contradictionis, controversiae, litis, contentionis; strife; , finis, rather as Bez. Terminus. , ad confirmationem; Eras. ad con∣firmandum; juramentum, jusjurandum, adhibitum. Syr. , The true solution of every contention between them is by an Oath. Arab. A lawful Oath is the decision of every controversie between them.
Verse 13, 14, 15, 16. For when God made Promise to Abraham; (God promising unto Abraham) be∣cause he could swear by no greater, he sware by himself, Saying, Surely blessing, I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee; and so after he had patiently endured he obtained the Promise. For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. ; For; Expositors agree that this causal Connexion doth not infer a reason or enforcement of the preceding Exhortation unto Faith and directly: But it gives an  account wherefore he proposed unto them the Examples of their Fore-fathers, as those who through Faith and Patience inherited the Promises. For that they did so really and truly he proves by an Instance above all exception, producing the Example of one which he knew would be most forcible and prevalent with them. It is evident that they by Faith and Patience obtained the Promise, for so did Abra∣ham, the grounds whereof he particularly declares. But this in my Judgement compriseth not the whole scope and design of the Apostle in the Introduction of this Example. He hath yet a farther aim in it which we must enquire into. Wherefore (1) having carried on his paraenetical discourse concerning fruitfulness in Profession, with constancy in Faith and Patience, unto a Declaration of the end of all Graces and Duties, which is the enjoyment of the Pro∣mise, he takes occasion thence to declare unto them the nature of the Gospel, and the Mediation of Christ therein proposed unto them, unto constancy in the Faith and Profession whereof he had so exhorted them. To this end he lets them know that they were nothing but the Accomplishment of the great Promise made unto Abra∣ham, which as themselves acknowledged to be the Foundation of all their hopes and expectations, so also that it had not been before perfectly fulfilled. In that Promise both the great blessing of Christ himself, and the whole work of his Me∣diation were included. Wherefore on this account doth he insist so largely on this Promise and the confirmation of it, and issueth his discourse in the Introduction of Christ according unto it. (2) He further designs to manifest that the Promise as to the substance of it belongs no less unto all Believers than it did to Abraham, and that all the benefits contained therein are by the Oath of God secured unto them all. There is in the words, observing as near as we can their order in the Text, in the distribution; (1) The Person unto whom the Promises were made, and who is proposed for the example of the Hebrews, which is Abraham. (2) The Promise made unto him, which is that of Christ himself and the benefits of his Mediation. (3) The confirmation of that Promise by Oath of God; God sware. (4) The especial nature of that Oath, God sware by himself. (5) The reason hereof, because he had none greater by whom he might swear. (6) The end of the whole on the part of Abraham; He obtained the Promise by patient waiting or enduring. (7) The Assu∣rance of the Promise on the part of God as confirmed by his Oath, by a general maxime of things among men, grounded on the Light of Nature and received in their universal practice; For verily men swear by the greater, &c. 1. The Person to whom the Promise was made is Abraham. He was origi∣nally . called Abram;  Pater excelsus, an high or exalted Father. God changed his Name upon the most signal Renovation of the Covenant with him into  Abraham, Gen. 17. 5. The reason and added signification whereof is given in the next words; for a Father of many Nations have I made thee.  is a multitude, and God now declaring that Abra∣ham should not only be the Father of all the Nations that should proceed naturally from his Loyns, but of all the Nations of the world that should afterwards embrace and imitate his Faith, interserts the first letter of Hamon a multitude into his name, that it might be unto him a perpetual memorial of the Grace and Favour of God, as also a continual confirmation of his Faith in the Promises, the Truth and Power of God being always suggested unto him by the name that he had given him. Now Abraham was the most meet on many accounts to be proposed as an Ex∣ample unto this people. For (1) Naturally he was the Head of their Families, their
first peculiar famous progenitor, in whose Person that distinction from the rest of the world began, which they continued in throughout all their Generations; and all men are wont to pay a great Reverence and Respect to such persons. (2) It was he who as it were got them their Inheritance which was first conveyed unto him, and they came in upon his Right. (3) Because the Promise now accomplished was first signally given unto him, and therein the Gospel declared, in the Faith whereof they are now exhorted to persevere. (5) The Promise was not given him meerly on his own account or for his own sake; but he was singled out as a pattern and example for all Believers. And hence he became the Father of the Faithful, and Heir of the World. 2. That which is affirmed concerning this Person is, that God made Promise unto . him; . Of the Nature of Divine Promises I have treated on Chap. 4. 1, 2. In general they are express Declarations of the Grace, Goodness, Pleasure, and Purpose of God towards men for their good and advantage. That here intended was that for the substance of it God made unto Abraham, Gen. 12. 2, 3. I will bless thee and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing, and I will bless them that bless thee and curse them that curse thee: and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. And this same Promise was confirmed unto him by the way of a Covenant, Chap. 15. 3, 4, 5. And more solemnly, chap. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. For chap. 15. it is only promised that he should have a natural Seed of his own, and that a Stranger should not be his Heir. But here his name is changed into Abraham, he is made Heir of the world, and many Nations are given in to be his spiritual Posterity. But because together with the Promise our Apostle designs to give an account and commendation both of the Faith and Obedience of Abraham, he calls not out that grant of this Promise which was preventing, renewing, and calling, antecedent unto all his Faith and Obedience, and communicative of all the Grace whereby he was enabled thereunto, as expressed chap. 12. but he takes it from that place where it was renewed and established unto him after he had given the last and greatest evidence of his Faith, Love, and Obedience, chap. 22. 16, 17, 18.  By my self have I sworn saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not with-held thy Son, thine only Son; ; That in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will mul∣tiply thy Seed. Thus God gave out unto him the fulness of the Promise by degrees. First he mentions only his own person without any Declaration how the Promise should be fulfilled in his Seed, Chap. 12. 2, 3. Then he expresly adds the mention of his Seed in the way whereby the Promise should be accomplished, but no more, Chap. 15. 5. And at length he lets him know the extent of his Seed unto Believers of all Nations, chap. 17. 5. To all which a farther confirmation by the Oath of God, and the Extent of the Promise is added, Chap. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18. So are we to embrace, and improve as he did the first dawnings of Divine Love and Grace. It is not full Assurance that we are first to look after, but wait for the confirmation of our Faith in compliance with what we have received; If we either value not, or improve not in thankful Obedience the first Intimations of Grace, we shall make no progress towards greater enjoyments. And in the Apostles expression of this Pro∣mise we may consider, 1. The manner of the expression. 2. The nature and concernments of the Promise it self. In the manner of the expression there are the Affirmative particles; ; certe, truly. They answer only directly unto  in the Hebrew; but the Apostle includes . a respect unto what was said before, ; In my self have I sworn. And  is sometimes used for  that is, truly; in way of an Asseveration, Job 34. 31. ; which we render, Surely, it is meet to be said unto God I have born, I will not offend, and that properly. And  was of common use in the Greek Tongue in Assertory Oaths. So Demosthenes, ; He sware  that he would destroy Philip. The Vulgar Latine renders it by nisi, that is, , contrary to the sense of the Ancients, Chrysostome, Oecumenius, and Theophylact, as some of the Expositors of the Roman Church do acknowledge. But yet that manner of expression denotes a sense not unusual in the Scripture. For there is an Intimation in it of a reserved Condition rendring the saying ensuing a most sacred Oath. Unless I bless thee, let
me not be trusted in as God, or the like. But the formality of the Oath of God is neither in Genesis nor here expressed; only respect is had unto what he affirms, by my self have I sworn. Surely, undoubtedly. The Promise it self is expressed in those words, , &c. Blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee. Our Apostle renders the words of Moses exactly, Gen. 22. 17. Only where it is said there, I will multiply thy Seed, he expresseth it by I will multiply thee, which is all one, or to the same purpose; for he could be no way multiplied, but in his Seed; and he proceedeth no farther with the words of the Promise, as being not concerned in what followeth. For although his Seed was actually multiplied, yet it was Abraham himself who was blessed therein. The Vulgar Latine in this place reads, Benedicens benedicam, blessing I will bless; but in Genesis hath only benedicam and multiplicabo. Hence divers of the Roman Expositors, as Ribera, Tena and others, give sundry reasons why the Apostle changed the ex∣pression from what was used in Moses, where it is only said I will bless thee, into blessing I will bless thee. And which I cannot but observe, Schlictingius who followeth in this place the Exposition of Ribera, complies with him also in that Observation: aliis quidem verbis (saith he) promissionem hanc apud Mosem extulit: But all this is but the mistake of the Vulgar Interpreter on Gen. 22. For the words in the Origi∣nal have the Reduplication rendered by the Apostle, which the Lxx also observe. And this Reduplication is a pure Hebraisme vehemently affirming the thing promised, and hath in it the nature of an Oath. It also intends and extends the matter pro∣mised. Blessing I will bless thee; I will do so without fail, I will do so greatly without measure, and eternally without end. And this kind of Asseveration is com∣mon in the Hebrew, Gen. 2. 17.  In the day thou eatest thereof dying thou shalt dye; thou shalt assuredly dye; be certainly ob∣noxious unto Death; it may be also that the double Death temporal and eternal is included therein. See Gen. 37. 33. 2 Kings 2. 23. 1 Sam. 23. 22. Josh. 24. 10. Jer. 23. 17. Dan. 11. 10. We have need of every thing that any way evidenceth the stability of Gods Promises to Obser. 1 be represented unto us, for the encouragement and confirmation of our Faith. As God redoubled the word at the first giving out of the Promise unto Abraham for the strengthening of his Faith, so is the same here expressed by the Apostle that it might have the same effect upon us. And two things especially God seems to impress upon our minds in this vehemency of expression. (1) The sincerity of his Inten∣tions without reserve. (2) The stability of his Purposes without alteration and change. It is to signifie both these, that such emphatical vehement expressions are used even among men, and both these Unbelief is apt to question in God. He that believeth not maketh God a liar, 1 Joh. 5. 10. He is a lyar who in his Promises intendeth not what his words signifie, but hath other reserves in his mind; and he who having promised changeth without cause. Both these doth Unbelief im∣pute to God, which makes it a sin of so hainous a nature. The first time God used this kind of Reduplication it was in his threatening of Death unto the Trans∣gression of the Command, Gen. 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof dying thou shalt dye. And that which Sathan deluded our first Parents by, was in perswading them that there was not sincerity in what God had said, but that he had reserved to him∣self, that it should be otherwise. The Serpent said unto the woman  dying ye shall not dye, Gen. 3. 4. But this being directly contrary unto what God had expresly affirmed, how could Sathan imagine that the Woman would im∣mediately consent unto him against the express words of God? Wherefore he useth this Artifice to prevail with her, that although God had spoken those words, yet he had a Reserve to himself that it should not be unto them indeed as he had spoken, ver. 5. By these means Unbelief entered into the world, and hath ever since wrought effectually in the same kind. There is no Promise of God so plainly expressed but Unbelief is ready to suggest innumerable exceptions why it should have such reserves accompanying of it, as that it doth not belong unto us. Most of these exceptions we gather from our selves, and were it not for them we sup∣pose we could believe the Promise well enough. But the truth is, when we are called to believe, when it is our Duty so to do, when we pretend that we are
willing and desirous to do so, were it not for such and such things in our selves, it is the sincerity of God in his Promises we all in question: and we think that al∣though he proposeth the Promise unto us, and commandeth us to believe, yet it is not his intention and purpose that we should do so, or that we should be made par∣takers of the good things promised. By the purpose of God I do not here intend the Eternal purpose of his Will concerning the effects and events of things, about which we are called to exercise neither Faith nor Unbelief, until they are mani∣fested. But the whole Rule of our Duty is in Gods Command, and the Faith re∣quired of us consists in this, that if we comply with what God prescribeth, we shall enjoy what he promiseth; if we believe, we shall be saved. And herein to question the Truth or Sincerity of God, is an high effect of Unbelief. This distrust there∣fore God removes by the Reduplication of the word of the Promise, that we might know he was in good earnest in what he expressed. The like may be spoken con∣cerning the stability of the Promises, with respect unto change, which because it must be particularly afterwards spoken unto, shall be here omitted. And these things we have need of. If we think otherwise we know little of the nature of Faith or Unbelief, of our own weakness, the efficacy of the Deceits of Sathan, or the mani∣fold oppositions which rise up against believing. 2. For the Promise it self here intended or the matter of it, it may be consi∣dered two ways. (1) As it was personal unto Abraham, or as the Person of Abra∣ham was peculiarly concerned therein. (2) As it regards all the Elect of God and their Interest in it; of whom he was the Representative. As this Promise was made personally unto Abraham, it may be considered, (1) With respect unto what was Carnal, Temporal and Typical. (2) Unto what was Spiritual and Eternal typed out by those other things. As unto what was Carnal and Typical, the things in it may be referred unto two Heads. (1) His own temporal prosperity in this world. Gods Blessing is always  an addition of good unto him that is blessed. So it is said Gen. 24. 1. God hath blessed Abraham in all things; which is explained ver. 35. in the words of his Servant, The Lord hath greatly blessed my Master and he is become great, and he hath given him Flocks and Herds, Silver and Gold, God increased him in Wealth, Riches and Power until he was esteemed as a mighty Prince by the people among whom he dwelt, Gen. 23. 6. And this in the Blessing was a Type and Pledge of that full Administration of Grace and Spiritual things, which was principally intended. (2) What concerned his Posterity where∣in he was blessed. And herein two things were in the Promise both expressed at large. (1) The greatness of their number; They were to be as the Stars of Heaven or as the Sand by the Sea-shore; that is, innumerable. (2) Their success and prosperity; that they should possess the Gates of their Ene∣mies; which principally respected the mighty successes which they had and Con∣quests which they made under the conduct of Joshua and afterwards of David. In both these things were they Typical of the more numerous Subjects of the Kingdom of Christ, and of his spiritual Conquest for them and in them of all their spiritual Adversaries. See Luke 1. 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75. In these two Branches of the Promise the Faith of Abraham was greatly exercised as unto the Accomplishment of them. For as unto the first or multiplication of his Posterity, though he lived after this about 70 years, yet he never saw any more than two persons, Isaac and Jacob that were interested in this Promise; For although he had other Children and Posterity by them, yet in Isaac only was his Seed to be called, as to this Promise. He had therefore during his own days no outward visible pledge or appearance of its Accomplishment; and yet however he lived and died in the Faith thereof. And as unto the latter, of their prosperity and success, he was told before, that they should be in Affliction and Bondage for 400 years. Yet looking by Faith through all these difficulties in its proper season, he inherited the Pro∣mise. And he was a great Example herein unto all Believers under the New Testament; For there are many Promises remaining as yet unaccomplished, and which at pre∣sent as in other Ages, seem not only to be remote from but as unto all outward means to be cast under an impossibility of accomplishment. Such are those as con∣cerning the calling of the Jews, the coming in of the fulness of the Gentiles, with the
enlargement and establishment of the Kingdom of Christ in this world. Concerning all these things, some are apt to despond, some irregularly to make haste, and some to reject and despise them. But the Faith of Abraham would give us pre∣sent satisfaction in these things and assured expectation of their Accomplishment in their proper season. Secondly, The peculiar Interest of Abraham in this Promise as to the spiri∣tual part of it may also be considered; and hereof in like manner there were two parts. 1. That the Lord Christ should come of his Seed according to the flesh. And he was the first person in the world, after our first Parents, to whom in the order of nature it was necessary, to whom the Promise of the Messiah to spring from them was confirmed. It was afterwards once more so confirmed unto David, whence in his Genealogy he is said in a peculiar manner to be the Son of David, the Son of Abraham. For unto these two persons alone was the Promise confirmed. And therefore is he said in one place to be the Seed of David according to the Flesh, Rom. 1. 3. and in another, to have taken on him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. Herein lay Abrahams peculiar Interest in the spiritual part of this Promise, He was the first who had this priviledge granted unto him by especial Grace, that the promised Seed should spring from his Loyns. In the Faith hereof he saw the Day of Christ and rejoiced; this made him famous and honourable throughout all Genera∣tions. 2. As he was thus to be the natural Father of Christ according to the flesh, whence all Nations were to be blessed in him or his Seed; so being the first that received or embraced this Promise, he became the spiritual Father of all that do believe, and in them the Heir of the world in a spiritual Interest, as he was in his carnal Seed the Heir of Canaan, in a political Interest. No men come to be accepted with God but upon the account of their Faith in that Promise which was made unto Abraham, that is, in him who was promised unto him. And we may observe That, The Grant and Communication of spiritual Priviledges is a meer act or effect of Sove∣raign Grace. Even this Abraham who was so exalted by spiritual Priviledges, seems Obser. 1. originally to have been tainted with the common Idolatrie which was then in the world. This account we have, Josh. 24. 2, 3. Your Father dwelt on the other side of the Flood in old time, Terah the Father of Abraham, and the Father of Nachor, and they served other Gods. And I took your Father Abraham from the other side of the Flood. It is true, the charge is express against Terah only; but it lying against their Fathers in general on the other side of the Flood, and being added that God took Abraham from the other side of the Flood, he seems to have been involved in the Guilt of the same sin whilst he was in his Fathers House and before his Call. Nor is there any account given of the least preparation or disposition in him unto the state and Duties which he was afterwards brought into. In this condition, God of his Soveraign Grace first calls him to the saving knowledge of himself, and by de∣grees accumulates him with all the Favours and Priviledges before mentioned. Hence in the close of his whole course he had no cause to glory in himself neither before God nor men, Rom. 4. 2. For he had nothing but what he gratuitously re∣ceived. Indeed there were distances of time in the collation of several distinct Mercies and Blessings on him. And he still through the supplies of Grace which he received under every mercy, so deported himself, as that he might not be un∣meet to receive the succeeding mercies whereof he was to be made partaker. And this is the method of Gods communicating his Grace unto sinners. His first Call and Conversion of them is absolutely gratuitous. He hath no consideration of any thing in them that should induce him thereunto. Neither is there any thing requi∣red unto a condecency herein. God takes men as he pleaseth, some in one condi∣tion and posture of mind, some in another; some in an open course of sin, and some in the execution of a particular sin, as Paul. And he indeed at the instant of his call was under the active power of two of the greatest hinderances unto Con∣version that the heart of man is obnoxious unto. For first he was zealous above measure of the Righteousness of the Law, seeking earnestly for Life and Salvation by it; and then he was actually ingaged in the persecution of the Saints of God. These
two qualifications constant resting in Legal Righteousness, with rage and madness in persecution, than which there are not out of Hell more adverse principles unto it, were all the preparations of that Apostle unto converting Grace. But after that this Grace which is absolutely free and Soveraign is received, there is an order in Gods Covenant which for the most part he observeth in the communication of ensuing Graces and Priviledges; namely, that Faith and Obedience shall precede the increase and enlargement of them. Thus was it with Abraham who re∣ceived his last great signal Promise and Priviledge, Gen. 22. upon that signal Act of his Faith and Obedience in offering up his Son upon Gods Command. As it was with Abraham, so is it with all those who in any Age are made parta∣kers of Grace or spiritual Priviledges. Secondly, The Promise here intended as to the spiritual part of it may be con∣sidered with respect unto all Believers; of whom Abraham was the Representative. And two things are contained therein. 1. The giving and sending of the Son of God to take on him the Seed of Abraham. This was the life and soul of the Promise; the ancient and first ex∣pressed regard of Divine Grace unto sinners. In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; that is, the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head. The Incarnation of the Son of God promised from the Foundation of the world, shall be fulfilled in thy Seed, he shall take on him the Seed of Abraham. So our Apostle argues, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made, he saith not unto Seeds as of many, but as of one, and thy Seed which is Christ. For the Pro∣mise which is made concerning Christ in one sense, is made unto him in another. As to the benefit and effects of the coming of Christ it was made concerning him unto Abraham and all his Seed, but as unto the first grant, intention and stability of the Promise it is made unto Christ himself, with respect unto that Everlasting Cove∣nant which was between the Father and him, in his undertaking the work of Medi∣ation. Or the Lord Christ may be considered either as the undertaker of the Cove∣nant with God, and so the Promise was made unto him; or as the Accomplish∣ment of the terms of it for us, so the Promise was concerning him. 2. The nature of the benefit which is to be received by Christ thus promised; and that in general is a Blessing, in thy Seed shall they be blessed. And two things are comprised in this Blessing, as the Springs of other mercies innumerable. The Promise of Christ himself was the fountain, and all other Promises were particular streams from it, especial Explications and Applications of that Promise. (1) The removal of the Curse of the Law which was come on all men by reason of sin. The Curse could not be removed but by a Blessing; and that which doth it is the greatest of Blessings, as that was the greatest of Curses and Miseries. (2) The bringing in of a blessed Righteousness, on the account whereof we might be accepted with God. See Gal. 3. 13, 14, 15. Before we proceed we may observe two things in general concerning this Pro∣mise. (1) That this was the Life of the Church of the Old Testament, the Spring of its continuance unto its appointed season, which could never be dried up. How many times were that whole people, the posterity of Abraham, at the very brink of Destruction? For sometimes they fell generally into such terrible provoking sins, as that their utter casting off might have been justly expected by Angels and men; sometimes they were in the just Judgement of God given up unto such wasting Desolations in their Captivities, as that they were wholly like dry bones on the face of the Earth without hopes of a Resurrection. Yet mercy, patience, and power wrought through all and preserved them in a Church state until this Pro∣mise was accomplished. This it was alone, or the Faithfulness of God therein whence all their healing and recoveries did proceed. And when this Promise was once fulfilled, it was beyond the power of all the world to keep them unto their former condition. All depended on the issue of this Promise, in whose fulfilling all things were to be cast into a new mold and order. (2) This was that which preserved the Spirits of true Believers among them from ruining Despondencies in the times of the greatest Apostasies, Calamities, and Desolations of the People. They had this Promise still to plead, and rested therein, notwithstanding all the Interveniencies which oft-times seemed to render the case of that people very desperate. See their Faith expressed, Micah 7. 18, 19, 20. Isa. 7. 13, 14, 15. chap. 5. 3. Luke 1. 70,
71, 72, 73. And I would hope there is mercy lies treasured in the Bowels of this Promise not yet brought forth toward the remainders of the Posterity of Abraham according to the Flesh. Who knows but that by virtue of the ingaged Love and Faithfulness of God declared in this Promise, these withered Branches may revive, and these dead bones rise again? Our Apostle placeth the Hopes of it on this ground alone, that as touching the Election they were beloved; they were beloved for the Fathers sake, Rom. 11. 28. As to Profession they were then vsibly falling off; but as to Election, as to Gods purpose concerning them, the Love which he bare to their Fathers, ingaged unto Abraham in this Promise, will one day find them out, and bring them in unto a plentiful share in this Blessing. Wherefore on all accounts the Instance chosen by the Apostle was of singular use unto the Hebrews, and singularly suited unto their present condition. For as they received many Advantages from his personal Priviledges who was their Father according to the Flesh; so they succeeded unto him in the spiritual part of the Pro∣mise; and therefore as the like Duties of Faith and Obedience and Perseverance were required of them as of him, so they in the performance of them had assurance given them in his success, that they also should inherit the Promise. So the Apo∣stle applies his discourse ver. 17, 18. Where the Promise of God is absolutely ingaged, it will break through all Difficulties. and Obser. 2. Oppositions unto a perfect Accomplishment. No Promise of God shall ever fail or be of none effect. We may fail or come short of the Promise by our Unbelief; but the Promises themselves shall never fail. There have been great seasons of Trial in many Ages wherein the Faith of Believers hath been exercised to the utmost about the accomplishment of the Promises; but the Faithfulness of God in them all hath hitherto been ever Victorious, and it will be so for ever. And this Trial hath arose partly from Difficulties and Oppositions, with all Improbabilities of their Accomplishment on rational accounts, or with respect unto visible means; partly from a misunderstanding of the nature of the Promises, or of the season of their Accomplishment. Thus in the first great Promise given unto our Parents after the Fall, how soon was their Faith exercised about it. When they had but two Sons the one of them slew the other, and the survivor was rejected and cursed of God. From whom should now the promised Seed be expected to proceed and spring? Is it not probable that they were oft-times ready to say, where is the Promise of his coming? And yet indeed this which seemed to overthrow and disannul the Promise, was only a means of its farther confirmation. For the death of Abel upon his offering his acceptable Sacrifice, was a Type of Christ and his suffering in his my∣stical Body, 1 Joh. 3. 12. When the wickedness of the world was come unto that height and fulness that God would not spare, but destroyed all the Inhabitants of it excepting eight persons, the very destruction of the whole Race of mankind seemed to threaten an Annihilation of the Promise. But this also proved unto its confir∣mation. For after the Flood God established it unto Noah, accompanied it with a Covenant and gave a visible Pledge of his Faithfulness therein to abide for ever, Gen. 9. 11, 12. For although that Covenant in the first place respected temporal things, yet as it was annexed unto the first Promise it represented and assured the spiritual things thereof, Isa. 54. 8, 9, 10. This great Promise was after limited unto the person of Abraham, namely, that from him should spring the blessed Seed. Yet after it was given unto him, many and many a year passed over him, before he saw the least hope of its Accomplishment. Yea he lived to see all natural ways and means of fulfilling it utterly to fail; Sarahs Womb being dead and his Body also; so that he was past and beyond all hope of having it fulfilled in the or∣dinary course of nature. And the Faith which he had in hope was against hope, Rom. 4. 18, 19. Hence he complained that after all his long and wearisome Pilgrimage he went Childless, Gen. 15. 2. and fell into no small mistakes in the matter of Ha∣gar and Ishmael. Yet after all, the Promise made its way unto its own Accom∣plishment. And by the signal victory it had herein against all oppositions, assured it self unto the Faith of all succeeding Generations, as is here expressed by the Apostle. Afterwards when the Promise was confined unto Isaac, by that word, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, and Abraham now drawing apace towards the Grave, he is commanded to slay this Isaac and offer him in Sacrifice unto God. This in∣deed
was the greatest appearance under the Old Testament of the absolute disan∣nulling and frustration of the Promise. And Abraham had no relief for his Faith under this Trial, but only the Omnipotency of God, which could produce effects that he could no way apprehend, as raising of him up again from the dead, or the like. But this also proved in the issue so great a confirmation of the Promise, as that it never received any thing of the like nature, before nor after, until its actual accomplishment. For hereon was it confirmed by the Oath of God, whereof we shall treat immediately; the Sacrifice of Christ illustriously represented, and an In∣stance given of the infallible victorious success of Faith whilst against all difficulties it adheres unto the Truth of the Promise. What was the condition with the Faith of the best of men when the Lord Christ was in the Grave? At how great a loss they were, and how their Faith was shaken to the utmost, the two Disciples ex∣pressed unto the Lord Christ himself as they went to Emmaus, Luke 24. 21. We trusted that it had been he who should have redeemed Israel, and for what they had heard then reported of his Resurrection they said they were astonished at it, but could not arrive at any positive actings of Faith about it. And this befell them when they were speaking to Christ himself, in whom the Promise had received its full Accomplishment. After this also when the Gospel began to be preached in the world, it appeared that it was rejected by the generality of the Jews, and that they also thereon were rejected from being the people of God. This made a great hesi∣tation in many about the Promise made unto Abraham concerning his Seed and Po∣sterity, as though it were of none effect. For now when the full Accomplishment was declared, and innumerable persons came in unto a participation of it, those unto whom it was peculiarly made, neither would be, nor were sharers of it. This great Objection against the Truth of the Promise our Apostle lays down; Rom. 9. 6. not as though the Word of God had taken none effect, in answer whereun∣to he spends the three ensuing Chapters. And he doth it by letting of us know that the Objection was grounded on a mistake of the Persons unto whom the Pro∣mise did belong; which were not the whole carnal Seed of Abraham but only the Elect of them, and all Nations whatever. And there are yet Promises of God on Record in the Scripture not yet fulfilled, that will and do exercise the Faith of the strongest and most experienced Believers, concerning whose Accomplishment our Lord Jesus Christ says, When the Son of Man cometh, shall he find Faith in the Earth? The Faith, hope and expectation of most will be at an end, before they are fulfilled; and that because of the insuperable difficulties that seem to lye in the way of their Accomplishment. Such are those which concern the destruction of Antichrist, the calling of the Jews, the spreading of the Gospel unto all Nations, and the flourishing of the Church in Peace and Purity. These things as to all out∣ward appearance seem as remote from Accomplishment, as they were the first day the Promise was given, and the difficulties against it increase continually. And yet notwithstanding the Promise shall break through all difficulties, at the end it shall speak and not lye; The Lord will hasten it in its time, Isa. 20. 22. Before its proper time, its appointed season it will not be; but then the Lord will hasten it that no opposition shall be able to stand before it. From this state of the Promises three things have fallen out. (1) That in all Ages the Faith of True Believers hath been greatly and peculiarly exercised, which hath been to the singular advantage of the Church. For the exercise of Faith is that whereon the flourishing of all other Graces doth depend. And from hence hath there been a Treasure of fervent Prayers laid up from the beginning, which shall in their proper season have a fruitful return. In that Faith and Patience, in those Supplications and Expectations, wherein in every Age of the Church the Faithful have abounded with respect unto the difficulties that have lain in the way of the Promise, hath God been exceedingly glorified; as also they were the means of drawing forth new encouragements and assurances as the comfort of the Church did require. (2) Hence it was that in most Ages of the Church there have been mockers and scoffers, saying, Where is the Promise of his coming, for since the Fathers fill asleep all things continue as from the beginning of the Creation, 2 Pet. 3. 4. The Fathers were they who received the Promises; especially that of the coming of Christ. These they preached and declared, testifying that they would be accom∣plished, and that great alterations should be wrought in the world thereby. The
sum of what they so declared was, That the Elect of God should be delivered, and that Judgement should be executed on ungodly men, by the coming of the Lord, Jude 14, 15. But what now is become of these Fathers, with all their great Promises and Preachments upon them? Things go on in the same course as they did in the beginning, and are like to do so to the end of the world; what, we pray, is this Promise of his coming you have so talked of? Such Scoffers have most Ages abounded withall; and I think none more than that wherein our Lot is fallen. Observing that all things are in a most unlikely posture to an eye of carnal reason for the Accomplishment of the great Promises of God that are upon Record in the Word, they scoff at all who dare to own an expectation thereof. (3) Some through haste and precipitation have fallen into manifold mistakes of the Promise on the same account. Some have feigned to themselves other things than God ever promised; as the generality of the Jews looked for a carnal Rule, Glory and Do∣minion at the coming of the Messiah which proved their temporal and eternal Ruine. And it is to be feared that some are still sick of the same or like Imaginations. And some have put themselves on irregular courses for the Accomplishment of Promises, walking in the Spirit of Jacob and not of Israel. But whatever of this or any other kind may fall out by the unbelief of men, all the Promises of God are Yea and Amen, and will make their way through all difficulties unto an assured Accom∣plishment in their proper season. Thus it is also with respect unto our Faith in the Promises of God as unto our own especial and personal Interest in them. We find so many difficulties, so many oppositions, as that we are continually ready to call in question the Accomplish∣ment of them; and indeed few there are, that live in a comfortable and confident assurance thereof. In the times of Temptation, or when perplexities arise from a deep sense of the guilt and power of sin, and on many other occasions, we are ready to say with Sion, The Lord hath forsaken us, our way is passed over from him, as for our part we are cut off. In all these cases it were easie to demonstrate whence it is that the Promise hath its insuperable efficacy, and shall have its infallible Accomplishment, but it must be spoken unto under the particular wherein the confirmation of the Promise by the Oath of God is declared. Again, Although there may be priviledges attending some Promises, that may be peculiarly ap∣propriated Obser. 2. unto some certain persons, yet the Grace of all Promises is equal unto all Be∣lievers. So Abraham had sundry personal Priviledges and Advantages communica∣ted unto him in and by this Promise, which we have before re-counted, Yet there is not the meanest Believer in the world, but he is equally partaker of the spiritual Grace and Mercy of the Promise with Abraham himself. They are all by virtue hereof made Heirs of God and Co-heirs with Christ whose is the Inheritance. The next thing considerable in the words, is the especial confirmation of the Pro∣mise made to Abraham by the Oath of God. For God—when he could swear by no greater he sware by himself. And sundry things we must enquire into in this pe∣culiar dispensation of God unto men, namely, in swearing to them. 1. The Person swearing is said to be God. God sware by himself. And ver. 17. in  the Application of the Grace of this Promise unto Believers, it is said, that God inter∣posed himself by an Oath. But the words here repeated are expresly ascribed unto the Angel of the Lord, Gen. 22. 15, 16. And the Angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of Heaven the second time, and said By my self have I sworn saith the Lord. So it is said before ver. 11. The Angel of the Lord called unto him out of Heaven and said Abraham; and adds in the close of ver. 12. thou hast not with-held thy Son, thine only Son from me. He is called an Angel that speaks, but he still speaks in the name of God. Three things are insisted on to assoil this difficulty. (1) Some say that he spake as a Messenger and Ambassador of God in his name, and so assumed his Titles, although he was a meer created Angel: For so a Legate may do, and use the name of him that sends him. But I do not see a sufficient foundation of this supposition. An Ambassador having first declared that he is sent, and from whom, may act in the Name and Authority of his Master; but not speak as if he were the same person. But here is no such Declaration made, and so no provision laid in against Idolatry. For when one speaks in the Name of God, not as from
God, but as God, who would judge but Divine Honour and Religious Worship were due unto them, which yet are not unto Angels however gloriously sent or employed, Rev. 19. 10. chap. 22. 9. Wherefore (2) It is said that this Angel doth only repeat the words of God unto Abraham as the Prophets were wont to do. And those of this mind countenance their Opinion with those words used by him, ver. 16.  saith the Lord; the words whereby the Prophets solemnly ushered in their messages. But yet neither will this solve the difficulty. For these words, saith the Lord, are often used in the third person, to express him unto us whom in all our Duties we regard, when God himself is introduced speaking. See Gen. 19. 24. Zech. 2. 8, 9. And he who called unto Abraham the second time, ver. 15. is the same with him who first called unto him, ver. 11, 12. and he speaks expresly in the name of God; Thou hast not with-held thy Son from me. Besides in each place this Angel is said to speak from Heaven; which expresseth the Glory of the person that spake. Where∣ever God makes use of created Angels in messages unto the Children of men, he sends them unto the Earth; but this speaking from Heaven is a description of God himself, Heb. 12. 25. Therefore (3) By this Angel no other Angel is to be understood, but the great Angel of the Covenant the second person of the Trinity, who thus appeared unto the Fathers under the Old Testament. See this proved at large in our Tenth Exercitation in the first Volume of our Exposition on this Epistle. He it was that spake and sware by himself. For when a meer Angel sweareth, he swears always by one greater than himself according to the rule of our Apostle in this place, Dan. 12. 17. Rev. 10. 5, 6. Secondly, It may be enquired when God did thus swear: ; . promising he sware. He did not first promise, and afterwards confirm it with his Oath. He gave his Promise and Oath together; or gave his Promise in the way of an Oath. Yet are they distinctly considered, nor is it the meer vehemency of the Promise that is intended. For in the next Verse the Apostle calls the Promise and the Oath two things, that is, distinct from one another; , two Acts of God. But although he hath respect principally unto that especial Promise which was given with an Oath, yet by the same Oath were all the Promises of this kind given before unto Abraham equally confirmed; whence it may be applied un∣to all the Promises of God as it is in the following verses. That which is di∣rectly intended is that whereof the story is expressed, Gen. 22. ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. upon his Obedience in offering up his Son. And this was the last time that God immediately and solemnly made Promise unto him after he had gone through all sorts of Trials and Temptations (whereof the Jews give ten particular Instances) and had acquitted himself by Faith and Obedience in them all. Thus did God in his infinite Goodness and Wisdom see good to give him the utmost assurance of the Accomplishment of the Promise, whereof in this Life he was capable; And although it was an Act of Soveraign Grace, yet had it also the nature of a reward, whence it is so expressed, Because thou hast done this thing, and hast not with-held thy Son, thine only Son. Of the same nature are all those assurances of Divine Love and Grace, with the peace and joy that accompany them, which Believers do re∣ceive in and upon the course of their Obedience. Thirdly, The Expression of this Oath may be also considered. The Apostle only mentions the Oath it self, with respect unto the ancient Record of it, but expresseth not the formal terms of it. He sware by himself saying; The Expression of it Gen. 22. 16. is ; By my self have I sworn saith the Lord. And we may consider two things concerning the Oath of God. (1) Why he sware. (2) How he swears. For the first of these, whereas all the Oaths of God are in the confirmation of his Promises or his Threatenings, the reason and nature of those which respect his Threatenings hath been declared at large on chap. 3. And that which concerns the Promises will return unto us, ver. 17. where it must be spoken unto. 2. How he swears; whrein also two things are comprised; (1) The manner of his swearing, and (2) the Nature of his Oath. 1. The manner of swearing is twofold. (1) That which positively expresseth and ingageth what is sworn by; and (2) That wherein an imprecation or execration is im∣plyed or expressed. The first the Latines express by per; per Deum; the Greeks by  and , to the same purpose; The Hebrews prepose the letter  unto the
thing sworn by. So here  that is, by my self. Sometimes there is no expression to that purpose, only God affirms that he hath Sworn, for he is every way his own witness, 1 Sam. 3. 14. I have sworn unto the House of Eli. So Psal. 132. Isa. 14. 24. Sometimes he expresseth some of the Properties of his Nature, as Psal. 89. 35.  Juravi per sanctitatem meam; I have sworn by my Holiness. So Amos 4. 2. By my self; Jer. 22. 5. Isa. 45. 23. chap. 43. 13. By his right hand, and the arm of his strength; Isa. 62. 8. By his great name; Jer. 44. 23. By his Soul; Jer. 51. 14. and by the excellency of Jacob; Amos 8. 7. that is himself only. For all the holy Properties of God are the same with his Nature and Being. For that form of an Oath wherein an Imprecation is used, the expression of it is always Elliptical in the Hebrew Tongue, whereas other Languages abound with cursed and prophane Imprecations. And this Elliptical form of expression by  si, is often used by God himself, 1 Sam. 3. 14. I have sworn to the House of Eli;  if the Iniquity of the House of Eli be purged, Psal. 89. 36. I have sworn unto David by my Holiness, ; if I lye unto David. So also Psal. 95. 11. Psal. 132. 2, 3. Isa. 14. 24. And this kind of expression is retained by our Apostle; chap. 3. 12. To whom I sware in my wrath, ; if they shall enter into my Rest. As also it is made use of by our Saviour, Mark 8. 12. . Verily I say unto you, if a sign shall be given unto this Generation. There is herein a Rhetorical , where something for Honours or Reverence sake is re∣strained, silenced, and not uttered. As, if it be so, then let me not be trusted, be∣lieved or obeyed. Secondly, For the Nature of this Oath of God it consists in an express engagement of those Holy Properties whereby he is known to be God, unto the accomplishment of what he promiseth or threateneth. By his Being, his Life, his Holiness, his Power, is he known to be God; and therefore by them is he said to swear, when they are all engaged unto the fulfilling of his word. Fourthly, There is a reason added why God thus sware by himself. It was be∣cause he had none greater whereby he might sware. And this reason is built upon this maxime; That the Nature of an Oath consisteth in the Invocation of a Superiour in whose power we are. For two things we design in that Invocation of another. (1) A te∣stimony to be given unto the Truth we assert. (2) Vengeance or Punishment of the contrary upon us. Wherefore we do ascribe two things unto him whom we invo∣cate in an Oath. (1) An absolute Omnisciency, or Infallible knowledge of the Truth or Falshood of what we assert. (2) A Soveraign Power over us, whence we expect Protection in case of Right and Truth, or Punishment in case we deal falsly and treacherously. And this respect unto punishment is that alone which gives force and efficacy unto Oaths among mankind. There is a Principle ingrafted in the minds of men by Nature, that God is the supream Rector, Ruler and Judge of all men and their Actions; as also that the Holiness of his Nature with his Righteousness as a Ruler and Judge, doth require that Evil and Sin be punished in them who are under his Government. Of his Omnipotent power also, to punish all sorts of Transgressors, the highest, greatest, and most exempt from humane Cog∣nizance, there is an alike conception and presumption. According as the minds of men are actually influenced by these Principles, so are their Oaths valid and useful and no otherwise. And therefore it hath been provided that men of profligate lives, who manifest that they have no regard unto God nor his Government of the world, should not be admitted to give Testimony by Oath. And if instead of driving all sorts of persons, the worst, the vilest of men on sleight or light, or no occasions, unto swearing, none might be in any case admitted thereunto, but such as evidence in their Conversations, such a regard unto the Divine Rule and Government of the world as is required to give the least credibility unto an Oath, it would be much better with humane Society. And that in-road which Atheisme hath made on the world in these latter Ages, hath weakened and brought in a laxation of all the Nerves and Bonds of Humane So∣ciety. These things belong unto the Nature of an Oath amongst men, and without them it is nothing. But wherefore then is God said to swear, who as the Apostle speaks, can have no greater to swear by, no Superiour unto whom in swearing he should have respect? It is because as to Infinite Omniscience, Power and Righteousness, the thing respected in an Oath, God is that
Essentially in and unto himself, which he is in a way of external Government unto his Creatures. Wherefore when he will condescend to give us the utmost security and assurance of any thing which our Nature is capable of antecedent unto actual enjoyment, in and by the express ingagement of his Holiness, Veracity and Immutability, he is said to swear or to confirm his Word with his Oath. The end and use of this Oath of God is so fully expressed ver. 17. that I must thither refer the consideration of it. Ver. 15. The Event of this Promise giving, and Oath of God on the part of Abraham is declared. And so after he had patiently endured he obtained the Promises. ; And so; This was the way and manner of Gods dealing with him, . and this was the way on the other side how he carried it towards God. And the manner of his deportment or the way whereby he attained the end proposed, was ; He patiently endured; after he had patiently endured, or rather pati∣ently . enduring. The word hath been spoken unto before.  longanimus, lentus, tardus ad iram. One that is not quickly pro∣voked, not easily excited unto Anger, hasty Resolutions, or any distempered passion of mind. And sundry things are intimated in this word. 1. That Abraham was exposed to Trials and Temptations about the Truth and Accomplishment of this Promise. If there be not difficulties, provocations and delays in a business, it cannot be known whether a man be  or no, he hath no occasion to exercise this Longanimity. 2. That he was not discomposed or exasperated by them so as to wax weary, or to fall off from a dependance on God. The Apostle explains fully the meaning of this word, Rom. 4. 18, 19, 20, 21. Against Hope he believed in Hope, that he might become the Father of many Nations; according unto that which was spoken, so shall thy Seed be. And being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, when he was about an hundred years old, neither yet the deadness of Sarahs Womb; He stag∣gered not at the Promise of God through Unbelief, but was strong in Faith giving Glory to God. And being fully perswaded that what he had promised he was able also to per∣form. Continuing in a way of Believing, as trusting to the Veracity and Power of God against all Difficulties and Oppositions was his , or patient endurance. 3. That he abode a long season in this state and condition, waiting on God and trusting unto his Power. It is not a thing quickly tried whether a man be , one that will patiently endure or no. It is not from his Deportment under one or two Trials, that a man can be so denominated. The whole space of time from his first call to the day of his death, which was just an hundred years, are here included. Wherefore this word expresseth the Life and Spirit of that Faith of Abraham, which is here proposed to the Hebrews as their Example. (2) The end of the whole was, that ; compos factus est . Promissionis; obtinuit Promissionem; He obtained or enjoyed the Promise. Sundry Expositors refer this obtaining of the Promise to the Birth of Isaac, a Son by Sarah, which he so long waited for and at length enjoyed; for this was the principal Hinge whereon all other priviledges of the Promises did depend. But Isaac was upwards of 20 years old, at that time when the Promise was confirmed by the Oath of God, which the Apostle hath respect unto. It cannot therefore be that his Birth should be the thing promised. Besides he twice informs us, chap. 11. ver. 13, 19. that the Ancient Patriarchs among whom he reckoneth Abraham as one, received not the Pro∣mises. That which he there intends is their full Accomplishment in the actual ex∣hibition of the promised Seed. It is not therefore a full actual enjoyment of the thing promised that is here intended, as it would be, if it respected only the Birth of Isaac. Wherefore Abrahams obtaining the Promise was no more but his enjoy∣ment of the Mercy, Benefit, and Priviledge of it, in every state and condition, where∣of in that state and condition he was capable. If therefore we take a view of the Promise as it was before explained, we shall see evidently how Abraham obtained it, that is, how it was every way made good unto him, according as the nature of the thing it self would bear. For as unto his own personal Blessing whether in things Typical or Spiritual, he obtained or enjoyed it. As
things were disposed in the Type, he was blessed and multiplied in that increase of Goods and Children which God gave unto him. Spiritually he was justified in his own person, and therein actually enjoyed all the Mercy and Grace which by the promised Seed, when actually exhibited, we can be made partakers of. He who is freely justified in Christ, and therewithall made partaker of Adoption and Sancti∣fication, may well be said to have obtained the Promise. And hereon dependeth Eternal Glory also, which our Apostle testifieth that Abraham obtained. For that part of the Promise, that he should be the Heir of the world, and the Father of all that Believe, it could not be actually accomplished in his own days; wherefore therein he obtained the Promise in the assurance he had of it, with the Comfort and Honour which depended thereon. As a pledge of all these things he saw the posterity of Isaac, in whom they were all to be fulfilled. Some things therefore there were in the Promises which could not be actually accomplished in his days; such were the Birth of the Blessing Seed, the numerousness and prosperity of his Children according to the Flesh, the coming in of a multitude of Nations to be his Children by Faith. These things he obtained in that assurance and comforta∣ble prospect which he had of them through believing. They were infallibly and unchangeably made sure unto him, and had their Accomplishment in their proper season, Isa. 60. 22. And we may observe that, 1. Whatever difficulty and opposition may lye in the way, patient endurance in Faith and Obedience will infallibly bring us unto the full enjoyment of the Promises. 2. Faith gives such an interest unto Believers in all the Promises of God, as that they obtain even those Promises, that is, the benefit and comfort of them, whose actual Accomplishment in this world they do not behold. Ver. 16. For men verily swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. The Apostle in these words confirms one part of his Intention, of the stability of a Divine Promise confirmed with an Oath, by a general maxime concerning the Nature and Use of an Oath among men; and withall makes a transition into the second part of his Discourse; or the Application of the whole unto the use of them that Believe. And therefore sundry things, an Observation whereof will give us the sense and explication of them, are to be considered. As, 1. The Reason why God in his gracious Condescension unto our Infirmities is . pleased to confirm his Promise with an Oath, is introduced by the particle , For, which gives an account of what was spoken ver. 13. and the reason intended consists herein; That by the Light of Nature witnessed unto by the common con∣sent and usage of mankind, the ultimate, supream and most satisfactory way of giving assurance unto, or confirming what is spoken, or promised, is by an Oath. And the Apostle argueth not meerly from what men do by common consent as it were among themselves, but what the Law and Order of all things, in subjection unto God, doth require. For whereas men do or ought to acknowledge his su∣pream Rule and Government over all, when their own rights and concerns can∣not be determined and peaceably fixed by reason or testimony, or any other In∣strument whereof they have the use, it is necessary that an Appeal be made unto God for his Interposition, wherein all must acquiesce. This therefore being amongst men the highest assurance and ultimate determination of their thoughts, the holy God intending the like assurance in Spiritual things confirms his Promise by his Oath, that we may know from what we centre in as to our own occasions, that there can be no accession of security made thereunto. 2. There is in the words the internal manner and form of swearing amongst men, they swear by a greater, a Nature above them, superiour unto them, in whose . power and at whose disposal they are; which hath been spoken unto. 3. The use of an Oath among men is declared; and therein (1) The subject matter of it, or what is the occasion and subject which it respects. And this is . , which we have rendered strife; contradiction between two or more. When one party avers one thing, and another another, and no evidence ariseth from the matter controverted about, nor any of its circumstances, there must of necessity be amongst them , an endless strife, and mutual
contradiction, which would quickly bring all things to violence and confusion. For if in matters of great concernment and especial Interest, one man positively asserts one thing, and another another, and no Evidence arise from circumstances to state aright the matter in difference, it must come to Force and War, if there be no other way of bringing all parties unto an Acquiescency; for he who hath pe∣remptorily asserted his right will not afterwards voluntarily forego it, not only be∣cause of the loss of his just claim as he apprehends, but also of his Reputation, in making an unjust claim thereunto. In such cases an Oath is necessary unto the Go∣vernment and Peace of mankind, as without which strifes must be perpetuated, or ended by force and violence. This the Apostle respects when he saith, an Oath amongst men is an end of strife. There is therefore unto a lawful Oath required, (1) A just occasion, or a strife amongst men otherwise undeterminable. (2) A law∣ful Rule, or Government with power to propose, and to judge about the difference on the Evidence thereof; or a mutual consent of persons concerned. (3) A solemn Invocation of God, as the supream Governour of the world, for the interposition of his Omniscience and Power, to supply the defects and weaknesses that are in the Rules and Rulers of humane Society. 4. This brings in the end of an Oath among men, and that is to be ; . that is, to put bounds and limits to the Contentions and mutual con∣tradictions of men, about Right and Truth not otherwise determinable, to make an end of their strife. 5. The way whereby this is done is by interposing the Oath , for the avowing of the truth, rendering it firm and stable in the minds of men which . did before fluctuate about it. If this be the nature, use, and end of an Oath amongst men, if under the con∣duct of natural Light, they thus issue all their differences and acquiesce therein; certainly the Oath of God wherewith his Promise is confirmed, must of necessity be the most effectual means to issue all differences between him and Believers, and to establish their Souls in the Faith of his Promises, against all oppositions, difficulties and temptations whatever, as the Apostle manifests in the next Verses. As these words are applied unto, or used to illustrate the state of things between God and our Souls, we may observe from them, (1) That there is, as we are in a state of Nature, a strife and difference between God and us. (2) The Promises of God are gracious proposals of the only way and means for the ending of that strife. (3) The Oath of God interposed for the confirmation of these Promises is every way sufficient to secure Believers, against all Objections and Temptations, in all Streights and Trials, about Peace with God through Jesus Christ. But there is that in the words absolutely considered which requires our further enquiry into, and confirmation of the Truth therein. There is an Assertion in them, that men use to swear by the greater, and thereby put an end unto strife and contentions between them. But it may yet be enquired whether this respects mat∣ter of Fact only, and declare what is the common usage among men; or whether it respect Right also, and so expresseth an approbation of what they do; And moreover whether upon a supposition of such an Approbation, this be to be ex∣tended to Christians, so that their swearing in the cases supposed be also approved. This being that which I affirm with its due limitation, I shall premise some things unto the understanding of it, and then confirm its truth. An Oath in the Hebrew is called , and there are two things observable about it: (1) That the Verb to Swear, is never used but in Niphal a passive Con∣jugation; . And as some think this doth intimate that we should be passive in swearing, that is, not to do it unless called, at least from circumstances com∣pelled thereunto; so moreover it doth, that he who swears hath taken a burden on himself, or binds himself to the matter of his Oath. And it is derived from  which signifies seven; because as some think an Oath ought to be before many Wit∣nesses. But seven being the sacred, compleat or perfect number, the name of an Oath may be derived from it, because it is appointed to put a present end unto dif∣ferences. The Greek calls it , most probably from , as it signifies to bind or strengthen. For by an Oath a man takes a Bond on his Soul and Con∣science
that cannot be loosed ordinarily. And the Latine words, juro and jusjuran∣dum, are plainly derived from jus; that is, Right and Law. It is an Assertion for the confirmation of that which is right, and therefore loseth its nature and becometh a meer prophanation when it is used in any other case but the confirmation of what is just and right. And the nature of an Oath consists in a solemn confirmation of what we affirm or deny by a Religious Invocation of the Name of God, as one that knoweth and owneth the Truth which we affirm. As far as God is thus invocated in an Oath it is part of his Worship, both as required by him and as ascribing Glory to him. For when a man is admitted unto an Oath, he is as it were so far discharged from an earthly Tribunal, and by common consent betakes himself to God, as the sole Judge in the case. By what particular expression this Appeal unto God and Invocation of him is made, is not absolutely necessary unto the nature of an Oath to determine. It sufficeth that such expressions be used as are approved and received signs of such an Invocation and Appeal among them that are concerned in the Oath: only it must be observed that these signs themselves are natural and not Religious unless they are approved of God himself. Where any thing pretends to be of that na∣ture, the Authority of it is diligently to be examined. And therefore that custom which is in use amongst our selves, of laying the hand on the Book in swearing, and afterwards kissing of it, if it be any more but an outward sign which custom and common consent hath authorised to signifie the real taking of an Oath, it is not to be allowed. But in that sense, though it seem very inconvenient, it may be used until somewhat more proper and suited unto the Nature of the Duty may be agreed upon, which the Scripture would easily suggest unto any who had a mind to learn. The necessary qualifications of a lawful and a solemn Oath are so expressed by the Prophet as nothing need to be added to them, nothing can be taken from them, Jer. 4. 2. Thou shalt swear the Lord liveth, that is, interpose the name of the living God, when thou swearest, in Truth, in Judgement and in Righteousness. (1) Truth is required in it, in opposition unto falshood and guile. Where this is otherwise, God is called to be a Witness unto a lye; which is to deny his Being. For he whom we serve is the God of Truth, yea Truth it self Essentially. (2) It must be in Judgement also that we swear; not lightly, not rashly, not without a just cause, that which is so in it self, and which appears unto us so to be; or by Judgement the contest it self unto whose determination an Oath is interposed, may be intended. Thou shalt swear in such a case only as wherein something of weight comes to be determined in Judgement. Without this qualification swearing is ac∣companied with irreverence and contempt of God, as though his Name was to be invocated on every slight and common occasion. (3) In Righteousness we must also swear, which respects the matter and end of the Oath, namely, that it be Right and Equity which we intend to confirm; or else we avouch God as giving countenance unto our wickedness and injustice. These things being premised I do affirm, That where matters are in strife or controversie among men, the peace and tranquillity of humane Society in general, or par∣ticular, depending on the right determination of them, it is lawful for a Christian or a Believer being lawfully called to confirm the truth which he knows by the interposition or invocation of the Name of God in an Oath, with this design to put an end unto strife. For our Apostle in this place doth not only urge the common usage of mankind, but he layeth down a certain maxime and principle of the Law of Nature whose ex∣ercise was to be approved amongst all. And if the practice hereof had not been lawful unto them unto whom he wrote, that is, Christians who obeyed the Gospel, he had exceedingly weakened all that he had designed from his Discourse concerning the Oath of God by shutting it up with this Instance, which could be of no force un∣to them, because in that which was unlawful for them to practise, or to have an experience of its efficacy. Wherefore I shall manifest these two things, (1) That a solemn Oath is a part of the natural Worship of God which the Light of Nature leads unto, and is not only lawful, but in some cases a necessary Duty unto Christians and posi∣tively approved by God in his Word. (2) That there is nothing in the Gospel that doth contradict or controul this Light of Nature and Divine Institution, but there is that whereby they are confirmed. For the first we have the Example of God himself,
who as we have seen is said sundry times to swear, and whose Oath is of signal use unto our Faith and Obedience. Now if men had not had a sense and under∣standing of the Nature, Lawfulness, and Obligation from the Light of Nature of an Oath, this would have been of no use nor signification unto them. It is true that God did expresly institute the Rite and Use of swearing in Judgement among his people at the giving of the Law, and gave directions about the causes, manner, and form of an Oath, Deut. 6. 16. chap. 13. 20. Exod. 22. 8. from thence the use of an Oath and consequentially of the Oath of God might be known. But the most solemn swearing of God was before the Law, as in that Instance which our Apostle insists upon of his Oath unto Abraham. The Nature and Force hereof could no otherwise be discovered but by the Light of Nature, wherein God farther enlightened and instructed men by his own Example. 2. In compliance herewith, holy men and such as walked with God before the giving of the Law, did solemnly swear when occasion did require it, and they were lawfully called. So Abraham sware to Abimelek, Gen. 21. 15. and gave an Oath unto his Servant, Gen. 24. 3. 9. So Jacob sware with Laban, Gen. 31. 52. And Joseph sware unto his Father, Gen. 47. 31. And these had no respect unto any legal Insti∣tution, so that their practice should be thought to be reproved in those passages of the Gospel which shall be mentioned afterwards. 3. That Oaths were in use and approved of under the Law and the Administration thereof, is not by any denied, and they are commended who did solemnly practice according to the Command. Isa. 65. 16. Psal. 63. 12. which of it self doth suffi∣ciently evidence that there is no evil in the nature of it; for God did never permit much less approve any thing of that kind. And those who judge an Oath to be unlawful under the New Testament, do suppose that the Lord Christ hath taken away the principal Instrument of humane Society, the great means of preserving Peace, Tranquillity and Right, though in its own Nature good and every way suited to the Nature of God and man. 4. There is in the New Testament nothing against this practice, yea there is much to confirm it, although considering the foundations whereon it is built, it is sufficient that there is not any thing in the Gospel contrary unto it, as it was a positive Institution, nor can be any thing in the Gospel contrary unto it as it is a dictate of the Light of Nature. But (1) That Prophecy Isa. 45. 23. doth belong and is expresly applied unto Believers under the New Testament. I have sworn by my self, the word is gone out of my mouth in Righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear. See Rom. 14. 11. This hath respect unto what God had of old prescribed, Deut. 6. 13. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and shalt swear by his Name. This now saith the Prophet shall in the days of the Gospel be observed throughout the world, which it could not be in case it were not lawful for Christians in any case to swear by that holy Name. And that in like manner is a promise concerning the Calling and Con∣version of the Gentiles under the New Testament, Jer. 12. 16. And it shall come to pass if they will diligently learn the ways of my people to swear by my Name, the Lord liveth (as they caused my people to swear by Baal) then shall they be built in the midst of my people; Now this can be no direction, no encouragement unto the Converts of the Gentiles, if it be not lawful for them so to swear, if it be not their Duty when lawfully called thereunto. Yea if God promiseth that they shall swear by his Name, and the Gospel should forbid them so to do, where should they find rest and assurance unto their Obedience. 2. The Apostle Paul doth solemnly swear unto the truth of his own Affirma∣tions concerning himself, and his sincerity in them, Rom. 9. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 23. It was not concerning any Doctrines he taught that he did swear. They needed no confirmation by his Oath; as deriving all their Authority and Assurance from Di∣vine Revelation. But it was concerning his own heart and purpose, whereof there might be much doubt and hesitation, yea presumption contrary to the truth; when yet it was of great concernment to the Church to have them truly known and stated. And in this case he confirms his Assertion by an Oath, which wholly takes off all pretence of a general Rule, that an Oath is unlawful under the New Testa∣ment, with those who will not make the Apostle a Transgressor.
3. Had an Oath been unlawful under the New Testament God would not have continued the use of it in any kind, lest Christians should thereby be drawn to act against the Rule and his Command. But this he did in that of the Angel, who lifted up his hand unto Heaven and sware by him who liveth for ever and ever, Rev 10. 5, 6. To give a great and an approved example of that which in no case we may imitate, doth not become the Wisdom of God, and his Care towards his Church. Add unto all these considerations the express Approbation given in this place by our Apostle unto the practice of solemn swearing among men to confirm the truth, and to put an end unto strife, and the lawfulness of an Oath will be found suffi∣ciently confirmed in the New Testament as well as the Old. There are two places in the New Testament which are usually pleaded in opposi∣tion unto this Liberty and Duty. The first is in the words of our Saviour, Matth. 5. 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. Ye have heard that it hath been said of old time, Thou shalt not forswear thy self, but thou shalt perform unto the Lord thine Oath. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven for it is Gods Throne, nor by by Earth for it is his Foot-stool, neither by Hierusalem for it is the City of the great King, neither shalt thou swear by thy Head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black: but let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatsoever is more than these, cometh of evil. And unto these words of our Saviour the Apostle James hath respect chap. 5. 12. But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay, lest you fall into Condemnation. Answ. It is evident that this place of James is derived from, and hath respect unto the words of our Saviour; it being an express Inculcation of his Precept and Direction on the same reason. The same Answer therefore will serve both places, which will not be difficult from the observation of the Reasons and Circumstances of our Saviours discourse. And to this end we may observe, (1) That all things prohibited by our Saviour in that Sermon to the Jews, were in themselves and by virtue of the Law of God antecedently unlawful. Only whereas the Pharisees by their Traditions and false Interpretations of the Scripture in a compliance with their own wickedness and covetousness, had perswaded the body of the Church, and brought them into the practice of much lewdness and many sins; and by their Ignorance of the true spiritual nature of the Law, had led men unto an Indulgence unto their internal Lusts and Corruptions, so they break not forth into open practice; our Saviour rends the veil of their Hypocrisie, discovers the corruption of their Traditions and Interpretations of the Law, de∣clares the true Nature of sin, and in sundry Instances shews how and wherein by these false glosses, the body of the people had been drawn into Soul-ruining sins, whereby he restored the Law, as the Jews speak, unto its pristine Crown. Let any of the particulars mentioned by our Saviour be considered, and it will be found that it was before unlawful in it self, or declared so in the positive Law of God. Was it not evil, to be angry with a Brother without a cause, and to call him Racha and Fool, ver. 22. was it not so to look on a woman to Lust after her, or were such un∣clean desires ever innocent? That therefore which is here prohibited by our Savi∣our, Swear not at all, was somewhat that was even then unlawful, but practised on the false glosses of the Pharisees upon the Law. Now this was not solemn swearing in Judgement and Righteousness, which we have proved before not only to have been lawful, but appointed expresly by God himself. (2) Our Saviour expresly limiteth his Precept unto our Communication, Let your Communication be yea, yea, nay, nay, ver. 37. There was then amongst men, and that countenanced by the Pharisees, a cursed way of mixing Oaths with mens or∣dinary Communication. This blasphemous wickedness, as it was a direct vio∣lation of the Third Commandment, so it was frequently rebuked by the Prophets. But as other publick sins, it grew and increased among the people until their cor∣rupt leaders in compliance with them, began to distinguish what Oaths in common Communication were lawful, and what were unlawful, what were obligatory and what were not. To eradicate this cursed practice our Saviour gives this general Prohibition unto all that would be his Disciples, Swear not at all, that is, in Commu∣nication, which is the first design of the Third Commandment. And as there is no∣thing
which more openly proclaims a Contempt of Christ and his Authority among many who would be esteemed Christians than their ordinary customary swearing and Cursing by the Name of God, and other Hellish Imprecations which they have in∣vented in their daily Communication; so possibly the observation of the greatness of that evil, its extent and incurableness, hath cast some on the other ex∣tream. But it is no property of a wise man by avoiding one extream, to run into another. (3) The Direction and Precept of our Saviour, is given in direct opposition unto the corrupt Glosses and Interpretations of the Law introduced by Tradition, and made Authentick by the Authority of the Pharisees. This is evident from the express Antithesis in the words, You have heard what hath been said of old time, but I say unto you: Now these were two, (1) That there was no evil in an Oath at any time, but only in swearing falsly. This they gathered, (as they fathered their most absurd apprehensions on some pretext of Scripture) from Deut. 19. 12. Ye shall not swear by my Name falsly, neither shalt thou prophane the Name of thy God. From hence they concluded that Gods Name was not prophaned in swearing, unless a man sware falsly, that is, forsware himself. And this also they restrained prin∣cipally unto promises by Oaths, or Vows to be performed unto God, which turned to their Advantage who had the disposal of things sacred and devoted. This they judged to comprise the whole of the Prohibition in the Third Commandment, but most falsly, and unto the hazard of the Souls of men. For not only the using or interposition of the Name of God in a false matter which is Perjury, but also the using of it in vain, that is, without just cause, or reason, or call, lightly and vainly, is expresly forbidden. Herein our Saviour interposeth his Divine Interpretation, and in opposition unto the corrupt exposition of the Pharisees, declares that not only false swearing by the Name of God in Judgement or otherwise is forbidden in the Command; but also that vain interposition of the Name of God in our Communication is utterly prohibited. And it is hence evident unto me, that no man ought voluntarily to take an Oath unless the matter in controversie be undetermi∣nable without it, and the Authority be lawful that requires it. (2) Aiming to comply with the Lusts and Corruptions of men, (as the great Artifice of all false Teachers consists in the accommodation of Doctrines to the blindness and preva∣lent sins of men) they had found out a way how they might swear, and swear on without the guilt of Perjury, did they swear never so falsly; And this was not to swear by the Name of God himself, which if they did and sware falsly, they were perjured, but by the Heavens, or by the Earth, or Hierusalem, or the Temple, or the Altar, or their own Heads; for such kind of Oaths and Execrations were then, as also now in use in the ordinary Communication of men. But herein also the filthy Hypocrites had a further reach, and had insinuated another pestilent Opinion into the minds of men, tending to their own advantage. For they had instructed them, that they might freely swear by the Temple, but not by the Gold of it, and by the Altar, but not by the Gift that was upon it, Matth. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19. For from the Gold offered in the Temple, and the Gift brought unto the Altar, did advantage arise unto these covetous Hypocrites, who would therefore beget a greater veneration in the minds of men towards them, than to the express Institu∣tions of God themselves. In opposition unto this corruption our Saviour declares, that in all these things there is a tacit respect unto God himself; and that his Name is no less prophaned in them, than if it were expresly made use of. These are the things alone which our Saviour intendeth in this Prohibition; namely, The Interposition of the Name of God in our ordinary Communication, without cause, call, warrant, or Authority, when no necessity requireth us thereunto; where there is no strife otherwise not to be determined, or which by consent is to be ended; And the usage of the names of Creatures Sacred or Common in our Oaths without mentioning of the Name of God. And there are two Rules in the Interpretation of the Scripture which we must in such cases always carry along with us. (1) That universal Affirmations and Negations are not always to be universally understood, but are to be limited by their occa∣sions, circumstances and subject matter treated of. So where our Apostle affirms, that he became all things unto all men; If you restrain not the Assertion unto things indifferent, false conclusions may be drawn from it, and of evil consequence. So is the Prohibition of our Saviour here to be limited unto rash and temerarious
swearing; or it would be contrary to the Light of Nature, the Appointment of God, and the Good of Humane Society. (2) It is a rule also of use in the Inter∣pretation of the Scripture; That where any thing is prohibited in one place, and allowed in another, that not the thing it self absolutely considered is spoken unto, but the different modes, causes, ends and reasons of it are intended. So here in one place swearing is forbidden, in others it is allowed, and examples thereof are proposed unto us; wherefore it cannot be swearing absolutely, that is intended in either place; but rash causeless swearing is condemned in one, and swearing in weighty causes, for just ends, with the properties of an Oath before insisted on, is recommended and approved in the other. I shall shut up the discourse with three Corollaries from it. (1) That the custom of using Oathes, Swearing, Cursing or Imprecation in common Communication, is not only an open transgression of the Third Commandment which God hath threatened to revenge, but it is a practical Renunciation also of all the Authority of Jesus Christ who hath so expresly interdicted it. (2) Whereas swearing by the Name of God in Truth, Righteousness and Judge∣ment is an Ordinance of God for the end of Strife amongst men; Perjury is justly reckoned among the worst and highest of sins, and is that which reflects the greatest disho∣nour on God, and tendeth to the ruine of Humane Society. (3) Readiness in some to swear on sleight occasions, and the ordinary Impositions of Oaths on all sorts of persons, without a due consideration on either hand of the Nature, Ends and Properties of lawful swearing, are Evils greatly to be lamented, and in Gods good time among Christians will be reformed. VERSE 17, 18, 19, 20. In this last part of the Chapter two things are further designed by the Apostle. (1) An Explication of the purpose and end of God in his Promise, as it was con∣firmed by his Oath; and therewithall and from thence he makes Application of the whole unto all Believers, seeing the mind and will of God was the same towards them all, as they were towards Abraham to whom the Promise so confirmed was made in particular. (2) A confirmation of the whole priviledge intended by the Introduction of the Interposition of Christ in this matter; and this is expressed in a Transition and return unto his former discourse concerning the Priesthood of Christ. 17. . 18. . 19. , 20. . , in quo, qua in re, Syr.  propter hoc, quapropter. Some have re∣spect unto the thing it self spoken of, some unto the reasons of things spoken. , Abundantius volens; volens ex abundanti, Syr.  maxime voluit, abunde voluit, would abundantly. . M. S. , ostendere, manifestly to set forth. , Immutabilitatem consilii, Bez. Immobilitatem, An. V. Lat. Rhem. The stability; which answers neither of the words used, which are more emphatical. Syr.  That his Promise should not be changed.  is that which cannot be altered nor transposed into any other state. , intervenit Juramento, An. fide jussit jurejurando, Bez. Interpo∣sitionem fecit jurejurando, interposuit jusjurandum. Vul. Lat. Rhem. He interposed an Oath. Not properly, for , is, He himself came between, or in the midst;
He interposed himself, and gave his Oath. From , is , Interventor, fide∣jussor, interpres, , pacificator. Thence is , mediatorem ago, pa∣cificatoris partes ago, to interpose a mans self by any means to confirm and establish peace, which was here done, , with an Oath. The word is used in this place only in the New Testament, as  is no where used but by Paul, Gal. 3. 19, 20. 1 Tim. 2. 5. Heb. 8. 6. 9. 15. 12. 24. , ut per duas res immutabiles, or immobiles: Rhem. that by two things unmoveable. Syr. which are not changed, or ought not to be; by two immutable things, , fortem consolationem habea∣mus; fortissimum solatium; validam consolationem habeamus, haberemus.  Syr. that great consolation should be to us.  denotes such a power and strength in that which is denominated by it, as is prevalent against op∣positions and difficulties, which is most proper in this place. , confugientes, qui confugimus, qui cursum eo corripimus; Bez. who have hastened our course or flight. Qui huc confugimus; Ours, who have fled for refuge. And indeed  with  is not used but for to fly to a shelter, refuge or protection. Hence  is refugium, a refuge that any one be∣takes himself unto in time of danger. , ad tenendum propositam spem, to hold the proposed hope. Obtinere, to obtain; Syr.  that we may hold. Ut spem propo∣sitam retineamus; Bez. ad obtinendam spem propositam; Ours most properly, to lay hold upon; for  is, injecta manu fortiter tenere or retinere. , safe and firm, firm and stable. Syr.  which holds our Soul that it be not moved, expressing the effect and not the nature or adjuncts of the means spo∣ken of. . Et incedentem, ingredientem, introeuntem, us{que} ad interiora velaminis. Vul. ad interius velaminis, us{que} in ea quae sunt intra velum. Bez. Some respect the place only, some the things within the place, which entereth into that within the Veil. Syr.  and entereth into the faces of the Gate; so that Interpreter always calleth the Veil, the faces of the Gate, Port, or Entrance of the Temple, namely, the most holy place, because it was as a face or frontispiece unto them that were to enter. See Matth. 27. 51. : Ubi praecursor pro nobis introivit. But quo is better, not where but whither, Rhem. The precursor for us: Syr.  where before Iesus is entered for us, which determines the ambiguity of , not our forerunner is entered, but the forerunner is entered for us. Verse 17, 18, 19, 20. Wherein God willing more abundantly to manifest unto the Heirs of Promise the Immu∣tability of his Counsel, interposed himself by an Oath; That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to deceive, we might have strong (prevailing) consola∣tion, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us; Which we have as an Anchor of the Soul both safe and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the Veil, Whither the forerunner is for us entred, Jesus made an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Sundry things are observable in these words. (1) The Introduction unto the Ap∣plication of the foregoing discourse to the use of all Believers. Wherein, (2) The design of God in the confirmation of his Promise by his Oath, which was to ma∣nifest the Immutability of his Counsel. And this is amplified, (1) By the frame, pur∣pose or mind of God therein; He was willing. (2) By the manner how he would declare his mind herein, more abundantly; namely, than could be done by a single Promise. It gave not a further stability unto his word, but manifested his willing∣ness to have it believed. (3) The persons are described unto whom God was thus willing to shew the Immutability of his Counsel; who are the Heirs of Promise; that is, all and only those who are so. (4) The way is expressed whereby God would thus manifest the Immutability of his Counsel, namely, by two immutable things, that is, his Promise and his Oath. Which (5) are proved to be sufficient
Evidences thereof from the Nature of him by whom they are made and given; It was impossible that God should lye. (6) The especial end of this whole design of God, with respect unto all the Heirs of Promise, is said to be that they might have strong Consolation. And thereon they are (7) further described by the way and means they use to obtain the Promise and the Consolation designed unto them there∣in, they fly for refuge to the hope set before them. The Efficacy whereof is (8) de∣clared from the Nature of it, in comparison unto an Anchor, which we have as an Anchor; further amplified, (1) from its Properties, it is sure or safe and sted∣fast; and also (2) from its use; It enters into that within the Veil. And this use (9) is so expressed that occasion may be thence taken to return unto that from which he had digressed chap. 5. 12. namely, the Priesthood of Christ. And (10) The mention thereof he so introduceth according to his usual manner, as also to manifest the great benefit and advantage of our entring by hope into that within the Veil, namely, (1) Because Christ is there. (2) Because he is entred thither as our forerunner. (3) From the Office wherewith he is there vested, called a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, as he had declared chap. 5. 12. all which must be opened as they occur in the Text. , that is, say many, , for which cause, respect may be had unto the  words immediately foregoing, An Oath among men is unto them an end of strife; so a reason is thence inferred why God should interpose himself by an Oath in this matter. And the words are rendered by some as we have seen; propter quod, or propterea, in for propter is not unusual. And this then is the coherence, Whereas mankind doth consent herein, that an Oath in things capable of no other proof or demonstration, shall end controversies, satisfie doubts, and put an issue to contra∣dictions, differences and strife; God took the same way in an infinite gracious condescension to give full satisfaction in this matter unto the Heirs of Promise. For what could they require further? Will they not rest in the Oath of God, who in doubtful cases do and will acquiesce in the Oaths of men? what way could be more suited unto their Peace and Consolation? And such is Gods Love and Grace that he would omit nothing that might tend thereunto, though in such way of condescension as no Creature would or could, or ought to have expected, before in∣finite Wisdom and Mercy had declared themselves therein. Or this expression may respect the whole subject matter treated of; and so the words are rendered in quo or in qua re, in which case or matter. And this our Translation seems to respect, rendering it wherein. Then the words direct unto the Introduction of the end of Gods Oath, expressed in the words following, In this matter God sware by himself, that thereby the Heirs of Promise, might not only be setled in Faith, but more∣over receive therewithall strong Consolations; And this import of the words, we shall adhere unto. , God willing. Hereunto all that follows is resolved, It is all . founded in the Will of God. And two things may be denoted hereby, (1) The In∣clination and disposition of the mind of God, he was free, he was not averse from it. This is that which is generally intended, when we say we are willing unto any thing that is proposed unto us; that is, we are free, and not averse unto it; so may God be said to be willing, to have an Inclination and an Affection unto the work, or to be ready for it, as he speaks in another place, with his whole Heart and with his whole Soul, Jer. 32. 41. But although there be a Truth herein, as to the Mind and Will of God towards Believers and their Consolations, yet it is not what is here peculiarly intended. Wherefore (2) A determinate act and purpose of the Will of God is designed herein. , is God purposing or deter∣mining. So is the same Act of God expressed by , Rom. 9. 22. what if God willing to shew his wrath; that is, purposing or determining so to do. And this , as it respects ; is the same with , Ephes. 1. 11. wherefore God willing, is God in Soveraign Grace and from especial Love, freely purposing and determining in himself, to do the thing expressed, unto the Relief and Comfort of Believers. The Soveraign Will of God is the sole spring and cause of all the Grace, Mercy and Consolation, that Believers are made partakers of in this world. So is it here pro∣posed; Obser. 1. thereinto alone is all Grace and Consolation resolved. God wills it
should be so. Man being fallen off from the Grace and Love of God, and being every way come short of his Glory, had no ways left in nor by himself, to obtain any Grace, any Relief, any Mercy, any Consolation. Neither was there any the least Obligation on God, in point of Justice, Promise or Covenant, to give any Grace unto, to bestow any Mercy or Favour upon Apostatized sinners; wherefore those things could have no rise, spring or cause, but in a free gracious Act of the Soveraign Will and Pleasure of God. And thereunto in the Scripture are they constantly assigned, whether absolutely, that Grace is bestowed on any, or com∣paratively, on one and not another, it is all from the Will of God. For herein is Love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us first, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our sins, 1 Joh. 4. 10. Christ himself with all the Grace and Mercy we have by him, is from the free Love and Will of God. So is our Election, Ephes. 1. 4, 5. Our Vocation, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. our Regeneration, Joh. 1. 13. Jam. 1. 18. Our recovery from sin, Hos. 14. 4. So is our Peace and all our Consolation, whence he is called the God of all Grace, 1 Pet. 5. 10. and the God of Patience and Consolation, Rom. 15. 5. the Author and Soveraign disposer of them all. So is it also with respect unto Grace and Mercy considered comparatively as collated on one and not another, Rom. 9. 15, 16. 1 Cor. 4. 7. there is no other Spring or Fountain of any Grace or Mercy. It may be some may hope to educe Grace out of their own wills and endeavours, and to obtain mercy by their own Duties and Obedience: But the Scripture knows no such thing, nor do Believers find it in their experience. Let them who have received the least of Grace and Mercy know from whence they have received it, and whereunto they are beholding for it. A due considera∣tion of this Soveraign Spring of all Grace and Consolation will greatly influence our minds in and unto all the principal Duties of Obedience. Such as thank∣fulness to God, Ephes. 1. 3, 4, 5. Humility in our selves, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Compassion to∣wards others, 2 Tim. 2. 25, 26. Let those who stand in need of Grace and Mercy, (as who doth not) expect them wholly from the Soveraign Will and Pleasure of God, who is gracious unto whom he will be gracious, Jam. 1. 5. our own Endeavours are means in this kind for obtaining Grace in the measures and degrees of it; but it is the Will of God alone that is the cause of it all, 2 Tim. 1. 9. 2. What God was thus willing unto is expressed, and that was more abundantly to declare the Immutability of his Counsel. And we may enquire concerning it, (1) What is meant by the Counsel of God; (2) How that Counsel of God was, and is Immutable. (3) How it was declared so to be. (4) How it was abundantly so declared. (1) The Counsel of God is the Eternal purpose of his Will, called his Counsel because of the infinite Wisdom wherewith it is always accompanied. So that . which is called the good pleasure which he had purposed in himself, Ephes. 1. 9. is termed the Counsel of his Will, ver. 11. Counsel among men, is a rational delibera∣tion about causes, means, effects, and ends according to the Nature of things ad∣vised about, and the proper Interests of them who do deliberate. In this sense Counsel, is not to be attributed unto God. For as the infinite Soveraign Wisdom of his Being admits not of his taking Counsel with any other; so the infinite simplicity of his Nature and Understanding comprehending all things in one single Act of his Mind, allows not of formal Counsel or Deliberation. The first there∣fore of these the Scripture explodes, Isa. 40. 13. Rom. 11. 34. and although in the latter way God be frequently introduced as one deliberating or taking Counsel with himself, it is not the manner of doing, but the effect, or the thing done is in∣tended. So it is in like manner where God is said to hearken, to hear, to see, whereby his infinite Knowledge and Understanding of all things are intended, those being the Mediums whereby we who are to be instructed do come to know and understand, what so we do. Whereas therefore the End of Counsel, or all rational Deliberation, is to find out the true and stable Directions of Wisdom, the Acts of the Will of God being accompanied with infinite Wisdom are called his Counsel. For we are not to look upon the Purposes and Decrees of God as meer Acts of Will and Pleasure, but as those which are effects of infinite Wisdom, and
therefore most reasonable, although the reasons of them be sometimes unknown unto us. Hence the Apostle issueth his discourse of Gods Eternal Decrees of Ele∣ction and Reprobation in an admiration of the infinite Wisdom of God whence they proceeded, and wherewith they were accompanied, Rom. 11. 33, 34, 35, 36. In particular the Counsel of God in this place, is the holy, wise Purpose of his Will, to give his Son Jesus Christ to be of the Seed of Abraham, for the Salvation of all the Elect, or Heirs of Promise; And that in such a way, and accompanied with all such good things, as might secure their Faith and Consolation. This is the Coun∣sel of God, which contained all the Grace and Mercy of the Promise, with the securing them unto Believers. (2) Of this Counsel, it is affirmed that it was immutable, not subject unto change. , is quod  nequit, that cannot be altered. But the design of God here was not to make his Counsel unchangeable, but to declare it so to be. For all the Purposes of God, all the Eternal Acts of his Will considered in themselves are Immutable. See Isa. 46. 10. Psal. 33. 11. Prov. 19. 21. chap. 21. 30. and their Immutability is a necessary consequent of the Immutability of the Nature of God, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1. 17. The strength of Israel is not a man that he should repent, 1 Sam. 15. 29. And in opposi∣tion unto all change or mutability it is said of God , Psal. 102. 27. which the Apostle renders by , thou art He always, in all respect one and the same. Hence among the Jews  He is a Name of God, expressing his immutable self-subsistence. But it will be said that there are in the Scriptures many Declarations of Gods altering his Purpose and Counsels, and repenting him of what he had before determined, being grieved at what he had done, Gen. 6. 6. 1 Sam. 2. 30. It is agreed by all, that those expressions of repenting, grieving, and the like, are figurative, wherein no such Affections are intended as those words signifie in created Natures, but only an event of things like that, which proceedeth from such Affections. And as to the changes themselves expressed, the School-men say not amiss, Vult Deus mutationem, non mutat voluntatem, He willeth a change, he changeth not his Will. But fully to remove these Difficulties; the Purpose of God and the Counsels of his Will, may be considered either in themselves, or in the Declaration that is made concerning their Execution. In themselves they are absolutely immutable, no more subject unto change than is the Divine Nature it self. The Declarations which God makes concerning their Execution or Accomplishments are of two sorts. (1) There are some of them wherein there is necessarily included a respect unto some antecedent moral Rule, which puts an express condition into the Declarations, although it be not expressed, and is always in like cases to be understood. Thus God Commands the Prophet to declare, that yet forty days and Niniveh should perish, Jonah 3. 4. Here seems to be an absolute Declaration of the Purpose of God without any condition annexed; a positive prediction of what he would do, and should come to pass. Either God must change his Purpose or Niniveh must be overthrown. But whereas this destruction was foretold for fin, and impenitency therein, there was an antecedent moral Rule in the case, which gives it as compleat a condition as if it had been expressed in words. And that is, that Repentance from sin, will free from the punishment of sin; so that the prediction had this limitation by an antecedent Rule, unless they Repent; And God declares that this Rule puts a condition into all his Threatenings, Jerem. 18. 7, 8. And this was the course of Gods dealing with the House of Eli, 1 Sam. 2. 30. God doth neither suspend his Purpose on what men will do, nor take up conditional resolutions with respect thereunto; He doth not purpose one thing, and then change his Resolutions upon contingent emergencies; for he is of one mind and who can turn him, Job 23. 13. nor doth he determine, that if men do so on the one hand, that he will do so; and if otherwise, that he will do otherwise. For instance, there was no such Decree or Purpose of God, that if Niniveh did Repent it should not be destroyed; and if it did not Repent it should perish. For he could not so purpose unless he
did not foresee what Niniveh would do; which to affirm, is to deny his very Being and Godhead. But in order to accomplish his Purpose that Niniveh should not perish at that time, he threatens it with Destruction in a way of prediction, which turned the minds of the Inhabitants to attend unto that antecedent moral Rule which put a condition into the prediction, whereby they were saved. (2) In the Declaration of some of Gods Counsels and Purposes as to the Exe∣cution and Accomplishment, there is no respect unto any such antecedent moral Rule, as should give them either Limitation or Condition. God takes the whole in such cases absolutely on himself, both as to the ordering and disposing of all things and means unto the end intended. Such was the Counsel of God concerning the sending of his Son to be of the Seed of Abraham, and the blessing that should ensue thereon. No alteration could possibly on any account be made herein, neither by the sin nor unbelief of them concerned, nor by any thing that might befall them in this world. Such was the Counsel of God, and such the Immutability of it here intended, as it was absolutely unchangeable in it self, so as to mans concerns and interest in it, it was attended with no condition or reserve. 3. This Immutability, God was willing , to shew, manifest, declare,  make known; It is not his Counsel absolutely, but the Immutability of his Counsel, that God designed to evidence. His Counsel he made known in his Promise. All the gracious actings of God towards us, are the executing of his holy Immutable Purposes, Ephes. 1. 11. And all the Promises of God are the Declarations of those Purposes. And they also in themselves are Immutable, for they depend on the Es∣sential Truth of God, Tit. 1. 2. In hope of Eternal Life which God that cannot lye promised before the world began. Gods Essential Veracity is engaged in his Promises. And they are so expresly the Declaration of his Purposes, that when God had only purposed to give us Eternal Life in Christ, he is said to have promised it; namely, before the world began. And this declareth the Nature of Unbelief, He that be∣lieveth not God, hath made him a Liar, 1 Jo. 5. 10. because his Essential Truth is engaged in his Promise. And to make God a Liar is to deny his Being, which every Unbeliever doth as he is able. But whereas God intended not only the con∣firmation of the Faith of the Heirs of Promise, but also their Consolation under all their Difficulties and Temptations, he would give a peculiar evidence of the Immutability of that Counsel which they embraced by Faith as tendered in the Promise. For what was done did not satisfie the fulness of Grace and Love which he would declare in this matter, no though it were done so abun∣dantly; But, 4. He would do it , more abundantly, that is, beyond what was ab∣solutely . necessary in this case. The Promise of God who is the God of Truth, is sufficient to give us Security. Nor could it be by us discovered how the Goodness of God himself should require a further procedure. Yet because some∣thing further might be useful, for the reasons and ends before declared, he would add a further Confirmation unto his Word. And herein as the Divine Goodness and Condescension are evidently manifested, so it likewise appears what weight God lays upon the assuring of our Faith and Confidence. For in this Case he swears by himself, who hath taught us not so to use his Name but in things of great con∣sequence and moment. This is the sense of the word if it respect the Assurance given, which is more abundant than it could be in or by a single Promise. But  may refer unto God himself, who gives this Assurance; and then it is as much as ex abundanti, when God who is Truth it self, might justly have re∣quired Faith of us on his single Promise, yet ex abundanti, from a superabounding love and care he would confirm it by his Oath; Either sense suits the Apostles design. 3. It is declared who they were to whom God intended to give this Evidence . of the Immutability of his Counsel, and that is, , to the Heirs of Promise, that is, Believers, all Believers, both under the Old and New Testament. It may be indeed that those of the Hebrews were in the first place intended. For unto them did the Promise belong in the first place, as they were the natural Seed of Abraham, and unto them was it first to be declared and proposed upon its Accomplishment, Acts 2. 29. Acts 3. 25. Acts 13. 46. But it is not they alone who are intended. All the Children of the Faith of Abraham are
Heirs also, Gal. 4. 27, 28. It is therefore with respect unto all Believers absolutely, that God confirmed his Promise with his Oath, though the natural Seed of Abraham was respected in the first place, until they cut off themselves by their Unbelief. See Luke 1. 72. Micah 7. 20. Believers are called Heirs of the Promise on a double account; (1) With respect unto the Promise it self. (2) With respect unto the matter of the Promise or the thing promised. This distinction is evidently founded on Chap. 11. ver. 13, 17, 39. compared. For look in what sense they are said to be Heirs of the Promise, therein they are not actually possessed of it. For an Heir is only in expectancy of that whereof he is an Heir. Wherefore take the Promise in the first sense for∣mally, and it is the Elect of God as such, who are the Heirs of it. God hath de∣signed them unto an Interest therein, and a Participation thereof; and he confirmed it with his Oath, that they might be induced and encouraged to believe it, to mix it with Faith, and so come to inherit it, or to be made actual partakers of it. To this purpose our Apostle disputeth at large, Rom. 9. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. In the latter sense taking the Promise materially for the thing promised, they are Heirs of it who have an actual Interest in it by Faith; and partaking of the present Grace and Mercy wherewith it is accompanied, as pledges of future Glory, have a Right unto the whole Inheritance. Thus all Believers, and they only, are Heirs of the Promise, Rom. 8. 17. Heirs of God, that is, of the whole Inheritance that he hath provided for his Children. And I take the words in this latter sense; for it is not the first believing of these Heirs of the Promise that they might be justified which is intended; but their establishment in Faith whereby they may be comforted or have strong consolation. But whereas this Declaration of the Immutability of Gods Counsel is made in the Promise of the Gospel which is universal, or at least indefinitely proposed unto all, how it comes here to be cast under this limitation, that it is made to Elect Believers, or the Heirs of Promise only, shall be immedi∣ately declared. 4. What God did in this matter for the ends mentioned is summarily expressed, ; he interposed himself by an Oath, fidejussit jurejurando. He that . confirmeth any thing by an Oath is fidejussor, one that gives security to Faith. And fidejussor in the Law is Interventor, one who interposeth or cometh between, and ingageth himself to give Security. This state of things is therefore here sup∣posed. God had given out that Promise whose Nature we have before declared. Hereon he required the Faith of them unto whom it was given, and that justly. For what could any reasonably require further to give them sufficient ground of assu∣rance? But although all things were clear and satisfactory on the part of God, yet many fears, doubts, and objections would be ready to arise on the part of Be∣lievers themselves, as there did in Abraham unto whom the Promise was first made, with respect unto that signal Pledge of its Accomplishment in the birth of Isaac. In this case though God was no way obliged to give them further Caution or Se∣curity, yet out of his infinite Love and Condescension, he will give them a higher Pledge and Evidence of his Faithfulness, and interposeth himself by an Oath; he mediated by an Oath, he interposed himself between the Promise and the Faith of Be∣lievers, to undertake under that solemnity for the Accomplishment of it. And swear∣ing by himself he takes it on his Life, his Holiness, his Being, his Truth, to make it good. The Truths which from these words thus opened we are instructed in, are these that follow. The Purpose of God for the saving of the Elect by Jesus Christ, is an Act of Infinite Wisdom as well as of Soveraign Grace. Hence it is called the Counsel of his Will, Obser. 1. or an Act of his Will accompanied with Infinite Wisdom, which is the Counsel of God. And among all the holy Properties of his Nature, the manifestation of whose Glory he designed therein, there is none more expresly and frequently men∣tioned than his Wisdom. And it is declared, (1) As that which no created understanding of Men or Angels is able perfectly to com∣prehend, neither in the Counsel, nor in the Effects of it. Hence our Apostle shut∣teth up his Contemplation of the ways, paths, and effects of this Wisdom with that Rapture of Admiration Rom. 11. 33, 34, 35, 36. O the depths of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his Judgements, and his
Ways past finding out? For who hath known the mind of the Lord, or who hath been his Counsellor? or who hath first given to him, and it shall be recompenced unto him again. For of him and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be Glory for ever, Amen? The whole issue of our Contemplation of the Wisdom of God in the Eternal projection of our Salvation by Jesus Christ, is only an Admiration of that Abysse which we cannot dive into, with an humble Ascription of Glory to God there∣on. And as to the especial effects of this Wisdom, the Angels themselves desire to bow down, with an humble diligence in their enquiry into them, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And on these considerations our Apostle concludes that without all controversie the work hereof is a great mystery, 1 Tim. 3. 16. which we may Adore but cannot Com∣prehend. See the Name of Christ, Isa. 9. 6. (2) As that wherein God hath expresly designed to Glorifie himself unto Eternity. This is the end of all the free Acts, and Purposes of the Will of God, neither can they have any other, though all other things may be subordinate thereunto. Now no Property of the Divine Nature is so conspicuous in the disposal of things unto their proper end, as that of Wisdom, whose peculiar work and effect it is. Where∣fore the great end which God will ultimately effect, being his own Glory in Christ, and the Salvation of the Elect by him, the Wisdom whereby it was contrived must needs be Eminent and Glorious. So the Apostle tells us, Then is the End when Christ shall have delivered up the Kingdom unto God, even the Father, and he also in his humane Nature subjects himself unto him, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 28. that is, when the Lord Christ hath finished the whole work of his Media∣tion, and brought all his Elect unto the enjoyment of God, then shall God be all in all; or therein, or thereby he will be for ever exalted and glorified; when it shall be manifest how all this great work came forth from him, and is issued in him, Jude 25. 1 Tim. 1. 17. (3) The whole work is therefore expresly called the Wisdom of God, because of those Characters and Impressions thereof that are upon it, and because it is a peculiar effect thereof. So our Apostle tells us, that Christ crucified is the Power of God and Wis∣dom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and that the Gospel whereby it is declared, is the Wis∣dom of God in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7. and the whole intended is both expresly and fully laid down, Ephes. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Unto me who am less than the least of all Saints is this Grace given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable Riches of Christ, and to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the be∣ginning of the world, hath been hid in God who created all things by Jesus Christ. To the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the Church the manifold Wisdom of God, according to the Eternal Purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. The purpose mentioned in the close of these words, is the same with the Counsel of Gods Will in this place. And this Pur∣pose was the Fountain, Spring, and Cause of all those glorious and admirable things, whose Declaration was committed unto the Apostle, as the great publisher of the Gospel unto the Gentiles; by the effects whereof such mysteries were un∣folded, as the Angels themselves in Heaven, did not before understand. And what was it (saith the Apostle) that was declared, manifested and known thereby? It was , the manifold Wisdom of God, or the Infinite Wis∣dom of God, exerting it self in such wonderful variety of holy, wise Operations, as no mind of Men nor Angels can comprehend. And, (4) On this account are all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge said to be hid in Jesus Christ, Col. 2. 3. There is not only in him, and the work of his Me∣diation, the Wisdom of God, that is, both exerted and manifested, but all the Treasures of it; that is, God will not produce any effects out of the stores of his infinite Wisdom, but what is suitable and subservient unto what he hath designed in and by Jesus Christ. And may we not, (1) Hence see the horrible depravation of Nature which by sin is befallen the minds, reasons, and understandings of men. For from hence alone it is that this Purpose of God which was an Act of Infinite Wisdom, that the work which he hath wrought pursuant thereof, whereon are impressed the Characters of his manifold Wisdom, are esteemed folly, or foolish things unto them. So far are men by Na∣ture from seeing an excellency of Divine Wisdom in them, that they cannot suf∣fer them to pass as things tolerably rational, but brand them as foolish, or folly
it self. This our Apostle declares and at large insisteth on, 1 Cor. 1. Had the mind of man fixed on any other Reason for the rejection of this Counsel of God, some excuse might be pretended for it, but to reject that as folly which God sets forth and declares as the principal Instance of his Infinite Wisdom, this discovereth the horrour of its depravation. And those in whom this blindness is prevalent may be referred unto three sorts. (1) Such as by whom the Gospel is absolutely rejected as a foolish thing unbe∣coming the Wisdom of God to propose, and their own Wisdom to receive. As this was the state of the Jews and Pagan world of old, and as it is the condition of the Mahumetans and Reliques of the Heathens at this day; so I wish that the Poison and Contagion of this wickedness were not further diffused. But alas we see many every day who on the account of their outward Circumstances live in some kind of compliance with the Name and Profession of the Gospel, who yet discover themselves sufficiently to hate, despise and contemn the Mystery of it, and the Wisdom of God therein. (2) Such as own the Gospel in the Letter of it, but look on the Mystery of it, or the Counsel of God therein as foolishness. Hence all the principal parts of it, as the Incarnation of Christ, the Hypostatical Union of his Person, his Sacrifice and Oblation, the Attonement and Satisfaction made by his Death, the Imputation of his Righteous∣ness, the Election of Grace, with the Power and Efficacy of it in our Conversion, are all of them either directly exploded as foolish, or wrested unto senses suited unto their own low and carnal Apprehensions. And this sort of men do swarm amongst us at this day like to Locusts when a North-East-Wind hath filled every place with them. (3) There are multitudes whose choice of their outward Conditions being prevented by the Providence of God, so that they are brought forth and fixed where the Gospel passeth currant in the world without any open controul, who do see no reason why, with the first sort, they should openly reject it, nor will be at the pains with the second sort to corrupt it, but yet practically esteem it a foolish thing to give place unto its power on their hearts, and do really esteem them foolish who labour so to do. And this is openly the condition of the generality of those, who live under the Dispensation of the Gospel in the world. I have named these things only to reflect thereby on that horrible depravation which by corruption of Nature is come upon the minds and reason of mankind. And it is in none more evident than in those who most boast of the contrary. And, (2) We may learn from hence, that there is no greater Evidence of thriving in spiritual Light and Understanding, than when we find our Souls affected with, and raised unto an holy Admiration of the Wisdom and Counsel of God which are declared in the Gospel. The Life and Assurance of our present Comforts and future Glory depend on the Obser. 2. Immutability of Gods Counsel. To secure those things unto us, God shews us that Immutability. Our own endeavours are to be used to the same End, for we are to give all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure. But all depends on the unchangeable Purpose of the Will of God, which alone is able to bear the Charge of so great a work. But this must be further spoken unto on the next Verse. The Purpose of God concerning the Salvation of the Elect by Jesus Christ, became Obser. 3. Immutable from hence, that the Determination of his Will was accompanied with infinite Wisdom; It was his Counsel. All the certainty that is amongst men as to the Ac∣complishment of any End designed by them, depends on the exercise of Wisdom in finding out and applying suitable means thereunto. And because their Wisdom is weak in all things, and in most no better than folly, whence generally they fix first on ends unprofitable, and then make use of means weak and unsuited unto their purpose, it is, that all their affairs are wrapped up in uncertainties, and most of them end in disappointments and confusion. But as God fixeth on those Ends which perfectly comply with his own infinite Holiness and Soveraignty, whence they
are necessarily good and holy; so he doth not first do so, and then make choice of various means that proffer themselves unto those Ends. But in his infinite Wisdom Ends and Means lye before him in one Vein; and fall together under his unalter∣able Determination. Two things therefore may be considered in the Wisdom of God giving Immutability to his Counsel concerning the Salvation of the Elect by Jesus Christ. (1) Thereby he saw at once not only whatever was needful for the Accomplishing of it, but that which would infallibly effect it. He chose not probable and likely means for it, and such as might do it, unless some great obstruction did arise, such as whose efficacy might be suspended on any conditions and emergencies; but such as should infallibly and inevitably reach the End intended. In the first Covenant wherein God had not immutably decreed to preserve mankind abso∣lutely in their Primitive Estate, he made use of such means for their preservation, as might effect it, in case they were not wanting unto themselves, or that Obedience which they were enabled to perform. This man neglecting, the means appointed of God as to their success depending thereon by Gods own Appointment, that End which in their own Nature they tended unto was not attained, and that because God had not immutably determined it. But now whereas God engaged himself in an unchangeable-Purpose, in his infinite Wisdom he fixeth on those means for its Accomplishment, as shall not depend on any thing, whereby their efficacy might be frustrated. Such was his sending of his Son to be Incarnate, and the Dispensation of Grace of the New Covenant, which is in its Nature infallibly effectual unto the End whereunto it is designed. (2) God in his infinite Wisdom foresaw all the Interveniencies on our part that might obstruct the certain Accomplishment of the Promise. The Promise was first given indefinitely unto all mankind in our first Parents. But soon after the wickedness of the whole world, with their absolute contempt of the Grace of the Promise was such, as that any Creature would conceive that it would be of none effect, being so visibly, so universally rejected and despised. But a perfect View hereof lying under the Wisdom of God, he provided against it for the Immuta∣bility of his Purpose and Infallibility of his Promise, by singling out first one, then another, and at last the whole Posterity of Abraham, towards whom the Promise should be accomplished. But yet after a long season, there came the last and uttermost trial of the whole matter. For the generality of the Seed of Abraham rejected the Promise also, whereby it appeared really to have been fru∣strated, and to be of none effect, as our Apostle declares in his Answer to that Objection, Rom. 9. 6. But instead of changing his Purpose, God then more fully discovered wherein the Immutability of his Counsel did consist, and whereon it did depend, as Gal. 3. 8. And this was, that all along, and under all those Aposta∣sies, he ever had, and ever will have in the world an Elect people chosen by him before the foundation of the world, in and towards whom his Purpose was Im∣mutable and his Promise Infallible. No Interveniency can possibly shake or alter what hath been settled by infinite Wisdom. There is not a particular Believer but is made so sensible of his own unworthiness, that at one time or another he cannot but be almost brought to a loss, how it should be, that such a one as he should ever inherit the Promise. But God foresaw all that hath befallen us, or will do so; and hath in his infinite Wisdom provided against all Interveniencies that his Purpose might not be changed, nor his Promise frustrated. Infinite Goodness, as acting it self in Christ, was not satisfied in providing and preparing good things for Believers, but it would also shew and declare it unto them for their pre∣sent Obser. 4. Consolation. God was willing to shew to the Heirs of Promise; and the end was that they might have strong Consolation. As it is with a good wise Father and an Obedient Son. The Father is possessed of a large and profitable Estate. And as the son hath a present allowance suitable to his Condition, so being Obedient he hath a just expectation, that in due time he shall enjoy the whole Inheritance; this being usual amongst men, and that which the Law of Nature directs unto; For Parents are to lay up for their Children, and not Children for their Parents. But the whole being yet absolutely in the Fathers power, it is possible he may other∣wise dispose of it, and it may not come to the right Heir. But now if his Father
seeth his Son on some occasion to want Encouragement, or he be to put him on any difficult Service where he may meet with Storms and Dangers, he will shew unto him his Deeds of Settlement, wherein he had irrevocably confirmed unto him the whole Inheritance. So God deals with Believers, with his Children in this case. He is Rich in Grace, Mercy and Glory, and all his Children are Heirs of it, Coheirs with Christ and Heirs of God, Rom. 8. 17. that is, of the whole Inheritance that God hath provided for his Children; This they have an expecta∣tion of by the Promise according to the Law of the New Covenant. But although their state be thus secured by their being Heirs of the Promise, yet God knowing that they have a difficult work and warfare to go through withall, and what it is to serve him in Temptations, for their Encouragement and Consolation, he produceth and sheweth them his irrevocable Deed of Settlement, namely, his Promise confirmed by his Oath, whereby the whole Inheritance is infallibly secured unto them, He was free and willing to shew it unto the Heirs of Promise. At first God gave out a meer Precept as the Declaration of his Will, and a Promise couched in a Threatening. This was that which Divine Goodness acting in a way of Na∣ture did require, and whereof man had no cause to complain. For as the mind of God was sufficiently declared therein, so man in himself had no grounds of discouragements from a compliance therewith. And God might so deal with us all, giving out the whole Revelation of his Will in a systeme of Precepts, as some seem to suppose that he hath done. But things are now changed on two Accounts. For (1) It was herein the peculiar Design of God to glorifie his Goodness, Love, Grace, and Mercy by Jesus Christ, and he will do it in an abundant manner. He had before glorified his Eternal Power and infinite Wisdom in the Creation of the World and all things therein contained, Psal. 19. 1, 2, 3. Rom. 1. 21. And he had glorified his Holiness and Righteousness in giving of the Law accompanied with Eternal Rewards and Punishments. But Grace and Truth (in the provision of it, and the Accomplishment of the Promise) came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 18. And therefore that the Lord Christ in all this may have the preheminence, he will do it in an abundant and unconceiveable manner, above the former Declarations of his Glory in any other of his Attributes. Hence in the Scripture the Commu∣nication of Grace is expressed in words that may intimate its exceeding, and passing all understanding, Rom. 5. 20. ; Grace did by Christ more than abound. To abound expresseth the largest comprehensible Mea∣sures and Degrees; But that which doth more than abound, who can conceive? 1 Tim. 1. 14. , The Grace of our Lord did more than abound; it exceeded all comprehension. So that Glory which is the Effect of this Grace, is said to be given, , 2 Cor. 4. 17. that is, in an excellency and exceeding greatness no way to be conceived. So plainly the Apostle calls the Grace of God in Christ, , Ephes. 2. 7. excelling Riches. That we may know his meaning, he calls it again, chap. 3. 8. , Riches whereof there is no Investigation. In the pursuit of this design to exercise and manifest the infinite fulness of his Love and Goodness, he will not satisfie himself with a meer declaration of his Will, but he will have those concerned in it, to know it, to understand it, to have the present Comfort of it; and because they could not do that without satisfaction in the Immutability of his Counsel, he evidenceth that unto them by all means possible. And thereby he sufficiently manifests how willing he is, how well pleasing it is unto him that our Faith in him should be firm and stedfast. (2) Man is now fallen into a condition of Sin and Misery. And herein is he filled with so many Fears, Discouragements, and Despondencies, that it is the diffi∣cultest thing in the world to raise him unto any hopes of Mercy or Favour from God. In this lost forlorn estate, Divine Goodness by an infinite Condescension accommodates it self unto our weakness and our distresses. He doth not there∣fore only prepose his Mind and Will unto us, as unto Grace and Glory, but useth all ways possible to ingenerate in us a Confidence of his willingness to bring us unto a participation of them. He doth every thing that may direct and encou∣rage us to take a stedfast view of the Excellency and Immutability of his Counsel in this matter. Hence a great part of the Scripture, the Revelation of Gods Will, is taken
up in Promises, Exhortations, Invitations, Discourses and Expressions of Love, Kind∣ness, and Compassion. And in particular, although the Promise it self was an abun∣dant Security for Faith to rest upon as to the Immutability of Gods Counsel, yet to obviate all pretences, and cast out all excuses, he confirms it with his Oath. And although he did this in particular and expresly unto Abraham, yet he takes all Believers who are his Seed into a participation of the same priviledge with him, and manifests how that in swearing unto him, he sware also unto them all. And two things do hence naturally issue. 1. The unspeakable encouragement unto Believing, which is given unto all unto whom this Counsel of God and its Immutability is proposed. The Es∣sential Truth of God and his Oath, are openly and manifestly engaged unto these two things. (1) That nothing but Unbelief shall keep off any from the enjoyment of the Promise. (2) That all Believers, whatever difficulties they may meet withall in themselves, or objections against themselves, shall certainly and infallibly enjoy the Promise and be saved. And the Immutability of Gods Counsel herein he hath made so evident, that there is no room for any Ob∣jection against it. This is tendered unto you unto whom the Gospel is pro∣posed. Greater Encouragement unto Believing, and more certainty of the Event, you shall never have in this world, you cannot have; God will not, God cannot give. All persons not yet come up unto Believing, unto whom this Peace with God is preached, are distinguished into two sorts; Them that are nigh, and them that are far off, Ephes. 2. 17. This, in the first place ex∣presseth the Jews and Gentiles; but in a parity of Reason must be extended unto others. Some are comparatively nigh; such as have been affected with the Word, and brought into enquiries whether they should believe or no; And there are some afar off, who as yet have taken little notice of these things. Herein is both a Call and Encouragement unto both. To the first to deter∣mine their Wills in the choice of Christ in the Promise; unto the other to look up unto him though from the Ends of the Earth. But I must not en∣large. 2. It discovers the hainous Nature of Unbelief. The Gospel which is a mes∣sage of Love, Peace, Mercy, and Grace, yet never makes mention of Unbelief but it annexeth Damnation unto it. He that believeth not shall be damned. And although they shall also perish unto whom the Gospel is not preached, Rom. 2. 12. yet the Gospel though it speaks not exclusively unto others, yet prin∣cipally it declares the inevitable destruction, the Everlasting Damnation of them who believe not when the Promise is declared to them, 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. however, it declares that they shall fall under a sorer death and destructi∣on than any others, 2 Cor. 2. 16. And the reason of this Severity is taken partly from the Nature of Unbelief, and partly from the Aggravation of it. The Nature of Unbelief consists in a refusal of the Testimony of God, so making him a Liar, 1 Joh. 5. 10. and in esteeming that which he proposeth as his Power and Wisdom to be weakness and folly. Hence there is no way of Sin or Rebellion against God whatever, that casts such Scorn and Indig∣nity upon him. So that it is in it self the greatest of sins, as well as the root and cause of them. Yet such is the blindness of corrupted Nature, that many who will boggle at other sins, especially such as look with a severe threatening Aspect on a Natural Conscience, as Adultery, Theft, and Murder, yet concern themselves not at all in this Unbelief, but rather approve them∣selves in their Infidelity. Yet is there not one unto whom the Gospel is preached, but if he do not really receive the Lord Christ as tendered in the Promise, he doth what lies in him to declare God to be a Liar, foolish in his Counsels, and weak in his Operations. And what account this will come unto is not hard to discern. Moreover, It is from the Aggravations that it is accompanied withall, from the Nature of the thing it self, and the way where∣by it is proposed unto us. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salva∣tion? Heb. 2. 3. We may look only on that which lies before us; namely, the Infinite Condescension of Divine Goodness in shewing, manifesting, and declaring the Immutability of his Counsel by Oath. Whereas therefore he hath done all to this End that was possible to be done, and more than ever would have en∣tred
into the Heart of any Creature to desire or expect, the woful condition of Unbelievers, both as to this sin and misery which will follow thereon, is in∣expressible. For those that will despise all that God will do, yea all that he can do, to give them assurance of the Truth and Stability of his Promises given in a way of Grace, have no reason to expect, nor shall receive any thing, but what he will do and can do in a way of Justice and Vengeance. It is not all mankind universally, but a certain number of persons under certain Qualifications, to whom God designs to manifest the Immutability of his Counsel, Obser. 5. and to communicate the Effects thereof. It is only the Heirs of Promise whom God intendeth. But herein two things are to be considered. (1) The out∣ward Revelation or Administration of these things; and (2) Gods Purpose therein. The former is made promiscuously and indefinitely unto all to whom the Gospel is preached. For therein is contained a Declaration of the Immu∣tability of Gods Counsel and his Willingness to have it known. But if God did design the Communication of the Effect of it, in the same latitude with the outward Administration of it, then must he be thought to fail in his Pur∣pose towards the greatest part of them who receive it not. This is that which the Apostle disputes upon Rom. 9. Having supposed that the generality of the Jews, of the Posterity of Abraham according to the Flesh, were cut off from the Promise by Unbelief, and declared his sense thereon, ver. 1. he raiseth an Objection against that supposition, ver. 6. that if it were so, the Promise of God was of none effect; for unto them all it was given and de∣clared. Hereunto the Apostle answers and replies in that and the following Verses, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And the substance of his Answer is, that although the Promise was promiscuously proposed unto all, yet the Grace of it was intended only unto the Elect, as he also farther declares, chap. 11. 7. But why then doth God thus cause the Declaration to be made promiscuously and indefinitely unto all, if it be some only whom he designs unto a Participation of the effects of his Counsel and good things promised? I Answer, Let us always remember that in these things we have to do with him who is greater than we, and who giveth no Account of his matters. What if God will take this way of procedure, and give no reason of it? who are we that we should dispute against God? Wherefore our Apostle having at large discoursed this whole matter, and pleaded the absolute freedom of God to do what∣ever he pleaseth, winds up the whole in a resignation of all unto his So∣veraignty, with a deep Admiration of his unsearchable Wisdom, wherein it is our Duty to acquiesce, Rom. 11. 33, 34, 35. But yet I may add, That the Nature of the thing it self doth require this Dispensation of the Pro∣mise indefinitely to all, though the benefit of it be designed to some only. For the way whereby God will give a participation of the Promise unto the Heirs of it, being by the Administration of his Word, and such means as are meet to work on the minds of men, to perswade and prevail with them unto Faith and Obedience, He would not do it by immediate Revelation or Inspiration, and the like extraordinary Operations of his Spirit alone. but by such ways as are suited to glorifie Himself and his Grace in the Rational minds of his Creatures capable thereof. Now this could no way be done, nor can unto this day, but by the Declaration and Preaching of the Promise with Commands, Motives, and Encouragements unto Believing. In this work all those whom He employs are utterly ignorant who they are who are Heirs of the Promise, until they are discovered by their actual Believing: wherefore they have no other work, but in the first place to propose the Pro∣mise promiscuously unto all that will attend unto it, leaving the singling out of its proper Heirs unto the Soveraign Grace of God. So the Word is preached unto all Indefinitely, and the Election obtains whilst the rest are hardened. God alone knows the due measures of Divine Condescension, or what becomes the Divine Nature therein. Who could have once apprehended, who durst Obser. 6. have done so, that the Holy God should swear by himself to confirm his Word
and Truth unto such worthless Creatures as we are? Indeed there is yet a more transcendent act of Divine Condescension, namely, the Incarnation of the Son of God, the Glory whereof will be the Object of the Admiration of Men and Angels unto Eternity. For alas! what created Understanding could ever have raised it self unto a thought, that the Eternal Word should be made Flesh? God alone who is infinitely Wise, only Wise, knew what became the Holiness of his Being, and his Goodness therein. And so is it in its measure in this of his Oath. And as we are with holy Confidence to make use of what he hath done in this kind, seeing not to do so, is to despise the highest expression of his Good∣ness; so we are not in any thing to draw Divine Condescension beyond Divine Ex∣pressions. So unspeakable is the weakness of our Faith, that we stand in need of uncon∣ceivable Obser. 7. Divine Condescension for its Confirmation. The Immutability of Gods Counsel is the Foundation of our Faith; until this be manifest it is impossible that ever Faith should be sure and stedfast. But who would not think that Gods Declaration thereof by the way of Promise, were every way sufficient thereunto? But God knew that we yet stood in need of more; not that there was want of sufficient Evidence in his Promise, but such a want of stability in us, as stood in need of a superabundant Confirmation, as we shall see in the next Verse. Verse 18. That by two Immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lye, we might have a strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge to lay hold upon the Hope set before us. Two things in general the Apostle further designs in this Verse. (1) That the Declaration which God had made of the Immutability of his Counsel in this matter was every way sufficient and satisfactory. (2) What was the especial End and Design which he had therein, towards the Heirs of Pro∣mise? For the first, He doth it by declaring the Evidence given and the Nature . of it, which consisted in two Immutable things.  is an Act or Deed, such as we make and deliver when we convey any thing from one to another. An Instrument of an Assurance. This is the Promise and the Oath of God. Security is given by them; both from their own Nature, and also because they are two; two Witnesses whereby the thing intended is established. But what need was there of two such things? Is it because one of these was weak, infirm, alterable, such as may be justly challenged, or excepted against; that the other is added to strengthen and confirm it? No, saith the Apostle, both of them are equally Immutable. Wherefore we must still carry along with us, the infinite and unconceive∣able Condescension of God in this matter, who to obviate our Temptati∣ons, and relieve us under our weaknesses, is pleased to give this Variety unto his Divine Testimony, which he did ex Abundanti; not only beyond what he was any way obliged unto, but whatever we could desire or expect. For (2) this makes the Evidence absolute, and uncontroulable, that as they are two things which are produced to make it good, so they are both of them equally Immutable; such as neither in their own Nature, nor in their Execu∣tion were any way exposed or liable unto Alteration. For the Promise it self was absolute, and the thing promised depended on no Condition in us, on nothing without God himself. For there was in the Promise it self, all the Springs of all that is good, and of Deliverance from all that is Evil, so that on every side it brings along with it the Condition of its own Accomplishment. But whereas God in the Covenant of Works did give no Promise unto Man∣kind but what was Conditional, and suspended on such things on our part, as might or might not be, whence it came to pass that we sinned and came
short of it; God in the giving out of this Promise, which is the foundation of the Covenant of Grace, to assure us that it is utterly of another nature, and such as on no occurrence is liable unto change, confirms it with his Oath. Moreover the Apostle confirmeth this Testimony yet further from the Na∣ture of him by whom it was given. ; In . or by which it was impossible that God should lye or deceive.  is not absolutely to lye, but by any means to deceive him who hath cause to trust what we say or do. The highest Security among men consists in a Promise confirmed with an Oath; and this is, and must be unto them an End of Strife; for higher they cannot go. But yet it is possible there may be a lye and deceit in their Testimony, and he who trusts unto them may be deceived, as it often falls out in the world. For although the things them∣selves are good, and such as would secure the Interest of Truth only, yet men that use them are changeable, yea liars. But it is God who makes use of them in our Case, and therefore is it Impossible that he should lye. God having made this double engagement of his Truth and Faithfulness, it is utterly impossi∣ble that he should deceive any one thereby. But why doth the Apostle put an Emphasis upon this, that by these things it was impossible that God should lye, or deceive? For it is necessary unto God from his own Being, that it should in all things be impossible for him to lye. He cannot lye, He cannot deceive, He cannot deny himself, or his Word, these things are repugnant unto his Being. I Answer; That the Apostle speaks not of the Nature of the things themselves, but of their manifestation with respect unto us. Nothing was added to the Promise of God to render it more certain, firm, and stable; but an Addition was made unto it to give our minds greater security. Gods Immutability in promising, and im∣possibility in deceiving, are both equally from his Nature, but the distinct proposition of them, is needful unto our Encouragement and Establish∣ment. Fallen sinful man stands in need of the utmost Encouragement that Divine Condescen∣sion can extend unto, to prevail with him to receive and lay hold of the Promise of Grace Obser. 1. and Mercy by Jesus Christ. There is nothing that we are so prone unto, as to distrust the Promises of God. Nothing that we are with more difficulty won over unto, than to mix them with Faith. To evidence this we may consider, 1. That the first entrance of Sin into the world, was by a disbelief of the Truth of God; yea that very sin formally consisted in an Apprehension, that God in his Promises and Threatenings had a mind to deceive us, Gen. 3. 4, 5, 6. And as sin thus laid its foundation by the Craft of Sathan, so it en∣deavours to carry on its building. It continually suggests to the Hearts and Minds of men, that they shall certainly be deceived in trusting to Gods Promises. For (1) Secret thoughts there are in the Hearts of men (which are de∣ceitful above all things, and desperately wicked) that neither the Promises nor Threatenings of God are true, in the terms and sense wherein they are pro∣posed unto them. They neither think that it shall be so bad with any as he threateneth, nor so well as he promiseth. Did men believe the Threaten∣ings of God as to the fearful and Eternal Ruine of Sinners, it were not possible they should live in Sin as they do without any Endeavour of Amend∣ments, so to fly from the Wrath to come. Nor do they think in their Hearts that it shall be with them that believe according as God hath pro∣mised. They say in their Hearts, The Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil, Zeph. 1. 12. namely, as he hath either promised or threatened. (2) Men think that there are still some reserves and latent Conditions in the Promises and Threatenings of God, and that God knows it shall be other∣wise, than they seem to pretend. By this Imagination Sathan deceived our first Parents as to the Truth of God in his Threatening. He perswaded them that there was a reserve therein, that was directly contrary unto what the
words of it declared; and that by transgressing of his Commands, they should not dye, but be Wise and like himself. And still men suppose that the Promises propose a fair ground indeed; but that if they should go to build upon it, there is a Mine under it, which would be sprung at one time or another unto their Ruine. They cannot apprehend that it shall be with them according unto, and as the Promise doth declare. If they should at∣tempt to believe, yet one latent condition or other would defeat them of ob∣taining it; whereas indeed the whole and entire Condition of enjoying the Promise is Faith alone. (3) Whatever may be the Truth of the Promise, yet they cannot conceive that God intends them therein; whereas yet there is no Declaration or Inten∣tion of God, whereby our Duty is to be regulated, and whereon we shall be judged, but what is contained and expressed in the proposal of the Promise it self. On these and the like grounds, the great contest in the world between God and Man, is whether God be True or a Liar in his Promise. It is not thus directly stated in the minds of Men; for they have many other pre∣tences why they do not believe; but this is that which it is resolved into. For he that receives not the Testimony of God, maketh him a Liar. So was it with the People in the Wilderness, whose Carkasses fell therein because of their Unbelief. The Reasons they pretended and pleaded why they would not at∣tempt to enter the Land of Canaan, were that the People were strong, and the Cities walled, and Giants among them, Numb. 13. 28, 32, 33. But the true reason was their Unbelief of Gods Promise; wherefore God expresseth the sense of his Indignation against them, with that Scheme of Reproach; Ye shall bear your Iniquities, and you shall know my breach of Promise, chap. 14. 34. or see what your Unbelief hath brought you unto. And no otherwise is it with all Unbelievers at pre∣sent, as our Apostle at large declares chap. 3. of this Epistle. Other things are pretended as the causes of their Unbelief, but it is their dissatisfaction in the Truth of God that is the true and only cause of it. And as this suffi∣ciently manifests the hainousness of Unbelief, so it Glorifies the Righteousness of God in the Condemnation of Unbelievers. 2. The Curse of the Law having by the guilt of Sin been admitted unto a Dominion over the whole Soul, it is a great thing to receive and admit of a Testimony to the contrary, such as the Promise is. What the Law speaks, it speaks unto them that are under it, as all men are by Nature. And it speaks in the Heart of every man, that the sinner must dye. Conscience complies also, and adds its suffrage thereunto. This fixeth a conclusion in the mind, that so it will be, whatever may be offered unto the contrary. But so is the Testimony of God in the Promise, namely, that there is a way of Life and Salvation for sinners, and that God offereth this way and an Interest therein unto us. Nothing but the exceeding greatness of the power of Grace, can enable a guilty sinner in this case to set his Seal that God is true. 3. When the Promise comes, and is proposed unto us, for the most part it finds us deeply engaged into, and as to our selves, Immutably fixed on other things that are inconsistent with Faith in the Promises. Some are interested in divers Lusts and Pleasures; Some are filled with inveterate prejudices through a vain Conversation received by Tradition from their Fathers; and some have some good hopes in themselves, that in the way wherein they are, by the Re∣ligion which they profess, and the Duties which they perform, they may in time arrive unto what they aim at. When the Promise is proposed, the first thing included therein, is an utter relinquishment of all these things. As it is a Promise of Grace, so it excludes every thing but Grace. Wherefore when it is proposed unto any, it doth not only require that it be believed, or God be believed therein, but also that in order thereunto, we part with and utterly renounce all hopes and confidences in our selves from what we are or expect to be, and betake our selves for Life and Salvation unto the Promise alone. Some imagine that it is a very easie thing to believe; and that the Souls of men are but deceived when they are called off from the Duties that Light and Conviction put them upon, to the way of Faith in the Promise.
But the truth is, that what from its own Nature, and from what is required thereunto, or comprised therein, it is as the most important, so the highest and greatest Duty that we are called unto, And which men would of their own choice rather grind in a Mill of the most burdensome Duties, than once apply their minds unto. 4. The guilt of sin hath filled the mind of every sinner with innumerable fears, doubts and Confusions that are very difficultly satisfied or removed. Yea the remainders of them do abide in Believers themselves, and oft-times fill them with great perplexities. And these when the Promise is proposed un∣to them arise and follow one another like the Waves of the Sea; James 1. 6. No sooner is one of them answered or waved, but immediately ano∣ther supplies its room. And in them all doth Unbelief put forth its power. And on these grounds it is that poor sinners have such need of the Redupli∣cation of Divine Assurances, that notwithstanding all pretences unto the contrary, the Promise of Grace in Christ shall be made good and be accomplished unto them. 5. The especial Design of God in this Dispensation and Condescension, is . , &c. That we might have a strong Consolation. Being engaged in the Application of his Instance in the Promise and Faith of God given unto Abraham, the Apostle here plainly dismisseth the considera∣tion of things past under the Old Testament, in those Blessings and temporal things which were Typical of things spiritual; and applies the whole unto present Believers, and therein unto all those of future Ages. That we might have. And herein he builds on this Principle; That whatever God promised, designed, sware unto Abraham, that he did so promise unto all Believers what∣ever; so that every Promise of the Covenant belongeth equally unto them with him or any other. And two things the Apostle lays down concerning such Believers. (1) What God designs unto them; (2) Such a Description of them as contains the Qualifications necessary unto a Participation of what is so designed. The first is . It sometimes signifies Exhortation, an encouraging perswasive Exhortation. And in that sense it is here taken by some Exposi∣tors, as Theophylact, and Oecumenius. That we might have thereby a prevalent Exhortation unto Faith and Patience in Believing. But Comfort or Consolation is the most usual signification of the Word in the New Testament, as I have shewed elsewhere; and that sense of the Word alone can be here intended. A Con∣solation it is that ariseth from the Assurance of Faith, and of our Interest there∣by in the Promises of God. This is that which relieves our Souls against all Fears, Doubts, and Troubles; For it either obviates and prevents them, or it out∣ballanceth them, and bears up our Souls against them. For Comfort is the Relief of the mind, whatever it be, against sorrow and trouble. And this Consolation which God intends and designs Believers, is ; solamen fortissimum, forte, validum, potens. Strong, powerful, prevalent. Strong so as to be prevalent against Opposition, is that which is intended. There are Comforts to be taken, or are often taken from earthly things. But they are weak, languid, and such as fade and dye upon the first appearance of a vigorous op∣position. But this Consolation is strong and prevalent against all Creature Op∣positions whatever. Strong; that is, such as will abide against all Opposition. A strong Tower; an impregnable Fortress, Munition of Rocks. For it is not the abounding of Consolation in us, but the prevalency of the Causes of it against Opposition that is intended. 6. There is the Description of the Persons unto whom God designs this Con∣solation by the Promise confirmed with his Oath; . . There are three things in this Description of Be∣lievers, or the Heirs of the Promise. (1) The way whereby they seek for Relief; they fly for Refuge. (2) The Relief it self which they seek after, which is the Hope set before them. (3) The way whereby they are made Par∣takers of it, they lay hold upon it.
1. They are ; say we, that fly for Refuge; Qui cursum corripiunt. It is the Judgement of many that here is an Allusion unto him who had slain a man unawares under the Law, whose safety and life depen∣ded on his speedy flight unto one of the Cities of Refuge, Numb. 35. 11, 12. And hereunto our Translators had undoubtedly respect, whereon they rendered the word, flying for Refuge. And indeed the word it self signifies such an Action as is there ascribed unto the man-slayer. For  properly, cursum corripere, hath respect unto two things. (1) An apprehension of Danger, or a real surprisal with it, whereon a man takes his flight for Deliverance. And so it was with the man-slayer; his apprehension of the approach of the Avenger of Blood, to take away his Life, stirred him up , to fly from the place and condition wherein he was, lest Evil should overtake him. (2) Speed and Diligence in an endeavour to attain that place or company, or End which a man proposeth unto himself, as the means of his Deliverance; and whereby he hopes to find safety. He that doth so fly, casts off all Tergiversation, stirs up himself, gives no place to sloth or vain hopes, and useth his utmost diligence in the pursuit of his safety. And hereby doth the Holy Ghost lively express the state and condition of all the Heirs of Promise in this mat∣ter. In themselves, by Nature, as they are Children of the first Adam, they are all exposed upon the Guilt of Sin Original and Actual unto the Sen∣tence of the Law. God by various means is pleased to awaken them unto the consideration of the Danger wherein they are, the Execution of that Curse which they are obnoxious unto being impendent over them. In this Condition they see a necessity of seeking out for Relief, as knowing that if it be not obtained they must perish, and that Eternally. Love of Sin, compliance with the World, hopes of Righteousness of their own, do all endeavour variously to retard and hinder them in their Design. But when God proceeds to shut them up, to sharpen their Convictions, and continually to represent their Condition unto them, giving them to conclude that there is no hope in their present Condition, at length they stir up themselves unto a speedy flight to the Hope set before them in the Promise. And, That is the second thing to be enquired into, namely, what is this Hope that is set before us, and how it is so. (1) Most Expositors take Hope here  by a Metonymy of the Subject for the thing hoped for; that is, Grace and Glory, Justification and Salvation by Jesus Christ. These things are the subject matter of the Promises, which we desire and hope after. And unto these we may be said to fly for Relief or Refuge, when in our expectation of them we are supported and comforted. (2) Some take Hope subjectively for the Grace of Hope it self. And this we are said to fly unto, that is, speedily to betake our selves unto the exercise of it, as founded in the Promises of God, foregoing all other expectations, wherein we shall find assured Consolation. (3) Hope, by a metonymy of the effect for the Cause, may express the Promise it self, which is the cause and means of ingenerating Hope in us. And this I take to be the proper meaning of the place, and which is not exclusive of the other senses mentioned. The Promise being proposed unto us is the Cause and Object of our Faith on the account of the Faithfulness of God therein. Faith brings forth Hope, whose Object is the same Promise, or the good things thereof, as proposed from the same Faithfulness. Thence is it self called the Hope, as that without which we could have none, there being neither Cause of it, nor Object for it. And this Hope is said to be set before us, or to be proposed unto us, which it is in the Declaration of the Promise, or the Dispensation of the Gospel. Therein it is proposed as the Object of our Faith and Hope, as the means of the strong Con∣solation which God is so abundantly willing that we should receive. And this renders the whole Metaphor plain and easie. For it is evident how the Promise and all that we hope for thereby is set before us and proposed unto us in the Gospel, as also how we fly or betake our selves thereunto in all distresses for Relief. And it is more natural to allow of this metonymical expression in the word Hope, than to admit of so rough a Catachresis in the other part of the words, wherein the Grace of Hope within us, should be said to be set before us.
Thirdly, With respect hereunto we are said to fly ; that is, , to lay hold on, fortiter apprehendere, constanter retinere. The signification  of this word, frequently used by our Apostle, I have on sundry occasions before declared. It is, injecta manu, totis viribus retinere; to hold fast what we lay hold on, with all our might and power. There will be many endeavours to strike off the hand of Faith from laying hold on the Promise; and many more to loosen its hold when it hath taken it. But it is in its Nature, and it is a part of our Duty strongly to lay hold upon, and firmly to retain the Promise when we have reached unto it. And there seems in the whole Metaphor to be an Allusion unto those who run in a Race. For whereas they have a Prize or  set before them, they first stir up themselves with all their strength to speed towards the mark, which when they have attained they both lay fast hold on, and bear it away with them as their own. So is it with Believers as to the Promise proposed unto them or set before them. They reach out after it, lay hold upon it, reserve it as to their Interest in it, as the only means of their Deliverance and Salvation, and of that Consolation which in every condition they stand in need of. And from the words so opened we may observe that, Sense of Danger and Ruine from sin, is the first thing which occasions a Soul to look Obser. 1. out after Christ in the Promise. It is implied in the word , which in∣cludes a respect unto Danger to be avoided, whence we render it, fly for Refuge. As the Lord Christ came to seek and save that which was lost, to call not the Righteous but sinners to Repentance, to be a Physician to the sick and not to the whole; so if men are not sensible of their lost condition, of the sin and sickness of their Souls, they will never in good earnest look out after him. And therefore as those by whom Conviction of Sin, and Humiliation for it are despised, as they are by many, Christ himself also, who is the End of the Law and all its Convictions for Righteousness, is despised; so the Profession of Christ and hopes of Salvation by him is in vain in all those who were never truly made sensible of Sin and the danger of Eternal Ruine thereby. A full Conviction of Sin is a great and shaking surprisal unto a guilty Soul. Hence is such an one here tacitely compared unto him who had killed a man Obser. 2. at unawares. He was just before in a condition of Peace and Safety, fearing no man, but with quietness and assurance attending his own occasions. But having now slain a man at unawares, he finds all things on a suddain changed round about him. Fear within, and danger from without, do beset him on every hand. If he seeth any man, he supposeth him the Avenger of Blood; and if he seeth no man, solitude is dreadful unto him. No otherwise is it with them who are throughly convinced of Sin. They were alive, as the Apostle speaks Rom. 7. and at peace, fearing no more Evil than they felt; perhaps per∣swading themselves that all things were well between God and their Souls, or not much solicitous whether they were or no. In this state the Commandment comes and discovers their guilt and danger thereon, and unveils the Curse which until now was hidden from them, as the Avenger of Blood ready to execute the Sentence of the Law. This being a thing which they never expected nor feared, fills them with great surprisals. Hence are those cries of such Persons; what shall we do to be saved? that argue a great distress and no small amaze∣ment. And those who know nothing of these things are utterly ignorant both of Sin and Grace. The Revelation or Discovery of the Promise, or of Christ in the Promise, is that alone which directs convinced sinners into their proper course and way. This is the setting of Obser. 3. an Hope before them, wherein they are called to look unto their strong Tower as Priso∣ners of Hope, that they may be brought out of the Pit through the Blood of the Ever∣lasting Covenant. The man slayer probably might have many contrivances sug∣gested in his mind, how he might escape the Danger whereunto he was ex∣posed. To leave his present habitation, to lye hid, to betake himself unto Woods or Desarts, and the like vain hopes might present themselves unto
him. But all these things did but keep him out of his way, and divert him from his Duty; and the longer he entertained them in his thoughts, the more his danger was increased, and his Life hazarded. It was the Re∣membrance alone of the City of Refuge, set before him in the Law, that di∣rected him to his proper Duty, and set him in his way unto safety. It is no otherwise with Persons under the Convictions of Sin. Many things pre∣sent themselves unto their minds, with hopes of Relief attending them. Sin it self with a continuance therein will do so, so also will sloth, and the pro∣crastination of present Duty; but especially some Duties themselves, a Righ∣teousness by the works of the Law will do so, and with many is effectual unto their Ruine. Whilst these or any of them are attended unto, the way of Duty and Safety is hidden from the Eyes of Sinners. But when the Promise, Christ in the Promise is proposed unto them, is set before them, so soon as they direct their Eyes that way, they see their course plain before them, and what it is they must betake themselves unto, if they intend a Deliverance out of the condition where∣in they are. Where there is the least of saving Faith, upon the first Discovery of Christ in the Obser. 4. Promise, it will stir up the whole Soul to make out towards him, and a Participation of him. As Faith is begotten in the Soul by the Promise, so the first na∣tural genuine Act of it, tends unto a farther Interest in and Participation of that Promise. In going to Christ upon his Call and Invitation, in laying hold upon him in the Promise, consists the Nature, Life, and Being of the Duty, Obedience and Grace of that Faith which is in the Heirs of Pro∣mise. It is the Duty and Wisdom of all those unto whom Christ in the Promise is once discovered, by any Gospel-means or Ordinance once set before them, to admit Obser. 5. of no delay, of a through closing with him. Many things, yea things innu∣merable will offer themselves with subtilty and violence unto that End; yea all the Crafts and Power of the Gates of Hell will engage to the same purpose; but as Faith being really set on work will prevail against them all, so it is our Duty to avoid them, as those which under specious pretences strike at the Life and Eternal welfare of our Souls. There is a spiritual strength and vigour required unto the securing of our Interest in Obser. 6. the Promise, ; to lay fast and firm hold upon it. The greatness of our concern therein, the opposition that will be made thereunto, the Love where∣with our Faith ought to be accompanied, do require the utmost of our strength and diligence herein. The Promise is an assured Refuge unto all sin-distressed Souls who betake themselves Obser. 7. thereunto. Where any Souls convinced of Sin by the charge of the Law, and their own Obser. 8. lost condition thereon, do betake themselves unto the Promise for Relief, God is abun∣dantly willing that they should receive strong Consolation. For herein doth the Na∣ture of that Faith consist which hath the Promise of Pardon, Justification and Salvation given unto it. And hereon I might enlarge to manifest the true Nature of that Faith which hath the Promises, but I must not too far digress.
Verse 19. Which (Hope) we have as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into that within the Vail. Having made mention of our Hope with respect unto the Promise of God, He adds an account of the use of that Hope in the course of our Faith and Obedience. And he leaves herein the metonymical signification of the word, returning unto that which is proper, namely, the Grace of Hope in us. But this he doth not abso∣lutely, but as it includes its Object or the Promise laid hold upon by Faith. For he doth not expresly mention Hope it self, but includes it in the relative Article, and so respects not its self alone but its object also, which he had mentioned be∣fore, Hope as arising from, or caused by and fixed on the Promise of God. Where∣fore the use of Hope as fixed on, and mixed with that Promise, securing our In∣terest therein, is that which he declares in this Verse. And three things are to be briefly spoken unto in the opening of these words. (1) The Nature of this Hope. (2) Its Use and Properties. (3) Its Operation and Effects. The first is included, the second expressed under a Natural, and the third under a Typical similitude. 1. The Grace of Hope being not expresly mentioned but only included in the words, and that not with respect unto its Essence and Nature, but its Use and Operation, here is no occasion given to insist upon it. Only whereas it is supposed as the principal subject of the Proposition, it may briefly be spoken unto. This Hope elsewhere He calls our confidence, and ascribes a , a glorying  or boasting unto it, chap. 3. 6. and a , or full assurance; chap. 6. 1. Wherefore it is that Grace whereon our Assurance, or that full perswasion of Faith which gives confidence and Glory, doth depend. And there is nothing more ad∣verse unto it, than the common notion of Hope. For it is generally conceived as a dubious, uncertain, fluctuating expectation of that which may be, or may not be for the future. Now although such expectations of all sorts may be included in the general notion of Hope, yet are they excluded from the Nature and Use of that Grace of Hope which is recommended unto us in the Scripture. For this is a firm Trust in God for the enjoyment of the good things contained in his Promises, at the appointed season, raising in the Soul an earnest desire after them, and expectation of them. And for want of the knowledge of the Nature of this Grace, many live without any benefit of its exercise. Let two things concerning it be observed and they will give Light into its Nature and Use. (1) That it springs from Faith, in that it fixeth all its expectation on the good things in the Promise, and that as promised. But it is Faith alone that receives the Promise and giveth an Interest therein. (2) That its Nature and Essence consists in Trust in God, which if it be not the Foundation of all its exercise, whatever may be so called is but a deceiving pre∣sumption, Psal. 33. 18. 42. 5. Psal. 130. 5. &c. Wherefore it is the fiduciary Act of Faith on God in the Promises, as it respects the good things of it, as yet absent, future, unenjoyed. 2. The Use and Operation of this Hope, the Apostle expresseth by a double metaphor, the one taken from things Natural, the other from things instituted and Typical. Its Use he sets forth by a Metaphor taken from things natural; it is the Anchor of the Soul, firm and stable; and its Operation by a Metaphor taken from things Typical, it entereth into that within the Vail. 1. In it self and as unto its Use He compareth it unto an Anchor; It is the . Anchor of the Soul. For the Souls of Believers it seems have need of an Anchor. And there is much instructive efficacy in such similitudes They are the only law∣ful Images in things sacred. For that which in its self is invisible, is by a suitable Representation proposed unto the Reason of the mind, and even objected unto sense it self. Hence as used in the Scripture, they are eminently communicative of spiritual Light and Experience unto the Soul. And this Instructive Allusion is to be taken from the principal Ends of the things compared, and ought not to be extended unto other Circumstances which belong not thereunto. Yea a dissimili∣tude is allowed in them all. Wherefore our Hope, as before described, is com∣pared unto an Anchor. (1) With respect unto its Use. (2) With respect unto
its Adjuncts and Properties. As the Nature and Use of an Anchor is to hold fast the Ship whereunto it doth belong, and to keep it steady. And it is principally of use at two seasons. (1) In Storms and Tempests, when the Art and Skill of the Mariners are overcome by the fierceness of the Wind and Sea that they cannot steer the Ship in its right course, nor preserve it from Rocks or Shelves. Then is an Anchor cast out, which if it have the Properties here mentioned, will hold fast and retain the Ship in safety against all outward violence. (2) When Ships are in their Harbour that they may not be tossed up and down at uncertainty, that men may attend their occasions and not be driven to and fro with every Wind, which our Apostle alludes unto, Ephes. 4. 13, 14. An Anchor is cast to keep the Vessel steady unto its posture. There are therefore two things supposed in this Allusion. (1) That the Souls of Believers are sometimes exposed unto Storms; and a stress of spiritual Dangers, Persecutions, Afflictions, Temptations, Fears, Sin, Death, and the Law, do make up these Storms that oft-times beat upon them. And they are com∣pared here unto Storms; (1) Because of their Violence. There are Degrees in them, and some are far more urgent than other, as Storms are of various sorts; but generally all of them have one degree or other of Fierceness and Violence. (2) Because of their Tendency; they tend in their own Nature unto Ruine and Destruction. It falls out indeed sometimes that a Storm at Sea, although it ter∣rifie the Passengers, and discompose the Ship, yet accidentally falling in with its course for a season doth speed it in its Voyage. But in their own Nature all Storms tend unto Ruine and Destruction. So likewise do all the ways and means where∣by the state of Believers with their Interest in the Promise are assaulted. They all tend unto the Ruine of their Souls. It is true through the holy, wise disposal of all things by the Lord Jesus Christ, they do for the most part issue in the growth of their Faith and furtherance of their Salvation. But this they have not of them∣selves, their work and tendency is of another Nature. Our Apostle gives us a Description of these Storms, with the use of this Anchor in them, and the success thereof in the safety of the Souls of Believers, Rom. 8. 33, 36, 38, &c. (2) The ordinary occasions of this Life and our Duties towards God and Men therein are like the tradings of Ships in their Harbour. For therein also a good and sure Anchor is necessary for them, the neglect of the use whereof hath proved ruinous to many. And without that which spiritually answers thereunto we shall fluctuate up and down in all that we do, and be in continual hazard of Ruine. In these seasons Hope, as be∣fore described, is the Anchor of the Soul; and as that is let down through the Waves and Darkness of the Ocean, by its Cable, until it comes to fix it self in the bottom; so our Hope let out as it were by the sure Word of God, entreth into that wherein it fasteneth it self and fixeth the Soul. 2. The Allusion respects the Properties of an Anchor, which as here expressed are two, the one respecting its Nature, the other its Use. (1) It is , sure; . that will not fail; it may be safely trusted unto. The substance of it is firm, the proportion of it is suited unto the Burden of the Ship; and it is no fair promising and yet deceitful Engine. (2) In its Use it is , firm and stedfast, which no . violence of Winds or Storms can either break or move from its hold. Such is Hope unto the Soul. (1) In its Nature it is , sure, and not a deceiving Ima∣gination. It maketh not ashamed, Rom. 5. 5. by any failure or disappointment. Groundless Presumptions are the deceitful Engines, whereby the Souls of multi∣tudes are ruined every day; of no more use than if the Mariners should cast out a Logg, or a burden of Straw, to stay their Vessel in a Storm. But Hope proceeding on and built on Faith, is infallible and will not deceive. (2) In its Use it is , firm and invincible, against all oppositions, not indeed from its self, but from the ground which it fixeth upon, namely, Christ in the Promise, as the next words declare. For, Secondly, The way or means whereby this spiritual Anchor secures our Souls is . expressed in the words following, and which entereth into that within the Vail. And herein there is a dissimilitude in the comparates. For an Anchor is cast downwards and fixeth it self in the Earth at the bottom of the Sea; but Hope ascendeth upwards, and fixeth it self in Heaven, or in that which is therein. And we must enquire, (1) What is this Vail. (2) How Hope entreth it. (3.) What is that with∣in it, that Hope entreth into. (1) For the Vail it self, the Apostle unto that na∣tural
Allusion which he insists upon, adds also one that is Typical, which renders the whole context figurative, as we shewed before. The Vail therefore here alluded unto, was that which parted the most holy place from the Sanctuary or Body of the Temple. This our Apostle calls the second Vail, chap. 9. 3. and here the Vail absolutely. For the Body of the Temple whereinto the Priests only entred to offer Incense, was separated from the People by the first Vail, as the most Holy place was from that, by the second Vail. Through the for∣mer the ordinary Priests passed every day to offer Incense; through the latter the High Priest passed, and that once a year. Now that which was denoted hereby with respect unto Christ and his Priesthood, were these aspectable Heavens through which he passed in his Ascension into the glorious Presence of God. See our Ex∣position on chap. 4. ver. 14. Within the Vail therefore, is within and above these visible Heavens, the place of Gods glorious Residence, the Holy Tabernacle not made with hands, where the Lord Christ continueth to administer for his Church. (2) This Hope entreth into, or passeth through. The Heavens are as a Vail unto the sense and reason of man; there, their sight and their thoughts are bounded; they can neither discern nor judge of any thing that is above or within that Vail. But Faith with Hope pierceth through it; no created thing can keep them at a di∣stance from God himself. As an Anchor stays not in the Waves of the Sea, as it cannot fix it self in the Waters, but pierceth through them until it come unto solid Earth in the bottom; no more doth or can the Hope of a Believer fix it self on any thing under these Heavens, but it pierceth through all till it come within the Vail. And this it doth (1) under the conduct of Faith, which goes before it, and presents unto it the things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1. (2) By the Rule and Line of the Word which on no occasion it will vary from. And (3) this it doth ; to that which is within. And what is it that is within this Vail? not an Ark and a mercy-seat, not Ta∣bles of Stone and Cherubims, the work of mens hands; but the things sig∣nified by them; God himself on a Throne of Grace, and the Lord Christ as the High priest of the Church standing at his Right Hand. God the Fa∣ther as the Author of the Promise of Grace, Christ as the Purchaser of all Mercy, the Counsel of Peace being between them both. Here Hope fixeth it self to hold the Soul stedfast in all the Storms and Tempests that may befall it. Wherefore that which Hope fixeth on within the Vail; is (1) The Fa∣ther as the Author. (2) The Lord Christ as the Purchaser. (3) The Cove∣nant as the Conveyance of all Grace; which were all Typically represented by the things within the Vail of Old. And the Apostle makes use of this Expression for two Reasons. (1) Because our Hope and Faith are not now fixed and bounded on Types, Shadows, and obscure Representations of the good things of the Promise, as things were under the Old Testament. All these things are now passed away, and we have immediately to deal with God and Christ Jesus. (2) To instruct the Hebrews in the Nature and Use of the Old Tabernacle Institutions, and from thence in the true Nature of the Priest∣hood of Christ which he is now returning unto. And we may observe from these words, That all true Believers are exposed to Storms and Tempests in this world. This makes Anchors so necessary for them. The wise God would not have pro∣vided Obser. 1. an Anchor for them and enjoyned its use, if he had not known they would be exposed unto Storms. He that dwells at peace in his House, of all things thinks least of an Anchor. But we are to look for Storms. Sup∣pose we might pass our time of sojourning here without outward Troubles, which yet he is exceedingly unwise who promiseth unto himself any such thing, whilst we are in the Flesh, and accompanied with so many occasions of Distress on every hand; yet who can escape from those inward Trials, Exercises and Troubles, from Temptations, Darkness, Sin, and the Law, where∣with we are often tossed and afflicted, and it may be for a season not com∣forted? For,
These Storms would prove ruinous unto the Souls of Believers, were they not in∣defeasibly Obser. 2. interested by Faith and Hope in the Promise of the Gospel. Every Storm almost will be too hard for Ships without Cables or Anchors. And as little security have we in a time of Trial from any thing in our selves, if Hope hold not fast on the Promise which is the Anchor of the Soul. And this it will do if it be genuine. For, No distance of place, no Interposition of difficulties can hinder the Hope of Believers, Obser. 3. from entring into the Presence of, and fixing it self on God in Christ. It pierceth through the Clouds, passeth through the Heavens, stops not at their glorious Vail, until it comes unto the Eternal Fountain and Spring of all Grace and Mercy. And therefore, The strength and assurance of the Faith and Hope of Believers is invisible unto Obser. 4. the world. They enter in within the Vail where no Eye of Reason can pur∣sue them. There all their concerns are hid, and the secret Influence which unto all purposes they have from thence is sometimes admired, sometimes derided by the blind and wicked world. However it is effectual to their good. For, Hope firmly fixed on God in Christ by the Promise will hold steady and preserve the Soul in all the Storms and Trials that may befall it. It is an Anchor both sure Obser. 5. and stedfast. Wherefore, It is our Wisdom at all times, but especially in times of Trial, to be sure that our An∣chor Obser. 6. have a good hold-fast in Heaven. This alone will be our Preservation and Se∣curity; if we are fixed on that within the Vail. Verse 20. Whither the forerunner is for us entred, Jesus made an High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. The Apostle issueth this long digression as he doth all his other Discourses, in the Person of Christ; who being the Author and Finisher of our Faith, with him he begins, and in him he ends continually. And three things he aims at in this Verse. 1. To give new Assurance unto the efficacy and prevalency of Hope fixed on the Promise as it enters in unto that within the Vail; namely, because Christ our High Priest is there. It enters there, , whither Christ is gone. Even Hea∣ven it self would be no safe place for us to fix the Anchor of our Trust and . Hope in, if Christ were not there. For without him there would be no Throne of Grace in Heaven, as there could have been no Typical Throne in the Sanctuary, without the Mercy-seat. And this contains the relation between the two Verses; wherein we see that, After the most sincere performance of the best of our Duties, our Comforts and Se∣curities Obser. 1. are centred in Christ alone. Our Hope entring within the Vail is a safe Anchor, because Christ is there. 2. The Apostle in these words by an Artificial Transition, lands us on that . Coast which he all this while steered towards; and this is the Priesthood of Christ as represented in that of Melchisedec. This he had asserted chap. 5. 12. But upon the consideration of the depth of this Mystery, the Importance of the subject matter of it, with the present state of the most of these Hebrews, he engageth into that long digression for their due preparation unto the hear∣ing and receiving of it, which we have now passed through. Wherefore
having discharged his Conscience and Duty towards them in various Admo∣nitions, he returns again in these words unto that design and discourse, which there he had broken off. And from the Nature of his Digression we may learn that, As the minds of men are greatly to be prepared for the Communication of spi∣ritual mysteries unto them, so the best preparation is by the cure of their sinful and corrupt Affections, with the removal of their Barrenness under what they have be∣fore learned and been instructed in. It is to no purpose, yea it is but the putting of New Wine into Old Bottles to the loss of all, to be daily leading men into the knowledge of higher mysteries, whilst they live in a neglect of the Practice of what they have been taught already. 3. He gives an account of the Lord Christ unto whom he hath now reduced his Discourse, in sundry particulars; As, 1. He expresseth him by his Name ; Jesus. And by the Interposition of . this name here the Apostle may design two things. (1) To mind us of the signification of it, whence the reason of his As∣sumption of it was taken. Jesus signifies a Saviour; And he was called Jesus, because he was to save his People from their sins, Matth. 1. 21. He therefore concerning whom all these things are affirmed, is to be considered as our Saviour; who had the name of a Saviour given him by God himself, with respect unto the work which he was to do, 1 Thes. 1. 10. and he is Jesus still, able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by him. (2) To reflect on the common use of that name in the world. This was the Name under which he was reproached, reviled, crucified and slain as a Male∣factor, They crucified Jesus. Wherefore the Apostle treating here of the glori∣ous Exaltation of the Son of God, that none might pretend or fancy to them∣selves that it was any other thing or person that he intended, he expresseth him by that Name, whereby he was known in the world, under which he was reproached and suffered. And this all the Apostles were careful to in∣culcate in the first preaching of the Gospel; Jesus of Nazareth, Acts 2. 22. This Jesus hath God raised up, ver. 32. His Son Jesus whom ye delivered up and denied in the presence of Pilate, chap. 3. 13. Jesus of Nazareth whom ye cruci∣fied; chap. 4. 10. Jesus whom ye slew and hanged on a Tree, chap. 5. 30. For as they testified hereby that they were not ashamed of his Cross, so they laid in security for Faith, against all those fond Imaginations which have been since vented, that Christ in Heaven and in us is somewhat else than that Jesus who was crucified on the Earth. This is that which by the use of this Name he calls our Faith unto, namely, that it is one and the same Jesus, who was humbled and is exalted, who died ignominiously and lives for ever in Glory. This same Jesus is our Saviour in every state and condition, the same on the Cross and the same at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Hence he is still represented in Heaven as a Lamb slain, Rev. 5. 6. And all apprehensions unto the contrary are destructive unto the whole Foundation of the Gospel. 2. He describes him by that Office and Action whence our Hope receives its . great encouragement to enter within the Vail; namely, that he is , a Forerunner for us, and as such is entred in thither. In this place alone is this Title assigned unto the Lord Christ, though the things intended in it are elsewhere expressed. And so it must be said concerning the name of a surety, which our Apostle makes use of in the next Chapter, ver. 22. Great mysterious Truths may often be comprised in one word, used and employed by the Holy Ghost for our Instruction; and therefore every word of the Scripture is diligently to be searched into. It is indifferent whether we render the words, the Forerunner for us, that is, our Forerunner is entred; or the Forerunner is entred for us. In the first
way the Qualification of his Person, a Forerunner for us; in the latter the design of his Action, the Forerunner acting for us, is intended. Both come to the same purpose; and our Translators so place the words as if they enclined unto the latter sense. Two things we are to enquire into. (1) What is a Forerunner. (2) What the Holy Ghost would instruct us in by this Ascription unto Christ, or he is a Forerunner entring within the Vail for us. (1) , Praecursor; is one who in an affair of publick concern, makes speed by himself unto the place whereunto the Affair belongs, to give an Account of it, and to dispose of all things needful and suited unto the disposal of the Affair that he reports. Commonly indeed such a publick Har∣binger is inferiour unto those who come after, under whose conduct the main of the affair doth abide. But this is only where he who is the Forerunner or Harbinger is so and no more. But now although the Lord Christ be a Fore∣runner also, yet he is more; He is the Person in whose hand lyeth the whole affair and its conduct. And he was himself the Forerunner, because of the great∣ness of the matter he had in hand, not manageable by any other. And we may consider the words distinctly. (1) His being a Forerunner. (2) For us. (3) Where he is so, within the Vail. (1) He is in his entrance into Heaven, or the Holy place, , . a Forerunner. This the High Priest of Old when he entred once a year into the Holy place was not. He entred thereinto himself, but he made no way for any to follow after. He did not go before the People to give them an entrance into the Holy place; but both by his entrance and his return signified their exclusion for ever. We have then herein another Instance of the excellency of our High Priest and his Office. When he entred into the Holy place, he did it not meerly for himself, but to go before, to lead and conduct the whole Church into the same Glory. (2) He is a Forerunner , for us; that is, for all Believers, for the whole Church in all Times, Ages and Places. And this he is three ways. . 1. By way of Declaration. It belongs unto a Forerunner to carry Tidings, and to declare what is the success that hath been obtained in the Affair which he giveth an account of. The Lord Christ entring into Heaven makes an open declaration, that he hath led Captivity Captive, spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed over them, that he hath obtained his Portion, and divided the spoil with the strong, Isa. 53. 12. that he hath rescued his Church from the Power of Sin, Sathan, Death and Law. And there were two parts of the Triumphant Declaration made by this Forerunner of the Church. (1) That he had discharged his Original Engagement for the Salvation of Believers under the Old Testament, on the Faith whereof they were accepted with God, and saved. Hence upon his entrance within the Vail, they also joyn in that doxologie, Rev. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. And he was their Forerunner also. For although I have no apprehension of the Limbus Patrum fancied by the Pa∣pists, yet I think the Fathers that died under the Old Testament had a nearer Admission into the Presence of God, upon the Ascension of Christ, than what they enjoyed before. They were in Heaven before, the Sanctuary of God; but were not admitted within the Vail, into the most holy place, where all the Counsels of God in Christ are displayed and represented. There was no entrance before either as to Grace or Glory within the Vail, Heb. 9. 8. For as I said, within the Vail are all the Counsels of God in Christ laid open, as they were typed in the Holy place. This none could or were to behold, before his own entrance thither. Wherefore he was their Forerunner also. (2) To declare the Redemption of all the Elect that were to follow him in their several Generations. This is Triumphantly declared in Heaven, Psal. 47. 5, 6, 7. Psal. 68. 18, 24, 25, 26. 2. By way of Preparation. And this is twofold. (1) With respect unto our present gracious entrance into the Holiest, by Faith and Prayer. This way was not made for us whilst the Old Taber∣nacle was standing, chap. 9. 8. But this way is now prepared for us by our
Forerunner, Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. We have an entrance into Heaven even whilst we are here on the Earth. An entrance is made for our Faith, for our Hope, for our Prayer; wherever they enter, our Souls do enter, and are present. And this entrance we make daily, and that with boldness and assurance on the ac∣count of our Forerunner. (2) As unto our future entrance into Glory. Under this capacity as a Fore∣runner, it belongs unto him to prepare Mansions for us in his Fathers House, whither he is gone, and which he hath promised to do, Joh. 14. 23. He prepares Mansions for us, and he prepares us for those Mansions, suiting Grace and Glory unto each other. Heaven indeed is ready for us, whenever we are meet and ready for Heaven. 3. By the way of Possession. He had now obtained for the Church Eter∣nal Redemption, and purchased for them and in their Name an Everlasting Inheritance, Acts 26. 18. This he went, for them and in their Name to take possession of, and to reserve it in the Heavens for them, 1 Pet. 1. 4. Hereon being by Adoption made Heirs of God, they become to be Coheirs with Christ, Rom. 8. 17. and are at last admitted into the same Glory with him. So is he a Forerunner for us. 3. As a Forerunner he is entred within the Vail; that is, into Heaven it self, the place of the glorious Presence of God. And this also may be considered two ways. 1. With respect unto what he hath already done for us; and two things are included therein. (1) That he had compleatly finished the work he had to do upon the Earth. He had absolutely won the Victory, and secured the Church from all its spiritual Adversaries. Without this a Triumphant Entrance into Heaven had not been granted unto him. (2) Gods blessed Approbation of all that he had done here below, Isa. 53. 11, 12. Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 2. With respect unto what he hath yet to do for us. Hence it is that he is not said absolutely to enter into his Glory; but to enter as a Priest, as through a Vail, as into the Holy place; where he continues as our Forerun∣ner in the exercise of that Office; as the Apostle declares in the close of the Verse; made an High Priest after the order of Melchisedec, whereof we must treat in the next Chapter. Now the Lord Jesus being thus entred into Heaven as our Forerunner, gives us manifold security of our entrance thither also, in the appointed sea∣son. This he assures us of, Joh. 14. 3, 19. For (1) He passed through all the Storms of Trials, Temptations, Persecutions, and Death it self, that we are exposed unto; and yet is landed safely in Eternal Glory. His Anchor was Trust and Hope in all his Storms, chap. 2. 13. Isa. 50. 7, 8, 9. And it was tried to the utmost, Psal. 22. 8, 9, 10. It preserved him in them all, and will be no less Faithful unto the whole Church. As he hath thus gone before us, he is able to succour us, and hath given us in himself a Pledge of success. (2) He is now where our Hope is fixed, namely, within the Vail, where he takes care of it and will preserve it unto the end. Again, If the Lord Christ be entred in Heaven as our Forerunner, it is our Duty to be following of him with all the speed we can. And it is required hereunto. (1) That we be willing to follow him, in the way wherein he went, as well as unto the place whither he is gone. And the way he went was, (1) The way of Obedience, chap. 5. 8, 9. (2) The way of suffering, chap. 12. 2. Holiness and the Cross are the two Essential parts of the way whereby our Fore∣runner entred into Glory. (2) That we burden not our selves with any thing that will retard us, chap. 12. 1. And we may see whereon the security of the Church doth depend as to the Trials and Storms which it undergoes in this world. He that can consider the Oppo∣sition that is made unto it in the world, the Counsel, the Power, and the
Malice which are ingaged unto its Ruine on the one hand; and its own weakness, solitariness, helplesness on the other, cannot but admire whence it is that it is preserved one moment from destruction. There is no proportion between its visible defence and the visible opposition that is made unto it. It is Jesus our Forerunner who is within the Vail, taking care of all our concerns, that is alone our security. And what will he not do for us, who in the height of his Glory is not ashamed to be esteemed our Forerunner? What Love, what Grace, what Mercy may we not ex∣pect from him? And, When our Hope and Trust enter within the Vail, it is Christ as our Forerunner that in opeculiar manner they are to fix and fasten themselves upon.
An Exposition on the VII. CHAPTER of the Epistle to the Hebrews. CHAP. VII. THERE are almost as many different Analyses given of this Chapter, as there are Commentators upon it. And sometimes the same Person proposeth sundry of them, without a Determination of what he principally adheres unto. All of them endeavour to reduce the whole Discourse of the Apostle unto such a Method as they judge most Artificial and Argumentative. But, as I have else-where Observed, the Force of the Apostles Reasonings doth not absolutely depend on any such Me∣thod of Arguing as we have framed unto our selves. There is something in it more Heavenly and Sublime, suited to convey the Efficacy of Spiritual Truth, as to the Understanding, so to the Will and Affections also. For this Reason I shall not insist on the Reducing of this Dis∣course unto any precise Logical Analysis, which none of the Ancients do attempt. But whereas those Methods which are proposed by Learned Men, whereunto, in their Judg∣ment, the Apostles Arguing is reducible, are onely Diverse, and not Contradictory un∣to one another: The Consideration of all, or any of them, may be of good Use to give Light unto sundry passages in the Context. Those who have Laboured herein with most appearance of Accuracy, are Piscator and Gomarus. My Design being to Ex∣amine and Consider all the Apostles Arguings, and their Connexions particularly, I shall content my self with a plain and obvious Account of the Whole in general. The Design of the Apostle in this Chapter is not to declare the Nature, or the Exer∣cise of the Priesthood of Christ, though the mention of them be occasionally inserted in some passages of it. For the Nature of it, he had spoken unto, Chap. 5th. and Treats of its Use at large, Chap. 9th. But it is of its Excellency and Dignity that he Discourseth in this place, and that not absolutely neither, but in Comparison with the Levitical Priesthood of the Church under the Old Testament. As this was directly conducing unto his End, so it was incumbent on him in the first place to confirm: For if it were not so Excellent, it was to no purpose to perswade them to embrace it who were actually in the enjoyment of another. This therefore he designeth to prove, and that upon Principles avowed by themselves, with Light and Evidence taken from what was re∣ceived and Acknowledged in the Church of the Hebrews from the first Foundation of it. After this, he manifests abundantly the Excellency of this Priesthood from its Nature and Use also. But he was, in the first place, to evince it from the Faith and Princi∣ples of the Ancient Church of Israel, which he doth in in this Chapter: For he Declares how God had many ways instructed them to expect an alteration of the Levitical Priest∣hood, by the Introduction of another more Useful, Efficacious, and Glorious; the continuance of them both in the Church at the same time being inconsistent. Herein was the Authority and Infinite Wisdom of God made manifest in his dealing with the Church of Old: By his Authority he obliged them unto a Religious Observ∣ance of all those Institutions which he had then appointed; this he did unto the last day of the continuance of that State of the Church, Mal. 4. 4, 5, 6. But in his Infi∣nite Wisdom, he had before them, in them, and with them, inlaid Instructions for the Church, whereby they might see, know, and believe, that they were all to cease and issue in something better afterwards to be introduced. So Moses himself in all that he
did in the House of God, gave Testimony unto what was to be spoken and Declared after∣wards, Chap. 3. 5. And with Respect unto both of these, did that Church greatly miscarry: For first, in many Ages it could not be brought with any Constancy to submit unto the Authority of God in Obedience unto his Ordinances and Institutions, as the whole story of the Old Testament doth declare. And now, when the time was come, wherein they were all to cease, under a pretence of adhering to the Authority of God, they Rebelled a∣gainst his Wisdom, and refused to consider the Instructions which he had inlaid from first to last concerning their Ceasing and Alteration; whereon the Generality of the Church fell and utterly perished. This therefore the Apostle Designs here to enlighten them in. And this should teach us with what Diligence, with what Reverence, with what Subjection of Soul, and Resignation of our Understandings unto the Will and Wisdom of God, all Divine Revelations are to be enquired into. So dealt in this Matter the Holy men and Prophets of Old, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. And as for Want hereof, the whole Church of the Jews perished at this Season; So in all Ages sundry particular Persons did wofully miscarry; see Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. 2 Sam. 6. 6, 7. 1 Chron. 14. 11. And the Want hereof is the Bane of most Churches in the World at this day. In Order unto the End mentioned, the Apostle in the first place declares, that Antecedently unto the giving of the Law, and the Institution of the Levitical Priest∣hood thereby, God had, without any Respect thereunto, given a Typical praefiguration of this Priesthood of Christ, in one who was on all Accounts Superiour unto the Leviti∣cal Priests, when they were afterwards introduced. This Sacred Truth which had been hid for so many Ages in the Church, and which undeniably manifests the certain future Introduction of another and a better Priesthood, is here brought to light, and im∣proved by the Apostle. As Life and Immortality, so all Spiritual Truth, was brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. 10. Truth was stored up in the Prophecies, Promises, and Institutions of the Old Testament; but so stored up, as it was in a great measure hidden also; but was brought forth to light, and made manifest in the Gospel. For whereas it is said, that the great Mystery of the manifold Wisdom of God, was hidden in him from the beginning of the World, Ephes. 3. 9, 10. The meaning is not, that it was so hid in the Will and purpose of God, as that he had made no intimation of it; for he had done so variously from the Foundation of the-World, or the giving of the first Promise: But he had so laid it up, and stored it in his Sacred Revelation, as it was much hid from the Understanding of the best of Men in all Ages, untill it was Display∣ed and brought forth to light by the Gospel, Psal. 49. 4. 78. 2. And all that Glori∣ous Evidence of the Grace of God which now appears unto us in the Writings of the Old Testament, is from a Reflection of light upon them from the New Testament, or the Revelation of God by Jesus Christ. And therefore the whole Church of the Jews, although they were in the entire possession of those Writings of the Old Testa∣ment for so many Ages, never understood so much of the Mystery of the Will and Grace of God declared in them, as every ordinary Believer under the Gospel is enabled to do. And if We have the Privilege and Advantage of those Oracles of God which were com∣mitted to them, incomparably above what They attained unto, certainly greater Measures of Holiness, and greater Fruitfulness in Obedience, are expected from us than from them. These things, the Instance here insisted on by our Apostle, will Manifest. He in whom this praefiguration of the Priesthood of Christ was made, is Melchise∣dec, concerning whom and his Priesthood an Account is given in the first part of the Chapter unto ver. 11. And the Description given of him consisteth of two parts: (1.) The Proposition of his story, or what is Recorded concerning him, ver. 1, 2, 3. (2.) The Application of it unto the present purpose and Design of the Apostle, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. And this closeth the first General part of the Chapter. The Second Part of it, from ver. 10. unto ver. 24. consisteth in a double Inference, with their Improvements taken from that Discourse, as respecting Christ in his Of∣fice. (1.) Unto the Removal, Abolition, or taking away out of the Church, the whole Aaronical Priesthood, with all the Worship of the Tabernacle and Temple, which de∣pended thereon. This he Evidently proves to ensue from the Respect that was had unto the Lord Christ in the Priesthood of Melchisedec, whereof he had given an Ac∣count. Hereunto do all Arguings belong, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. (2.) Unto the Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ in it self above that of the Ta∣bernacle,
even during its continuance, which follows no less evidently from what he had proved before, ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. (3.) Having laid this Foundation in his Demonstration of the Necessary removal of the Aaronical Priesthood, and the preeminence of that of Christ above it, even whilst it did continue, he further declares the Nature of it, from the Dignity and Qua∣lifications of his Person, with the manner of the discharge of his Office on this Ac∣count, ver. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. For the Design of the Apostle in this Epistle, espe∣cially in this Chapter and the three that ensue, is to open unto us, or turn aside a dou∣ble Veil; the one here below, the other above: That below is the Veil that was on all the Ordinances, Institutions, Ceremonies, and Types of the Law. This is the Veil that is unto this day upon the Jews, that they cannot see unto the end of the things that were to be done away. This he removes by giving a clear and full Account of the mind of God in them, of their Use and Signification. The other above is the Veil of the Heavenly Sanctuary: This he opens unto us in a Declaration of the Ministry of Christ our High Priest therein, as we shall see. And under these Heads, as the Apo∣stle plainly convinceth the Hebrews of the Ceasing of their Priesthood and Worship, and that unto the unspeakable Advantage of the Church; So to us he doth unfold the Principal Design and End of all the Mosaical Types of the Old Testament, with the Institution of God in them. This may suffice as a plain View and Prospect of the general scope of the Apostle in these Discourses. The especial coherence of one thing with another, the Nature of his Instances, the Accuracy and Force of his Arguings, the Perspicuity of his Deducti∣ons, with the like Concernments of the Argument in hand, shall be observed and spo∣ken unto as they particularly occur in our Progress. Ver. 1, 2, 3. . THere is little variety in the Translation of these Verses, , vul. Lat. Dei Summi, for altissimi, the most High God , Syr.  of all; but adds in a new way of Exposition,  every thing that was with him; that is, of the Spoyls, as it is afterwards Expounded. , vul. Lat. divisit; properly Syr.  Separated, laid aside, Bez. impartitus est, Imparted, gave,  vul. Lat. sine Genealogiâ; Bez. sine genere, without stock; sine serie gene∣ris, without Pedigree. The Syriack gives us an Exposition of this passage, Whose Father and Mother are not written in the Generations or Genealogies, neither the begin∣ning of his days, nor the end of his life; which manifests how Ancient this Exposition of these words was in the Church, , Syr. —his Priesthood remaineth. Ver. 1, 2, 3. For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, Priest of the most High God, who met Abra∣ham returning from the slaughter of the Kings, and Blessed him; to whom also Abraham divided out a tenth part of all: First, being by Interpretation King of Righteousness; and after that also King of Salem, which is King of Peace: Without Father, without Mo∣ther, without Pedigree; having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto the Son of God, abideth a Priest continually. The words are an entire Proposition, consisting of a Subject, and a Predicate, or what is affirmed of it. Unto the Subject spoken of, which is Melchisedec, there is adjoyn∣ed a large Description, by its Properties and Adjuncts in sundry particulars. That which is affirmed of him, as so described, which is the predicate of the Proposition, is contained in the last words, or the Close of the third Verse; but being made like un∣to the Son of God, abideth a Priest for ever. The Introduction of the whole Discourse, and therein its Connexion unto what went before, is contained in the casual Particle , For; and this may respect the
Reason why the Apostle affirmed, and insisted so much on it, that the Lord Christ was a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec: For, both the Truth (saith he) of my Asser∣tion, and the Necessity of insisting thereon, will be sufficiently manifest, if you will but consider who this Melchisedec was, how he is Represented in the Scripture, and what is affirmed of him. Or Respect may be had in this word unto the whole prece∣ding Discourse, from Chap. 5. ver. 11. There he lays the Foundation of it, affirm∣ing, that he had many things to say of this Melchisedec; and those such, as they would not easily understand, unless they diligently applyed their minds unto the knowledge of Divine Mysteries; hereof he now designs to give them an Account. For this Melchi∣sedec, &c. But the Connexion is most Natural unto the words immediately preceding; and a Reason is given of what was affirmed in them, Namely, That Jesus was made an High Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec, Chap. 6. 20. for it was thus with this Melchisedec. When Truths in themselves Mysterious, and of great Importance unto the Church, are as∣serted or declared, it is very necessary that clear Evidence and Demonstration be given unto them; that the minds of men be left neither in the dark about their Meaning, nor in suspense about their Truth. So dealeth our Apostle in the large ensuing confirma∣tion which he establisheth his fore-going Assertion withal. The mention of Melchisedec is introduced with the Demonstrative Pronoune  this: It always hath an Emphasis, and denotes somewhat eminent in the Subject spoken of, mostly in a way of Commendation, so ver. 4. , Consider how . great a man this was. This man of whom is our Discourse. The Person spoken of is variously Described: (1.) By his Name, Melchisedec. (2.) By his Original Office, he was a King. (3.) The place of his Rule or Domi∣nion, which was Salem; King of Salem. (4.) By another Office added to the for∣mer, which principally belongs unto the Design of the Apostle; which is described, (1.) By the Nature of it, the Priesthood; a Priest. (2.) By its Object and Author; of the most High God. (3.) By his Actings as a Priest; he Blessed Abraham: Illu∣strated, (1.) By the manner of it, he met him. (2.) By the time of it, and its Cir∣cumstance, when he returned from the slaughter of the Kings. (6.) By the acknowledg∣ment of his Office made by Abraham; he divided unto him the tenth part of all. (7.) By the Interpretation of his Name; the King of Righteousness. (8.) Of the place of his Reign; King of Peace. (9.) By sundry Properties of his Person, gathered out of the Relation of his History in the Scripture; without Father, without Mother, without Pedi∣gree, without beginning of days, or end of life. These Descriptions in all these parti∣culars being given of him, there are two things affirmed concerning him: (1.) That he was made like unto the Son of God. (2.) That he abideth a Priest continually; all which things must be spoken unto. For the Person spoken of, and Described by his Name, Melchisedec, I shall in this place say no more of him but what is Necessary for the Understanding of the Text. For I shall not here Examine those Opinions and Disputes concerning him, which for the most part have been raised by needless Curiosity: the fond and impious imagination of them who would have him, some of them, to be the Holy Ghost, and some of them God, even the Father himself, have been long since exploded. That he was an Angel in Humane Appearance, is so contrary to the Design of the Apostle, that not ma∣ny have given Countenance to that Opinion. But that he was the Son of God himself, in a prelibation of his Incarnation, taking upon him the Form of a man, as he did afterwards the internal Form and Being in the Personal Union, some Learned Men have conjectured and contended. Howbeit, this also is directly contrary to the Text, wherein he is said to be made like unto the Son of God. And indeed all such Opinions as make him more than Man, are wholly incon∣sistent with the Design of the Apostle, which is to prove, that even among men, there was a Priest and Priesthood representative of Christ, and his Priesthood Superiour to that of the Law; which hath nothing of Argument in it, if he were more than a Man. Besides he lays it down for a certain Principle, That every High Priest is taken from a∣mong men, Chap. 5. 1. And therefore if Melchisedec were an High Priest, he was so also. Among these who grant him a meer man, very many, following the Opinion of the Jews, contend he was Shem the Son of Noah, who was certainly then alive, and of great Authority in the World by virtue of his Primogeniture. But this also riseth up in Contradiction unto our Apostle, beyond all possibility of Reconciliation. The
Jews who are no further concerned in him but as to what is declared by Moses, may safely, as to their own Principles, though not truly, conjecture him to be Shem. But whereas our Apostle affirms that he was without Father, without Mother, without Ge∣nealogy, having neither beginning of Days, nor end of Life, we are not allowed to In∣terpret these things of him concerning whom most of them are expressely Recorded. Nor will it suffice to say that these things indeed are written of him under the Name of Shem, but not under the Name of Melchisedec: For this were to make the Apostle to lay the weight of so Important an Argument as that in hand, and from whence he infers the removal of all the Ancient Legal Institutions out of the Church, upon a Niceity, and to catch as it were at an Advantage for it. Besides, let him be called as he will, it is his Person in the discharge of his Office which the Apostle speaks of, and the things affirmed of him are not true concerning, or not truly applicable unto Shem. And we may observe by the way, what a blessed effect it is of the Care and Wisdome of God towards the Church, that there are so few things in the Scripture that seem to admini∣ster occasion unto the Curiosities and Conjectures of Men, and of those not any of them needful unto our Faith and Obedience, so as that they should receive the least preju∣dice by our Ignorance of the precise sence of those places. The whole is filled with such Depths of Wisdome and Truth, as require our Humble, Diligent, Reverend, Careful search into them, all the days of our lives. But particular Passages, Histori∣cal or Mystical, such as seem to leave room for variety of Conjectures, are very few: Had they been Multiplyed, especially in Matters of any Importance, it could not have been avoided, but that Religion would have been filled with Fruitless Notions and Spe∣culations. And thus it hath fallen out in this Matter of Melchisedec, which being veiled or hidden in the Old Testament, and that on purpose that we should know no more of him, nor any of his Concerns, but what is expressely written, all Ages have been fruitlesly exercised, yea, pestered with such curious Enquiries about him, as rise up in direct opposition unto the scope of the Holy Ghost in the Account given concern∣ing him. These things therefore are certain, and belong unto Faith in this Matter. First, That he was a meer Man, and no more but so; for (1.) Every High Priest was to be taken from among Men, Chap. 5. 1. So that the Son of God himself could not have been a Priest had he not assumed our Nature. (2.) That if he were more than a man, there were no Mystery in it, that he is introduced in the Scripture, without Father, without Mother, without Pedigree, for none but Men have so. (3.) Without this Conception of him there is no force in the Apostles Argument against the Jews. Se∣condly, That he came not to his Office by the Right of Primogeniture (which includes a Genealogy) or any other Successive way, but was raised up and immediately called of God thereunto. For in that respect Christ is said to be a Priest after his Order. Thirdly, That he had no Successor on the Earth, nor could have; for there was no Law to constitute an Order of Succession, and he was a Priest onely after an extraordinary Call. These things belong unto Faith in this Matter, and no more. Two things every way consistent with the scope and purpose of the Apostle, yea, Eminently subservient thereunto, I shall take leave to add; the one as my Judgment, the other as a probable Conjecture onely. And the first is, that although he Lived and Dwelt in Canaan, then and afterwards principally possessed by the Posterity of the Son of Cham so called, yet he was none of the Seven Nations or People therein that were in the Curse of Noah devoted unto Bondage and Destruction. For whereas they were therein by a Spirit of Prophecy Anathematized and cast out of the Church, as also devoted unto Destruction, God would not raise up among them, that is of their Accursed Seed, the most glorious Ministry that ever was in the World, with respect unto Typical Signification, which was all that could be in the World until the Son of God came in his own Person. This I take to be true, and do somewhat wonder that no Expositors did ever take any Notice of it, seeing it is necessary to be granted from the Analogy of Sacred Truth. My Conjecture is, that he was a Person of the Posterity of Japhet, who was prin∣cipally to be regarded, as the Father of the Gentiles that were to be called. Noah had Prophesied, that God should enlarge the Heart of Japhet, or perswade him so, as that he should return to dwell in the Tents of Shem, Gen. 9. 27. Unto Shem he had before granted the present Blessing of the Covenant, in those words, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, ver. 26. and thereby the bringing forth of the Promised Seed was confined un∣to his Posterity. Hereon among them was the Church of God to be continued, and
upon the matter confined, until the Shilo came, unto whom the gathering of the Gentiles was to be, in the enlargement of Japhet, and his Return to dwell in the Tents of Shem. And whereas the Land of Canaan was designed of God for the seat of the Church in his Posterity, he suffered it to be possessed first by the Seed of Cursed Canaan that in their dispossessing and destruction he might give a Representation and Security of the Victory and final Success of the Lord Christ and his Church over all their Adversaries. Before this came to pass, God, as I suppose, brought this Melchisedec and some others of the Posterity of Japhet into the Land of Canaan, even before Abraham himself, in pursuit of the Promise made unto Shem, had possession of it, and placed him there in a Condition of Office Superiour unto Abraham himself. And this might be done for two ends. (1.) That a claim might be put in on the behalf of Japhet unto an Interest in the Tents of Shem in the Type of the Priviledge, for a while confined unto his Family. This Right and Rule of Melchisedec in those places which were to be the Seat of the Church enjoying the Promise made to Shem; took, as it were, Livery and Seisin for the Gentile Posterity of Japhet, which was in due time to be brought into the full pos∣session of all the Rights and Priviledges of it. (2.) That he might manifest that the state of Gentile Converts in the Promise and Spiritual Priviledges of the Church, should be far more Excellent and better than was the state and Privileges of the Posterity of Shem whilst in their separate condition, God having provided some better things for us that they without us should not be made perfect. But these things are submitted to the judgment of every Candid Reader. I shall onely add what is certain and indubitable, namely, that we have herein a sig∣nal Instance of the Sovereignty and Wisdome of God. All the World was at that time generally fallen into Idolatry and false Worship. The Progenitors of Abraham, though a principal Branch of the Posterity of Shem (as it is like, in the line of Primogeniture) dwelt beyond the River, and Served other gods, Josh. 24. 2. Probably Abraham him∣self was not free from the Guilt of that Apostacy before his Call. Canaan was Inhabi∣ted by the Amorit with the rest of the devoted Nations on the one hand, and the So∣domites on the other. In the midst of these sinners above others, was this man raised up, the great Type of Christ, with all the Illustrious Qualifications to be afterwards de∣clared. And we may learn, 1. That God can raise the greatest Light in the midst of the greatest Darkness; as, Mat. 4. 16. 2. He can raise up Instruments for his Service and unto his Glory, when, where, and how he pleaseth. 3. This Signal Praefiguration of Christ in the Nations of the World, at the same time when Abraham received the Promises for himself and his Posterity, gave a Pledge and As∣surance of the certain future Call of the Gentiles unto an Interest in him and Participation of him. 2. This is the Person spoken of; and the first thing in the Description of him is his Office, that he was a King. So he is Reported in the first mention of him, Gen. 14. 18. Melchisedec King of Salem. Now whereas this doth not belong unto that wherein he was . principally to be a Type of Christ, nor is the Lord Christ any where said to be a King after the Order of Melchisedec, nor doth the Apostle make any Use of the consideration of this Office in him. We may enquire wherefore God placed him in that state and con∣dition. And there seem to have been two Ends thereof. 1. To make his Typical Ministry the more eminent and conspicuous. For, placing him in the condition of Regal Power and Authority, what he was and did, would neces∣sary be more conspicuous and more regarded, than if he had been onely a private man. And moreover by those Possessions and Wealth which he had as a King, he was ena∣bled unto the Solemn and Costly discharge of his Office of Priesthood in Sacrifices and other Solemnities. God therefore made him a King, that he might be known and ob∣served as he was a Priest, and be able to bear the Burden of that Office. And these things were then not onely consistent, but some Preparation seems to be made for the Conjunction of these Offices, by the Priviledge and Rights of Primogeniture, whereof I have Discoursed else-where. Now although nothing can be concluded from hence con∣cerning the Preeminence of the Priestly Office among men above the Regal, which the Romanists plead for, from more vain and empty pretences; yet it doth follow, that the greatest Temporal Dignities and Enjoyments, ought to be subservient unto Spiritual things, and the Concerns of Christ. 2. Although he was not in his Kingly Office directly Typical of Christ, yet he was by
being a King the more meet to represent him as a Priest, seeing he was to be the onely King & Priest of the Church also. And it may be observed, that although Moses in Genesis makes mention of the Acts of both his Offices, yet our Apostle takes notice of those of one sort onely. For Moses informs us in the first place, that when he went to meet Abraham, he brought forth Bread and Wine, that is, for the Refreshment of him and his Army. Now this was an Act of Regal Power and Munificence. This the Apostle takes no Notice of, but only of his receiving Tythes, and Blessing Abraham, which were both of them Acts of Sacerdotal Power. Wherefore although it was conveni∣ent he should be a King, yet as a King, and in what he did as a King, he was no Type of Christ, though there might be a Moral Resemblance between them. For as Mel∣chisedec Refreshed Abraham the Father of the Faithful and his Army, when they were weary after their Conflict with their Enemies, and in the Discharge of their Duty; so doth the Lord Christ as King of his Church take care to support, relieve, and refresh all the Children of Abraham, all Believers in all their Duties, and in the whole course of Obedience. So hath the Wisdom of God disposed of things in the Scripture unto a fitness to give Instruction, even beyond what they are firstly and principally designed unto. And although this and the like considerations should give no countenance unto mens Curiosity in the Exposition and Application of any Passages in the Scripture, be∣yond the severest Rules of Interpretation, yet may it encourage us unto a diligent search into them, whilst we are duly steered by the Analogy of Faith. And I see no Reason why we may not hence collect these two things. 1. The Lord Christ as King of the Church is plentifully stored with all Spiritual Provi∣sions for the Relief, Supportment, and Refreshment of all Believers in and under their Du∣ties, and will give it out unto them as their Occasions do require. For as Melchisedec re∣presented the Lord Christ in what he did, so Abraham in his Battel and Victory, was a Type of all Believers in their warfare and Conflict with all their Spiritual Adversaries. VVherefore as he and all his were Refreshed by the Kingly bounty of Melchisedec, so shall they be from the Munificence and unsearchable Riches of Jesus Christ. 2. Those who go to Christ meerly on the Account of his Priestly Office and the Benefits thereof, shall also receive the Blessings of his Kingly Power, in abundant Supplies of Mer∣cy and Grace. Abraham designed nothing with Melchisedec but the owning of his Sa∣cerdotal Office in giving him the Tythes of all, and receiving his Blessing. But when he met him he was Refreshed also with his Kingly Bounty. Many poor sinners go un∣to Christ principally, if not only at the first, upon the account of his Sacerdotal Office, to have an Interest in his Sacrifice and Oblation, to be made partaker of the Mercy and Pardon procured thereby. But when they come to him in a way of Believing, they find that he is a King also, ready, able, powerful to relieve them, and unto whom they owe all Holy Obedience. And this Answers the Experience of many, it may be the most of them that do believe. III. This Kingly Office of Melchisedec is farther asserted by the Specification of the Place where he was King and Reigned. He was King of Salem. There hath been great enquiry about, and much uncertainty there is concerning this place or City. Two . Opinions, all sorts of those who have enquired into these things with any Sobriety, do incline unto. For as for one who hath not long since affirmed, that this Salem is Hie∣rusalem that is above, the Mother of us all, he hath thought meet to give other Instances also, how little he understands the things he undertakes to treat about. But some think it was that City, and no other, which was afterwards called Hierusalem, and became in David's time, and so for a long continuance, the Principal seat of the Church and So∣lemn VVorship of God. This place they say was first called Salem, and afterwards; it may be presently after the Reign of this Melchisedec, and on the occasion thereof, by the addition of  or  a Vision, or, they shall see Peace, called Hierusalem. O∣thers think that Salem was a City or Town not far from Sychem, which was afterwards destroyed; and there are Reasons for both Opinions. Of this latter Opinion Hierome is the Principal Author and Maintainer in his Epistle to Cuagrius. And there are three Reasons for it, whereon he much insists: (1.) That there was a City near Sychem that was called Salem and no otherwise. And this is plainly affirmed in the Scripture, Gen. 33. 18. And Jacob came to Shalem a City of Shechem which is in the Land of Canaan. For those who render the words, —Et venit Jacob pacificus or incolumis ad Urbem Shechem, so making the word appellative, and not the Name of a place, are undoubtedly mista∣ken. For the same place is mentioned again in the New Testament by the same
Name, John 3. 23. John was Baptizing in Aenon near to Salim. For, that Salim and Salem are the same Hierome well thews, with the Reason of the variation. (2.) He affirms, that at that time were seen at Sychem the Ruines of the Palace of Melchisedec, which manifested it to have been a munificent Structure. (3.) It is pleaded that the circumstances of the story make it necessary to judge that it was this Salem. For A∣braham was passing by the place where Melchisedec Reigned, who thereon went out to meet him. Now whereas he was returning from Hoba which was on the left hand, or North-side of Damascus, Gen. 14. 15. Hierusalem was not in the way of his Re∣turn, but Salem was. On the other side it is pleaded with more probability, that Hicrusalem was the Seat of his Kingdom. For (1.) It was Anciently called Salem, which Name is afterwards occasionally applyed unto it, as that whereby it was known, Psal. 76. 2. In Salem is Gods Tabernacle, and his dwelling-place in Sion, where Hierusalem only can be in∣tended. Afterwards some think that when it was possessed by the Jebusites, it began at first to be called Jebus-Salem, that is, Salem of the Jebusites, which by Custom was transformed into Hierusalem. But the approved Etymology from  and  so that the Name should signifie a Sight or Vision of Peace, is certainly true, and pro∣bably given by God himself. (2.) In the days of Joshua, the King of Hierusalem was called Adonizedec, a Name of the same signification with Melchisedec, which possibly from him was the Name of the Kings who afterwards Reigned in that City. And that man as it should seem was in some Reputation for Righteousness among the Canaanites, whence he managed their common Cause in their Danger, Josh. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. (3.) A∣braham dwelt at this time at Hebron in the Plain of Mamre; and in his Return from Hoba or Damascus, the way lay near unto Hierusalem, as all Charts yet declare; and Sychem was more to the North than that he should conveniently pass that way. (4.) Hie∣rusalem being designed to be the place where the Lord Christ was to begin and exercise his Priestly Office, it may well be supposed that there this his Illustrious Type was to appear and be manifested; especially considering that it was to be the place where the Seat of the Church was to be fixed untill the signification of the Type was to be ef∣fected. And these Reasons do prevail with me to judge that Hierusalem was the place of the Habitation and Reign of Melchisedec. As for what is affirmed by Hierome concern∣ing the Ruines of his Palace at Sychem, it is notoriously known, how little Credit such Traditions do deserve. Besides, Josephus who lived 400 Years before him, makes no mention of any such thing. And it is probable that the Ruines which Hierome saw were those of the Palace of Jeroboam, who there fixed the Seat of the Kingdom of Israel, 1 Kings 12. 25. as King of the place where he obtained the Crown, ver. 1. But Credulous and Superstitious Posterity chose to ascribe it unto the Memorial of Mel∣chisedec rather than of him, who being the Bane and Ruine of the Nation, his Memo∣ry was accursed. And to enquire how this City came afterwards into the hands of the Jebusites, is directly contrary to the Design of the Holy Ghost, which was to hide from us the end of his Life and Offices, as our Apostle declares. And herein also Possession was taken of the Seat of the Church in the Tents of Shem, on the behalf and in the Name of the Japetian Gentiles. And may we not observe, that, God in his Sovereign Pleasure gives various Intervals unto places, as to the enjoyment of his Worship and Ordinances. This Hierusalem which was at first enobled by the Priest∣hood of Melchisedec, was afterwards left for a long Season unto the Idolatrous Jebu∣sites. In process of time it was visited again, and made the fixed station of all Solemn Divine Worship, as it is now left unto Salt and Barrenness. So hath he dealt with many other places, and in particular, notwithstanding their boasting, with the City of Rome, sometimes a Seat of the Gospel, now the Throne of Antichrist. Go to my place which was in Shilo, Jer. 7. 12, 14. 26. 6. By the way we must here give an Account of somewhat that the Apostle doth not say, as well as what he doth. After the mention of Melchisedec and his being King of Salem, in the Story, Gen. 14. it is added, That he met Abraham, and brought forth Bread and Wine, ver. 17. 18. Of his meeting Abraham the Apostle takes Notice, but of his bringing forth Bread and Wine, not at all. Hereof undoubtedly no Reason can be given, but only that That particular Action or Passage belonged not at all unto his Purpose. For he who takes Notice of all other Circumstances, Arguing as well from what was not said of him, as from what was, would not have omitted any thing which is so expressely affirmed, as this is, had it any way belonged unto his Purpose.
But the importunity of the Papists, who with a strange kind of Considence do hence seek Countenance unto their Missatical Sacrifice, makes it necessary that we should en∣quire a little farther into it. Melchisedec, they tell us, as a Priest and Type of Christ did offer this Bread and Wine in Sacrifice to God. Herein, they add, alone was he Typical of Christ, who offered him∣self unto God under the Appearance of Bread and Wine. And he also Instituted the Sacri∣fice of the Mass, wherein he should be so Offered continually unto the end of the World. And on that Account alone (they say) he continueth a Priest for ever. For if he had not appointed Priests here in his room to Offer him unto God, that Office of his would have ceased, as Bellarmine disputes at large. It were easie to make naked the fondness of these Imaginations, would our present Design permit. Some few things may be Remarked on their Assertions. As, (1.) The Apostle in this whole Discourse wherein Melchisedec is introduced and concerned, treateth not at all of the Sacrifice of Christ, nor intimates any Resemblance between the Offering of Melchisedec and that of Christ; but it is the Office alone and its Digni∣ty which he insists upon, designing to treat afterwards at large about his Sacrifice. And when he doth so, he doth not in the least compare it with the Sacrifice of Melchi∣sedec, but with those of Aaron according to the Law; so that here was no occasion for him to mention any Sacrifice of Melchisedec's, should any such thing be supposed in the Text of Moses. (2.) A Supposition of such a Sacrifice of Bread and Wine as that pleaded for, is contrary to the Apostles Design, and destructive of it. For whereas he endeavoureth to prove that the Priesthood of Melchisedec was far more Excellent than that of Levi, he could not do it by this, that he Offered Bread and Wine in Sacrifice, for so also did the Levitical Priests, Lev. 7. 13. 23. 13, 18. But all the Excellencies which the Apostle insisteth on, consists in the Dignity of his Office, and the Qualifi∣cations of his Person, not in the matter of his Sacrifice. (3.) Let all be granted they can desire, yet are they not advantaged as unto their especial end thereby. For what is the Offering of real Bread and Wine, and no more, unto the Offering of the Body and Soul of Jesus Christ, under the appearance of them? (4.) As unto what they con∣tend, That the Lord Jesus Christ would not be a Priest for ever, unless he had those Priests on Earth who continue to Offer him in the Sacrifice of the Mass: It is so far from Truth, as that the contrary is irrefragably true and certain. For if he indeed hath need of o∣ther Priests to carry on his Office, he doth not continue the Administration of it him∣self, or all the Apostle's Arguings against the perpetuity of the Aaronical Priesthood are invalid. But because I am not willing to engage in any thing Controversial beyond what is absolutely Necessary, I shall only tender some Considerations Evidencing that no such thing as a Sacrifice can be included in that Expression, He brought forth Bread and Wine; and so proceed. 1. The Process of the Story directs unto another sence of words. Abraham was now Returned with his Forces unto the Valley of Shaveh, which is the Kings Dale, ver. 17. a place not far from Hierusalem, called, as it is likely, the Kings Dale, from Mel∣chisedec, unto whom it belonged; where afterwards Absalom built a Pillar, for the Memorial of his Name, 2 Sam. 18. 18. Here probably he continued for a while, as to Refresh his own People, so to stay for the coming of the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah. For upon their Defeat in the Battel they had left the Plain, and fled into the Mountains, ver. 10. giving up the Cities with all their Spoil unto the Conquerours. But now hearing of the Success of Abraham, and his Recovery of the Captives with their Goods, they resort unto him for Relief: He who intended to restore all unto them, stay'd for them, as it is probable, some days in the Kings Dale. Now, it was the manner in those Countries where any Forces were on an Expedition, that those in their way who were at Peace with them did bring forth Supplies of Bread and Wine, or Water for their Refreshment. For the Neglect of this Duty, wherein they break the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality, did Gideon so severely Punish the Inhabitants of Succoth and Penuel, Judges 8. 5, 6, 7; 13, 14, 15, 16. And the Observance of this Duty is Recorded unto the Commendation of Barzillai the Gileadite, who sent Refreshment unto David and his Army; for he said, The People are Hungry, and Thir∣sty, and Weary in the Wilderness, 2 Sam. 17. 27, 28, 29. In this state of things Mel∣chisedec being the Neighbour, Friend, and Confederate of Abraham, when he came with his Army and abode so near unto him, brought forth Bread and Wine for their Refreshment; which being a meer Civil Action, our Apostle takes no Notice of it. And they who can discover a Sacrifice in this Expression, have either more skill in the
Opening of Mysteries than he had, or a better Invention in coyning groundless Fables and Imaginations of their own. 2. This Act of Melchisedec is immediately subjoyned unto the mention of him as King, being an Instance of Kingly Power and Munificence. Melchisedec, King of Sa∣lem, brought forth Bread and Wine. After this, is added, And he was a Priest of the most High God; which is a plain Introduction of, and Preparation for the Expression of his Exercise of that Office in his Blessing of Abraham, which ensues in the next words. The Romanists contend that Vau in —is reditive, giving a Rea∣son of what was before affirmed: He brought forth Bread and Wine, because he was the Priest of the High God. But as this offers force to the Universal usage of that Par∣ticle, which is Connexive only; so it will not serve their Occasion. For they would have it that Melchisedec only Offered this Sacrifice of Bread and Wine; whereas if the Reason why he did so, was because he was the Priest of the High God, then every one who was so, was in like manner to Offer the same Sacrifice. And whereas they place the whole especial Nature of the Melchisedecian Priesthood in this his Sacrifice; if this were common to him with all others, then was he not a Priest of a particular Order; and so the whole Discourse of the Apostle is vain and impertinent. But it is plain that he having nothing to do with, nor Inference to make from his Royal Office or Acts, doth therefore omit this which evidently was an Act of Kingly Bounty. 3. The word here used , he brought forth, or caused to be brought forth, Bread and Wine, is no Sacred word, nor is ever used in the Scripture to express the Sacred Action of Oblation or Offering in Sacrifice. It is always a common Action that is denoted thereby. 4. The Apostle's silence in this matter casteth this Pretence out of all consideration. His Design was to evince the Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ above that of Levi, from this particular consideration, That he was a Priest after the Order of Mel∣chisedec. To prove that he was so indeed, and withal to shew how great and Excel∣lent a Person this Melchisedec was, who bare that Office as a Type of Christ in his, and also in how many things the Resemblance between the Lord Christ and him did consist, wherein he was made like unto the Son of God, he proposeth unto consideration every minute Circumstance of all that was spoken of him, and what also in common Use ought to be spoken of him, but being not so, was certainly omitted for some special Reason and Signification; insisting on some things which no man could have conjectured to have been designedly Significant, if the Holy Ghost himself had not made the Discovery thereof; omitting nothing, that might confirm the Truth, or Illustrate the Evidence of his Argument; yet he wholly passeth by this Pas∣sage without the least Notice of it. Herein, if the Romanists may be believed in this accurate Collection of all things, he omits nothing but only that wherein the Essence and Substance of his Cause and Plea did wholly consist. For this his Offering of Bread and Wine in Sacrifice they say, was that thing alone wherein he was peculiarly the Type of Christ, and Dispute with great vehemency that the Resemblance between them consisted herein alone, although the Apostle instance expressely in sundry other things, as we shall see more afterwards, and makes no mention of this at all. It is therefore clear as the day-light, that He and They are diversly minded in this matter. But if they are in the right, certainly never any Man managed an Argument unto less Advan∣tage than the Apostle doth that in this place, wherein yet there is an appearance of so great Accuracy and Care. For they do suppose that he Scrupulously Collects all Circum∣stances belonging unto the Matter he treats of, and some of them of a difficult Appli∣cation unto his purpose, and at the same time omits that wherein the whole force of his Argument did consist; which is a failure not modestly to be ascribed unto any Person of Sobriety or Judgment. Wherefore we need not farther trouble our selves with those forced and futilous pretences. The Reason why the Apostle mentions Melchisedec as King of Salem is to intimate his first Prerogative above the Aaronical Priests, in that he was a King. And we may Observe, that Acts of Munificence & Bounty are memorable & Praise-worthy, though they no way belong unto things Sacred by Virtue of Divine Institution. So was this Bringing forth of Bread & Wine by Melchisedec to Refresh Abraham and his People, though there was nothing of Sacrifice therein. In former Ages either Men were more inclined to such Acts than now they are, or there were more efficacious means of engaging them thereunto, than are judged meet now to be made Use of, because perhaps discovered to have something of deceit in them. But this went along with all their Bounty, that they would make the Acts of it Sacred and Religious, all should be peculiarly devoted and dedicated unto
God; wherein, although their Pious Intentions are to be commended, yet it may justly be feared that they missed of their aim, in making Things and Services Sacred which God had not made so. But such Acts as those we speak of towards Men, need no more of Religion in them; but that they be done in Obedience to the Will of God, who requires of us to do good to all, and to exercise loving kindness in the Earth. They are so good and Praise-worthy, provided, (1.) They are of real Use, and not in things that serve only for Ostentation and show. (2.) That they enterfere with no other especial Duty, nor cause an Omission of what is Necessary, &c. Again, It is acceptable with God that those who have Laboured in any Work or Service of his, should receive Refreshments and Encouragements from men. For as such an acceptable Service is the Relief given to Abraham and his People, by Melchisedec Celebrated. God is himself a sufficient Reward unto his People in and for all their Services. He needs not call in the help of Men to give them a Recompence. However it is well-pleasing unto him, that he, or his Work which they do, in any thing, be owned by Men. IV. The Apostle proceeds with his Description of the Subject of his Proposition, with Respect unto that Office which he principally regards: : Priest of . the most High God. Two things are here asserted. (1.) That in general he was a Priest. (2.) The Limitation of that Office with Respect unto the Author and Ob∣ject of it is expressed, He was a Priest of the most High God. First, he was a Priest, and he was the first that was so by especial Institution; How the Rite of Sacrificing was common to all Worshippers of Old, and what was the pe∣culiar Interest of the First-born therein, I have at large before declared. I have also proved that Melchisedec was the first who was Authoritatively separated unto this Office by Gods Approbation. And as it was a new, so it was a great and Remarkable thing in the World. For although we know not how far it was received or understood by the Men of that Age, who I believe were not stupidly Ignorant and Carnal as some would have them to be; yet certain it is, that the Institution of this Office, and the Representation of it in the Person of Melchisedec, gave great Light and Instruction in∣to the Nature of the first Promise, and the work of the Blessing Seed which was to be exhibited. For the Faith of the Church in all Ages was so directed, as to believe that God had respect unto Christ and his Work, in all his Institutions of Worship. Where∣fore the Erection of the Office of a Priesthood to offer Sacrifice, and that in the Per∣son of so great a Man as Melchisedec, must needs lead them into an Acquaintance with the Nature of his work in some measure, both he and it being so conspicuously represented unto them. In this general Assertion that he was a Priest, two things are included. (1.) That he was truly and really a man, and not an Angel or an Appearance of the Son of God praelusory unto his Incarnation. For every Priest is taken from among men, Chap. 5. 1. of the same common Nature with other Men, and in the same state untill he be sepa∣rated unto his Office. And so was Melchisedec, a Man called out from amongst Men, or he was not a Priest. (2.) That he had an Extraordinary Call into his Office. For he falleth likewise under that other Rule of our Apostle; No man taketh this Honour unto himself unless he be Called of God, Heb. 5. 4. But of what Nature this Call was, and how he received it, cannot positively be determined in particular. Two things are certain concerning him negatively. (1.) That he came not to this Office in the Church by Succession unto any that went before him, as did all the Levitical Priests after Aaron. There was none went before him in this Office, as none Succeeded unto him, as we shall see immediately. And when the Lord Christ is said to be a Priest af∣ter the Order of Melchisedec, it doth not suppose that he was of any certain Order wherein were a Series of Priests succeeding one another, but only that it was with Christ as it was with him, in point of Call and Office. Wherefore his Call was Per∣sonal, in some Act of God towards him, wherein himself and no other was concerned. (2.) He was not called or set apart unto his Office by any outward Unction, Solemn Consecration, or Ceremonious Investiture. For the Lord Christ Jesus had none of these, who was made a Priest after the manner that he was; only there was an outward sign of his Call unto all his Offices in the descending of the Holy Ghost on him in the form of a Dove, Mat. 3. John 1. These things belonged purely unto the Law and Aaronical Priesthood, wherein Spiritual things were to have a Carnal Representation. And those by whom they are received in the separation of any unto an Evangelical Office, do prefer the Ministration of the Law before that of the Gospel, as more Glo∣rious, because they discern not the Glory of Spiritual things. Besides there was none
in the World greater than he, nor nearer unto God to confer this Office upon him, as Aaron was Consecrated by Moses. For in the Authoritative Collation of an Office there is a Blessing, and without Controversie he who Blesseth is greater than he who is Bles∣sed by him, as we shall see immediately. And therefore would not God make Use of any outward means in the Call or the Separation of the Lord Christ unto his Offices or any of them, because there was none in Heaven or Earth Greater than he, or nearer unto God to be employed therein. Angels and Men might bear Witness as they did unto what was done by the Lord God and his Spirit, Isa. 61. 1. but they could con∣fer nothing upon him. And therefore in the Collation of the Ministerial Office under the Gospel, the Authority of it resides only in Jesus Christ. Men can do no more but design the Person according to his Rules and Laws, which may be done among Equals. Wherefore the Call of Melchisedec unto his Office was extraordinary, and consisted in an extraordinary Unction of the Spirit. And this had two things attending of it. (1.) That it gave unto himself sufficient Security and Warranty to undertake and execute the Office whereunto he was Called. So did every extraordinary Call accompanied with a Di∣vine Afflatus and Inspiration, Amos 7. 14, 15. (2.) That it evidenced it self unto all that feared God, who thereon willingly submitted unto his Administrations in the discharge of his Office. And this is all that we can know, as to the way and manner of his becoming a Priest: That he was not so by Succession unto any other, by the Right of Primogeniture, nor made so by men, are certain from the Apostle's Discourse. The Time, Place, Season and Occasion of his Call are all hidden from us; but he was made a Priest by God himself. For, 1. Every one is that in the Church and nothing else which God is pleased to make him so to be. Wherefore for us to rest in Gods Vocation is our Honour and our Safety as well as our Duty. For, 2. Where God Calleth any one unto a singular Honour and Office in his Church, it is in him a meer Act of his Sovereign Grace. So he took this Melchisedec who had nothing of Stock, Race, Descent, or Succession to recommend him, but as one as it were newly sprang out of the Earth, and raised him to the highest Dignity that any Man in those Days was capable of. Let us not therefore repine or murmure at any of Gods Dealings with others, nor envy because of his Gifts bestowed on them, may he not do what he will with his own, seeing he is greater than Man, and giveth no account of his matters? 3. A Divine Call is a sufficient Warranty for the acting of them according unto it, who are so Called, and the Obedience of others unto them in their Work or Office. By Virtue hereof this Melchisedec arose in the midst of the Nations of the World, took on him a new Office and Power, being owned and submitted unto therein, by Abraham and all that Believed. 4. The first Personal Instituted Type of Christ was a Priest: This was Melchisedec. There were before real Instituted Types of his Work, as Sacrifices. And there were Moral Types of his Person, as Adam, Abel, and Noah, which Represented him in sundry things. But the first Person who was Solemnly designed to teach and repre∣sent him by what he was and did, was a Priest. And that which God taught herein was, That the Foundation of all that the Lord Christ had to do in and for the Church was laid in his Priestly Office, whereby he made Attonement and Reconciliation for Sin. Every thing else that he doth is Built on the supposition hereof. And we must begin in the Application where God begins in the Exhibition. An Interest in the Effects of the Priestly Office of Christ, is that which in the first place we ought to look after. This being attained, we shall be willing to be Taught and Ruled by him, and not else. Secondly, The Apostle adds the Limitation of this his Office of Priesthood, as to its Author and especial Object, and that is, the most High God. For so by , doth he render  in Moses. (1.) He was  a Priest to God. This determines the sence of the word Cohen to the Office of the Priesthood; contrary to the Pretensions of some Modern Jews, and the Targum on Psal. 110. For whereas they cannot understand how the Messiah should be a Priest, and perceive well enough the inconsistency of the Legal Priesthood with such a supposition, they would have the word Cohen in the Psalms to signifie a Prince or a Ruler. But although the word used absolutely may be applyed sometimes to such a Purpose, yet where God is proposed as its object, a Priest of God, or unto God, none can be signified but one in the Priestly Office. (2.) He was a Priest unto the most High God. This is the first time that this Title is ascribed unto God in the Scripture, which afterwards is frequently repeated,
and so also are others of the same Importance, as God above, God over all, the God of Heaven, and absolutely the most High. And it is either Descriptive or Di∣stinctive, as all such Attributes and Epithets are. 1. As it is Descriptive; the Majesty, Power, and Authority of God over all are intended therein. The most High God is the Glorious God with whom is ter∣rible Majesty. To Represent them it is said, That his Throne is High and lifted up, Isa. 6. 1. And he is called the High and Lofty one that Inhabiteth Eternity, Isa. 57. 17. Thus is he styled to fill our Hearts with a Reverence of him, as one infinitely above us, and whose Glorious Majesty is absolutely unconceivable. So when the Holy Ghost would express the Glory of Christ as exalted, he says, he is made Higher than the Heavens, and he is sate down at the Right hand of the Maje∣sty on High. The most High God therefore is first, God as inconceiveably ex∣alted in Glory and Majesty. Again, his Power and Authority are also intended herein. The most High Ruleth over all, Dan. 4. 17. God over all in Power and Authority disposing of all things, is the most High God. So Abraham explains this Name, Gen. 14. 18. 2. As it is Distinctive it respects other gods, not in Truth and Reality, but in Reputation. For so there were then Lords many, and Gods many in the World. So they were esteemed by them that made them, and Worshipped them:  as our Apostle speaks, such as were called gods, 1 Cor. 8. 5. but by Nature were not gods, Gal. 4. 8. They were all Earthly, and though some of them had their Being above, as the Sun, Moon, and Host of Heaven, yet they had all their Deity from beneath; nor ever had it any Existence but in the deluded Imaginations of the Sons of Men. In Opposition unto them, with Distinction from them, God is called the most High God. The World was at that time fallen into all manner of Idolatry. Every Countrey, every City, every Family almost had made new gods unto themselves. The most general Veneration, as I have elsewhere shewed, was then given unto the Sun, and that because he appeared to them on High, or the Highest Being they could apprehend. Hence had he the Name of  a∣mong the Greeks, from  the High one. In Opposition unto all these gods, and Renunciation of them, Melchisedec professed himself the Priest of the most High God; as Paul Preached at Athens the unknown God in Opposition unto all their known , or Idols whom they supposed themselves acquainted with∣all. And whereas God had not yet Revealed himself by any especial Name, as he did afterwards on sundry occasions; (the first he made of that kind being El Shad∣dai, or God Almighty, Gen. 17. 1. as himself Declares, Exod. 6. 3.) Those that feared him made Use of this Title as most comprehensive, as most suited un∣to their present Faith and Profession. So Abraham Expounds this Title, ver. 22. The most High God, Possessor of Heaven and Earth, which he gives as a Reason why he would not take ought of the King of Sodom, seeing he was the Servant of that God who disposed of all things in Heaven and Earth, and so had no need of Sup∣plies from him: His God could make him Rich without the help of the King of Sodom. Wherefore God under this Consideration of the most High God was the principal Object of the Faith of Believers in those Days. For whereas they were few in Number, and all the Inhabitants of the Earth being greedily set upon getting Possessions and Inheritances for themselves, they Believed in God as he who was able to Protect them, and provide for them, according unto the Tenor of the Name whereby he afterwards Revealed himself unto Abraham, namely, of El Shaddai, or God Almighty. And this also was the principal part of their Profession, that they Served the most High God alone, in opposition unto all the false and Dunghill Deities of the Earth. The Socinians in all their Disputes against the Deity of Christ do always make Use of this Name, and continually repeat it; Christ, they say, is not the most High God; a God they will allow him to be, but not the most High God. But whereas this Name is used in Distinction only from all false gods, if their Christ be a God but not on any Account the most High God, he is a false god, and as such to be re∣jected. See Jer. 10. 11. And from this Name or Title of God as it is Descriptive of his Majesty and Authority, we may observe, 1. To keep up and preserve a due Reverence of God in our Minds and Words, we should think of, and Use those Holy Titles which are given unto him, and whereby he
is described in the Scripture. This was the constant manner of the Holy Men of Old, and which God himself in sundry places directs unto. Thus Abraham im∣mediately makes Use of this Name, Gen. 14. 22. I have lift up my Hand unto Je∣hovah the most High God, the Possessor of Heaven and Earth. So are we taught to fear that Dreadful and Glorious Name, The Lord thy God, Deut. 28. 58. See Isa. 30. 15. Chap. 57. 15. And there is nothing that Argues a greater contempt of God among Men, than the common slight irreverend mention of his Name, whose highest degree is that horrible Profanation of Swearing and Cursing by it, with wicked and Diabolical Spirits. Let us not therefore think of God, nor mention him, but as the most High and Holy one that Inhabiteth Eternity. Not that on all Occasions of mentioning him we should constantly make Use of these Glorious Ti∣tles, the Scripture Warranting us to speak both to him and of him, without their Addition unto his Name; but that we should do so as Occasion doth require, and always Sanctifie him in our Hearts and Words, as he unto whom they do be∣long. 2. It is good at all times to fix our Faith on that in God, which is meet to encourage our Obedience and dependence upon him in our present Circumstances. The Believers in those Days did in a very particular manner confess themselves to be Strangers and Pilgrims in the Earth, Heb. 11. 13. The Church was not as yet fixed unto any certain place, and they being Separated from the Apostate World, not mix∣ing with it, nor incorporating in any Society, went up and down from one place to another: In this Condition, having no Inheritance nor abiding place, but expo∣sed unto manifold Dangers, they eyed God in an especial manner as the most High God; as he that was over all, and had the Disposal of all things in his own Sove∣reign Power. And that variety of Titles which in the Scripture are given unto God, with the Descriptions that are made of him, are all suited unto this end, that in the variety of Occasions and Trials that may befall us in this World, we may still have something peculiarly suited unto the Encouragement of our Faith and de∣pendence on God. 3. In particular it is a matter of inestimable Satisfaction that he whom we Serve is the most High God, the Sovereign Possessor of Heaven and Earth. It is in sence, the same with that Name which God gave himself when he entred into Covenant with Abraham, encouraging thereby unto an adherence to him in Faith and Obedience, Gen. 17. 1. I am God Almighty. And it were easie to Demonstrate what Relief in all Troubles, Dangers, Persecutions, Distresses inward and outward, in Life and Death, we may thence receive. As this Name is Distinctive we may observe, That, 4. Publick Profession in all Ages is to be suited and pointed against the Opposition that is made unto the Truth, or Apostacy from it. The World being now generally fal∣len into Idolatry and the Worship of new Earthly gods, Believers made this the principal part of their Profession, that they Served the most High God, which ought to be observed on all alike Occasions. V. The Apostle Describes this Melchisedec from that Action of his with its Circumstances, which gave occasion unto the whole Account of him. Who met Abraham returning from the Slaughter of the Kings. On this Occasion onely is he introduced in the Scripture-story, as a new Person never heard of before, nor ever afterwards to be made mention of, as unto any of his own Concerns. Abra∣ham did not only overthrow the whole Army of the Kings, and Recovered the Spoyls, but he slew the Kings themselves, as is expressely affirmed, Gen. 14. 17. Hence is he here said, to return from the Slaughter of the Kings; for as he includeth in it the Destruction of their Host, so it was that which signalized his Victory. And the  afterwards mentioned were the Opima Spolia taken from the Kings themselves. As Abraham thus returned with Honour and Glory, made very great in the Eyes of the Nations round about, as he staid in the Kings Dale to deliver un∣to the King of Sodom his Goods and People with a Royal Munificence becoming a Servant of the most High God, who had a better Portion than could be found a∣mongst the Spoyls, Melchisedec knowing the state of things, and the Promise made to Abraham, comes out unto him for the Ends mentioned. But it may be enquired whether this were a just Occasion for the Introduction of
this King of Peace, Priest of the High God, and Type of Christ, to Bless him who returned from War with the Spoyls of a bloody Victory. Answ. (1.) The Apostacy and Rebellion of the whole World against God have made it necessary that Spiritual Victory be the Foundation of all the actings of Christ, in the setting up of his Kingdom. The first Promise of him was, that he should break the Ser∣pents Head, wound the Head over the large Earth, Psal. 110. 6. This was to be Effected by a Glorious Conquest and Victory, which is every where so described in the Scripture. See Col. 2. 15. And because outward Force and Opposition is always used by the World in the Defence of the Interest of Satan, He will also sometimes apply the outward Sword for the Destruction of his stubborn Adversa∣ries, Isa. 63. 1, 2, 3. Rev. 19. This therefore was no unmeet Season for the In∣troduction of him, who made so Solemn a Representation of him. (2.) Abra∣ham himself was in this Victory herein also a Type of Christ, not absolutely of his Person as was Melchisedec, but of his Power and Presence in his Church. Mel∣chisedec, I say, Represented Christ in his Person and his Offices. Abraham Re∣presented his Presence in the Church, or the Church, as his Body. I will neither approve of nor reject that Conjecture of some, that these four Kings were Types of the four great Monarchs of the World which the Church of God was to con∣flict withal, and at length to prevail against; as Dan. 7. 18. ver. 27. And in∣deed many things in their Names and Titles, do notably countenance that Con∣jecture. But it is certain in general that they were great Oppressors of the World roving up and down for Dominion and Spoyl. Wherefore Abraham's Conquest of them, was not only a Pledge of the final Success of the Church in the VVorld, but also a Representation of the Usefulness of the Church unto the VVorld, when∣ever its Pride and Blindness will admit of its help and kindness, Micah 5. 7. The Church is indeed the onely means of conveying Blessings unto the VVorld, as the Oppression thereof will prove its Ruine. 3. The Land of Canaan was now given unto Abraham and his Seed for a Pos∣session, to be the Seat of the Church and Gods VVorship among them. The Nations now Inhabiting of it, were devoted unto Destruction in an appointed Sea∣son. And he was not to allow these Foreign Kings to set up any Dominion there∣in. And God gave him this Victory as a Pledge of his future Possession. 4. Abraham was obliged in Justice and Affection, both, to Rescue his Brother Lot, whom they were carrying away Captive. And this is expressed as the next cause of his Engagement against them; ver. 14. On all Accounts therefore this VVar was just, and the Victory of God. And because there was a Representa∣tion therein of the Victory and Success of Christ in his Church, it was a Season most eminently proper for the Introduction of Melchisedec, blessing him in the ex∣ercise of Sacerdotal Power. 5. This Congress of Melchisedec and Abraham, after Abraham had gotten the Victory over all his Adversaries, was a Type and Representation of the Glorious Congress and Meeting of Christ and the Church at the last day, when the whole Church shall have finished its warfare, and be Victorious over the VVorld, Sin, the Law, Death and Hell. Then will the Lord Christ bring out the Stores of Hea∣ven for their Eternal Refreshment, and give them in the fulness of the Blessing, and all things shall issue in the Glory of the most High God. All the Promises are unto him that overcometh. And we we may observe, That, 1. All the Commotions and Concussions that are among the Nations of the World, do lye in or shall be brought into a subserviency unto the Interest of Christ and his Church. I intend those places where either the Seat of the Church is, or is to be. A great VVar and Tumult there was between these Eastern Kings and those of Canaan, and many Nations were smitten and destroyed in the Expedition, Gen. 14. 5, 6, 7. And what is the final Issue whereinto all these things do come? VVhy, two things fell out hereon that neither side of the Combatants either looked for, or had any Interest in. (1.) The Victory of Abraham or the Church over them all. (2.) A Glorious Type and Representation of Christ brought forth visibly acting in his Church. Yea I may add, that in Abraham's Glorious Victory, and Royal Munificence on the one hand, and in the Sacerdotal Blessing of Melchisedec on the other, there was such a Representation of Christ in his Principal Offices as Priest and King, as had never been made in the VVorld before. This Issue did God
direct that VVar and Tumult unto. It will be no otherwise with all those Confu∣sions and Disorders that the world is filled withal at this day, though we can see nothing of the ways and means of their tendency unto such an end. 2. There have been and are to be such Seasons wherein God will dispose of Nations and their Interest according as the Condition of the Church doth require; as he did here with all these Nations, Isa. 43. 3, 4. Chap. 60. 6, 7. 3. The Blessing of God may be expected on a Just and Lawful War. This VVar and Victory of Abraham, which he received the Blessing upon, is Celebrated, Isa. 41. 2, 3. And our Apostle mentions that Circumstance of the Slaughter of the Kings as that which was a Token of Gods kindness unto Abraham, and of his own Greatness. And where these things occur, (1.) A Lawful necessary immediate Cause of War, as Abraham had for the Rescue of Lot. (2.) A Lawful Call unto the War, as Abraham had being a Sovereign Prince and raising his Army of his own People meerly, and that to the securing of the Possessions of a Countrey granted unto him by God himself; and (3.) A Subserviency unto the Glory of Christ and the Good of the Church, the Presence of God in it, and the Blessing of God upon it, may be justly expected. VI. Melchisedec is farther Described by two Acts of his Sacerdotal Power, or Office which he exercised on this occasion of meeting Abraham. (1.) He Blessed him, and then (2.) He received Tithes of him. He met Abraham and Blessed him. This Solemn Benediction is fully expressed, Gen. 14. 19, 20. And he Blessed him and said, Blessed be Abraham of the most High God Possessor of Heaven and Earth; and Blessed be the most High God who hath delivered thine Enemies into thy hand. There are two parts of this Blessing; (1.) That which hath Abraham for its Object, a Blessing of Prayer. (2.) That which hath God for its Object, a Blessing of Praise. Our Apostle seems to take Notice only of the first, or that part of the Blessing whereof Abraham was the im∣mediate Object. But the Truth is, the other part whereby he Blessed God, being on the Account of Abraham and as it were in his Name, it belongs also to the Bles∣sing wherewith he was Blessed. As to this Blessing we may consider, (1.) The Nature. (2.) The Form of it. As to the Nature of it, Blessings in general are the means of Communicating Good Things, according unto the Power and Interest in them of them that Bless, Gen. 33. 11. So also are Curses of Evil. Hence it is God alone that absolutely can ei∣ther Bless or Curse, for he onely hath Sovereign Power of all Good and Evil. He doth therefore so express his Blessing; In Blessing I will Bless thee, Gen. 22. 17. Do it assuredly and effectually as having all the Subject-matter of Blessings in my hand. And therefore he says to Abraham, I will Bless them that Bless thee, and Curse them that Curse thee, Gen. 12. 3. Because he is over them and all their Bles∣sings and Curses. Balak therefore was not a little mistaken when he tells Balaam, I know that he whom thou Blessest is Blessed, and he whom thou Cursest is Cursed, Numb. 22. 6. For however he might Divine concerning them that should be so, abso∣lutely he could neither Bless nor Curse. Wherefore I say all Blessings are Instituted means of the conveyance and Communication of Good unto others, according un∣to the Power and Interest of them that Bless, in that Good. This being amongst Men by Gods Concession and Institution various, there are also various sorts of Blessings, which may be reduced unto two Heads. (1.) Such as are Authorita∣tive. (2.) Such as are Charitative or meerly Euctical. The latter fort of Bles∣sing is removed from our Consideration in this place. For our Apostle treats only of such Blessings as evidently and unavoidably prove him that Blesseth to be Superior unto him that is Blessed, ver. 7. But this is not so in this latter sort of Blessings, which consist only in Prayer for a Blessing on them. For so Equals may Bless one another; yea Inferiours may bless Superiours, Children may bless Parents, Servants Masters, Subjects their Rulers, Psal. 20. 1, 2, 3, 4. Authoritative Benediction among Men is two-fold. (1.) Paternal. (2.) Sa∣cerdotal, or with Respect unto any other Office in the Church. Paternal Benedictions were of old of two sorts. (1.) Such as were of Com∣mon Right. (2.) Such as had an especial Prophetical Warranty. For the first; Parents have an especial Right by virtue of Divine Institution Authoritatively to
bless their Children, in as much as he hath given unto them an especial Interest in the Matter of the Blessing, and Power for the Communication of it. And this Blessing consists in two things. (1.) A Solemn Declaration unto God of their Acceptance and Approbation of that Duty and Obedience which the Children per∣form unto them, by the Law of Nature and Gods appointment. This brings ordinarily the Children so Blessed under the Promise of the fifth Commandment. So are the words of the Command,  that they may prolong thy Days. They shall have Power to communicate this good unto thee by their Blessing, in their Solemn Declaration of their Acceptance and Approbation of thy Obedience. And if this were more considered and more observed by Parents and Children, it would be much to their Advantage. And indeed the state of those Chil∣dren is unhappy, whose Parents cannot sincerely avow an Approbation of their Duty, which intercepts the benefit of their Blessings. (2.) Parents bless Chil∣dren by endeavouring to enstate them in their own Covenant-Interest. God having promised to be a God unto Believers and their Seed in and by them, they do three ways bless them with the good things thereof. (1.) By communicating unto them the Priviledge of the initial Seal of the Covenant, as a Sign, Token and Pledge of their being blessed of the Lord. (2.) By pleading the Promise of the Cove∣nant in their behalf. (3.) By careful Instructing of them in the Mercies and Du∣ties of the Covenant. Wherefore although this Power of blessing be founded in the Law of Nature, and in all Nations something hath been observed that looks towards it, yet it is by Faith alone and in an Interest in the Covenant, that any Pa∣rents are able to Bless their Children in a due manner. For a blessing is a commu∣nication of Good according to his Interest in it that blesseth, which we have none in any that is really so, but by virtue thereof. And whereas these things are a Solemn appointment of God, it is certainly a disadvantage that a Foppish Cere∣mony is in common practice substituted in the room of them. Secondly, There was of old a Paternal Benediction that had its Rise in an espe∣cial Warranty, and was accompanied with a Spirit of Prophecy. This consisted in a certain Praediction and Declaration of future Events, whereby those so Blessed were Infallibly and Indispensibly stated in a Right unto them. So Noah blessed Shem and Japhet; Isaac blessed Jacob, Jacob all his Sons. Herein God gave unto some Parents the Honour of a Power to bequeath unto their Posterity, those Good things which he Graciously intended to bestow on them. This kind of blessing is now absolutely ceased, for it wholly respected the coming of Christ in the Flesh with those other things which conduced thereunto. It were well if instead of all these several ways of Blessing, many Parents did not Curse their Children. Some upon their provocations have desperately and Profane∣ly imprecated Curses upon them; and we have known Instances wherein God hath eminently revenged their Impiety by his Judgments inflicted on Parents and Chil∣dren both. Some entail a Curse upon them, by Oppressions and Falshood, in getting their Estates, or in a Flagitious course of Life, which God will Revenge to the third Generation. But most do Curse them with the Cursed Example of their Conver∣sation, initiating them almost from the Cradle in a course of Sin and Wicked∣ness. It is true, many of those Parents who do use conscientiously the ways appointed of God whereby they may Bless their Children, do oft-times not see the effect of their Endeavours. They Bless them, but they are not Blessed. But (1.) They have Peace and Comfort in the Discharge of their Duty (2.) Their Blessing may have Success and oftentimes hath, when they are gone out of the World, yea, in their Childrens Children for many Generations. (3.) If all fail, they shall be Witnesses for God at the last day against their own profligate Posterity. But I return. Sacerdotal Blessings were Authoritative also; and that on a double Ground. (1.) Of Common Right and Equity. (2.) Of Especial Institution. (1.) There was a common Right and Equity that he who was called to be a Priest should bless the People Authoritatively. For as he was appointed to Act for Men with God, so it is reasonable, that he should pronounce Blessings unto them in the Name of God; that as he Ministerially carried their Gifts, Offerings, and Services unto God, so in like manner he should return his Acceptance and blessing unto them. Whereas
therefore this Right and Duty belonged unto the Office of the Priest, two things ensue thereon. (1.) That this Blessing was an Act of Authority, for every Act of Office is so. (2.) That he who thus blesseth another is greater than he who is blessed by him, as our Apostle disputes, and we shall see afterwards. And we may take Notice in our passage, That whatever be the Interest, Duty and Office of any to act in the Name of others towards God, in any Sacred Administrations, the same proportionably is their Interest, Power and Duty to act towards them in the Name of God in the Blessing of them. And therefore Ministers may Authoritatively bless their Congregations. It is true, they can do it onely Declaratively, but with∣all they do it Authoritatively, because they do it by Virtue of the Authority com∣mitted unto them for that purpose. Wherefore the Ministerial Blessing is some∣what more than Euctical or a meer Prayer. Neither is it meerly Doctrinal and Declaratory, but that which is built on a particular especial warranty proceeding from the Nature of the Ministerial Office. But whereas it hath respect in all things unto other Ministerial Administrations, it is not to be used but with refe∣rence unto them, and that by them, by whom at that season they are Admini∣stred. Secondly, There was an especial Institution of a Sacerdotal Benediction under the Old Testament, Recorded, Numb. 6. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, speak unto Aaron and his Sons, saying, On this wise shall ye Bless the Children of Israel, saying; The Lord Bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his Face to shine upon thee, and be Gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon thee and give thee Peace; and they shall put my Name on the Children of Israel, and I will Bless them. Their putting the Name of God upon the People, was their praying for and pronouncing Blessings on them in his Name, by virtue of this Institution. For it is an Institution whereby the Name of God is put on any thing or Person. Hereon God would effectually bless them. This especial Institution I acknowledge was after the Days of Melchisedec, and the ces∣sation of his Office as to actual Administration. But it is apparent, and may be proved, that many if not the most of those Sacred Institutions, which were given in one Systeme unto Moses, were singly and gradually given out by Inspiration and Prophecy unto the Church before the giving of the Law; onely at Sinai their Number was increased, and the Severity of their Sanction heightned. Thus this Sacerdotal Benediction was but a Transcript from, and expressive of that Power and Form of Blessing, which Melchisedec as a Priest enjoyed and used before. And from what hath been spoken we may gather the Nature of this Blessing of Mel∣chisedec wherewith he Blessed Abraham. For, (1.) It had the Nature of a Bles∣sing in general, whereby any one Man may bless another, in that it was Euctical and Eucharistical, It included both Prayer for him, and Thanksgiving on his Ac∣count unto God. And (2.) It was Authoritative and Sacerdotal; He was the Priest of the High God, and he blessed Abraham, that is, by virtue of his Office. For so the Nature of the Office requireth, and so God had in particular appointed, that the Priests should bless in his Name. (3.) It was Prophetical, proceeding from an immediate Inspiration, whereby he declares the confirmation of the great Blessing Promised unto Abraham; Blessed be Abraham. And we may see, 1. That he who hath received the greatest Mercies and Priviledges in this World, may yet need their Ministerial confirmation. Abraham had before received the Bles∣sing from the Mouth of God himself. And yet it was no doubt a great confirmation of his Faith to be now blessed again in the Name of God by Melchisedec. And in∣deed such is the estate of all the Faithful the Children of Abraham in this World, that what through the weakness of their Faith, what through the greatness of their Temptations and Trials, they stand in need of all Ministerial Renovations of the Pledges of Gods good will towards them. We are apt to think that if God should speak once unto us as he did to Abraham, and assure us of the Blessing, we should never need farther confirmation whilst we live. But the Truth is, he doth so speak unto all that believe in the Word, and yet we find, how much we want the Ministerial Renovation of it unto us. Bless God for the Ministry, for the Word and Sacraments; Ordinarily our Faith would not be kept up without them. 2. In the Blessing of Abraham by Melchisedec all Believers are Virtually Blessed by Jesus Christ. Melchisedec was a Type of Christ and represented him in what he
was and did, as our Apostle declares. And Abraham in all these things bare the Person of, or Represented all his Posterity according to the Faith. Therefore doth our Apostle in the foregoing Chapter Entitle all Believers, unto the Promises made unto him, and the Inheritance of them. There is therefore more than a bare story in this matter. A blessing is in it conveyed unto all Believers in the way of an Ordinance for ever. 3. It is Gods Institution that makes all our Administrations Effectual. So did Sa∣cerdotal Benedictions become Authoritative and Efficacious. Innumerable ways and means of blessing things and persons have been found out in the Papacy. They will bless Bells, Steeples, and Churches, Church-yards, Utensils, Fonts, Candles, Salt; and Children by Confirmation. There is in Truth in them all a want of that wis∣dom, Gravity and Reverence which ought to accompany Men in all Religious Ser∣vices; but that which renders them all Useless and casts them out of the Verge of Religion, is that they want a Divine Institution. The Second Sacerdotal Act, or Exercise of Priestly Power ascribed unto Mel∣chisedec is that he received Tithes of all. To whom Abraham also gave the Tenth of . all. As Abraham gave them in a way of Duty, so he received them in a way of Office. So the Apostle expresseth it, ver. 6. He received Tithes of Abraham, or Tithed him. And the word  of all, is limited unto the Spoyls which he took of the Enemies, ver. 4. To whom Abraham gave the Tenth of the Spoyls. This in the Original History is so expressed as to leave it doubtful both to whom the Tenths were given, and of what they were, Gen. 14. 20.  And he gave him the Tenth of all. The words immediately preceding are the words of Melchisedec, and the Story concerneth him; so that if the Relative in∣cluded in —he gave, do answer unto the next Antecedent, Melchisedec gave the Tenth of all unto Abraham. Nor doth it appear what the  or, all was that is intended; whether his own whole Estate, or all the Tithable things which he had then with him. But all this Ambiguity is removed by our Apostle according to the mind of the Holy Ghost, and withal declared how great a My∣stery depended on the right understanding of those words. It was Abraham that gave the Tenth of all to Melchisedec, whereby he acknowledged him to be the Priest of the High God, and the Type of the Son of God as Incarnate, every way Superiour unto him, who but newly received the Promises. And that the Tenth which he gave was only of the Spoyls that he took from the Enemies, as a Token and Pledge in particular that the Victory and Success which he had against the Kings was from God. This receiving of Tithes by Melchisedec was a Sacerdotal Act. For, (1.) The Tenth thus given was firstly given unto God; and he who received them received them as Gods Officer in his Name. Where there was none in Office so to re∣ceive them, they were immediately to be Offered unto God in Sacrifice accord∣unto their Capacity. So Jacob vowed the Tenth unto God, Gen. 28. 22. which he was himself to Offer, there being no other Priest to receive it at his hand, and no doubt but he did it accordingly, when God minded him to pay his Vow at Be∣thel, Gen. 35. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. And (2.) The things that were fit of this sort, were actually to be Offered in Sacrifice unto God. This Saul knew, when he made that his pretence of sparing and bringing away the fat Cattel of the Amale∣kites, 1 Sam. 15. 15. And I no way doubt but that these Tenths that Abraham gave, at least such of them as were meet for that Service, although it be not ex∣pressed, were Offered in Sacrifice unto God by Melchisedec. For whereas he was a King he stood in no need of any Contribution from Abraham; nor was it Ho∣nourable to receive any thing in way of Compensation for his Munificence in bring∣ing forth Bread and Wine, which was to Sell his Kindness and spoil his Bounty, nor would Abraham have deprived the King of Sodom and others of any of their Goods, to give them unto another. Wherefore he received them as a Priest to Offer what was meet in Sacrifice to God, whereon no doubt according to the Customs of those times, there was a Feast wherein they eat Bread together and were mutually Re∣freshed. (3.) This Matter was afterwards precisely determined in the Law, wherein all Tithes were appropriated unto the Priest. I Observe these things, only to shew that the Apostle had just Ground to infer from hence the Sacerdotal Power of Melchisedec and his Preheminence in that Office above Abraham. For
every thing in the Scripture is Significant and hath its especial Design, the whole being inlay'd with Truth by Infinite Wisdom, whether we apprehend it or no. Without this Light given by the Holy Spirit himself, how should we have con∣ceived, that this giving the Tenth of the Spoils to Melchisedec was designed to prove his Greatness and Dignity above Abraham and all the Levitical Priests on that Account, as the Great Type and Representative of Jesus Christ. And indeed all the Mysteries of Sacred Truth which are contained in the Old Testament, are seen clearly only in the Light of the New; and the Doctrine of the Gospel is the only Rule and Measure of the Interpretation of the writings of the Old Testament. Wherefore although the writings of both are equally the Word of God, yet the Revelation made immediately by Jesus Christ, is that which ought to be our Guide in the whole. And they do but deceive themselves and others who in the Inter∣pretation of Mystical Passages and Prophecies of the Old Testament, do neglect the Accomplishment of them and Light given unto them in the New, taking up with Jewish Traditions, or vain Conjectures of their own, such as the late writings of some highly pretending unto Learning are stuffed withal. And we may see from hence, (1.) How necessary it is for us according to the Command of our Savi∣our to Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. , to make a Scrupulous Enquiry, a diligent Investigation, to find out things hidden, or parcels of Gold Oar. So are we directed to Seek for Wisdom as Silver, and to search for her as for hid Trea∣sures, Prov. 2. 4. There are Precious Useful Significant Truths in the Scripture, so disposed of, so laid up, as that if we accomplish not a diligent search we shall ne∣ver set eye on them. The common course of Reading the Scripture, nor the com∣mon help of Expositors, who for the most part go in the same track, and scarce venture one step beyond those that are gone before them, will not suffice, if we intend a Discovery of these hid Treasures. This diligent search was attended unto by the Prophets themselves under the Old Testament with respect unto their own Prophecies, which they received by Inspiration, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. God gave out those deep and Sacred Truths by them which they comprehended not, but made Diligent Enquiry into the mind of the Holy Ghost in the words which themselves had spoken. What belongs unto this diligent search shall be elsewhere declared. (2.) That the clear Revelations of the New Testament ought to be our Principal Rule in the Interpretation of difficult Passages in the Old. What our Apostles in these cases had by immediate Inspiration and Direction, that we must look for, from what is Recorded in their Writings, which is sufficient for us, and will not fail us. There is great Enquiry usually made on this place, whether Tithes be due by the Light of Nature, or at least by such a Moral positive Command of God, as should be perpetually Obligatory unto all Worshippers unto the end of the World. This many contend for, and the principal Reasons which they plead from the Scripture are these. (1.) That Tithes were paid before the Law as well as under the Law; and what was so observed in the Worship of God, Namely, that being in Usage before the Law and confirmed by the Law, is Originally of the Law of Nature, and could have no other Fountain. (2.) Our Lord Jesus Christ himself speaking of Tithing Mint and Cummin, approveth of it, affirming that those things ought not to be omitted though the most Inferiour Instance that could be given of the Duty. (3.) He seems in like manner to have respect thereunto, when he commands to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, which were the Tithes, the Law concerning them being thereby confirmed, which proves it not to be Ceremonial. And this some Men judge to be a certain Argu∣ment, of that which is Moral and unalterable, namely, the appointed Usage of it, before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel after the Expiration of the Law of Ceremonies, or the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances. And it seems so to be, if there be the same Reason of the Law or Command in all these Seasons, for otherwise it is not so. For instance it is supposed that the eat∣ing of Blood was forbidden before the Law, and assuredly it was so under the Law, and is so in the New Testament, Acts 15. which yet proves it not to be Morally Evil and perpetually forbidden. For it is not so upon the same Grounds and Rea∣sons. For in that place of Gen. 9. 4. But Flesh with the Life thereof, that is, the Blood thereof shall ye not eat: Blood is not absolutely forbidden, but in some cases
and with respect unto a certain End. It was not to be eaten whilst it was yet hot and warm in the Flesh, which Prohibition God gave to prevent that Savage Cu∣stom which yet afterwards got ground among Mankind, of eating Flesh like Ra∣venous Beasts whilst the Blood was yet warm in it. Under the Law it was for∣bidden, because God had taken it to be the Principal part of Sacrifices, and far the most Significant, Lev. 17. 5, 6, 11, 14. And in the 15th. of the Acts it is only occasionally forbid for a Season to avoid Scandal and Offence. So that if it should be supposed that the matter of the Prohibition before the Law, under the Law, and in that Synod at Hierusalem were the same, yet the Reasons of it being various, it doth not prove a Morality in the Law, or such as should be everlastingly Obliga∣tory. But where not only the Subject-matter, but the Formal Reason of the Com∣mand is the same, there it is of Natural Equity, and unalterable; and so it is said to be in the case of Tithes. I shall not enter into any long Digression about this controverted Subject. It is such as wherein the various Interests of Men have engaged their utmost diligence on the one hand and on the other. But this I am sure enough of, that unless they were paid by them that give them with more Conscience and regard unto Duty than gene∣rally they seem to be, not one in a thousand having respect in the payment of them, to any thing but the Civil Law of the Land; and unless they turned unto a better Account with them by whom they are received, than generally they do, it is to no great purpose to dispute upon what Grounds, or by what Right they are due unto any. And without sollicitousness concerning Offence, I shall take leave to say, that it is no safe Plea for many to insist on, that Tithes are due and Divine, as they speak, that is, by a binding Law of God now under the Gospel. For be the Law and Institution what it will, nothing is more certain than that there is nothing due under the Gospel by virtue of Gods Command or Institution with respect unto his Worship unto any who do not wholly give up themselves unto the Ministry and Labour in the Word and Doctrine, unless they be such as are disenabled by Age and Infirmities, who are not to be forsaken all the days of their lives. For Men to live in Pleasure and Idleness, according to the Pomp, Vanities and Grandeur of the World, neither rising early, nor going to bed late, nor spending their time or strength in the Service of the Church, according to the Duties required of all the Ministers thereof in the Gospel, to sing unto themselves that Tithes are due to them by the Appointment and Law of God, is a fond Imagination, a Dream that will fill them with Perplexity when they shall awake. But as unto the Question in hand, I shall briefly give my thoughts about it in the ensuing Observations and Pro∣positions. 1. By Tithes is understood either the express Law of Tithing, or paying the Tenth of all our Substance and of the whole Increase of the Earth; or only the dedicating of a certain Portion of what we have unto the Uses of the Worship and Service of God. If this latter be intended, it is with me past all Doubt and Que∣stion, that a bountiful part of our Enjoyments is to be separated unto the Use and Service of the Worship of God, particularly unto the comfortable and honoura∣ble Supportment of them that Labour in the Ministry. And it is no small part of that Confusion which we suffer under, that Christians being in all places compelled to pay the Tenth by Civil Laws unto some or other whether they will or no, are either discouraged, or disenabled, or think themselves discharged from doing that which God certainly requireth at their hands in a way of Duty. However this will be no Excuse for any, for generally they have yet left unto them that whereby they may discharge their Duty in an acceptable manner. And I cannot but won∣der how some Men can satisfie their Consciences in this Matter, in such Circum∣stances as I shall not now name. 2. If the strict Legal course of Tithing be intended, it cannot be proved from this Text, nor from any other Instance before the Law. For Abraham gave only the Tenth of the Spoils which were not Tithable by Law. For if the places taken or destroyed in War, were Anathematized, as Jericho was and also Amalek, no Portion was to be reserved under a pretence of Sacrifice or any other Sacred Use, as Saul found to his Cost. And if they were not Anathematized, all the Spoils were left entirely unto the People that went to War, without any Sacred Decimation. So the Reubenites and the Gadites at their Return over Jordan into their own Land
carried all their Rich Spoils and Cattel with them, no Tithe being mentioned, Josh. 22. 8. Although there is no Question but many of them Offered their Free-will Offerings at the Tabernacle. And when God would have a Sacred Portion out of the Spoils, as he would have in the Wilderness, out of those that were taken from the Midianites, to manifest that they fell not under the Law of Tithes, he took not the Tenth part, but one Portion of 500 from the Souldiers, and one of 50 from the People, Numb. 31. 28, 29, 30. Wherefore the giving of the Tenth of the Spoils, was not from the Obligation of any Law, but was an Act of Free-will and Choice in the Offerer. But yet there was so great an Equity herein also, Namely, that God should have an acknowledgment in the Fruits of those Successes which he gave in VVar, that out of the Spoils of his and his Peoples Enemies David made his Provision for the Building of the Temple. And the Captains of the Host that went against Midian, after a Tribute was raised for the Lord out of the Spoyls according unto the Proportions mentioned, when they found the Goodness of God in the Preservation of their Souldiers, whereof there was not one lost, they made a new voluntary Oblation unto God out of their Spoils, Numb. 31. 48, 49, 50. And as for the Instance of Jacob, who Vowed unto God the Tenth of all, it is so far from proving that the Tenth was due by virtue of any Law, that it proves the con∣trary. For had it been so, it could not have been the matter of an Extraordinary Vow, whereby he could express his Obedience unto God. 3. The precise Law of Tithing is not confirmed in the Gospel. For that say∣ing of our Saviours approving the Tithing of Mint and Cummin, evidently respects that Legal Institution which was then in force, and could not be violated without sin. And by his Approbation of that Law, and of the Duty in observance of it, he did no more confirm it, or ascribe an Obligatory Power unto it under the Gospel, than he did so unto all other those Ceremonial Institutions which both he himself observed as a Man made under the Law, and enjoyned others so to do. They all continued in full force unto the Time of Reformation, which gave them their Bounds and Li∣mits, Heb. 9. 10. and ended with his Resurrection. His other saying, of giving unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, and unto God the things that are Gods, respects our whole Moral Obedience unto God, and not this or that particular Institution. The meaning of it is, that we are to pay or perform unto God all whatever he requireth of us in a way of Obedience, but what that is in particular, is not here determined. And other mention of Tithes in the Gospel there is none. 4. VVhereas by the Light of Nature, all Rules of Reason, and positive Institu∣tions, a Portion of what God is pleased to give unto every Man is to be returned unto him in the way of his Worship and Service, wherein it may be used according unto his Appointment; And whereas before the giving of the Law sundry Holy Men fixed on the Tenth part, as that which was meetest to be so Dedicated unto God, and that as is probable not without some especial Conduct of the Holy Spirit, if not upon express Revelations; and whereas this was afterwards expressely confirmed under the Law by positive Institution, the Equity whereof is urged in the Gospel; it is the best direction that can be given unto any what proportion of their Estate should be set apart unto this Purpose. Herein, I confess, so many Circumstances are in particular cases to be considered, as that it is impossible any one certain Rule should be prescribed unto all Persons. But whereas withal there is no need in the least to furnish Men with Pleas and Excuses for the non-performance of their Duty, at least as unto the necessary degrees of it, that I shall not suggest any thing unto them, which may be used to that purpose. I shall therefore leave this Rule in its full Latitude, as the best Direction of Practice in this Matter. 5. On these Suppositions it is that the Apostle treating of this Matter makes no Use of the Right or Law of Tithing, though directly unto his purpose, if it had not been abrogated. For intending to prove that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be Liberally supported in their works with the Earthly things of them unto whom they do Administer the things of God, he Argueth from the Light of Nature, the general Equity of other Cases, the Analogy of Legal Institutions, the Rules of Ju∣stice with the especial Institution of Christ in the Gospel, but makes no mention of the Natural or Legal Right of Tithing, 1 Cor. 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. And farther I shall not at present divert on this Subject. And we may Observe, That Whatsoever we receive signally from God in a way of Mercy, we ought to return a
Portion of it unto him in a way of Duty. That this was the Practice of the Saints of old, might easily be proved by an Induction of Instances, from this Act of Abra∣ham, (yea, from the Sacrifice of Abel) down to the Vow of Jacob, the Dedica∣tions of David, Solomon, and others in their respective places and Generations. The light of Nature also counted it as a Duty among all the Civilized Heathens. The Offerings and Sacred Dedications of Nations and Private Families, are Famous on this Account. And it was laid as a lasting blemish on good Hezekiah that he re∣turned not unto the Lord according to the Mercy which he had received. And we may do well to consider, (1.) That no Man hath any great or signal Success in any Affair or Occasion, more than others, or more than at other time, but there will be in his Mind an ascription of it unto one cause or another. This the Nature of things makes Necessary, nor can it be avoided, Hab. 1. 11. (2.) That whatever a Man doth secretly ascribe such Successes unto, That he makes in some sence his God. They Sacrifice unto their Net, and burn Incense unto their Drag, be∣cause by them their Portion is fat, and their Meat plenteous, Hab. 1. 16. They as∣cribed their Successes unto their own strength, endeavours and means that they used. Hereby they Deified themselves as far as in them lay; and therefore these thoughts are called Sacrificing and Burning Incense which were Expressions of Reli∣gious Worship. And it is no better with us when in our Successes in our Trades and Affairs we secretly applaud our own Endeavours, and the Means we have used as the only causes of them. (3.) It is a great sign that a Man hath not engaged God in the getting of any thing, when he will not entitle him unto any Portion of what is gotten. There are two Evils common in the World in this case. Some will make no Acknowledgment unto God in the especial Consecration of any part of their Substance unto him, where it is Lawfully gotten. And some will make great Dedications of what hath been gotten by Robbery, Spoils, Oppression and Vio∣lence. Many Publick Works of Munificence and Charity as they are called, have had no other Original. This is but an Endeavour to entitle God unto injustice, and draw him to a Copartnership with them, by giving him a share in the Advantage. God hateth Robbery for Burnt-Offerings, Isa. 61. 8. and he smites his hand at Mens dishonest Gain, Ezek. 22. 13. He will have nothing to do with such things, nor accept of any Portion of them or from them, however he may over-power things in his Providence unto his Glory. Both these ways are full of Evil, though the latter be the worst. (4.) No Man hath any Ground to Reckon that he can settle what he hath unto himself or his, where this Chief Rent unto God is left unpaid. He will at one time or other make a Re-entry upon the whole, take the Forfeiture of it, and turn the ungrateful Tenant out of Possession. And among other things this makes so many Estates Industriously gotten so speedily moulder away as we see they do in the VVorld. (5.) God hath always his Receivers ready to accept of what is tendred, namely, his Poor, and those that Attend the Ministry of his House. VI. The Apostle pursues his Design and Argument from the Name and Title of the Person spoken of with their Interpretation. First, being by Interpretation King of Rightcousness, and after that also King of Salem, that is, King of Peace. And we shall consider herein, 1. The Names themselves with their Interpretation. 2. The Grounds or Reasons of the Apostle's Arguing from this Interpretation of Names. 3. What is intended in them, or what he would have us Learn from them. 4. Their Order which he particularly Observes. First, 1. He respecteth his Proper Name, that is, Melchisedec. For the Fancy of . some that Sedec was a place or City where first he Reigned, as he did afterwards at Salem, is very fond. For then he must be utterly without a Name belonging unto his Person, which the Apostle doth not observe, as he would have done one way or other, had any such unusual thing offered it self unto him. Besides had it been so, he would not have been called Melchisedec, but said to be Melch Sedec, as he is said to be Melec Salem. -. is a King, and by the Interposition of Yod to smooth the Composition, the former Saegol is turned into Patha, and the latter into Schevah, whence Melchi ariseth. Some would have this Yod to be a Pronoun
Affix, and then the meaning of the word is my King; and on this Supposition, ta∣king  for  Sedek for Saddik; they would render it, my Righteous King. But there is nothing more Ordinary in the Composition of Names than the Inter∣position . of Yod paragoricum, to soften the Sound and Pronunciation of them. So is it in Adonisedek, Adonibezek, Abimelech, Achitob, Abishua, Abishag, Abi∣shalom, and sundry others. Wherefore Malchi is nothing but the Name Melek a King, a little varied to fit it unto the Composition intended.  is Righteous∣ness. And so the whole Name is properly Interpreted and rendred by our Apo∣stle  a King of Righteousness. 2. His Title is, , the King of Salem, of which place we have spo∣ken before. This is by Interpretation saith our Apostle,  the King . of Peace. Some think that herein occurs a greater Difficulty, than did in the In∣terpretation of his Name. For  Salem, say they, doth not signifie Peace, but  Shalom. Salem is only as much as Pacificus, Peaceable, not Pax, or Peace it self. But yet neither ought this to give us any trouble. For Instances may be given in this Language wherein the same word is used sometimes Substantively, sometimes Adjectively; as for Instance  and  and  are. And upon the matter the signification is the same. Rex pacificus and Rex pacis do both denote him that is the Maker and Author of Peace. So God on that Account is called the God of Peace, Rom. 15. 13. Chap. 16. 20. 1 Thes. 5. 23. 2 Thes. 3. 16. Heb. 13. 20. Wherefore as we ought to acquiesce in the Authority of the Apostle who knew better than us all, the signification of these Names, so that he gives, is proper according unto our best conception of these things. Secondly, It may be enquired what Ground the Apostle had to Argue from the Signification of these Names, which seems to be but a Curious and infirm kind of Argumentation. And we find by Experience, that whilst some have followed and imitated as they suppose this Example, they have fallen into woful Mistakes. Answ. 1. The Apostle takes it for granted in general that every thing in the story of Melchisedec was Mystical and Figurative. This he did on good Grounds, because the only Reason of its Introduction was to give a Representation of the Per∣son and Priesthood of Christ. 2. It was usual under the Old Testament to have Names given unto Children by a Spirit of Prophecy, as to Noah, Peleg, and others, yea, it may be most of the Patriarchs. It was so also to have Mens Names changed upon some great and Solemn Occasions, as Abram was called Abraham, Sarai, Sarah, Jacob was called Israel, and Solomon, Jedediah. And whereas this was sometimes done by Divine Authority, as in the Instances mentioned, whence it was highly significant; so the People in imitation thereof, did often give other Names to themselves, or others, on some Occasion wherewith they were affected. Hence it is that we find the same Persons so frequently called by divers Names, which gives no little Difficulty in Ge∣nealogies. But where this was done by Divine Warranty, it was Doctrinal and Prophetically instructive. So was it in that great Name given unto our Lord Jesus Christ himself, namely, Immanuel, which the Evangelist remembers and gives us the Interpretation thereof, Mat. 1. 23. Now whether this Name was given to Melchisedec from his Nativity by a Spirit of Prophecy, as is most probable, or whether his Name were changed by God himself when he was Publickly called unto his Office is uncertain, and no way needful to be enquired into. But certain it is, that this Name was given him by Divine Direction, and that for the very End for which it is here used and applyed by our Apostle. And no Countenance can hence be taken unto their Curiosity who seek for Mysteries out of Names and their Numbers, which for ought they know had a Casual Imposition, or that which respected some particular Occasion, whereof they are utterly Ignorant. 3. As for the Name of the place where he Reigned, or Salem, it was also gi∣ven unto it on the same Ground to be praesignificative of the work that was to be Effected by him, whom he Typed out. Most probably at that time, God first gave that Name unto that place; for that it was not the Salem by Sychem we have before declared. And I am perswaded that God himself by some Providence of his, or other intimation of his mind, gave that Name of Peace first unto that City, because there he designed not only to Rest in his Typical Worship for a season, but also in the fulness of Time there to accomplish the great work of Peace-making
between himself and Mankind. Hence it was afterwards by the same Guidance called Jerusalem or a Vision of Peace, because of the many Visions and Prophecies concerning the Spiritual and Eternal Peace which was to be wrought and Publish∣ed in that place; as also from all those Holy Institutions of his Worship which there represented the means whereby that Peace was to be wrought, namely, the Sacrifice of Christ himself, the only real and proper Priest of the Church. Where∣fore our Apostle doth justly Argue from the signification of those Names which were given both to the Person and place by Divine Authority and Guidance, that they might teach and fore-signifie the things whereunto by him they are ap∣plyed. Thirdly, The Interpretation of the Names being proper, and the Argument from thence in this case Useful, as to the Signification of them, it must be enqui∣red how this Man was King of Righteousness and Peace. Most suppose that no more is intended but that he was a Righteous and Peaceable King, one that Ruled Righteously, and Lived Peaceably. And it is true that absolutely in himself and as unto his own Personal Qualifications he was so and no more, nor could be more. But these Names have Respect to his Relative state, and were given him as a Type of Christ. He was a King of Righteousness and Peace, as he was without Father and without Mother, that is, to Represent Christ in his Office. Really he was a Righ∣teous and Peaceable King; Typically he was the King of Righteousness and Peace. Now the King of Righteousness is he who is the Author, Cause, and Dispenser of Righteousness unto others. As God is said to be the Lord our Righteousness. And so is the King of Peace also; in which sence God is called the God of Peace. Thus was it with Melchisedec as he was the Representative of Jesus Christ. 4. The last thing that the Apostle Observes from these Names and Titles in their Order, wherein it is Natural that the Name of a Man should precede the Ti∣tle of his Rule. First, King of Righteousness, and afterwards King of Peace. Righ∣teousness must go first, and then Peace will follow after. So it is Promised of Christ and his Kingdom, that in his days the Righteous shall flourish and abundance of Peace, so long as the Moon endureth, Psal. 72. 7. First they are made Righteous, and then they have Peace. And Isa. 32. 17. The work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of Righteousness Quietness and Peace for ever. This is the Order of these things. There is no Peace but what proceedeth from and is the Effect of Righteousness. So these things with respect unto Christ are declared by the Psalmist, Psal. 85. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. What we are taught hence is, 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ is the only King of Righteousness and Peace unto the Church. See Isa. 32. 1, 21. Chap. 9. 6. He is not only a Righteous and Peaceable King as were his Types Melchisedec and Solomon, but he is the Author, Cause, Procurer and Dispenser of Righteousness and Peace to the Church. So is it de∣clared, Jer. 23. 5, 6. Behold the Days come saith the Lord that I will raise unto David a Righteous Branch, and a King shall Reign and Prosper, and shall Execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth. In his Days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righ∣teousness. He is Righteous and Reigneth Righteously, but this is not all, he is the Lord our Righteousness. VII. The Apostle proceeds yet unto other Instances in the Description of Mel∣chisedec wherein he was made like unto the Son of God, ver. 3. Without Father, without Mother, without Descent, having neither beginning of Days nor end of Life. The things here asserted being at the first view strange and uncouth would admini∣ster occasion unto large Discourses, and accordingly have been the Subject of many Enquiries and Conjectures. But it is no way unto the Edification of those who are Sober and Godly, to engage into any long Disputes about those things, wherein all Learned sober Expositors are come to an Issue and Agreement, as they are in general in this matter. For it is granted that Melchisedec was a Man, really and truly so, and therefore of Necessity must have all these things; for the Nature of Man af∣ter him who was first Created, who yet also had beginning of Life and end of Days, doth not exist without them. Wherefore these things are not denied of him abso∣lutely, but in some sence, and with respect unto some especial end. Now this is with respect unto his Office, therein or as he bare that Office, he was without Fa∣ther,
without Mother, &c. And how doth this appear that so it was with him? It doth so because none of them is Recorded or mentioned in the Scripture, which yet diligently Recordeth them concerning other Persons; and in particular those who could not find and prove their Genealogies were by no means to be admitted unto the Priesthood, Ezra 2. 61, 62, 63. And we may therefore by this Rule enquire into the particulars. 1. It is said of him in the first place, that he was without Father, without Mother,  whereon part of the latter clause, namely, without beginning of Days, doth de∣pend. But how could a Mortal Man come into the World without Father or Mo∣ther? Man that is Born of a Woman is the Description of every Man; what there∣fore can be intended? The next word declares, he was , without . Descent say we. But  is a Generation, a Descent, a Pedigree, not abso∣lutely, but Rehearsed, Described, Recorded.  is he whose Stock and Descent is entered upon Record. And so on the contrary,  is not he who hath no Descent, no Genealogy, but he whose Descent and Pedigree is no where Entered, Recorded, Reckoned up. Thus the Apostle himself plainly ex∣presseth this word, ver. 6. , whose Descent is not count∣ed, that is, reckoned up in Record. Thus was Melchisedec without Father and Mother, in that the Spirit of God who so strictly and exactly Recorded the Genea∣logies of other Patriarchs and Types of Christ, and that for no less an end than to manifest the Truth and Faithfulness of God in his Promises, speaks nothing unto this purpose concerning him. He is introduced as it were one falling from Heaven, appearing on a sudden, Reigning in Salem, and Officiating the Office of the Priest∣hood unto the High God. 2. On the same Account is he said to be without beginning of Days or end of Life. For as he was a Mortal Man he had both. He was assuredly Born, and did no less . certainly dye, than other Men. But neither of these are Recorded concerning him. We have no more to do with him, to learn from him, nor are concerned in him, but only as he is Described in the Scripture, and there is no mention therein of the Beginning of his Days, or the end of his Life. Whatever therefore he might have in himself, he had none to us. Consider all the other Patriarchs mentioned in the Writings of Moses, and you shall find their Descent Recorded, who was their Father, and so upwards unto the first man; and not only so, but the time of their Birth and Death, the Beginning of their Days, and the End of their Lives is ex∣actly Recorded. For it is constantly said of them, such an one Lived so long, and begat such a Son, which fixed the time of Birth. Then of him so begotten it is said he lived so many Years, which determines the end of his Days. These things are expressely Recorded. But concerning Melchisedec none of these things are spoken. No mention is made of Father or Mother, no Genealogy is Recorded of what Stock or Progeny he was, nor is there any Account of his Birth or Death. So that all these things are wanting unto him in this Historical Narration wherein our Faith and Knowledge is alone concerned. Some few things may yet farther be enquired into for the clearing of the sence of these words. (1.) Whereas the Observation of the Apostle is built upon the silence of Moses in the History, which was sufficient for him, whatever was the Cause and Reason of that silence, we may enquire whence it was? Whence it was, I say, that Mo∣ses should introduce so great and excellent a Person as Melchisedec without any mention of his Race or Stock, of his Parents or Progenitors, of his Rise or Fall, contrary unto his own Custom in other cases, and contrary unto all Rules of Useful History. For to introduce so great a Person, in any Story, and on so great an Occasion, without giving any Account of him, or of any of his Circumstances whereby his concernment in the Matter related might be known, is utterly con∣trary unto all Rules of Serious History. Answ. 1. Some of the Jews absurdly imagine that it was because his Parents were not only Obscure, but that he was Born of Fornication, and so he had no Right of Genealogy. But this is both a foolish and wicked Imagination. For it is not to be supposed God would have Advanced a Person known to be of such an Extract and Original, into the Honour of the Priesthood, and that of the most Excellent kind that ever was under the Old Testament. For being low and mean in the World it is neither Disadvantage nor Disparagement. The best of Men were so, and
all the chief Patriarchs were but Shepherds. But Bastardy is a Mark of Infamy in the World, and God would not raise such an one to Administer peculiarly unto him, and that as a Type of his own Son, who was to be Incarnate. 2. Some say that there is no singular thing herein, but that it is done according to the Custom of Scripture, which relates only the Genealogies of the Patriarchs, who were of that Linage from whence Christ did come. But when it makes mention of any others, though they be never so eminent, it reckoneth not up their Genealogy. Thus it dealeth with Jethro the Father-in-law of Moses, and with Job, so great and Holy a Person, concerning whom it says no more, but that there was a Man in the Land of Uz Named Job. And some things may be allowed herein. But the Instances are no way parallel. For Jethro, he was a stranger unto the Church, and there is a full Account concerning him, so far as it is either Necessary or Useful, that we should in point of story know any thing of him. And the story of Job, is a se∣parate story wherein himself only and Family was concerned; and we have there∣in his Countrey, the Number and Names of his Children, with the Years of his Life, and time of his Death. But as we have none of these things in the Account of Melchisedec, so he is introduced as one in whom the Church of God was Pub∣lickly concerned. Wherefore, 3. The true Cause of the Omission of all these things, was the same with that of the Institution of his Priesthood, and the Introduction of his Person in the Story. And this was that he might be the more express and signal Representative of the Lord Christ in his Priesthood. For to this End it was not only needful that he should be declared to be a Priest, as the Messiah was to be, but also in that Decla∣ration all those Circumstances were to be observed, wherein the Nature of the Priesthood of Christ might be any way praefigured. After this the Church being reduced into a standing Order for Succession, it was obliged necessarily for many Generations unto a Priesthood which depended solely on their Genealogy and Pedi∣gree both by Father and Mother, Ezra 10. 18, 19. Nehem. 7. 63, 64, 65. Where∣fore whereas the Priesthood of our Lord Christ was to depend on no such Descent (for it is evident that our Lord sprang of Judah, whereof Moses spake nothing of the Priesthood) it was necessary that it should be Originally represented, by one who had no Genealogy, seeing that as unto his Office he himself was to have none. And therefore when the Church of Israel was in the highest enjoyment of the Levitical Priesthood, whose Office depended wholly on their Genealogy, yea, so far as on a supposition of a defect or Change thereof, not only the Priesthood it self, but all the Sacred Worship also which it was designed to officiate must utterly cease; yet the Holy Ghost then thought meet to mind them, that a Priest was to come with∣out respect unto any such Descent or Genealogy, in that he was to be after the Or∣der of Melchisedec who had none, Psal. 110. 4. This is the true and only Rea∣son why in the story of Melchisedec as the Priest of the High God, there is no men∣tion made of Father, Mother, Genealogy, Beginning of Life or end of Days. And we may herein consider the Sovereign wisdom of the Holy Ghost in bring∣ing forth Truth unto Light according as the state and condition of the Church doth require. And first he proposeth only a naked Story of a Person that was a Type of Christ, and that obscurely and sparingly. Something the Men of the Age wherein he lived might learn by his Ministrations, but not much. For that which was principally Instructive in him for the Use of the Church was not of Force un∣til all his Circumstances were forgotten; and the Church was now to be Instructed, not so much by what he was, as what was Recorded of him, wherein the Scrip∣ture superseded all Tradition that might be of him in the World. Yea, the con∣trivance of any Tradition concerning his Parents, Birth and Death had been con∣trary to the mind of God, and what Instruction he intended the Church by him. Afterwards when it may be, all thoughts of any Use or Design of this Story in Moses was lost, and the Church was fully satisfied in a Priesthood quite of another Nature, the Holy Ghost in one word of Prophecy Instructs the Church, not only that the thing spoken concerning Melchisedec were not so Recorded for his sake, or on his own account, but with respect unto another Priest which was afterwards to arise, by him Represented; which gave a new Consideration, Sence and De∣sign to the whole Story; but moreover gives it to know that the Priesthood which it then enjoyed was not alwas to continue, but that another of another Nature was
to be introduced, as was signified long before the Institution of that Priesthood which they enjoyed, Psal. 110. 4. And as this was sufficient for the Use and Edi∣fication of the Church in those days, yet it was left greatly in the dark as to the full Design and meaning of these things. And therefore it is evident that at the Coming of our Saviour, and the accomplishment of this Type, the Church of the Jews had utterly lost all knowledge and Understanding of the Mystery of it, and the Promise renewed in the Psalm. For they thought it strange that there should be a Priest that had no Genealogy, no Solemn Consecration nor Investiture, with his Office. VVherefore our Apostle entring upon the unfolding of this Mystery doth not only Preface it with an Assertion of its Difficulty, or how hard it was to be under∣stood aright, but also by a long previous Discourse variously prepareth their minds unto a most diligent attention. And the Reason of it was not only because they had utterly lost the Understanding that was given in these things formerly, but al∣so because the true Understanding of them would put an end at that time unto that Priesthood and Worship which they had adhered unto. Wherefore until this time the Church was not able to bear the true Understanding of this Mystery, and now they could no longer be without it. Hence is it here so fully and particularly de∣clared by our Apostle. And we may Observe, 1. That the Church never did in any Age, nor ever shall want that Instruction by Divine Revelation which is needful unto its Edification in Faith and Obedience. This it had in all Ages according unto that gradual progression which God gave unto Light and Truth in the Explication of the great Mystery of his Grace, which was hid in him from the Foundation of the World. An Instance hereof we have in the things which concern this Melchisedec, as we have observed. The Church had never need to look after the Traditions of their Fathers, or to betake themselves unto their own Inventions, their Instruction by Revelation was always sufficient for the State and Condition wherein they were. Much more therefore is it so now, when the Sum and Perfection of all Divine Revelations is given in unto us by Jesus Christ. 2. It is a great Honour to Serve in the Church by doing or suffering for the Use and Service of future Generations. This was the Honour of Melchisedec, that he was employed in a Service, the true Use and Advantage whereof was not given in unto the Church, until many Generations after. And I add Suffering unto Doing, because it is well known what Glories have sprang up in future Ages, upon the past Sufferings of others. 3. The Scripture is so absolutely the Rule, Measure, and Boundary of our Faith and Knowledge in Spiritual things, as that what it conceals is Instructive, as well as what it expresseth. This the Apostle Manifests in many of his Observations concerning Melchisedec, and his Inferences from thence. But I have (as I remember) Discoursed somewhat hereof before. Secondly, Our next Enquiry is, Wherein Melchisedec was Typical of Christ, or what of all this belongeth unto the following Assertion that he was made like unto the Son of God; that is, so described as that he might have a great Resemblance of him. Answ. It is generally thought that he was so in the whole, and in every particular mentioned distinctly. Thus he is said to be without Father, and without Mother, (no mention is made of them) because the Lord Christ was in some sence so also. He was without Father on Earth as to his Humane Nature, with respect whereunto God says that he will create a New thing in the Earth, That a Woman should com∣pass a Man, Jer. 31. 22. or Conceive a Man without Natural Generation. And he was without Mother as to his Person or Divine Nature, being the only begotten of the Father, by an Eternal Generation of his own Person. But yet it must not be denyed but that on the other side, he had both Father and Mother. A Father as to his Divine, and a Mother as to his Humane Nature. But as to his whole Person he was without Father and Mother. Again, Whereas he is said to be with∣out Genealogy, it is of somewhat a difficult application; for the Genealogy of Christ was , or  the Roll of his Pedigree, is declared by two of the Evangelists, the one driving of it up to Abraham, the other unto Adam, as it was necessary, to manifest the Truth of his Humane Nature and the Faithful∣ness of God in the accomplishment of his Promises. It may be (therefore) respect is had unto those words of the Prophet, Isa. 53. 8. —Who shall
declare his Generation; there was somewhat in his Age and Generation, by Rea∣son of his Divine praeexistence unto all, that was ineffable. Again, He is said to be without Beginning of Days and end of Life. And this also is spoken by our Apostle with respect unto the Narration of Moses wherein mention is made neither of the one, nor of the other. And it belongs unto his Conformity unto the Son of God, or that wherein he Represented him; for as un∣to his Divine Person, the Lord Christ had neither the one nor the other, as the Apostle proves, Chap. 1. 10, 11, 12. from Psal. 102. 25, 26, 27. But on the other side, as to his Humane Nature he had both, he had both beginning of Days and End of Life, both which are upon Solemn Record. Wherefore it should seem that if there be a likeness in these things on the one account, there is none on the other, and so no Advantage in the Comparison. Considering these Difficulties in the Application of these particulars, some do judge that these Instances do not belong unto the Analogy and Resemblance between Christ and Melchisedec, but are introduced only in Order unto what ensues, namely, He abides a Priest for ever, wherein alone the similitude between him and Christ doth consist. And so they say we find things quoted in the Scripture at large, when on∣ly some one passage in it, may be used directly unto the business in hand. But although this will be difficultly proved, namely, that any Testimony is cited in the Scrip∣ture, whereof any principal part of it belongs not unto the Matter designed to be confirmed, yet it may be granted that it is so sometimes, when the sence of the whole Context is to be taken in. But there was no Reason on this Ground, that the Apostle should make so many Observations on what was not spoken at all, which in an Ordinary way ought to have been mentioned, if the whole of what he so Ob∣served, was not at all to his Purpose. Wherefore it must be granted, as that which the plain Design of the Apostle exacteth of us, that Melchisedec even in these things, that in the Story he was with∣out Father, without Mother, without Genealogy, having neither beginning of Days nor End of Life, was a Type and Representative of Christ. But it is not of the Per∣son of Christ absolutely, nor of either of his Natures distinctly that our Apostle treateth, but meerly with respect unto his Office of Priesthood. And herein all the things mentioned do concur in him, and make a lively Representation of him. It was utterly a new Doctrine unto the Hebrews that the Lord Christ was a Priest, the only High Priest of the Church, so as that all other Priesthood must cease. And their chief Objection against it was, that it was contrary unto the Law, and in∣consistent with it. And this because he was not of the Line of the Priests, neither as to Father or Mother, or Genealogy, nor had any to Succeed him. But in this Type of his the Apostle proves that all this was to be so. For (1.) In this re∣spect he had neither Father nor Mother from whom he might derive any Right or Title unto his Office. And this was for ever sufficient to exclude him from any Interest in the Priesthood as it was Established by Law. (2.) He had no Genea∣logy upon the Priestly Line. And that which is Recorded of him on other accounts, is so far from having respect unto his Right unto the Priesthood of the Law, that it directly proves and demonstrates that he had none. For his Genealogy is evi∣dently of the Tribe of Judah, which was excluded Legally from that Office, as we have besides the Institution an Instance in King Uzziah, 2 Chron. 26. 16, 17, 18. from Exod. 30. 7. Numb. 18. 7. Hence our Apostle concludes, That had he been on the Earth, that is, under the Order of the Law, he could not have been a Priest, there being others who by virtue of their Descent had alone the Right thereunto, Heb. 8. 3, 4. Wherefore God in these things Instructed the Church, that he would erect a Priesthood which should no way depend on Natural Generation, Descent, or Genealogy; whence it inevitably follows that the state of the Priesthood under the Law was to cease, and to give place unto another, which our Apostle principally designs to prove. (3.) In this respect also the Lord Christ was without Begin∣ning of Days and End of Life. For although in his Humane Nature he was both Born, and Died, yet he had a Priesthood which had no such Beginning of Days, as that it should be traduced from any other to him, nor shall ever cease or be de∣livered over from him unto any other, but abides unto the consummation of all things. In these things was Melchisedec made like unto Christ, whom the Apostle here
calls the Son of God; made like unto the Son of God. I have formerly observed in this Epistle, that the Apostle makes mention of the Lord Christ under various . Appellations, on various Occasions; so that in one place or another he makes Use of all the Names whereby he is signified in the Scripture. Here he calls him the Son of God, and that, (1.) To intimate that although Melchisedec were an Excel∣lent Person, yet was he infinitely beneath him whom he Represented, even the Son of God. He was not the Son of God, but he had the Honour in so many things to be made like unto him. (2.) To declare how all these things which were any way Represented in Melchisedec or couched in the Story, or left unto Enquiry by the vail of silence drawn over them, could be fulfilled in our High Priest. And it was from hence, namely, that he was the Son of God. By virtue hereof was he ca∣pable of an always-living, abiding, uninterrupted Priesthood, although as to his Hu∣mane Nature he once died in the Discharge of that Office. This Description being given of the Person treated of, which makes up the Subject of the Proposition, it is affirmed concerning him that he abideth a Priest for ever. For any thing we find in the Story of his Death, or the Resignation of his  Office, or the Succession of any one unto him therein, he abideth a Priest for ever. Some I find have been venturing at some obscure Conjectures of the perpetuity of the Priesthood of Melchisedec in Heaven. But I cannot perceive that they well un∣derstood themselves what they intended. Nor did they consider that the real con∣tinuance of the Priesthood for ever in the Person of Melchisedec, is as inconsistent with the Priesthood of Christ, as the continuance of the same Office in the Line of Aaron. But things are so related concerning him in the Scripture, as that there is no mention of the ending of the Priesthood of his Order, nor of his own Perso∣nal Administration of his Office by Death or otherwise. Hence is he said to abide a Priest for ever. This was that which our Apostle principally designed to confirm from hence, namely, that there was in the Scripture before the Institution of the Aaronical Priesthood a Representation of an Eternal, unchangeable Priesthood to be introduced in the Church, which he demonstrates to be that of Jesus Christ. It may not be amiss in the close of this Exposition of these Verses summarily to represent the several particulars wherein the Apostle would have us to observe the likeness between Melchisedec and Christ, or rather the especial Excellencies and Properties of Christ that were Represented in the Account given of the Name, Reign, Person and Office of Melchisedec. As, 1. He was said to be, and he really was, and he only, first the King of Righ∣teousness, and then the King of Peace; seeing he alone brought in Everlasting Righteousness and made Peace with God for Sinners. And in his Kingdom alone are these things to be found. 2. He was really and truly the Priest of the High God, and properly he was so alone. He offered that Sacrifice, and made that Attonement which was signi∣fied by all the Sacrifices Offered by Holy Men from the Foundation of the World. 3. He Blesseth all the Faithful, as Abraham the Father of the Faithful was Blessed by Melchisedec. In him were they to be Blessed, by him are they Blessed, through him delivered from the Curse and all the Fruits of it, nor are they Partakers of any Blessing but from him. 4. He receiveth all the Homage of his People, all their grateful Acknowledg∣ments of the Love and Favour of God in the Conquest of their Spiritual Adver∣saries, and Deliverance from them, as Melchisedec received the Tenth of the Spoils from Abraham. 5. He was really without Progenitors or Predecessors unto his Office, nor would I exclude that Mystical sence from the intention of the place, that he was without Father as to his Humane Nature, and without Mother as to his Divine. 6. He was a Priest without Genealogy, or Derivation of his Pedigree from the Loyns of Aaron, or any other that ever was a Priest in the World, and moreover Mysteriously was of a Generation which none can declare. 7. He had in his Divine Person, as the High Priest of the Church, neither Be∣ginning of Days nor End of Life, as no such thing is reported of Melchisedec. For the Death which he underwent in the Discharge of his Office, being not the death
of his whole Person, but of his Humane Nature only, no Interruption of his end∣less Office did ensue thereon. For although the Person of the Son of God died, whence God is said to Redeem his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. yet he died not in his whole Person. But as the Son of man was in Heaven whilst he was speaking on the Earth, John 3. 13. namely, he was so in his Divine Nature; so whilst he was dead in the Earth in his Humane Nature, the same Person was alive in his Divine. Absolutely therefore, nor in respect of his Office, he had neither Beginning of Days nor end of Life. 8. He was really the Son of God, as Melchisedec in many Circumstances was made like to the Son of God. 9. He alone abideth a Priest for ever; whereof we must particularly treat af∣terwards. The Doctrinal Observations that may be taken from these Verses, are, 1. When any were of Old designed to be Types of Christ, there was a Necessity that things more Excellent and Glorious should be spoken or intimated of them, than did pro∣perly belong unto them. So many things are here observed of Melchisedec, which were not properly and literally fulfilled in him. And so there are likewise of Da∣vid and Solomon in sundry places. And the Reason is, because the things so spoken were never intended of them absolutely, but as they were designed to Represent the Lord Christ, unto whom alone they did truly belong. And in the Exposition of such Typical Prophecies, the utmost Diligence is to be used in distinguishing a∣right what is absolutely spoken of the Type only, and what is spoken of it meerly as Representing Christ himself. 2. All that might be spoken so as to have any probable Application in any sence unto Things and Persons Typically, coming short of what was to be fulfilled in Christ, the Holy Ghost in his Infinite Wisdom supplied that defect by Ordering the Account which he gives of them so, as more might be apprehended and learned from them than could be expressed. And where the Glory of his Person as vested with his Office could not be Represented by positive Applications, it is done by a Mystical Silence, as in this Story of Melchisedec. And the most Eminent and Glorious things assigned un∣to Types as such, have a more Glorious signification in Christ than they have in them. See to this purpose our Exposition on Chap. 1. ver. 5. 3. That Christ abiding a Priest for ever hath no more a Vicar or Successor or Sub∣stitute in his Office, or any deriving a real Priesthood from him, than had Melchise∣dec, whereof we shall speak afterwards. 4. The whole Mystery of Divine Wisdom effecting all unconceivable Perfections cen∣tred in the Person of Christ, to make him a meet, Glorious, and most Excellent Priest unto God in the behalf of the Church. This it is the principal Design of the whole Gospel to demonstrate, namely, to declare that all the Treasures of Divine Wis∣dom and Knowledge are hid in Jesus Christ, Col. 2. 3. The Constitution of his Per∣son, was the greatest Mystery that ever Infinite Wisdom effected, 1 Tim. 3. 16. And thereby did God Gloriously Represent himself and all his Infinite Perfections unto us, Heb. 1. 3. Col. 1. 14, 15. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Had he not the Divine Nature, he could not have been the Express Image of God in himself. And had he not been Man, he could not have Represented him unto us. Nor can any thing be more My∣steriously Glorious, than the Furniture of his Person as Mediator, with all fulness of Power, Wisdom and Grace for the accomplishment of his Work, John 1. 16. Col. 1. 18, 19. Chap. 2. 9. Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. The work that he wrought in Offering himself a Sacrifice and making attonement for sin, hath the highest uncon∣ceivable Impression of Divine Wisdom upon it, John 3. 16. Acts 20. 28. Rev. 5. 8. Eph. 5. 2. And so also hath the Grace that is from thence administred by him and from him unto Jews and Gentiles, Eph. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11. And Instances of the like kind may be multiplyed. And we may consider thence first, into what Con∣dition of sin and misery we were fallen by our Apostacy from God, whence nothing would or could recover us but this Blessed work of the whole Mystery of Divine Wisdom. And then the unspeakable Riches and Excellencies of that Wisdom, Love, and Grace which provided this way for our Recovery.
VER. 4, 5, 6. THE Proceed of these Verses is unto the Application of what was before Dis∣coursed. For having proved that Christ the promised Messiah was to be a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec from Psal. 110. and given a Description both of the Person and Office of this Melchisedec from the Historical Narration of them as laid down by Moses, he makes Application of the whole unto his present purpose. And from the consideration of sundry particulars in his Description, confirms in general the Argument which he had in hand. For that which princi∣pally he designeth to prove is, that a more Excellent Priesthood than that of Aaron being introduced according to the Purpose and Promise of God, it followed neces∣sarily, that that Priesthood with all the Worship, Rites and Ceremonies which be∣longed unto it, was to cease and be taken out of the way. For as this new Pro∣mised Priesthood was inconsistent with it, and could not be Established without the Abolition of it, so it brought a far greater Benefit and Spiritual Advantage unto the Church than it before enjoyed. And we are not to wonder that the Apostle insists so much hereon, and that with all sorts of Arguments, especially such as the Old Testament furnished him withal. For this was the Hinge on which the Eter∣nal Salvation or Destruction of that whole Church and People at that time, did turn. For if they would not forgoe their Old Priesthood and Worship, their Ruine was unavoidable. Christ would either be rejected by them, or be of no profit unto them. Accordingly things fell out with the most of them, they clave absolutely unto their Old Institutions, and rejecting the Lord Christ, perished in their unbe∣lief. Others contended for the Continuance of their Priesthood and Worship, for which they supposed they had Invincible Reasons, although they admitted the Pro∣fession of Christ and the Gospel therewithal. But our Apostle knowing how in∣consistent these things were, and how the retaining of that Perswasion, would keep them off at present from believing the Necessity, Usefulness, Glory and Advan∣tages of the Priesthood of Christ, and the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel, as also dispose them unto Apostacy for the future, laboureth by all means to eradicate this pernicious Fundamental Error out of their minds. Unto this End doth he so diligently insist on all the Instances, and particulars of them, whereby God of Old did intimate unto their Fore-fathers the Introduction of this Alteration, with the Advantage of the Church thereby. And I mention these things, that we may see the Reason the Apostle did so Scrupulously as it were to insist on all the ensuing particu∣lars, which otherwise we may not so easily discern the necessity of; and withal to shew, (1.) How hard it is to dispossess the minds of men of inveterate Perswasions in Religion. (2.) The great Care and Diligence they ought to Use and Exercise who have the Care of the Souls of Men committed unto them, when they discern them in apparent danger of Ruine. That the Old Priesthood was to be removed, and the New one mentioned to be introduced. He proves in the first place, by the Greatness of the Person who was first chosen of God to praefigure and Represent the Lord Christ in his Office of Priesthood. For if he were so Excellent in his Person and Office, as deserved∣ly to be preferred above Aaron and all his Successors, then he who was praefigured and represented by him, must be so also; yea, be so much more as that which is Typed out and Signified, is, and always must be more Excellent than the Type and Sign, which are of no Use but with respect thereunto. In these Verses he choseth out his first Instance in what he had observed before out of the Narrative of Moses concerning the Greatness and Excellency of Melchi∣sedec, in that he received Tithes of Abraham. His Design is to prove him more Excellent and Great than all the Levitical Priests. But herein he takes a step back∣ward, and begins with Abraham himself, from whom both People and Priests con∣fessedly derived all their Priviledges. And he produceth his Instance in the case of Tithes, whereon as it is known the whole Levitical Priesthood did depend. And this the Apostle knew full well, that if once he proved him Greater than A∣braham, he should not need with that People to prove him above any of his Po∣sterity, but they would immediately give over the Contest. So in their Excep∣tions unto our Saviour's Testimony concerning himself they acknowledge they
could proceed no higher; Art thou, say they, Greater than our Father Abraham? whom makest thou thy self to be? John 8. 53. But yet our Apostle not content here∣with, to obviate all Pretences, proves distinctly afterwards that the whole Order of the Levitical Priests were inferiour unto him. VER. 4, 5, 6. . ; Considerate, Spectate, Syr. —Videte; Vul. Lat. intuemini. Con∣sider, Behold, Contemplate; serious Consideration with Diligent Intuition is in∣tended. ; quantus hic; sit, vul. fuerit, is supplyed by others; as by us, how great this Man was. Syr. —quam magnus hic. . Decimas spoliorum, decimas de spoliis hostium; de spoliis, vul. Lat. Decimas de praecipuis, of the chiefest things. The Syr. makes a distinction. —Tithes and First-fruits. ; Cujus Generatio non annumeratur in eis; Whose Generation is not numbred in them; very obscurely. Cujus genus non recensetur ex illis, non refertur ad illos. Whose Stock, Race, Pedigree is not reckoned from them, referred unto them; the Syriack  who is not written in their Genealogies, which is the sence of the word; for respect is had unto the Genealogies that were written and upon Record. VER. 4. Consider then how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the Tenth of the Spoils. The Duty of the Hebrews upon the Proposition of the state of Melchisedec be∣fore insisted on, is here pressed on them. And the words contain both a Respect un∣to the preceding Discourse, a Duty prescribed, the Object of that Duty, and the Reason of a Qualification therein expressed, amplified by the Title, State and Con∣dition of one Person concerned. 1. The Note of Respect unto the preceding Discourse is in the Particle , which we render now, consider now, then, or therefore; but do you consider. The things before . laid down are as of Importance in themselves, so of your especial concernment. 2. The Especial Duty which he prescribes unto them with Respect unto the things proposed by him concerning the Excellency of Melchisedec and his Office, . is that they would consider it. He doth four times in this Epistle call the Hebrews unto this especial Duty of an In∣teuse Consideration of the things proposed unto them, as we have translated his words, and that not unduly, Chap. 3. 1. Chap. 10. 24. Chap. 12. 3. and in this place, Chap. 3. 1. Chap. 10. 24. we have the same word in the Original, , whose Importance hath been declared on Chap. 3. 1. Chap. 12. 2. the word is , which sig∣nifies to call things unto a due Reckoning and Account, so as to conform our minds un∣to them, which is our great Duty with respect unto the patient Sufferings of Christ there intended. The word here used signifies diligently to behold, contemplate on, or to look into the things proposed unto us. He had before warned them that what he had to Discourse on this Subject was difficult and hard to be understood, but withal such was its Use and Excellency that neither would he refrain from declaring of them, nor ought they to spare any pains in a diligent Enquiry into them. Ha∣ving therefore laid down the matter of Fact, and stated the whole Subject which he designed to treat upon, he adds their Duty with respect thereunto. And this in the first place is that they would heedfully and diligently look into them. 1. It will be fruitless and to no Advantage to propose or declare the most Important Truths of the Gospel, if those unto whom they are proposed do not diligently enquire into them. And here those unto whom the Dispensation of the Gospel is committed, are pressed with no small difficulty, as our Apostle professeth that he was in this very case. For whereas it is incumbent on them in that Declaration of the whole Counsel of God which is enjoyned them, to insist upon sundry things that are Deep, Mysterious, and hard to be understood, when their Hearers for want of a good Foun∣dation
of Knowledge in the Principles of Religion, or through carelesness in at∣tending unto what is delivered, do not come unto a due perception and understand∣ing of them, it is very grievous to see their own Labours and others Profit disap∣pointed. Wherefore if Men think they have nothing to do, but as it were to give the hearing unto such as endeavour to carry them to perfection, they will lose all the advantage of their Ministry. This Duty therefore is here prescribed by the Apostle with respect unto this Truth, to obviate this slothful frame. And we may on this Occasion briefly name the things that are required thereunto. As, (1.) Sense of a concernment in them. Unless this be well fixed on the mind, Men will never diligently attend unto them, nor duly consider them. If upon the pro∣posal of Sacred Truths that appear hard to be understood, they begin to think that this belongs not unto them, it is for others who are more exercised than they, it is not likely they should ever endeavour to apprehend them aright. And this very frame keeps many in a low form of knowledge all their days; possibly also this Neglect is increased in many, by the spreading of a late foolish apprehension, that we are upon the matter to look after nothing but the Doctrines and Precepts of Mo∣rality that are in the Scripture; but as for the more Spiritual Mysteries of Grace we are not concerned in them. Where this Principle is once imbibed, Men will rest and satisfie themselves in the most profound Ignorance; and not only so, but despise all such as endeavour to be wiser than themselves. But, (2.) Unto a due Apprehension of these things there is not only required a sense of our concern∣ment, but also a Delight in them. If the Light be not Pleasant unto us, as well as Useful, we shall not value it nor seek after it. When such Mysterious Truths as that here insisted on by our Apostle, are proposed unto Men, if they have no Delight in such things, they will never be at the Cost and pains of enquiring into them with necessary Diligence. Curiosity indeed, or an humour to pry into things we have not seen, and which we cannot see in a due manner because not revealed, is every where condemned by our Apostle, who warns us all to be wise unto Sobri∣ety, and not above what is written. But there is a secret delight and complacen∣cy of mind in every beam of Spiritual Light shining in its proper Divine Revela∣tion, when the Soul is disposed aright unto the reception of it. Without this in some measure we shall not follow on to know, nor thrive in knowledge. (3.) Study, Meditation and Prayer, with the diligent Use of all other means appointed for the search and Investigation of the Truth, do close this Duty. Without these things in Hearers, Ministers lose all their Labour in the Declaration of the most impor∣tant Mysteries of the Gospel. This the Apostle as to the present case designs to obviate in the frequent prescription of this Duty. That which the Apostle proposeth in the first place and in general as the Object of this Enquiry and consideration, is , Quantus iste erat; the word . respects Greatness and Excellency in any kind. Nunc quantus Achilles, Quantus erat Julius Caesar, and the like. And this Greatness of Melchisedec respected nei∣ther the endowments of his Person, nor the largeness of his Dominion, nor his Riches or Wealth, in which sence some are said to be Great in the Scripture, as Job, Barzillai, and others; but it regards alone his Dignity with respect unto his Office, and his Nearness unto God on that account. That which these Hebrews insisted on as their Chief and Fundamental Priviledge in Judaism, and which they were most unwilling to forgo, was the Greatness of their Predecessors, with their nearness unto God in Favour and Office. In the first way as to Divine Love and Favour, they Gloried in Abraham, and opposed the Priviledge of being his Chil∣dren on all Occasions unto the Person and Doctrine of Christ, John 8. 33, 53. And in the latter they thought Aaron and his Successors to be preferred above all the VVorld. And whilst they were under the Power and Influence of these Apprehen∣sions, the Gospel could not but be ungrateful unto them, as depriving them of their Priviledges, and rendring their Condition worse than it was before. To undeceive them in this matter, and to demonstrate how unspeakably all those in whom they trusted, came short of the true High Priest of the Church, he calls them to consi∣der the Greatness of him, whose only eminence consisted in being a Type or Re∣presentative of him. Wherefore the Greatness of Melchisedec here proposed un∣to earnest Consideration, is that which he had in Representing Jesus Christ, and his nearness unto God on that Account. And it were well that we were all really
convinced, that all true Greatness consists in the Favour of God, and our nearness un∣to him, on the Account of our Relation unto Jesus Christ. We neither deny nor un∣dervalue any Mans Wealth or Power hereby. Let those who are Rich and Wealthy in the World be accounted and called Great, as the Scripture sometimes calls them so. And let those who are High in Power and Authority be so esteemed, we would derogate nothing from them which is their due: But yet the Greatness of them all is but particular, with respect unto some certain things, and therefore fa∣ding and perishing. But this Greatness and Honour of the Favour of God, and nearness unto him, on the account of Relation unto Jesus Christ, is general, abi∣ding, yea, eternal. The Proof of the Apostle's Assertion, included in that Interrogation, How Great this Man was, follows in an Instance of what he had before observed and proposed unto them; Unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the Tenth of the Spoils. , that is, ; the Tenth part. The Conjunction  is Emphatical; and although in the Original it is joyned with , yet in Con∣struction . it is to be understood with Abraham; not, unto whom Abraham gave even the Tenth; but unto whom even Abraham gave the Tenth, as it is in our Tran∣slation. The Proof of the Greatness of Melchisedec from hence consists in three things. (1.) In the Nomination of the Person that was Subject unto him, or Abraham. (2.) In the Qualification of his Person, He was the Patriarch. (3.) In what he did, He gave him the Tenth part of the Spoils. As to the Person himself he was the Stock and Root of the whole People, their . Common Father in whom they were first separated from other Nations to be a Peo∣ple of themselves. And herein they had a singular Reverence for him, as gene∣rally all Nations have for the first Founders of their Political State, who among the Idolatrous Heathens were commonly Deified, and made the Objects of their Re∣ligious Adoration. But moreover it was he who first received the Promise and the Covenant with the Token of it, and by whom alone they put in their Claim unto all the Priviledges and Advantages which they Gloried in above all Nations in the VVorld. This Abraham therefore they esteemed next unto God himself. And their Fosterity do now place him in Heaven above the Angels, hardly allowing that the Messiah himself should be exalted above him, and tell a Foolish story how he took it ill, that the Messiah should be on the Right Hand, and he on the Left Hand of God. But it is sufficiently evident from the Gospel, how much in those days they boasted of him, and trusted in him. Hence it is that our Apostle expresseth it so emphatically, even Abraham. The Qualification of his Person, and his Title thereon is added in like manner: . He was . A Patriarch is a Father, that is, a Prince or Ruler of a Fa∣mily. A Ruling Father; and these Patriarchs were of three sorts among the Jews. Of the first sort was he alone who was the first separated Progenitor of the whole Nation. He was their —the first Father of all that great Family. Secondly, there were such as Succeeded him, from whom the whole Nation in like manner Descended, as Isaac and Jacob, who were Heirs with him of the same Pro∣mise, Heb. 11. 4. Thirdly, Such as were the first Heads of their Twelve Tribes into which the Nation was divided, that is, the Twelve Sons of Jacob, are called Pa∣triarchs, Acts 7. 8, 9. Others that followed them, as David, who is also called a Patriarch, Acts 2. 29. were termed so, in allusion unto them, and being signal∣ly the Progenitors of a most Eminent Family among them. Now it is evident that the first of these on all accounts is the Principal, and hath the Preeminence over all the rest. And this was Abraham alone. VVherefore if any one were greater than Abraham, and that in his own time, it must be acknowledged it was upon the ac∣count of some Priviledge that was above all that ever that whole Nation as De∣scendents from Abraham were made partakers of. But that this was so the Apo∣stle proves by the Instance ensuing, namely, that he gave to Melchisedec, &c. he gave them; yet not arbitrarily, but in the way of a Necessary Duty, not as an Honorary respect, but as a Religious Office. And he gave thus , . that is, , or  the Tithe-portion, delivering it up unto his Use and Disposal as the Priest of the most High God. And this Tenth was , as the Apostle Interprets the passage in Moses, of the Spoils of War.  is acervus, .
an heap of Corn or any Useful things;  is the top of the Heap, the best of it, from whence the First-fruits were taken for Sacred Services. And because it was the Custom of all Nations afterwards to dedicate or devote some Portion of what they got in War unto Religious Services, the word it self came to signifie the Spoils of War. At first it was the portion that was taken out of the whole, and afterwards the whole it self was signified by it. Now although Abraham had re∣served nothing unto himself of what belonged unto the King of Sodom and his Companions, yet the Army and King which he had newly slain and destroyed ha∣ving smitten sundry other Nations, Gen. 14. 5, 6, 7. and dealt with them as they did with Sodom and the other Towns, took all their Goods and Provision, ver. 11. being now in their return home and laden with Prey, it fell all into the hand of the Conquerour; The Tenth part of the Spoils in every kind, might probably be a very great Offering both for Sacrifice and Sacred Dedication in the place where Melchi∣sedec Ministred in his Office. What farther concerns the Greatness of this Man, the Apostle farther declares in the ensuing Verses, where it will fall under Consi∣deration. From this one Instance of Abraham's paying Tithes unto him, it is in a great measure already evinced. But how came Melchisedec to be thus Great? Is it because he was Originally in himself, more Wise and Honourable than any of the Sons of Men? We Read no such thing concerning him, which the Apostle declares to be the Rule and Measure of all our Conceptions in this matter. Is it that he attained this Dignity and Great∣ness, by his own Industry and Endeavours? as the Prophet says of some, that their Judgment and their Dignity proceeds from themselves, Hab. 1. 7. Neither do we find any thing of that Nature ascribed unto him. The sole Reason and Cause here∣of, is, that God raised him up and disposed of him into that Condition of his own good pleasure. And we may see in him, that The Sovereign Will, Pleasure, and Grace of God is that alone which puts a diffe∣rence among Men, especially in the Church. He makes Men Great or Small, High or Low, Eminent or Obscure, as it seemeth Good unto him. He raiseth up the Poor from the Dust, and lifteth up the Beggar from the Dunghill, to set them among Princes, and to make them Inherit the Throne of Glory, for the Pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he hath set the World upon them, 1 Sam. 2. 8. which is plenti∣fully elsewhere Testified unto. Whence was it that the Twelve Poor Fisher∣men were made Apostles to sit on Twelve Thrones Judging the Tribes of Israel, and becoming Princes in all Nations? Who made the most Glorious Apostle of the first and fiercest Persecutor? VVas it not he who hath Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and is Gracious unto whom he will be Gracious? And it is laid down as an Universal Rule, That no Man hath any thing in this kind but what he hath freely Re∣ceived, nor doth any Man make himself to differ from others, 1 Cor. 4. 7. For, (1.) God lays the Foundation of all Spiritual Differences among Men, in his So∣vereign Decree of Eternal Election, Rom. 9. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Ephes. 1. 4. And among them that are Chosen he calleth them when and how he pleaseth, both unto Grace and Employment or VVork. And (2.) As to Grace, Gifts, and Spiritual Endowments, the Holy Spirit divideth unto every Man as he will, 1 Cor. 12. 11. Let every one then be contented with his Lot and Condition, every one endeavour to fill up the place and state wherein he is fixed, and as he is called to abide with God. Let God be owned in all his Gifts and Graces, and our Souls be Humbled in what we come short of others; and the Sovereignty of Grace admi∣red in all the different effects of it which we behold. Secondly, Whereas even Abraham himself gave the Tenth of all to Melchisedec, we may Observe, that The Highest Priviledge exempts not any from the Obligation unto and Performance of the meanest Duty. Notwithstanding all these Advantages and Priviledges which Abraham was possessed of, on the account whereof he was Mighty in his own Days & almost Adored by his Posterity, yet when the meanest Duty was presented unto him, he readily complyed with it. Nor ought it to be otherwise with any. For, (1.) Priviledge is less than Duty. A Man may have the Greatest Priviledges and yet be rejected, but the least sincere Duty shall not be unrewarded. For Duty in∣deed is our chiefest Honour and Advantage. And for Men to pretend to such Ad∣vancements in the Church of God, as that they should be exempted thereby from
the Ordinary Labour of the Ministry, is horrid Pride and Ingratitude. But when Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Priviledges are pretended to countenance Men in a Life or Course of Idleness, Sloth, Pleasure, Sensuality, or Worldliness in any kind, it is a Crime that it may be we as yet want a Name to express. Wherefore, (2.) Whatever is pretended, that is no Priviledge, which either exempts a Man, or hinders him in and unto the performance of any Duty whatever. It is such a Priviledge as being well improved will send Men to Hell. It will prove no other∣wise let the pretence be what it will. For, (3.) There are indeed but two Ends of any Priviledges whereof in this World we may be made Partakers; whereof the first is to enable us unto Duty, and the other is to encourage us thereunto. Here∣unto we may add, that when any are highly exalted in Priviledges, that they have an Advantage thereby to give an eminent Example unto others in the Performance of their Duties, when these Ends are not pursued, all Priviledges, Promotions, Dignities, Exaltations, are snares and tend unto the Ruine of Mens Souls. There are things still of this Nature both as unto whole Churches and as unto particular Persons. Some Churches are like Capernaum as to the outward means of Grace, as it were lifted up to Heaven; Let them take heed of Capernaum's Judgment in being brought down as low as Hell for their Abuse of them, or Negligence in their Improvement. Some Persons have Eminent Endowments, and if they are not Eminent in Service, they will prove their disadvantage. Yea, the Highest Privi∣ledges should make Men ready to condescend unto the meanest Duties. This is that which our Lord Jesus Christ so signally Instructed his Disciples in, when he himself washed their Feet, and taught them the same Duty towards the meanest of his Disciples, John 13. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. 3. Opportunities for Duty which render it beautiful, ought diligently to be embraced. So did Abraham as unto this Duty upon his meeting of Melchisedec. Hence the Performance of this Duty became so Renowned, and was of the Use whereunto it is here applyed by our Apostle. It is Season that gives every thing its Beauty. And Omission of Seasons or Tergiversations under them, are Evidences of an Heart much under the power of Corrupt Lusts or Unbelief. 4. When the Instituted Use of Consecrated things ceaseth, the things themselves cease to be Sacred, or of Esteem. For what became of all these Dedicated things after the death of Melchisedec? They were no more Sacred, the Actual Admini∣stration of his Typical Priesthood ceasing. Of what Use was the Brazen Serpent after it was taken from the Pole whereon it was lifted up by Gods appointment; or of what Use would the lifting of it up be, when it was not under an express Com∣mand? We know it proved a Snare, a means of Idolatry, and that was all. Gods Institution is the Foundation and VVarranty of all Consecration. All the Men in the world cannot really Consecrate or Dedicate any thing, but by virtue of Divine Appointment. And this Appointment of God respected always a limited Use, be∣yond which nothing was Sacred. And every thing kept beyond its Appointment is like Manna so kept, it breeds VVorms and stinketh. These things are mani∣fest from the consideration of all things that God ever accepted or dedicated in the Church. But Ignorance of them is that which hath filled the world with horrid Superstition. How many things have we had made Sacred which never had war∣ranty from any Institution of God? Monasteries, Abbies, Persons and Lands, Al∣tars, Bells, Utensils, with other things of the like Nature very many, which whatever Use they are of, yet all the Men in the world cannot make them Sacred. And the extending of the Sacredness of Dedicated things beyond their Use, hath had no less pernitious Event. Hence was the Useless Reservation of the Consecra∣ted Bread after the Sacrament, and afterwards the Idolatrous VVorship of it. But these things are here occasionally only mentioned. The Apostle adds in the Con∣firmation of his Argument, VER. 5. And verily they that are the Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the People according to the Law, that is of their Brethren though they come out of the Loins of Abraham.
There is in these words an Illustration and Confirmation of the present Argu∣ment, proving the Preference of Melchisedec above Abraham, from his giving the Tithe or Tenth of all unto him, and consequently receiving the Blessing from him. And this is taken from what was determined in the Law and acknowledged among the Hebrews, with which kind of Arguments the Apostle doth principally press them in the whole Epistle, as we have shewed on many Occasions. Now this is, that the Priests who received Tithes by the Law were Superiour in Dignity and Honour unto the People from whom they did receive them. And this was only de∣clared in the Law, for the Foundation of it was in the Light of Nature, as the A∣postle expressely intimates in the Instance of Benediction afterwards. There are considerable in the words, (1.) The Introduction of this new con∣firmation of his fore-going Argument. (2.) A Description of the Persons in whom he Instanceth. (3.) The Action ascribed unto them with its Limitation. And (4.) The Qualification of the Persons to whom their Power was exercised. The Introduction of his Reasoning herein is in these words, . The Con∣nexion in the Conjunction is plain; yet not a Reason is given of what was spoken . before, but a Continuation of the same Argument with farther Proof is intended. And he adds the Note of Observation, , verily; as if he had said, as to this mat∣ter of Tithing and what may thence justly be inferred as to Dignity and Preemi∣nence, you may consider how it was under the Law, and there, what I propose un∣to you, you will find directly Confirmed. It is a great advantage to press them with whom we have to do from their own Principles. The Description of the Persons in whom he Instanceth is in those words, The Sons of Levi who receive the Office of the Priesthood. It was the Priests directly . whom he intended, or the Sons of Aaron; and he might have so expressed it, the Priests according to the Law. But he varieth his expression for sundry Rea∣sons that appear in the Context. 1. Because all the Levites did receive Tithes by the Law, yea, Tithes in the first place was paid unto them in common. But because their Dignity among the People was less conspicuous than that of the Priests; and the design of the Apostle is not meerly to argue from the giving of Tithes unto any, but the giving of them unto them as Priests, as Abraham gave Tithes of all to Melchisedec as Priest of the High God, he thus expresseth it, The Sons of Levi, who receive the Office of the Priesthood. For though all the Sons of Levi received Tithes, yet all of them did not receive the Priesthood, with which sort of Persons alone he was concerned. 2. He doth thus express it to introduce the mention of Levi, whom he was afterwards to mention on the same Occasion, and to lay the weight of him and the whole Tribe under the same Argument. 3. He minds them by the way of another Dignity of the Priesthood, in that not all the Posterity of Abraham, no, nor yet of Levi were partakers thereof, but it was a Priviledge granted only to one part of them, even the Family of A∣aron. And these are the Persons in whom he makes his Instance. Thus God distributes Dignity and Preeminence in the Church as he pleaseth. Not all the posterity of Abraham but only those of Levi were set apart to receive Tithes, and not all the posterity of Levi but only the Family of Aaron did receive the Priesthood. And this Order of his Soveraign pleasure God required of them all to submit un∣to and acquiesce in, Numb. 16. 9, 10. And it is a dangerous thing out of Envy, pride, or Emulation to transgress the Bounds of Dignity and Office that God hath prescribed, as we may see in that Instance of Korah. For every Man to be con∣tented with his Station which God hath fixed him unto by Rule and providence, is his Safety and Honour. VVhat God calleth and disposeth Men unto, therein are they to abide, and that are they to attend. It was new to the people to set the whole Tribe of Levi taken into a peculiar Sacred Condition, to attend for ever on the worship of God, yet therein they acquiesced. But when the Priests were ta∣ken out of the Levites and exalted above them, some of them murmured at it, and stirred up the Congregation against Aaron, as though he took too much upon him, and deprived the Congregation of their Liberty, which yet was all Holy. The end of this Sedition was known, notwithstanding the specious pretence of it. Thirdly, What is ascribed unto these Persons ensues in the words, have a Com∣mandment
to take Tithes of the People according to the Law. They had a Command to take Tithes, and they were to do it according to the Law; the one was their . Warranty, and the other their Rule, for so are the Commandment and the Law here to be distinguished. (1.) They had a Commandment to take Tithes, that is, there was a Command or Institution enabling them so to do. For the Command in the first place respected the People, making it their Duty to pay all their Tithes unto the Levites. God did first take the Tithe to be his peculiar Portion, and thereby alienated it from the People that they had no Propriety in it. And the Tithe of the Land, saith he, is the Lord's, Lev. 27. 30. Hence those that with-held their Tithes are said to rob God, Mal. 3. 8. And wherever it can be manifested that God hath by an Institution of his own, taken the whole Tithe of any place into his own possession, there for any to detain them for their own Use, it is Sacrilege, and not else. But God having thus in the Land of Canaan taken them into his own Propriety, he Commanded the People to pay them to the Priests. This Command given unto the People to pay them, was a Command to the Priests to receive them. For what Men have a Right to do in the Church by Gods Institution, that they have a Command to do. The Right of the Priests unto Tithing was such, as that it was not at all their Liberty to forgoe it at their pleasure, yea, it was their sin so to have done. The Command which Obliged others to pay them, Obliged them to receive them. And they who on slight pretences do forgoe what is due to them with respect unto their Office, will on as slight when Occasion serves neg∣lect what is due from them on the same account. And this fell out frequently with the Priests of old, they neglected their Wages that they might have Countenance in the Neglect of their Work. And we may hence observe, That Rule, Institution, and Command, without regard unto unrequired Humility, or Pleas of greater Zeal and Self-denial, unless in evident and cogent Circumstances, are the best Preservatives of Order and Duty in the Church. They are so in every kind, especially in the disposal of Earthly things, such as the Maintenance of the Offi∣cers of the Church doth consist in. Neither the Peoples pretence of Poverty, nor the Ministers pretence of Humility will regulate this Matter as it ought to be. But as it is the Peoples Duty to provide for them, wherein they exercise Grace and O∣dience towards Jesus Christ, so it is the Ministers Duty chearfully to Receive what is their Due by the appointment of Christ, for they have a Command so to do. But whereas they are not many who are apt to Transgress on this hand, we shall not need farther to press this Consideration. But add, 2. As it is the Duty of those who are employed in Sacred Ministrations to receive what the Lord Christ hath appointed for their Supportment, and in the way of his Ap∣pointment, so it is likewise without Trouble, Solicitousness or Complaint to acquiesce there∣in. So was it with the Priests of old, they were to receive their portion, and to acquiesce in their portion; the Neglect of which Duty was the sin of the Sons of Eli. VVe take it for granted that the way of Maintenance is changed as to the Ministers of Holy things under the Old and New Testament. That the Law of Maintenance is taken away is the highest folly to imagine, it being so expressely as∣serted by our Saviour himself and his Apostles, Luke 10. 7. 1 Cor. 9. But here it is thought lies the disadvantage; that whereas the Priests under the Old Testa∣ment had a certain portion which was Legally due unto them, and they might de∣mand it as their own, it is now referred unto the voluntary Contribution of them that have the Benefit and Advantage of their Labour. Now whereas they oftentimes, yea, for the most part are negligent in their Duty, and through love of the present VVorld, very scanty and backward in their Contributions, Ministers cannot be Supported in their VVork in any measure proportionable unto what the Priests were of old. Besides it should seem unworthy a Minister of the Gospel who ought to be had in Esteem, and is declared by the Apostle to be worthy of double Honour, to depend on the Wills and as it were Charity of the people, many of them it may be poor and low themselves. And these things have taken such Impressions on the Minds of the most of them that are called Ministers, as that with the help of the Secular powers they have wisely provided a new way and Law of Legal Tithing for their Subsistence, with a notable over-plus of other good Ecclesiastical Lands and Revenues, which practice I shall neither Justifie nor Condemn, let the Effects of it and the Day declare it. Only I say that the Institution of Christ before
mentioned, stands in no need of this Invention or Supply to Safe-guard it from these Objections. For, 1. The Change made in the way of Maintenance pretended so disadvantagious unto Ministers of the Gospel, is no other but a part of that Universal Alteration, wherein Carnal things are turned into those that are more Spiritual, which was made by the bringing in of the Kingdom of Christ. And if Ministers may com∣plain that they have by the Gospel lost the former Allottment of Sacred Officers in Tithes, the People may as well complain that they have no Inheritances in the Land of Canaan. But he is unworthy the Name of a Minister of the Gospel, who is not satisfied with what our Lord hath Ordained in every kind. And as for those who indeed think better of what was of Use in Judaism or Heathenism, than what is warranted by the Gospel, I shall not debate the matter with them. Where∣fore as yet I Judge, that the taking of the Maintenance of Sacred Ministers from the Law of a Carnal Commandment, enforcing of it, charging it on the Grace and Duty of the Church, is a perfective Alteration, becoming the Spirituality and Glory of the Kingdom of Christ. For, 2. This way is the most Honourable way, and that which casts the greatest Respect upon them. Even the Princes and Rulers of the World have their Revenue and Supportment from the Substance of the People. Now I would only ask, whether it would not be more Honourable that the People should willingly and of their own accord bring in their Contribution, than meerly pay it under the Compulsion of a Law. For in this latter way, no Man knoweth whether they have the least true Honour for their Ruler or Regard unto his Office. But if it might be done in the former, all the World must take Notice what Reverence, Regard, and Honour they have for the Person and Dignity of their Prince. It is true generally the Men of the World are such lovers of themselves, and so little concerned in Pub∣lick Good, that if they were left absolutely at Liberty in this matter, their Go∣vernours might be defrauded of their Right, and the Ends of Government be dis∣appointed. Wherefore in all Countries, Provision is made by Law, for the pay∣ment of that Tribute which yet without Law was due, But whether it be meet to bring this Order into the Church or no, I much Question. If it be so, possibly it may secure the Revenue of Ministers, but it will not increase their Honour. For however men may please themselves with outward appearances of things, true Ho∣nour consists in that Respect and Reverence which others pay them in their Minds and Hearts. Now when this is such, and that on the account of Duty, that men will freely Contribute unto their Supportment, I know no more Honourable Sub∣sistence in the World. What will some say, to depend on the Wills and Love of the People there is nothing more base and unworthy? Yea, but what if all the Ho∣nour that Jesus Christ himself hath, or accepts from his People, proceeds from their Wills and Affections? Mahomet indeed who knew well enough that neither Honour, Respect, nor Obedience were due unto him, and that he could no way Recompence what should be done towards him in that kind, provided that men should be brought in Subjection unto his Name, by Fire and Sword. But our Lord Jesus Christ despiseth all Honour, all Obedience and Respect that is not Voluntary and free, and which doth not proceed from the Wills of Men. And shall his Servants in the work of the Gospel suppose themselves debased, to receive Respect and Honour from the same Principle? Well therefore because our Apostle tells us that our Lord hath Ordained that those who Preach the Gospel shall live on the Gospel, and all Obedience unto his Ordinances and Institutions must be Voluntary, if Ministers are ashamed and esteem it unworthy of them to receive what is so Contributed in a way of Voluntary Obedience, let them try if they can prevail with themselves to receive it so for him, and in his Name, who is not ashamed to receive it, no, if it be only a Cup of cold Water, so it comes from a free and willing Mind, when he despiseth the Revenue of the whole world upon Compulsion. If they will not do so, their best way is to leave his Service and take up with that which is more Honourable. For my part I do judge that the way of Maintenance of Ministers, by Voluntary Benevolence in a way of Duty and Obedience unto Christ, though it be not likely the most Plentiful, is yet the most Honourable of all others. And of this judgment I shall be, until I am convinced of two things. (1.) That true Ho∣nour doth not consist in the Respect and Regard of the Minds of Men unto the real
Worth and Usefulness of those who are Honoured but in outward Ceremonies and forced works of Regard. (2.) That it is not the Duty which every Church owes to Jesus Christ, to maintain those who labour in the Word and Doctrine, ac∣cording to their Ability; or that it is any Gospel-Duty which is influenced by Force or Compulsion. Thirdly, It must be acknowledged that this way of Voluntary Contribution is not like to afford matter for that Grandeur and Secular Greatness, those ample Reve∣nues, those Provisions for Ease, Wealth and Worldly Honour, which some think necessary in this case. But yet however it must be granted, that all those large Possessions and Dominions which some now enjoy under the Name of Church-Revenues, were Originally Voluntary Grants and Contributions. For it will not be said that the Clergy got them by Force of Arms, or Fraud, nor were they their Patrimonial Inheritance. But yet I fear, there were some undue Artifices used to induce men unto such Donations and Ecclesiastical Endowments, and somewhat more of Merit fixed thereon than Truth will allow, besides a Compensation there∣in for what might be undergone in Purgatory when men were gone out of the world. However the thing it self in its whole kind, that men out of their Sub∣stance and Revenue should design a Portion unto the Service of the Church, is not to be condemned. But it proved Mischievous and Fatal, when those who received what was so given, being unmeasurably Covetous and Worldly, fixed no Bounds unto the Charity or Superstition of men in this kind, until they had over-run the World with their Gains. And not only so, but whereas there was no pretence of Use of such great Revenues in any way pretended to be of Divine Appointment, they were forced to invent and find out ways innumerable, in Abbies, Monasteries, Cloysters, to be Repositories of their overflowing Treasure and Revenues. But when God had appointed to Build his Tabernacle of the Free-will Offerings of the People, a Type of the Gospel-Church, when there was Provision enough of Ma∣terials brought in, the Liberality of the People was restrained by Proclamation, and some perhaps grieved that their Offerings were not received, Exod. 36, 5, 6. Want of this care to put a stop unto the Devotions of Men in these Donations ac∣cording unto a just measure of the Churches Necessary Use, the Bounds whereof were broken up and left invisible by the Pride, Ambition, Covetousness, and Craft of the Clergy, the whole World run into Superstition and Confusion. At pre∣sent I grant that the way which the Gospel appoints is not likely to make Provision for Pomp, Grandeur, Wealth, Revenues, and Inheritances unto them that re∣lye upon it. Nor do I think that if the present Establishment of a Superfluous Re∣venue unto the Clergy were removed, that the VVorld it self would in haste run into the same state again. VVherefore those who judge these things Necessary and desirable, must be permitted as far as I know, to betake themselves unto the Advantage the world will afford; it is acknowledged that the Gospel hath made no Provision of them. 4. It is indeed supposed unto the Disadvantage of this way, that by means there∣of Ministers do become obnoxious unto the, People do depend upon them, and so cannot deal so uprightly and sincerely with their Consciences as they ought to do, left they incur their Displeasure, wherein they are too much concerned. It were easie to manifest with how many more and greater Inconveniencies the other way is at∣tended, were we now comparing of them. And in Truth it is a vain thing to look for or expect any such Order and Disposal of these things, as should administer no Occasion for the VVisdom and Graces of them concerned, nor would such a way be at all Useful. I say therefore, that God hath Established mutual Duty to be the Rule and Measure of all things between Ministers and People. Hereunto it is their wisdom and Grace to attend, leaving the Success unto God. And a Minister may easily conclude that seeing his whole Supportment in Earthly things with respect unto his Ministry, depends on the Command of God on the Account of the Dis∣charge of his Duty, if he have respect thereunto in his work, or so far as it is Law∣ful for him to have, that the more sincere and upright he is therein, the more as∣sured will his Supportment be. And he who is enabled to give up himself unto the work of the Ministry in a due manner, considering the Nature of that work, and what he shall assuredly meet withal in its Discharge, is not in much danger of being
greatly moved with this pitiful consideration of displeasing this or that man in the Discharge of his Duty. 5. It is farther pleaded, That these things were tolerable at the first entrance and Beginnings of Christianity, when the Zeal, Love, and Liberality of its Pro∣fessors did sufficiently stir them up unto an abundant Discharge of their Duty; but now the whole Body of them is degenerate from their pristine Faith and Love, Coldness and Indifferency in the things of their Eternal concernment, with Love of Self and this present evil World, do so prevail in them all, as that if things were left unto their Wills and sence of Duty, there would quickly be an end of all Ministry for want of Maintenance. This is of all others the most cogent Argu∣ment in this case, and that which prevails with many good and sober men, utterly to decry the way of Ministers Maintenance by a Voluntary Contribution. I shall briefly give my thoughts concerning it, and so return from this Digression. And I say, (1.) I do not condemn any Provision that is made by Good, Wholsom, and Righteous Laws among men for this end and purpose, provided it be such as is accommodate unto the furtherance of the Work it self. Such Provision as in its own Nature is a Snare and Temptation, inclining men unto Pride, Ambition, Lux∣ury, distance from, and elation above the meanest of the Sheep or Lambs of Christ, or as it were requiring a Worldly Grandeur and Secular Pomp in their course of Life, must plead for it self, as it is able. But such as may comfortably Support, Encourage, and help men in this work and discharge of their Duty, being made without the Wrong of others, is doubtless to be approved. Yea, if in this De∣generacy of Christianity under which we Suffer, any shall out of Love and Obedi∣ence unto the Gospel, set apart any portion of their Estates, and settle it unto the Service of the Church in the Maintenance of the Ministry, it is a Good Work, which if done in Faith, will be accepted. (2.) Let those who are true Disciples indeed know, that it is greatly incumbent on them to roll away that Reproach which is cast upon the Institutions of Christ by the miscarriages of the Generality of Christians. He hath Ordained that those who Preach the Gospel shall Live on the Gospel. And the way whereby he hath prescribed this to be effected is, that those who are his Disciples should in Obedience unto his Commands supply them with Temporals by whom Spirituals are dispensed unto them. If this be not done, a Reproach is cast upon his Institutions as insufficient unto the End for which they were designed. It is therefore incumbent on all who have any true Zeal for the Glory and Honour of Christ, to manifest their Exemplary Obedience and Fruitfulness in this matter; where∣by it may appear that it is not any defect in the Appointments of Christ, but the stubborn Disobedience and Unbelief of Men, that is the cause of any Disorder. (3.) Seeing there is such a Degeneracy among Christians, as that they will not be wrought upon unto a Voluntary Discharge of their Duty in this matter, it may be enquired what hath been the Cause or at least the principal Occasion thereof. Now if this should be found and appear to be, the Coldness, Remisseness, Neglect, Ignorance, Sloth, Ambition, and Worldliness of those who have been their Guides and Leaders, their Officers and Ministers in most Ages, it will evince how little Reason some have to complain that the People are backward and Negligent in the discharge of their Duty. And if it be true, as indeed it is, that the Care of Re∣ligion that it be preserved, thrive and flourish, not only in themselves but in the whole Church be committed unto those Persons, there can be no such Apostacy as is complained of among the People, but that the Guilt of it will be at their Doors. And if it be so, it is to be enquired whether it be the Duty of Ministers absolutely to comply with them in their Degeneration, and suffer them to Live in the neglect of their Duty in this matter, only providing for themselves some other way; or whether they ought not rather by all ways and means to endeavour their Recovery into their pristine Condition. If it be said, that whatever men pretend, yet it is a thing impossible to work the People unto a due Discharge of their Duty in this matter; I grant it is, whilst that is only or principally intended. But if men would not consider themselves or their Interest in the first place, but really endea∣vour their Recovery unto Faith, Love, Obedience, and Holiness, and that by their own Example as well as Teaching, it may well be hoped that this Duty would re∣vive again in the Company of others; for it is certain it will never stand alone by it self. But we must proceed with our Apostle.
Secondly, These Sons of Levi who obtained the Priesthood received Tithes ac∣cording to the Law; That is, as the matter or manner of Tithing was determined . by the Law. For by Tithes I understand that whole Portion which by Gods Order and Command belonged unto the Priests; and this in all the concerns of it was de∣termined by the Law. What, when, how, of whom, all was expressely established by Law. So they received Tithes according to the Law, in the Order, Way, and Manner therein determined. For it is Gods Law and Appointment that gives Boundaries and Measures unto all Duties. What is done according unto them is straight, right, and acceptable; whatever is otherwise, however it may please our own Wisdom or Reason, is crooked, froward, perverse and rejected of God. But there is an Objection that this Assertion of the Apostle seems liable unto, which we must take Notice of in our passage. For whereas he affirms that the Le∣vites who received the Office of the Priesthood took Tithes of their Brethren, it is evi∣dent from the first Grant and Institution of Tithing, that the Levites who were not Priests, were the first who immediately received them of the People. See Numb. 18. 21, 22, 23, 24. Answ. 1. By Tithes the whole Consecrated portion according unto the Law is intended, as we said before. Hereof the Portion allotted unto the Priests out of various Offerings or Sacrifices was no small part, wherein the Levites had no In∣terest, but they belonged and were delivered immediately unto the Priests. (2.) The Levites themselves were given unto the Priests for their Service in and about Holy things, Numb. 3. 9. Whatever afterwards was given unto the Levites, it was so with reference unto the Supportment of the Priesthood in due Order. The Tithes therefore that were paid to the Levites were in the Original Grant of all to the Priests. (3.) The Priests Tithed the whole People in that Tenth of all which they received of the Levites; and that being given unto them, what remained in the possession of the Levites themselves, became as all other clean things, to be used promiscuously, Num. 18. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32. Fourthly, The Priviledge of the Priests in taking the Tenth of all is amplified . by the consideration of the Persons of whom they took them: Now these were not Strangers or Foreigners, but their own Brethren. And these also were so their Brethren as that they had a right unto, and were partakers of the same Original Priviledge with themselves, which did not exempt them from the Duty of pay∣ing Tithes of all unto them, took Tithes of their Brethren, though they came out of the Loins of Abraham. Abraham first received the Promises, and was an equal common Spring of Priviledges to his whole Posterity. The Priests were not more Children of Abraham than the People were. The whole People therefore being so, and thereby equally interested in all the Priviledges of Abraham or the Church of Believers, it is manifest how great the Honour and preeminence of the Priests were in that they took Tithes of them all. And this the Apostle declares to strengthen his Argument for the Greatness and Excellency of Melchisedec in that he received Tithes of Abraham himself. And we may learn, (1.) That it is Gods Prerogative to give Dignity and Preeminence in the Church among them which are otherwise equal, which is to be acquiesced in. Our common Vocation by the word, states us all equally in the same Priviledge, as all the Children of Abraham were in that respect in the same Condition. But in this common state, God makes by his Prerogative a three-fold difference among Believers; as to Grace, as to Gifts, as to Office. For, (1.) Although all true Believers have the same Grace in the kind thereof, yet some much excel others in the degrees and exercise of it. As one Star differeth from another, that is, excelleth another in Glory, so here one Saint excelleth another in Grace. This both the Examples of the Scripture, and the Experience of all Ages of the Church doth testifie. And this dependeth on the Soveraign Pleasure of God. As he is Gracious unto whom he will be Gracious, so when, and how, and in what measure he pleaseth. Some shall have Grace sooner than others, and some that which is more eminent than others have. Only he that hath least, shall have no lack, as to making of him meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and he that hath most, hath no more than he shall find need of and exercise for. But so it is, some God will have as Pillars in his House, and some are but as bruised Reeds. And every ones Duty it is for himself, in his place and
Condition, to comply with the will of God herein. First, Let not the weak, the feeble of the Flock, those who either really are so, or in their own apprehensions, complain or faint. For (1.) There is no Man in the world that hath so little Grace, who hath any, but he hath more than he ever deserved; as none hath so much, as that any Dram of it is of his own earning. And as he who hath nothing but what he hath freely received, hath nothing to boast of; so he who hath that which he never deserved, hath no Reason to complain. (2.) It is the Pleasure of God it should be so. If it be his will to keep us Spiritually Poor, so we are thereby kept Humble, we shall be no losers. I say not this, as though any one who hath but a little Grace, or apprehends himself to have so, should on the Pre∣tence that such is the will of God concerning him and his Condition, neglect the most earnest Endeavour after more, which would be a shrewd Evidence that he hath none at all; but that those who in a diligent Use of means for Growth and Improve∣ment, cannot yet arrive unto such an Increase, such an addition of one Grace unto another, as their profiting may be manifest, which falls out on several Occasions, may find Relief in the Sovereign pleasure of God to keep them in their low Con∣dition. (3.) They may do well to consider, that indeed there is a great deal of Glory in the least of true Grace. Though there be not so much as in more Grace, yet there is more than in all things under the Sun besides. No Man hath so little Grace, who hath any, as that he is ever able to set a sufficient price upon it, or to be thankful enough for it. (4.) There is indeed so much spoken in the Scripture concerning the Love, Care, Compassion, and Tenderness of our Lord Jesus Christ, towards the Weak, the Sick, the Diseased of his Flock, that on some Accounts the state of those Humble Souls who have yet received but little Grace seems to be most safe and desirable, Isa. 40. 11. Let not such therefore complain, it is God alone who is the Author of this difference between them and others. And on the same Grounds, (Secondly) Those who are strong, who have much Grace, ought not, (1.) To boast, or be lifted up. For as we observed before, they have nothing but what they have freely received. Yea, it is very suspitious that what any one boasteth of, is not Grace. For it is the Nature of all true Grace to exclude all boasting. He that by comparing himself with others, finds any other Issue in his thoughts, but either to admire Sovereign Grace, or to judge himself beneath them, is in an ill Condition, or at least in an ill frame. (2.) Nor to trust unto what they have received. There is none hath so much Grace, as not every moment to need Supplies with more. And he who like Peter trusteth unto that wherein he is above others, will one way or other be brought down beneath them all. (3.) Let such be greatly Fruitful, or this appearance of much Grace will issue in much darkness. Secondly, God dealeth thus with Men as to Spiritual Gifts. Among those who are called, the Spirit divideth unto every one even as he will. Unto one he giveth five Talents, unto another two, and to a third but one. And this diversity depend∣ing meerly on Gods Soveraignty is visible in all Churches. And as this tends in it self unto their Beauty and Edification, so there may be an abuse of it unto their disadvantage. For besides those disorders which the Apostle declares to have en∣sued, particularly in the Church of Corinth upon the undue Use and Exercise of Spi∣ritual Gifts, there are sundry Evils which may befall particular Persons by reason of them, if their Original and End be not duly attended unto. For, (1.) Those who have received these Spiritual Gifts in any Eminent manner, may be apt to be lifted up with good Conceits of themselves, and even to despise their Brethren who come behind them therein. This Evil was openly prevalent in the Church of Co∣rinth. (2.) Among those who have received them in some Equality, or would be thought so to have done, Emulations and perhaps Strifes thereon, are apt to ensue. One cannot well bear that the Gift of another should find more Accep∣tance, or be better Esteemed than his own. And another may be apt to extend himself beyond his due line and measure, because of them. And (3.) Those who have received them in the lowest degree, may be apt to despond, and refuse to Trade with what they have, because their Stock is Inferiour unto their Neigh∣bours. But what is all this to us? May not God do what he will with his own? If God will have some of the Sons of Abraham to pay Tithes, and some to receive them, is there any Ground of Complaint? Unto him that hath the most Eminent
Gifts, God hath given of his own, and not of ours; he hath taken nothing from us to endue him withal, but supplyed him out of his own stores. Whoever therefore is unduly Exalted with them, or Envies because of them, he despiseth the Prerogative of God, and contends with him that is Mighty. 3. God distinguisheth Persons with Respect unto Office. He makes, and so accounts whom he will Faithful, and puts them into Ministry. This of Old Korah repi∣ned against. And there are not a few who free themselves from Envy at the Mi∣nistry by endeavouring to bring it down into contempt. But the Office is Honou∣rable, and so are they by whom it is discharged in a due manner; and it is the Prerogative of God to call whom he pleaseth thereunto. And there is no greater Usurpation thereon, than the Constitution of Ministers by the Laws, Rules, and Authority of Men. For any to set up such in Office, as he hath not Gifted for it, nor called unto it, is to sit in the Temple of God, and to shew themselves to be God. We may also hence observe, That, No Priviledge can exempt Persons from Subjection unto any of Gods Institutions. Though they were of the Loyns of Abraham. Yet, VER. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. IN the five following Verses the Apostle pursues and Concludes that part of his Argument from the Consideration of Melchisedec, which concerned the Great∣ness and Glory of him who was Represented by him, and his Preeminence above the Levitical Priests. For if Melchisedec who was but a Type of him, was in his own Person in so many Instances more Excellent than they; how much more must he be esteemed to be above them, who was Represented by him. For he whom another is appointed to represent, must be more Glorious than he by whom he is re∣presented. This part of his Argument the Apostle concludes in these Verses, and thence proceeds unto another great Inference and Deduction from what he had taught concerning this Melchisedec. And this was that which strook unto the heart of that Controversie which he had in hand, namely, that the Levitical Priesthood must necessarily cease upon the Introduction of that better Priesthood which was fore-signified by that of Melchisedec. And these things, whatsoever sence we now have of them, were those on which the Salvation or Damnation of these Hebrews did absolutely depend. For unless they were prevailed on to forgoe that Priesthood which was now abolished, and to betake themselves alone unto that more Excellent which was then Introduced, they must unavoidably perish; as accordingly on this very account it fell out with the Generality of that People, their Posterity persist∣ing in the same Unbelief unto this day. And that which God made the Crisis of the Life and Death of that Church and People, ought to be diligently weighed and considered by us. It may be some find not themselves much concerned in this La∣borious acurate Dispute of the Apostle, wherein so much occurrs about Pedigrees, Priests, and Tithes, which they think belongs not unto them. But let them re∣member, that in that great Day of taking down the whole Fabrick of Mosaical Worship, and the Abolition of the Covenant of Sinai, the Life and Death of that Ancient Church, the Posterity of Abraham the Friend of God, to whom unto this Season an inclosure was made of all Spiritual Priviledges, (Rom. 9. 4.) depended upon their receiving or rejecting of the Truth here contended for. And God in like manner doth often-times single out especial Truths for the Trial of the Faith and Obedience of the Church in especial Seasons. And when he doth so, there is ever after an especial Veneration due unto them. But to return. Upon the Supposition that the Levitical Priests did receive Tithes, as well as Mel∣chisedec, wherein they were equal; and that they received Tithes of their Bre∣thren the Posterity of Abraham, which was their especial Prerogative and Dignity; he yet proveth by four Arguments that the Greatness he had assigned unto Melchi∣sedec and his Preeminence above them, was no more than was due unto him. And the first of these is taken from the Consideration of his Person of whom he received Tithes, ver. 6. The Second from the Action of Benediction which accompanied his receiving of Tithes, ver. 7. The Third from the Condition and state of his own Person compared with all those who received Tithes according to the Law, ver. 8. And the Fourth from that which determines the whole Question, namely,
that Levi himself, and so consequently all the whole Race of Priests that sprang from his Loyns, did thus pay Tithes unto him. VER. 6, 7. . The Aethiopick Translation omits those words, . He takes up the Name Abraham in the fore-going Verse, who came forth out of the Loyns of Abraham; and adds unto them what follows in this, who received the Promise; possibly deceived by a maimed transcript of the Original. . Syr. —He who is not written in their Genealogies; properly enough; for the Apostle speaks of the Ge∣nealogies that were Written and on Record in the Book of Genesis, wherein there is none of Melchisedec. And it is the Writing by Divine Inspiration that his Ar∣gument is founded on. Answ. Genealogisatus, Genealogised. Is cujus genus non recensetur ex illis; Whose Stock is not reckoned from them; or as Beza, Ad illos non refertur. Vul. Lat. Cujus Generatio non annumeratur in eis; That is as the Rhe∣mists, He whose Generation is not Numbred among them. Nor whose Descent is not counted from them; putting Pedigree in the Margin. , is, is cujus ortus, generatio, nativitas recensetur; whose Original, Nativity, Stock, Race, is reckoned up or Recorded. , from them, from among them; Vul. Lat. in eis, for, inter eos, among them, whose Generation is not Numbred among them. The meaning is, he was not of their Stock or Race; he sprang not of them, nor arose from among them. , decimas tulit, sumpsit, exegit, accepit, decimavit; , is deci∣mo, or decimam partem excerpo; to take out the Tenth part, ; Plut. in Camillo; ex spoliis hostium decimas excerpere,  with an Accusative case as here, is to receive Tithes of any; and , in the same construction, is of the same signification, ver. 5. . But absolutely it signifies to pay Tithes, or to give Tithes, not to receive them, Luke 18. 12. , I Tithe all that I possess; that is, give Tithe out of it. VER. 6. But he whose Descent is not reckoned from them, received Tithes from Abra∣ham, and Blessed him that had the Promises. A Description there is in these words of Melchisedec, by a Negation of a cer∣tain Respect Useful to be Observed unto the Design of the Apostle; and then an Assertion upon a supposition thereof. (1.) He was a Person whose Descent, Pe∣digre, Nativity, Traduction of Stock and Linage, was not reckoned from among . them. He had before observed absolutely, that he was not at all Genealogized, ver. 3. , without Descent. And how this was necessary to shadow out the Eternity of the Priesthood of Christ, we have declared. For if he had any Genealogy, or had stood in need thereof, it had been to shew from whom he derived his Priesthood, and unto whom it was transmitted; whereas he had no such Circumstances, nor was to have, as to the End of his Call and Office. Hence it follows in particular, that he could not derive his Descent from Levi; Morally he could not, because so he had none at all; and Naturally he could not, for in his Days Levi was only yet in the Loyns of Abraham; so that in no respect he could descend from him. But the Apostle hath a peculiar Intention in this Verse. For whereas he designed to prove the Greatness of Melchisedec from his receiving Tithes, he intends here to declare, on what Right and Title he did so: For there were but two ways whereby any one did or might take Tithes of any. (1.) By virtue of the Law, or Institution of God in the Law. This way none could do so, but he who Legally derived his Descent from Levi. (2.) By virtue of some
especial Grant or Personal Priviledge, either before or above the Law. Whereas therefore Melchisedec as is here declared, had no Interest in the former, it must be with respect unto the latter that he had this Right, which Argues his Dignity. So God may and doth sometimes communicate of his Favour and Priviledges thereby, by especial exemption, and not by an Ordinary Rule or Constitution. I do not at all know, nor can it be proved, that God is now by his VVord or Law or Constitution, Obliged to give no Ministry unto the Church, but by virtue of an Orderly outward Call according to the Rule. It is true, we are obliged to keep our selves unto the Rule and Law in the Call of Ministers so far as we are able; but whether God hath bound himself unto that Order, I very much Question. Yea, when there is any great and Signal Work to be done in the Church, it may be such as the Church cannot or will not call any unto, even such a Reformation of Persons as may prove a dissolution of its Constitution, if God raise, Gift and Providenti∣ally call any unto that work, assisting them in it, I should not doubt of the Lawful∣ness of their Ministry, as granted unto them by especial Priviledge, though not Communicated by external Rule and Order. It is good ordinarily to be Genealo∣gised into the Ministry by established Rule; but God can by virtue of his own Soveraignty grant this Priviledge unto whom he pleaseth. And let not any imagine that such a Supposition must needs immediately open a Door unto Confusion; for there are unvariable Rules to try Men and their Ministry at all times whether they are sent of God or no. The Doctrine which they teach, the Ends which they pro∣mote, the Lives which they lead, the Circumstances of the seasons wherein they appear, will sufficiently manifest whence such Teachers are. 2. Having thus described Melchisedec, and manifested on what Account the things mentioned were ascribed or did belong unto him, he mentions the things themselves, which were two. (1.) That he received Tithes of Abraham. (2.) That he Blessed him. In both which he demonstrates his Greatness and Dignity. (1.) By the Consideration of the Person of whom he received Tithes, it was Abraham himself. (2.) By an especial Circumstance of Abraham; it was he who received the Promises, from whence the whole Church of Israel claimed their Priviledges. (1.) He received Tithes of Abraham. The Levitical Priests received Tithes of those who came out of the Loyns of Abraham, which was an Evidence of their . Dignity by Gods Appointment. But he received them of Abraham himself, which Evidently declares his Superiority above them, as also herein above Abraham him∣self. And the Apostle by insisting on these things so particularly, shews, (1.) How difficult a matter it is to dispossess the minds of Men of those things which they have long trusted unto and boasted of. It is plain from the Gospel throughout, that all the Jews looked on this as their great Priviledge and Advantage, that they were the Posterity of Abraham, whom they conceived on all accounts the greatest and most Honourable Person that ever was in the VVorld. Now although there was much herein, yet when they began to abuse it, and trust unto it, it was Ne∣cessary that their Confidence should be abated and taken down. But so difficult a matter was this to effect, as that the Apostle applies every Argument unto it, that hath a real force and evidence in it, especially such things as they had not before considered, as it is plain they were utterly Ignorant in the Instructive part of this story of Melchisedec. And we see in like manner, when Men are possessed with an inveterate conceit of their being the Church, and having all the Priviledges of it en∣closed unto them, although they have long since forfeited openly all Right thereunto, how difficult a thing it is to dispossess their minds of that pleasing presumption. (2.) That every Particle of Divine Truth is Instructive and Argumentative when it is rightly used and improved. Hence the Apostle presseth all the Circumstances of this Story, from every one of them, giving light and evidence unto the great Truth which he sought to Confirm. 2. That it might yet farther appear how great Melchisedec was, who received Tithes of Abraham, he declares who Abraham was in an instance of his great and . especial Priviledge. It was he who received the Promises. This he singles out as the greatest Priviledge and Honour of Abraham, as it was indeed the Foundation of all the other Mercies which he enjoyed, or Advantages that he was entrusted withal. The Nature of this Promise, with the Solemn manner of its giving unto Abraham, and the Benefits included in it, he had at large declared, Chap. 6. ver.
13, 14, 15, 16. Hereby Abraham became the Father of the Faithful, the Heir of the World, and the Friend of God; so that it exceedingly Illustrates the Great∣ness of Melchisedec, in that this Abraham paid Tithes unto him. The Medium of the Argument in this instance is lyable only unto one Excep∣tion; namely, That Abraham was not the first that received the Promises, so that although he were not, yet there might be others greater than Melchisedec, who never made any acknowledgment of his Preeminence. For the Promise was gi∣ven unto Adam himself immediately after the Fall, as also unto Noah in the Co∣venant made with him, and to others also who before Abraham died in the Faith. Answ. It is true, they had the Promise and the Benefit of it; but yet so as in sun∣dry things Abraham was preferred above them all. For, (1.) He had the Pro∣mise more plainly and clearly given unto him, than any of his Predecessors in the Faith. Hence he was the first of whom it is said, that He saw the Day of Christ and Rejoiced, as having a clearer view of his Coming and of Salvation by him, than any that went before him. (2.) The Promise was confirmed unto him by an Oath, which it had not been unto any before. (3.) The Promised Seed was in it peculiarly confined unto his Family or Posterity; See Heb. 2. 17. (4.) His re∣ceiving of the Promise was that which was the Foundation of the Church in his Po∣sterity which he had peculiarly, to deal withal. He had therefore the Preeminence above all others in this matter of receiving the Promises. But it may yet be said, that Abraham had not received the Promises then when he was Blessed of Melchisedec, so that it was no Argument of his Preeminence at that time. But (1.) He had before received the same Promise for the Substance of it, which was afterwards more Solemnly confirmed unto him, on the trial of his Faith in Offering his only Son, Gen. 12. 2, 3. Chap. 13. 15, 16. (2.) He was then actually instated in a Right unto all that farther Confirmation of the Promises which he received on various Occasions, and what followed added not unto the Dignity of his Person, but served only unto the Confirmation of his Faith. So Mel∣chisedec Blessed him who had the Promises. And we may Observe, 1. We can be made partakers of no such Grace, Mercy, or Priviledge in this World, but that God can when he pleaseth make an addition thereunto. He who had received the Promises was afterwards Blessed. VVe depend upon an infinite Foun∣tain of Grace and Mercy, from whence it is made out unto us by various degrees according to the good pleasure of God. Neither will he give unto us, nor are we capable to receive in this world, the whole of what he hath provided for us, in the enjoyment whereof our final Blessedness doth consist. VVherefore as it is required of us to be thankful for what we have, or to walk worthy of the Grace we have received: Yet we may live in constant expectation of more from him, and it is the great Comfort and Relief of our Souls that we may so do. 2. It is the Blessing of Christ, Typed in and by Melchisedec, that makes Promises and Mercies effectual unto us. He is himself the great Subject of the Promises, and the whole Blessing of them cometh forth from him alone. All besides him, all with∣out him, is of, or under the Curse. In him, from him, and by him only, are all Blessings to be obtained. 3. Free and Soveraign Grace is the only Foundation of all Priviledges. All that is spoken of the Dignity of Abraham is resolved into this, That he received the Pro∣mises. VER. 7. But what if Abraham was thus Blessed by Melchisedec, doth this prove that he was less than he by whom he was Blessed? It doth so, saith the Apostle, and that by virtue of an unquestionable general Rule. . The words  and , less and greater, are in the Neuter Gender, and so rendred in most Translations; illud quod minus est, à majore; only the Sy∣riack reduceth them to the Masculine,  He who is the less, is Blessed of him who is greater, or more Excellent than him, which is the sence of the words.
, Erasm. Porro nemo negat; absque ulla, omni contradicti∣one; and without all Contradiction. And without all Contradiction the Less is Blessed of the Greater. The words prevent an Objection, which is supposed, not expressed. And there∣fore are they continued with those fore-going by the Conjunction , as carrying . on what was before asserted by a farther Illustration and Confirmation of it. And there is in them, (1.) The Manner of the Assertion; and, (2.) The Proposition it self. (1.) The Manner of it is in these words, ; without, be∣yond, . above, all reasonable Contradiction. A Truth this is that cannot, that will not be gain-said, which none will deny or oppose; as that which is evident in the Light of Nature, and which the Order of the things spoken of, doth require. All Truths, especially Divine Truths, are such as ought not to be Contradicted, and which no Contradiction can evert or change their Natures, that they should not so be. But against some of them, not for want of Truth, but either from want of Evi∣dence in themselves or for want of light in them unto whom they are proposed, Contradictions may arise, and they may be called into Dispute or Question. Thus it hath fallen out with all Truths which we receive by meer Supernatural Revelation. The Darkness of the minds of Men, unable clearly to discern them, and perfect∣ly to comprehend them, will raise Disputes about them, and Objections against them. But some Truths there are, which have such an Evidence in themselves, and such a Suitableness unto the Principles of Reason and Light Natural, that no colour of Opposition can be made unto them. And if any out of brutish Affecti∣ons or Prejudices do force an Opposition unto them, they are to be neglected and not Contended withal. Wherefore that which is here intimated is, That there are some Principles of Truth that are so Secured in their own Evidence and Light, as that being unquestionable in themselves, they may be used and improved as concessions, whereon other less evident Truths may be Confirmed and Established. The due consi∣deration hereof is of great Use in the Method of Teaching, or in the Vindication of any unquestioned Truths from Opposition. In all Teaching, especially in Mat∣ters that are Controverted, it is of great Advantage to fix some unquestionable Prin∣ciples, whence those which are less evident, or are more opposed may be deduced; or be otherwise influenced and confirmed. Neglect hereof, makes popular Discourses weak in their Application, and those wherein Men contend for the Truth, infirm in their Conclusions. This Course therefore the Apostle here useth, and resolveth his present Argument into such an unquestionable Principle, as Reason and common Sence must admit of. 2. The Proposition thus Modified, is, That the Less is Blessed of the Greater; that is, wherein one is orderly Blessed by another; he that is Blessed is therein less . than, or beneath in Dignity, unto him by whom he is Blessed, as it is expressed in the Syriack Translation. Expositors generally on this place distinguish the several sorts of Benedictions that are in Use and warrantable among Men, that so they may fix on that concerning which the Rule here mentioned by the Apostle, will hold unquestionably. But as unto the especial design of the Apostle this Labour may be spared: For he treats only of Sacerdotal Benedictions, and with Respect to them, the Rule is not only certainly true, but openly evident. But to Illustrate the whole, and to shew how far the Rule mentioned may be extended, we may reduce all sorts of Blessings unto four Heads. (1.) There is Benedictio Potestativa; that is, such a Blessing as consists in an actual Efficacious Collation on, or Communication of the matter of the Blessing unto the Person Blessed. Thus God alone can Bless absolutely. He is the only Fountain of all Goodness, Spiritual, Temporal, Eternal, and so of the whole en∣tire matter of Blessing, containing it all eminently and virtually in himself. And he alone can efficiently communicate it unto, or collate it on any others, which he doth as seemeth Good unto him, according to the Counsel of his own will. All will grant, that with Respect hereunto, the Apostle's Maxime is unquestionable, God is greater than Man. Yea, this kind of Blessing ariseth from, or dependeth solely on that Infinite Distance that is between the Being or Nature of God, and the Being
of all Creatures. This is Gods Blessing, —an Addition of Good as the Jews call it; a real communication of Grace, Mercy, Priviledges, or what∣ever the matter of the Blessing be. 2. There is Benedictio Authoritativa. This is when Men in the Name, that is, by the Appointment and Warranty, of God, do declare any to be Blessed, pro∣nouncing the Blessings unto them, whereof they shall be made Partakers. And this kind of Blessings was of Old, of two sorts. First, Extraordinary by virtue of especial immediate Inspiration, or a Spirit of Prophecy: Secondly, Ordinary by virtue of Office and Institution. In the first way Jacob Blessed his Sons, which he calls a Declaration of what should befall them in the last days, Gen. 49. 1. And such were all the Solemn Patriarchal Benedictions; as that of Isaac, when he had Infallible direction, as to the Blessing, but not in his own mind as to the Person to be Blessed, Gen. 27. 27, 28, 29. So Moses Blessed the Children of Israel in their respective Tribes, Deut. 33. 1. In the latter, the Priests by virtue of Gods Ordi∣nance were to Bless the People with this Authoritative Blessing. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, speak unto Aaron and his Sons, saying, On this wise shall ye Bless the Children of Israel saying unto them; The Lord Bless thee and keep thee, the Lord make his Face shine upon thee, and be Gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon thee, and give thee Peace; and they shall put my Name on the Children of Israel, and I will Bless them, Numb. 6. The whole Nature of this kind of Blessing is here exemplified. It is founded in Gods Express Institution and Command. And the Nature of it consists in putting the Name of God upon the People; that is, declaring Blessings unto them in the Name of God, praying Bles∣sings for them on his Command. Wherefore the word Bless is used in a two-fold sence in this Institution; ver. 23. Ye shall Bless the Children of Israel is spoken of the Priests; ver. 27. I will Bless them is spoken of God. The Blessing is the same, declared by the Priests, effected by God: They blessed declaratively, He efficiently. And the blessing of Melchisedec in this place seems to have a mixture in it of both these. For as it is plain that he blessed Abraham by virtue of his Sacerdotal Office, which our Apostle principally considereth; so I make no Question but he was pe∣culiarly acted by immediate inspiration from God in what he did. And in this sort of Blessing the Apostolical Maxime maintains its Evidence in the Light of Nature. 3. There is Benedictio Charitativa: This is, when one is said to bless another, by praying for a Blessing on him, or using the means whereby he may obtain a Bles∣sing. This may be done by Superiours, Equals, Inferiours, any or all Persons mu∣tually towards one another, See 1 Kings 8. 14, 55, 56. 2 Chron 6. 3. Prov. 30. 11. This kind of Blessing, it being only improperly so, wherein the Act or Duty is demonstrated by its Object, doth not belong unto this Rule of the Apostle. 4. There is Benedictio Reverentialis; Hereof God is the Object. So Men are said often to Bless God, and to Bless his Holy Name, which is mentioned in the Scripture as a signal Duty of all that Fear and Love the Lord. Now this Blessing of God is a Declaration of his praises with an Holy Reverential Thankful admiration of his Excellencies. But this belongs not at all unto the design of the Apostle, nor is regulated by this general Maxime, but is a particular Instance of the direct con∣trary, wherein without Controversie the Greater is Blessed of the Less. It is the se∣cond sort of Blessings that is alone here intended; and that is mentioned as an Evi∣dent Demonstration of the Dignity of Melchisedec, and his Preeminence above Abraham. It is a great Mercy and Priviledge when God will make Use of any in the Blessing of others with Spiritual Mercies. It is God alone who Originally and Efficiently can do so, who can actually and infallibly Collate a Blessing on any one. Therefore is he said to Bless us with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly things, Ephes. 1. 3. There is no one Blessing but he is the sole Author and worker of it. But yet also he ma∣keth Use of others, severally, in various degrees of Usefulness, for their Commu∣nication. And this he doth, both to fill up that Order of all things in dependance on himself, wherein he will be glorified; and also to make some Partakers in his especial Grace and Favour by using them in the Collation of Good things, yea, the best things on others. For what greater Priviledge can any one be made Partaker of, than to be an Instrument in the Hand of God, in the Communication of his Grace and Goodness? And a Priviledge it is whose Exercise and Improvement
must be accounted for. I speak not therefore of them whose Benedictions are Euctical and Charitative only, in their mutual Prayers; but of such as are in some sence Authoritative. Now a Man Blesseth by the way of Authority when he doth it as an especial Ordinance, as he is called and appointed of God thereunto. Pecu∣liar Institution gives peculiar Authority. So Parents Bless their Children and Houshold, and Ministers the Church. Parents Bless their Children in the Name of the Lord, several ways. (1.) By Instruction; the Discharge whereof was the Glory and Honour of Abraham in the sight of God himself, Gen. 18. 17, 18, 19. For whereas the Knowledge and Fear of God, is the greatest Blessing that any one in this World can be made Partaker of, he hath Ordained that Parents shall be In∣strumental in the communication of them unto their Children, suitably unto that general Law of Nature, whereby they are Obliged in all things to seek their good. This being the End of the Instruction which God hath appointed them to attend unto, they do therein Bless them in the Name of the Lord. And if Parents did truly consider, how they stand in the stead of God in this matter, how what they do is peculiarly in his Name and by his Authority, they would (it may be) be more Diligent and Conscientious in the Discharge of their Duty, than they are. And if Children could but understand that Parental Instruction is an Instituted means of Gods Blessing them with the principal Blessing, & that whereon all others, as un∣to them, do much depend, whereunto the Fifth Commandment is Express, they would with more Diligence and Reverence apply themselves unto the reception of it, than is usual among them. (2.) They do it by their Example. The Conversation and Ho∣ly walking of Parents is Gods Ordinance whereby he Blesseth their Children. This is the Second way of Instruction, without which the former will be insufficient, yea, insignificant. Let Parents take what pains they please in the Teaching and Instructing of their Families, unless their Personal walk be Holy, and their Lives Fruitful, they will do more for their Destruction than their Edification. The least Disorder of Life persisted in, is of more prevalency to turn aside Children from the ways of God, from the liking and practice of them, than a multitude of Instructions are to perswade their Embracement. For besides that we are all Na∣turally more prone to Evil than Good, and a far less occasion or means will hasten us down a precipice, than raise us and bear us up in the difficult course of Holy O∣bedience; Instances of a Life inconsistent with Instructions or not answering them, beget secret thoughts in the minds of them who are Instructed, that all the pains taken therein is Hypocritical, than which Apprehension nothing is more effectual to alienate the minds of any from the ways of God. But when Mens Teachings of their Families are exemplified by the Holiness and Fruitfulness of their own Lives, then are they an Ordinance of God for the Blessing of them. To Pray, to Read, to Catechize, to Instruct, and then to lead a Life in Frowardness, Passi∣on, Worldly-mindedness, Vain Communication, and the like, is to pull down with one hand what we set up with the other, or rather with both our Hands to pull down our own Houses. (3.) By Prayer for them. So David Blessed his House∣hold, 2 Sam. 6. 20. For besides the Duty of Prayer, absolutely considered, there is in those Prayers by the Appointment of God, an especial Plea for, and Ap∣plication of the Promises of the Covenant unto them which we our selves have received. So it is expressed in the Prayer of David, 2 Samuel 8. 29. Therefore now let it please thee to Bless the House of thy Servant, that it may continue for ever before thee, for thou O Lord God hast spoken it, and with thy Blessing let the House of thy Servant be Blessed for ever. And I do not under∣stand how those who do not believe the especial Interest of their Children in the Co∣venant of Grace, can Bless them in the Name of the Lord in a due manner. These are some few Heads of Paerental Benedictions, which whether the Duty thereof be answered in that common Custom which some even confine all Parental Blessings unto, in an open neglect of all the Duties mentioned and others of an alike Nature, is not hard to determine. Secondly, Ministers Bless the Church. It is part of their Ministerial Duty, and belongs unto their Office so to do. (1.) They do it by putting the Name of God upon the Church. This was the way whereby the Priests Blessed the People of Old, Numb. 6. last. And this putting the Name of God upon the Church is, by the right and orderly Celebration of all the Holy Ordinances of Worship
of his appointment. For the Name of God and of Christ is upon them all; where∣fore in the orderly Celebration of them, the Name of God is put upon the Church, and is brought under the Promise of the Meeting and Blessing of God; as he hath spoken concerning every thing whereon he hath placed his Name. This is an espe∣cial way of Authoritative Blessing, which can no way be discharged but by virtue of Ministerial Office. Only let Ministers take heed that they put not the Name of a false god upon the Church, by the introduction of any thing in Religious Wor∣ship which is not of Gods Appointment. (2.) They Bless the Church in the Dispensation and Preaching of the Word unto the Conversion and Edification of the Souls of Men. So speak the Apostles concerning their Preaching of the VVord, Acts 3. 26. Unto you first God having raised up his Son Jesus sent him to Bless you, in turning every one of you from his Iniquities. This sending of Christ after his Resur∣rection was the sending of him in the Ministry of the Apostles and others, by the Preaching of the Gospel. And the End hereof is to Bless them unto whom it is Preached. And it is known that all the Principal Spiritual Blessings of God in this World are Communicated unto the Souls of Men by the Ministry of the VVord, and Ministerial Administration of the Sacraments, as the only outward Causes and Means thereof. Herein do Ministers Bless the People in the Name and Authority of God. (3.) They do it by the particular Ministerial applications of the Word un∣to the Souls and Consciences of Men. This Authority hath Christ given unto them; saith he, VVhose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained, John 20. 23. I know what Use hath been made of these words, that is, how they have been abused to give Countenance unto the ne∣cessity of private Confession of all Sins unto the Priests, and of their Power of Ab∣solution or Remission thereon. But yet the real intention of the words and the Truth that is in them, must not be waved or over-looked. It is not therefore the meer Preaching of the VVord and therein a Doctrinal Declaration of whose Sins are remitted, and whose Sins are retained, according to the Gospel, which Men are respectively interested in by their Faith or Unbelief, that is here intended; the Commission giving Power whereunto, is of a more general Nature. But an especial Application of the word unto the Consciences of Men with respect unto their Sins is included therein. And this is done two ways. (1.) VVith respect unto the Judgment of the Church. (2.) VVith respect unto the Judgment of God. The first is that binding or loosing which the Lord Christ hath given Power for unto the Mi∣nisters and Guides of the Church as to the Communion thereof, Mat. 18. 18. For by the Ministerial Application of the Word unto the Sins and Consciences of Men, are they to be continued in, or excluded from the Communion of the Church, which is called the binding or loosing of them. The other respects God himself; and the sense which the Conscience of a Sinner hath of the guilt of Sin before him. In this case the Ministers of the Gospel are Authorized in the Name of Christ, to remit their Sins; that is, so to apply the Promises of Mercy and Grace unto their Souls and Consciences, as that being received by Faith, they may have Peace with God. So are they Authorized to remit or retain Sins according to the tenor and terms of the Gospel. Not that the Remission of Sins absolutely doth depend on an Act of Office, but the Release of the Conscience of a Sinner from the sense of guilt, doth sometimes much depend upon it, rightly performed; that is, by due Application of the Promises of the Gospel unto such as Believe and Repent. (4.) How they Bless the Church by Prayer and Example, may be understood from what hath been spoken concerning those things with respect unto Parents. The Authority that is in them depends on Gods especial Institution, which exempts them from and exalts them above the common Order of mutual Charitative Benedictions. (5.) They Bless the People Declaratively; as a Pledge whereof it hath been al∣ways of Use in the Church, that at the Close of the Solemn Duties of its Assem∣blies, wherein the Name of God is put upon it, to Bless the People by express mention of the Blessing of God, which they pray for upon them. But yet because the same thing is done in the Administration of all other Ordinances, and this Be∣nediction is only Euctical or by the way of Prayer, I shall not plead for the Neces∣sity of it. And we may yet infer two things from hence. (1.) That those who are thus appointed to Bless others in the Name of God, and thereby exalted into a Pre∣eminence above those that are Blessed, by his appointment, ought to be accordingly re∣garded
by all that are so Blessed by them. It is well if Christians do rightly consi∣der what their Duty is unto them who are appointed as a means to communicate all Spiritual Blessings unto them. And (2.) Let those who are so appointed take heed lest by their miscarriage they prove not a Curse unto them whom they ought to Bless. For if they are negligent in the Performance of their Duties in the things mentio∣ned, much more, if therewithal they put the Name of any false god upon them, they are no otherwise. VER. 8. The Eighth Verse carrieth on the same Argument, by a particular Application unto the Matter in hand, of the things which he had in general observed before in Melchisedec. For whereas the Apostle had before declared, that he was without Fa∣ther, without Mother, without Beginning of Days or End of Life, he now shews how all this conduced unto his purpose. . , Syr. by an usual Idiotisme of that Language, the Sons of Man. , qui moriuntur, who dye. Vul. Lat. Homines morientes, dying men; of which difference we must speak afterwards; , generally, de quo testatum est, quod vivat. Vul. Lat. Ibi autem con∣testatur quia vivit; which the Rhemists render, but there he hath witness, that he Liveth; both obscurely. Arius, Testatione dictus quia vivit, to no Advantage. , is properly, is de quo testatur, as Erasmus, Beza, Castalia, Smidle, render it. The Arabick concurs with the Vulgar. The Syriack by way of Pa∣raphrase; He of whom the Scripture witnesseth that he Liveth. And here men verily that dye receive Tithes, but there he of whom it is wit∣nessed that he Liveth. There is in the words a Comparison and Opposition between the Levitical Priests and Melchisedec in this matter of receiving Tithes, which in general was common to them both. And we may consider in them, (1.) The Circumstances of the Com∣parison. (2.) The general Agreement of both sorts, which is the ground of the Comparison. (3.) The parts of the Antithesis or Opposition, or dissimilitude be∣tween them. The Circumstances of the Comparison are two. (1.) The manner of its In∣troduction, in the earnestness of the Assertion, in the Particle , it is as much as . quidem or equidem, truly, verily, which is omitted in our Translation, though else∣where the same Particle is so rendred. This moreover is the state of the Case in this matter. And the Insertion of it is proper unto an Affirmation upon a Concession, as this here is. Secondly, The Determination of the Time or Place, or Manner of the Opposition in those Adverbs  and , here and there;  usually refers unto place. And some think that the Apostle hath respect unto Hierusalem the Seat of the Levitical . Priesthood, and the Land of Canaan which alone was Tithable according to the Law. For the Jews do Judge, and that rightly, that the Law of Legal Tithing extended not it self beyond the Bounds of the Land of Canaan; a sufficient Evidence that it was Positive and Ceremonial. In Opposition hereunto,  there, must signifie some other places or any place where the Priesthood of Melchisedec hath its signi∣fication; that is, in Christian Religion. But the Truth is, if  here signifies a certain and determinate place, that opposed in  there, must be Salem, where Melchisedec dwelt, which was not only afterwards Tithable as within the Bounds of Canaan, but most probably was Hierusalem it self, as we have declared. This Conjecture therefore is too Curious; nor do we need to tye up our selves unto the precise signification of the word , although that also be sometimes used with respect unto time as well as place. VVherefore these words here and there, do
express the several different states under Consideration. Here, is in the case of the Levitical Priesthood; and There respects the case of Melchisedec, as stated, Gen. 14. Secondly, The Foundation of the Comparison, that wherein both agreed, is in this, that they received Tithes. It is expressed of the one sort only, namely, the Levitical Priests, they received Tithes; but it is understood of the other also, whereon the word is repeated and inserted in our Translation; but there he re∣ceiveth . them, , They do receive Tithes in the Present Tense. But it may be said, there was none that then did so; or at least de jure could do so, seeing the Law of Tithing was abolished. Wherefore an Enallage may be allow∣ed here of the present time for that which was past; they do, that is, they did so whilst the Law was in force. But neither is this Necessary: For as I have before Observed, the Apostle admits or takes it for granted, that the Mosaical System of Worship was yet continued, and argueth on that concession unto the Necessity of its approaching abolition. And yet we need not here the Use of this Supposi∣tion. For the words determine neither time nor place, but the state of Religion under the Law. According unto the Law are Tithes to be paid unto, and received by such Persons. This therefore is agreed, That both the Levitical Priests and Melchisedec received Tithes. The Opposition and Difference lyes in the Qualification and Properties of them . by whom they are received. For (1.) Those on the one side, that is, of the Levitical Priesthood were ; Homines qui moriuntur, or homi∣nes morientes; Men that dye, dying men; that is, Men subject unto Death, Mortal men, who lived and dyed in the Discharge of their Office, according unto the Common Laws of Mortality. And the Observation of Schlictingius on these words is as far as I can understand Useless unto his own Design, much more to the Apostles. Notandum vero quod non mortalibus hominibus, sed morientibus tantum Melchisedecum Author opponat, nec immortalem eum esse, sed vivere dicit; vita au∣tem non mortalitati sed morti proprie opponitur. Something is aimed at in way of Security unto another Opinion, namely, that all men were Created in a state of Mortality without respect unto Sin. But nothing is gotten by this Subtility. For by Dying men the Apostle intends not Men that were actually dying, as it were at the point of Death. For in that Condition the Priests could neither execute their Office nor receive Tithes of the People. Only he describes such Persons as in the whole course of their Ministry were liable unto Death from the Common Con∣dition of Mortality, and in their several Seasons dyed accordingly. Wherefore dying men, or men Subject to Death, and Mortal men are in this case the same. And although Life as to the Principle of it be opposed unto Death, yet as unto a continual Duration, the thing here intended by the Apostle, it is opposed unto Mortality, or an obnoxiousness unto Death. For a Representation is designed of him who was made a Priest not after the Law of a Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an endless Life. Wherefore, saith the Apostle, those who received Tithes after the Law, were all of them Mortal men, that had both Beginning of Days and End of Life. So the Death of Aaron the first of them, and in him of all his Successors is Recorded in the Scripture. In Opposition unto this state of the Levitical Priests, it is affirmed that , in . the Case of Melchisedec, , it is Witnessed that he Liveth. How he Liveth, and how it is Witnessed unto that he Liveth we must Enquire. For it is apparently of Melchisedec, of whom in the first place as the Type these things are spoken; and yet we know that really and in his own Person he was Dead long before. But there are several things on the Account whereof, it is said, that it is witnessed that he Liveth. For (1.) Whatever the Scripture is silent in as to Mel∣chisedec, which it usually relates of others in the like state, our Apostle takes for a Contrary Testimony unto him. For he lays down this general Principle, That what the Scripture conceals of Melchisedec it doth it to Instruct us in the Mystery of his Person and Ministry, as Types of Christ and his. Hence the Silence of the Scrip∣ture in what it useth to express, must in this case be Interpreted as a Testimony un∣to the contrary. So it witnessed of him that he was without Father, without Mother, without Descent, in that it mentioneth none of them. And whereas he had neither Beginning of Days nor End of Life Recorded in the Scripture, it is thereby wit∣nessed,
that not absolutely but as to his Typical consideration, he Liveth. For there are no bounds nor periods fixed unto his Priesthood, nor did it expire by the bringing in that of Levi, as that did by the Introduction of Christ's. (2.) He did actually continue his Office unto the end of that Dispensation of God and his Worship wherein he was employed: and this witnesseth the perpetuity of his Life in opposition unto the Levitical Priests. For these two States are compared by the Apostle, that of Melchisedec and that of Levi. There was a time limited un∣to this Priesthood in the House of Aaron; and during that time one Priest died and another Succeeded in several Generations until they were greatly multiplyed, as the Apostle observeth, ver. 23. But during the whole Dispensation of things with respect unto Melchisedec, he continued in his own Person to execute his Office from first to last, without being Subject unto Death, wherein it is witnessed that he Liveth. (3.) He is said to Live, that is, always to do so, because his Office con∣tinueth for ever, and yet no meer Mortal Man Succeeded him therein. (4.) In this whole Matter he is considered not Absolutely and Personally, but Typically and as a Representation of somewhat else. And what is Represented in the Type, but is really, subjectively and properly found only in the Antitype, may be affirm∣ed of the Type as such. So it is in all Sacramental Institutions; as the Paschal Lamb was called expressely Gods Passover, Exod. 12. 11. when it was only a Pledge and Token thereof; as under the New Testament, the Bread and Wine in the Sacred Supper, are called the Body and Blood of Christ, which they do Represent. Thus it is true really and absolutely of our Lord Jesus Christ, That he Liveth for ever, that he is a Priest for ever, which the Apostle much insisteth on and urgeth unto his purpose afterwards. This Eternity or ever-living of Jesus Christ was Represented in Melchisedec in that it is not said any where in the Scripture that he dyed; it is wit∣nessed therefore that he Liveth, because He whom he Represents doth really do so, & his own Death is not mentioned, on purpose that he might so Represent him. And the Apostle's Argument unto the Dignity and Preheminence of Melchisedec above the Levitical Priests in this Instance, is of an unquestionable Evidence. For consider Melchisedec not in his Natural Being and Existence, which belongs not unto this My∣stery, but in his Scripture-Being and Existence, and he is Immortal, always Living, wherein he is more Excellent than those who were always obnoxious unto Death in the Exercise of their Office. And from the branches of this Comparison we may take two Observations. 1. In the outward Administration of his worship God is pleased to make Use of poor, frail, mortal, dying men. So he did of old, and so he continues still to do. Our Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they Live for ever? Zech. 1. 5. The Prophets of old, the most Eminent Administrators under the Old Testament they were all mortal dying men, and whilst they lived in this World they were Subject, unto like Passions with other Men, James 5. 17. And the same account the Apostle giveth us of the Principal Administrators of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Chap. 6. 8, 9. And we know it is so with all those into whose hands the same work is transmitted. Yea, oft-times as to the Infirmities of Body and out∣ward Condition, their weakness and frailty, are signalized above others. Nor doth any Advantage accrue to the Gospel by the Secular Exaltations of such as pre∣tend unto the same Employment, wherein without other Qualifications they do lit∣tle resemble the Ministry of Christ himself. Such, I say, doth God please to make Use of; Persons obnoxious unto all Infirmities and Temptations with all other Be∣lievers, and equally with them falling under the stroke of Mortality. He could have accomplished his whole Design immediately by his Grace and Spirit without the Institution of any Administrators. He could have employed his Holy Angels in the Declaration and Dispensation of the Gospel; or he could have raised up Men so signalized with Wisdom and all endowments of Mind and Body, as should have eminently distinguished them from the whole Race of Mankind besides. But wa∣ving these and all other ways possible and easie unto his Infinite Wisdom and Power, he hath chosen to make Use in this great Occasion, of Poor, Infirm, Frail, Tempted, Sinning, Dying men. And sundry Reasons of this his Holy Councel are expressed in the Scripture. 1. He doth it to make it Evident that it is his own Power and nothing else which gives Efficacy and Success unto all Gospel-Administrations. 2 Cor. 4. 7. VVe have
this Treasure in Earthen Vessels that the Excellency of the Power may be of God and not of us. There is an Excellency of Power accompanieth the Dispensation of the VVord. Mighty Spiritual Effects are produced by it, such as wherein the Glory of God doth consist, and whereon the Eternal welfare of the Souls of Men doth depend. This Glory in subduing the Adverse Power of Sin, Satan, and the World, in the Quickening, Sanctifying, Saving the Souls of the Elect, God will be seen and owned in, he will not give it unto another. Whereas therefore those by whom these Treasures are communicated unto others, are frail, perishing, Earthen Vessels, or those by whom the Gospel is dispensed are poor, frail, weak men, seen and known so to be, there is no veil by their Ministry cast over the Glory of God. There is not a Soul Convinced, Converted, or Comforted by their Word, but they may truly say of it as the Apostles did of the Miracle which they wrought, Acts 3. 12. Why look ye so on us, as though by our own Power and Holiness we made this man walk? This Blind Man to see, this Dead Man to live. By the Conside∣ration of our meanness all may discern that the Excellency of this Power is of God, and not of us. Yea, for this very End our Apostle refused to make Use of such a perswasiveness of words and exercise of VVisdom, as might give any Appear∣ance or Countenance unto such an Apprehension, as though by them this Effect were produced. 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. My Speech and my Preachings was not with enticing words of mans wisdom, but in demonstration of Spirit and of Power; that your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of Man, but in the Power of God. And herein ought he to be an Example unto us all. But it is come to that with many, that being desti∣tute utterly of what he had, namely, and ability to dispense the word in the Demon∣stration of the Spirit and of Power, do wholly betake themselves unto what he re∣fused, or the enticing words of Mans wisdom, according to their Ability. But what the Jews spoke Blasphemously of Christ upon his opening the Eyes of him who was Born Blind, may in a sence be truly spoken of any of us upon the open∣ing of the Eyes of them that were Spiritually Blind; Give God the praise, we know that this man is a Sinner. (2.) God hath so Ordered things in VVisdom and Grace, that the Administra∣tors of Holy things unto others, might have Experience in themselves of their State and Condition so as to be moved with Compassion towards them, Care about them, and Zeal for them. VVithout these Graces and this constant Exercise Men will be but very useless Instruments in this work. And they will not grow any where but in Mens own Experience. For how shall he be Tender Compassionate, Careful towards the Souls of others, who knows no Reason why he should be so towards his own? The High Priest of Old was such an one as could have Compassion on the Ignorant and them that are out of the way, for that he himself was encompassed with Infirmity, Heb. 5. 2. And therein was he a Type of Christ, who was in all points Tempted as we are, that he might be ready to Succour them that are Tempted. This gave him the Experience of Compassion in the Exercise of it. VVherefore when a Mi∣nister of the Gospel knows his own VVeakness, Infirmities, and Temptations, his need of Mercy and Grace, the ways of his obtaining Supplies of them, the dan∣ger of the Snares which he is exposed unto, the value of his own Soul, the Pre∣ciousness of the Blood of Christ, and Excellency of the Eternal Reward, he can∣not, considering the Charge committed unto him and the Duty required of him, but be moved with Pity, Compassion, Tenderness, Love, and Zeal towards those unto whom he doth Administer, especially considering how greatly their Eternal welfare depends on his Ability, Diligence and Faithfulness in the Discharge of his Duty. And this proves on sundry accounts greatly to the Advantage of the poor Tempted Disciples of Christ. For it makes a Representation unto them of his own Compassion and Love as the great Shepherd of the Sheep, Isa. 40. 11. and causeth a needful Supply of Spiritual Provisions to be always in readiness for them, and that to be Administred unto them with Experience of its Efficacy and Success. 3. That the Power of Gospel-Grace and Truth may be exemplified unto the Eyes of them unto whom they are dispensed, in the Persons of them by whom it is Administred according unto Gods Appointment. It is known unto all who know ought in this mat∣ter, what Temptations and Objections will arise in the minds of poor Sinners against their obtaining any Interest in the Grace and Mercy that is dispensed in the Gospel. Some, they judge, may be made Partakers of them, but for them, and such as
they are, there seems to be no Relief provided. But is it no Encouragement un∣to them, to see that by Gods appointment, the Tenders of his Grace and Mercy are made unto their Souls, by Men Subject unto alike Passions with themselves, and who if they had not freely obtained Grace, would have been as vile and unwor∣thy as themselves? For as the Lord called the Apostle Paul to the Ministry, who had been a Blasphemer, a Persecutor and Injurious, that he might in him shew forth all Long-suffering for a Pattern unto them who should hereafter believe on him to Ever∣lasting Life, that is for the Encouragement even of such high Criminal Offenders to Believe, 1 Tim. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. So in more Ordinary Cases, the Mercy and Grace which the Ministers of the Gospel did equally stand in need of with those unto whom they dispense it, and have received it, is for a Pattern, Example, and Encouragement of them to Believe after their Example. 4. In particular God maketh Use of Persons that dye in this matter, that their Te∣stimony unto the Truth of Gospel-Grace and Mercy may be Compleat and unquestionable. Death is the great Touch-stone and Trial of all things of this Nature, as to their Efficacy and Sincerity. Many things will yield Relief in Life, and various Re∣freshments, which upon the approach of Death vanish into nothing. So it is with all the Comforts of this VVorld, and with all things that have not an Eternal Truth and Substance in them. Had not those therefore who dispense Sacred things, been designed themselves to come unto this Touch-stone of their own Faith, Profession, and Preaching, those who must dye, and know always that they must do so, would have been unsatisfied what might have been the Condition with them, had they been brought unto it; and so have ground to fear in themselves what will become of that Faith wherein they have been Instructed, in the warfare of Death when it shall ap∣proach. To obviate this Fear and Objection, God hath Ordained that all those who Administer the Gospel, shall all of them bring their own Faith unto that Last Trial; that so giving a Testimony unto the Sincerity and Efficacy of the things which they have Preached, in that they Commit the Eternal Salvation of their Souls unto them, (and higher Testimony none can give) they may be Encouragements unto others, to follow their Examples, to imitate their Faith, and pursue their Course unto the End. And for this cause also doth God oft-times call them forth unto peculiar Trials, Exercises, Afflictions, and Death it self in Martyrdom, that they may be an Example and Encouragement unto the whole Church. I cannot but Observe for a Close of this Discourse, that as the unavoidable In∣firmities of the Ministers of the Gospel managed and passed through in a course of Faith, Holiness, and Sincere Obedience, are on many Accounts of singular Use and Advantage unto the Edification and Consolation of the Church; so the Evil Examples of any of them in Life and Death, with the want of those Graces which should be excited unto Exercise by their Infirmities, is pernicious thereunto. . 2 The Life of the Church depends on the Everlasting Life of Jesus Christ. It is said of Melchisedec, as he was a Type of him, It is witnessed that he Liveth. Christ doth so, and that for ever; and hereon under the Failings, Infirmities, and Death of all other Administrators, depends the Preservation, Life, Continuance, and Salvation of the Church. But this must be spoken peculiarly on ver. 27. whi∣ther it is remitted. VER. 9, 10. It may be Objected unto the whole precedent Argument of the Apostle, That although Abraham himself paid Tithes unto Melchisedec, yet it followeth not that Melchisedec was Superiour unto the Levitical Priests, concerning whom alone the Question was between him and the Jews. For although Abraham might be a Priest in some sence also, by virtue of common Right, as were all the Patriarchs, yet was he not so by virtue of any especial Office, Instituted of God to abide in the Church. But when God afterwards by peculiar Law and Ordinance Erected an Order and Office of Priesthood in the Family of Levi, it might be Superiour unto or Exalted above that of Melchisedec, although Abraham paid Tithes unto him. This Objection therefore the Apostle obviates in these verses, and there∣withal giving his former Argument a farther Improvement, he makes a Transition according unto his usual Custom (as it hath been often Observed that it is his Me∣thod
to do) unto his especial Design, in proving the Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ, above that of the Law, which is the main scope of this whole Discourse. VER. 9, 10. . , Ut verbum dicere, as to speak a word. Vul. Lat. Ut ita dictum sit, be it so said. Syr. As any one may say. Arab. And it is said that this Dis∣course, or Reason, may be some way ended. Ut ita loquar, as I may so speak. In the rest of the words there is neither Difficulty, nor Difference among Tran∣slators. There are three things Observable in these words. (1.) The manner of the Introduction of the Apostle's new Assertion. (2.) The Assertion it self, which hath the force of a new Argument unto his Purpose, ver. 9. And (3.) The Proof of his Assertion in ver. 10. The manner of the Introduction of his Assertion is in these words, as I may so . say. This Qualification of the Assertion makes an abatement of it one way or other. Now this is not, as to the Truth of the Proposition, but as to the Pro∣priety of the Expression. The words are, as if that which is expressed was actu∣ally so; namely, that Levi himself paid Tithes, whereas it was so only virtually. The thing it self intended was with respect unto the Apostles purpose as if it had been so indeed; though Levi not being then actually existent, he could not be Tithed in his own Person. Nor is the Apostle dubious of the Truth of the Con∣sequent which he urgeth from this Observation, as if he had said prope dixerim, which is supposed as one signification of this Phrase. Only the Instance being new, and he Arguing from what was virtual only, as if it had been actual, he gave his Assertion this Qualification. This is spoken upon an allowance of the common acceptation of the sence of these words among Interpreters. For my part, I ra∣ther incline to judge that he useth this Phrase for as much as ut verbo dicam, to sum up the whole in a word. To put an Issue unto this Dispute between the Levitical Priesthood and that of Melchisedec: I say, that not only Abraham, but even Levi himself was Tithed by him. 2. His Assertion is, That Levi who received Tithes was Tithed in Abraham, . namely, when Abraham gave the Tithes of all to Melchisedec. By Levi he in∣tendeth not the Person of Levi absolutely, the Third Son of Jacob, but his Po∣sterity, or the whole Tribe proceeding from him, so far as they were Interested in the Priesthood. For Levi himself never received Tithes of any, the Priesthood being erected in his Family long after his Death in the Person of his Great Grand∣child Aaron. So then Levi who received Tithes is the same with the Sons of Le∣vi who received the Priesthood, ver. 5. Namely, in their several Generations unto that Day. Of this Levi it is affirmed that , He was Tithed or paid . Tithes in Abraham, or through him, and by him, as the word is. When Abra∣ham himself gave Tithes to Melchisedec, he did it not in his own Name only, but in the Name of himself and his whole Posterity. And this upon the Principles be∣fore laid down and vindicated, proves the Preeminence of the Priesthood of Mel∣chisedec above that of the House and Family of Levi. All the Difficulty of the Argument lies in the Proof of the Assertion, namely, That Levi did indeed so pay Tithes in Abraham. This the Apostle therefore proves by the Observation which he lays down, ver. 10. For he was yet in the Loyns of his Father when Melchisedec met him. The force of this Proof seems to depend on a double Principle. (1.) That . Children, the whole Posterity of any one, are in his Loyns before they are Born. And this Principle is sure in the Light of Nature and common Reason; they are in them as the Effect in its Cause; nor have they any future existence but with Relation un∣to their Progenitors even the remotest of them. (2.) That what any one doth,
that all his Posterity are esteemed to do in and by him. But it is certain that this Rule will not generally hold, nor indeed will it ever do so absolutely without some other cogent Circumstances. By Humane Laws, the Crimes of Men reflect disho∣nour in some cases on their Families; and on the other side they entail the Honour which by their worth they have acquired on their Posterities. What a Man also gives away of his Estate unto Publick Uses, as in the Foundation of Schools or Hos∣pitals, his Children may be said to do it in him, because so much is decreased from their Inheritance. As here what Abraham gave to Melchisedec it was alienated from his Posterity, Levi among the rest. But none of these things reach the case in hand, or are sufficient to give Force or Evidence unto the Reasoning of the Apo∣stle. Wherefore to find them out, sundry things must be observed which are ma∣nifest Truths in themselves, and on the Supposition whereof the Apostle's Ar∣gument stands firm. 1. That Abraham was now called of God, and separated unto his Service, so as to be the Foundation of a new Church in the World. And there is a Relation unto such an Original Stock in all the Branches, beyond what they have unto any other intermediate Progenitors. Hence all the Idolatrous Nations in the World, constantly made the first Persons from whom they derived their Original, of whose Off-spring they would be ccounted, their gods whom they Worshipped. These were their Joves indigites, their Home-born Deities, whom they Honoured, and whose Honours they thought descended unto them by Inheritance. 2. He had now received the Promise that God would be a God unto him and his Seed after him; whereby all his Posterity were taken into Covenant with him, and hereon Abraham Covenanted with God in the Name of, and as the great Repre∣sentative of all his Seed. And such Covenants are the Foundation of all Order and Rule in this World. For after Persons, or a People have Covenanted into such Agreements in Government, and as to the Administration of Common Right among themselves, provided the terms whereon they have agreed be good and suitable unto the light of Nature, their Posterity are not at Liberty to alter and change them at their Pleasure. For whereas they derive all their Right and Inhe∣ritances from their Progenitors, they are supposed in them to have consented unto all that was done by them. 3. Hereon what God said and did unto Abraham, he said it and did it unto all his Seed in him. The Promises were theirs, and the Inheritance was theirs; yea, what God is said to give unto Abraham so often, namely, the whole Land of Ca∣naan, was never actually made good unto him in his own Person, no, not a Foots breadth. But he received the Grant of it as a Representative of his Posterity, who 400 Years after had the actual Possession of it. 4. What Abraham did Solemnly in Obedience unto God by virtue of the Cove∣nant as a Publick Condition thereof, he did undertake in it for his Posterity, and performed it in their Name. And therefore God enjoyned him to bring all his Po∣sterity under the Token of that Engagement in Circumcision so soon as they were capable thereof. And on the other hand, God continually affirms that he would do them good because of his Oath and Engagement unto Abraham, seeing they were intended therein. Wherefore, 5. Abraham in this Solemn Address unto God by Melchisedec the Type of Christ, wherein he expressed his Covenant-Obedience unto him, was the Represen∣tative of all his Posterity, and in particular of Levi and all the Priests that De∣scended from him. And having now received the whole Land by virtue of a Co∣venant in the behalf of his Posterity, that it should be theirs, though he himself had never Possession of it, nor in it, he doth in the Name of his Posterity, and as their Representative, give the Tenths unto God by Melchisedec, as that Chief Rent which God for ever reserved unto himself, upon his Grant. When the People came actually to Possess the Land, they held it always on this Condition, That the Tenths of all should be given unto God. And this Abraham in his taking seisin of it for them paid in their Name: So truly and virtually was Levi himself Tithed in the Loyns of Abraham when Melchisedec met him. Wherefore it was not meerly Le∣vi being in the Loyns of Abraham with respect unto Natural Generation, whence he is said to be Tithed in him, but his being in him with Respect unto the Cove∣nant which Abraham entred into with God in the Name of his whole Posterity.
This Reasoning of the Apostle's I confess at first view seemeth as intricate and more remote from cogency than any else-where used by him. And therefore by some Profane Persons hath it been cavilled at. But all things of that Nature arise meerly from want of a due Reverence unto the Word of God. When we come unto it with those Satisfactions in our Minds, that there is Truth, and Divine Wis∣dom in every Expression of it, that all its Reasonings are cogent and effectual, though we understand them not, we shall not fail upon an Humble Enquiry to attain what we may safely embrace, or see what we ought to admire. And so this place which at first sight seems to present us with a Reasoning on a very uncertain Foun∣dation, being duly enquired into, we find it Resolved into the firm Principles of Rea∣son and Religion. And the fore-going Observation will expedite two difficult Questions which Ex∣positors raise unto themselves on this Verse. The first whereof is, whether Christ himself may not as well as Levi be said to pay Tithes in Abraham, as being in his Loyns? which would utterly frustrate the Design of the Apostle. The Second is, how or in what sence one may be said to do any thing in another, which may be reckoned or imputed unto him? For the first of these, Austin and others have well Laboured in the solution of it: The Sum of what they say is, That the Lord Christ was not in Abraham as Levi was, not in his Nature as it was Corrupted; nor did he educe or derive his Na∣ture from him by Carnal Generation or the Common way of the Propagation of Man∣kind. And these things do constitute a sufficient Difference and distance between them in this Matter. But yet with these Considerations and on the Supposition of them, there is another which contains the true and proper Reason of this Diffe∣rence. And that is, that the Lord Christ was never in Abraham as a foederate, as one taken into Covenant with him, and so Represented by him, as Levi was. Abra∣ham was taken into Covenant with Christ, as the Head, Sponsor, Surety, and Mediator of the New Covenant, with Respect whereunto he says of himself and the Elect, Behold I and the Children which the Lord hath given me. Hereon he was the Representative of Abraham and all that Believe, and what he did is impu∣ted unto them. But he was never taken into Covenant with Abraham, nor was ca∣pable of so being, seeing unto him it was a Covenant of Pardon and Justification by Faith, which he was no way concerned in but as the Procurer of them for others. Wherefore what Abraham did cannot be imputed unto him, so as he should be esteemed to have done them in him. And this makes way for the Solution of the general Question, How one may be said to do any thing in another which shall be reckoned unto him as his own act? And this may be by virtue of a Covenant and no otherwise. Hence Divines do usually Illustrate the imputation of the Sin of Adam unto his Posterity by this Example of Levi, though I have not met with any who truly understand the Ground of the Compari∣son, which is Abraham acting as a Covenanter in the Name of his Posterity. But whereas this is opposed with some vehemency by Schlictingius in his Comment on this place, I shall Transcribe his words, and consider his Discourse. Haec senten∣tia non ad omnes actiones transferenda est; sed ad eas tantum quae propriè versantur vel in auctione vel in diminutione rerum quae à Parentibus in liberos devolvi & haere∣ditario jure transferri solent, qualis actio est decimarum solutio. Persolvuntur enim de bonis & facultatibus, quae hactenus cùm sunt liberorum, quatenus jus haereditatis ad eos spectat, praesertim si certum sit, fore liberos, qui in bona succedant, quemad∣modum Abrahamo contigit, cui certa fuit à deo promissa posteritas. Quemadmodum enim haeredes personam patris post mortem ratione possessionis bonorum veluti repraesen∣tant, it a antequam haeredes à patre separentur & de bonis paternis statuendi arbitrium habeant, Pater omnium liberorum suorum personam quadam ratione refert, & quic∣quid de illis statuerit aut fecerit id haeredes quodammodo fecisse censentur. Dico, quodammodo, quia propriè id dici non potest; nec autor hic D. id propriè factum esse asserit, sed improprietatem verbis suis subesse ipsemet profitetur, ut antea vidimus. Ex dictis autem facilè intelligitur, id quod nos unà cum Autore D. statuimus, ad eos tantum Successores seu posteros esse extendendum ad quos vel certò, ut Abrahami posteris contigit, vel saltem verisimiliter perventura sit haereditas Parentis, & notabilis aliqua bonorum ab eo profectorum portio. Alioquin vis illa haereditatis de qua diximus, ex∣pirabit, nec posteris tribui poterit id quod majorum aliquis circa bona sua fecerit.
Quibus it a explicatis, facile jam apparet falli eos qui ex hoc loco colligunt omnem A∣dami posteritatem in ipso Adamo parente suo peccasse, & mortis supplicium verè fuisse commeritum. Nam vel de co nunc quidquam dicam ipsum Autorem impropriet atem in hac loquendi forma agnoscere, nequaquam id extendendum est ad parentum majo∣rumve peccata ac merita. Etenim peccata ac merita qua talia mere sunt personalia, seu personam ejus qui peccat non egrediuntur, nec eatenus parentes posteritatem suam re∣praesentant; licet fieri queat ut ex eorum delicto damnum aliquod nec exiguum ad libe∣ros redumlet, quemadmodum quidem in Adami delicto contigit; ipsum tamen peccatum ac meritum Adami revera non communicatur cum ejus posteritate, ac proinde posteri Adami ob Parentis sui noxam revera non puniuntur, nisi & ipsi parentem fuerint imi∣tati. I have Transcribed these words at large, because their Design is to defeat that Article of our Faith concerning the Imputation of the Sin of Adam unto all his Po∣sterity, which there is no doubt but they will make Use of, who are gone over among our selves unto the Negative of it: and that it might appear whose Heifer they Plough withal who deny the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ unto Justi∣fication, because those things that are Personal and Inherent in one, cannot be commu∣nicated unto another. I say therefore, (1.) That this Assertion, Of one being accounted unto another in what he doth, holds only in those things which belong unto the Increase or Diminution of an Inheritance which descends from Parents unto Chil∣dren, and not otherwise, is gratis dictum, without pretence or Confirmation. Even in things Moral God threatens to visit the Sins of the Fathers on the Children. So the Israelites wandred poenally in the Wilderness forty Years, and bare the Iniquity of their Parents. The Infants that perished in the Flood, and at the Conflagration of Sodom, died poenally under the Judgment that came for the sin of their Parents. Wherefore the general Foundation of his whole Discourse is unproved and false, and the application of it unto the present Case, as we shall see, weak and imper∣tinent. For, (2.) This renders the Argument of the Apostle as weak and im∣pertinent as any thing can be imagined. For it allows Levi to be no otherwise Tithed in Abraham, but as part of the Goods which Abraham gave in Tithe to Melchisedec would have descended unto him. For he was but one of the twelve Sons of Jacob, the Grand-child of Abraham, whose share in those Tithes cannot be computed to be worth mentioning, much less to bear the weight of an Argu∣ment in so great a Cause. Besides it is not the Person of Levi, but his Posterity in the Family of Aaron, that is intended. And such Movables as were Tithed by A∣braham do seldom descend through so many Generations. It is therefore ridicu∣lous to impose such a kind of Argumentation on the Holy Apostle. (3.) Yea, this Interpretation is directly contrary unto what the Apostle designed to confirm by the Instance he gives. For that which he aimed at was to prove Levi Inferiour to Melchisedec by his paying of Tithes in the Loyns of Abraham. But if he did this no otherwise, but that some Goods that should have descended unto him were gi∣ven unto Melchisedec, it Argues him rather Superiour unto him; for absolutely he that gives is Superiour to him that receives, as it is in general a more Blessed thing to give than to receive. (4.) That which he proceeds upon, is a general Rule of his own framing, which is no way applicable unto this particular Case, as it is a particular Case. It is that, as Children Succeed into the room of their Parents as to their Goods, and after a sort represent them; so Parents before their Children come to Inherit do represent their Children, so as that they may be said in some sence to do what is done by their Parents. But this is a Rule made without any colour of Reason. For, (1.) I would know when this Representation and Concernment should expire, or whether it hold unto all Generations. If it hold for ever, then may we all be said in some sort to do what Adam did with his Goods and Lands before he died, and so of all our Intervenient Progenitors. If it do expire, and this Relation abideth only for a Season, I desire to know the Bounds of that Season. Aaron was the first of the House of Levi, who is intended in these words, and he was the seventh Generation from Abraham, in which time it is probable, if ever, this Right of Inheritance would expire. (2.) It is not true in any sence, in the very next Pa∣rents in most cases. For suppose a Parent be wicked and flagitious, and shall waste his Substance and Goods in Riotous living, in what sence shall his Son, suppose him a Person fearing God, be said so to have disposed of his Goods in him? (3.) The
Truth is, unless it be a subsequent Approbation of what our Progenitors have done, or by virtue of a Covenant whereby they and their Posterity were Obliged, which is the Case in hand, Children can in no sence be said to do, what their Pro∣genitors have done in the Disposal of their Goods and Inheritances. Neither indeed will a subsequent Approbation give any Tolerable sence unto this Assertion, unless there be a Power of an effectual dissent in the Children also. If a Man give a part of his Estate to Found an Hospital, and leave the Care of it unto his Posterity, with this proviso, that if any of them saw just Cause for it, they should re-assume the State into their own Possession; in case they do not so, they may in some sence be said to do, what indeed their Father did. But if this be not in their Power, though they approve of what he did, they cannot be said to have done it. But in Cove∣nants the Case is plain. Men may enter into a mutual Covenant for the Erection of a Government among them, which proving a Foundation of all their Civil Rights for the Future, their Posterity may be said to have made that Covenant, and to be Obliged thereby, as it was in this Case. (5.) Neither will it advantage his pre∣tence, with a seeming acknowledgment of some Impropriety in his Assertion in those words, , as I may so say. For although it should be granted that he intends some impropriety in the Expression, yet there must be Truth in his Assertion, which this Interpretation will not allow: For if it be true only in the sence he contends for, it is true in none at all, for that is not any. But the meaning of these words is, ut verbo dicam, that I may give you a Summary of the whole, that which my Argument riseth up unto. (6.) Having given us this crooked Rule, he adds a Limitation unto it, whereby he hopes to reduce the whole to his Purpose. For, saith he, this Rule is not to be extended unto the Merits or Sins of Parents and Ancestors, though some loss may accrew unto the Children thereby; for thence he in∣fers, that though we may suffer some loss by the Sin of Adam, yet his Sin is not imputed unto us. But (1.) How far the Children of Flagitious Parents may not only suffer loss, but undergo Temporal Punishment also for the Sins of their Parents was shewed before in the Instances of those who perished in their Infancy, both by the Flood and in the Conflagration of Sodom. (2.) The Case between any other Parent and his Posterity, is not the same as it was between Adam and us all, so that these things are Sophistically jumbled together. There is indeed an Analogy between Adam and his Posterity on the one hand, and Christ with Believers on the other; and never was there, nor shall there be the like Relation between any else. For these two Individual Persons were appointed of God to be the Heads of the two Covenants, and Representatives of the Foederates as unto the Ends of the Cove∣nants. Hence the whole Evil of the one, and the Good of the other, as they were, and as far as they were, Heads of the Covenants are imputed unto them who derive from them in their respective Covenants. But after the first Sin Adam ceased to be an Head unto his Posterity, as to the Good or Evil of that Covenant, which was now broken and disanulled. Neither was he nor any of his Posterity ever after restored or assumed into the same State and Condition. It is therefore highly vain to confound the Consideration of our Concernment in what Adam did as he was the Head of the Covenant, with what he afterwards did, and other in∣tervenient Progenitors might do. All this our Apostle confirms at large, Rom. 5. (7.) Abraham was taken into a new Administration of the Covenant with new Pro∣mises and Seals. But he neither was nor could be made the Head and Represen∣tative of that Covenant whereinto he was taken, otherwise than Typically. Hence his Moral Good or Evil could not be reckoned unto his Posterity in Covenant. But yet he was made the Head and Spring of the Administration of its outward Privi∣ledges; and this so far as his Trust extended, was imputed unto his Posterity, as in the case of Circumcision. Wherefore seeing what he did unto Melchisedec be∣longed unto the Administration of the Covenant committed unto him, Levi is right∣ly said to have done it in him also. And so these things do mutually Illustrate one another. But to deny that we were all in Adam as the Head of the first Covenant, that we sinned in him, that the Sin which we in any sence have sinned is imputed unto us, is not to dispute with us, but expressely to contradict the Holy Ghost. But we may take some Observations from these words: As, 1. They who receive Tithes of others for their work in Holy Administrations, are thereby proved to be Superiour unto them of whom they do receive them. They are
given unto them among other Ends as an acknowledgment of their Dignity. So it was when they were paid of Old by Gods Institution; and so it would be still, if they might be paid or received in a due manner with respect unto the Labour of any in Gospel Administrations. But whereas not one among thousands doth give or pay them on any other Ground but because they must do so whether they will or no; nor would do so any more were it not for the coercive enforcing Power of Humane Laws: If they on the other side that do receive them, do look on them not as a free Pledge of the Peoples Respect and the Honour that they bear unto them, but as their own Right and due by Law, they are a Testimony neither of the Peoples Obe∣dience, nor of the Ministers Dignity, but only of the extream Disorder of all things in Religion. 2. It is of great Concernment unto us, what Covenant we do belong unto, as being esteemed to do therein what is done by our Representatives in our Name. There were never absolutely any more than two Covenants. Wherein all Persons indefinitely are concerned. The first was the Covenant of Works made with Adam and with all in him. And what he did as the Head of that Covenant, as our Representative there∣in, is imputed unto us as if we had done it, Rom. 5. 12. The other is that of Grace made Originally with Christ, and through him with all the Elect. And here lieth the life and hope of our Souls, That what Christ did as the Head of that Covenant as our Representative, it is all imputed unto us for Righteousness and Salvation. And certainly there is nothing of more Importance unto us than to know whether of these Covenants we belong unto; we are also some way concerned in them, by whom that one or the other of these Covenant-states is conveyed unto us. For before we make our own Personal voluntary Choice, we are by the Law of our Na∣tures, and of the Covenant it self inclosed in the same Condition with our Proge∣nitors as to their Covenant-state. And thence it is that in the severest Temporal Judgments Children not Guilty of the actual Transgression of their Parents, not having sinned after the similitude of them, by imitation, do yet oft-times partake of the Punishment they have deserved, being esteemed in some manner to have done what they did so far as they were included in the same Covenant with them. And many Blessing on the other hand are they partakers of, who are included in the Covenant of those Parents, who are Interested in the Covenant of Grace. For such Parents succeed in the room of Abraham every one of them. And what Abra∣ham did as to the Administration of the Covenant intrusted with him, his Poste∣rity, whose Representative he was therein, are said to have done in him, as Levi is in this place, and therefore had the Seal of the Covenant given unto them in their Infancy. And an Alteration in this Dispensation of Grace hath not yet been pro∣ved by any, or scarce attempted so to be. VER. 11. IN this Verse, after so long a Preparation and Introduction, whereby he cleared his way from Objections, and secured his future Building, the Apostle enters on his Principal Argument concerning the Priesthood of Christ, and all the Conse∣quences of it with respect unto Righteousness, Salvation, and the Worship of God, which depend thereon. This being his main Design, he would not engage into it before he had in every respect declared and vindicated the Dignity and Glory of the Person of Christ as vested with his Blessed Offices. And from hence unto the didactical part of the Epistle, he proceeds in a Retrograde Order unto what he had before insisted on. For whereas he had first declared the Glory of the Person of Christ in his Kingly Office, Chap. 1. then in his Prophetical, Chap. 2, 3. And having now entred on his Sacerdotal, he goes on to enlarge upon this last Function, then he returns unto his Prophetical, and shuts up the whole with a re∣newed mention of his Kingly Power, as we shall see in their Order and proper places. . , Syr.  consummatio, perfectio, A Sacred Perfection, or com∣pleatness of State and Condition.
, Syr.  By the Hand of the Priest∣hood of Levi himself; Because Levi himself received not the Priesthood in his own Person, but his Posterity: Tremellius renders it Levitarum, the Priesthood of Le∣vites. The Original leaves no scruple: By the Levitical Priesthood. The Priest∣hood that was confined to the House, Family, Tribe, and Posterity of Levi. , M. S. , corruptly; Nam sub hoc, popu∣lo sancita est Lex, Beza. For under it the Law was established to the People. Sub ipso populus legem accepit, acceperat; Syr.  by whom, or whereby the Law was imposed upon the People; if  by whom, relate unto Levi, the sence is mistaken; and much more by the Arab. who takes the Law only for the Law of the Sacerdotal Office, from which it is plainly distinguished. The Aethiopick reads the whole Verse to this purpose. And the People did according to the Law of the Priesthood which was appointed; what need was there therefore that he should give another Priest, whose appointment one should say was according to Mel∣chisedec? which Argues the great unskilfulness of that Interpreter. , quid adhuc, quid amplius opus erat, esset; necessarium fuit. What need was there yet, or moreover; Syr.  wherefore, ad quid, to what pur∣pose? , oriri; Beza. Exoriri, Surgere; vul. Lat. Syr.  should arise. Oriri, properly, , Syr.  in or after the likeness of Melchi∣sedec, Secundum ordinem. , Et non secundum ordinem Aaron dici, Syr. —which is rendred in the Translation, in the Polyglot: Sed dixit, but he said, it shall be, or he shall be in the likeness of Aaron; Dixisset antem, which regulated by the precedent Interrogation, gives us the true sence of the place. Sup∣pose there must another Priest arise, yet if Perfection had been by the Levitical Priest∣hood, he would have said that he should be of the Order of Aaron. VER. 11. If therefore Perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood, (for under it the Peo∣ple Received the Law) what farther need was there that another Priest should rise after the Order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the Or∣der of Aaron. The first thing in the words is the Introduction of the ensuing Discourse and Argument, in those particles of Inference, , if therefore. If things be . as we have declared. He had a peculiar Scope and Design in all those things. These he is now introducing. The Improvement of his whole preceding Dis∣course, and the whole Mystery of the Priesthood of Melchisedec, he will now make an Application of unto the great cause he had in hand. He hath proved by all sorts of Arguments that the Priesthood of Melchisedec was Superiour unto that of Aaron. Before he had evinced that there was to be another Priest after his Or∣der; and this Priest must of necessity be greater than all those who went before him of the Tribe of Levi, in as much as he was so, by whom he was represented before the Institution of that Priesthood. Now he will let the Hebrews know whi∣ther all these things do tend in particular, and what doth necessarily follow from, and depend upon them. This he lays the Foundation of in this Verse, and declares in those following. And that they might consider how, what he had to say, was educed from what he had before proved, he introduceth it, with these Notes of Inference, , if therefore. And to comprehend the meaning of these words in general, with the Design of the Apostle in them, we may observe, 1. That his Reasoning in this case is built upon a Supposition which the Hebrews  could not deny. And this is, that , Perfection or Consummation is the end aimed at in the Priesthood of the Church. That Priesthood which perfects or con∣summates the People in order unto their acceptance with God, and future enjoyment of him, their present Righteousness and future Blessedness, is that which the Church stands in need of, and cannot rest till it comes unto. That Priesthood which doth not do so, but leaves Men in an imperfect unconsummate estate, whatever Use it may be of for a season, yet cannot it be perpetual unto the exclusion of another. For if
so, either God had not designed to consummate his people, or he must do it some other way and not by a Priesthood. The first is contrary to the Truth and Faith∣fulness of God in all his Promises, yea, would make all Religion vain and ludicrous. For if it will never make Men perfect, to what end doth it serve, or what must do so in the room thereof? That this should be done any other way than by a Priesthood, the Hebrews did neither expect nor believe. For they knew full well, that all the ways appointed by the Law, to make attonement for sin, to attain Righteousness and Acceptance with God, depended on the Priesthood, and the Ser∣vices of it in Sacrifices and other parts of Divine Worship. If therefore the Apo∣stle proves that Perfection could not be attained by, nor under the Levitical Priest∣hood, it necessarily follows that there must be some more Excellent Priesthood re∣maining as yet to be introduced. This therefore he undeniably evinceth by this con∣sideration. For, 2. Look unto the Levitical Priesthood in the days of David and Solomon. Then was that Order in its height and at its best; then was the Tabernacle first, and af∣terwards the Temple in their greatest Glory, and the Worship of God performed with the greatest Solemnity. The Hebrews would grant, that the Priesthood of Levi could never arise to a higher pitch of Glory, nor be more Useful than it was in those days. Yet, saith he, it did not then consummate the Church: Perfection was not then attainable by it. This the Jews might deny, and Plead that they de∣sired no more Perfection than what was in those days attained unto. Wherefore our Apostle proves the contrary; namely, that God designed a Perfection or Consumma∣tion for his Church by a Priesthood that was not then attained. This he doth by the Testimony of David himself, who Prophesied and fore-told that there was to be another Priest after the Order of Melchisedec. For if the Perfection of the Church was all that God ever aimed at by a Priesthood; if that were attained or attainable by the Priesthood in David's time, to what End should another be pro∣mised to be raised up of another Order? To have done so, would not have been consistent with the Wisdom of God, nor the Immutability of his Counsel. For unto what purpose should a new Priest of another Order be raised up, to do that which was done before? Wherefore, 3. The Apostle obviates an Objection that might be raised against the sence of the Testimony produced by him and his Application of it. For it might be said, that after the Institution of the Levitical Priesthood there was yet mention of ano∣ther Priest to rise, it might be some Eminent Person of the same Order, such a one as Joshua the Son of Josedec after the Captivity, who was eminently Serviceable in the House of God, and had eminent Dignity thereon, Zech. 3. 4, 5, 6, 7. So that the defect supposed might be in the Persons of the Priests, and not in the Order of the Priesthood. This the Apostle obviates by declaring that if it had been so, he would have been called or spoken of as one of the Order of Aaron. But whereas there were two Orders of the Priesthood, the Melchisedecian and Aaronical, it is expressely said that this other Priest should be of the former, and not of the lat∣ter. 4. He hath yet a farther Design, which is not only to prove the Necessity of another Priest and Priesthood, but thereon also a Change and an Abrogation of the whole Law of Worship under the Old Testament. Hence he here introduceth the mention of the Law, as that which was given at the same time with the Priesthood, and had such a Relation thereunto, as that of Necessity it must stand and fall with it. And this may suffice for a view of the Scope of this Verse, and the force of the Argument contained in it. We shall now consider the particulars of it. 1. A Supposition is included that , which we render Perfection, is the adaequate and compleat end of the Office of the Priesthood in the Church. This at one time or another, in one Order or another, it must attain, or the whole Office is Useless. And the Apostle denies that this could be obtained by the Levitical Priesthood. And he calls the Priesthood of the Law Levitical, not only because . Levi was their Progenitor, the Patriarch of their Tribe, from whom they were Genealogized; but also because he would comprise in his Assertion not only the House of Aaron, unto whom the Right and Exercise of the Priesthood was limi∣ted and confined, but he would also take into Consideration the whole Levitical Service which was subservient unto the Office of the Priesthood, and without which
it could not be discharged. Wherefore the Levitical Priesthood is that Priesthood in the Family of Aaron, which was assisted in all their Sacerdotal Actings and Du∣ties by the Levites, who were Consecrated of God unto that End. That , or Perfection was of this Priesthood, is denyed in a restrictive Interrogation. If it had been so, it would have been otherwise with respect unto another Priest, than as it is declared by the Holy Ghost. 2. Our principal Enquiry on this Verse will be, what this  is, and wherein it doth consist. The word is rendred Perfectio, Consummatio, Consecra∣tio,  Sanctificatio, Dedicatio. The Original Signification and Use of the word hath been spoken unto on Chap. 2. ver. 10. where it is rendred Sanctification; real and internal Sanctification is not intended, but that which is the same with Sacred Dedi∣cation or Consecration. For it is plainly distinguished from real Inherent Sanctifica∣tion by our Apostle, Chap. 10. 14. , By one Offering he hath perfected them that are Sanctified. This , the Effect and Product of  is wrought towards them who are Sanctified, and so doth not consist in their Sanctification. Much less therefore doth it signifie an absolute Perfection of Inherent Holiness. Some Men no sooner hear the Name of Perfection in the Scripture, but they presently dream of an absolute, sinless, Inherent Perfection of Holiness, which if they are not utterly blinded and hardned, they cannot but know themselves far enough distant from. But this word hath no such signification. But if it denotes not internal Holiness at all, it doth not do so the Perfection of it. Nor is any such Perfection attainable in this Life, as the Scripture every where te∣stifies. Wherefore the Apostle had no need to prove that it was not attainable by the Levitical Priesthood, nor to reflect upon it for that reason, seeing it is not at∣tainable by any other way or means whatever. We must therefore diligently en∣quire into the true Notion of this  or Perfection, which will guide the re∣maining Interpretation of the words. And concerning it we may observe in ge∣neral, First, That it is the Effect or End, or Necessary consequent of a Priesthood. This Supposition is the Foundation of the whole Argument of the Apostle. Now the Office and Work may be considered two ways. (1.) With respect unto God, who is the first immediate Object of all the proper Acts of that Office. (2.) With respect unto the Church, which is the Subject of all the Fruits and Be∣nefits of its Administration. If we take it in the first way, then the Expiation of Sin is intended in this word. For this was the great Act and Duty of the Priesthood towards God, namely, to make Expiation of Sin, or Attonement for it by Sacrifice. And if we take the word in this sence, the Apostle's Assertion is most true. For this Perfection was never attainable by the Levitical Priesthood. It could Expiate sin, and make At∣tonement only Typically, and by way of Representation, really and effectually as to all the Ends of Spiritual Reconciliation unto God, and the Pardon of sin they could not do it. For it was not possible, as our Apostle observes, that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins, Chap. 10. 4. which he also proves in his en∣suing Discourse at large. But I do not know that this word is any where used in this sence, nor doth it include any such signification. And whereas God is the immediate Object of that Sacerdotal Energy whereby sin is Expiated, it is the Church that is here said to be Perfected; so that Expiation of sin cannot be intend∣ed thereby, though it be supposed therein. Besides the Apostle doth not here understand Sacrifices onely, by which alone attonement was made, but all other Administrations of the Levitical Priesthood whatever. The Socinians would have Expiation of Sin here intended; and I shall therefore examine briefly what they speak to this purpose, in their Comment on this place. Perfectionis  nomine hoc loco nihil aliud intelligit Autor, quàm veram & perfectam Expiationem peccatorum, qua non tantum quorundam sed omnium etiam gra∣vissimorum criminum reatus, isque non tantum poenae alicujus temporariae & ad hanc vi∣tam spectantis, sed ipsius aeternae mortis aufertur, jusque homini vitae sempiternae conce∣ditur; qua denique non tantum reatus omnis omnium peccatorum, sed & ipsa peccata in hominibus tolluntur. Namque his in rebus vera hominum perfectio coram deo consistit. Si ergo haec perfectio hominibus contingere potuisset per Sacerdotium Leviticum, certè nullus fuisset usus novi Sacerdotis Melchisedeciani. Sacerdotium enim propter pecca∣torum
expiationem constituitur. At si perfecta peccatorum Expiatio contingebat per A∣aronicum Sacerdotium, quid opus erat novum istum superinducere Sacerdotem secundum ordinem Melchisedeci, ut scilicet perageret id, quod peragere potuerat Aaronicus? Quocirca cùm Deus illum constituere voluerit, atque adeò jam constituerit; hinc patet uemini per Leviticum Sacerdotium, perfectionem seu perfectam expiationem contigisse, ut certe non contigit. Quorundum enim peccatorum expiatio per illud fiebat, nempe Ignorantiarum & Infirmitatum; gravium autem peccatorum & scelerum poena mortis luenda erat. Nec ista expiatio ad tollendam aeternam mortem quidquam virium habuit, sed tantum ad tollendas quasdam poenas temporarias, & huic vitae proprias. Nec deni∣que illis Sacrificiis ulla vis inerat homines ab ipsis peccatis retrahendi. 1. What in general is suited unto the Apostle's Argument, whatever be the sence of the  here mentioned, is approved. The Question is, whether the Expiation of Sin be here intended, what is the Nature of that Expiation, and what was the Use of the Sacrifices under the Law? All which on this Occasion are spoken unto, and the mind of the Holy Ghost in them all perverted. For (1.) That Expiation of Sin properly so called by an Act of the Priestly Office towards God, is not here intended, hath been before declared, both from the signification of the word, and the Design of the Apostle. What these Men intend by the Expiation of Sin, and how remote it is from that which the Scripture teacheth, and the Na∣ture of the thing it self requireth in the Reason and common Understanding of all Mankind, I have fully evinced in the Exercitations about the Priesthood of Christ. And take Expiation in the sence of the Scripture, with the common sence and usage of Mankind, and in their Judgment, it was by the Levitical Priesthood, and was not by the Priesthood of Christ. For it cannot be denied, but that the Levitical Priests acted towards God, in their Offering of Sacrifices to make Attonement for Sin. But that the Lord Christ did so is by these Men denyed. For that which un∣der this Name they ascribe unto him is onely the taking away of Punishment due unto sin by his Power, which Power was given him of God upon his Ascention or Entrance into Heaven as the Holy place. (2.) They deny that Expiation was by the Levitical Priesthood, on two grounds. (1.) Because they did Expiate only some lesser Sins, as of Ignorance and Infirmity; and so it cannot be said to be by them, because they were only some few sins that they could Expiate. (2.) Because their Expiation concerned only deliverance from Temporal Punishment. That Expiation in the Scripture-sence could not be really effected by the Levitical Priesthood is granted, and shall afterwards be proved. But both these pretended Reasons of it are false. For (1.) There was an Attonement made in general for all the sins of the People. For when Aaron made an Attonement by the Scape Goat, Lev. 16. 10. he Confessed over him all the Iniquities of the Children of Israel, and all their Transgres∣sion in all their Sin, ver. 21. And herein the Greatest as well as the Least of their Sins were comprised. For although there were some sins which being Capital ac∣cording unto the Constitutions of their Common-wealth, in which respect, there was no Sacrifice appointed in particular whereby they who were guilty of them might be freed from Punishment, that the Ordinances of God might not seem to interfere; yet had they by their Interest in the more general Sacrifices a Right un∣to Expiation of Sin as to its Guilt, for otherwise every one who died poenally, must of necessity die eternally. (2.) It is also false that their Sacrifices had no other Use but to free Men from Temporal Punishments. Indeed it is a wild apprehension that the Use of Sacrifices in the Church of old, to be observed by the People with so great Solemnities, and under so great Penalties, wherein the Principal Actings of Faith did consist, as also the great Exercise of the Spiritual Obedience of the whole Church, should serve only to free Men from Legal, Outward, Civil, Tempo∣ral punishments for lesser sins of Ignorance and Infirmity, which were none at all for the most part. Absolutely indeed, and of themselves by virtue of their own worth, or by their own innate efficacy they neither did, nor could Expiate sin, as to its Guilt and Eternal Punishment which attended all sin by the Curse of the Law; nor did God ever appoint them for that end, yet they did it Relatively and Typically, that is, they Represented and exhibited unto the Faith of the Sacrificers, that true Effectual Sacrifice to come, whereby all their sins were pardoned and done away. Wherefore, (3.) The Difference between the Expiation of sin by the Levitical Priesthood and by Christ, did not consist in this, that the one expiated sin only with re∣spect
unto Temporal punishments, the other with respect unto them that are Eter∣nal; but in the manner of their Expiation, and the Efficacy of each to that end. They Expiated sins only Typi ally, Doctrinally, and by way of Representation, the Benefit received from their Sacrifices being not contained in them, nor wrought by their causality, nor procured by their worth or value, but were exhibited unto the Faith of the Sacrificers, by virtue of their Relation unto the Sacrifice of Christ. Hence were they of many sorts and often repeated, which sufficiently Argues that they did not effect what they did represent. But the Lord Christ by the one Offer∣ing of himself wrought this effect really, perfectly, and absolutely by its own va∣lue and Efficacy according unto the Constitution of God. But this is not the Per∣fection here intended by the Apostle. Secondly, This  respects the Church, which is the Subject of all the Benefits of the Priesthood, and it is that perfect state of the Church in this World, which God from the beginning designed unto it. He entred upon its Erection in the first Promise, with respect unto his Worship, and the blessed Condition of the Church it self. Hereon, and with respect hereunto, is the Church-state of the Old Testament said to be weak and imperfect like that of a Child under Go∣vernours and Tutors. Hence also it had a Yoak imposed on it, causing fear and bondage; God having Ordained better things for us, or the Church under the New Testament, , Heb. 11. 40, That they without us should not be consummate, or made perfect in their Church-state. And this state of the Church is expressed by this word in other places, as we shall see. The Founda∣tion of it was laid in that word of our Saviour wherewith he gave up the Ghost, , John 19. 30. It is finished or compleated; that is, all things belonging un∣to that great Sacrifice whereby the Church was to be perfected, were accomplish∣ed. For he had respect unto all that the Prophets had fore-told; all that he was to do in this World, and the consummation of the Church was to ensue thereon, when by one Offering he for ever perfected them that are Sanctified. And those who were throughly instructed in the Priviledges of this Church-state, and had a sense of the Benefits thereof, are called , perfect, 1 Cor. 2. 6. We speak Wis∣dom , the Mysteries of the Gospel wherein such Persons discerned the Wisdom of God. And so are they called, Heb. 5. 14. This our Saviour Prayed for in the behalf of his Church immediately before he procured it by his Sacrifice, John 17. 23. , that they may be perfected. And the End of the Institution of the Ministry of the Gospel, to make his Mediation effectual unto the Souls of Men by the Application of it in the Word unto them, was to bring the Church , Ephes. 4. 13. to a perfect Man; or that per∣fection of state which it is capable of in this Life. So the Apostle informs us, that what he aimed at in his Ministry, by warning every Man, and teaching them in all Wisdom, was that he might present , Col. 1. 28. every Man, that is, all Believers perfect in Christ Jesus. For in him we are compleat, Chap. 2. 10. Where though another word be used, () yet the same thing is intended; namely, that perfect compleat state of the Church which God designed to bring it unto in Christ. And that our Apostle useth the same word in the same sence in sundry places in this Epistle we shall see in our Progress. Thirdly, This , or Perfection, may be considered two ways. (1.) As to its absolute compleatness in its final Issue. This the Apostle denies that he himself had as yet attained, Phil. 3. 12. Not as though I had already attained, or received,  namely, the whole of what is purchased for me by Christ, ; or were already made perfect, which could not be without attaining the Resurrection of the Dead, ver. 11. though the substance be so already in the Saints departed; whence he calls them the Spirits of Just Men, , Heb. 12. 23. made perfect. And this he calls absolutely , 1 Cor. 13. 10. That which is per∣fect; or that state of absolute Perfection which we shall enjoy in Heaven (2.) It may be considered as to its initial state in this World, expressed in the Testimonies before recited: and this is that which we enquire after. And the Lord Christ, as the sole procurer of this state, is said to be  the Consum∣mator, the Perfecter, the Finisher of our Faith, or Religious Worship, Heb. 12. 2. as having brought us into a state  of Perfection. This is that, whatever it be, (which we shall immediately enquire into) that
is denyed unto the Levitical Priesthood, and afterwards unto the Law, as that which they could not effect. They could not by their utmost Efficacy, nor by the strictest Attendance unto them, bring the Church into that state of Perfection, which God had designed for it in this World, and without which the Glory of his Grace had not been demonstrated. 4. The Chief thing before us therefore is to enquire, What this state of Per∣fection is, wherein it doth consist, and what is required unto the Constitution of it; and in the whole to shew that it could not be by the Levitical Priesthood or Law. Now the things that belong unto it are of two sorts. (1.) Such as belong unto the Souls and Consciences of Believers, that is, of the Church: And (2.) Such as belong to the Worship of God it self. For with respect unto these two, doth the Apostle Discourse, and asserts a state of Perfection in opposition unto the imperfect state of the Church under the Law, with respect unto them both. And as unto the first there are seven things concurring unto the Constitution of this state. (1.) Righteousness. (2.) Peace. (3.) Light or Knowledge. (4.) Liberty with boldness. (5.) A clear Prospect into a future state of Blessedness. (6.) Joy. (7.) Confidence and Glorying in the Lord. And the Latter or the Worship of the Gospel becomes a part of this state of Perfection. (1.) By its being Spiritual. (2.) Easie, as absolutely suited unto the Principles of the New Creature. (3.) In that it is Instructive. (4.) From its Relation unto Christ as the High Priest. (5.) From the Entrance we have therein into the Holy place. In these things consists that state of Perfection which the Church is called unto under the New Testament, which it could never attain by the Levitical Priesthood. This is that Kingdom of God which is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Rom. 14. 17. But because these things are of great Importance, although the Par∣ticulars are many, I shall briefly consider them all apart. 1. The first thing constituting this Gospel-state of Perfection, is Righteousness. The Introduction of all Imperfection and weakness in the Church was by sin. This made the Law weak, Rom. 8. 3. and Sinners to be without strength, Rom. 5. 7. VVherefore the Reduction of Perfection must in the first place be by Righteousness. This was the great Fundamental Promise of the times of the New Testament, Isa. 60. 21. Psal. 72. 7. Psal. 85. 10, 11. And this was to be brought in by Christ alone. VVherefore one Name whereby he was Promised unto the Church, was, The Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23 6. Righteousness of our own we had none, nor could any thing in the whole Creation supply us with the least of its Concerns, with any thing that belongs thereunto: Yet without it must we perish for ever. VVherefore Jehovah himself becomes our Righteousness, that we might say, In Jehovah have we Righteousness and Strength, and that in him all the Seed of Israel might be Justified and Glory, Isa. 45. 25. For by him are all that Believe Justified from all things, from which they could not be Justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13 39. To this end he brought in Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9. 24.  Not a Temporary Righteousness suited unto the  the Age of the Church under the Old Covenant, which is often said to be Everlasting in a limited sence; but that which was for all Ages to make the Church Blessed unto Eternity. So is he made unto us of God Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. This is the Foundation of the Gospel  or Perfection; and it was pro∣cured for us, by the Lord Christ Offering up himself in Sacrifice as our great High Priest. For we have Redemption through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins, Ephes. 1. 7. God having set him forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood to declare his Righteousness for the forgiveness of sins. And this he is in Opposition unto whatever the Law could effect, taking away that Condemnation which issued from a Conjunction of Sin and the Law. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and for sin, Condemned sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the Law might be ful∣filled in us, Rom. 8. 3, 4. The end of the Law in the first place, was to be a means and Instrument of Righteousness unto those to whom it was given. But after the entrance of sin it became weak and utterly insufficient unto any such purpose; for by the deeds of the Law can no Flesh be Justified. VVherefore Christ is become the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that Believeth, Rom. 10. 4. And by whomsoever this is denyed, namely, that Christ is our Righteousness, which he can∣not
be but by the Imputation of his Righteousness unto us, they do virtually over∣throw the very Foundation of that state of Perfection which God had designed to bring his Church unto. This the Levitical Priesthood could not effect, for the Reason given in the words following; For under it the People received the Law. It could do no more but what the Law could do; but that could not make us Righ∣teous, because it was weak through the Flesh. And by the deeds of the Law no Man can be Justified. It may be said that Believers had this Righteousness under the Levitical Priesthood, or they could not have had a good Report through Faith, namely, this Testimony, That they pleased God. Answ. 1. Our Apostle doth not deny it, yea, he proves it at large by mani∣fold Instances, Chap. 11. that they had it. Only he denies that they had it by vir∣tue of the Levitical Priesthood, or any Duties of the Law. He speaks not of the thing it self, with respect unto the Persons of Believers under the Old Testament, but of the cause and means of it. What they had of this kind was by virtue of another Priesthood, which therefore was to be introduced; and the other, which could not effect it, was therefore to be removed. He denies not Persection unto Persons under the Levitical Priesthood, but denies that they were made Partakers of it thereby. 2. They had this Righteousness really and as to the Benefits of it, but had it not in that Clearness and Evidence of its Nature, Cause, and Effects, as it is now re∣vealed in the Gospel. Hence although their Interest in it was sufficient to secure their Eternal Concernments, yet they had it not in such a way as was required un∣to this  in this Life. For we know how great a Portion of the perfect state of the Gospel, consists in a clear Apprehension, that Christ is, and how he is our Righteousness, whereon the main of our present Comforts do depend. The great Enquiry of the Souls of Men is how they may have a Righteousness before God. And the clear discovery of the causes of it, of the way and manner how we are made partakers of it, is a great part of the Perfection of the Gospel∣state. 3. It was so obscurely represented unto them, as that the Law arose up in a com∣petition with it, or rather against it, in the minds of the Generality of the People. They looked for Righteousness as it were by the works of the Law, Rom. 9. 32. and on this Rock of Offence, this stumbling-stone, they Shipwracked their Eternal Con∣dition, ver. 32, 33. For whilst they went about to establish their own Righteousness, they submitted not unto the Righteousness of God, Rom. 10. 3. And we may easily apprehend how great a snare this proved unto them. For there is in corrupted Nature such an Opposition and Enmity unto this Righteousness of God in Christ, and the dictates of the Law are so riveted in the Minds of Men by Nature, that now after the full and clear Declaration of it in the Gospel, Men are shifting a thousand ways to set up a Righteousness of their own in the room of it. How strong then must the same Inclination be in them, who had nothing but the Law to Guide them, wherein this Righteousness was wrapt up under many Veils and Coverings. Here therefore at the last, the Body of the People lost themselves, and continue unto this day under the Curse of that Law, which they hoped would Justifie and Save them. 2. Peace is the next thing that belongs unto this Gospel-state of Perfection. The Kingdom of God is Peace, Rom. 14. 17. To lay the Foundation of this Kingdom, the Lord Christ both made peace, and Preached peace, or declared the Nature of the Peace he had made, tendring and communicating of it unto us, Ephes 2. 14, 17. And this Peace of Evangelical Consummation is three-fold. (1.) With God. (2) Be∣tween Jews and Gentiles. (3. In and among our selves. 1. It is Peace with God. This is the first Effect and Fruit of the Righteousness before mentioned, Isa. 32. 17. For being Justified by Faith we have Peace with God, Rom. 5. 1. And hereon depends our Peace in the whole Creation above and be∣low. And if we look into the Promises of the Old Testament concerning the Kingdom of Christ, the greatest part, and the most Eminent of them respect Peace with God and the whole Creation. All things in the Creation were at odds, jarring and interfering continually, upon the entrance of sin. For an Enmity thereby being introduced between God and Man, it extended it self unto all other Creatures that
had either dependance on Man, or were subservient Naturally unto his Use, or were put in subjection to him by God, the Lord of all. Hereby were they all cast into a state of Vanity and Bondage which they groan under, and as it were, look out for a Deliverance from, Rom. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. But in this Gospel-state God designs a Reconciliation of all things, or a reduction of them into their proper Order. For he purposed in himself that in the Dispensation of the fulness of times, he would gather together in One all things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in him, Ephes. 1. 9, 10. The  here men∣tioned is the same on the matter with the  in this place. God had in his Counsel and Purpose distributed the Times or Ages of the World into several Parts or Seasons, with respect unto his own Works and the Revelation of his mind and will unto Men. See Our Exposition on Chap. 1. ver. 1. Every one of these Parts or Seasons had its particular , or Dispensation. But there was a , a certain time or season, wherein all the rest that were past before, should have their Complement and Perfection. And this Season had its especial , or Dispensation also. And this was the  mentioned; the Peace-ma∣king and Reconciliation of all things, by gathering up the scattered, divided, jar∣ring parts of the Creation into One Head even Christ Jesus. And as this Enmity and Disorder entred into the Whole, by the sin of Man; so the Foundation of this Catholick Peace and Order, from which nothing is excluded but the Serpent and his Seed, must be laid in Peace between God and Man. This therefore God designed in Christ alone, 2 Cor. 5. 30, 31. The First and Fundamental work of Christ, as the High Priest of the New Covenant, was to make Peace between God and Sinners. And this he did by bringing in of Everlasting Righteousness. So was he Typed by Melchisedec, first King of Righteousness, then King of Peace. For when we were Enemies we were Reconciled unto God by the Death of his Son, Rom. 5. 10. Hence his Name was  the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9 6. Wherefore this Recon∣ciliation and Peace with God, is a great part of this Gospel-perfection. So our Sa∣viour Testifieth, John 14. 27. Peace, saith he, I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you, not as the World giveth, I give unto you let not your Heart be troubled, nei∣ther let it be afraid Assured Peace with God delivering the Souls of his Disciples from all Trouble and Fear, is that which he peculiarly bequeathed unto them. And so great a share in this  doth this Peace with God, and the Consequents of it in Peace with the Residue of the Creation bear, that the Kingdom of Christ is most frequently spoken of under this Notion, Isa. 11. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, &c. But these things are liable unto a double Objection. For First, Some may complain hereon, Behold our Bones are dried, our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. For we cannot attain unto this Peace with God, being Exercised with Fear and Dis∣consolations all our days, so as that we seem to have no Interest in this Gospel-state. Answ. (1.) Peace is made for all that Believe. (2.) The way of attaining it is laid open unto them, Isa. 27. 5. (3.) Patient abiding in Faith will in due time bring them into this Peace. (4.) It is one thing to have Peace with God, which all Be∣lievers have; another to have the constant sense and comfort of it in their own Souls, which they may want for a Season. Secondly, some say, they are so far from finding Peace with the whole Creation, that on all accounts they meet with great Enmities in the World. Answ. (1.) It is not said that Peace is made for us with Satan or the World, the Serpent and his Seed. This belongs not unto this Perfection. (2.) Whatever troubles we may have with other things, yet in the Issue, they shall all work together for our Good, which is sufficient to constitute a state of Peace. This part of the Perfection of the Church could not be attained by the Levitical Priesthood. For two things belonged thereunto. (1.) That Peace be actually made. (2.) That it be fully declared. So the Apostle expresseth it as it was effected by Christ, Ephes. 2. 14. He is our Peace; and that (1.) By making Peace, he made Peace, ver. 15, 16. (2.) By declaring it, ver. 17. He came and Preached Peace. Neither of these could be done by the Levitical Priesthood. Not the first, it could not make Peace, because it could not bring in Righteousness, which is the Cause and Foun∣dation of it, Isa. 32. 17. Rom. 5. 1. Not the second, it could not declare or preach this Peace. For the giving of the Law, with all Tokens of Dread and Severity, with the Curse annexed unto it, was directly contrary hereunto. This therefore was brought in by this better Priesthood alone.
2. Peace between Jews and Gentiles belongs unto this state. For God designed not the erecting of his Kingdom amongst one Party or sort of Mankind. That it should be otherwise, that the Gentiles should become the Children of Abraham, and be made Heirs of the Promise, was a great Mystery under the Old Testament, Ephes. 3. 4, 5, 6. And we know how slow the Disciples of Christ himself were in the receiving and understanding hereof. But evident it is, that this was God's design from the giving of the first Promise, and we see now in the light of the Gospel that he gave many intimations of it unto the Church of Old, with respect whereunto the Veil abideth on the minds of the Jews unto this day. Wherefore without this Peace also, the perfect state of the Church aimed at could not be at∣tained. But this could never have been brought about by the Livitical Priesthood and Law. For they were indeed the principal Occasion of the Distance between them, and the means of the continuance of their Disagreement. And that which the Jews thought to have been the principal Advantage and Priviledge of Abra∣ham in his Posterity, was that which whilst it continued, kept him from the actual Possession of his greatest Glory in being the Heir of the World, and a Father of a Multitude of Nations. Nor whilst that Priesthood was standing, could Japhet be perswaded to dwell in the Tents of Shem. Hence this Peace was so far from being the Effect of the Levitical Priesthood and the Law, as that it could not be introduced and established until they were both taken out of the way, as our Apo∣stle expressely declares, Ephes. 2. 14, 15, 16. The last Issue of this contest came unto these two Heads. (1.) Whether the Gentiles should at all be called unto the Faith of the Gospel. (2.) Whether being Called, they should be obliged unto the Observation of the Law of Moses. The first fell out among the Apostles them∣selves, but quickly determined by our Lord Jesus Christ unto their Joy and Satis∣faction. And this he did two ways. (1.) By sending Peter to Preach the Gos∣pel unto Cornelius, and therein bestowing the Holy Ghost on them that did Believe, Acts 10. 14, 17, 45, 46, 47. Chap. 11. 17, 18. (2.) By giving Paul an open full Commission to go to the Gentiles and Preach the Gospel unto them, Acts 22. 22. Chap. 26. 15, 16, 17, 18. Here the Body of the People of the Jews fell off with rage and madness. But the other part of the Controversie was of longer continu∣ance. The Jews finding that the Gentiles were by the Gospel brought so near un∣to them, as to turn from Dumb Idols unto God, and to receive the Promise no less than themselves, would by all means have brought them over unto the Obedience of the Law of Moses also. This Yoke the Gentiles being greatly afraid of, were in no small perplexity of Mind what to do. The Gospel they were resolved to embrace, but were very unwilling to take on them the Yoke of the Law. Where∣fore the Holy Ghost in the Apostles, at length puts an issue unto this Difference also, and lets the Church know, that indeed the Wall of Partition was broken down, the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances was taken away, and that the Gen∣tiles were not to be Obliged unto the Observation of it, which they greatly re∣joyced in, Acts 15. 31. Other way there was none for the Reconciliation of those Parties, who had been at so long and so great a variance. It will be said that we yet see a variance between Jews and Gentiles continued all the World over; and they are in all places mutually an Abomination unto each other. And it is true it is so, and is likely so to continue. For there is no Remedy that can be so effectual to heal a Distemper, or make up a Fracture, as that it will work its Cure without Use or Application. The Gospel is not at all concerned in what state and condition Men are who re∣ject it, and refuse to believe it. They may still live in Enmity and Malice, hateful and hating one another. But where it is believed, embraced, and submitted unto, there an absolute end is put unto all Difference or Enmity between Jews and Gen∣tiles, as such, seeing all are made One in Christ. And this  belongs only unto them who do Obey the Gospel. 3. Peace among our selves, that is, among Believers, doth also belong hereunto. There was Peace and Brotherly Love required under the Law. But no Duty re∣ceiveth a greater Improvement under the Gospel. The Purchase of it by the Blood of Christ, his Prayer for it, the new Motives added unto it, the communication of it as the Legacy of Christ among his Disciples, with the especial Ends and Duties of it, do constitute it a part of the perfect state of the Church under the Gospel.
3. The third thing wherein this  or Perfection doth consist, is Spiritual Light and Knowledge, with respect unto the Mysteries of the Wisdome and Grace of God. God had designed for the Church a Measure of Spiritual light and know∣ledge which was not attainable under the Law, which is the Subject of that great Promise, Jer. 31. 34. whose Accomplishment is declared, 1 John 2. 27. And there are three things which concur unto the Constitution of this Priviledge. 1. The Principal Revealer of the mind and will of God. Under the Law God made use of the Ministry of Men unto this purpose, as of Moses, and the Prophets. And he employed also, both in the Erection of the Church-state, and in sundry particulars afterwards the Ministry of Angels, as our Apostle declares, Chap. 2. 2. And in some sence that state was thereby put in Subjection unto Angels, ver. 5. But this Ministry, the Dispensation of light and knowledge thereby, could not render it compleat; yea, it was an Argument of the Darkness and Bondage under which it was. For there was yet one greater than they all, and above them all, one more intimately acquainted with God and all the Counsels of his will, by whom he would speak forth his mind, Deut. 18. 18, 19. This was the Son of God himself, with∣out whose immediate Ministry the consummation of the Church-state could not be attained. This consideration our Apostle insists upon at large in the first Chapter and the beginning of the second, concluding from thence the Preeminence of the Evangeli∣cal state above the Legal. The especial Nature whereof We have declared in the Exposition of those places. A most eminent Priviledge this was, yea, the highest outward Priviledge that the Church is capable of, and eminently concurs unto its Per∣fection. For whether we consider the Dignity of his Person, or the perfect Know∣ledge and Comprehension that he had of the whole Counsel of God, and the My∣steries of his Grace, it incomparably exalts the Church-state above that of Old, whence our Apostle draws many Arguments unto the necessity of our Obedience, above what they were urged withal. See Chap. 2. 2, 3. Chap. 12. 25. And this full Revelation of his Counsels by the Ministry of his Son, God did reserve partly that he might have a Preeminence in all things, and partly because none other either did or could comprehend the Mysteries of it as it was now to be Revealed. See John 1. 18. 2. The matter or things themselves revealed. There was under the Levitical Priesthood a shadow of good things to come, but no perfect Image or compleat deli∣neation of them, Chap. 10. 1. They had the first Promise, and the enlargements of it unto Abraham and David. Sundry Expositions were also added unto them, relating unto the manner of their Accomplishment. And many Intimations were given of the Grace of God thereby. But all this was done so darkly, so obscurely, so wrapped up in Types, Shadows, Figures, and Allegories, as that no Perfection of light or knowledge was to be obtained. The Mystery of them continued still hid in God, Ephes. 3. 9. Hence are the Doctrines concerning them called Parables and dark Sayings, Psal. 78. 2. Neither did the Prophets themselves see into the depth of their own Predictions, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. Hence the Believing Church waited with earnest expectation, until the day should break, and the shadows should flee away, Cant. 2. 17. Chap. 4. 6. They longed for the breaking forth of that glo∣rious Light, which the Son of God was to bring, attending in the mean time unto the Word of Prophecy, which was as the light of a Candle unto them shining in a dark place. They lived on that great Promise, Mal. 4. 2. They expected Righ∣teousness, Light, and Grace, but knew not the way of them. Thence their Pro∣phets, Righteous Men, and Kings desired to see the things of the Gospel, and saw them not, Mat. 13. 17. Luke 10. 24. And therefore John the Baptist, who was greater than any of the Prophets because he saw and owned the Son of God as come in the Flesh, which they desired to see, and saw not; yet living and dying under the Levitical Priesthood, not seeing Life and Immortality brought to light by the the Gospel, the least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he in Spiritual know∣ledge. Wherefore it belonged unto the , or perfect state of the Church, that there should be a full and plain Revelation and Declaration made of the whole Counsel of God, of the Mystery of his Will and Grace, as the end of those things which were to be done away. And this is done in the Gospel under that New Priesthood which was to be introduced. Nor without this Priesthood could it be so made. For the principal part of the Mystery of God depends on, consists in the
Discharge of the Office of that Priesthood. They do so on his Oblation and In∣tercession, the Attonement made for Sin, and the bringing in of everlasting Righ∣teousness thereby. The plain Revelation of these things which could not be made before their actual Accomplishment is a great part of this Gospel-perfection. This the Apostle disputes at large, 2 Cor. 3. from ver. 7. to the end of the Chapter. 3. The inward Spiritual Light of the minds of Believers enabling them to discern the mind of God, and the Mysteries of his Will as revealed, doth also belong unto this part of the Perfection of the Gospel Church-state. This was promised under the Old Testament, Isa. 11. 9. Chap. 54. 13. Jer. 31. 34. And although it was enjoyed by the Saints of Old, yet was it so in a very small measure and low degree, in comparison of what it is now after the plentiful Effusion of the Spirit. See 1 Cor. 2. 11, 12. This is that which is prayed for, Ephes. 1. 17, 18, 19. Chap 3. 18, 19. VVherefore this Head of the  or Perfection intended consists in three things. (1.) The Personal Ministry of Christ in the Preaching of the Gos∣pel, or Declaration of the Mystery of the VVisdom and Grace of God in himself. (2.) The Dispensation or Mission of the Holy Ghost to reveal and fully make known the same Mystery by the Apostles and Prophets of the New Testament, Ephes. 3. 5. (3.) In the Effectual Illumination of the Minds of them that do Believe, ena∣bling them Spiritually to discern the Mysteries so revealed, every one according to the measure of his gift and grace. See concerning it, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ephes. 3. 17, 18, 19. Chap. 5. 8. Fourthly, There belongs unto this Perfection that , that Liberty and Bold∣ness which Believers have in their Approaches unto God. This is frequently men∣tioned as an especial Priviledge and Advantage of the Gospel-state, Ephes. 3. 12. Heb. 3. 6. Chap. 4. 16. Chap. 10. 19, 35. 1 John 3. 21. Chap. 4, 17. Chap. 5. 14. And on the contrary, the state under the Levitical Priesthood is described as a state of Fear and Bondage that is comparatively, Rom. 8. 15. 2 Tim. 1. 7. Heb. 2. 15. And this Bondage or Fear arose from sundry Causes inseparable from that Priest∣hood and the Administrations of it. As, 1. From the Dreadful manner of giving the Law. This filled the whole Peo∣ple with Terror and Amazement. Upon the Administration of the Spirit by the Gospel Believers do immediately cry, Abba Father, Rom. 8. 16. Gal 4 6. They have the Liberty and Boldness to draw nigh unto God, and to call him Father. But there was such an Administration of a Spirit of Dread and Terror in the giving of the Law, as that the People were not able to bear the Approaches of God unto them, nor the thought of an Access unto him. And therefore they desired that all things for the future might be Transacted by an Internuncius, one that might go between God and them whilst they kept at their distance, Deut. 5. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. VVhen any first hear the Law, they are afraid of God, and desire nothing more than not to come near him. They would be saved by a distance from him. VVhen any first hear the Gospel, that is, so as to believe it, their Hearts are opened with Love to God, and all their desire is, to be near unto him, to draw nigh unto his Throne. Hence it is called the Joyful sound. Nothing can be more op∣posite than these two frames. And this Spirit of Fear and Dread thus first given out in the giving of the Law, was communicated unto them in all their Genera∣tions, whilst the Levitical Priesthood continued. For as there was nothing to re∣move it, so it self was one of the Ordinances provided for its continuance. This are we now wholly delivered from. See Chap. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. 2. It arose from the Revelation of the Sanction of the Law in the Curse. Hereby principally the Law gendered unto Bondage, Gal. 4. 25. For all the People were in some sence put under the Curse; namely, so far as they would seek for Righteous∣ness by the Works of the Law. So saith our Apostle, As many as are of the Works of the Law are under the Curse, Gal. 3. 10. This Curse was plainly and openly denounced as due to the breach of the Law, as our Apostle adds; It is written, Cursed is every one who continueth not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them. And all their Capital Punishments were Representations thereof. This could not but take a deep impression on their minds, and render them ob∣noxious unto Bondage. Hence although on the account of the Promise they were Heirs, yet by the Law they were made as Servants, and kept in Fear, Gal. 4. 1. Neither had they such a Prospect into the Nature & Signification of their Types as to
set them at perfect Liberty from this cause of dread. For as there was a veil on the Face of Moses, that is, all the Revelations of the Mind and Will of God by him, were veiled with Types and Shadows; so there was a veil on their Hearts also in the weakness of their Spiritual light, that they could not look stedfastly unto the End of that which is abolished, 2 Cor. 3. 13. that is, unto him, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness unto them that do Believe, Rom. 10. 4. It was therefore impossible but that their Minds must Ordinarily be filled with Anxiety and Fear. But there is now no more Curse in the Gospel-state, Rev. 22. 2. The Curse abideth only on the Serpent and his Seed, Isa. 65. 25. The Blessing of the Promise doth whol∣ly possess the place of it, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Only they who will choose still to be un∣der the Law, by living in the sins that it condemneth, or seeking for Righteousness by the works which it commands, are under the Curse. 3. Under the Levitical Priesthood, even their Holy Worship was so appointed and Ordered, as to keep them partly in Fear, and partly at a Distance from the Pre∣sence of God. The continual Multiplication of their Sacrifices, one day after ano∣ther, one week after another, one moneth after another, one year after another, taught them, that by them all there was not an end made of sin, nor Everlasting Righteousness brought in by any of them. This Argument our Apostle makes use of to this purpose, Chap. 10. 1. The Law, saith he, could never by those Sa∣crifices which they Offered, Year by Year continually, , bring the Worshippers unto this Perfection. And he gives this Reason for it, namely, be∣cause they had still a Conscience of Sin, that is, a Conscience condemning them for sin, and therefore there was a Remembrance made of sin again every Year, ver. 2, 3. Hereby they were kept in Dread and Fear. And in their Worship they were minded of nothing so much as their Distance from God, and that they had not as yet a Right to an immediate Access unto him. For they were not so much as once to come into the Holyest, where were the Pledges and Tokens of Gods Presence. And the Prohibitions of their Approaches unto God were attended with such severe Penalties, that the People cryed out they were not able to bear them, Numb. 17. 12, 13. which Peter reflects upon, Acts 15. 10. The Holy Ghost thereby signifying that the way into the Holyest of all was not made manifest whilst the first Tabernacle was standing, Chap 9. 8. No Man had yet Right to enter into it with boldness, which Believers now have, Chap. 10. 19, 20. 4. God had designed the whole Dispensation of the Law under that Priesthood unto this very End, that it should give the People neither Rest nor Liberty, but press and urge them to be looking after their full Relief in the Promised Seed, Gal. 4. 1, 2. Chap. 3. 24. It pressed them with a sense of sin, with a Yoke of Ceremonious Ob∣servances, presenting them with the Hand-writing of Ordinances which was against them, Col. 2. 14. It urged their Consciences not to seek after Rest in or by that state. Here could be no Perfection, because there could be no Liberty. The , or Boldness we speak of, is opposed unto all these causes of Bondage and Fear. It was not the Design of God always to keep the Church in a state of Non-age, and under School-Masiers; he had appointed to set it at Liberty in the fulness of time, to take his Children nearer unto him, to give them greater Evidences of his Love, greater Assurances of the Eternal Inheritance, and the use of more Liberty and Boldness in his Presence. But what this  of the Gospel is, wherein it doth consist, what is included in it, what freedom of Spirit, what liberty of Speech, what Right of Access, and Boldness of Approach unto God, Built upon the removal of the Law, the communication of the Spirit, the way made into the Holyest by the Blood of Christ, with other concernments of it, Constitutive of Gospel-perfection, I have already in part declared in Our Exposition on Chap. 3. ver. 5. and must, if God please, yet more largely insist upon it, on Chap. 10th. so that I shall not here further speak un∣to it. 5. A clear fore-sight into a Blessed estate of Immortality and Glory, with unquesti∣onable Evidences and Pledges, giving Assurance of it, belongs also to this Con∣summation. Death was Originally threatned as the final End and Issue of sin. And the Evidence hereof was received under the Levitical Priesthood in the Curse of the Law. There was indeed a Remedy provided against its Eternal Prevalency, in the first Promise. For whereas Death comprised all the Evil that was come, or was to come on Man for Sin; In the day thou eatest thereof thou soal die: The Pro∣mise
contained the means of deliverance from it, or it was no Promise, tendred no Relief unto Man in the state whereinto he was fallen. But the People under the Law could see but little into the manner and way of its Accomplishment, nor had they received any Pledge of it, in any one that was dead and lived again so as to die no more. Wherefore their Apprehensions of this deliverance were dark, and attended with much fear, which rendred them obnoxious unto Bondage. See the Exposition on Chap. 2. 14. where we have declared the dreadful Apprehensions of the Jews concerning Death, received by Tradition from their Fathers. They could not look through the dark shades of Death into Light, Immortality, and Glory. See the two-fold Spirit of the Old and New Testament, with respect unto the Apprehensions of Death expressed; the one Job 10. 21, 22. the other 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. But there is nothing more needful unto the perfect state of the Church. Suppose it endowed with all possible Priviledges in this World, yet if it have not a clear view and prospect, with a Blessed assurance of Immortality and Glory after Death, its condition will be dark and uncomfortable. And as this could not be done without bringing in of another Priesthood, so by that of Christs it is accomplished. For, 1. He himself died as our High Priest. He entred into the devouring Jaws of Death, and that as it was threatned in the Curse. And now is the Trial to be made. If he who thus ventured on Death as threatned in the Curse, and that for us, be swallowed up by it, or detained by its Power and Pains, there is a certain end of all our Hopes. Whatever we may arrive unto in this World, Death will convey us over into eternal Ruine. But if he brake through its Power, have the pains of it removed from him, do swallow it up into Victory, and rise Triumphantly into Immortality and Glory, then is our entrance into them also even by and after Death secured. And in the Resurrection of Christ the Church had the first unque∣stionable Evidence that Death might be Conquered, that it and the Curse might be separated, that there might be a free passage through it into Life and Immor∣tality. These things Originally and in the first Covenant were inconsistent, nor was the Reconciliation of them evident under the Levitical Priesthood. But hereby was the Veil rent from top to bottom, and the most Holy place not made with hands laid open unto Believers. See Isa. 25. 7, 8. 2. As by his Death, Resurrection, and entrance into Glory He gave a Pledge, Example, and Evidence unto the Church of that in his own Person, which he had designed for it; so the Grounds of it were laid in the Expiatory Sacrifice which he Offered, whereby he took away the Curse from Death: There was such a close Conjunction between Death and the Curse, such a Combination between Sin, the Law, and Death, that the breaking of that Conjunction, and the dissolving of that Combination was the greatest Effect of Divine Wisdom and Grace, which our A∣postle so Triumpheth in, 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. This could no otherwise be brought about, but by his being made a Curse in Death, or bearing the Curse which was in Death, in our stead, Gal. 3. 13. 3. He hath clearly declared unto the utmost of our Capacities in this World that future state of Blessedness and Glory, which he will lead all his Disciples into. All the concernments hereof under the Levitical Priesthood, were represented on∣ly under the obscure Types and Shadows of Earthly things. But he hath abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. 10. He destroyed and abolished him who had the Power of Death, in taking away the Curse from it, Chap. 2. 14. And he abolished Death it self in the removal of those dark shades which it cast on Immortality and Eternal Life; and hath opened an abundant entrance into the Kingdom of God and Glory. He hath unveiled the un∣created Beauties of the King of Glory, and opened the Everlasting Doors, to give an insight into those Mansions of Rest, Peace, and Blessedness which are prepared for Believers in the Everlasting Enjoyment of God. And these things constitute no small part of that consummate state of the Church which God designed, and which the Levitical Priesthood could no way effect. 6 There is also an especial Joy belonging unto this state. For this Kingdom of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Neither was this at∣tainable by the Levitical Priesthood. Indeed many of the Saints of the Old Testa∣ment did greatly Rejoyce in the Lord, and had the Joy of his Salvation abiding with
them. See Psal. 51. 12. Isa. 25. 9. Hab. 3. 17, 18. But they had it not by virtue of the Levitical Priesthood. Isaiah tells us that the ground of it was the swallowing up of Death in Victory, ver. 8. which was no otherwise to be done, but by the Death and Resurrection of Christ. It was by an Influence of Efficacy from the Priesthood that was to be introduced, that they had their Joy: Whence Abraham saw the Day of Christ, and Rejoyced to see it. The Prospect of the Day of Christ was the sole Foundation of all their Spiritual Joy, that was purely so. But as unto their own present state, they were allowed and called to Rejoyce in the abundance of Temporal things; though the Psalmist in a Spirit of Prophecy, prefers the Joy arising from the light of God's Countenance in Christ, above all of that sort, Psal. 4 6, 7. But ordinarily their Joy was mixed and allayed with a respect unto Tempo∣ral things. See Lev. 23. 39, 40, 41. Deut. 22. 11, 12, 18. Chap. 16. 11. 27. 7. This was the end of their Annual Festivals. And those who would introduce such Festival Rejoycings into the Gospel-state, do so far degenerate into Judaisme, as pre∣ferring their Natural Joy in the outward manner of Expression, before the Spiritual ineffable Joys of the Gospel. This it is that belongs unto the state thereof; such a Joy in the Lord, as carrieth Believers with an Holy Triumph through every con∣dition, even when all outward causes of Joy do fail and cease. A Joy it is unspeak∣able and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. See John 5. 11. Rom. 15. 13. Jude 24. It is that inexpressible Satisfaction which is wrought in the minds of Believers by the Holy Ghost, from an Evidence of their Interest in the Love of God by Christ, with all the Fruits of it present and to come, with a Spiritual Sense and Experience of their Va∣lue, Worth, and Excellency. This gives the Soul a quiet Repose in all its Trials, Refreshment when it is weary, Peace in Trouble, and the highest Satisfaction in the hardest things that are to be undergone for the Profession of the Name of Christ, Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 7. Confidence and Glorying in the Lord is also a part of this Perfection. This is the Flowring, or the Effect and Fruit of Joy; a readiness unto, and the way where∣by we do express it. One great Design of the Gospel is to exclude all Boasting, all Glorying in any thing of self in Religion, Rom. 3. 27. It is by the Gospel and the Law of Faith therein that Men are taught not to boast or glory, neither in out∣ward Priviledges, nor in Moral Duties. See Phil. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Rom. 3. 27, 28. Chap. 4. 2. What then, is there no Glorying left us in the Profession of the Gospel, no Triumph, no Exultation of Spirit, but we must always be sad and cast down, at best stand but on even terms with our Oppositions, and never re∣joyce over them? Yes, there is a greater and more excellent Glorying introduced, than the Heart of Man on any other Account is capable of. But God hath so Ordered all things now, that no Flesh should Glory in his Presence, but that he who gloryeth, should glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 29, 31. And what is the Reason or Foundation hereof? It is this alone, That we are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, ver. 30. So it was promised of Old; that in the Lord, that is, the Lord our Righteousness, all the Seed of Israel should be Justified and Glory, Isa. 45. 25. This is that , which we have opened on Chap. 3. 6, 14. whither the Reader is refer∣red. It is that Triumphant Exultation of Spirit which ariseth in Believers, from their absolute proferring their Interest in Heavenly things above things present, so as to con∣temn and despise whatever is contrary thereunto, however tendred in a way of Allure∣ment or Rage. In these things and others of the like Nature and Kind, consists that , or Consummation of the state of the Church as to the Persons of the Worshippers, which the Apostle denies to have been attainable by or under the Levitical Priesthood. The Arguments wherewith he confirms his Assertion ensue in the Verses follow∣ing, where they must be farther considered. But we may not proceed without some Observations for our own Edification in this matter. Observ. 1. An Interest in the Gospel consisteth not in an outward Profession of it, but in a real participation of those things wherein the Perfection of its state doth consist. Men may have a form of Godliness, and be utter strangers to the Power of it. Mul∣titudes in all Ages have made, and do make a Profession of the Gospel, who yet have no Experience in themselves of the real Benefits and Advantages wherewith it is accompanied. All that they obtain hereby is but to deceive their Souls into eter∣nal
Ruine. For they live in some kind of Expectation, that in another World they shall obtain Rest and Blessedness and Glory by it. But the Gospel will do nothing for them hereafter in things Eternal, who are not here Partakers of its Power and Fruits in things Spiritual. Observ. 2. The Preeminence of the Gospel-state above the Legal is Spiritual and undiscernable unto a Carnal Eye. For (1.) It is evident that the Principal Design of the Apostle in all these Discourses is, to prove the Excellency of the state of the Church under the New Testament, in its Faith, Liberty, and Worship, above that of the Church under the Old. And (2.) That he doth not in any of them produce instances of outward Pomp, Ceremonies, or visible Glory, in the con∣firmation of his Assertion. He grants all the outward Institutions and Ordinances of the Law, insisting on them, their Use, and Signification in particular; but he opposeth not unto them any outward visible glory in Gospel-Administrations. (3.) 2 Cor. 3. He expressely compares those two Administrations of the Law and the Gospel as unto their Excellency and Glory. And first, he acknowledgeth that the Administration of the law, in the Institution and Celebration of it, was glorious, v. 9, 10, 11. But withal he adds, that it had no Glory in comparison with that under the New Testament, which doth far excel it. Wherein then doth this Glory consist? He tells us it doth so in this, in that it is the Administration of the Spirit, ver. 8. How shall not the Administration of the Spirit be rather Glorious? He doth not resolve it into outward Order, the Beauty and Pomp of Ceremonies and Ordi∣nances. In this alone it doth consist, in that all the whole Dispensation of it is carried on by the Grace and Gifts of the Spirit; and that they are also Administred there∣by. This, saith he, is Glory and Liberty, such as excel all the glories of Old Administrations. (4.) In this place he sums it up all in this, that the Perfection we have treated of was effected by the Gospel, and could not be so by the Leviti∣cal Priesthood and the whole Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances. In these Spiritual things therefore are we to seek after the glory of the Gospel, and its Preeminence above the Law. And those who suppose they render the Dispensa∣tion of the Gospel glorious by vying with the Law in Ceremonies and an external Pomp of Worship, as doth the Church of Rome, do wholly cross his Design. And therefore, Secondly, This  or Perfection respects the Worship of the Gospel as well as the Persons of the Worshippers, and the Grace whereof they are made Partakers. God had designed the Church unto a more perfect state in point of Worship, than it was capable of under the Levitical Priesthood. Nor indeed could any Man rea∣sonably think, or wisely judge, that he intended the Institutions of the Law, as the compleat ultimate Worship and Service that he would require or appoint in this VVorld, seeing our Natures, as renewed by Grace, are capable of that which is more Spiritual and Sublime. For, 1. They were in their Nature Carnal, as our Apostle declares, ver. 16. and Chap. 9. 10. The Subject of them all, the means of their Celebration were Car∣nal things, beneath those pure Spiritual Acts of the Mind and Soul, which are of a more Noble Nature. They consisted in Meats and Drinks, the Blood of Bulls and Goats, the Observation of Moons and Festivals, in a Temple made of Wood and Stone, Gold and Silver, things Carnal, perishing, and transitory. Certainly God, who is a Spirit, and will be VVorshipped in Spirit and in Truth, designed at one time or other a VVorship more suited unto his own Nature, though the Imposition of these things on the Church for a Season, was Necessary. And as they were Carnal, so they might be exactly performed by Men of Carnal Minds, and were so for the most part; in which respect God himself speaks often with a great undervaluati∣on of them: See Psal. 50. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13. Had not he de∣signed the Renovation of our Natures into his own Image, a new Creation of them by Jesus Christ, this Carnal Worship might have sufficed, and would have been the best we are capable of. But to suppose that he should endow Men, as he doth by Christ, with a new Spiritual Supernatural Principle, enabling them unto a more sub∣lime and Spiritual Worship, it cannot be imagined that he would always bind them up unto those Carnal Ordinances in their Religious Service. And the Reason is, because they were not a meet and sufficient means for the exercise of that New Principle of Faith and Love which he bestows on Believers by Jesus Christ. Yea,
to burden them with Carnal Observances, is a most effectual way to take them off from its Exercise in his Service. And so it is at this day, where-ever there is a Multiplication of outward Services and Observances, the Minds of Men are so taken up with the Bodily Exercise about them, as that they cannot attend unto the pure internal Actings of Faith and Love. 2. What by their Number, and what by their Nature, and the manner of ex∣acting of them, they were made a Yoke which the People were never able to bear with any Joy or Satisfaction, Acts 15. 10. And this Yoke lay partly in the first place on their Consciences or the inner Man. And it consisted principally in two things. (1.) The multitude of Ceremonies and Institutions did perplex them, and gave them no rest. Seeing which way soever they turned themselves one Precept or other, positive or negative, touch not, taste not, handle not, was upon them. (2.) The Veil that was on them, as to their Use, Meaning, and End, increased the trouble of this Yoke. They could not see unto the End of the things that were to be done away, because of the veil, nor could apprehend fully the Reason of what they did. And it may be easily conceived how great a Yoke it was to be bound unto the strict Observation of such Rites and Ceremonies in Worship; yea, that the whole of their VVorship should consist in such things, as those who made use of them did not understand the End and Meaning of them. And (2.) It lay on their Persons from the manner of their Imposition; as they were tyed up unto Days, Times, and Hours, so their Transgression or Disobedience made them ob∣noxious to all sorts of Punishments and Excision it self. For they were all bound upon them with a Curse; whence every Transgression and Disobedience received a just Recompence of Reward, Chap. 2. 2. For he that despised Moses Law died with∣out Mercy, Chap. 10. 28. which they complained of, Numb. 17. 12, 13. This put them on continual scrupulous Fears, with endless Inventions of their own to se∣cure themselves from the guilt of such Transgressions. Hence the Religion of the Jews at present is become a Monstrous confused heap of vain Inventions and scrupulous Observances of their own, to secure themselves, as they suppose, from transgressing any of those which God had given them. Take any one Institution of the Law, and consider what is the Exposition they give of it in their Mishna, by their Oral Tradition, and it will display the Fear and Bondage they are in, though the Reme∣dy be worse than the Disease. Yea, by all their Inventions they did but increase that which they endeavoured to avoid. For they have brought things unto that pass among them, that it is impossible that any one of them should have Satisfaction in his Conscience that he hath aright observed any of Gods Institutions, although he should suppose that he required nothing of him but the outward performance of them. 3. Their Instructive Efficacy, which is the Principal End of the Ordinances of Divine VVorship was weak, and no way answered the Power and Evidence of Gospel-Institutions, Chap. 10. 1. Therefore was the way of Teaching by them intricate, and the way of Learning difficult. Hence is that difference which is put between the Teachings under the Old Testament and the New. For now it is Pro∣mised that Men shall not teach every Man his Brother, and every Man his Neighbour, saying, know the Lord, as it was of Old. The means of Instruction were so dark and cloudy, and having only a shadow of the things themselves that were to be taught, and not the very Image of them, that it was needful that they should be continually incalcated to keep up the knowledge of the very Rudiments of Religion. Besides, they had many Ordinances, Rites, and Ceremonies imposed on them to increase their Yoke, whereof they understood nothing but only that it was the Soveraign pleasure and will of God, that they should Observe them, though they understood not of what Use they were: And they were Obliged unto no less an exact Obser∣vance of them, than they were unto that of those which were the clearest and most lightsome. The best Direction they had from them and by them was, that indeed there was nothing in them, that is, in their Nature or proper Efficacy, to produce or procure those good things which they looked for through them, but only pointed unto what was to come. VVherefore they knew that although they Exercised themselves in them with Diligence all their Days, yet by virtue of them they could never attain what they aimed at; only there was something signified by them, and
afterwards to be introduced, that was Efficacious of what they looked after. Now unto the strict Observation of these things were the People obliged under the most severe Penalties, and that all the days of their Lives. And this increased their Bondage. God indeed by his Grace did influence the Minds of true Belie∣vers among them unto Satisfaction in their Obedience, helping them to adore that Soveraignty and Wisdom which they believed in all his Institutions. And he gave unto them really the Benefits of the good things that were for to come, and that were prefigured by their Services. But the state wherein they were by reason of these things was a state of Bondage. Nor could any Relief be given in this state unto the Minds or Consciences of Men by the Levitical Priesthood. For it was it self the principal cause of all these Burdens and Grievances, in that the Administration of all Sacred things was com∣mitted thereunto. The Apostle takes it here for granted, that God designed a , or state of Perfection unto the Church; and that as unto its Worship as well as unto its Faith and Obedience. We find by the Event that it answered not the Divine VVisdom and Goodness to bind up the Church during its whole Sojourning in this VVorld, unto a VVorship so Carnal, Burdensome, so imperfect, so unsuited to express his Grace and Kindness towards it, or its sense thereof. And who can but pity the woeful condition of the present Jews, who can conceive of no greater Blessedness than the Restauration of this burdensome Service. So true is it what the Apostle says, the Vail is upon them unto this present day, yea, Blindness is on their minds that they can see no Beauty but only in things Carnal, and like their fore-fathers who preferred the Bondage of Egypt because of their Flesh-pots, before all the Li∣berty and Blessings of Canaan; so do they their old Bondage-state, because of some Temporal Advantages it was attended withal, before the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. In Opposition hereunto there is a worship under the Gospel which hath such Pro∣perties as are constitutive also of this Perfection. By Gospel-worship, I under∣stand the whole Way and Order of that Solemn VVorship of God, which the Lord Christ hath Commanded to be observed in his Churches, with all the Ordinances and Institutions of it; and all the private Worship of Believers, in their whole Access unto God. The Internal Glory and Dignity of this Worship must be re∣ferred unto its proper place, which is Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. Here I shall only mention some few things, wherein its Excellency consists in opposition unto the defects of that under the Law, on the account whereof it is Constitutive of that Evangelical Perfection whereof we treat. 1. It is Spiritual, which is the Subject of the Apostle's Discourse, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9, &c. And it is so on a two-fold Account. (1.) In that it is suited unto the Nature of God, so as that thereby he is glorified as God. For God is a Spirit, and will be Worshipped in Spirit, which our Saviour asserts to belong unto the Gos∣pel-state, in opposition unto all the most glorious Carnal Ordinances and Institutions of the Law, John 4. 21, 22, 23. So is it opposed unto the old Worship as it was Carnal. It was that which in and by it self, answered not the Nature of God, though Commanded for a Season. See Psal. 50. ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. (2.) Because it is performed meerly by the Aids, Supplies, and Assistances of the Spirit, as it hath been at large proved elsewhere. 2. It is easie and gentle in opposition unto the Burden and insupportable Yoke of the Old Institutions and Ordinances. That so are all the Commands of Christ un∣to Believers, the whole System of his Precepts, whether for Moral Obedience or Worship, himself declares. Take my Yoke upon you, saith he, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest unto your Souls; for my Yoke is easie, and my Burden is light, Mat. 11. 29, 30. So the Apostle tells us, that his Commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. But yet concerning this Ease of Gospel-worship, some things must be observed. 1. As to the Persons unto whom it is so easie and pleasant; and it is so only unto them, who being weary and heavy laden do come unto Christ, that they may have Rest, and do learn of him; that is, unto convinced, humbled, converted Sinners that do Believe in him. Unto all other who on meer Convictions, or by other means do take it upon them, it proves an insupportable Burden, and that which
they cannot endure to be obliged unto. Hence the Generality of Men, although Professing the Christian Religion, are quickly weary of Evangelical worship, and do find out endless Inventions of their own, wherewith they are better satisfied in their Divine Services. Therefore have they multiplyed Ceremonies, fond Super∣stitions, and down-right Idolatries, which they prefer before the Purity and Sim∣plicity of the VVorship of the Gospel, as it is in the Church of Rome. And the Reason hereof is, that Enmity which is in their Minds against the Spiritual things represented and exhibited in that VVorship. For there being so near an Alliance between those things and this VVorship, they that hate the one, cannot but despise the other. Men of unspiritual Minds cannot delight in Spiritual VVorship. It is therefore 2. Easie unto Believers, on the Account of that Principle wherewith they are acted in all Divine things. This is the New Nature, or New Creature in them, where∣in their Spiritual life doth consist. By this they delight in all Spiritual things in the inner Man, because they are cognate and suitable thereunto. Weariness may be upon the Flesh, but the Spirit will be willing. For as the Principle of Corrupted Nature goeth out with delight and vehemency unto Objects that are unto its Satisfaction, and unto all the means of its Conjunction unto them and Union with them; so the Prin∣ciple of Grace in the Heart of Believers is carried with Delight and Fervency un∣to those Spiritual things, which are its proper object; and therewithal unto the ways and means of Conjunction with them and Union unto them. And this is the proper Life and Effect of Evangelical VVorship. It is the means whereby Grace in the Soul is conjoyned and united unto Grace in the VVord and Promises, which renders it easie and pleasant unto Believers, so that they delight to be Exercised therein. 3. The constant Aid they have in and for its performance if they be not want∣ing unto themselves, doth entitle it unto this Property. The Institution of Go∣spel-worship is accompanied with the Administration of the Spirit, Isa. 59. 21. and he , helpeth and assisteth in all the worship of it, as was intimated before. 4. The Benefit which they receive by it renders it easie and pleasant unto them. For all the Ordinances of Evangelical-worship are of that Nature, and appointed of God unto that End, so as to excite, increase, and strengthen Grace in the worship∣pers, as also to convey and exhibit a sense of the Love and Favour of God unto their Souls. And in these two things consists the Principal Interest of all Believers in this world, nor have they any design in competition with that of increasing in them. Finding therefore how by the diligent Attendance unto this Worship they thrive in both parts of their Interest, it cannot but be pleasant unto them. 5. The Outward Rites of it are few, lightsome, easie to be observed, without scrupulous tormenting fears, nor such as by attendance unto Bodily Services do divert the Mind from that Communion with God which they are a means of. Thirdly, It is Instructive, and that with clearness and evidence of the things which we are to know and learn. This was a great part of the Imperfection of Legal Institutions, that they taught the things which they signified and represented Obscurely, and the Mind of God in them was not learned but with much difficulty, no small part of their Obedience consisting in a resignation of their Understandings unto God's Soveraignty, as to the Use and the End of the things wherein they were exercised in his Worship. But all the Ordinances and Institutions of the Gospel do give light into, and exhibit the things themselves unto the Minds and Faith of Believers. Hereon they discern the Reasons and Grounds of their Use and Benefit; whence our whole Worship is called our Reasonable Service, Rom. 12. 1. Thus in the Preaching of the Word, Jesus Christ is evidently set forth Crucified among us, Gal. 3. 1. not darkly represented in Types and Shadows. And in the Sacrament of the Supper we do plainly shew forth his Death untill he comes, 1 Cor. 11. 26. And the like may be said of all other Evangelical Institutions. And the principal Reason hereof is, because they do not represent or shadow things to come, no, nor yet things absent, as did those of Old; but they really present and exhibit Spiritual things, Christ and the Benefits of his Mediation unto our Souls. And in the observance of them we are not kept at a distance, but have an Admission unto the Holy place not made with hands, because Christ, who is the Minister of
that Holy Sanctuary, is in them and by them really present unto the Souls of Be∣lievers. Two other things mentioned before concerning this Worship, namely, its Relation unto Christ as our High Priest, and our Access in it unto the Holy place the Throne of Grace, must be spoken unto at large elsewhere. This is a brief Declaration of that  or Perfection, which the Apostle denies to have been attainable by the Levitical Priesthood. And the grounds of his Denial he gives us in the remaining words of the Text, which we shall also consi∣der: only we may observe by the way, That, To look for Glory in Evangelical Worship from outward Ceremonies and Carnal Or∣dinances, is to prefer the Levitical Priesthood before that of Christ. That which we are to look for in our worship is a , such a Perjection as we are capable of in this world. This the Apostle denies unto the Levitical Priesthood, and ascribes it unto the Priesthood of Christ. But if such a Perfection be to be found in Cere∣monies and Ordinances outwardly Pompous and Glorious, upon Necessity the con∣trary conclusion must be made and affirmed. But yet so it is come to pass in the world, that Men do order things in their Publick worship, as if they judged that the pure immixed worship of the Gospel had no Glory, in comparison of that of the Law, which did excel, and whereunto they do more or less conform them∣selves. But it is time for us to proceed with our Apostle. Having denyed Perfection unto the Levitical Priesthood, which he lays down in a Supposition including a Negation, so as to make way for the Proof of what he denyed; for the further Explication of it, and Application unto his present pur∣pose, he adds the respect that their Priesthood had to the Law, intending thereby to bring the Law it self under the same censure of disability and insufficiency. . 1. The Subject spoken of is , the People, that is in the Wilderness, the . Body of the Church, to whom the Law and Priesthood were given immediately by the Ministry of Moses. But after this the whole Posterity of Abraham in their successive Generations were one People, with them, and are so esteemed. For a People is still the same, and as a People never dies till all Individuals that belong unto it are cut off. So by this People the whole Church of all Ages under the Old Testament is intended. 2. Of this People he says, , they were Legalized. They were also Evangelized, as our Apostle speaks, Chap. 4. 2. They were so in the Promise . made unto Abraham, and in the many Types of Christ and his Offices and Sacrifice that were instituted among them. Yet were they at the same time so brought un∣der the Power of the Law, as that they had not the Light, Liberty, and Comfort of the Gospel, which we enjoy. , is legem ferre, legem sancire, legem im∣ponere; to make, constitute, impose a Law. And the Passive , when ap∣plyed unto Persons, is legi latae subjici, or legem latam accipere, to be made Subject unto a Law; to receive the Law made to oblige them. So is it used in this place. VVe have therefore not amiss rendred it, received the Law. The People received the Law. But the sence of that Expression is regulated by the Nature of a Law. They so received it, as to be made Subject unto it, as to be obliged by it. Other things may be otherwise received; but a Law is received by coming under its Obligation. They were brought under the Power, Authority, and Obligation of the Law. Or because the Law was the Foundation and Instrument of their whole state, both in things Sacred and Civil, the meaning of the word may be, they were brought in∣to that state and condition whereinto the Law disposed them. This is said to be done, , under it; that is , under that Priest∣hood. . But how the People may be said to receive the Law under the Levitical Priesthood, must be further enquired into. Some think that  in this place an∣swers unto  in the Hebrew; that is, concerning it. And so the meaning o the word is; for it was concerning the Levitical Priesthood that the People received a Com∣mand; that is, God by his Law and Command Instituted the Levitical Priesthood among them, and no other during the times of the Old Testament. According unto this Interpretation, it is not the whole Law of Commandments contained in Or∣dinances, that is intended, but the Law constituting the Levitical Priesthood. This
sence is embraced by Schlictingius and Grotius, as it was before them touched on, but rejected, by Junius and Piscator. But although there be no inconveniency in this Interpretation, yet I look not on it, as suited unto the Design of the Apostle in this place. For his intention is to prove, that Perfection was not to be obtained by the Levitical Priesthood. Unto this end he was to consider that Priesthood under all its Advantages; for if any of them seem to be omitted, it would weaken his Argument; seeing what it could not do under one consideration, it might do un∣der another. Now although it was some commendation of the Levitical Priest∣hood that it was appointed of God, or confirmed by a Law; yet was it a far greater Advancement that therewith the whole Law was given, and thereon did depend, as our Apostle declares in the next Verses. The Introduction of this clause by the Particle , may be on a double Ac∣count, . which though different, yet either of them is consistent with this Interpre∣tation of the words. (1.) It may be used in a way of Concession of all the Ad∣vantages that the Levitical Priesthood was accompanied withal; be it, that toge∣ther with that Priesthood the People also received the Law. Or (2.) On the o∣ther side, there is included a Reason, why Perfection was not to be attained by that Priesthood; namely, because together with it, the People were brought into Bon∣dage under the Yoke of the Law. Either way the whole Law is intended. But the most probable Reason of the Introduction of this Clause by that Particle, for, was to bring in the whole Law into the same Argument, that Perfection was not attain∣able by it. This the Apostle plainly reassumes, ver. 18, 19, concluding as of the Priesthood here, that it made nothing Perfect. For it is the same Law, which made nothing perfect, that was given together with that Priesthood, and not that especi∣al Command alone whereby it was instituted. There yet remains one Difficulty in the words. For the People are said to re∣ceive the Law under the Levitical Priesthood, and therefore it should seem that that Priesthood was established before the giving of the Law. But it is certain, that the Law was given on Mount Sinai before the Institution of that Priesthood. For Aaron was not called nor separated unto his Office, untill after Moses came down from the Mount the second time, with the Tables renewed after he had broken them, Exod. 40. 12, 13, 14. Two things may be applyed to the removal of this Difficulty. For (1.) The People may be said to receive the Law under the Le∣vitical Priesthood, not with respect unto the Order of the giving of the Law, but as unto their Actual Obedience unto it, in the exercise of the things required in it. And so nothing that appertained unto Divine Worship according unto the Law, was performed by them until that Priesthood was established. And this, as I have shewed, is the true Signification of the word  here used. It doth not signifie the giving of the Law unto them, but their being legalized, or brought under the Power of it. Wherefore although some part of the Law was given before the institution of that Priesthood, yet the People were not brought into the Actual Obedience of it but by virtue thereof. But (2.) The Apostle in this place hath especial respect unto the Law, as it was the Cause and Rule of Religious Worship, of Sacrifices, Ceremonies, and other Ordinances of Divine Service. For in that part of the Law the Hebrews placed all their Hopes of Perfection, which the Moral Law could not give them. And in this respect the Priesthood was given before the law. For although the Moral law was given in the Audience of the Peo∣ple before on the Mount, and an Explication was given of it unto Moses, as it was to be applyed unto the Government of that People in Judiciary proceedings, com∣monly called the Judicial law, before he came down from the Mount, Exod. 21. 22, 23. yet as to the system of all Religious Ceremonies, Ordinances of Worship, Sacrifices of all sorts, and Typical Institutions, whatever belonged unto the Sacred Services of the Church, the law of it was not given out unto them until after the Erection of the Tabernacle, and the separation of Aaron and his Sons unto the Office of the Priesthood. Yea, that whole Law was given by the voyce of God out of that Tabernacle, whereof Aaron was the Minister, Lev. 1. 1, 2. So that the Peo∣ple in the largest sence may be said to receive the law under that Priesthood. Where∣fore the sence of the words is, that together with the Priesthood the People receiv∣ed the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, which yet effected not in their Conjunction the End that God designed in his Worship. And we may ob∣serve that,
Obs. Put all Advantages and Priviledges whatever together, and they will bring nothing to Perfection without Jesus Christ. God manifested this in all his Revelati∣ons and Institutions. His Revelations from the Foundation of the world were gra∣dual and partial, increasing the light of the knowledge of his Glory from Age to Age. But put them all together from the first Promise, with all Expositions of it, and Additions unto it, with Prophesies of what should afterwards come to pass, taking in also the Ministry of John the Baptist; yet did they not all of them toge∣ther make a perfect Revelation of God his Mind and Will, as he will be known and worshipped, Heb. 1. 1. John 1. 18. So also was there great variety in his Instituti∣ons. Some were of great Efficacy, and of clearer Significancy than others. But all of them put together made nothing perfect. Much more will all the ways that others shall find out to attain Righteousness, Peace, Light and life before God, come short of Rest or Perfection. The last thing considerable in these words is the Reason whereby the Apostle proves, That in the Judgment of the Holy Ghost himself Perfection was not at∣tainable by the Levitical Priesthood. For if it were, what farther need was there that another Priest should arise after the Order of Melchisedec, and not be called after the Order of Aaron? The Reason in these words is plain and obvious. For after the Institution of that Priesthood, and after the Execution of it in its greatest Glory, Splendour, and Effi∣cacy, a Promise is made in the Time of David, of another Priest, of another Or∣der to arise. Hereof there can be no Account given but this alone, that Perfection was not attainable by that which was already instituted and executed. For it was a Per∣fection that God aimed to bring his Church unto, or the most Perfect state in Righ∣teousness, Peace, Liberty, and VVorship which it is capable of in this world. And whatever state the Church be brought into, it must be by its High Priest, and the Discharge of his Office. Now if this might have been effected by the Levitical Priesthood, the rising of another Priest was altogether needless and useless. This is that Invincible Argument whereby the Holy Apostle utterly overthrows the whole Systeme of the Judaical Religion, and takes it out of the way, as we shall see more par∣ticularly afterwards. But the Expressions used in this Reason must be distinctly considered. That another Priest, , A Priest of another sort. Not only a Priest who individually was not yet exhibited, but one of another Stock, and Order. A . Priest that should not be of the Tribe of Levi, nor of the Order of Aaron, as is af∣terwards explained. , to arise; that is, to be called, exalted; to stand up in the Execution of that Office. To rise up, or to be raised up, is used indefinitely concerning any one . that attempts any new work, or is made Eminent for any End good or bad. In the latter sence God is said to raise up Pharaoh to shew his Power in him, that he might Magnifie his Glorious Power in his Punishment and Destruction, Exod. 9. 16. Rom. 9. 17. In a good sence with respect unto the Call of God, it is used by Debo∣rah, Judg. 5. 7. Untill I Deborah arose, untill I arose a Mother in Israel. Com∣monly  and  are used to this purpose, Mat. 11. 11. Chap. 24. 13. John 7. 52. To arise therefore is, to appear and stand up at the Call of God and by his designation, unto the execution or performance of any office or work. So was this other Priest to appear, arise, stand up, and execute the Priests Office in com∣pliance with the Call and Appointment of God. And this Priest was thus to arise after the Order of Melchisedec. So it is ex∣pressely affirmed in the Psalms. And here the Apostle takes in the consideration of what he had before Discoursed, concerning the Greatness of Melchisedec. For he designed not only to prove the thing it self, which is sufficiently done in the Testi∣mony out of the Psalmist; but also to Evidence the Advantage and Benefit of the Church by this change. And hereunto the consideration of the Greatness of Mel∣chisedec was singularly subservient, as manifesting the Excellency of that Priesthood by whom the Righteousness of the Church and its VVorship was to be consum∣mate. Lastly, The Apostle adds negatively of this other Priest who was to rise by Rea∣son of the weakness of the Levitical Priesthood which could not Perfect the state of the Church, that he was not to be Called after the Order of Aaron.
, and not to be called after the Order of Aaron, that is in the Psalm where the rising of this Priest is declared and fore-told; there  he is said to be, or denominated a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, and no∣thing is spoken of the Order of Aaron.  denotes only an external denomi∣nation, not an internal Call. It is not the same with , used by our Apo∣stle, Chap. 5. 4. , called of God; that is, by an effectual call and separation unto Office. But it answers , Chap. 5. 10. Cognomina∣tus, called so by external Denomination. For the real call of Christ unto his Of∣fice by him who said unto him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, was such as the call of Melchisedec himself could not represent. Wherefore the call of Christ unto his Office and that of Melchisedec are no where compared. But upon the Account of sundry Resemblances insisted on by the Apostle in the first verses of this Chapter, Christ is called by external Denomination a Priest after his Order, and is no where called so after the Order of Aaron. And the Reason why the A∣postle addeth this Negative is evident. For it might be said that although another Priest was fore-told to arise, yet this might respect only an extraordinary call un∣to the same Office, and not a call unto an Office of another Kind or Order. Aaron was called by God immediately and in an extraordinary manner; and all his Poste∣rity came unto the same Office by an ordinary Succession: So God Promiseth to raise up a Priest in a singular manner, 1 Sam. 2. 35. I will raise me up a Faithful Priest, which shall do according unto that which is in mine heart and my mind. A Priest of another Order is not here intended, but only the change of the time of Suc∣cession from the House of Ithamar, unto that of Phineas, fulfilled in Zadock in the days of Solomon. So a new Priest might be raised up, and yet the old Legal Or∣der and Administration be continued. But, saith the Apostle, He is not to be of the same Order: For the defect of the Levitical Priesthood was not only in the Per∣sons which he mentions afterwards, but it was in the Office it self, which could not bring the Church to Perfection. And that de facto he was so to be, he proves by this Argument negatively from the Scripture, that he is no where by the Holy Ghost said to be of the Order of Aaron, but on the contrary of that of Melchise∣dec, which is inconsistent therewithal. And this is the first Argument whereby the Apostle confirms his principal De∣sign, which he particularly strengthens and improves in the Verses following. VER. 12. . Mutato Sacerdotio; Vul. Lat. Translato. Beza. Hoc Sacerdotio; expressing the Article. Syr. Yea, even as a change was made in the Priesthood, so a change was made also in the Law, not to the mind of the Apostle; Aethiop. If their Law so passed away, their Priesthood shall pass away; more out of the way than the other. VER 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of Necessity a change of the Law. IN this Verse the Apostle Evidently Declares what he intended by the Law in that foregoing, which the People received under the Levitical Priesthood. It was the whole Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, or the whole Law of Moses so far as it was the Rule of Worship and Obedience unto the Church. For that Law it is, that followeth the Fates of the Priesthood. And herein lyeth the stress and moment of the Controversie which the Apostle then had with the Jews, and which we have at this day with their Unbelieving Po∣sterity. For the Question was, whether the Law of Moses was to be eternal abso∣lutely, the Rule of the Worship of the Church whilst it was to continue in this world. And it appears that in the Preaching of the Gospel, that which most pro∣voked the Jews, was that there was inferred thereby a cessation and taking away of Mosaical Institutions. This was that which enraged them, unto the Blood of
the Church, which they were guilty of, after the Murder of the Head thereof. For they fell on Stephen under pretence he had said that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy the Customs which Moses delivered, Acts 6. 14. And this also provoked their Rage against our Apostle, Acts 21. 28. Yea, the most of them who were Con∣verted to the Faith of the Gospel, yet continued obstinate in this Perswasion, That the Law of Moses was yet to continue in force, Acts 20. 21. And with this Opi∣nion some of them troubled the Peace, and hindred the Edification of the Churches called from among the Gentiles, as hath been at large elsewhere declared. This matter therefore which the Apostle now entreth upon, was to be managed with care and diligence. This he enters upon in this Verse, being a Transition from one point unto ano∣ther, having made way for his intentions in the verse foregoing. That which hitherto he hath insisted on in this Chapter, is the Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ, above that of the Law, manifested in the Representation made of it by Mel∣chisedec. In the pursuit of his Argument unto that purpose, he proves that the Aaronical Priesthood was to be abolished, because after its Institution there was a Promise of the Introduction of another, wherewith it was inconsistent. And here∣in observing the strict Conjunction that was between that Priesthood and the Law, with their mutual dependance on one another, he proves from thence that the Law it self was also to be abolished. Herein therefore lay the Principal Design of the Apostle in this whole Epistle. For the Law may be looked on under a double consideration. (1.) As unto what the Jews in that degenerate state of the Church obstinately looked for from it. (2.) As unto what it did really require of them, whilst it stood in force and power. And under both these Considerations it was utterly inconsistent with the Gospel. The Jews at that time expected no less from it, than Expiation of Sin by its Sacrifices, and Justification by the works of it. It is true, they looked for these things by it unjustly, seeing it promised no such thing, nor was ever ordained unto any such purpose; but yet these things they looked for, and were resolved so to do, until the Law should be removed out of the way. And it is evident how inconsistent this is with the whole work of the Mediation of Christ, which is the sum and substance of the Gospel. But suppose they looked not absolutely for Attonement and Justification by the Sacrifices and VVorks of the Law, yet the continuance of their observance was repugnant unto the Gospel. For the Lord Christ by the One Offering of him∣self, had made perfect Attonement for Sin; so that the Sacrifices of the Law could be of no more Use or Signification. And the continuance of them, wherein there was renewed mention of the Expiation of Sin, did declare that there was not a per∣fect Expiation already made, which over-throws the Efficacy and Virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ. Even as the daily repetition of a Sacrifice in the Mass conti∣nueth to do. Again, VVhereas the Lord Christ by his Obedience and Righteousness had ful∣filled the Law, and was become the End of it, for Righteousness, unto them that do Believe, the seeking after Justification as it were by the Works of the Law was wholly repugnant thereunto. And in the next place the Law may be considered as it prescribed a way of Wor∣ship in its Ordinances and Institutions, which God doth accept. This the People were indispensably obliged unto whilst the Law stood in force. But in the Gospel our Lord Jesus Christ had now appointed a new Spiritual Worship suited unto the Principles and Grace thereof. And these were so inconsistent as that no Man could at once serve these two Masters. VVherefore the whole Law of Moses, as given unto the Jews, whether as used or abused by them, was repugnant unto and inconsistent with the Gospel, and the Media∣tion of Christ, especially his Priestly Office therein declared. Neither did God either design, appoint, or direct that they should be co-existent. If then the Law continue in its force, and have Power to oblige the Consciences of Men, and is still so to abide, there is neither room nor place for Christ and his Priesthood in the Church, nor indeed for the Discharge of his other Offices. And this opposition between the Law and the Gospel, VVorks and Grace, our own Righteousness and that of Christ, our Apostle doth not only grant, but vehemently urge in all his Epistles, allowing none to suppose that they may have both these strings unto their
Bow. One of them he is peremptory that all Mankind must betake themselves unto. Here the Jews were entangled, and knew not what to do. The greatest part of them adhered unto the Law with an utter rejection of the Gospel and the Author of it, perishing in their Unbelief. Others of them endeavoured to make a composition of these things, and retaining of Moses, they would admit of Christ and the Gospel also. And this the Holy Ghost in the Apostles did for a while bear withal. But now whereas the whole Service of the Tabernacle was of it self fallen down, and become, as Useless, so of no Force, its Obliging Power ceasing in its Accomplishment by Christ; and whereas the Time was drawing near where∣in God by his Providence would utterly remove it, the inconsistency of it with the Gospel-state of the Church was now fully to be declared. This therefore our Apostle grants, that there was such a Repugnancy between the Law and the Gospel, as unto the Ends of Righteousness and Divine Worship, as that one of them must of Necessity be parted withal. Wherefore the whole Controversie turning on this hinge, it was highly incumbent on him to manifest and prove that the Law did now cease, according unto the Appointment of God; and that God had of old designed, fore-told, and promised, that so it should do, and be abolished upon the Introduction of that which was the End and Substance of it. And this I look upon as the greatest Trial the Faith of Men ever had in the con∣cerns of Religion; namely, to believe that God should take away, abolish, and leave as dead and useless, that whole System of Solemn Worship which he had ap∣pointed in so Glorious a manner, and accepted for so many Generations. But yet as we are to acquiesce in the Soveraign pleasure of God made known by Revelati∣on against all Reasonings of our own whatsoever: So it must be confessed, that Faith was greatly bespoken and prepared by the Nature, End, and Use of all those Institutions, which more than intimated, that they were appointed only for a time, and served to introduce a more Glorious Dispensation of Divine Wisdom and Grace. The Proof therefore of the utter Cessation of the Law the Apostle enters upon by the Invincible Argument, whose Foundation or Proposition is laid in this verse, and the especial parts of it are explained, confirmed, and vindicated in those that follow. And in his ensuing Discourse his Principal Design is to prove, That the Church is so far from being a loser or disadvantaged by this Change, as that she re∣ceiveth thereby the highest Priviledge, and greatest Blessing that in this World she is capable of. In the words of this verse there is a Supposition of the Change of the Priesthood, as that which was proved before, and an Inference from thence unto a Necessity of the change of the Law. The Priesthood being changed; that is, the Priesthood of Levi appointed and ex∣ercised under the Law , translato, mutato; so some read, transferred,  translated, some changed. The former do not reach the whole sence intended. For the Office of the Priesthood may be transferred from one Person to another, one Family unto another, yea, one Tribe unto another; and yet the Priesthood, as to the kind and nature of it, continue the same. This our Apostle afterwards men∣tions, ver. 13, 14. as a part of his Argument to prove the Priesthood it self to be changed. But this it doth not absolutely; seeing it is possible that the Office may be transferred from one Tribe unto another, and yet not be changed, as unto its Nature. But the Proof lies in this, That Moses in the Institution of the Priesthood made no mention of the Tribe of Judah, and therefore if that Office be transferred unto that Tribe, it must be of another kind than that before Instituted. And on this Supposition that which he intends to prove follows evidently upon the Tran∣slation of the Priesthood. For all the Sacred Services and Worship which the Law required, were so confined, or at least had that respect unto the Levitical Priest∣hood, as that no part of it, no Sacred Duty could be performed, on a Supposition of taking away the Priesthood from that Tribe and Family. For whereas the whole of their Worship consisted in the Service and Sacrifices of the Tabernacle, God had appointed that whosoever did draw nigh unto the performance of any of these Services that was not of the Seed of Aaron, should be cut off and destroyed. Wherefore upon a Supposition of the ceasing or changing of the Priesthood in that Family, the whole Law of Ordinances became Unpracticable, Useless, and lost its
Power; especially seeing there was no Provision made in the Law it self for a Priest∣hood in any other Tribe. Besides such was the contexture of the Law, and such the Sanction of it (Cursed is he who continueth not in all things written in the Law to do them,) that if any thing be taken out of it, if its Order be disturbed, if any Alteration be made, or any Transgression be dispensed withal, or exempted from the Curse, the whole Fabrick must of Necessity fall unto the Ground. But yet it is not a meer transferring of the Priesthood from one Tribe unto ano∣ther, that is here intended by the Apostle. For there is such a change of the Priesthood as there is of the Law. But the change of the Law was an , a disanulling or abolishing, as is affirmed, ver. 18. Such therefore must the change of the Priesthood be, and so it was. The Priesthood was changed, in that one kind of it was utterly abolished, and another introduced. So was the Levitical Priest∣hood changed, as that the other Priest which came with his Office in the room thereof, could not be called or said to be after the Order of Aaron, but was of ano∣ther kind Typed out by Melchisedec. It may therefore be enquired on what Grounds this Priesthood was to be so abo∣lished, or how it appears that so it is, and by what means it was actually taken away. That it was so to be abolished the Apostle proves, (1.) Because before the In∣stitution of that Priesthood, there was another far more Excellent, namely, that of Melchisedec. (2.) That the Holy Ghost had declared that the Introduction of that more Excellent Priesthood for a Season, was to prefigure and represent another Priesthood that was afterwards to be established. And this could not be that of Levi, seeing God doth not make use of that which is more Excellent, to figure or represent that which is Inferiour thereunto. Another Priesthood therefore must arise and be granted unto the Church in answer unto that Type. (3.) That it was im∣possible that this new Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, should be consistent with that of Levi, or that it shoudl be continued after that was brought in. For (1.) He was to be of another Tribe, as he immediately proves. (2.) Because his Priesthood and Sacrifice were to be of another kind than that of Levi, which he demonstrates at large in the ensuing Chapters. (3.) Because on the other hand the Priesthood of Aaron, (1.) Could never Accomplish and Effect the true and pro∣per Ends of the Priesthood, which the Church stood in need of, and without which it could not be Consummate: And (2.) Was in its own Nature, Offices, Works, and Duties, inconsistent with any Priesthood, that was not of its own Order. It must therefore be abolished. It may therefore be enquired, how the Priesthood was changed, or that of the House of Levi taken away. And I say as the Apostle directs, it was done by the Appointment of God. For his Introduction of another Priest when it was actually accomplished, had the force of a Repealing law. The Institution of the former was abrogated thereby, without any other Constitution. For as unto its Use, it did hence cease of it self. It had no more to do, its work was at an end, and its Services of no Advantage to the Church: For the Sign of what is to come, is set aside when the thing signified is brought in; and ceaseth to be a Sign. Yea, the continuance of it would give a Testimony against it self. And as to its Right, this new Institution of God, applyed by his own Authority unto it in its proper Season, took it away. (2.) The Application of the Authority of God in the Insti∣tution of a new Priesthood to take away the old was made by the Holy Ghost, in the Revelation of the will of God by the Gospel, wherein the ceasing of it was de∣clared. And sundry things may be observed concerning this abolishing of it. 1. Notwithstanding the great and many provocations of them by whom it was exer∣cised and discharged, yet God took it not away until it had accomplished the End where∣unto it was designed. Neither the wickedness of the People, nor of the Priests themselves, could provoke the Lord to revoke his Institution, until the appointed End of it was come. And it is no small part of the Blindness of the present Jews, to think that God would so utterly abolish his own Ordinance, as they must acknow∣ledge he hath done, if he would have it to be of any longer Use in the Church. For 1600 Years, they have not had any Priest among them, nor is it possible they should according unto the Law, if they were actually restored unto their own pretended Right in Canaan. For they have utterly lost the Distinction of Tribes among them,
nor can any of them in the least pretend that they are of the linage of the Priests. And for any one to Usurp that Office who is not lineally Descended from Aaron, they own to be an Abomination. As therefore they know not how to look for a Messiah from the Tribe of Judah, seeing all Sacred Genealogy is at an end; no more can they look for a Priest of the House of Aaron. Now this End of it, was the bring∣ing in of a better Hope, or the Promised Seed, who, according to the Promise, was to come to the Second Temple, and therefore whilst that Priesthood continued. (2.) God took it not away till he brought in that which was more Excellent, Glo∣rious, and Advantagious unto the Church, namely, the Priesthood of Christ. And if this be not received through their Unbelief, they alone are the cause of their be∣ing losers by this Alteration. (3.) In abundant Patience and Condescention with re∣spect unto that Interest which it had in the Consciences of Men from his Institution, God did not utterly lay it aside in a day, after which it should be absolutely unlaw∣ful to comply with it. But God took it away by Degrees, as shall afterwards be declared. 2. That the Efficacy of all Ordinances or Institutions of Worship depends on the will of God alone. Whilst it was his will that the Priesthood should abide in the Family of Levi, it was Useful and Effectual unto all the Ends whereunto it was designed. But when he would make an Alteration therein, it was in vain for any to look for either Benefit or Advantage by it. And although we are not now to expect any change in the Institutions of Divine Worship, yet all our Expectations from them, are to be resolved into the will of God. 3. Divine Institutions cease not without an express Divine Abrogation. Where they are once granted and erected by the Authority of God, they can never cease without an express Act of the same Authority taking of them away. So was it with the Institutions of the Aaronical Priesthood, as the Apostle declares. And this one consideration is enough to confirm the grant of the initial Seal of the Co∣venant unto the present Seed of Believers, which was once given by God himself, in the way of an Institution, and never by him revoked. 4. God will never abrogate or take away any Institution or Ordinance of Worship un∣to the loss or disadvantage of the Church. He would not remove or abolish the Priesthood of Levi, until that which was incomparably more Excellent was intro∣duced and established. 5. God in his Wisdom so Ordered all things, that the taking away of the Priesthood of the Law, gave it its greatest Glory. For it ceased not before it had fully and absolutely accomplished the End whereunto it was designed, which is the Glory and Perfection of any Ordinance: even the Mediation of Christ himself shall cease, when all the Ends of it are fulfilled. And this End of the Priesthood was most Glorious; namely, the bringing in that of Christ, and therein of the Eternal Sal∣vation of the Church. And what more Honourable Issue could it come unto? The Jews by their pretended Adherence unto it, are they which cast the highest disho∣nour upon it; for they own that it is laid aside, at least that it hath been so for 1600 Years, and yet neither the End of it effected, nor any thing brought in by it, un∣to the greater advantage of the Church. The next thing considerable in these words, is the Inference which the Apostle makes from his Assertion and the Proof of it: There is made of Necessity a change also of the Law, , Of Necessity. It is not a note of the necessity of the In∣ference . from the Proposition in the way of Argument, but the necessary dependance of the things mentioned, the one on the other. For whereas the whole Admini∣stration of the Law so far as it concerned the Expiation of sin by Sacrifices, and the Solemn Worship of God in the Tabernacle or Temple, depended absolutely on, and was confined unto the Aaronical Priesthood, so as that without it no one Sacri∣fice could be offered unto God, nor any Ordinance of Divine Worship be observed; that Priesthood being abolished and taken out of the way, the Law it self of Ne∣cessity and unavoidably ceaseth and becometh useless. It doth so, I say, as unto all the proper Ends of it, as a Law Obligatory unto the Duties required in it. Wherefore there is also , a change of the Law; that is, an Abo∣lition of it. For it is a change of the same Nature with the change of the Priest∣hood; . which, as we have shewed, was its Abolition and taking away. And how this came to pass the word  declares, there is made a change. It did in∣deed .
necessarily follow on the change of the Priesthood; yet not so, but that there was an Act of the Will and Authority of God on the Law it self. God made this change, and he alone could do it; that he would do so, and did so, the Apostle proves in this and the Verses following. So is the Law of Commandments contain∣ed in Ordinances taken out of the way, being nailed unto the Cross of Christ, where he left it compleatly accomplished. But moreover the Law in its Institutions was an Instructive Revelation, and taught many things concerning the Nature of Sin, its expiation and cleansing, repre∣senting, though darkly, good things to come. So it is yet continued as a part of the Revealed will of God. And the light of the Gospel being brought unto it, we may learn things far more clearly out of it, than ever the Jews of Old could do. And the force of the Argument here insisted on by the Apostle against the ab∣solute perpetuity of the Law, which was of Old, and yet continueth to be the Head of the Controversie between the Jews and the Church of Christ, is so unavoid∣able, that some of them have been compelled to acknowledge that in the Days of the Messiah Legal Sacrifices and the rest of their Ceremonies shall cease; though the most of them understand that their Cause is given away thereby. And they have no other way to free themselves from this Argument of the Apostle, but by denying that Melchisedec was a Priest, or that it is the Messiah who is Prophesied of, Psal. 110. which evidences of a desperate Cause, and more desperate Defen∣ders of it, have been elsewhere convinced of Folly. Wherefore this important Argument is confirmed by our Apostle in the ensuing Verses. And we may see, 1. How it is a fruit of the manifold Wisdom of God, that it was a great Mercy to give the Law, and a greater to take it away. And 2. If under the Law the whole worship of God did so depend on the Priesthood, that that failing or being taken away, the whole worship of it self was to cease, as being no more acceptable before God; how much more is all worship under the New Testament rejected by him, if there be not a due regard therein unto the Lord Christ as the only High Priest of the Church, and the Efficacy of his Discharge of that Office. 3. It is the highest Vanity to pretend Use or Continuance in the Church, from posses∣sion or prescription, or pretended Benefit, Beauty, Order, or Advantage, when once the mind of God is declared against it. The Pleas for the Old Priesthood and Law of this kind, excelled all that can be insisted on, with respect unto any other things that any pretend a Veneration in Divine Worship; yet were they of no Validity or Efficacy. VER. 13. . , in quem, in quo; Vul. Lat.  Syr. For he concerning whom these things are spoken. For he on whom these things are said, Rhem. improperly. , Vul. de alia tribu est, Rhem. is of ano∣ther Tribe, omitting the especial force of the word , though the substance of the sence be retained. Syr.  was Born of another Tribe. Particeps fuit, did derive his Genealogy from, and so had his especial Relation unto another Tribe.  ministravit, attendit; Vul. praesto fuit. The Aethiopick, And if any one will say so (or as one may say) he placeth another Tribe, because they kept not the Altar, mistaking both the meaning of the Design, and sence of the A∣postle's Words. VER. 13. For He of whom these things are spoken, pertaineth unto another Tribe, of which no man gave Attendance at the Altar. The Causal Conjunction , doth not only intimate a pursuit of the fore-going Argument, and the confirmation of the Supposition whereon it was built, but also .
an Entrance upon the express Application of the whole precedent Discourse unto the Person of Jesus Christ the true and only High Priest of the Church. In the words there is, (1.) The Subject to be further treated on, described, . . That , de quo; He concerning whom, quem designa∣verunt haec, ad quem haec pertinent; He who is designed in all these things, He un∣to whom they do all belong. He, with respect unto whom, , these things; . that is, all that hath been spoken concerning Melchisedec and his Priesthood, all things that do Naturally follow and ensue thereon. For although sundry of them were spoken firstly and immediately concerning other Persons and things; yet they all belong ultimately and perfectly unto Christ alone, whom they did represent and make way for. And we may observe hence, That it is our Duty in studying of the Scripture to enquire diligently after the things which are spoken concerning Jesus Christ, and what is taught of him in them. This doth our Apostle find out in all that was spoken concerning Melchisedec and the Le∣vitical Priesthood. This he gives himself in Charge, John 5. 39. Search the Scrip∣tures, they are they which testifie of me. Our principal Aim in searching the Scrip∣tures ought to be, that we may find out, what they say, and what they testifie con∣cerning Christ. And this was the Practice of the Prophets of Old, with respect unto all the Revelations which they received, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. Let the Pains, and Industry, and Skill of Men in the Reading and Interpreting of the Scriptures be what they will, without this Design they will never rightly be understood, nor duly improved. For as those things which concern his Person, Office, and Grace, with the Mysteries of the Wisdom of God in them all, are the principal Subject of them: So all other things which are taught and revealed in them, are never appre∣hended unto any good End or Purpose, unless their Relation unto him, and de∣pendance upon him be rightly understood. Some are charged that they esteem of no Preaching but that which is concerning the Person of Christ, which how false an Accusation it is, their Preaching and Writings do discover. But this they say indeed, that is, some do so, that seeing it is the Design of God to gather all things into an Head in Christ, that Preaching is to little purpose, which doth not more or less expresly Evidence the Relation of all Truths, and Duties unto him. It is added , He pertained unto another Tribe. To confirm his Argument concerning the Changing or Abolition of the Priesthood, the Apostle sup∣poseth . the Distribution of the People into Tribes according unto the Number of the Sons of Jacob. And as these Tribes had a common Interest in the Church, so some of them had peculiar Priviledges granted and confirmed unto them by Law. So the Priesthood was granted, confined, and confirmed unto the Tribe of Levi, and unto the Family of Aaron in that Tribe. And it was so confined thereunto, as that all the rest of the Tribes were for ever excluded from any Interest therein, and all that belonged unto them incapacitated thereof. But unto one of the Tribes so ex∣cluded from an Interest in the Legal Priesthood did he belong, of whom these things are spoken. And this I look upon as the principal Reason of the distinction of that people into their Tribes; namely, that God thereby might provide for their In∣struction, as to the continuance of the Legal Worship among them, which could be no longer continued than the Priesthood was reserved unto that one Tribe, where∣unto it was Originally granted, : See the meaning of the word in Our Ex∣position on Chap. 2. 11, 12. His Share, Lot, and Interest lay in another Tribe. 3. He Describes in general this other Tribe whereof he was, by its Legal ex∣clusion from all the Service of the Altar; Of which no man gave attendance at the Altar. VVhat Tribe that was in particular he declares in the next Verse, shewing not only of what Tribe he was, but also what it was necessary he should be. Ano∣ther Tribe, , whereof, from which none that was Genealogized, attended at the Altar; that is, had Right so to do, or was not forbidden by the Law so to do. . God doth not reckon that to be done in his Service which he hath not appointed, much less which he hath forbidden. VVhat other inroads were made on the Sa∣cerdotal Office, we know not; but one of the Tribe here intended by the Apostle, whereof none was to attend the Altar, did draw nigh to Offer Incense, for which he was rebuked by the High priest, and punished of God, 2 Chron. 20. 18. And God exercised the greater Severity herein, that the Church might understand, that
when he introduced and allowed of a Priest of another Tribe, that Old Priesthood must of necessity cease and be abolished. No man gave attendance, that is, had Right so to do. That Expression, , attended, waited on the Altar, may be a Synechdochical Description of the whole Priestly Office from the principal Work . and Duty belonging thereunto. But I suppose the Apostle may not only include the Priests, unto whom the immediate work of Sacrificing at the Altar did belong; but all those who attended the Services of it, though they could Offer neither burnt Incense nor Sacrifice; that is, all the Levites in their courses. For He so excludes the Tribe, whereof he speaks, from the least Relation unto the Sacerdotal VVork or Office. None of them ever did or might draw near nor Minister unto the Al∣tar in any Sacred Services whatsoever. See 1 Cor. 9. 13. This Entrance doth the Apostle make into the confirmation of his Assertion, that the Priesthood was changed, and therewithal the Law. For it appears that there was to be a Priest who had no Right by the Law so to be; seeing he was of that Tribe which the Law utterly excluded from any Interest in the Sacred Services of the Altar; and much more those which were peculiar unto the Aaroni∣cal Priests. Thus, 1. All mens Rights, Duties, and Priviledges in Sacred things are fixed and limi∣ted by Divine Institution. And, 2. Seeing Christ himself had no Right to Minister at the Material Altar, the Re∣introduction of such Altars is inconsistent with the perpetual continuance of his Priest∣hood. VER. 14. THIS Apostle confirms his Assertion by a particular Application of it unto the Person of our Lord Jesus Christ. . , Vul. Lat. de Sacerdotibus, without countenance from any Copies of the Original or Ancient Translation. The words contain a double Assertion. (1.) That our Lord sprang of the Tribe of Judah. (2.) That of that Tribe Moses spake nothing concerning the Priesthood. There wants nothing to compleat the Proof of his Argument but that our Lord was a Priest, which he therefore proves in the ensuing Verses. VER. 14. For it is Evident (or Manifest) that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Tribe Moses spake nothing concerning the Priesthood. In the first part of the words there are two things considerable. The manner of the Proposition, or the Modification of the Assertion, . The Conjunction , . for, doth only shew that a Reason or Proof of what was before laid down, is here introduced. And of this he saith, palam est, manifestum, it is manifest, open, a thing confessed; Evident, as we say, in it self. A thing easie to be proved, but that it is by no Man denyed. Only whereas  is manifest or evident,  seems to intimate what was manifest before-hand; as  is to Evidence a mat∣ter before-hand. And this may not only respect, but be confined unto the preced∣ing Promises and Declaration that the Messiah should be of the Tribe of Judah. But we may consider in general how this is said to be a thing Evident or Manifest in its application unto our Lord Jesus Christ. And 1. This was included in the Faith of Believers, who granted him to be the Mes∣siah. For nothing was more plainly promised under the Old Testament, nor more firmly believed by the Church, than that the Messiah was to be of the Tribe of Ju∣dah, and of the Family of David. And thus it was  manifest to them
before-hand. For unto Judah the Promise was Solemnly confined, Gen. 49. 8, 9, 10. and frequently reiterated unto David, as I have shewed elsewhere. VVho∣ever therefore acknowledged our Lord Jesus Christ to be the true Messiah, as all the Hebrews did unto whom our Apostle wrote, though the most of them adhered unto the Law and Ceremonies of it, they must and did grant, that he sprang of the Tribe of Judah. And none of the Unbelieving Jews made use of this Objection, that he was not of the Tribe of Judah, which if they could have managed, had absolutely Justified them in their Unbelief. This was sufficient unto the purpose of the Apostle, seeing he proceeded not only on what was granted among them, but firmly believed by them, and not denied by their Adversaries. 2. It was in those days manifest by his known Genealogy. For by the Providence of God his Parents were Publickly enrolled of that Tribe and of the Family of Da∣vid in the Tax and Recognition of the people appointed by Augustus Caesar, Luke 2. 4. And this was made yet more Famous by the Cruelty of Herod, seeking his De∣struction among the Children of Bethlehem, Mat. 2. And the Genealogies of all Fa∣milies, whilst the Jewish Common-wealth continued in any condition, were carefully preserved, because many legal Rights and Constitutions did depend thereon. And this Preservation of Genealogies was both appointed of God, and fenced with Le∣gal Rights for this very End, to Evidence the accomplishment of his Promise in the Messiah. And unto this End was his Genealogy written and recorded by two of the Evangelists, as that whereon the Truth of his being the Messiah did much depend. Sundry of the Ancients had an apprehension that the Lord Christ derived his Genealogy from both the Tribes of Judah and Levi, in the Regal and Sacerdotal Offices, as he who was to be both King and Priest. And there is a Story inserted in Suidas, how in the days of Justinian the Emperour, one Theodosius, a principal Patriarch of the Jews, acquainted his Friend, one Philip, a Christian, how he was enrolled by the Priests in their Order, as of the Linage of the Priests, by the Name of Jesus the Son of Mary and of God; and that the Records thereof were kept by the Jews at Tiberias to that very time. But the whole Story is filled with gross effects of Ignorance and incredible Fables, being only a Dream of some Super∣stitious Monastick. But the Ancients grounded their imagination on the Kindred that was between his Mother and Elizabeth the Wife of Zechariah the Priest, who was the Daughter of Aaron, Luke 1. 5. But this whole conceit is not only false, but directly contradictory to the Scope and Argument of the Apostle in this place. For the Authors of it would have the Lord Christ so to derive his Genea∣logy from the Tribe of Levi, as thence to be entitled unto the Priesthood, which yet it could not be, unless he was also proved to be of the Family of Aaron. And to assign a Priesthood unto him as derived from Aaron, is openly contradictory un∣to the Apostle in this place, and destructive of his whole Design, as also of the true real Priesthood of Christ himself; as is evident unto any one, who reads this Chapter. The Alliance and Kindred that was between the Blessed Virgin and Elizabeth was doubtless by an Antecedent intermarriage of those Tribes, as Eli∣zabeth's Mother might be Sister unto the Father or Grand-father of the Holy Vir∣gin. And this was not only Lawful between the Tribes of Judah and Levi or the Regal and Sacerdotal Families, whence Jehoshabeath the Wife of Jehoiadah, was the Daughter of Jehoram the King, 2 Chron. 22. 11. as some have imagined; but such Marriages were usual unto, and Lawful among all the other Tribes, where Wo∣men had no Inheritances of Land, which was expresly provided against by a par∣ticular Law. And this very Law of Exception doth sufficiently prove the Liber∣ty of all others. For the words of it are, Every Daughter, that possesseth an Inhe∣ritance in any Tribe of the Children of Israel, shall be Wife unto one of the Family of the Tribe of her Father, that the Children of Israel may enjoy every one the Inheri∣tance of their Father, Numb. 36. 8. Both the express limitation of the Law unto those who possessed Inheritances, and the Reason of it for the preservation of the Lots of each Tribe entire, as ver. 3, 4. manifest that all other were at liberty to Marry any Israelite, be he of what Tribe soever. And thus both the Genealogies of Matthew and Luke, one by a Legal, the other by a Natural line, were both of them from the Tribe of Judah, and Family of David. So It pleaseth God to give sufficient Evidence unto the accomplishment of his Promise.
2. For the manner of the proceeding of the Lord Christ from that Tribe, the Apostle expresseth it by , He sprang;  is usually taken in an . active sence, to cause to rise, Mat. 5. 45. , he causeth his Sun to rise. And sometimes it is used Neutrally, for to rise; and so as some think it peculiarly denotes the rising of the Sun, in distinction from the other Planets. Hence is , the East, from the rising of the Sun. So the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ is called the rising of the Sun of Righteousness with healing in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. , Luke 1. 78. The day-spring from on high. Thus did the Lord Christ arise in the light and glory of the Sun, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People Israel. But the word is used also to ex∣press other springings; as of Water from a Fountain, or a Branch from the Stock. And so it is said of our Lord Jesus, that he should grow up as a tender Plant, and as a Root out of a dry Ground, Isa. 53. 2. A Rod out of the Stem, and a Branch out of the Roots of Jesse, Chap. 11. 1. Hence he is frequently called the Branch, and the Branch of the Lord, Isa. 4. 2. Jer. 23. 5. Chap. 33. 15. Zech. 3. 8. Chap 6. 12. But the first, which is the most proper sense of the words, is to be regarded; he arose eminently and illustriously from the Tribe of Judah. Having laid down this Matter of Fact, as that which was evident, and on all hands confessed, he observes upon it, that of that Tribe Moses spake nothing con∣cerning the Priesthood. , with reference unto which Tribe, , de qua Tribu. Being to prove that the Priesthood did no way belong to the Tribe of Judah: So that the In∣troduction . of a Priest of that Tribe must necessarily exclude those of the House of Aaron from that Office, he appeals unto the Law-giver, or rather the Law it self. For by Moses, not the Person of Moses absolutely is intended; as though these . things depended on his Authority: but it is his Ministry in giving of the Law; or his Person only as Ministerially employed in the Declaration of it, that our Apostle respects. And it is the Law of Worship that is under consideration. Moses did re∣cord the Blessing of Judah, as given him by Jacob, wherein the Promise was made unto him, that the Shilo should come from him, Gen. 49. 10. And this same Shilo was also to be a Priest. But this was a Promise before the Law, and not to be ac∣complished until the expiration of the Law, and belonged not unto any Institution of the Law given by Moses. Wherefore Moses as the Law-giver, when the Office of the Priesthood was Instituted in the Church, and confirmed by especial Law or Ordinance, spake nothing of it with respect unto the Tribe of Judah. For as in the Law, the first Institution of it was directly confined unto the Tribe of Levi, and House of Aaron, so there is not in all the Law of Moses the least intimation, that on any Occasion in any future Generations, it should be translated unto that Tribe. Nor was it possible without the alteration and abolition of the whole Law, that any one of that Tribe should once be put into the Office of the Priesthood: The whole wor∣ship of God was to cease, rather than that any one of the Tribe of Judah should Officiate in the Office of the Priesthood. And this silence of Moses in this mat∣ter, the Apostle takes to be a sufficient Argument to prove that the legal Priest∣hood did not belong, nor could be transferred unto the Tribe of Judah. And the Grounds hereof are resolved into this general Maxime, that whatever is not reveal∣ed and appointed in the Worship of God by God himself, is to be considered as nothing, yea, as that which is to be rejected. And such he conceived to be the Evidence of this Maxime, that he chose rather to Argue from the silence of Moses in general, than from the particular Prohibition, that none, who was not of the Posterity of A∣aron, should approach unto the Priestly Office. So God himself condemneth some Instances of false VVorship, on this Ground, that he never appointed them, that they never came into his Heart, and thence aggravates the sin of the People, rather than from the particular Prohibition of them, Jer. 7. 31. VVherefore Divine Revelation gives Bounds positively and negatively unto the Worship of God.
VER. 15, 16, 17. THat the Aaronical Priesthood was to be Changed, and consequently the whole Law of Ordinances that depended thereon, and that the Time, wherein this Change was to be made, was now come, is that which is designed unto Confirma∣tion in all this Discourse. And it is that Truth whereinto our Faith of the Accep∣tance of Evangelical Worship is resolved. For without the removal of the Old, there is no place for the New. This therefore the Apostle now fully confirmes by a Recapitulation of the force and sum of his preceding Arguments. . And it is yet far more evident for that after the Similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another Priest, who is made not after the Law of a carnal Commandement, but after the power of an Endless Life. For he Testifieth, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. There are four things to be considered in these words. 1. The manner of the Introduction of this new Argument, declaring its especial force with the weight that the Apostle lays upon it; And it is yet far more Evident. 2. The Medium or Argument it self which he insists upon, which is, that from what he had already proved, there was another Priest to arise after the Similitude of Melchisedec. 3. The Illustration of this Argument in an Explication of the wayes and means whereby this Priest arose, declared both negatively and positively: Who is made not after the Law of a carnal Commandement, but after the Power of an Endless Life. 4. The Confirmation of the whole with the Testimony of David. For he Testi∣fieth, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. The manner of the Introduction of this Argument is Emphatical: . And it is yet far more Evident. The Conjunctive Particle  connects this consideration unto that forgoing, as of . the same nature and tendency. The thing spoken of is said to be . Of what he said before he affirmed . that it was  ver. 14. namely, that our Lord sprang of Judah; Evident, Manifest, Demonstrable: but this he adds is , which composition of the word intends the signification, arguing yet a more open and convincing Evidence. Hence he adds, that it is , magis patet: abundantius manifestum, . comparatively with what was said before; of an abundant Efficacy for Convicti∣on; that, whose light nothing can stand against. But we must observe that the A∣postle doth not compare the things themselves absolutely with one another, and so determine that one is of a more evident Truth than the other; but he compares them only with respect unto the Evidence in arguing unto his End. There is more immediate force in this Consideration to prove the Cessation of the Levitical Priest∣hood, that another Priest was to rise after the Similitude of Melchisedec, than was meerly in this, that our Lord sprang of the Tribe of Judah; but of this after∣wards. And therefore he adds  yet; that is, above all that hath been collected from . the Consideration of Melchisedec, there is yet this uncontroulable Evidence unto our purpose remaining. The Apostle we see lays great weight on this Argument, and withal proceeds gradually and distinctly from one thing to another in the whole Discourse. It may be we see not why he should insist so much upon, and so narrowly Scan all particulars in this matter. For being freed by the Gospel from the power of Temptations about it, and being of the Gentiles, who were never concerned in it, we cannot be sensible of the just importance of what is under Confirmation. The Truth is, He hath the greatest Argument in hand that was ever controverted in the Church of God and upon the Determination whereof the Salvation or Ruine of the Church did depend. The Worship he treated of, was immediately instituted by God
himself; and had now continued near 1500 years in the Church. All this while it had been the certain Rule of Gods Acceptance of the People or his Anger towards them; For whilst they complyed with it, his Blessing was continually upon them; and the neglect of it was still punished with Severity. And the last Caution that God had given them by the Ministry of the last Prophet he sent unto them, was, that they should abide in the Observance of the Law of Moses, lest he came and smote the whole Earth with a Curse. Mal. 4. last. Besides these and sundry other things that were real and pleadable in the behalf of the Mosaical Worship, the He∣brews esteemed it always their great and Singular Priviledge above all other Nati∣ons; which they would rather dye than part withal. And the Design of the Apostle in this place is to prove that now utterly unexpectedly unto the Church, after so long a season, their whole worship was to be removed, to be used no more, but that another System of Ordinances and Institutions absolutely new, and inconsistent with it, was to be introduced. And upon the Compliance of the Hebrews with this Doctrine, or the Rejection of it, depended their Eternal Salvation or De∣struction. It was therefore very necessary that the Apostle should proceed Warily, Distinct∣ly and Gradually, omitting no Argument that was of Force and Pleadable in this Cause, nor to remark on them in an especial manner, which contained an especial Evidence and demonstrative force in them, as he doth in this Instance. For this Introduction of it, and it is yet far more, or abundantly more Evident, is as an hand put in the Margin of a writing calling for a peculiar Attendance unto, and conside∣ration of the matter directed unto. And we may see, 1. That Present Truths are earnestly to be Pleaded and Contended for. So the A∣postle Peter would have Believers established , in the present Truth. All Truth is Eternal, and in it self equally subsistent and present unto all Ages. But it is especially so either from the great use of it in some seasons, or the great Op∣position that is made unto it. So this Doctrine about the Abolition of the Mosaical Ceremonies and Institutions with the Introduction of a new Priesthood and new Ordinances of Worship, was then the Present Truth, in the knowledge and confirma∣tion whereof, the Church was eternally concerned. And so may other Truths be at other seasons. And any of them may be so rendred by the Opposition that at any time is made unto them. For God is pleased to exercise and try the Faith of the Church by Heresies which are Feirce, Pertinacious and Subtle Oppositions made to the Truth. Now none of them, which aim at any consistency in and with them∣selves, or are of any real danger unto the Church, did ever reject all Gospel-Truths, but some general Principles they will allow, or they would leave themselves no Foundation to stand upon, in their Opposition unto others. Those therefore singly opposed by them at any time, as the Deity or Satisfaction of Christ, Justification by Faith and the like, being so opposed, become the present Truth of the Age, in the instance of Adherence whereunto God will try the Faith of his People, and re∣quires that they be earnestly pleaded for. And this is that which the Apostle Jude intends, ver. 3. where he exhorts us  to contend, strive, wrestle with all earnestness and the utmost of our Endeavours, for the Faith once delivered unto the Saints; namely, because of the Opposition that was then made unto it. And a Truth may come under this Qualification by Persecution as well as Heretical Oppo∣sition. Satan is always awake and attentive unto his Advantages; and therefore though he hate all Truth, yet doth he not at all times equally attempt upon every thing that is so. But he waiteth to see an inclination in men from their Lusts, or Prejudices, or Interests in this World, against any especial Truth, or way of Di∣vine Worship which God hath appointed. When he finds things so ready prepa∣red, he falls to his work, and stirrs up Persecution against it. This makes that Truth to be the present Truth to be contended for, as that wherein God will try the Faith and Obedience and Patience of the Church. And the Reasons why we ought with all Care, Diligence and Perseverance to attend unto the Preservation and Profession of such Truths, are obvious unto all. 2. Important Truths, should be strongly Confirmed. Such is that here pleaded by the Apostle, and therefore doth he so labour in the Confirmation of it. He had undertaken to convince the Hebrews of the Cessation of their Legal Worship, out of their own acknowledged Principles. He deals not with them meerly by his Apo∣stolical
Authority, and by vertue of the Divine Revelations of the will of God which himself had received; but he proceeds with them on Arguments taken out of the Types, Institutions and Testimonies of the Old Testament, all which they owned and acknowledged, though without his aid they had not understood the meaning of them. On this Supposition it was necessary for him to Plead and Press all the Arguments from the Topick mentioned, which had any Cogency in them; and he doth so accordingly. 3. Arguments that are equally true, may yet on the Account of Evidence not be equally Cogent; yet 4. In the Confirmation of the Truth we may use every help that is true and seasonable, though some of them may be more effectual unto our End, than others. This we are instructed in by the Apostle, affirming in this place, that what he now affirms is yet far more Evident. And this Evidence, as we observed before, may respect either the things themselves, or the Efficacy in point of Argument. For in themselves all things under the old Testament were Typical and Significant of what was afterwards to be introduced. So our Apostle tells us that the Ministry of Moses consisted in giving Testimony to those things which were to be spoken or declared afterwards, chap. 3. 5. But among them some were far more Clear and Evident as to their signification than others were. In the latter sense the things which he had discoursed about Melchisedec and his Priesthood, were more effectu∣ally demonstrative of the Change of the Levitical Priesthood, than what he had newly observed concerning the Rising of our Lord Jesus Christ not of the Tribe of Levi but of Judah, although that had life and evidence also in it self, which is prin∣cipally intended. The Argument it self is nextly expressed whereunto this full Evidence is ascrib∣ed, ; if another Priest do arise af∣ter the Similitude of Melchisedec. And in the words there is (1) the Modification of the Proposition in the particle ; (2) The Notation of the Subject spoken of; a∣nother Priest. (3) His Introduction into his Office, he did arise. (4) The Nature of his Office, and the manner of his coming unto it: after the likeness of Melchisedec. , if, is generally taken here not to be a Conditional but a Causal Conjunction. Ei. And so, as many judge, it is used: Rom. 8. 31. 2 Cor. 5. 15. 1 Thess. 3. 8. 1 Pet. 1. 17. And it is rendered in our Translation by For, For that another Priest; as Beza rendreth it by quod, because. Others by ex eo quòd, and siquidem. Syr. and again this is more known, by that which he said. All take it to be an intimation of a Reason proving what is affirmed; and so it doth if with the Vulgar we retain si, or siquidem, if so be. And it is yet far more Evident, if so be that another Priest. As to the Argument in general, we must observe (1) That the Design of the Apostle in this place is not to demonstrate the Dignity and Eminency of the Priest∣hood of Christ from that of Melchisedec his Type, which he had done before suffi∣ciently; he doth not produce the same Words and Arguments again unto the same purpose: but that which he aims at, is, from that Testimony, whereby he had proved the Dignity of the Priesthood of Christ, now also to prove the necessary Abo∣lition of the Levitical Priesthood. Wherefore (2) He doth not insist on the whole of the Testimony before pleaded, but only on that one thing of another Priest, ne∣cessarily included therein. 2. The Subject spoken of is ; that is not meerly , that is,  alius: as the Syriack understood it, who renders it by : but it is  ali∣enus, . that is intended. Every  was by the Law absolutely forbidden to ap∣proach unto the Priests Office, or Altar, or Sacred employment. So , ano∣ther in this Case is a Stranger, one that is not of the House or Family of Aaron. And nothing can be more evident than that the Levitical Priesthood and the whole Law of Divine Worship must be taken away and abolished then, if it appear that any , or Stranger, may be admitted into that Office; much more, if it were necessary that it should so be. For the Law of the Priesthood took care of nothing more than that no Stranger, that was not of the House of Aaron, should be called to that Office. See Exod. 29. 33. Lev. 22. 10. Numb. 1. 51. and Numb. 3. 10. Aaron and his Sons they shall wait on the Preists Office  and the Stranger that cometh nigh, that is, to discharge any Sacerdotal Duty, shall be put to death. And God gave an eminent Instance of his Severity with respect unto this
Law in the Punishment of Corah, though of the Tribe of Levi, for the Transgression of it. And he caused a perpetual Memorial to be kept of that Punishment, to the End they might know, that no Stranger who is not of the Seed of Aaron should come near to Offer Incense before the Lord, Numb. 16. 40. And hence our Apostle in the next verse observes, that this Priest was not to be made after the Law of a Carnal Commandement, seeing his making was a Dissolution of that Law or Com∣mandement. If therefore there must be , another Priest, that was not of the linage of Aaron, the other is abolished. 3. His Introduction into his Office is expressed by , there ariseth. Ori∣tur, . Exoritur. Syr.  Surgit. Vul. Lat. exurgat, Arose, in an extraordinary manner, Judg. 5. 7. Untill I Deborah arose, I arose a Mother in Israel; that is, by an extraordinary Call from God to be a Prophetess and a Deliverer. Deut. 18. 18. A Prophet will I raise up unto you; which was Christ himself. So God raised up a Horn of Salvation in the house of his Servant David. Luk. 1. 69. that is, with an extraordinary Power and Glory. So was this Priest to arise, not springing out of, nor succeeding in any order of Priesthood before Established. But all things in the Law lay against his Introduction; and the Body of the People in the Church, was come unto the highest Defiance of any such Priest. But as God had fore-signified what he would do, when the time of the Reformation of all things should come, so when he performed his Word herein, he did it in that manner, with that evidence of his Glory and Power, as introduced him against all Opposition. For when the appointed time is come, wherein the Decrees of God shall bring forth, and his Counsel be accomplished, all Difficulties though appearing insupe∣rable, shall vanish and disappear. Zech. 4. 6, 7. 4. The Nature of his Priesthood is declared in its Resemblance unto that of  Melchisedec, . The Apostle intendeth not to express the words of the Psalmist, , which he constantly renders , according unto the Order; but he respects the whole Conformity that was between Melchisedec and our Lord Jesus Christ, in the instances which he had before insisted on. For where∣as God had ordered all things in the Scripture concerning Melchisedec, that he might be , ver. 3. made like unto the Son of God, he is said to arise , according to the likeness or similitude of Melchisedec. For every Similitude is mutual; one thing is as like unto another, as that is unto it. This therefore is evident, that there was to be another Priest; , not only , meerly another, but , one of another Stock and Race; and a Priest he was to be after the Similitude of Melchisedec, and not so much as after the Similitude of Aaron. The arising of Christ in his Offices puts an end unto all other things that pretend an usefulness unto the same end with them. When he arose as a King he did not put an end unto the Office and Power of Kings in the World; but he did so unto the Typical Kingdoms over the Church, as he did to the Priesthood by arising as a Priest. And when he ariseth spiritually in the Hearts and Consci∣ences of Believers, an end is put unto all other things, that they might before look for life, or Righteousness, or Salvation by. VER. 16. This Verse containeth an Illustration and Confirmation of the foregoing Asser∣tion, by a Declaration of the way and manner how this other Priest, who was not of the Seed of Aaron, should come unto that Office. And this was necessary also for the prevention of an Objection, which the whole Discourse was obnoxious unto. For it might be said, that whatever was affirmed concerning another Priest, yet there was no way possible, whereby any one might come so to be, unless he were of the Family of Aaron. All others were expressely excluded by the Law. Nor was there any way or means ordained of God, any especial Sacrifice institu∣ted whereby such a Priest might be dedicated, and initiated into his Office. In prevention of this Objection, and Confirmation of what was before declared, the Apostle adds,
Who was made, not after the Law of a Carnal Commandment, but after the Power of an Endless Life. The words declare, (1.) That this Priest was made so; and (2.) How he was made so, both negatively and positively. 1. He was made so; , which Priest was made; or who was made a Priest. The force of this Expression hath been explained on Chap. 3. 2. and Chap. 5. 5. . The Lord Christ did not meerly on his own Authority and Power take this Office upon himself. He became so, he was made so by the Appointment and Designa∣tion of the Father. Nor did he do any thing in the whole work of his Media∣tion, but in Obedience unto his Command, and in compliance with his Will. For it is the Authority of God alone which is the Foundation of all Office, Duty, and Power in the Church. Even what Christ himself is and was unto the Church, he is and was so by the Grace and Authority of God even the Father. By him was he sent, his will did he perform, through his Grace did he die, by his Power was he exalted, and with him doth he intercede. What Acts of God in particular do concur unto the constitution of this Office of Christ, and to the making him a Priest, have been declared before. 2. The manner of his being made a Priest is expressed Negatively, , . not after; or not according unto the Law of a Carnal Com∣mandment. Syr.  the Law of Bodily Commandments. It is un∣questionable, that the Apostle by this Expression intendeth in the first place the Law of the Levitical Priesthood, or the way and manner, whereby the Aaronical Priests were first called and vested with their Office, and then any other Law, Constitu∣tion, Rule, or Order of the same kind. He was made a Priest neither by that Law, nor any other like unto it. And two things we must enquire into. (1.) Why the Call of the Aaronical Priests is said to be after the Law of Commandment (2.) Why this Commandment is said to be Fleshly. 1. For the first, we may observe that the whole Law of Worship among the Jews is called by our Apostle, , Ephes. 2. 15. The Law of Commandments in Ordinances. And it is so called for two Reasons. (1.) Because Commands were so multiplyed therein, that the whole Law was de∣nominated from them. Hence it became , a Yoke hardly to be born, if not altogether intolerable, Acts 15. 10. (2.) Because of that Severity where∣with Obedience was exacted. A Command in its formal Notion expresseth Au∣thority, and the multiplication of them Severity: And both these God designed to make Eminent in that Law; whence it hath this denomination, a Law of Com∣mandments. Hereof the Law of the constitution of the Office of the Priesthood and the Call of Aaron thereunto, was a part, and he was therefore made a Priest by the Law of Commandments; that is, by a Preceptive Law, as a part of that System of Commands wherein the whole Law consisted. See this Law and all the Commands of it, Exod. 28. throughout. 2. Why doth the Apostle call this Commandment Carnal or Fleshly. Answ. It . may be on either of these three Accounts. (1.) With respect unto the Sacrifices which were the principal part of the con∣secration of Aaron unto his Office. And these may be called Fleshly on two Ac∣counts. 1. Because of their Subject-matter, they were Flesh, or the Bodies of Beasts; as the Syriack reads these words, the Commandment of Bodies, that is, of Beasts to be Sacrificed. 2. In themselves and their Relation unto the Jewish State they reached no further than the purifying of the Flesh. They Sanctified un∣to the Purifying of the Flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Chap. 9. 13. And thus the whole Commandment should be denominated from the principal Subject-matter, or the Offering of Fleshly Sacrifices unto the Purifying of the Flesh. (2.) It may be called Carnal, because a Priesthood was Instituted thereby, which was to be continued by Carnal Propagation only; the Priesthood appointed by that Law was confined unto the Carnal Seed and Posterity of Aaron, wherein this other Priest had no Interest. (3.) Respect may be had unto the whole System of those Laws and Institutions of Worship, which our Apostle, as was also before observed, calls Carnal Ordinan∣ces,
imposed unto the Time of Reformation, Chap. 9. 10. They were all Carnal in opposition unto the Dispensation of the Spirit under the Gospel and the Institutions thereof. None of these ways was the Lord Christ made a Priest. He was not dedica∣ted unto his Office by the Sacrifice of Beasts, but Sanctified himself thereunto, when he Offered himself through the Eternal Spirit unto God, and was consum∣mate in his own Blood. He was not of the Carnal Seed of Aaron, nor did, nor could claim any Succession unto the Priesthood by virtue of an Extraction from his Race. And no constitution of the Law in general, no Ordinance of it, did con∣vey unto him either Right or Title unto the Priesthood. It is therefore Evident, that he was in no sense made a Priest according to the Law of a Carnal Commandment; neither had he either Right, Power, or Authority to exercise the Sacerdotal Function in the observation of any Carnal Rites or Ordinan∣ces whatever: And we may observe, That what seemed to be wanting unto Christ in his entrance into any of his Offices, or in the Discharge of them, was on the account of a greater Glory. Aaron was made a Priest with a great outward Solemnity. The Sacrifices which were Offered, and the Garments he put on, with his visible separation from the rest of the People, had a great Ceremonial Glory in them. There was nothing of all this, nor any thing like unto it, in the Consecration of the Lord Christ unto his Office. But yet indeed these things had no Glory, in comparison of that excelling Glory, which accompa∣nied those invisible Acts of Divine Authority, VVisdom, and Grace which com∣municated his Office unto him. And indeed in the VVorship of God, who is a Spirit, all outward Ceremony is a diminution and debasement of it. Hence were Ceremonies for Beauty and Glory multiplyed under the Old Testament, but yet as the Apostle shews, were all but Carnal. But as the sending of Christ himself and his Investiture with all his Offices were by Secret and Invisible Acts of God and his Spirit, so all Evangelical VVorship, as to the Glory of it, is Spiritual and In∣ternal only. And the removal of the Old Pompous Ceremonies from our VVor∣ship is but the taking away of the Veil, which hindred from an insight and entrance into the Holy place. 2. The way and manner whereby the Lord Christ was made a Priest is expres∣sed positively: . But according unto the Power of an . indissoluble Life.  denotes an Opposition between the way rejected and this asserted, as those which were not consistent. He was not made a Priest that way, but this. How is Christ then made a Priest according to the Power of an endless Life? That . is, saith one in his Paraphrase, installed into the Priesthood after his Resurrection. VVhat is meant by installed, I well know not. It should seem to be the same with , Consecrated, Dedicated, Initiated. And if so, this Exposition diverts wholly from the Truth. For Christ was installed into his Office of Priesthood be∣fore his Resurrection, or he did not Offer himself as a Sacrifice unto God in his Death and Blood-shedding. And to suppose that the Lord Christ discharged and per∣formed the principal Act of his Sacerdotal Office, which was but once to be perform∣ed, before he was installed a Priest, is contradictory to, Scripture and Reason it self. Ideo ad vitam im mortalem perductus est, ut in aeternum sacrdos noster esset. He was therefore brought unto an Immortal Life, that he might be our Priest for ever, saith another. But this is not to be made a Priest according to the Power of an endless Life. If he means, that he might always continue to be a Priest, and to execute that Office always unto the consummation of all things; what he says is true, but not the sence of this place: but if he means, that he became Immortal after his Resurrection, that he might be our Priest, and abide so for ever, it excludes his Oblation in his Death from being a proper Sacerdotal Act, which that it was, I have sufficiently proved elsewhere, against Crellius and others. Some think that the endless life intended is that of Believers, which the Lord Christ by virtue of his Priestly Office confers upon them. The Priests under the Law proceeded no further but to discharge Carnal Rites, which could not confer Eternal life on them, for whom they Ministred. But the Lord Christ in the Dis∣charge of his Office, procureth Eternal Redemption and Everlasting life for Be∣lievers. And these things are true, but they comprise not the meaning of the Apo∣stle
in this place. For how can Christ be made a Priest according to the Power of that Eternal Life, which he confers on others. For the comparison and opposition that is made between the Law of a Carnal Commandment, whereby Aaron was consti∣tuted a Priest, and the Power of an endless Life, whereby Christ was made so, do Evidence, that the making of Christ a Priest, not absolutely, which the Apostle treats not of, but such a Priest as he is, was the Effect of this endless Life. VVherefore the , the indissoluble Life here intended, is the life of Christ himself. Hereunto belonged, or from hence did proceed that , or Power, whereby he was made a Priest. And both the Office it self and the Ex∣ecution or Discharge of it, are here intended. And as to the Office it self, this Eternal or endless life of Christ, is his life as the Son of God. Hereon depends his own Mediatory life for ever, and his conferring of Eternal life on us, John 5. 26, 27. And to be a Priest by virtue of, or according unto this Power, stands in direct opposition unto the Law of a Carnal Commandment. It must therefore be enquired, how the Lord Christ was made a Priest according unto this power. And I say it was, because thereby alone he was rendred meet to discharge that Office, wherein God was to redeem his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. By Power therefore here, both meetness and ability are intended. And both these the Lord Christ had from his Divine Nature and his endless life therein. Or it may be the Life of Christ in his Humane Nature is intended, in opposi∣tion unto those Priests, who being made so by the Law of a Carnal Commandment, did not continue in the Discharge of their Office by reason of Death, as our Apo∣stle observes afterwards. But it will be said, that this Natural life of Christ, the life of the Humane Nature was not Endless, but had an End put unto it in the Dissolution of his Soul and Body on the Cross. I say therefore this life of Christ was not absolutely the life of the Humane Na∣ture considered separately from his Divine; but it was the life of the Person of the Son of God, of Christ as God and Man in one Person. And so his life was endless. For first, in the Death which he underwent in his Humane Nature, there was no Interruption given unto his Discharge of his Sacerdotal Office, no, not for a mo∣ment. For Secondly, His Person still lived, and both Soul and Body were therein inseparably United unto the Son of God. Although he was truly and really dead in his Humane Nature, he was still alive in his indissoluble Person. And this the Apo∣stle hath a respect unto in the Testimony, which he cites in the next Verse, to prove that he is a Priest for ever. The Carnal Commandment gave Authority and Effi∣cacy unto the Levitical Priests. But Christ is made a Priest according to the Power of an endless life; that is, through the Power and Efficacy of that Eternal life which is in his Divine Person, both his Humane Nature is preserved always in the Dis∣charge of his Office, and he is enabled thereby to work out eternal life on the be∣half of them for whom he is a Priest. And so the Apostle proves the Difference of this other Priest from those of the Order of Aaron, not only from the Tribe wherein he was to be, and from his Type Melchisedec, but also from the way and means, whereby the one and the other were enabled to discharge their Office. VER. 17. The Proof of all before asserted is given in the Testimony of the Psalmist so of∣ten before appealed unto. For he testifieth, thou art a Priest for ever after the Or∣der of Melchisedec. The Introduction of this Testimony is by , or he Witnesseth or Te∣stifieth; . that is, David doth in the Psalm, or rather the Holy Ghost speaking in and by David, doth so testifie. He doth not absolutely say that so he speaks, but testifies; because he used his words in a way of Testimony unto what he had de∣livered. And although one thing be now principally intended by him, yet there is in these words a Testimony given unto all the especial Heads of his Discourse. As (1.) That there was to be another Priest, a Priest that was not of the Stock . of Aaron, nor Tribe of Levi. For he says unto the Messiah Prophesied of, who was to be of the Seed of David, Thou art a Priest, although a stranger from the Aaronical Line. (2.) That this other Priest was to be after the Order of Mel∣chisedec,
and was not to be called after the Order of Aaron. For he was , after the Order;  is a redundant, and not a suffix.  is from  and signifies a state or order of things;  . Eccles. 3. 18. I said in my Heart concerning the estate of the Sons of Men, their condition and Order of all things; that is, . The Priest∣hood of Christ in the mind of God was the Eternal Idea or Original Exemplar of the Priesthood of Melchisedec. God brought him forth and vested him with his Office in such a way and manner, as that he might outwardly represent in sundry things the Idea of the Priesthood of Christ in his own mind. Hence he and his Priesthood became an External Exemplar of the Priesthood of Christ as unto its actual exhibition; and therefore is he said to be made a Priest after his Order, that is, suitably unto the Representation made thereof in him. (3.) That he was made a Priest, namely, by him and his Authority, who said unto him, Thou art a Priest; as Chap. 5. 5, 6, 10. (4.) That he was so after the power of an endless life. For he was a Priest for ever. This word is applyed to the Law and legal Priesthood, and signifies a Duration commensurate unto the state and condition of the things whereunto it is applyed. There was an  of the Law; an Age whereunto its continuance was confined. So long all the Promises annexed unto it stood in force. And as ascribed unto the new state of things under the Gospel, it doth not signifie Eternity absolutely, but a certain unchangable Duration unto the end of the Time and Works of the Gospel. For then shall the Exercise of the Priesthood of Christ cease, with his whole Mediatory Work and Office, 1 Cor. 15. 28. Christ therefore is said to be a Priest for ever. (1.) In respect of his Person, endued with an endless life. (2.) Of the Execution of his Office unto the final end of it; he lives for ever to make Intercession. (3.) Of the Effect of his Offices, which is to save Believers unto the utmost, or with an Everlasting Salvation. And the Apostle had sufficient Reason to affirm that what he proposed was emi∣nently manifest, namely, from the Testimony which he produceth thereof. For what can be more evident than that the Aaronical Priesthood was to be abolished, if so be that God had designed and promised to raise up another Priest in the Church, who was neither of the Stock nor Order of Aaron, nor called the same way to his Office, as he was, and who when he was so raised and called, was to continue a Priest for ever, leaving no room for the continuance of that Priesthood in the Church, nor place for its return when it was once laid aside? And we may ob∣serve that, 1. The Eternal continuance of Christs Person gives Eternal continuance and effi∣cacy unto his Office. Because he lives for ever, he is a Priest for ever. His endless life is the Foundation of his endless Priesthood. Whilst he lives we want not a Priest; and therefore he says, that because he lives, we shall live also. 2. To make new Priests in the Church, is virtually to renounce the Faith of his living for ever as our Priest, or to suppose that he is not sufficient to the Discharge of his Office. 3. The Alteration that God made in the Church by the Introduction of the Priesthood of Christ was progressive towards its perfection. To return therefore unto or look after legal Ceremonies in the Worship of God, is to go back unto poor beggarly Elements and Rudiments of the World. VER. 18, 19. IN the Twelfth Verse of this Chapter the Apostle affirms, that the Priesthood being changed, there was of Necessity a change made of the Law also. Having proved the former, he now proceeds to confirm his Inference from it, by declaring that the Priest and Priesthood that were promised to be introduced, were in all things inconsistent with the Law. In that place he mentions only a , or change of the Law. But he intended not an Alteration to be made in it, so as that being changed and mended, it might be restored unto its former Use. But it was such a change of it, as was an , an Abrogation of it, as in these Verses he doth de∣clare. Now this was a matter of the highest concernment unto the Hebrews, and of great Importance in it self. For it included and carried along with it an Alteration of the
whole state of the Church, and of all the Solemn Worship of God therein. This therefore was not to be done but on Cogent Reasons and Grounds indispensable. And no doubt but the Apostle foresaw, what a surprisal it would be unto the Gene∣rality of the Hebrews, to hear that they must quit all their concern and special Inte∣rest in the Law of Moses. For he had three sorts of Persons to deal withal in this great cause. 1. Such as adhered unto and maintained the Mosaical Institutions in Opposition unto Christ and the whole way of our coming unto God by him. These esteem∣ed it the greatest Blasphemy imaginable for any to affirm, that the Law was to be changed or abrogated. And this was the occasion of the death of the first Martyr of Jesus Christ under the accusation of Blasphemy, which by the Law was to be punished with Death. For this they made their charge against Stephen, that he spake Blasphemous words against Moses, (whom they put in the first place) and against God. Act. 6. 11. And the proof of this Blasphemy they lay on those words, that Jesus should change the Customs which Moses had delivered to them. Accordingly on this very account they stirred up Persecution with rage and madness against the Holy Apostles all the World over. The mouths of these Cursed Unbelievers were to be stopped; and therefore Cogent Reasons and Unanswerable were in this Case to be urged by the Apostle; and they are so accordingly. And they were now to know that notwithstanding all their Rage and Bluster, those that believed were not ashamed of the Gospel, and they must be told that the Law was to be abrogated, whether they would hear or forbear, however they were provoked or enraged thereby. 2. There were others of them who, although they received the Gospel and believ∣ed in Christ, yet were perswaded that the Law was still in force, and the Worship prescribed in it still to be observed. And of these there were very great Multi∣tudes as the Apostle declares; Acts 21. 20. This Error was in the Patience of God for a while tolerated among them, because the time of their full Conviction was not yet come. But those who were possessed with it, began after a while to be very troublesome unto the Church, and would not be content to observe the Law themselves, but would impose the Observation of it on all the Gentile Converts on the pain of Eternal Damnation. Acts 15. 1. They said and contended, that unless they were Circumcised after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved. These also were to be restrained and convinced. And those of them who were obstinate in this Perswasion, not long after apostatized from the whole of Christianity. And 3. There were sincere Believers, whose Faith was to be strengthned and confirmed. With respect unto them all the Apostle laboureth with great Diligence in this Argu∣ment, and evidently proves, both that it was the will and purpose of God that the Ad∣ministration of the Law should have an End, and also that the time was now come, wherein it was to cease and be abrogated. This therefore he proceeds withal in these Verses. . , Vul. Lat. Reprobatio; Rhem. Reprobation, most improperly; Syr.  Mutatio, a Change; which reacheth not the force of the word, Ar. Abro∣gatio; Bez. fit irritum; that is, mandatum.  is rendred, loco moveo, abrogo, abdico, irritum facio; To take out of the way, to abrogate, to disanul, to make void; and for the most part it hath respect unto a Rule, Law or Command, that was or is in force. Sometimes it is used of a Person, who ought in Duty to be re∣garded and honoured, but is despised, Luk. 10. 16. Joh. 12. 48. where it is ren∣dred to despise. So 1 Thess. 4. 8. Jude 8. Sometimes it respects things; Gal. 2. 21. 1 Tim. 5. 12. But commonly it respects a Law, and is applyed unto them who are absolutely under the power of the Law, or such in whose power the Law is. The first sort are said to make void the Law, when they Transgress it, neglecting the Authority whereby it is given. Mark 7. 9. Heb. 10. 28. But when this word is applyed unto him who hath power over the Law, it signifies the Abrogation of it, so far as that it shall have no more power to oblige unto its observance.  is used no where in the new Testament but here and chap. 9. 26. Here it is applyed
unto the Law, being the taking away of its Power to oblige unto Obedience; there unto Sin, denoting the abrogating of its Power to condemn. ; quidem, equidem, enim Syr.  autem, but; For verily. praecedentis mandati. The Syriack thus renders the verse, The Change, which was made in the first Commandement, was made for its weakness and be∣cause there was no profit in it. ; propter ipsius imbecillitatem; infirmitatem; propter illud quod in eo erat infirmum aut imbecille. ; & inutilitatem,  Syr. and because there was no profit in it. The Arab. changeth the sense of the place; reading to this purpose. For there is a Transgression where the Commandement went before, because that was weak and of little Advantage. ; perfecit lex. Bez. consummavit, ad perfectum adduxit; Vul. Lat. Rhem. brought nothing to Perfection. Syr. For the Law did not perfect any thing. . Vul. introductio verò melioris spei. Beza, sed superintroducta spes potior. Others, Sed erat Introductio ad spem potiorem. Syr, But there entered in the room thereof, an hope more excellent than it. ; appropinquamus; accedimus; Vul. proximamus. Rhem. we approach. Our own Translation fully expresseth the Original in all the parts of it, only it determines the sense of verse the 19, by the insertion of that word (did.) VER. 18, 19. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandement going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. For the Law made nothing perfect; but the bringing in of a better hope, by which we draw nigh unto God. (1) The Subject spoken of is the Command; (2) Described by the Time of its giving, it went before; (3) Hereof it is affirmed, that it is disannulled; and (4) The Reason thereof is adjoyned from a twofold property or adjunct of it in particular; For 1. It was Weak. 2. It was Unprofitable. (5) As unto its defici∣ency from its general End; it made nothing perfect; (6) Illustrated by that which took its work upon it self, and effected it throughly; the Hope brought in, by which we draw nigh unto God. 1. The  or Command is of as large a signification ver. 18. as  the Law in ver. 19. For the same thing is intended in both the words. It is not there∣fore . the peculiar command for the institution of the Legal Priesthood that is intended, but the whole System of Mosaical Institutions. For the Apostle having already proved, that the Priesthood was to be abolished, he proceeds on that Ground and from thence to prove, that the whole Law was also to be in like manner abolished and removed. And indeed it was of such a nature and constitution, that pull one pin out of the Fabrick and the whole must fall unto the Ground. For the Sanction of it being, that he was cursed who continued not in all things written in the Law to do them, the change of any one thing must needs overthrow the whole Law. How much more must it do so, if that be changed, removed, or taken away, which was not only a material part of it, but the very hinge, whereon the whole observance of it did depend and turn. And the whole of this System of Laws, is called  a Command, because it consisted , in arbitrary Commands and Precepts, regulated by that Maxim; The man that doth these things shall live by them. Rom. 10. 5. And therefore the Law, as a Command, is opposed unto the Gospel, as a Promise of Righteousness by Jesus Christ. Gal. 3. 11, 12. Nor is it the whole Ceremonial Law only that is intended by the Command in this place; but the Moral Law also, so far as it was compacted with the other into one Body of Precepts for the same End. For with re∣spect unto the Efficacy of the whole Law of Moses as unto our drawing nigh unto God, it is here considered. 2. This Commandement is described by the Time of its giving; it is ; it went before, that is, before the Gospel as now preached and dispensed. It did .
not do so absolutely. For our Apostle shews and proves, that as to the Promise, whereby the Grace of the New Covenant was exhibited, and which contained the Substance and Essence of the Gospel, it was given 430 years before the giving of the Law, Gal. 3. 17. Wherefore the Precedency of the Law here expressed may respect the Testimony produced out of David, whereby the Apostle proves the Cessation of the Priesthood and consequently of the Law it self. For the Command was given before that Testimony, and so went before it. But it rather respects the actual Introduction of a New Priest in the Accomplishment of this Promise. For hereon the whole change and alteration in the Law and Worship pleaded for by our Apostle, did ensue. The Commandement going before, is the Law whereby the Worship of God and Obedience unto him was regulated before the coming of Christ, and the Introduction of the Gospel. 3. Of this Command or Law, it is affirmed that there is an , and that with some earnestness. ; For truly, verily, certainly. This what∣ever . it be, it came not to pass of its own accord, but it was made by him who had Power and Authority so to do, which must be the Lawgiver. , may respect a Law, as was before intimated, either on the Account of  the Lawgiver, him that hath power over it, or of those unto whom it is given as a Law, and who are under the Power of it. In the latter sense , is to Trans∣gress a Law, to make it void what lies in us, by contemning the Authority of him by whom it is given; that use of the word was before observed in Mark. 7. 9. Heb. 10. 28. In the first sense it is directly opposed unto : That is, the giving, presenting, and promulgating of a Law, by a just and due Authority, whence it hath a power and force to oblige unto Obedience.  is the Dis∣solution hereof. The Word, as was said even now, is once more used in the New Testament, and that by our Apostle in this Epistle, chap. 9. 26. Christ hath ap∣peared , to put away sin, say we, by the Sacrifice of himself. That is to the abrogation or abolishing of that power, which Sin hath by its guilt to bind over sinners unto Punishment. So the  of the Law is its Abrogation, in taking away all its power of obliging unto Obedience or Punishment. The Apostle elsewhere expresseth the same Act by  Eph. 2. 15. 2 Tim. 1. 10. It is therefore plainly declared, that the Law is abrogated, abolished, disanulled; but we must yet farther enquire, (1) How this could be done; (2) By what means it was done; and (3), which himself adds expresly, for what Reason it was done. The first of these seemes not to be without its difficulties. For it was a Law originally given unto the Church by God himself, and continued therein with his Approbation for many Generations. And there are multiplyed instances in the Sa∣cred Records, of his blessing them, who were faithful and obedient in its Observa∣tion. Yea the whole prosperity of the Church did always depend thereon; as its neglect was always accompanied with severe Tokens of Gods displeasure. Besides our Saviour affirmeth of himself that he came not  Math. 5. 17. to dissolve or destroy the Law, which upon the matter is the same with . For if a Law be disanulled or abrogated, it is totally dissolved as to its obligatory power. And our Apostle removes the suspicion of any such thing from the Doctrine of the Gospel, Rom. 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid: yea we establish the Law. Ans. There are two ways whereby any Law may be disanulled or abrogated. First, By taking away all Authority and use from it as unto its proper end, whilst it is in its pretended force. For suppose it to be made for ever or for a time only, its Abrogation is its deprivation of all Authority and Use as a Law. And this cannot regularly be done, but on one of these accounts. (1) That the Authority giving the Law was not valued from the Beginning, but men have been obliged unto it on a false presumption thereof. (2) That the matter of it was never Good, or usefull, or meet to be made the matter of Law. On neither of these accounts could this Law be abolished, nor ever was so by the Lord Christ or the Gospel, nor is so to this day. For God himself was the immediate Author of it, whose Authority is Soveraign and over all; and thence also it follows, that the matter of it was Good. For the Commandement, as our Apostle speaks, was Holy, Just, and Good, Rom.
7. 12. And however there be a difference between that which is Morally Good in it self and its own Nature, and that which is so only by Divine Institution; yet the Revealed Will of God is the adequate Rule of Good and Evil unto us, as unto our Obedience. On these Accounts therefore, it never was, nor ever could be abo∣lished. Secondly, A Law may be abrogated, when on any consideration whatever, its Obligation unto practice doth cease or is taken away. Thus was it with this Law; for, as every other Law, it may be considered two ways. 1. With respect unto its main End, and directive power to guide Men therein. This, in all Humane Laws, is the Publick Good of the Community or Society unto whom it is given. When this ceaseth, and the Law becomes not directive or Use∣ful unto the Publick Good any more, all Rational Obligations unto its Observance do cease also. But yet this Law differed also from all others. All that any other Law aimeth at, is Obedience unto it self, and the Publick Good, which that Obedience will produce. So the Moral Law in the first Covenant had no other End but Obe∣dience unto it, and the Rewardableness thereon of them that did obey it. So was it an entire Instrument of our living to God, and of Eternal Rewards thereon. But as in its Renovation it was made a part of the Law here intended, it came with it to be of another Nature, or to have another Use and End. For the whole Scope and Design of this Law was to direct Men, not to look after that Good which was its End, in Obedience unto it self, but in something else, that it directed unto by that Obedience. The End it directed unto was Righteousness before God: But this could never be attained by an Obedience unto it, nor was it ever intended that so it should do. This the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, Rom. 8. 3. And therefore those who pursued and followed after it with the most earnest∣ness for this End, never attained thereunto, Rom. 9. 31, 32. This End therefore is principally to be considered in this Law, which when it is attained, the Law is established, although its Obligation unto Obedience unto it self, do necessarily cease. Now this End of the Law was Christ and his Righteousness, as the Apo∣stle expresly declares; For Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that Believeth, Rom. 10. 4. And therefore this whole Law was our School-Master to Christ, Gal. 3. 24, 25. This is called by our Saviour, , to fulfil the Law, and is opposed unto the destroying of it, Mat. 5. 17. I came not  to destroy or dissolve the Law, but to fulfil it. That is, not to abrogate it or take it away, as that which either wanted a just Authority, or was not Good or Useful, the common Reasons of the Abrogation of any Law in force: But I came to bring in and accomplish the whole End which it aimed at, and directed unto; whereon it would cease to oblige unto a further Practice. And this the Apostle calls , to establish the Law; do we then make void the Law through Faith? yea, we establish the Law, Rom. 3. 31. That is, we declare how it hath its End and full Accomplishment, which is the greatest Establishment that any Law is capable of. And if the fulfilling of the Law, both as unto what it requires in a way of Obedi∣ence, and what also in its Curse for Sin, be not imputed unto us, we do not by Faith Establish the Law, but make it void. 2. The Law may be considered with respect unto the particular Duties, that it required and prescribed. And because the whole Law had its End, these were ap∣pointed only untill that End might be or was attained. So saith our Apostle, They were imposed untill the Time of Reformation, Chap. 9. 10. VVherefore two things did accompany this Law in its first Institution. (1.) That an Obedience unto its Commands would not produce the Good which it directed unto, as formally re∣specting the Law it self. (2.) That the Duties it required had a limited time for their Performance and Acceptance allotted unto them. VVherefore without the least Disparagement unto it, as unto the Authority whereby it was given, or as unto its own Holiness and Goodness, it might be disanulled as unto its actual Ob∣ligation unto practice and observance of its Commands. For the End of it being fully accomplished, it is no less Established, than if the observance of it had been continued unto the end of the world. It was therefore Established by Christ and the Gospel as unto its End, Use, and Scope; it was disanulled as unto its Obliga∣tory Power unto the observance of its Commands. For these two are inconsistent,
namely, that a Law, as unto all its Ends, should be fulfilled, and yet stand in force in its Obligatory Power unto Obedience. Secondly, VVe must enquire how this was done, or how this Law was Abro∣gated, as to its Obligatory Power and Efficacy. And this was done two ways. 1. Really and virtually. This was done by Christ himself in his own Person. For the fulfilling and accomplishing of it was that which really and virtually took away all its Obligatory Power. For what should it oblige Men unto? An Answer is ready unto all its Demands, namely, that they are fulfilled: and as unto what was Sig∣nificative in its Duties, it is all really exhibited; so that on no Account it can any more Oblige or Command the Consciences of Men. This the Apostle sets out in a comparison with the Relation that is between a Man and his Wife with the Ob∣ligation unto mutual Duties that ensues thereon, Rom. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Whilst the Husband is alive, the Wife is Obliged unto all Conjugal Duties towards him and unto him alone. But upon his Death that Obligation ceaseth of it self, and she is at li∣berty to Marry unto another. So were we Obliged unto the Law, whilst it was alive, whilst it stood in its force and vigour: But when through the Death of Christ the Law was accomplished, it died as to the Relation which was between it and us, whereon all its Obligation unto Observance was disanulled. This was that, whereby the Law was really and virtually abrogated. Its preceptive part be∣ing fulfilled, and its Significative being exhibited, it was of no more Force or Ef∣ficacy as a Law. The Reason why it was thus to have an end put unto it, is de∣clared in the Close of the Verse. 2. It was so abrogated Declaratively; or the Will of God concerning its Abro∣gation was made known four ways. 1. In general by the Promulgation and Preaching of the Gospel, where the Ac∣complishment and Cessation of it was declared. For the Declaration made that the Messiah was come, that he had finished his work in the VVorld, and thereby made an End of Sin, bringing in Everlasting Righteousness, whereby the Law was fulfilled, did sufficiently manifest its Abrogation. The Apostles, I confess, in their first Preaching to the Jews spake not of it expresly, but left it to discover it self as an undeniable consequent of what they taught, concerning the Lord Christ and the Righteousness of God in him. This for some while many of them, that Be∣lieved, understood not, and therefore were Zealous of the Law, which God in his Patience and Forbearance did Graciously tolerate so, as not to impute it unto them. It was indeed great Darkness and manifold Prejudices that hindred the Believing Jews from seeing the necessary consequence unto the Abolition of the Law from the Promulgation of the Gospel: Yet this was God pleased to bear with them in, that we might not be too fierce, nor reflect with too much Severity on such as are not able in all things to receive the whole Truth as we desire they should. 2. It was so by the Institution and Introduction of new Ordinances of Worship. This was wholly inconsistent with the Law, wherein it was expresly enacted; that nothing should be added unto the Worship of God therein prescribed. And if any such Ad∣dition was made by the Authority of God himself, as was inconsistent with any thing before appointed, it is evident that the whole Law was disanulled. But a new Order, a new entire System of Ordinances of Worship was declared in the Gos∣pel. Yea, and those, some of them especially, as that of the Lords Supper, utter∣ly inconsistent with any Ordinances of the Law, seeing it declares that to be done and past, which they direct us unto as future and to come. 3. There was a Determination made in the case by the Holy Ghost upon an occasion administred thereunto. Those of the Apostles, who Preached the Gospel unto the Gentiles, had made no mention unto them of the Law of Moses, as knowing, that it was nailed unto the Cross of Christ, and taken out of the way. So were they brought unto the Faith and Obedience of the Gospel without any respect unto the Law, as that wherein they were not concerned, now it had received its Accomplishment. But some of the Jews who Believed, being yet perswaded that the Law was to be continued in force, and its Observation imposed on all that were Proselyted by the Gospel, occasion was given unto that Solemn Determination which was made by the Apostles through the Guidance of the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. And the Substance of that Determination was this; that the Gospel, as Preached unto the Gentiles, was not a way or means of Proselyting them unto Judaism, but the bringing them
unto a new Church-state by an Interest in the Promise and Covenant of Abraham, given and made 430 Years before the giving of the Law. VVhilst the Law stood in its force, whoever was Proselyted unto the Truth, he was so unto the Law, and every Gentile that was Converted unto the true God, was bound to be Circum∣cised, and became obliged unto the whole Law. But that being now disanulled, it is Solemnly declared, that the Gentiles Converted by the Gospel, were under no obligation unto the Law of Moses, but being received into the Covenant of A∣braham, were to be gathered into a new Church-state erected in and by the Lord Christ in the Gospel. 4. As unto those of the Hebrews, who yet would not understand these express Declarations of the ceasing of the Obligatory Power of the Law, to put an end unto all Disputes about his will in this Matter, God gave a dreadful  or Abolition unto it, in the total, final, irrevocable Destruction of the City and Temple, with all the Instruments and Vessels of its VVorship, especially of the Priesthood, and all that belonged thereunto. Thus was the Law disanulled, and thus was it decla∣red so to be. Obs. 1. It is a matter of the highest Nature and Importance to set up or take away, to re∣move any thing from, or change any thing in the Worship of God. Unless the Autho∣rity of God interpose, and be manifested so to do, there is nothing for Consci∣ence to rest in, in these things. And 2. The Revelation of the Will of God, in things relating unto his Worship, is very dif∣ficultly received, where the minds of Men are prepossessed with Prejudices and Traditi∣ons. Notwithstanding all those ways whereby God had revealed his mind concern∣ing the Abolition of the Mosaical Institutions, yet these Hebrews could neither un∣derstand it nor receive it, untill the whole Seat of its VVorship was destroyed and Consumed. 3. The only Securing Principle in all things of this Nature, is to preserve our Souls in an entire Subjection unto the Authority of Christ, and unto his alone. The Close of the Verse gives an especial Reason of the disanulling or abrogation of the Command, taken from its own Nature and Efficacy. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment going before; , that is, . The Adjective in the Neuter Gender put for . a Substantive, which is Emphatical; as on the contrary it is so, when the Substantive is put for the Adjective; as 1 John 2. 27. , is true, and is not a lye; that is, mendax, false or lying. And , its own, is added to shew that the principal cause of disanulling the Law was taken from the Law it self. I have proved before that the Commandment in this verse is of equal extent and signification with the Law in the next. And the Law there doth evidently intend the whole Law, in both the parts of it, Moral and Ceremonial, as it was given by Moses unto the Church of Israel. And this whole Law is here charged by our Apo∣stle with weakness and unprofitableness, both which make a Law fit to be disanulled. But it must be acknowledged that there is a Difficulty of no small Importance in the assignation of these Imperfections unto the Law: For this Law was given by God himself. And how can it be supposed that the Good and Holy God should pre∣scribe such a Law unto his People, as was always weak and unprofitable. From this and the like considerations the Blasphemous Manichees denyed that the Good God was the Author of the Old Testament, and the Jews continue still upon it to reject the Gospel, as not allowing the least Imperfection in the law, but equalling it al∣most with God himself. VVe must therefore consider in what sense the Apostle ascribes these Properties unto the Law. 1. Some seek for a Solution of this Difficulty from Ezek. 20. ver. 11. compared with ver. 25. Ver. 11. God saith, That I gave them my Statutes, and shewed them my Judgments, which if a Man do, he shall live in them. But ver. 25. I gave them also Statutes that were not Good, and Judgments whereby they should not live. The first sort of Laws, they say, were the Decalogue, with those other Judgments that accompanied it, which were given unto the People as Gods Covenant before they broke it by making the Golden Calf. These were Good in themselves, and Good un∣to the People, so as if they did them they should live therein. But after the People had broken the Covenant in making of a Golden Calf, God gave them that whole Sy∣stem of Ordinances, Institutions, and Laws which ensued. These, they say, in that
place of Ezekiel God calls Ordinances that were not Good, and Judgements whereby they should not live, as being imposed on the People in the way of Punishment. And with respect unto these they say it is, that the Apostle affirms the Command∣ment was weak and unprofitable. But as the Application of this Exposition unto this passage in the Apostle's Dis∣course, is not consistent with the Design of it, as will afterwards appear: So in∣deed the Exposition it self is not defensible. For it is plain, that by the Laws and Sta∣tutes mentioned, ver. 11. not any part of them, but the whole System of Ordinan∣ces and Commandments, which God gave by Moses, is intended. And the two words in the Text  and  do express the whole Law Ceremo∣nial and Judicial. And it was not from this or that part, but from the whole Law that the People, as far as they were Carnal, looked for Righteousness and Salva∣tion, Rom. 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. And as these Laws and Statutes mentioned ver. 11. contained the whole Law given by Moses, so those intended, ver. 25. whereof it is said, that they were not Good, nor could they live in the keeping of them, cannot be the Laws and Statutes of God considered in themselves. For it is inconsistent with the Holiness, Goodness, and Wisdom of God, to give Laws, which in them∣selves and their own Nature, should not be Good, but Evil. Nor on Supposition that he had given them Statutes that were not Good, and Judgments wherein they should not live, could he plead as he doth, that his ways were equal, and that their ways were unequal. For in these Laws he evidently promised that those who did them should live therein. Where is the Equality, Equity, and Righteousness if it were otherwise? Wherefore if the Statutes of God be intended in the place, it must be with respect unto the People, their Unbelief and Obstinacy, that it is said of them, that they were not Good; being made useless unto them by Reason of Sin. In that sense the Apostle says, that the Commandment which was Ordained unto life, he found to be unto Death, Rom. 7. 10. But I rather Judge, that having charged the People with neglect and contempt of the Laws and Judgments of God which were Good, Gods giving them up Judicially unto ways of Idolatry and false Wor∣ship, which they made as Laws and Judgments unto themselves, and willingly walk∣ed after the Commandment, as Hos. 5. 11. is here so expressed. But there is no Ground for such a Distinction between the Laws. and Judgments of God in them∣selves, that some of them should be Good, and some of them should be not Good; that in some of them Men might live, but not in others. Secondly, I Answer, That the whole Law may be considered two ways. (1.) Ab∣solutely in it self. (2.) With Respect. (1.) Unto the End for which it was gi∣ven. (2.) Unto the Persons unto whom it was given. In it self, no Reflection can be made upon it, because it was an effect of the Wisdom, Holiness, and Truth of God. But in the Respects mentioned it mani∣fests its own weakness and unprofitableness. For they were Sinners unto whom it was given, and both defiled and guilty antecedently unto the giving of this Law, being so by Nature, and thereon Children of Wrath: Two things they stood in need of in this Condition. 1. Sanctification by an Inherent Purity and Holiness, with a Compleat Righteous∣ness from thence. This the Moral Law was at first the Rule and Measure of; and would have always effected it by its Observance. It could never indeed take away any defilement of Sin from the Soul, but it could have prevented any such defilement. But now with respect unto the Persons unto whom it was given, it became weak and unprofitable unto any such end. It became so, saith the Apostle, by Reason of the Flesh, Rom. 8. 3. For although in it self it was a perfect Rule of Righteousness, Rom. 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. 21. yet it could not be a cause or means of Righteousness un∣to them who were disenabled by the entrance of Sin to comply with it, and fulfill it. Wherefore the Moral Law, which was in it self Efficacious and Useful, was now become unto Sinners, as unto the Ends of Holiness and Righteousness, weak and unprofitable: For by the deeds of the Law shall no Flesh be Justified. (2.) Sinners do stand in need of the Expiation of Sin: For being actually guilty already, it is to no purpose to think of a Righteousness for the future, unless their present Guilt be first expiated. Hereof there is not the least Intimation in the Mo∣ral Law. It hath nothing in it, nor accompanying of it, that respects the Guilt of Sin, but the Curse only. This therefore was to be expected from the Ceremo∣nial
Law, and the various ways of Attonement therein provided, or no way at all. But this of themselves they could not effect. They did indeed represent and pre∣figure what would so do, but of themselves they were insufficient unto any such end. For it is not possible, as our Apostle speakes, that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin, chap. 10. 5. And this Law may be considered three ways. (1) In Opposition unto Christ, without respect unto its Typical Signification, under which Notion it was now adhered unto by the unbelieving Hebrews. This being no state of it by divine Appointment, it became thereby not only of no use unto them, but the occasion of their Ruin. (2) In Competition and Conjunction with Christ; and so it was adhered unto by many of these Hebrews who believed the Gospel. And this also was a state not designed for it, seeing it was appointed only unto the Time of Reformation, and therefore was not only useless but noxious and hurtful. (3) In Subordination unto Christ to Typifie and Represent what was to be obtained in him alone; so during its own Season it was of use unto that End; but yet could never effect the things which it did represent. And in this state doth the Apostle pronounce it weak and unprofitable, namely, on a Supposition that Attonement and Expiation of Sin was actually to be made, which it could not reach unto. But it may be yet farther enquired, Why God did give this Law unto the People, which although it were Good in it self, yet because of the condition of the People it could not attain the End which was intended. The Apostle gives so full an answer unto this enquiry, as that we need not farther to insist upon it. For he giveth two Reasons why God gave this Law. First he saith it was added because of Transgression till the seed should come to whom the Promise was made. Gal. 3. 19. It had a manifold necessary respect unto Transgression. As (1) to discover the nature of Sin, that the Consciences of men might be made sensible thereof. (2) To Coerce and Re∣strain it by its Prohibition and Threatnings that it might not run out into such an excess as to deluge the whole Church. (3) To represent the way and means, though obscurely, whereby Sin might be expiated. And these things were of so great use, that the very being of the Church depended on them. Secondly, There was another Reason for it, which he declares in the same place, ver. 23, 24; It was to shut up men under a sense of the Guilt of Sin, and so with some severity drive them out of themselves and from all expectation of a Righteousness by their own works, that so they might be brought unto Christ, first in the Promise, and then as he was actually exhibited. This brief Account of the weakness and unprofitableness of the Law, whereon it was disanulled and taken away, may at present suffice. The Consideration of some other things in particular will afterwards occur unto us. Only in our passage we may a little examine, or reflect on the senses that some others have given unto these words. Schlictingius in his Comment on the next verse gives this Account of the state of the Law. Lex expiationem concedebat leviorum delictorum, idque ratione poenae alicu∣jus arbitrariae tantum: gravioribus autem peccatis quibus mortis poenam fixerat, nullam reliquer at veniam, maledictionis fulmen vibrans in omnes qui graviùs peccássent. But these things are neither accommodate unto the Purpose of the Apostle, nor true in themselves. For (1) The Law denounced the Curse equally unto every Transgres∣sion, be it small or great; Cursed is he who continueth not in all things. (2) It ex∣piated absolutely no Sin small nor great, by its own power and efficacy; neither did it properly take away any punishment temporal or eternal. That some sins were punished with Death, and some were not, belonged unto the Politie of the Govern∣ment erected among that People. But (3) As unto the Expiation of Sin, the Law had an equal respect unto all the Sins of Believers, great and small; it Typically re∣presented the Expiation of them all in the Sacrifice of Christ, and so confirmed their Faith as to the Forgiveness of Sin, but farther it could not proceed. And Grotius on the place. Non perduxit homines ad justitiam illam veram & in∣ternam, sed intra ritus & facta externa constitit: Promissa terrestria non operantur mortis contemptum, sed eum operatur melior spes vitae aeternae & caelestis. Which is thus enlarged by another; The Mosaical Law got no man freedom from Sin, was able to give no man strength to fulfill the Will of God, and could not purchase Pardon for any that had broken it. This therefore was to be done now afterwards by the Gospel, which
gives more sublime and plain Promises of pardon of Sin, which the Law could not Pro∣mise, of an Eternal and Heavenly Life to all true penitent Believers; which gracious tenders now made by Christ, give us a freedom of access unto God, and Confidence to come and expect such mercy from him. Ans. (1) What is here spoken, if it intend the Law in it self and its carnal Ordinances without any respect unto the Lord Christ and his Mediation, may in some sense be true. For in it self it could neither Justifie nor Sanctifie the Worshippers, nor spiritually or eternally expiate Sin. But (2) Un∣der the Law and by it, there was a Dispensation of the Covenant of Grace, which was accompanied with Promises of eternal life. For it did not only repeat and re-inforce the Promise inseparably annexed unto the Law of Creation, do this and live, but it had also other Promises of Spiritual and eternal things annexed unto it, as it contained a legal Dispensation of the first Promise or the Covenant of Grace. But (3) The Opposition here made by the Apostle is not between the precepts of the Law and the precepts of the Gospel, the Promises of the Law and the Promises of the Gospel, outward Righteousness and inward Obedience; but between the efficacy of the Law unto Righteousness and Salvation, by the Priesthood and Sacrifices ordained therein, on the one hand, and the Priesthood of Christ with his Sacrifice which was promised before and now manifested in the Gospel, on the other. And herein he doth not only shew the Preference and Dignity of the latter above the former, but also that the former of it self could do nothing unto these Ends; but whereas they had represented the Accomplishment of them for a Season, and so directed the Faith of the Church unto what was future, that now being come and exhibited, it was of no more use nor Advantage, nor meet to be retained. Thus then was the Law disanulled; and it was so actually by the means before mentioned. But that the Church might not be surprized, there were many warn∣ings given of it before it came to pass. As (1) A Mark was put upon it from the very Beginning, that it had not a Perpetuity in its Nature, nor inseparably annex∣ed unto it. For it had no small presignification in it, that immediately upon the giving of it as a Covenant with that People, they brake the Covenant in making the Golden Calf in Horeb, and thereon Moses brake the Tables of Stone wherein the Law was written. Had God intended that this Law should have been perpetual, he would not have suffered its first constitution to have been accompanied with an express Em∣bleme of its disanulling. (2) Moses expresly foretells that after the giving of the Law, God would provoke them to jealously by a foolish People; Deut. 32. 21. Rom. 10. 19. that is, by the calling of the Gentiles, whereon the Wall of Partition that was between them, even the Law of Commandements contained in Ordinances was of necessity to be taken out of the way. (3) The Prophets frequently declared that it was of it self utterly insufficient for the expiation of Sin, or the Sanctification of Sinners, and thereon preferred moral Obedience above all its Institutions; whence it necessarily follows that seeing God did intend a  or state of Perfection for his Church, that this Law was at last to be disanulled. (4) All the Promises concerning the coming of Christ as the end of the Law, did declare its station in the Church not to be perpetual; especially that insisted on by our Apostle, of his being a Priest after the Order of Melchisedec. (5) The Promises and Predictions are express, that a New Covcnant should be established with the Church, unto the removal of the Old, whereof we must treat in the next Chapter. By all these ways was the Church of the Hebrews fòrewarned that the Time would come, when the whole Mosaical Law, as to its Legal or Covenant Efficacy, should be disannulled unto the unspeakable Advantage of the Church. And we may hence observe. 1. The Introduction into the Church of what is better and more full of Grace in the same kind with what went before, doth disanul what so preceded; but the bringing in of that which is not better, which doth not communicate more Grace, doth not do so. Thus our Apostle expresly disputes that the bringing in of the Law 400 years after the giving of the Promise, did not evacuate or any way enervate the Promise. And the Sole Reason hereof was, because the Promise had more Grace and Privi∣ledge in it, than the Law had. But here the bringing in of another Priesthood, be∣cause it was filled with more effectual Grace and mercy, utterly disanulled that which was instituted before. And as we may hence learn the care and kindness of God unto the Church; so also our own Duty in adhering with constant Obedience unto the Institutions of Christ. For this must be so, untill something else more full
of Grace and Wisedom then they are, be appointed of God in the Church. And indeed this is that which is pretended by those by whom they are rejected. For they tell us that the Ordinances of the Gospel are weak and unprofitable, and are dis∣anulled by that Dispensation of the Spirit which hath ensued after them. But the Truth is, to fancy a Dispensation of the Spirit without, against, or above the Ordi∣nances of Christ, who alone doth dispense him, and that in the ways of his own Appointment, is to renounce the whole Gospel. 2. If God would disanul every thing that was weak and unprofitable in his Service, though originally of his own Appointment, because it was not exhibitive of the Grace he intended, he will much more condemn any thing of the same kind that is invented by men. I could never yet understand why God should abolish those Ordinances of worship which himself had appointed because they were weak, and approve of such as men should find out of themselves, which cannot have the least Efficacy or signification towards Spiritual Ends; Such as are multiplyed in the Papacy. 3. It is in vain for any men to look for that from the Law now it is abolished, which it could not effect in its best estate; and what that is the Apostle declares in the next Verse. VER. 19. . ; Syr. ; non enim aliquid; that is, Nihil. ; Syr.  perfecit; finished, perfected. Vul. Lat. ad perfectum ad∣duxit; Rhem. brought to Perfection. Bez. consummavit. Others, Sanctificavit. Of the use of this Word, we have spoken before. , &c. Syr. ; but for it (or in its stead) there entred an Hope which is better than it. Beza, Superintroducta spes potior. , is Supraintroductio, or Postintroductio; the bringing in of one thing after another. Some supply erat here, and read the words; sed erat Intro∣ductio ad spem potiorem; or spei melioris. ; proximamus ad Deum. Vul. Lat. Appropinquamus Deo. VER. 19. For the Law made nothing Perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope, whereby we draw nigh unto God. The Disanulling or Abolition of the Law was laid down in the precedent verse, as a necessary consequent of its being weak and unprofitable. For when a Law hath been tried, and it is found liable unto this Charge, it is equal and even necessary that it should be disanulled; if the End aimed at, be necessary to be attained, and there be any thing else to be substituted in its Room, whereby it may so be. This there∣fore the Apostle declares in this Verse, giving the Reasons in particular of what he had before asserted in general. So the Causal Connexion , For, doth inti∣mate. . And 1. He gives an especial Instance, wherein it was evident that the Law was weak and unprofitable. 2. He declares what was to be introduced in the Room thereof which would attain and effect the end, which the Law could not reach unto, by Reason of its weakness. 3. He expresseth what that End was. The first he doth in those words: : For the Law made  nothing perfect. The subject spoken of is , the Law; that is, the whole Sy∣stem of Mosaical Ordinances, as it was the Covenant which God made with the Peo∣ple in Horeb. For the Apostle takes the Commandment and the Law for the same in this Chapter; and the Covenant in the next, for the same with them both. And he treats of them principally in the instance of the Levitical Priesthood; partly be∣cause the whole Administration of the Law depended thereon; and partly be∣cause it was the Introduction of another Priesthood, whereby the whole was disa∣nulled. Of this Law, Commandement, or Covenant, it is said that , it
made nothing perfect. , nothing, for , no man say expositors generally;  it made no man perfect. So the Neuter is put for the Masculine. So it is in those words of our Saviour, Joh. 6. 37. ; All that the Father giveth me, cometh unto me; that is every one. So is , as here, put for , ver. 63. ; The Flesh profiteth nothing, that is, say some, no man. But I am not satisfyed with this Exposition, but rather judge that the Apostle did properly express his Intention. It made nothing, that is, none of the things which we treat about, perfect. It did not make the Church state perfect, it did not make the worship of God perfect, it did not perfect the Promises given unto Abraham in their Accomplishment, it did not make a perfect Covenant between God and man; it had a shaddow, an obscure Representation of all these things, but it made nothing perfect. What the Apostle intends by , and so consequently by  in this  place, we have discoursed at large before on ver. 11. So that we shall not here a∣gain insist upon it. But it may be enquired, why, if the Law made nothing perfect, it was institu∣ted or given by God himself? He had designed a state of Perfection unto the Church, and seeing the Law could not effect it, nay seeing it could not be introduced whilst the Law was in force, unto what end served the giving of this Law? Ans. This doubt was in part solved before, when we shewed the Ends for which the Law was given, although it was weak and unprofitable, as unto some other. But yet there are some other Reasons to be pleaded to represent the Beauty and Order of this Dispensation. For 1. In all these things the Soveraignty of God is to be submitted unto. And unto humble Souls there is beauty in divine Soveraignty. When the Lord Jesus rejoyced in Spirit, and thanked his heavenly Father that he had revealed the Mysteries of the Gospel unto Babes, and hid them from the Wise and Prndent, he assigns no other Reason but his Soveraignty and Pleasure, wherein he rejoyced; even so Fa∣ther, for so it seemed Good in thy Sight, Luke 10. 21. And if we cannot see an ex∣cellency in the Dispensations of God, because they are his, who gives no account of his matters, we shall never delight in his ways. So our Apostle gives no other Reason of this legal Dispensation, but that God had provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect; chap. 11. 40. Therefore did he give them this Law for a Season, which made nothing perfect; even so it seemed Good in his Sight. It is the Glory of God to be gracious to whom he will be gracr∣ous, and that at what time he will, and unto what degree and measure he pleaseth. And in this Glory of his are we to acquiesce. 2. Mankind having wofully prevaricated and apostatized from God, it was just and equal that they should not be at once enstated in their Reparation. The suddain∣ness of it might have taken off from its Greatness. Wherefore as God left the Ge∣nerality of the World without the knowledge of what he intended, so he saw Good to keep the Church in a state of Expectancy as to the Perfection of Liberty and Deliverance intended. He could have created the World in an Hour or Mo∣ment; but he chose to do it in the space of Six days, that the Glory of his work might be distinctly represented unto Angels and Men. And he could immediately after the Fall have introduced the Promised seed, in whose Advent the Church must of necessity enjoy all the Perfection whereof it is capable in this World. But to teach the Church the greatness of their Sin and Misery, and to work in them an ac∣knowledgement of his unspeakable Grace and Mercy, he proceeded gradually in the very Revelation of him, as we have shewed on Chap. 1. ver. 1. and caused them to wait under earnest desires, longings, and expectations, many Ages for his com∣ing. And during this season it was of necessity that they should be kept under a Law that made nothing perfect. For as our Apostle speaketh, if they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void; Rom. 4. 14. and if Righteousness come by the Law; then is Christ dead in vain; Gal. 2. 21. And if there had been a Law given, which could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law, Gal. 3. 21. Wherefore until the actual Exhibition of the Promised Seed, it was absolutely ne∣cessary that the Church should be kept under a Law that made nothing Perfect. 3. That People unto whom the Law was peculiarly to be given, and by whom God would accomplish his further Design, were a stubborn, earthy, hard-hearted
People, that stood in need of a Yoke to burden and subdue them unto the will of God. So obstinate they were in what they had once received, and so proud of any Priviledge they enjoyed, that whereas their Priviledges were very many, and very great, they would never have had any thought of looking out after another state, but have forgone the Promise, had they not been pinched, and burdened, and disappointed in their Expectation of Perfection by this Law, and the Yoke of it. 4. God had designed that the Lord Christ should in all things have the Prehemi∣nence. This was due unto him on the Account of the Glory of his Person, and the Greatness of his Work. But if the Law could have made any thing Perfect, it is evident, that this could not have been. Perfection being thus denied unto the Law, it is added . The words are elliptical, and without a Supplement give no certain sense. And this may be made two ways. First, by the Verb Substantive , and so the whole of what is asserted is an effect of the Law. It made nothing perfect, but it was the bringing in of a better Hope, or an Introduction unto a better Hope, as some render the words. It served as Gods Way and Method unto the bringing in of our Lord Jesus Christ; unto this End it was variously Serviceable in the Church. For as its Institutions, Promises, Instructions, and Types did represent him unto the Faith of Believers; so it prepared their Minds unto an Expectation of him, and longing after him. And the Conjunction , which is Adversative, seems to intimate an Opposition in what the Law did, unto what it is said before that it did not. It did not make any thing Perfect, but it did bring in a better Hope; and we know in how many things it was a preparatory Introduction of the Gospel. VVherefore this sence is true, though not, as I judge, directly intended in these words. Beza first Observed, that  was put for , in this place, as it is unquesti∣onably in sundry others. If so, not an Assignation of a contrary effect unto the Law unto what was before denyed, is intended; but the designation and expres∣sion of another Cause of the effecting of that which the Law could not effect. And the defective Speech is to be supplyed by , made perfect; as we do it by did, that is, did make all things perfect. To the same purpose the Apostle expres∣seth himself in other words, Rom. 8. 3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. For the words are so to be supplyed, what the Law could not do, that God did; which what it was, and how God did it, the fol∣lowing words declare. Thus God had designed to bring the Church unto a better state, a state of Comparative Perfection in this World. This the Law was not a means or Instrument suited unto: wherefore another way is fixed on to that End, which being compleatly effective of it, the Law was laid aside and disanulled as un∣profitable. This the word  doth lead unto: For it is as much as Postintroductio, . or Superintroductio; the Introduction of one thing after, or upon another. This was the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ, which were brought in after the Law, upon it, in the room of it, to effect that which the Law could not do. This our Apostle further Argues and confirms, Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. This therefore is the sense of the words; The Introduction of the Better Hope, after, and upon the Law, when a sufficient Discovery had been made of its weakness and insufficiency, as unto this End, did make all things perfect, or bring the Church unto that state of consummation, which was designed unto it. It remaineth only therefore that we shew what this Better Hope is, whereunto this effect is ascribed. Whatever it be, it is called better, with respect unto the  Law, with all things that the Law contained or could effect, somewhat of more Power and Efficacy to perfect the Church-state. This neither was, nor could be any thing but Christ himself and his Priesthood: For in him we are compleat, Col. 2. 10. and by one Offering he hath for ever perfected them that are Sanctified; the Heavenly things themselves being purified thereby. Hope therefore is used here Metonymically, to design the thing hoped for. From the giving of the first Promise, and throughout under the Dispensation of the . Law, Christ and his coming into the VVorld were the Hope of all Believers, the
great thing which they desired, longed and hoped for. Hence was he called, the Desire of all Nations, Hag. 2. that which the Secret desires of the whole Race of Mankind worked towards. And in the Church, which enjoyed the Promises, they rejoyced in the fore-sight of it, as did Abraham; and desired to see its Day, as did the Prophets, diligently enquiring into the time and season of the Accomplishment of those Revelations, which they had received concerning him, 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. It is not therefore the Doctrine of the Gospel, with its Precepts and Promises (as some suppose) which is here intended; any other ways but as it is a Declaration of the coming of Christ, and the Discharge of his Office: For without a respect hereunto, without Virtue and Efficacy thence alone dirived, the outward Precepts and Promises of the Gospel would no more perfect the Church-state than the Law could do. Obs. 1. When God hath designed any Gracious End towards the Church, it shall not fail, nor his work cease for want of effectual means to accomplish it. All means in∣deed have their Efficacy from his Designation of them unto their End. His Wis∣dom makes them meet, and his Power makes them Effectual. VVhatever there∣fore seems to be a means in the hand of God unto any End, and doth not effect it, was never designed thereunto: For he fails in none of his Ends, nor do his means come short of what he aims at by them. VVherefore although God designed a Perfect state of the Church, and after that gave the Law; yet he never designed the Law to accomplish that End. It had other Ends, as we have already decla∣red. But Men were very apt to take up with the Law, and to say of it, Surely the Lords Annointed is before us. VVherefore God by many ways and means dis∣covered the weakness of the Law, as unto this End. Then were Men ready to conclude, that the Promise it self concerning this perfect Church-state would be of none effect. The mistake lay only herein, that indeed God had not as yet used that onely means for it, which his infinite Wisdom had suited for, and his infinite Pow∣er would make Effectual unto its attainment. And this he did in such a way, as that those, who would not make use of his means, but would as it were impose that upon him which he never intended to make use of in that kind, perished in their Unbelief. Thus was it with the Generality of the Jews, who would have Perfection by the Law, or none at all. VVherefore the Promise of God concerning the Church, and to it, must be the Rule and Measure of our Faith. Three things do deeply Exercise the Church, as unto their Accomplishment. (1.) Difficulties rendring it wholly improbable. (2.) Long unexpected Procrastination. (3.) Disappointment of appearing means of it. But in this Instance of the Introduction of a perfect Church-state in and by the Person of Jesus Christ, God hath provided a Security for our Faith, against all Objections, which these considerations might suggest. For, (1.) VVhat greater Difficulties can possibly lye in the way of the Accomplish∣ment of any of the Promises of God, which yet are upon the Sacred Record un∣accomplished, as suppose, the Calling of the Jews, the Distruction of Antichrist, the Peace of the Church, and Prosperity of it in the plentiful Effusion of the Spi∣rit; but that as great, and greater lay in the way of the fulfilling of this Promise? All the National Provocations, Sins, and Idolatries, that fell out in the Posterity of Abraham; all the Calamities and Desolating Judgments that over-took them, the cutting down of the House of David, untill there was only a Root of it left in the Earth; the Unbelief of the whole Body of the People, the Enmity of the world, Acted by all the Crafts and Powers of Satan, were as Mountains in the way of the Accomplishment of this Promise. But yet they all of them became at length a Plain before the Spirit of God. And if we should compare the Difficulties and Oppositions that at this Day lye against the fulfilling of some Divine Promises, with those that rose up against this one of perfecting the Church-state in Christ, it would, it may be, abate our forwardness in condemning the Jews of Incredulity, unless we found our selves more established in the Faith of what is to come, than for the most part we are. (2.) Long and unexpected Procrastinations are Trials of Faith also. Now this Promise was given at the Beginning of the world, nor was there any time allotted for its Accomplishment. Hence it is generally supposed from the words there used in the imposition of the Name of Cain on her First-Born, that Eve apprehended that the Promise was actually fulfilled. The like Expectations had the
Saints of all Ages: and were continually looking out after the rising of this bright morning Star. Many a time did God renew the Promise, and sometimes confirm∣ed it with his Oath, as unto Abraham and David; and yet still were their expect∣ations frustrate so far as confined unto their own Generations. And though God accepted them in their cryes and prayers and hopes, and longing desires, yet near four thousand years were expired before the Promise received its Accomplish∣ment. And if we do believe that the Faith and Grace of the New Testament do exceed what was administred under the Old; and that we do enjoy that Pledge of Gods Veracity in the Accomplishment of his Promises, which they attained not unto, shall we think it much, if they are exercised some part of that season, (as yet but a small time) in looking after the Accomplishment of other Promises? (3) Disappointment of appearing means is of the same nature. Long after the Promise given and renewed, the Law is in a solemn and glorious manner delivered unto the Church, as the Rule of their worship and the means of their Acceptance with God. Hence the Generality of the People did alwayes suppose, that this was it, which would make all things perfect. Something indeed they thought might be ad∣ded unto its Glory, in the personal coming of the Messiah: but the Law was still to be that which was to make all things perfect. And we may easily apprehend what a surprizal it was unto them, when it was made manifest that the Law was so far from effecting this promised state, that there was a necessity of taking it out of the way as a thing weak and unprofitable, that the better Hope perfecting the state of the Church might be introduced. Such Appearances are sometimes represented unto us of means highly probable for the Delivery of the Church, which after a while do utterly disappear, and things are rolled into a posture quite con∣trary unto the expectations of many. When there is an Appearance of what God hath promised, of what Believers have prayed for, it is no wonder if some do earnestly embrace it. But where God hath laid aside any means, and sufficient∣ly declared that it is not his holy pleasure to use it in such a way, or unto such a length as we would desire for the fulfilling of his Promises, it is not Duty, but obstinacy and selfishness to adhere unto it, with any such expectations. Obs. 2. Believers of Old who lived under the Law, did not live upon the Law, but upon the Hope of Christ, or Christ hoped for. Christ is the same (that is, unto the Church) yesterday to day and for ever. If Justification, if Salvation could be had any other way, or by any other means, then was his coming needless, and his death in vain. It was the Promise of him, and not of the Law which he had broken, which was the Relief and Salvation of Adam. This being the first thing that was proposed unto fallen man, as the only means of his Restauration, Justification and Salvation, if any thing were afterwards added unto the same purpose, it would de∣clare this to be insufficient; which would be an impeachment of Divine wisdom and grace. On the same promise of Christ, which virtually contained and exhibited unto Believers all the Benefits of his mediation, as it was frequently renewed and variously explained, did all the Saints live under the Old Testament. And the ob∣scurity of the Revelations of him in comparison of that by the Gospel, respected only the degrees, but not the essence of their Faith. Obs. 3. The Lord Christ by his Priesthood and Sacrifice makes perfect the Church and all things belonging thereunto, Col. 2. 10. In the last place the Apostle illustrates the work wrought through the Introduction of the better Hope, by the effect of it in them that do believe. . . By which we draw nigh unto God. , by which, may refer either to the remote antecedent  the Introduction or bringing in, or unto the next, which is  the Hope; being both of the same Gender. By the Introduction of the better Hope we draw nigh to God; or by which Hope we draw nigh to God. Both come to the same for the substance of the sense; but the Application is more natural to the next Antecedent, by which Hope we draw nigh unto God. It re∣maineth only that we enquire, what it is thus to draw nigh to God. is a word belonging unto the Sacerdotal Office, denoting the approach of the Priests unto God in his worship. So the LXX for the most part render  the General term for all Access unto God with Sacrifices and Offerings. And this doth the Apostle intend. Under the Levitical Priesthood, the Priests in their Sacrifices and Solemn Services did draw nigh unto God. The same now is done by all Believers under
the Sacerdotal Ministration of Jesus Christ. They now all of them draw nigh unto God. And in all their worship, especially in their prayers and supplications, they have by him an Access unto God, Ephes. 2. 18. There is a similitude in these things, and an Allusion in the one unto the other; yet so as that the one doth far excell the other, as to Grace and Priviledge. For, (1.) under the Law it was the Priests alone who had this Priviledge of drawing nigh unto God, in the solemn worship of the Temple and Tabernacle. The People were kept at a Distance, and might never come near the Sacred Services of the Holy place. But all Believers being made a Royal Priesthood, every one of them hath an equal Right and Priviledge by Christ, of drawing nigh unto God. (2.) The Priests themselves did draw nigh only unto outward pledges, Tokens, and Symbols of Gods Presence. Their highest Attain∣ment was in the Entrance of the High Priest once a year into the most Holy place. Yet was the Presence of God there only in things made with hands, only instituted to represent his Glory. But Believers do draw nigh to God himself, unto the throne of his Grace, as the Apostle declares, Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. It may therefore be granted that there is this Intention in the words. For as by the Law of Old the Priests in the solemn worship of the Church did draw nigh to God in those visible pledges of his Presence which he had appointed; and this they did by vertue of the Aaronical Priesthood and the Law of its Institution, which was the utmost that could be attained in their imperfect state; so now upon the Introduction of the better Hope, and by vertue thereof, Believers in all their so∣lemn worship do draw nigh unto God himself, and find Acceptance with him. And there are two Reasons for the Admission of this Interpretation. For, (1.) one part of the Apostles Design is to manifest the Glory and Preheminence of Gospel-worship above that of the Law. And the excellency hereof consists, not in outward forms and pompous Ceremonies, but in this, that all Believers do therein draw nigh unto God himself with boldness. (2.) Whereas it is peculiarly the Priesthood of Christ and his Discharge of that office in his Oblation and Inter∣cession, which he intends by the better Hope, as he fully declares himself to∣wards the end of the Chapter; they are those which we have a peculiar respect unto, in all our approaches unto God in our holy worship. Our Entrance unto the Throne of Grace is through the veil of his flesh as offered. Our Admission is only by vertue of his Oblation, and our Acceptance depends on his Intercession. Herein therefore in a peculiar manner, by this better Hope, we draw nigh unto God. But yet there is a more extensive signification of this Expression in the Scripture, which must not be here excluded. By nature all men are gone far off from God. The first general Apostacy carried mankind into a most unconceiveable Distance from him. Though our Distance from him by nature, as we are Creatures, be infinite, yet this hinders not but that in his infinite Goodness and Condescension we may have intercourse with him, and find Acceptance before him. But the Distance which came between us by sin cuts off all Communion of that kind. Wherefore our Moral Distance from God as our nature is corrupted, is greater, with respect unto our Relation unto him, than our essential Distance from him, as our nature is created. Hence, being afar off, is the expression of this state of nature, Ephes. 2. 13. You were sometimes afar off. And whatever accompanieth that state in wrath and curse upon men in fear, bondage, the power of sin and enmity against God within them; in obnoxiousness unto misery in this world and eternal De∣struction hereafter, is comprized in that expression. It is to be far from the Love and Favour of God, from the knowledge of him, and obedience unto him. Wherefore our drawing nigh unto God, denotes our delivery and recovery from this estate. So it is expressed in the place named: But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes afar off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. To represent this all the Acts of solemn worship, which respected the Sacrifice of Christ, were called Approximations. And hereunto, unto this drawing nigh to God, or that we may so do, two things are required. 1. A Removal of whatever kept us at a Distance from God. And the things of this nature were of two sorts. (1.) What was upon us from God for our sin and Apostacy. This was his wrath and curse; And these were declared in the pub∣lishing
of the Law on mount Sinai with the terrible appearances and dreadful voices that accompanied. This made the People stand afar off; Exod. 20. 21; as an Emblem of their condition with respect unto the Law. (2) Guilt within, with its consequences of fear, shame, and Alienation from the life of God. Unless these things of the one sort and the other, those upon us and those within us, be ta∣ken away and removed, we can never draw nigh unto God. And to secure our Distance, they were enrolled in an hand-writing as a Record against us, that we should never on our own account so much as endeavour any Access unto him, Ephes. 2. 14. Col. 2. 14. How they were removed by the bringing in of the better Hope, that is, by the Priesthood of Christ, the Apostle declares in this Epistle, as we shall see God willing in our Progress. This neither was nor could be done by the Law or its Ordinances, neither the Moral preceptive part of it, nor the Ceremonial, in all its Rites and Sacrifices, could of themselves expiate sins, make Attonement for our Apostacy, turn away the wrath of God, nor take away Guilt, fear, bondage, and Alienation out of the minds of men. 2. There is moreover required hereunto, that upon the Justification and Acceptation of our Persons, we have Faith, Liberty, Boldness, Confidence and Assurance given unto us in our coming unto God. And this cannot be without the Renovation of our natures into his Image, the quickning of our souls with a new Principle of Spiritual life, and Ability unto all Duties of acceptable Obedience. All these things are required unto our drawing nigh unto God, or unto a state of Re∣conciliation, Peace, and Communion with him. And we may observe, 1. Out of Christ, or without him all Mankind are at an unconceivable Distance from God. And a Distance it is of the worst kind; even that which is an effect of mutual Enmity. The cause of it was on our part voluntary, and the effect of it the height of misery. And however any may flatter and deceive themselves, it is the present condition of all who have not an Interest in Christ by Faith. They are far off from God, as he is the Fountain of all Goodness and Blessedness; inhabiting, as the Prophet speaks, the parched places of the wilderness, and shall not see when Good com∣eth, Jerem. 17. 6. far from the dews and showers of grace or mercy, far from di∣vine love and favour; cast out of the bounds of them, as Adam our of Paradise, without any hope or power in themselves to return. The flaming sword of the Law turns every way to keep them from the Tree of Life. Yet are they not so far from God, but they are under his wrath and curse, and whatever of misery is con∣tained in them. Let them fly whither they please, wish for Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, as they will do hereafter; hide themselves in the Darkness and Shades of their own Ignorance, like Adam among the Trees of the Garden, or immerge themselves in the pleasures of sin for a season; all is one, the wrath of God abideth on them. And they are far from God in their own minds also; being alienated from him, Enemies against him, and in all things made up with Sathan the Head of the Apostacy. Thus is it and unconceivably worse with all that embrace not this better Hope to bring them nigh unto God. 2. It is an effect of infinite condescension and Grace, that God would appoint a way of Recovery for those who had willfully cast themselves into this wofull Distance from him. Why should God look after such Fugitives any more? He had no need of us or our services in our best condition, much less in that useless, depraved state where∣into we had brought our selves. And although we had transgressed the Rule of our moral dependance on him in the way of obedience, and thereby done what we could to stain and eclipse his Glory; yet he knew how to repair it unto Ad∣vantage by reducing us under the order of Punishment. By our sins we our selves come short of the Glory of God, but he could lose none by us, whilst it was abso∣lutely secured by the Penalty annexed unto the Law. When upon the entrance of sin, he came and found Adam in the bushes, wherein he thought foolishly to hide himself, who could expect (Adam did not) but that his only design was to appre∣hend the poor rebellious Fugitive, and give him up to condign Punishment? But quite otherwise, above all thoughts that could ever have entred into the Hearts of Angels or men, after he had declared the nature of the Apostacy, and his own in∣dignation against it, he proposeth and promiseth a way of Deliverance and Reco∣very. This is that which the Scripture so magnifies under the names of Grace and Love of God, which are beyond expression or conception, Joh. 3. 16. And it hath
also that lustre frequently put upon it, that he dealt not so with the Angels that sin∣ned; which manifests what condition he might have left us in also, and how infi∣nitely free and Soveraign that Grace was, from whence it was otherwise. Thence it was that he had a desire again unto the works of his hands, to bring poor mankind near unto him. And whereas he might have recalled us unto himself, yet so as to leave some marks of his displeasure upon us, to keep us at a greater Distance from him than that we stood at before; as David brought back his wicked Absalom to Jerusalem, but would not suffer him to come into his Presence; He chose to act like himself in infinite wisdom and grace, to bring us yet nearer unto him, than ever we could have approached by the Law of our Creation. And as the Foundation, means and Pledge hereof he contrived and brought forth that most glorious and unparallel'd effect of divine wisdom, in taking our nature into that unconceive∣able nearness unto himself, in the union of it unto the Person of his Son. For as all things in this bringing of us nigh to God who were afar off, are ex∣pressive effects of wisdom and Grace; so that of taking our nature into union with himself is glorious unto Astonishment. And as we are thereby made unconceive∣ably more nigh to God in our nature, than we were upon our first Creation, or than Angels shall ever be; so by vertue thereof, are we in our Persons brought in many things much nearer to God, then ever we could have been brought by the Law of Creation. O Lord our God, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy Glory above the Heavens. Psal. 8. 1. It is in the Admiration of this unspeakable Grace, that the Psalmist is so ravished in the contemplation of God, as hath been declared in our Exposition on the second Chapter of this Epistle. 3. All our Approximation unto God in any kind, all our Approaches unto him in holy worship is by him alone, who was the blessed Hope of the Saints under the Old Testament and is the life of them under the New. These things must be afterwards spoken unto. VER. 20, 21, 22. THE Apostle had warned the Hebrews before, that he had many things to say, and those not easie to be understood concerning Melchisedec. And herein he in∣tended not only those things which he expresseth directly concerning that Person and his office, but the things themselves signifyed thereby in the Person and Office of Christ. And therefore he omits nothing which may from thence be any way re∣presented. So from that one Testimony of the Psalmist he makes sundry Inferences unto his purpose. As, 1. That the Lord Christ was to be a Priest, which included in it the cessation of the Levitical Priesthood, seeing he was of the Tribe of Judah, and not of the Tribe of Levi. 2. That he was to be Another Priest, that is, a Priest of another Order, namely, that of Melchisedec. And this he variously demonstrates to prove his Preheminence above the Aaronical Priesthood: as also thereon, that upon his In∣troduction that Order was utterly to cease and be disanulled. 3. He observes from the same Testimony unto the same purpose, that he was to be a Priest for ever, so as that there should never more upon his death or other∣wise be any need of another Priest, nor any possibility of the return of the former Priesthood into the Church. 4. Neither yet doth he rest here, but observes moreover the manner how God in the Testimony insisted on, declared his purpose of making the Lord Christ a Priest which was constitutive of his Office; and that was by his Oath. And thence takes occasion to manifest how far his Priesthood is exalted above that under the Law. This is that which now lyes before us in these verses. And we have in these things an Instance given of what unsearchable stores of Wisdom and Truth are laid up in every parcel of the word of God, if we have a spiritual light in their Investigation. . The words of the 20th. verse being Elliptical, the sense of them is variously supplyed. Most Translators carry on the sense unto that which is the middest of
the 21 in our Translation, Others were made Priests without an Oath. The Syriack refers the words unto them foregoing;  and confirmed it, (that is the better Hope) with an Oath. And Beza, etiam quatenus non sine jurejuran∣do superintroducta est; in as much as (that Hope) is not brought in without an Oath; And another, since, Et eo potior illa spes, quatenùs n n absque jurejurando superintroducta est Schmid. But this limits the comparison unto this verse, which the Apostle really finisheth ver. 22. Vul. Lat. & quantum est non sine jurejurando; which the Rhemists render; and in as much as it is not without an Oath. Ours supply; he was made a Priest; in as much as not without an Oath, he was made a Priest: no doubt ac∣cording to the mind of the Apostle. For he hath a prospect in these words un∣to what ensues, where he expresly applyes this Oathunto the Priesthood of Christ, and the consummation thereof. ; Etiam quatenus; & quatenus; and in as much.  is omitted by the Syriack; Vul. in quantum est, in as much; hereunto answereth,  ver. 22. eatenus. is the same with , jusjurandum; an Oath. But it is here principally applyed unto those Oaths whereby Conventions, compacts, or Covenants were confirmed. Hence  were the sacrifices that were offered in the confirmation of sworn Covenants. It is three times used here by our Apostle on this occasion, ver. 20, 21, 28. and no where else in the new Testament. . Vul. Alii quidem, which the Rhemists mend by rendring it, and the other; Beza. nam illi quidem; and so the Syriack  and they; ours; for those Priests; rather, and truly those Priests, though , have only the force of a causal conjunction. ; Syr. ; were, but the manner of their being made Priests is intended; and so the words are to be expressed fully; facti sunt, were made. ; The Syriack adds,  by the hand of David; It is not the giving of the Oath, but the recording of it in the Psalm that he in∣tendeth. ; non poenitebit; Syr.  and will not lye; will not re∣pent, or change his mind. ; Vul. in tantum; to answer in quantum before; Tantò, eatenùs; tan∣to; by so much; Syr.  hoc toto, by all this; and so proceeds; this Cove∣nant was more excellent wherein Jesus was made the Surety. Of the signification of the word  I shall speak afterwards. VER. 20, 21, 22. And in as much as not without an Oath. For they truely were made without an Oath; But this with an Oath, by him that said unto him, the Lord sware, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. By so much was Jesus made surety of a better Covenant. The same Argument is pursued as in the foregoing verses, only with a new Medium, and that such as leads on towards the conclusion of the whole Disputa∣tion. The Introduction of a new Priesthood, the Cessation or Abolition of the Old, with the Advantage of the Church thereby, because of its Dignity, Prehe∣minence and stability above that which was to give place unto it, are the things which the Apostle is in the proof and confirmation of. There are three things in these three verses. 1. A Proposition of a New Medium for the confirmation of the principal Argu∣ment before insisted on, ver. 20. 2. An Illustration and Proof of what is asserted in that Proposition, ver. 21. 3. An Inference from its being so established and proved, ver. 22. In the Proposition three things may be considered. 1. The Connexion of it unto the preceding Discourse, by the conjunction . 2. The Modification of the Proposition in the manner of its Introduction; ; quanto, quatenus, in quantum; in as much. 3. The Proposition it self expressed negatively; ; not without, &c. The Note of Connexion , may respect ver. 17; where the same Testimony now insisted upon, is introduced, and so may intimate a farther pursuit of the same
Argument. If so, the other two verses, 18, 19. are inserted as a Parenthesis, comprizing an inference of what the Apostle had before proved, with the Reasons of it. For whereas before he had only made use of the words of the Father unto Christ, thou art a Priest for ever, and thereon shewed what would thence follow; he now proceeds to declare the manner how those words were spoken, namely, with an Oath. Or it may respect the words immediately foregoing, namely, the bringing in of a better hope; for it was brought in by an Oath: and this sense is fol∣lowed by most Translators, who supply the Defect in these words by the repeti∣tion of a better Hope. But although neither of those suppositions concerning the connexion of the words, doth prejudice the sense or Design of them, yet as we have observed before, , For, oftentimes is as much as moreover, as it is rendred, etiam, by Beza; and then it denotes not an immediate connexion with, or dependance on what went before in particular, but only a Processe in the same general Argu∣ment. And so it is here a note of Introduction, of a new special consideration for the confirmation of the same Design. Thence our Translators supply the words, not with any thing that went before, but with what follows after, which the Apo∣stle designed now in particular to speak unto, he was made a Priest. The Modification of the Proposition is in those words , eatenus quantum,  in quantum, inasmuch, so much. Hereunto answers , ver. 22. in tantum: quanto, tanto. The excellency of the Covenant whereof Christ was made Media∣tor above the old Covenant, had proportion with the preheminence of his Priest∣hood above that of Aaron, in that he was made a Priest by an Oath, but they were not so. And we may observe in general, that Obs. The Faith, Comfort, Honour, and Safety of the Church, depends much on every particular remark that God hath put upon any of the Offices of Christ, or whatever belongs thereunto We have lived to see Men endeavouring their utmost to render Christ himself, and all his offices of as little use in Religion as they can possibly admit, and yet re∣tain the Name of Christians. And it is to be feared that he is as little valued by some in their Practice, as he is by others in their notions. This is not the way of the Scripture. Therein every concernment of him and his Offices is particularly insisted on; and the Apostle in this Chapter makes it manifest, what important Mysteries depend on such minute considerations, as some would think were little to be regarded. But all things concerning him are full of Divine Mysteries, and eve∣ry Word about them that drops from infinite Wisdom, ought to be an object of Faith and Admiration. When therefore we cease to enquire with all Diligence into all the Revclations made concerning Christ or his Offices, or any thing which belongs unto them; we do really cease to be Christians. And there can be no greater Evidence of our want of Faith in him and Love unto him, than if we neglect a due consideration of all things, that the Scripture reveals and testifies concerning him. The Proposition it self is in those words; not without an Oath. Two things the Apostle supposeth in this Negative Proposition. . 1. That there were two ways whereby men either were or might be made Priests, namely, they might be so either with, or without an Oath. And he expresseth the latter way applying it negatively unto Christ, that he might include a Negation of the former way with respect unto the Priests under the Law; both which he after∣wards expressely mentioneth. 2. That the Dignity of the Priesthood depends on, and is declared by the way whereby God was pleased to initiate men into that Office. These two things being in general laid down, as those which could not be deni∣ed; the Apostle makes Application of them in the next verse distinctly, unto the Friests of the Law on the one hand, and Christ on the other, in a comparison be∣tween whom he is ingaged. And we may observe, that Nothing was wanting on the part of God that might give eminency, stability, glory, and efficacy unto the Priesthood of Christ. Not without an Oath. For, 1. This was due unto the Glory of his Person. The Son of God in infinite Grace condescending unto the susception of this Office, and the discharge of all the Duties of it, it was meet that all things which might contribute any thing unto the Glory, or efficacy of it should accompany his undertakings. For being in himself the Image
of the invisible God, by whom all things were created, it was meet that in his whole work, he should in all things have the preheminence, as our Apostle speaks Col. 1. 15, 16, 18. He was in every thing that he undertook, to be preferred and exalted above all others, who ever were employed in the Church, or ever should be; and therefore was he made a Priest not without an Oath. 2. God saw that this was needful to encourage and secure the Faith of the Church. There were many things defective in the Priesthood under the Law, as we have partly seen already, and shall yet see more fully in our progress. And it suited the design and wisdom of God that it should be so. For he never intended that the Faith of the Church should rest and be terminated in those Priests or their Office. What he granted unto them was sufficient unto the end and use whereunto he had designed it; so as that the Church might have all that respect for it, which was need∣ful or for their Good. But so many defects there were in that Administration, as might sufficiently evidence that the Faith of the Church was not to acquiesce there∣in, but to look for what was yet to come, as our Apostle proves by many instances in this Chapter. But upon the Introduction of the Priesthood of Christ, God really and actually proposeth and exhibiteth unto the Church, all that they were to trust un∣to, all that he would do or was any way needful to be done for their Peace and Sal∣vation. No other Relief was to be expected for the future; therefore did God in infinite Wisdom and Grace for the stability and security of their Faith, grant the highest and most peculiar Evidences of the everlasting confirmation of his Priest∣hood. And hereby did he manifest that this Dispensation of his Will and Grace was absolutely unchangeable, so that if we comply not therewithal we must perish for ever. Thus all the whole Scripture, and all contained therein direct us unto our ultimate Hope and Rest in Christ alone. VER. 21. In the Application of this assertion the Apostle affirms, that those Priests, the . Priests under the Law, were made without an Oath. No such thing is mentioned in all that is recorded concerning their Call and Consecration. For where they are express∣ly declared in their outward circumstances, Exod. 28, 29. there is mention made of no such thing. But their dedication consisted in three things. 1. A Call from God expressed, chap. 28. ver. 1. VVe have shewed how ne∣cessary . this was unto the first erection of any Priesthood, though it was to be conti∣nued by an ordinary succession. See chap. 5, 4. It is therefore granted that in this general Foundation of the Office, Aaron had it, even as Christ had, though not in the same way or manner. For the Call of Christ was far more eminent and glori∣ous than that of Aaron; as hath been shewed. 2. It consisted in the Appointment and Preparation of those peculiar Garments, and Mystical Ornaments wherein they were to administer their Office, and their Unction with the holy Annointing Oyle, when cloathed with those Garments. 3. In the Sacrifices wherewith they were consecrated and actually set apart unto that Office whereunto they were called. And these two were peculiar unto them, there being no use of them in the consecration of Christ, for both of them did de∣clare their whole Administration to be external and carnal, and therefore could ne∣ver make any thing perfect, nor were capable of a confirmation unto perpetuity. But the Promise made unto Phineas seems to be expresse for an eternity in this Priesthood. Behold, saith God, I give unto him my Covenant of Peace, and he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an Everlasting Priesthood. Num. 25. 12, 13. But this proves not a certain absolute perpetuity of this Priesthood of Phineas. For, 1. The Covenant intended, was not a compleat solemn Covenant confirmed either by Oath or Sacrifice, but only a naked Promise or Declaration of the VVill of God. And that  is frequently used for such a promise, as wherein the nature of a Covenant is not contained, is acknowledged by the Jews themselves. 2. All the special Covenants or Promises that God made unto, or which any un∣der the Law that had respect unto legal Administrations, were all of them Commen∣surate unto the Duration and Continuance of the Law it self. VVhilst the Covenant of the Law it self was in force, they also continued; and when that ceased, then also
were they to cease. For the Foundation being taken away the whole Building must come to the ground. Now that this Old Covenant of the Law was to cease and be taken away by the introduction of another and a better, God did openly and frequently declare under the Old Testament, as our Apostle manifests by one signal instance in the next chapter. And this is the sense of  for ever, in this case constantly. It expresseth a certain continuance of any thing so as not to be changed, or to have another thing substituted in the Room of that whereunto it is applyed, whilst that legal Dispensation continued. And so it was in this Pro∣mise made unto Phineas. For although there was an Intercision made afterwards as to the continuance of the Priesthood in the line of his Family, by the interposition of Eli and his sons, who were of the Posterity of Ithamar, yet he returned again into the enjoyment of this Promise, in the Person of Zadock in the days of Solomon, and so continued until the second Temple was forsaken of God also, and made a den of Thieves. But neither with respect unto him or any other, is there any mention of the Oath of God. For indeed God did never solemnly interpose himself with an Oath in a way of Priviledge or Mercy, but with direct respect unto Jesus Christ. So he sware by himself unto Abraham, that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, whereby he declared the immutability of his Counsel, in sending his Son to take his seed upon him. So he sware unto David by his Holinesse, that his seed, namely Christ, should sit on the Throne for ever. Wherefore although God never changeth any real internal Acts of his Will, or his Purposes, for with him there is neither variableness nor shadow of turning; yet he often works an Alteration in some things, which on some conditions, or for some time he hath proposed and en∣joyned unto his Church, unless they were confirmed by his Oath. For this declares them to be absolutely immutable. This is the Account the Apostle gives of the Aaronical Priests,  and they  truly, that is, Aaron and all his Posterity that exercised the Priests Office in a due manner, they were all made Priests, that is, by God himself. They did not ori∣ginally take this Honour unto themselves, but were called of God. For he hath no regard unto them who in those days invaded the Priests Office with violence, de∣ceit, or bribery, and so not only corrupting but evacuating the Covenant of Levi. Those that entred into and executed their Office according to the Law, are here intended by him. These were all made Priests in the way of Gods appointment; but neither all of them nor any of them were made Priests by an Oath. God, into whose Soveraign Will and Pleasure all these things are resolved, granted unto them what he saw convenient, and withheld what seemed good unto him; what he did was sufficient to oblige the People unto Obedience during that Dispensation of his Will: and what he did not adde, but reserved for a further dispensation of His Grace, intimated that liberty which he reserved unto himself of making an Altera∣tion therein, as he saw Good. And we may see, That Although the Decrees and Purposes of God were always firm and immutable, yet there was no fixed state of outward Dispensations, none confirmed with an Oath, untill Christ came. Nor shall we find any rest in any thing, until we come to Christ. The Apostle in the next words declares in particular, and positively, what he had in general and negatively before laid down; but this with an Oath, , but He, , this Man, he who was to be a Priest after the order of Melchisedec. He was made  with an Oath. This is first asserted and then proved by the . Testimony of the Psalmist; and the Assertion may have a double signification. (1) That this Oath was constituent of his Office. Therein his Call and Consecration did consist. (2.) That his Call, Constitution, or Consecration was confirmed and rati∣fied with an Oath; And the latter sense is intended; For so doth the Antithesis require. Those legal Priests had a Divine Constitution and Call, but they had no Confirmation by the Addition of an Oath; God used not an Oath in or about any thing that belonged unto them. Wherefore this Man was also to have another Call unto, and Constitution of his Office, but he was to be confirmed therein by an Oath. Wherein this call of Christ unto his Office did consist, what were the Acts of the Divine Will thereabout, and what was the manifestation of them, I have declared at large in the Exercitations about the Priesthood of Christ. Two things are to be considered in this Oath. (1.) The form. And (2.) the matter of it.
1. The Form of it is in those words, the Lord sware and will not repent. And the Mat∣ter of it is, that he in his own Person should be a Priest for ever. . The Person swearing is God the Father, who speaks unto the Son in the Psalm 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord: and the Oath of God is nothing but the so∣lemn Eternal Unchangeable Decree and Purpose of his Will, under an especial way of Declaration. So the same Act and Counsel of Gods Will is called his Decree, Ps. 2. 7. Wherefore when God will so far unveil a Decree and Purpose, as to testifie it to be absolute, and unchangeable, he doth it in the way of an Oath, as hath been declared, Chap. 6. ver. 13, 14. Or to the same purpose God affirms that he hath sworn in the case. If then it be demanded, When God thus sware unto Christ? I answer, we must consi∣der the Decree it self unto this purpose, and the peculiar Revelation or Declarati∣on of it, in which two this Oath doth consist. And as to the first, it belongs en∣tirely unto those eternal foederal Transactions between the Father and the Son, which were the original of the Priesthood of Christ, which I have at large explain∣ed in our Exercitations. And as for the latter, it was when he gave out that Re∣velation of his mind, in the Force and Efficacy of an Oath in the Psalm by Da∣vid. It is therefore not only a mistake but an Error of danger in some Expositors, who suppose that this Oath was made unto Christ upon his Ascension into Heaven. For this Apprehension being pursued, will fall in with the ; of the Soci∣nians in this whole Cause, namely, that the Kingly and Priestly Offices of Christ are not really distinct. Moreover it supposeth the principal discharge of the Priesthood of Christ, in his sacrifice, to have been antecedent unto this Oath which utterly ener∣vates the Apostles Argument in these words. For if he were made a Priest and discharged his Office without an Oath, as he must be and do on this supposition that the Oath of God was made unto him after his Ascension, (or that his death and Oblation therein belonged not unto his Priestly Office) he had no preheminence herein unto the Aaronical Priests. He might so have a subsequent Priviledge of the Confirmation of his Office, but he had none in his Call thereunto. Wherefore this Oath of God, though not in it self solely the constituent cause of the Priesthood of Christ, yet it was, and it was necessarily to be antecedent unto his Actual entrance upon, or discharge of any solemn Duty of his Office. That additional expression, and he will not repent, declares the nature of the Oath of God and of the Purpose confirmed thereby. When God makes an Alte∣ration . in any Law, Rule, Order, or Constitution, he is or may be said, , to repent. This God by this word declares shall never be; no Alteration or Change, no Removal or Substitution shall ever be made in this matter. 2. The matter of this Oath, is, that Christ is and should be a Priest for ever. He was not only made a Priest with an Oath, which they were not, but a Priest for . ever. This adds unto the unchangeableness of his Office, that he himself, in his own Person was to bear, exercise, and discharge it, without substitute or suc∣cessor. And this, for ever, answers unto the for ever under the Law; each of them be∣ing . commensurate unto the Dispensation of that Covenant which they do respect. For absolute Eternity belongs not unto these things. The Ever of the Old Testa∣ment was the Duration of the Dispensation of the Old Covenant. And this, for ever, respects the New Covenant, which is to continue unto the consummation of all things, no change therein being any way intimated or promised, or consistent with the Wisdome and Faithfulness of God, all which were otherwise under the Law. But at the end of the world, together with the Dispensation of the New Covenant, an end will be put unto all the Mediatory Offices of Christ, and all their Exercise. And there are four things which the Apostle declareth and evinceth in this observation. 1. That our High Priest was peculiarly designed unto and initiated into his Office by the Oath of God, which none other ever was before him. 2. That the Person of the High Priest is hereby so absolutely determined, as that the Church may continually draw nigh unto God in the full Assurance of Faith. 3. That this Priesthood is liable to no Alteration, Succession, or Substitution. 4. That from hence ariseth the principal Advantage of the New Testament above the
Old, as is declared in the next verse, and we may observe, 1. That although God granted great Priviledges unto the Church under the Old Te∣stament, yet still in every instance he withheld that which was the principal, and should have given perfection unto what he did grant. He made them Priests, but without an Oath. In all things there was a reserve for Christ, that he in all might have the Preeminence. 2. God by his Oath declares the Determination if his Soveraign pleasure unto the Object of it. What he proposeth and prescribeth unto us, he declares no more of his mind and his will about, but that he requireth and approveth of our Obedience unto it, but still reserves the liberty unto himself of making those Alterations in it and about it, that seem good unto him. Nothing therefore in the whole legal Ad∣ministration being confirmed by the Oath of God, it was always ready for a remo∣val at the appointed season. 3. Christ his being made a Priest by the Oath of God for ever, is a solid Foundation of Peace and Consolation to the Church. For, 4. All the Transactions between the Father and the Son, concerning his Offices, un∣dertakings, and the work of our Redemption, have respect unto the Faith of the Church, and are declared for our Consolation. Such were his solemn Call to his sacerdotal Of∣fice, and the Oath of God whereby he was confirmed therein. I will not say that these things were needless on the part of Christ himself, Seeing it became the Glory of his Person to be thus testified unto in his condescension unto Office; yet was it in all these things the Good and Benefit of the Church that was designed. What the Lord Christ said of his Prayer unto God the Father, at least so far as it was vocal, it was not needful for him, but was only for the confirmation of the Faith of others; John 11. 41, 42. may be spoken of all other Transactions be∣tween God and him; the Faith of others was principally respected in them, and thereunto they were absolutely needful. For, 1. The things which God proposeth unto our Faith through Christ, are ex∣ceeding great and glorious, and such as being most remote from our innate Appre∣hensions, do need the highest confirmation. Things they are, which Eye hath not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have they entred into the Heart of Man, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Things unexpected, great and glorious are apt to surprize, amaze and over∣whelm our Spirits, until they are uncontrollably testified unto. So when Jacobs sons told their Father that Joseph was alive, and made Governour over all the Land of Egypt, Gen. 45. 26. The Tidings were too great and good for him to receive. But it is added, that when they gave Evidence unto their report by the Waggons that Joseph had sent to carry him, the Spirit of Jacob revived; ver. 27, 28. The things of the Gospel, pardon of Sin, Peace with God, Participation of the Spirit, Grace and Glory, are great and marvellous. Men at the hearing of them are like them that dream, the words concerning them seem like the Report of the Woman unto the Apostles, concerning the Resurrection of Christ, they seemed as idle Tales, and they believed them not, Luke 24. 11. Wherefore God discovers the Fountains of these things that we may apprehend the Truth and Reality of them. His Eternal Covenant with his Son about them, his Oath that he hath made unto him, whereby he was established in his office, and the like glorious Transactions of his Wisdom and Grace, are revealed unto this very end, that we might not be faithless in these things but believe. For can any thing that is proposed unto us be supposed to ex∣ceed the Duty of Faith, when we see it either in it self, or in its springs and foun∣dation solemnly confirmed by the Oath of God? They are glorious things which we are to expect from the Priesthood of Christ, and the Discharge of that Office. And is it not an unspeakable encouragement thereunto, that God hath confirmed him in that office by his solemn Oath unto him? For two things evidently present them∣selves unto our minds thereon. First, that this is a thing which the infinitely holy wise God lays great weight and stress upon. And what is he not able to effect when he doth so, and consequently lays out the Treasures of his Wisdome, and inga∣geth the greatness of his Power in the pursuit of it? And secondly, his Counsel here∣in is absolutely immutable, and such as on no emergency can admit of Alteration. If therefore the ingagement of infinite Wisdome, Grace, and Power will not ex∣cite and encourage us unto believing, there is no remedy but we must perish in our sins.
2. As the things proposed in the Gospel as effects of the Priesthood of Christ, are in themselves great and glorious, requiring an eminent confirmation; so the frame of our Hearts with respect unto them, is such from first to last, as stands in need of all the Evidence that can be given unto them. For there is in us by nature an aversation unto them, and a dislike of them. In the wisdom of our carnal minds we look on them as foolish and useless. And when this woful enmity is conquered by the Mighty Power of God, and the Souls of Sinners wrought over to approve of these effects of Divine Wisdom and Grace, yet no man can recount how many doubts, fears, jealous suspicions we are, as to our closing with them by Faith, obnoxious unto. Every ones own Heart, if he have any acquaintance with it, if he be diligent in the examination of it, will sufficiently satisfie him what objections Faith in this mat∣ter hath to conflict withal. And it is to be feared that he who is insensible of the oppositions that arise against sincere believing, never yet knew what it is so to be∣lieve. To encourage and strengthen our Hearts against them, to give power unto Faith against all oppositions, doth God thus reveal the Wisdom of his Counsel and the glorious springs of this Ministration whereinto our whole Faith is princi∣pally resolved. And indeed we may try the sincerity of our Faith by its respect unto these things. It may be some, for ought I know, may be carried on in such an easie course and be so preserved from perplexing Temptations as not to be dri∣ven to seek their Relief so deep, as these springs of Gods confirmation of the office of Christ by his Oath do lye: But yet he that doth not of his own choice refresh his Faith with the consideration of them, and strengthen it with pleas in his suppli∣cations taken from thence, seems to me to be greatly unacquainted with what it is truly to believe. Verse XXII. By so much was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament. , By so much answers directly to , ver. 20. in as much. There is therefore an immediate connexion of these words unto that verse. Hence ver. 21. wherein a confirmation is interserted of the principal Assertion, is justly placed in a Parenthesis in our Translation. So the sense of the Words is to this purpose: And in as much as he was not made a Priest without an Oath, he is by so much made the Surety of a better Testament. And there may be a twofold Design in the Words. (1.) That his being made a Priest by an Oath made him meet to be the Surety of a better Testament; or (2.) That the Testament whereof he was the Surety must needs be better than the other; because he who was the Surety of it was made a Priest by an Oath. In the one way, he proves the Dignity of the Priesthood of Christ from the New Testament; and in the other the Dignity of the New Testament from the Priesthood of Christ. And we may reconcile both these senses by affirming, that really and efficiently the Priesthood gives Dignity unto the New Testament, and declaratively the New Testament sets forth the Dignity of the Priesthood of Christ. It is owned tacitely, that the Priesthood of Levi, and the Old Testament were good, or these could not be said to be better in way of comparison. And Good they were because appointed of God, and of singular use unto the Church during their continuance. But this Priesthood and Testament are better, by so much as that which is confirmed with an Oath, is better than that which is not so, which a∣lone gives the proportion of comparison in this place. Many other advantages there were of the Priesthood of Christ, and of the New Testament in comparison unto those of old, all which encrease the proportion of Difference; but at present the Apostle considers only what depends on the Oath of God. Wherefore the De∣sign of the Comparison contained in those words , is, that whereas this . Priest after the Order of Melchisedec, was designed to be the Surety of another Testament, he was confirmed in his office by the Oath of God, which gives a Prcheminence both unto his Office and the Testament whereof he was to be a Surety. In the Assertion it self that Jesus was made a Surety of a better Testament, we may consider, (1.) what is included or supposed in it, and (2.) what is literally expressed.
Three things are included and supposed in this Assertion. (1.) That there was another Testament that God had made with his People. (2.) That this was a good Testament. (3) That this Testament had in some sense a Surety. As unto what is expressed in these words, there are four things in them. (1.) The Name of him who was the subject discoursed of, it is Jesus. (2.) What is affirmed of him, he was a Surety. (3.) How he became so, He was made so. (4.) Whereof he was a Surety, and that is of a Testament of God. Which, (5.) is described by its respect unto the other before mentioned, and its preference above it, it is a better Testament. 1. It is supposed that there was another Testament which God had made with his People. This the Apostle supposeth in this whole context, and at length brings his discourse unto its Head and issue in the eighth Chapter, where he expresly compareth the Two Testaments the one with the other. Now this was the Cove∣nant or Testament that God made with the Hebrews on Mount Sinai when he brought them out of Egypt, as is expresly declared in the ensuing Chapters, whereof we must treat in its proper place. 2. It is supposed, that this was a Good Testament. It was so in it self, as an effect of the Wisdom and Righteousness of God. For all that he doth is good in it self, both naturally and morally, nor can it otherwise be. And it was of Good Use unto the Church, namely, unto them who looked unto the end of it, and u∣sed it in its proper design. Unto the Body of the People indeed, as far as they were carnal, and looked only on the one hand for temporal Benefits by it, or on the other for Life and Salvation, it was an heavy yoke, yea the Ministration of Death. With respect unto such Persons and Ends it contained Statutes that were not Good, Commandments that could not give Life; and was every way unprofitable. But yet in it self it was on many Accounts Good, Just and Holy. (1.) As it had an Impression upon it of the Wisdom and Goodnesse of God. (2) As it was instru∣ctive in the nature and demerit of Sin. (3.) As it directed unto and represented the only means of deliverance by Righteousnesse and Salvation in Christ. (4.) As it established a Worship which was very Glorious and Acceptable unto God during its Season. But as we shall shew afterwards, it came short in all excellencies and worth of this whereof Christ is the Surety. 3. It is supposed that this Testament had a Mediator. For this New Testa∣ment having a Surety, the other must have so also. But who this was must be in∣quired. 1. Some would have our Lord Jesus Christ to be the Surety of that Testament al∣so. For so our Apostle affirms in general, There is one God, and one Mediator between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransome for all to be Testified in due time; 1 Tim. 2. 5, 6. Be the Covenant or Testament what or which it will, there is but one Mediator between God and Man. Hence our Apostle says of him, that Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Chap. 13. 8. If therefore he be the only Mediator to day under the New Testament, he was so al∣so yesterday under the Old. Answ. 1. There is some difference between a Mediator at large, and such a Mediator as is withal a Surety. And however on any Account Christ may be said to be the Mediator of that Covenant, he cannot be said to be the Surety of it. 2. The place in Timothy cannot intend the Old Covenant but is exclusive of it. For the Lord Christ is there called a Mediator with respect unto the Ransome that he paid in his death and bloodshedding. This respected not the confirmation of the Old Covenant, but was the Abolition of it; and the Old was confirmed with the Blood of Beasts, as the Apostle expresly declares, Chap. 9. 18. 19. 3. The Lord Christ was indeed in his Divine Person the immediate Administra∣tor of that Covenant, the Angel and Messenger of it on the behalf of God the Fa∣ther; but this doth not constitute him a Mediator properly: For a Mediator is not of one, but God is one. 4. The Lord Christ was a Mediator under that Covenant, as to the original Pro∣mise of Grace, and the efficacy of it, which were administred therein; but he was not the Mediator and Surety of it as it was a Covenant: For had he been so, he be∣ing the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, that Covenant could have never been dis∣anulled.
2. Some assert Moses to have been the Surety of the Old Testament. For so it is said, that the Law was given by the Disposition of Angels in the hand of a Media∣tor. Gal. 3. 19. That is, of Moses; whom the People desired to be the internunci∣us between God and them, Exod. 20. 19. Deut. 5. 24. Chap. 18. 16. Answ. (1.) Moses may be said to be the Mediator of the Old Covenant in a ge∣neral sense, inasmuch as he went between God and the People, to declare the Will of God unto them, and to return the profession of Obedience from them unto God; But he was in no sense the Surety thereof. For on the one side God did not appoint him in his stead to give Assurance of his fidelity unto the People. This he took absolut∣ly unto himself in those words wherewith all his Laws were prefaced; I am the Lord thy God. Nor did he, nor could he on the other side undertake unto God for the People; and so could not be esteemed in any sense the Surety of the Covenant. (2.) The Apostle hath no such argument in hand, as to compare Christ with Mo∣ses, nor is he treating of that Office wherein he compares him with him, and pre∣fers him above him, which was his Prophetical Office whereof he had before dis∣coursed, Chap. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. VVherefore 3. It was the High Priest alone who was the Surety of that Covenant. It was made and confirmed by sacrifices, Psal. 50. 5. as we shall see more at large after∣wards, Chap. 9. 19, 20. And if Moses were concerned herein, it was as he exe∣cuted the office of the Priest in an extraordinary manner. Therefore the High-Priest offering solemn sacrifices in the name and on the behalf of the People, mak∣ing Attonement for them according to the terms of that Covenant, supplyed the place of the Surety thereof. And we may observe, That How good and glorious soever any thing may appcar to be, or really be in the Worship of God, or as a way of our coming to him, or walking before him; if it be not ratified in and by the immediate Suretiship of Christ, it must give way unto that which is better; it could be neither durable in it self, nor make any thing perfect in them that made use of it. 2. In what is positively asserted in the words we may observe, 1. The Person who is the subject spoken of, and that is, Jesus. He had in ge∣neral . declared the nature of the Priesthood of him who was to have that Office, according to the order of Melchisedec. But he had not yet in this whole chapter, that is, from the beginning of this discourse, mentioned who that Person was, or named him. But here he makes application of the whole unto him; it is Jesus who in all these things was intended. And this he doth suitably unto his design and occasion. For two things were in question among the Hebrews. (1.) What was the Nature of the Office of the Messiah. (2.) Who was the Person. For the first of these, he proves unto them from their own acknowledged Principles, that he was to be a Priest, as also what was the nature of that Priesthood, and what would be the necessary consequents of the setting up that office in the Church, and the exercise of it: this his whole precedent discourse is designed unto. Now he asserts the second part of the difference, namely, that it was Jesus who is this Priest, because in him alone do all things concurre that were to be in that Priest, and he had now discharged the principal part and Duty of that Office. It was sufficient for the Church of the Jews to believe in the Messiah, and to own the work of Redemption which he was to accomplish. Nor did the meer actual coming of Christ make it absolutely necessary that they should all immediately be obliged to believe him to be the Person. Many, I doubt not, died after his Incar∣tion and went to Heaven without an actual belief that it was He who was their Re∣deemer. But their obligation unto Faith towards that individual person arose from the Declaration that was made of him, and the Evidences given to prove him to be the Son of God, the Saviour of the world. So he tells those unto whom he preach∣ed and who saw his miracles, if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins, John 8. 24. It would not now suffice them to believe in the Messiah in general, but they were also to believe, that Jesus was He, or they must perish for their unbelief. Howbeit they only were intended who hearing his words and seeing his Miracles, had sufficient Evidence of his being the Son God. Of others in the same Church, this was not as yet required. Nor, it may be, doth our Saviour oblige them imme∣diately unto Faith in this matter; only he declares what would be the event with them, who upon his Accomplishment of his work in the Earth, and the sending of
the Holy Ghost after his Ascension, whereby he gave the principal Declaration and Evidence of his being the Messiah, should continue in their unbelief. Hereon and not before, the Belief in his individual Person, in Jesus the Son of God, became the Foundation of the Church; so that whoever beleived not in him did die in their sins. Wherefore the Apostles immediately upon the coming of the Holy Ghost, made this the first and principal subject of their Preaching, namely, that Jesus was the Christ. See Acts 2, 3, 4, 5. so our Apostle in this place, having asserted the Nature of the Office of the promised Messiah, makes an application of it unto his Person, as he also had done, Chap. 2. 9. And we may observe that, All the Priviledges, Benefits and Advantages of the Offices and Mediation of Christ, will not avail us, unless we reduce them all unto Faith in his Person. Indeed it is not so much what is done, though that be unconceivably great, as by whom it is done, namely, Jesus the Son of God, God and Man in One Person. It is a matter of somewhat a surprizing Nature, that divers in these days do endeavour to divert the minds and Faith of men from a Respect unto the Person of Christ. But that the crafts of Satan have made nothing, be it never so foolish or impious in Religion, to seem strange, a man could not but admire how such an At∣tempt should be either owned or countenanced. For my part I must acknowledge that I know no more of Christian Religion but what makes me judge, that the prin∣cipal trouble of Believers in this world, lies herein, that they can no more fervent∣ly love, nor more firmly Believe in the Person of Christ, than what they have as yet attained unto. But this notion hath been vented and carried on among us, by Persons who out of an aym after things novel and contrary to the received Faith, have suffered themselves to be imposed on by those who have other Principles than what they seem to own. For the Socinians denying the Divine Nature of Christ, do, (in the pursuit of that Infidelity) their utmost to take the minds of men from a regard unto his Person, and would reduce all Religion unto a meer Obedience unto his Commands. And indeed there can be no place for that Divine Faith in him, trust on him, and Love unto him which the Church always professed, if it be supposed that he is not God and Man in one Person. And their reasonings, they are un∣to this purpose, which some represent unto us, who yet will not avow that Prin∣ciple from whence alone they are taken and do rise. But so long as we can hold the Head, or this great Foundation of Religion, that the Lord Christ is the Eternal Son of God, which alone gives life and efficacy unto his whole work of Mediation, our Faith in all its actings will be reduced unto his Person; there it beginneth, there it endeth. It is Jesus who is this Mediator and Surety of the Covenant, in whose Per∣son God Redeemed the Church with his own Blood. 2. That which is affirmed of this Person is, that he was made a Surety. 1. The way whereby he became so, is expressed by . He was made so. So . is this word used with respect unto him, Chap. 1. 4. of the same importance with another translated appointed, Chap. 3. 2. and it signifies what is expressed, Chap. 5. 5. The places may be consulted with our exposition of them. Respect is had here∣in unto the Acts of God the Father in this matter. What are those Acts of God, whether Eternal or Temporal that did concurre unto or any way belong un∣to the investiture of Christ in his Offices, I have at large declared on Chap. 1. 1, 2, 3. And more particularly for what concerns his Priesthood, it hath been handled apart in our Exercitations on that subject. But we may here also observe, that The whole undertaking of Christ and the whole efficacy of the discharge of his Office depends on the Appointment of God even the Father. 3. It is affirmed that he was thus made, appointed or constituted, that is, by God himself a Surety, which is farther declared by the Addition of that whereunto his Suretiship had a respect, namely, a better Covenant; . Of the proper signification of the word  and its use, we must treat ex∣pressely . afterwards. Here we shall only observe that in this word the Apostle takes many things as granted among the Hebrews. As, 1. That there was to be another Covenant or Testament of God with and towards the Church, besides that which he made with Israel when he brought them out of Egypt. The Promises hereof are so frequently repeated in the Prophets especial∣ly those who prophecyed towards the latter end of their Church State, that there could be no question about it, nor could they be ignorant of it.
2. That this New Covenant or Testament should be better than the former, which was to be disanulled thereby. This carried along with it, its own Evidence. For after God in his Wisdom and Goodness had made one Covenant with his Peo∣ple, he would not remove it, abolish it, and take it away by another, unless that other were better than it; especially declaring so often as he doth, that he granted them this New Covenant, as the highest effect of his Grace and Kindness towards them. And that indeed it was expressely promised to be a better Covenant than the former, we shall see in the next chapter, if we live and God Will. 3. It is supposed that this better Covenant must have a Surety. The original Co∣venant that God made with Adam had none, and therefore was it quickly bro∣ken and disanulled. The especial Covenant made with Israel had no Surety, pro∣perly so called. Only therein the High Priest did represent what was to be done by any one that should undertake to be such a Surety. Of the word and its signification we have spoken before. And in our enquiry . into the nature of this Suretiship of Christ, the whole will be resolved into this one Question, namely, Whether the Lord Christ was made a Surety only on the part of God unto us, to assure us that the Promise of the Covenant on his part should be accomplished, or also an Undertaker on our part for the performance of what is required, if not of us, yet with respect unto us, that the Promise may be accomplished. The first of these is vehemently asserted by the Socinians, who are followed by Grotius and Hammond in their Annotations on this place. The words of Schlictingius are. Sponsor foederis appellatur Jesus, quod nomine Dci nobis spoponderit, id est, fidem fecerit Deum foederis promissiones servaturum esse. Non verò quasi pro nobis spoponderit Deo, nostrorumve debitorum solutionem in se receperit. Nec enim nos misimus Christum sed Deus, cujus nomine Christus ad nos venit, foedus no∣biscum panxit, ejusque promissiones ratas fore spopondit & in se recepit, ideoque nec sponsor simpliciter sed foederis sponsor nominatur. Spopondit auiem Christus pro foederis divini veritate, non tantùm quatenùs id firmum ratumque fore verbis perpetuo testatus est, sed etiam quatenus muneris sui fidem maximis rerum ipsarum comprobavit Documentis, tum perfectâ vit ae innocentia & sanctitate, tum divinis plané quae patravit operibus, tum mortis adeò truculentae, quam pro doctrin ae suae veritate subiit, perpessione. After which he subjoyns a long Discourse about the Evidences which we have of the veracity of Christ. And herein we have a brief Account of their whole opinion concerning the Mediation of Christ. The words of Grotius are; Spopondit Christus. i. e. nos certos Promissi fecit, non solis verbis sed perpetuâ vitae saenctitate, morte ob id toleratâ, et miraculis plurimis, which are an Abridgment of the Discourse of Schlic∣tingius. To the same purpose Dr. Hammond expounds it, that he was a sponsor or Surety for God unto the confirmation of the Promises of the Covenant. On the other hand the generality of Expositors antient and modern, of the Roman and Protestant Churches, affirm that the Lord Christ as the Surety of the Cove∣nant was properly a Surety or undertaker unto God for us, and not a Surety or un∣dertaker unto us for God. And because this is a matter of great importance, wherein the Faith and Consolation of the Church is highly concerned, I shall insist distinctly upon it. And first, we may consider the Argument that is produced to prove, that Christ was only a Surety for God unto us. Now this is taken neither from the Name nor Nature of the Office or work of a Surety, nor from the Nature of the Covenant whereof he was a Surety, nor of the Office wherein he was so. But the sole Argu∣ment insisted on, is, that we do not give Christ as a Surety of the Covenant unto God, but he gives him unto us, and therefore he is a Surety for God and the Accomplishment of his Promises, and not for us to pay our debts, or to answer what is required of us. But there is no force in this Argument. For it belongs not unto the nature of a Surety, by whom he is or may be designed unto his Office and work therein. His own voluntary susception of the Office and work, is all that is required thereunto, however he may be designed or induced to undertake it. He who of his own Ac∣cord doth voluntarily undertake for another, on what Grounds, Reasons or Con∣siderations soever he doth so, is his Surety. And this the Lord Christ did in the be∣half of the Church. For when it was said, sacrifice and burnt Offerings and whole burnt-offerings for sin God would not have, or accept as sufficient to make the Attone∣ment that he required, so as that the Covenant might be Established and made effectu∣al
unto us, then said he, Lo I come to do thy will O God, Heb. 10. 5, 6. He willing∣ly, and voluntarily, out of his own abundant Goodness and Love took upon him to make Attonement for us, wherein he was our Surety. And accordingly this under∣taking is ascribed unto that Love which he exercised herein, Gal. 2. 12. 1 John 3. 16. Rev. 1. 5. And there was this in it moreover that he took upon him our Nature or the Seed of Abraham, wherein he was our Surety. So that although we neither did nor could appoint him so to be, yet he took from us that wherein and whereby he was so: which was as much as if we had designed him unto his work, as to the true Reason of his being our Surety. Wherefore notwithstanding those antecedent Transactions that were between the Father and him in this matter, it was the vo∣luntary engagement of himself to be our Surety, and his taking our Nature upon him for that End, which was the formal Reason of his being instituted in that Office. 2. We may consider the Arguments, whence it is evident that he neither was nor could be a Surety unto us for God, but was so for us unto God. For, 1.  or , a Surety, is one that undertaketh for another wherein he is defective really or in Reputation. Whatever that undertaking be, whether in Words of Promise, or in depositing of real security in the hands of an Arbi∣trator, or by any other Personal engagement of Life and Body, it respects the defect of the Person for whom any one becomes a Surety. Such an one is sponsor or fidejussor in all good Authors and common use of speech. And if any one be of absolute credit himself, and of a Reputation every way unquestionable, there is no need of a Surety, unless in case of Mortality. The words of a Surety in the behalf of another whose Ability or Reputation is dubious, are, ad me recipio, faciet aut faciam. And when  is taken Adjectively as sometimes it is, it signifies him who is satisdationibus obnoxius; liable to payments for others that are non-sol∣vent. 2. God can therefore have no Surety properly, because there can be no Imagi∣nation of any defect on his part. There may be indeed a Question whether any Word or Promise be a Word or Promise of God. To assure us hereof, it is not the work of a Surety, but only any one or any means that may give evidence that so it is. But upon a supposition that what is proposed, is his Word or Promise, there can be no Imagination or Fear of any defect on his part, so as that there should be any need of a Surety for the performance of it. He doth indeed make use of Wit∣nesses to confirm his Word, that is, to testifie that such Promises he hath made and so he will do. So the Lord Christ was his Witnesse, Isa. 43. 10. Ye are my wit∣nesses, saith the Lord, and my Servant whom I have chosen. But they were not all his Sureties. So he affirms that he came into the VVorld to bear witnesse unto the Truth, John 18 37. that is, the Truth of the Promises of God; for he was the Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of the Promises of God unto the Fathers, Rom. 15. 8. But a Surety for God properly so called he was not, nor could be. The distance and difference is wide enough between a witnesse and a Surety; for a Surety must be of more Ability, or more Credit and Reputation than he for whom he is a Surety, or there is no need of his Suretiship. This none can be for God, no not the Lord Christ himself, who in his whole work was the Servant of the Fa∣ther. And the Apostle doth not use this word in a general improper sense for any one that by any means gives Assurance of any other thing; for so he had asserted nothing peculiar unto Christ. For in such a sense all the Prophets and Apostles were Sureties for God, and many of them confirmed the Truth of his VVord and Pro∣mises with the laying down of their Lives. But such a Surety he intends as under∣taketh to do that for others, which they cannot do for themselves, or at least are not reputed to be able to do what is required of them. 3. The Apostle had before at large declared who and what was Gods Surety in this matter of the Covenant, and how impossible it was that he should have any o∣ther: And this was himself alone interposing himself by his Oath. For in this cause, because he had none greater to swear by, he sware by himself, Chap. 6. 13, 14. VVhere∣fore if God would give any other Surety besides himself, it must be one greater then He. This being every way impossible, he swears by himself only. Many ways he may and doth use for the declaring and testifying of his Truth unto us, that we may know and believe it to be his word; and so the Lord Christ in his Ministry was the principal Witnesse of the Truth of God. But other Surety than himself he can have none. And therefore,
4. VVhen he would have us in this matter, not only come unto the full Assurance of Faith concerning his Promises, but also to have strong Consolation, he resolves it wholly into the immutability of his counsel, as declared by his Promise and Oath, Chap. 6. 18, 19. So that neither is God capable of having any Surety properly so called, neither do we stand in need of any on his part for the confirmation of our Faith in the highest degree. 5. VVe on all Accounts stand in need of a Surety for us, or on our behalf. Nei∣ther without the Interposition of such a Surety could any Covenant between God and us be firm and stable, or an Everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure. In the first Covenant made with Adam there was no Surety, but God and Man were the immediate Covenanters. And although we were then in a state and condition able to perform and answer all the Terms of the Covenant, yet was it broken and disanulled. If this came to pass by the failure of the Promise of God, it was ne∣cessary that on the making of a new Covenant, he should have a surety to undertake for him, that the Covenant might be stable and Everlasting. But this is false and blasphemous to imagine. It was man alone who failed and brake that Covenant. VVherefore it was necessary that upon the making of the New Covenant, and that with a design and purpose that it should never be disanulled, as the former was, that we should have a Surety and undertaker for us. For if that first Covenant was not firm and stable because there was no Surety to undertake for us, notwithstanding all that Ability which we had to answer the Terms of it, how much less can any other be so, now our natures are become depraved and sinful? wherefore we alone are capable of a Surety properly so called for us, we alone stood in need of him, and without him the Covenant could not be firm and inviolable on our parts: The Surety therefore of this Covenant is so with God for us. 6. It is the Priesthood of Christ that the Apostle treats of in this place, and that alone. VVherefore he is a Surety as he is a Priest and in the Discharge of that of∣fice, and is therefore so with God on our behalf. This Schlictingius observes and is aware what will ensue thereon against his pretensions, which he endeavours to obviate. Mirum (saith he) porrò alicui videri posset, cur D. Auctor de Christi sacer∣dotio in superioribus & in sequentibus agens, derepente eum sponsorem foederis, non verò sacerdotem vocet. Cur non dixerit, tantò praestantioris foederis factus est sacerdos Jesus? hoc enim planè requirere videtur totus orationis contextus. Credibile est in voce sponsoris sacerdotium quoque Christi intelligi. Sponsoris enim non est solùm alieno nomine quippiam promittere, & fidem suam pro alio interponere; sed etiam, si ita res ferat, alterius nomine id quod spopondit, praestare. In rebus quidem humanis, si id non praestet is pro quo sponsor fide jussit; hic verò propter contrariam causam (nam prior hic locum habere non potest) nempe quatenus ille, pro quo spopondit Christus, per ipsum Christum promissa sua nobis exhi∣bet, quâ in re praecipuè Christi sacerdotium continetur. Answ. (1.) It may indeed seem strange unto any one who imagineth Christ to be such a Surety as he doth, why the Apostle should so call him and so introduce him in the Description of his Priestly Office, as that which belongeth thereunto. But grant what is the proper work and duty of a Surety, and who the Lord Jesus was a Surety for, and it is evident that nothing more proper or pertinent could be menti∣oned by him, when he was in the Declaration of that office. (2.) He confesseth that by his exposition of this Suretiship of Christ, as making a Surety for God, he contradicteth the nature and only notion of a Surety among men. For such a one he acknowledgeth doth nothing but in the defect and inability of them for whom he is ingaged and doth undertake. He is to pay that which they owe, and to do what is to be done by them, which they cannot perform. And if this be not the notion of a Surety in this place, the Apostle makes use of a word no where else used in the whole Scripture, to teach us that which it doth never signifie among men, which is improbable and absurd. For the sole Reason why he did make use of it was, that from the Nature and Notion of it among men in other Cases, we may understand the signification of it, what he intends by it, and what under that name he ascribes unto the Lord Jesus. (3.) He hath no way to solve the Apostles mention of Christs being a Surety in the Description of his Priestly Office, but by overthrowing the nature of that Office also. For to confirm this absurd notion that Christ as a Priest was a Surety for God, he would have us believe that the Priesthood of Christ con∣sists in his making effectual unto us the Promises of God, or his effectual Communica∣ting
of the Good things promised unto us; the falshood of which notion really destructive of the Priesthood of Christ, I have elsewhere at large detected and con∣futed. Wherefore seeing the Lord Christ is the Surety of the Covenant as a Priest, and all the sacerdotal Actings of Christ have God for their immediate Object, and are performed with him on our behalf, he was a Surety for us also. It remaineth that we enquire positively, how the Lord Christ was the Surety of the New Covenant, and what is the benefit we receive thereby. And unto this pur∣pose we must first consider that opinion of some, that the whole end of the Media∣tion of Christ, was only to procure the New Covenant; although at first view it be irreconcileable unto the nature and notion of a Surety. For a Surety is not the Pro∣curer of that whereofhe is the Surety, but only the undertaker for its Accomplish∣ment. But we must more distinctly consider this Assertion, and in what sense Christ may be said to procure the New Covenant by his Death and Mediation. And to this end we must observe that the New Covenant may be considered divers ways in various respects. 1. In the Designation and Preparation of its Terms and Benefits in the Counsel of God. And this although it have the nature of an Eternal Decree, yet is it distinguish∣ed from the Decree of Election, which first and properly respects the Subjects or Per∣sons for whom Grace and Glory are prepared. For this respects the Preparation on∣ly of that Grace and Glory, as to the way and manner of their Communication. It is true, this Purpose or Counsel of Gods Will, is not called the Covenant of Grace, which is the expresse declared exemplification of it. The Covenant of Grace, I say, is only the Declaration of this Counsel of Gods VVill, accompanied with the Means and Powers of its Accomplishment, and the Prescription of the ways where∣by we are to be interested in it, and made partakers of the Benefits of it. But in the enquiry after the procuring Cause of the New Covenant, it is the first thing that ought to come under consideration For nothing can be the procuring Cause of the Co∣venant which is not so of this Spring and Fountain of it, of this Idea of it in the mind of God. But this is no where in the Scripture affirmed to be the effect of the Death or Mediation of Christ, and so to ascribe it, is to overthrow the whole freedom of Eternal Grace and Love. Neither can any thing that is absolutely Eter∣nal as is this Decree and Counsel of God, be the effect of, or be procured by any thing that is External and Temporal. And besides, it is expresly assigned unto absolute Love and Grace: see Ephes. 1. 4, 5, 6. with all those places where the Love of God is assigned as the sole cause of the Designation of Christ unto his Office, and the sending of him. 2. It may be considered with respect unto the Federal Transactions between the Father and Son, concerning the Accomplishment of this counsel of his Will. What these were, wherein they did consist, I have declared at large in my Exercitations. Neither do I call this the Covenant of Grace absolutely, nor is it so called in the Scripture. But it is that wherein it had its establishment, as unto all the ways, means and ends of its Accomplishment; and all things so disposed, as that it might be effectual unto the Glory of the Wisdom, Grace, Righteousness and Power of God. Wherefore the Covenant of Grace could not be procured by any means or cause, but that which was the cause of this Covenant of the Mediator, or of God the Father with the Son as undertaking the work of Mediation. And as this is no where ascribed unto the Death of Christ in the Scripture, so to assert it, is contra∣ry unto all spiritual Reason and understandings. Who can conceive that Christ by his Death, should procure the Agreement between God and him, that he should dye? 3. With respect unto the Declaration of it: this you may call Gods making or esta∣blishing of it with us, if you please, though making of the Covenant in the Scripture is applyed only unto its Execution or actual Application unto Persons. But this Declaration of the Grace of God, and the Provision in the Covenant of the Media∣tor for the making of it effectual unto his Glory, is most usually called the Covenant of Grace. And this is twofold. 1. In the way of a singular and absolute Promise, as it was first declared unto, and thereby established with Adam and afterwards with Abraham. This is the Decla∣ration of the Purpose of God, or the free Determination of his VVill as to his deal∣ing with sinners, on the supposition of the fall and the forfeiture of their first Co∣venant state. Hereof the Grace and VVill of God was the only Cause: Heb. 8. 8.
And the Death of Christ could not be the means of its procurement; for he himself and all that he was to do for us, was the substance of that Promise wherein this De∣claration of Gods Grace and Purpose was made, or of this Covenant of Grace which was introduced and established in the room of that which was broken and disanulled as unto the ends and benefits of a Covenant. The substance of the first Promise, wherein the whole Covenant of Grace was virtually comprized, directly respected and expressed the giving of him, for the Recovery of mankind from sin and mise∣ry by his Death. Gen. 3. 15. VVherefore if he, and all the benefits of his Media∣tion, his Death and all the effects of it, be contained in the Promise of the Covenant, that is, in the Covenant it self; then was not his Death the procuring Cause of that Covenant, nor do we owe it thereunto. 2. In the additional prescription of the way and means whereby it is the will of God that we shall enter into a Covenant state with him, or be interested in the be∣nefits of it. This being virtually comprized in the absolute Promise, is expressed in other places by the way of the Conditions required on our part. This is not the Covenant but the Constitution of the Terms on our part, whereon we are made par∣takers of it. Nor is the Constitution of these Terms an effect of the Death of Christ, or procured thereby. It is a meer effect of the Soveraign Wisdom and Grace of God. The things themselves as bestowed on us, communicated unto us, wrought in us by Grace, are all of them effects of the Death of Christ; but the Constitution of them to be the Terms and Conditions of the Covenant, is an Act of meer Soveraign Wisdom and Grace. God so loved the VVorld as to send his only Begotten Son to dye, not that Faith and Repentance might be the means of Salvation, but that all his E∣lect might believe, and all that believe might not perish, but have Life Everlasting. But yet it is granted that the Constitution of these Terms of the Covenant doth re∣spect the federal Transactions between the Father and the Son, wherein they were ordered to the Praise of the Glory of Gods Grace; and so although their Constituti∣on was not the Procurement of his Death, yet without respect unto it, it had not been. VVherefore the sole cause of making the New Covenant in any sense, was the same with that of giving Christ himself to be our Mediator, namely, the Pur∣pose, Counsel, Goodnesse, Grace and Love of God, as it is every where expressed in the Scripture. It may be therefore enquired what respect the Covenant of Grace hath unto the Death of Christ or what Influence it hath thereunto. I Answer, it hath a threefold respect thereunto. 1. In that it was confirmed, ratified, and made irrevocable thereby. This our A∣postle insists upon at large, Chap. 9. ver. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And he compares his Blood in his Death and sacrifice of himself, unto the sacrifices and their Blood whereby the old Covenant was confirmed, purified, dedicated or established, ver. 18, 19. Now these sacrifices did not procure that Covenant, or prevail with God to enter into it, but only ratified and confirmed it; and this was done in the New Covenant by the Blood of Christ, in the way that shall be afterwards declared. 2. He thereby underwent, and performed all that which in the Righteousnesse and VVisdome of God required that the Effects, Fruits, Benefits and Grace in∣tended, designed and prepared in the New Covenant, might be effectually ac∣complished and communicated unto sinners. Hence although he procured not the Covenant for us by his Death, yet he was in his Person, Mediation, Life, and Death, the only Cause and Means whereby the whole Grace of the Covenant is made effectual unto us. For, 3. All the Benefits of it were procured by him; that is, all the Grace, Mercy, Priviledges and Glory that God had prepared in the Counsel of his VVill, and proposed in the Covenant or promises of it, are purchased, merited, and procu∣red by his Death, and effectually communicated or applyed unto all the Covenant∣ers, by vertue thereof, with other of his Mediatory Acts. And this is much more an eminent procuring of the New Covenant, than what is pretended about the procurement of its Terms and Conditions. For if he should have procured no more but this, if we owe this only unto his Mediation, that God would thereon, and did grant and establish this Rule, Law, and Promise, that Whosoever believed should be saved, it was possible that no one should be saved thereby; yea if he did no more, considering our state and condition, it was impossible that any one should so be.
These things being premised we shall now briefly declare how or wherein he was the Surety of the Covenant, as he is here called. A Surety, Sponsor, Vas, Praes, Fidejussor, for us the Lord Christ was, by his vo∣luntary undertaking out of his rich Grace and Love, to do, answer, and perform all that is required on our Parts, that we may enjoy the Benefits of the Covenant, the Grace and Glory prepared, proposed and promised in it, in the way and manner determined on by Divine wisdom. And this may be reduced unto two Heads. 1. He undertook as the Surety of the Covenant to answer for all the sins of those who are to be, and are made Partakers of the Benefits of it. That is, to under∣go the punishment due unto their sins; to make Attonement for them, by offering himself a propitiatory Sacrifice for their Expiation, redeeming them by the price of his Blood from their state of misery and bondage under the Law and the Curse of it, Isa. 53, 4, 5, 6, 10. Matth. 20. 28. 1 Tim. 2. 6. 1 Cor. 6. 20. Rom. 3. 25, 26. Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. Rom. 8. 2, 3. 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20, 21. Gal. 3. 13. And this was abso∣lutely necessary, that the Grace and Glory prepared in the Covenant might be communicated unto us. VVithout this undertaking of his, and performance of it, the Righteousness and Faithfulness of God would not permit, that sinners, such as had Apostatized from him, despised his Authority, and rebelled against him, falling thereby under the sentence and curse of the Law, should again be received into his favour, and be made partakers of Grace and Glory. This therefore the Lord Christ took upon himself, as the Surety of the Covenant. 2. That those who were to be taken into this Covenant should receive Grace en∣abling them to comply with the Terms of it, fulfil its conditions, and yield the obedi∣ence which God required therein. For by the Ordination of God, he was to pro∣cure, and did merit and procure for them the Holy Spirit, and all the needful supplies of Grace to make them New Creatures, and enable them to yield obedience unto God from a New Principle of spiritual life, and that faithful unto the end. So was he the Surety of this better Covenant. Obs. The stability of the New Covenant depends on the Suretiship of Christ and is secured unto Believers thereby. The Introduction of a Surety in any case is to give Stability and Security. For it is never done but on a supposition of some weakness, or defect on one Account or other. If in any Contract, Bargain, or Agreement, a man be esteemed every way responsible both for Ability and Fidelity, there is no need of a Surety, nor is it required. But yet whereas there is a defect or weak∣ness amongst all men, mentioned by our Apostle in the next verses, namely, that they are all mortal and subject unto death, in which case neither Ability nor Fideli∣ty will avail any thing; men in all cases of Importance need Sureties. These give the utmost confirmation that affairs among men are capable of. So doth the Sure∣tiship of Christ on our behalf in this Covenant. For the evidencing whereof, we may consider, 1. The first Covenant as made with Adam, had no Surety. As unto that which in the New Covenant the Suretiship of Christ doth principally respect, it had no need of any. For there was no sin, Transgression or Rebellion against God to be satisfied for, so that it was absolutely incapable of a Surety unto that end. But as to the second part of it, or his undertaking for us, that through supplies of strength from him, we shall abide faithful in the Covenant, according to the Terms and Tenure of it; this had no inconsistency with that first state. As the Lord Christ upon his undertaking the work of Mediation, became an immediate Head unto the Angels that sinned not, whereby they received their establishment and security from any future defection; so might he have been such an Head unto, and such an undertaker for man in Innocency. No created nature was or could have been unchangeable in its condition and state, meerly on its root of Creation. As some of the Angels fell at first, forsaking their habitation, falling from the principle of obedience which had no other Root but in themselves; so the Rest of them, all of them, might afterwards have in like manner Apostatized and fallen from their own innate stability, had they not been gathered up into the new head of the Creation, the Son of God as Mediator; receiving a New Relation from thence, and establishment thereby. So it might have been with man in In∣nocency: But God in his infinite Soveraign wisdom saw it not meet that so it should be. Man shall be left to the Exercise of that Ability of living unto God, which
he had received in his Creation, and which was sufficient for that end: A Surety God gave him not. And therefore although he had all the Advantage which a sinless nature filled with holy Principles, Dispositions, and Inclinations, free from all viti∣ous habits, rebellious affections, inordinate imaginations, could afford unto him; yet he broke the Covenant, and forfeited all the benefits thereof. Whatever there was besides in that Covenant, of Grace, Power, Ability, and the highest obli∣gations unto Duty; yet all was lost for want of a Surety. And this abundantly testifies unto the Preheminence of Christ in all things. For whereas Adam with all the innumerable Advantages he had, that is, all helps necessary in himself, and no Opposition or Difficulty from himself to conflict withal, yet utterly brake the Covenant wherein he was Created and Placed; Believers who have little strength in themselves, and a powerful inbred opposition unto their stability, are yet secured in their station by the Interposition of the Lord Christ as their Surety. 2. When God made a Covenant with the People in the wilderness, to manifest that there could be no stability in it without respect unto a Surety, that it could not continue, no not for a day, he caused it to be dedicated or confirmed with the blood of Sacrifices. This the Apostle declares, and withal its Typicalness with respect unto the new Covenant and the confirmation of it with the blood of Christ, Chap 9. 18, 19, 20, 21. And afterwards, as we have declared, the high Priest in the Sacrifices that he offered, was the Typical Mediator and Surety of that Cove∣nant. And the end of this Appointment of God, was to manifest, that it was from the Blood of the true Sacrifice, namely, that of Jesus Christ, that the new Covenant was to receive its stability. And we need a Surety unto this pur∣pose, 1. Because in the state and condition of sin, we are not capable of immediate dealing or Covenanting with God. There can be no Covenanting between God and sinners, unless there be some one to stand forth in our name, to receive the Terms of God, and to undertake for us. So when God began to treat imme∣diately from Heaven with the people of old, they all jointly professed, that such was the Greatness and Glory of God, such the Terror of his Majesty, that it was im∣possible for them so to treat with him; and if he spake unto them any more, they should all dye and be consumed. VVherefore with one consent they desired that there might be one appointed between God and them, to transact all things and to un∣dertake for them as to their Obedience, which God well approved in them. Deut. 5. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Adam indeed in the state of innocency could treat immediately with God, as unto that Covenant wherein he was placed. For notwithstanding his infinite distance from God, yet God had made him for converse with himself, and did not despise the work of his own hands. But immediately upon the entrance of sin he was sensible of the losse of that Priviledge, whereon he both fled and hid himself from the Presence of God. And hence those who of Old thought they had seen God, concluded that they should dye, as being sensible of their incapacity to treat immediately with him. So when the Prophet cryed out that he was undone or cut off, because of the immediate Presence of God, his Eyes having seen the King the Lord of Hosts; Isa. 6. 5. He was not relieved from his Apprehensions, untill his mouth was touched with a coal from the Altar, a Type of the Mediation and Sacrifice of Christ. VVhilst we have any thing of sin remaining in us, we can have nothing to do with God immediately. Wherefore that there may be any Covenant between God and us, much more such an one as shall be or∣dered in all things and Sure, there must be one to stand before God in our stead, to receive the Terms of God, and declare them unto us, and to undertake for us that we shall stand unto them and make them good to the Glory of God. And in this sense was the New Covenant firstly made with Christ; not only as he undertook the work of Mediation, which he did upon the especial eternal compact which was be∣tween the Father and him; but also as he undertook for all the Elect to receive the Terms of the Covenant from God for them, in which sense the Promise in the first place was made unto the seed that is One, which is Christ, Gal. 3. 16. and to answer for them, that they should receive and stand to those Terms. For he said, surely they are my People, Children that will not lye, so he was their Saviour, Isaiah 63. 8. VVherefore it could not be upon the Account of Gods Holiness and glorious great∣ness, that there should be any New Covenant at all between God and sinners, without
the interposition of a Surety. Nor did it become the infinite VVisdom of God, af∣ter Man had broken and disanulled the Covenant made with him in innocency, to enter into a New Covenant with him in his fallen Condition, without an immediate undertaker, that it should be assuredly kept and the ends of it attained. If you have lent a man a thousand pounds upon his own security, when he owed nothing else, nor was indebted to any other; and he hath not only failed in his payment, but con∣tracted other debts innumerable, will you now lend him ten thousand pounds on the same security expecting to receive it again? Had God entred into never so many Covenants with men, without such a surety and undertaker, they would have been all broken and disanulled, as he well knew. He knew that we would deal very treacherously, and were rightly called Transgressors from the VVomb, Isaiah 48. 8. But so to Covenant with us, would no way have become the infinite VVisdom of God. VVherefore he laid help upon one that is mighty, he exalted one chosen out of the People, Psal. 89. 19. He committed this work unto Jesus Christ, and then said concerning us, now deliver them, for I have found a Ransom. 2. The changeableness of our Condition in this World, requires a Surety for us, to render the Covenant firm, stable and unalterable. So the Psalmist complaining of our frail and mutable Condition shews, that it is in Christ alone that we have all our establishment, Psal. 102. 25, 26, 27, 28. Of old thou hast laid the Foundations of the Earth, &c. That it is the Lord Christ the Son of God that in an especial manner is intended, I have shewed and proved at large on Chap. 1. 10. where this passage in the Psalm is applyed unto him. And the conclusion that the Psal∣mist makes from the consideration of his immutability, is this, the Children of thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before thee, ver. 28. With∣out an interest in him and his stability we are subject to Change, Alter, Decline, so as it is impossible the Covenant should be Sure unto us. The very Nature of the Principle whereby we live, and walk before God in this world, renders our Condition Alterable in it self. For we walk by Faith and not by Sight, 2 Cor. 5. 7. It is vision alone, or the immediate enjoyment of God which will enstate us in an Unalterable Condition. Whilst we walk by Faith, it is otherwise with us, and we depend wholly on our Surety for our security in the Covenant. 3. VVho is it among the whole society of Believers, that is not sensible of such actual dispositions unto change, yea such actual changes, as that it is not evident unto him, that his final stability depends on the undertaking of a Surety? No man can give an Account from himself whence it is, that he hath not already utterly bro∣ken Covenant with God. There is no one Corruption, No one Temptation, but doth Evidence a sufficiency in themselves to defeat us of our Covenant interest, if we stood upon our own bottoms. It is Faith alone with respect unto the Sureti∣ship of Christ, which discovers how we have been kept hitherto, and which gives us any comfortable prospect of our future Preservation. And the same is evident from the Consideration of all the Adversaries of our Covenant interest. Here we might stay a while to contemplate the glory of Divine wisdom and grace, in providing this Surety of the Covenant, and to adore the infinite Love and condescension of him, who undertook the discharge of this Office for us. But we must proceed, only observing 2. That the Lord Christs undertaking to be our Surety gives the highest Obligation unto all Duties of Obedience according to the Covenant. For he hath undertaken for us, that we shall yield unto God this Covenant Obedience, and said, sure∣ly they are Children that will not lye. He is no Believer who understands not some∣what of the Force and Power of this Obligation. VER. 23, 24, 25. . , Vulg. Lat. Et alij quidem plures facti sunt sacerdotes; And ma∣ny others truly were made Priests, or, and others truly were made many Priests.
The Rhemists reduce it to this sense, and the other indeed were made Priests being ma∣ny; rendring , by alij, instead of illi, which corrupts the sense, and takes off from the immediate respect unto the Priests of the Order of Aaron intended by the A∣postle. Et illi quidem plures sunt facti sacerdotes. And they truly were many Priests. So the Syr. ; and they were many Priests, omitting the note of Asseveration, , Truely. , were made: not only the event and matter of fact, but Gods Insti∣tution is also intended. . Vulg. Lat. Idcirco quòd morte prohiberentur permanere, Rhem. because that by death they were prohibited to continue. Ours, Because they were not suffered to continue by Reason of Death; quoniam per mortem non sine bantur permanere; which is the true meaning of the words. Syr. Because they died and were not left to continue. , hic autem, at iste; But this Man, ; quòd mane∣at in aeternum; quoniam ipse in aeternum maneat, propterea quòd in aeternum manet; all to the same purpose. Syr.  Because he standeth (or continu∣eth) for ever. , sempiternum, perpetuum habet sacerdotium. Syriack,  His Priesthood passeth not away: , is, that may not be transgressed, and so not altered, as , a Sacred Law which none ought to transgresse, which cannot in any thing be dispensed withal: And by con∣sequence only, it is that which passeth not away. That Priesthood, (,) which altereth not, which cannot be changed. , Syr. ; and he can quicken, or enliven, or give Eternal Life; , Syr.  for ever, respecting duration of time, in perpetuum, Vul. Lat. Others, perfectè, perfectly, compleatly; Ours, to the ut∣most. ; accedentes per semetipsum ad Deum. Rhemists, he is able to save for ever going by himself unto God; strangely darkening the sense. For going seems to respect his own going to God, which the Vulg. accedentes, will not bear, eos qui per ipsum accedunt ad Deum. Those who by him draw nigh to God. ; semper vivens ad interpellandum pro nobis, always living to make in∣tercession for us, instead of for them, , Syr.  Cau∣sing to ascend, or offering prayers for them. VER. 23, 24, 25. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of Death. But this Man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable Priesthood. Wherefore he is able to save them also to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make Intercession for them. THe Apostle in these words proceedeth unto his last Argument, from the consi∣deration of the Priesthood of Christ, as Typed and represented by that of Melchisedec. And his intention is still to prove the excellency of it above the Le∣vitical, and of his Person above theirs. And in particular he makes it manifest that the bringing in of this better Hope, did perfect or consummate all things which the Law could not do. That he hath in these verses a respect unto Melchisedec as a Type of Christ and what we are taught thereby, is evident from the matter treated of in them. He had observed that as to the Description given of him in the Scripture, that he abid∣eth a Priest continually, ver. 3. and that it is witnessed of him, that he lives, seeing it is no where mentioned that he died, ver. 8. and this is the last consideration of him which he improveth unto his purpose, and it is that which gives vertue and effica∣cy unto all the other that he had before insisted on Set this aside, and all the other, whether Advantages or Excellencies, which he had discoursed of, would be as in∣effectual unto the ends aymed at, as the Law it self. For what profit could it be unto the Church, to have so excellent and glorious a Priest for a season, and then im∣mediately
to be deprived of him, by the Expiration of his Office. Moreover as what the Apostle affirms here of Christ hath respect unto what he had before observed concerning Melchisedec, so what he affirms of the Levitical Priests depends on what he had before declared concerning them, namely, that they were all mortal dying men and no more, and who actually died in their Suc∣cessive Generations, ver. 8. The words therefore have three things in them in General. 1. The state and Condition of the Levitical Priests by reason of their mortality, ver. 23. This he observes because he is not declaring the Dignity of Christ and his Priesthood absolutely, but with respect unto them; whose state therefore was the Antithesis in the Comparison. 2. The state and Condition of the Priesthood of Christ on the account of his glo∣rious Immortality, ver. 24. 3. The blessed effects and consequents of the Priesthood of Christ, in as much by vertue of his Immortality, he was a Priest for ever, v. 25. In the first (ver. 23.) there is (1.) The Introduction of his Assertion and Observa∣tion, , and they truly. (2.) What he affirms of those Priests, they were many. (3.) Whence that came to pass; namely, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of death: which is not alledged only as the cause and Reason of their being many, but also as a proof of their weakness and Infirmity. In the Introduction of his Assertion, there is a note of connexion and another of Asseveration. The first is the copulative Conjunction; And, . A Process unto a new Argu∣ment . to the same purpose with those foregoing is intended hereby. The former Design is continued and a new confirmation of it is added. For he resolved to omit nothing that was of moment, and unto his purpose. 2dly. There is a vehemency in his Assertion or a note of Asseveration; and they . truly. He had used the same note before in the same manner, ver. 21. where we omit the Emphasis of it without cause. And in other places the same Translators render this Particle by, truly, as they do here, 1 Joh. 1. 3. But he doth not so much assert a thing by it that was dubious, as positively declare that which was well known, and could no way be gainsaid by them with whom he had to do. And an Argument pressed ex concessis is forceible. This is a known Truth. 2. That which he affirms of them is, that they were many Priests; or there . were many made Priests; or they who were made Priests were many. The sense is the same. By the Appointment of God himself, there were many made Priests, or executed the office of the Priesthood. It is of the High Priests only, Aaron and his Successors of whom he speaks: And it is with respect unto their Succession one to another, that he affirms they were many. This both the reason of it which he subjoynes, and what he afterwards adds concerning the Priest∣hood of Christ, wherein there was no Succession, do evidently declare. For there neither was nor could be by the Law any more than one at a time. Perhaps in the disorder and confusion of that Church there might be more that were so called and esteemed, as were Annas and Caiphas: but that confusion he takes no notice of, but attends unto what alwayes was or ought to have been, according to the Law. By Succession these High Priests were many. For from Aaron the first of them unto Phineas, who was destroyed with the Temple, there were inclusively four-score and three High Priests. Of these, thirteen lived under the Tabernacle, before the building of the Temple by Solomon; Eighteen under the first Temple unto its Destruction by the Babylonians; and all the rest lived under the second Temple, which yet stood no longer than the first. And the Multiplication of High Priests un∣der the second Temple, the Jews look upon as a Punishment and token of Gods displeasure: for because of the sins of a Nation, their Rulers are many, and fre∣quently changed. Whatever Advantages there may be in an orderly Succession, yet is it abso∣lutely an Evidence of Imperfection. And by the Appointment of this Order God signified an Imperfection and Mutability in that Church state. Succession indeed was a Relief against death; but it was but a Relief, and so supposed a want and weak∣ness.
Under the Gospel it is not so, as we shall see afterwards. Observe, that God will not fail to provide Instruments for his work that he hath to accomplish. If ma∣ny Priests be needful, many the Church shall have. 3 The Reason of this Multiplication of Priests, was because they were not suf∣fered . to continue by reason of Death. They were mortal men subject unto death, and they died. Death suffered them not to continue in the Execution of their Of∣fice. It forbad them so to do, in the name of the great Sovereign Lord of Life and Death. And hereof an Instance was given in Aaron the first of them. God to shew the nature of this Priesthood unto the people, and to manifest that the everlasting Priest was not yet come, commanded Aaron to dye in the sight of all the Congregation, Num. 20. 25, 26, 27, 28. So did they all afterwards, as other men, dye in their several Generations. They were all by death forbidden to continue. Death laid an injunction on them one after another, from proceeding any farther in the Administration of their Office. It is not surely without some especial design that the Apostle thus expresseth their dying; They were by death prohibited to con∣tinue. Wherefore he shews hereby, (1.) The way whereby an end was put unto the personal Administration, and that was by death. (2.) That there was an Imperfection in the Administration of that Office, which was so frequently in∣terrupted. (3.) That they were seized upon by death whether they would or no, when it may be they would have earnestly desired to continue, and the people also would have rejoyced in it. Death came on them, neither desired nor expected, with his Prohibition. (4.) That when death came and seized on them, it kept them under its power, so that they could never more attend unto their Office. But it was otherwise with the Priest of the better Covenant, as we shall see immediately. Observe, 1. There is such a necessity of the continual Administration of the Sacerdotal Of∣fice in behalf of the Church, that the interruption of it by the death of the Priests was an Argument of the weakness of that Priesthood. The High Priest is the Sponsor and Mediator of the Covenant. Those of old were so Typically and by way of Representation. VVherefore all Covenant Transactions between God and the Church must be through him. He is to offer up all Sacrifices, and therein represent all our prayers. And it is evident from thence what a Ruin it would be unto the Church to be without an High Priest one moment. Who would venture a suprizal unto his own soul in such a condition? Could any man enjoy a moments peace, if he supposed that in his extremity the High Priest might dye? This now is provided against, as we shall see in the next verse. VER. 24. But this man, because he continueth ever, hath an unchangeable Priesthood. IN opposition unto what was observed in the Levitical Priests, the contrary is here affirmed of the Lord Christ. And the Design of the Apostle is still the same, namely, to evince by all sorts of Instances his Preeminence as a Priest above them as such also. 1. The Person spoken of is expressed by . The Exceptive Conjunction,  but, . answereth unto  before used, and introduceth the other member of the Antithe∣sis. ; Hic, ille, iste; He of whom we speak, namely, Jesus, the Surety of the New Testament. We render it, this man, not improperly; he was the Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Nor doth the calling of him this man, exclude his Divine nature; for he was truly a man, though God and man in one Person. And the things here ascribed unto him, were wrought in and by the humane nature, though he that wrought them were God also: But He; or this man, who was represented by Melchisedec, of whom we speak. 2. It is affirmed of this Person, that he hath an unchangeable Priesthood; the Ground and Reason whereof is assigned, namely, because he continueth ever, which must be first considered. The sole Reason here insisted on by the Apostle, why the Levitical Priests were . many, is because they were forbidden by death to continue. It is sufficient there∣fore on the contrary, to prove the perpetuity of the Priesthood of Christ, that
he abideth for ever. For he doth not absolutely hereby prove the perpetuity of the Priesthood, but his perpetual uninterrupted Administration of it. . This was the Faith of the Jews concerning the Messiah, and his office. We have heard, say they, out of the Law, , Joh. 12. 34. That Christ abideth for ever; whereon they could not understand what he told them about his being lifted up by Death. And so the word  signifieth to abide, to continue in any state or condition, Joh. 21. 22, 23. And this was that which prin∣cipally he was Typed in by Melchisedec, concerning whom there is no Record, as to the Beginning of Days or End of Life, but as unto the Scripture Descripti∣on of him he is said to abide a Priest for ever. It may be said in opposition hereunto, that the Lord Christ dyed also, and that no less truely and really than did Aaron or any Priest of his Order. Wherefore it will not hence follow that he had any more an uninterrupted Priesthood than they had. Some say the Apostle here considers the Priesthood of Christ only after his Resur∣rection and Ascension into Heaven, after which he dyes no more, death hath no more power over him. And if we will believe the Socinians, then he first began to be a Priest. This Figment I have fully confuted elsewhere. And there is no ground in the Context, on which we may conjecture that the Apostle intends the Admini∣stration of his Priesthood in Heaven only, although he intend that also. For he speaks of his Priesthood as typed by that of Melchisedec, which as we have proved before, respected the whole of his Office. I say therefore that although Christ dyed, yet he was not forbid by death to abide in his Office as they were. He died as a Priest, they died from being Priests. He died as a Priest, because he was also to be a Sacrifice. But he abode and continued not only vested with his Office, but in the execution of it in the state of death. Through the indissolubleness of his Person, his soul and body still subsisting in the Person of the Son of God, he was a capable subject of his Office. And his be∣ing in the state of the dead belonged unto the Administration of his Office, no less than his Death it self. So that from the first moment of his being a Priest he abode so alwaies without interruption or intermission. This is the meaning of , He in his own Person abideth. Nor doth the Apostle say, that he did not dye, but only that he abideth alwaies. 3. It followeth from hence, that he hath an unchangeable Priesthood. A Priest∣hood . subject to no change or alteration: that cannot pass away. But , is sacerdotium successivum, per successionem ab uno alteri traditum. Such a Priest∣hood as which when one hath attained, it abideth not with him but he delivereth over unto another, as Aaron did his unto Eleazar his Son, or it falls unto another by some Right or Law of Succession: A Priesthood that goes from hand to hand.  is a Priesthood that doth not passe from one unto another. And this the Apostle seems directly to intend, as is evident from the Antithesis. The Priests after the Order of Aaron were many, and that by reason of death. Wherefore it was necessary that their Priesthood should pass from one to another by Succession. So that when one received it, he that went before him ceased to be a Priest. And so it was, either the Predecessors were taken off by death, or on any other just occasion as it was in the case of Abiathar, who was put from the Priests Office by Solomon, 1 King. 2. 27. How beit our Apostle mentions their going off by death only; be∣cause that was the ordinary way, and which was provided for in the Law. With the Lord Christ it was otherwise. He received his Priesthood from none. Al∣though he had sundry Types, yet he had no Predecessor. And he hath none to suc∣ceed him, nor can have any added or joyned unto him in his Office. The whole office of the Priesthood of the Covenant, and the entire administration of it are con∣fined unto his Person. There are no more that follow him than went before him. The Expositors of the Roman Church are greatly perplexed in the reconciling of this Passage of the Apostle unto the present Priesthood of their Church. And they may well be so, seeing they are undoubtedly irreconcileable. Some of them say that Peter succeeded unto Christ in his Priesthood, as Eleazar did unto Aaron; So Ribera: some of them deny that he hath any Successor properly so called. Suc∣cessorem non habet, nec it a quisquam Catholicus loquitur, si bene & circumspectè loqui
velit; saith Estius. But it is openly evident that some of them are not so circum∣spect as Estius would have them, but do plainly affirm that Peter was Christs Succes∣sor. A Lapide indeed affirms that Peter did not succeed unto Christ as Eleazar did unto Aaron, because Eleazar had the Priesthood in the same degree and dig∣nity with Aaron, and so had not Peter with Christ. But yet that he had the same Priesthood with him, a Priesthood of the same kind, he doth not deny. That which they generally fix upon is, that their Priests have not another Priest∣hood or offer another Sacrifice, but are Partakers of his Priesthood and minister under him, and so are not his Successors but his Vicars: which I think is the worst com∣posure of this difficulty they could have thought upon. For, 1. This is directly contrary unto the words and design of the Apostle. For the Reason he assigns why the Priesthood of Christ doth not passe from him unto any other, is because he abides himself for ever to discharge the Office of it. Now this excludes all subordination and conjunction; all Vicars as well as Successors, unless we shall suppose that although he doth thus abide, yet is he one way or other dis∣abled to discharge his Office. 2. The Successors of Aaron had no more another Priesthood but what he had, than it is pretended that the Roman Priests have no other Priesthood but what Christ had. Nor did they offer any other Sacrifice than what he offered, as these Priests pre∣tend to offer the same Sacrifice that Christ did. So that still the case is the same be∣tween Aaron and his Successors, and Christ and his Substitutes. 3. They say that Christ may have Substitutes in his Office though he abide a Priest still, and although the office still continue the same unchangeable. So God in the Government of the world makes use of Judges and Magistrates, yet is him∣self the Supreme Rector of all. But this Pretence is vain also. For they do not substitute their Priests unto him, in that which he continueth to do himself, but in that which he doth not, which he did indeed and as a Priest ought to do, but now ceaseth to do for ever in his own Person. For the principal Act of the Sacerdotal Office of Christ consisted in his Oblation, or his offering himself a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour unto God. This he did once, and ceaseth for ever from doing so any more. But these Priests are assigned to offer him in Sacrifice every day, as partakers of the same Priesthood with him, which is indeed not to be his Substi∣tutes but his Successors; and to take his Office out of his hand, as if he were dead and could henceforth discharge it no more. For they do not appoint Priests to in∣tercede in his room, because they grant he continueth himself so to do; but to of∣fer Sacrifice in his stead, because he doth so no more. Wherefore if that be an Act of Priesthood, and of their Priesthood, as is pretended, it is unavoidable that his Priesthood is passed from him unto them. Now this is a blasphemous Imagina∣tion and directly contrary both unto the words of the Apostle and the whole De∣sign of his Argument. Nay it would lay the advantage on the other side. For the Priests of the Order of Aaron had that Priviledge, that none could take their Of∣fice upon them, nor officiate in it whilst they were alive. But although Christ abideth for ever, yet according unto the sense of these men and their practice thereon, he stands in need of others to officiate for him, and that in the principal part of his Duty and Office. For Offer himself in Sacrifice unto God he neither now doth, nor can, seeing henceforth he dieth no more. This is the work of the Mass-Priests alone, who must therefore be honoured as Christs Successors, or be abhor∣red as his Murderers, for the Sacrifice of him must be by blood and death. The Argument of the Apostle as it is exclusive of this Imagination, so it is cogent unto his purpose. For so he proceedeth. That Priesthood which chang∣eth not, but is alwaies vested in the same Person and in him alone, is more excel∣lent than that which was subject to change continually from one hand unto another. For that Transmission of it from one unto another was an effect of weakness and Imperfection. And the Jews grant that the frequency of their change under the second Temple was a Token of Gods displeasure. But thus it was with the Priesthood of Christ which never changeth, and that of Aaron which was alwaies in a transient Succession. And the Reasons he gives of this contrary state of these two Priesthoods do greatly enforce the Argument. For the first Priesthood was so Successive, because the Priests themselves were obnoxious unto death the sum and issue of all weaknesses and infirmities. But as to the Lord Christ, his Priest∣hood
is perpetual and unchangeable, because he abideth personally for ever, being made a Priest according to the Power of an endless Life, which is the sum of all Perfections, that our nature is capable of. And we may observe, 1. The perpetuity of the Priesthood of Christ depends on his own perpetual Life. He did not undertake any Office for the Church to lay it aside whilst he lives, until the whole Design and work of it be accomplished. And therefore he tells his Dis∣ciples, that because he liveth they shall live also, John 14. 19. For whilst he lives, he will take care of them. But this must be spoken unto on the next verse. 2. The perpetuity of the Priesthood of Christ, as unchangeably exercised in his own Person, is a principal part of the Glory of that Office. His discharge of this Office for the Church in his own Person throughout all Generations is the glory of it. (1.) Hereon depends the Churches preservation and stability. There is neither a ceasing nor any the least intermission of that Care and Providence, of such interposition with God on its behalf which are required thereunto. Our High Priest is continu∣ally ready to appear and put in for us on all occasions. And his abiding for ever, manifests the continuance of the same Care and Love for us, that he ever had. The same Love wherewith as our High Priest he laid down his Life for us, doth still continue in him. And every one may with the same confidence go unto him with all their concerns, as poor diseased and distempered Persons went unto him when he was upon Earth; when he never shewed greater displeasure than unto those who forbad any to come unto him whatever their pretences were. (2.) Hereon depends the Union and Communion of the Church with it self in all successive Generations. For whereas he who is their Head and High Priest, in whom they all center as unto their Union and Communion, and who hath all their Graces and Duties in his hand to present them unto God, they have a Relation unto each other and a concernment in one another. VVe that are alive in this generation have Commu∣nion with all those that died in the Faith before us, as shall be declared, if God will, on Chap. 12. ver. 22, 23, 24. And they were concerned in us, as we are also in the generations that are to come. For all the Prayers of the Church from first to last are lodged in the hand of the same High Priest who abides for ever. And he returns the prayers of one Generation unto another. VVe enjoy the fruits of the Prayers, Obedience, and Blood of those that went before us; and if we are faithful in our generation, serving the VVill of God, those shall enjoy the fruits of ours, who shall come after us. Our joynt interest in this our abiding Priest gives a line of Communication unto all Believers in all Generations. And, (3.) the Consolation of the Church also depends hereon. Do we meet with Troubles, Trials, Difficul∣ties, Temptations and Distresses; hath not the Church done so in former Ages? What do we think of those days wherein Prisons, Tortures, Swords and Flames were the Portion of the Church all the world over? But did any of them miscar∣ry? Was any one true Believer lost for ever? And did not the whole Church prove victorious in the End? Did not Satan rage and the World gnash their Teeth to see themselves conquered and their power broken, by the Faith, Patience, and Suf∣fering of them whom they hated and despised? And was it from their own wis∣dom and courage that they were so preserved? Did they overcome meerly by their own Blood? or were delivered by their own Power? No, but all their preservati∣on and successe, their deliverance and eternal Salvation depended meerly on the care and power of their merciful High Priest. It was through his Blood, the Blood of the Lamb, or the efficacy of his Sacrifice, that they overcame their Adversaries, Revel. 12. 11. By the same blood were their Robes washed and made white, Chap. 7. 14. From thence had they their Righteousness in all their Sufferings. And by him had the Church its triumphant issue out of all its Trials. Now is he not the same that he ever was, vested with the same Office, and hath he not the same Qua∣lifications of Love, Compassion, Care and Power for the discharge of it, as he al∣ways had? whence then can any just cause of despondence in any Trials or Tempta∣tions arise? We have the same High Priest to take care of us, to assist and help us, as they had, who were all of them finally victorious. (4.) This gives perpetual efficacy unto his sacrifices, &c. 3. The Addition of sacrificing Priests as Vicars of, or Substitutes unto Christ in the discharge of his Office, destroys his Priesthood as to the principal eminency of it above that of the Levitical Priesthood.
VER. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make Intercession for them. IN this verse the Apostle brings his whole preceding Mysterious discourse unto an Issue, in the Application of it unto the Faith and Comfort of the Church. It was not his Design meerly to open Mysterious Truths in the notion of them; Nor only to prove the Glory and preeminence of the Gospel Church state, above that of the same Church, under Mosaical Institutions, on the Account of the Priesthood of Christ: But his principal Design was, to demonstrate the Spiritual and Eternal Ad∣vantages of all true Believers by these things. The sum of what he intends, he proposeth in this verse, and afterwards enlargeth on unto the end of the Chapter. What Believers ought to seek in, and what they may expect from this blessed glo∣rious Priesthood, is that which he now undertakes to declare. In like manner on all occasions he manifests that the end of God in the whole Mystery of his Grace by Jesus Christ, and Institutions of the Gospel, is the Salvation of his Elect unto the praise of the Glory of his Grace. There are in the words, (1.) The Illative Conjunction or note of Inference; Wherefore. (2.) An Ascription of Power unto this High Priest; He is able. (3.) The end of that Power, or the effect of it; it is to save, which is farther de∣scribed, 1. By the extent of it, it is unto the uttermost. (2.) The especial Object of it; Those that come to God by him. 4. The Reasons of the whole; which are, (1.) His perpetual life; (2.) His perpetual work. He ever liveth to make Intercession for them. The note of Infe∣rence , is frequently made use of by our Apostle in this Argumentative Dis∣course, as Chap. 2. 17. 3. 1. 8. 3. 9 18. 11. 19. and in this place, ideo, quaprop∣ter. . Nor is it any where else in the New Testament used for the Introduction of a Conclusion or Inference from Premises in a way of Argument. And the causality which here it includes, may respect the whole foregoing Discourse; as asserting that which necessarily follows thereon. Or it may have respect only unto the en∣suing clause in this verse; As if the Apostle had only intended in particular, that the Lord Christ is able to save to the uttermost, because he ever abideth. But he ra∣ther seems to make an Inference from the whole foregoing Discourse, and the close of the verse is onely an addition of the way and manner, how the Lord Christ ac∣complisheth what is ascribed unto him by vertue of his Office. Being such an High Priest as we have evidenced to be, made by an Oath and abiding for ever, he is able to save. Considerations of the Person and Offices of Christ ought to be improved unto the strengthening of the Faith, and encrease of the Consolation of the Church. So they are here by the Apostle. After the great and ample Declaration that he hath made of the Excellency of his Priestly Office with respect unto his Person, he applies all that he hath spoken unto the incouragement of the Faith and Hope of them that en∣deavour to go to God by him. And all those who explode such considerations and such improvements of them, are no otherwise to be looked on but as persons ut∣terly ignorant both of Christ and Faith in him. 2. That which is inferred to be in this Priest, is Power and Ability. . He is able; He can. This is the second time the Apostle ascribeth Power or Ability . unto this Priest; see Chap. 2. ver. 18. and the Exposition thereof. And it is, not an Ability of nature, but of Office that is intended. An Ability of nature in Christ he had proved sufficiently in the first Chapter of the Epistle, and that accompa∣nied with Supreme Power or Authority over all; But whereas, as our Mediator, he hath undertaken such Offices for us, he is, as such, able to do no more, than he is so by vertue of them or in the discharge of those Offices. If therefore there be any thing needfull for us, which although it may be supposed within the compasse of the Divine Power of the Son of God, is yet not to be effected in a way of Office, that as our Mediator he, is not able for. Hence doth our Apostle presse his Ability not
absolutely, but as the High Priest of the Church: As if a man who is mighty in Wealth, Riches, and Power be also made a Judge. It is one thing what he can do by his Might and Power, another what he is able for, and can do as a Judge. And he who hath to deal with him as a Judge, is to consider only what he is able for in the Discharge of that Office. And he doth this partly to evince his preeminence a∣bove the High Priests of the Law. For by reason of their personal Infirmities and the limited nature of their Office, they were really unable to effect many things which the Church stood in need of from those that discharged that Office, suppo∣sing them the only way of our approach unto God. Were they never so ready, Wil∣ling, diligent and watchful, yet they were not Able to do all that was necessary for the Church. Being themselves sinful Men, made Priests by the Law of a carnal Commandment and subject unto Death, they had no Ability to effect in the Church what is expected from the Priestly Office. But the Lord Christ our High Priest being free from all these Imperfections, as he was a Priest, He is Able. But prin∣cipaliy he insists upon it to encourage and confirm the Faith of the Church, in him with respect unto this Office. Wherefore having by many Demonstrations assu∣red us of his Love and Compassion, Chap. 2. and Chap. 5, there remains nothing but to satisfie us also of his Power and Ability. And this he hath now evinced from the nature and dignity of his Office as vested in his Person. This is the Ability here in∣tended, not an absolute Divine Power inherent in the Person of Christ, but a Mo∣ral Power; a Jus, a Right, and what can be effected in the just discharge of this Office. And hereon, The Consideration of the Office Power of Christ is of great use unto the Faith of the Church. To this end we may observe, 1. That the Foundation of all the Benefits which are received by Christ, that is, of the Spiritual and Eternal Salvation of the Church, is laid in his condescension to undertake the Office of a Mediator between God and Man. And as this was the greatest effect of Divine Wisdom and Grace, so it is the first Cause, the Root and Spring of all Spiritual Blessings unto us. This the whole Scripture beareth Testi∣mony unto, Heb. 10. 7. 1 John 3. 16. This is the fundamental Article of Faith Evangelical. And the want of laying this Foundation aright, as it occasioneth ma∣ny to Apostatize from the Gospel unto a natural Religion, so it weakeneth and dis∣ordereth the Faith of many Believers. But this is the first Ground of all Friendship between God and Man. 2. Having undertaken that Office, all the Actings of it for us and towards us or towards God in our behalf, are circumscribed and limited by that Office. We have no Ground of Faith to expect any thing from him or by him, but what belongs un∣to the Office that he hath undertaken. Neither are we in our Addresses unto him, and expectations from him, to consider him absolutely as God, the Eternal Son of God only, but as the Mediator between God and Man. VVe can look for no more from a King but what he can justly do as a King, nor any other Person in Office; no more are we to look for from Christ himself. 3. This Office of Christ in general as the Mediator and Sponsor of the New Co∣venant, is distinguished into three especial Offices, of a King, a Prophet, and a Priest. Whatever therefore we receive from Christ, or by him, we do it as he acts in that threefold capacity, or in one of those Offices, a King, a Priest, or a Pro∣phet. VVhatever he hath done for us, or continueth to do, whatever he doth over us, for us, or towards us, he doth it in and under one of these capacities. For unto them may all his Office Relation unto us be reduced. And the kindness of all those other Relations wherein he stands unto us, as of a Shepherd, the Bishop of our Souls, of an Husband, of a Brother, a Friend, he puts forth and exerciseth in the Acts and Actings of these Offices. 4. All these Offices, whether vested jointly in any one other Person, or severally and distinctly in several Persons, as they were under the Old Testament, could ne∣ver extend their Acts and Effects unto all the occasions and necessities of the Church. The business of our Apostle, in this chapter, is to prove, that the Office of the Priesthood as vested in Aaron and his Successors, made nothing perfect, did not consummate the Church state, nor could effect its Salvation. The Kingly Office as it was Typically managed by David and others, was remote from answering that Rule and Safety which the Church stood in need of. Neither did nor could
any one Prophet, no nor yet all the Prophets together, reveal and declare the whole Counsel of God. But, 5. These Offices as they were in Christ did perfectly answer, and yet do, all that belongs to the Redemption, Sanctification, Protection and Salvation of the Church. And this they do on two Accounts, 1. Because they were Committed unto him in a more full, ample and unlimited manner, than either they were, or could be unto others, on Purpose that they might answer all the ends of Gods Grace towards the Church. So as he was made a King; not this or that degree or enlargement of Power was committed unto him, but all Power in Heaven and in Earth, over all the Creation of God, in all things Spiritual, Temporal and Eternal. See our Description and Delineation of this Power, on Chap. 1. ver. 2, 3. As a Prophet he did not receive this or that particu∣lar Revelation from God, but all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge were laid up in him, and he knew the whole mind and Counsel of God, as coming forth from his Divine Bosom. And as unto his Sacerdotal Office, we are now engaged in an enquiry into its especial nature, as differing from, and exalted above, what∣ever was committed unto any of the Sons of men, under that Name. 2. The principal Reason of the All-sufficiency of the Office-Power, and Ability of Christ, is taken from his own Person, which alone was capable of a Trust of such a Power, and able to execute it unto all the Ends of it. He alone who was God and Man in one Person, was capable of being such a King, Priest, and Prophet, as was able to save the Church unto the uttermost. Wherefore in the consideration of this Office-Power of Christ wherein all our Salvation doth depend, we have two things to attend unto. First, his Person who bears these Offices, and who alone was fit and able so to do; and secondly, the especial Nature of the Office as committed unto him. On these grounds he was Able to do infinitely more as a Priest, than all the Priests of the Order of Aaron could do. So the Apostle expresseth it in the next words. 3. He is able to save, ; even to save, to save also; not for this or that . particular end, but absolutely, even to save. The general sense of this word is li∣mited and determined in the use and Application of it throughout the Scripture, not any temporal Deliverances, but that which is supernatural, spiritual and eternal is intended thereby. And, (1.) The Notion of the word includeth in it a supposition of some Evil or Danger that we are delivered from. This is sin with its consequents of Misery, in the Curse of the Law and the VVrath to come: VVherefore it is said of Christ that he saves his People from their sins, Math. 1. 21. from the Curse, Gal. 3. 13. and from the Wrath to Come, 1 Thess. 1. 10. In these things all that is or can be Evil un∣to our nature here, or unto eternity, are included. (2.) The bringing of us into an estate of present Grace and Right unto future Blessedness, with the enjoyment of it in its appointed season, is intended in it. For although this be not included in the first notion of the VVord, yet it belongs unto the Nature of the thing intended. This Salvation, called therefore great and E∣ternal Salvation, doth not meerly respect the evil we are delivered from, but the contrary Good also in the present favour and future enjoyment of God. And con∣cerning this Salvation two things are to be considered. 1. That there is Power and Ability required unto this work. He is able to save. It was no easie thing to take away sin, to subdue Satan, to fulfil the Law, to make Peace with God, to procure Pardon, to purchase Grace and Glory, with all o∣ther things great and glorious, that belong unto this Salvation. And it is the great concernment of Faith well to fix this principle; that he who hath undertaken this work is able to accomplish it, and that by the means he hath designed to use, and the way wherein he will proceed. We are apt to pass this over without any enquiry into it, and to take it for granted that God is able to do whatever he pleaseth: But it is not of the absolute Power of God whereof we speak, but of the Power of God or of Christ put forth in such a peculiar way. And the want of Faith herein, is the first and most proper part of Unbelief. VVherefore as God ingageth his Omnipotency or All-sufficiency as the Foundation of all his Covenant Actings to∣wards us, Gen. 17. 1. So he often pleadeth the same Power to assure us of the Ac∣complishment of his Promises, Isa. 40. 28, 29. And it is expresly asserted as
the principal ground of Faith, Rom. 4. 21. Chap. 11. 23. 1 Cor. 10. 10. 13. Ephes. 3. 20. 2. Tim. 1. 12. Jude 24. and often in this Epistle. 2. It is here supposed that the discharge of Christs Priestly Office, is the Way de∣signed to save us by, or to effect this great work of Salvation. No other way or means is appointed of God unto this End. Here we must look for it, or go with∣out it. Wherefore the enquiry is necessary, whether in the discharge of this Of∣fice, and within the bounds and limits of it, he be able to save us with this Salva∣tion. For indeed many are like those sons of Belial, who said of Saul when God had anointed him King, how shall this man save us, and despised him, 1 Sam. 10. 21. They understand not how Christ is able to save them by his Priesthood, and there∣fore under various Pretences they trust to themselves and despise him. All false Religion is but a choice of other things for men to place their trust in with a neglect of Christ. And all Superstition grows on the same Root, in all effects or instances of it, be they great or small. VVherefore I say we are to consider whether this Office and the Acts of it, be suited and meet for the effecting all things that belong to this Salvation. For if we find them not so, we cannot believe that he is a Priest able to save us. But they evidence themselves to be otherwise, unless our minds are darkned by the Power of Unbelief, as we shall see in the particulars after∣wards insisted on by our Apostle. And we are here taught. That, It is good to secure this first Ground of Evangelical Faith, that the Lord Christ as vested with his Offices and in the exercise of them, is able to save us. Salvation is that which all sinners, who have fallen under any Convictions, do seek after. And it is from God they look for it; he alone they know can save them; and unless he do so, they cannot be saved. And that he can do so they seem for a while to make no Question, although they greatly doubt whether he will or no. Here under these general apprehensions of the Power of God, they cannot long abide, but must proceed to enquire into the Way whereby he will save them, if every they be saved. And this the whole Scripture testifieth to be no otherwise but by Jesus Christ. For there is no salvation in any other; neither is there any other Name under Heaven given among men whereby they must be saved; Act. 4. 12. When their thoughts are thus limited unto Christ alone, their next enquiry is, how shall this man save us? And hereon are they directed unto his Offices, especially his Priesthood whereby he undertakes to deliver them from the Guilt of their sins, and to bring them into favour with God. Is it not therefore highly incumbent on them, to satisfie themselves herein that Christ is able to save them in the exercise of this Office? For if he be not, there is no salvation to be obtained. And when men are come thus far, as that they will not Question in general but that the Lord Christ in the discharge of his Sacer∣dotal Office, is able to save sinners in general, yet unbelief will keep them off from acquiescing in this Power of his as so limited, for their own salvation. As Naaman had thoughts in general that Elisha could cure men of their Leprosie, yet he would not believe that he could cure them in the way and by the means he pre∣scribed. He thought he would have taken another course with him more suited unto his apprehensions, as a means for his Recovery. Hereon he turns away in a Rage, which if he had not by good advice been recalled from, he had lived and died under the Plague of his Leprosie, 2 King. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. When Per∣sons are reduced to look for salvation only by Christ, and do apprehend in general that he can save sinners, yet oft-times when they come to inquire into the way and manner of it by the Exercise of his Priestly Office, they cannot close with it. Away they turn again into themselves, from which if they are not re∣covered, they must dye in their sins. Unless therefore we do well and distinctly fix this Foundation of Faith, that Christ as a Priest is able to save us, or is able to do so in the discharge of his Sacerdotal Office, we shall never make one firm step in our Progress. To this end we must consider, That the Lord Christas Mediator, and in the Discharge of his Office, is the wise∣dom of God and the Power of God. So saith our Apostle; Christ crucified is to them that believe the Power of God and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. His death is both an effect of divine Power and Wisdom, and thereby do they exert their effi∣cacy unto the utmost, for the attaining of the end designed in it. Wherefore we are to look unto this Priesthood of Christ, as that which divine wisdom hath appoint∣ed as the only way and means whereby we may be saved. And if there be any
defect therein, if Christ in the discharge of it, be not able to save us notwithstand∣ing the Difficulties which unto us seem insuperable, it must be charged on divine wisdom, as that which was wanting in the contrivance of a due means unto its end. And so it is done by the world. For the Apostle testifieth that this wisdom of God is looked on and esteemed by men as meer foolishness. The way proposed in it to save sinners by the Cross of Christ, is accounted as folly by all unbelievers, what∣ever else they pretend as the Reason of their unbelief. But this Faith is to fix upon; namely, that although we yet see not how it may be done, nor have the experience of it in our own souls, yet this being the way which infinite wisdom hath fixed on, there is no defect in it, but Christ by it is able to save us. For the very first notion which we have of wisdom as Divine and Infinite, is, that we are to acquiesce in its Contrivances and Determinations, though we cannot comprehend the Reasons or wayes of them. Besides, the Lord Christ is herein also the Power of God. God in him and by him put forth his omnipotent Power for the accomplishing of the ef∣fect and end aimed at. Wherefore although we are not to look for our salvation from the Power of God, absolutely considered; yet are we to look for it from the same omnipotency, as acting it self in and by Jesus Christ. This is the way where∣by infinite wisdom hath chosen to act omnipotent Power. And into them is Faith herein to be resolved. 3. He is able to save also . The word may have a double sense; ; for it may respect the Perfection of the work, or its Duration; and so it is variously rendred; to the utmost, that is, compleatly; or evermore, that is, alwaies or for ever. So the Syriack Translation carries it. Take the word in the first sense, and the meaning is; that he will not effect or work out this or that part of our salvation; do one thing or another that belongs unto it, and leave what remains unto our selves or others; but he is our Rock and his work is perfect. Whatever belongs unto our entire compleat Salvation he is able to effect it. The general notion of the most that are called Christians, lies directly against this Truth. In the latter sense two things may be intended. (1.) That after an entrance is made into this work, and men begin to be made partakers of deliverance thereby, there may great oppositions be made against it in Temptations, Trials, Sins and Death, before it be brought unto Perfection. But our Lord Christ, as our Faithful High Priest, fainteth not in his work, but is able to carry us through all these difficulties, and will do so until it be finished for ever in heaven. (2.) That this Salvation is durable, perpetual, eternal, Isa. 45. 17. Salvare in aeternum; to pro∣cure salutem aeternam. But favores sunt ampliandi, and there is nothing hinders but that we may take the words in such a comprehensive sense, asto include the meaning of both these Interpretations. He is able to save compleately as to all Parts, fully as to all causes, and for ever in Duration. And we may observe, Whatever hindrances and difficulties lye in the way of the salvation of Believers, whatever oppositions do rise against it, the Lord Christ is able by vertue of his Sacer∣dotal Office, and in the exercise of it, to carry the work through them all unto eternal perfection. In the Assertion of the Ability of Christ in this matter, there is a Supposition of a work whereunto great Power and efficacy is required; and whereas it is em∣phatically affirmed, that he is able to save unto the uttermost, it is supposed that great Oppositions and difficulties do lye in the way of its accomplishment. But these things are commonly spoken unto by our Practical Divines, and I shall not therefore in∣sist upon them. The whole is farther declared by instancing in those who are to be saved or made Partakers of this Salvation. He is able to save to the uttermost, but yet all are not to be saved by him; Yea, they are but few that are so. Of the most it may be said, They will not come unto him that they may have life. Wherefore those whom he is thus able to save and doth save accordingly, are all those and only those, who come unto God by him. To Come to God hath a double sense in the Scripture, for it is sometimes expres∣sive . of Faith, sometimes of VVorship. (1.) To come unto God is to believe. Faith or believing is a coming to God. So Christ calling us unto Faith in him, cal∣leth us to come unto him, Matth. 11. 28. And Unbelief is a refusal to come to
him, You will not come to me that you may have Life. Faith in God through him, is coming to the Father by him, Joh. 14. 6. so to come to God by Christ, is through him to believe in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21. 2. Our Accesse unto God in his Worship, is our coming unto him. So is it most frequently expressed in the old Testament, Drawing nigh unto God. And the expression is taken from the Approach that was made unto the Tabernacle in and with all holy services. Worship is an Approximation unto God, Psal. 73. 28. . So our Apostle calls those who worshipped God in the Ordinan∣ces of the Law; , Heb. 10. 1. The Comers, the worshippers; not those that come to the Worship, but those who by that Worship come to God. In an∣swer hereunto, our Evangelical Worship is , an Accesse, an Approxima∣tion, a drawing nigh or coming to God, Ephes. 1. 18. Heb. 10. 22. The latter sense is principally here intended; for the discourse of the Apostle is concerning the slate of the Church under the New Testament, with the Advantage of it above that of Old, by its Relation unto the Priesthood of Christ. They came of old to God with their worship by the High Priest of the Law; But those High Priests could not save them in any sense; But the High Priest of the New Te∣stament can save to the utmost all Gospel worshippers, all that come to God by him. But the former sense of the word is also included and supposed herein. They that come unto God by Christ, are such, as believing in him, do give up themselves in holy Obedience to worship God in and by him. So is the way expressed of this coming unto God, ; That is by him as an . High Priest; as it is at large explained by the Apostle, Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. Now to come unto God by Jesus Christ in all holy worship, so as thereon to be interested in his saving Power as the High Priest of the Church, is so to come, (1.) In Obedience unto his Authority as to the way and manner of it; (2.) With Affi∣ance in his Mediation, as to the Acceptance of it; (3.) VVith Faith in his Person as the Foundation of it. 1. It is to come in Obedience unto his Authority, and that on a double account. (1.) Of the way of coming. It is not by legal Institutions, it is not by our own In∣ventions, it is only by his Appointment. Matth. 28. 20. To come to God any other way, gives us no interest in the care or saving Power of Christ, John 15. 7, 8. (2.) Of that especial respect which we have in our Souls and Consciences un∣to his Soveraign Rule over us. 2. With Affiance in his Mediation. And therein Faith hath respect unto two things, (1.) The Sacrifice he hath offered, the Attonement and Reconciliation he hath made for us, whereon our whole liberty of Accesse unto God doth depend, Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. (2.) To his Intercession whereby he procures actual Acceptance for our Persons and our Duties, Heb. 4. 16. 1 John 2. 2. 3. The Foundation of the whole is Faith in his Person as vested with his holy Office, and in the discharge of it. It is so to believe in him, as to believe that he is able to save to the utmost all that come unto God by him. This is the ground whereon in our holy worship we assemble in his name, Matth. 18. 20. And make all our Supplications unto God in his name, John 16. 26. That is, by an exercise of Faith and Trust in him, that by and through him we shall be accepted with God. And we may hence observe, 1. The Salvation of all sincere Gospel worshippers is secured by the Actings of the Lord Christ in the Discharge of his Priestly Office. 2. Attendance unto the Service, the worship of God in the Gospel, is required to in∣terest us in the saving Care and Power of our High Priest. Men deceive themselves who look to be saved by him, but take no care to come to God in Holy Worship by him: Nor is it an easie or common thing so to do. All men pretend unto Di∣vine worship, some one way, some another, and in words they interpose the name of Christ therein; but really to come to God by him, is a matter of another im∣port. Two things are indispensibly required thereunto. (1.) That the Princi∣ple of saving Faith be antecedent unto it; (2.) That the exercise of Faith be conco∣mitant with it. Unless we are true Believers our worship will not be accepted. And unless we are in the exercise of Faith on God through Christ in the performance
of it, it gives no glory to him, it brings no Advantage unto our selves. 3. Those who endeavour to come unto God any other way, but by Christ; as, by Saints and Angels, may do well to consider, whether they have any such Office in Heaven as by vertue whereof they are able to save them to the uttermost. That this is done by those of the Roman Church, cannot with any modesty be denied, yea, it is avowed by them. For when they are charged with the wickedness of their Doctrine and Practice in this matter, evacuating the Mediation of Christ, they reply that they admit of no Mediators of Reconciliation with God, but only of intercession. Be it so, Ability to save to the utmost is here ascribed unto our High Priest upon the Account of his inter∣cession. A respect unto his Oblation whereby he made Reconciliation is included, but it is the efficacy of his Intercession that is expresly regarded. For being re∣conciled by his Death, we are saved by his Life, Rom. 5. 10. He therefore alone is the Mediator of Intercession, who is able by vertue of his Office to save us to the utmost, through that intercession of his. Those whom they choose to go to God by, are able to save them, or they are not. If they are not, is it not the greatest folly and madness imaginable, whilst we seek after Salvation, to set him aside on any occasion, in any one instance, who can save us to the utmost, and betake our selves unto them who cannot save us at all? If they are able to save us in any sense, it is either by vertue of some Office, and Office-Power that they are invested withal in Heaven, (as Ministers are in the Discharge of their Office said to save them that hear them, 1 Tim. 4. 16. That is, ministerially and in∣strumentally) or without any such Office. If they can do so without any Office, they can do more than Jesus Christ can do; for he is able to do it by vertue of his Office only. And if it might have been otherwise, what need was there that Christ should undertake and discharge this Office of the Priesthood, and that our Apostle should so labour to prove the Excellency of this his Office, only to satisfie us that he is able to save them that come to God by him? If they do it by vertue of any Of∣fice committed to them, let it be named what it is. Are they Priests in Heaven for ever after the Order of Melchisedec? Dishonour enough is done unto Christ, by making any Sacrificing Priests on the Earth, as they do in their Masse; but to make interceding Priests in Heaven also, is the highest reproach unto him. Or are they the Kings or Prophets of the Church: or under what Name or Title is this Power intrusted with them? Such imaginations are most forreign from true Christian Re∣ligion. An Holy painful Minister on the Earth can do much more towards the sav∣ing of the souls of Men, than any Saint or Angel in Heaven. For the work of doing it ministerially by the Dispensation of the Word is committed unto them in the way of Office; but Office in the Church beareth none in Heaven, but only Je∣sus Christ. And what is the Reason, why men should so readily close with other means, o∣ther Mediators of Intercession to go to God by them? For when they pray to Saints, although they should only pray unto them to intercede for them, as some of them pretend, (however openly and manifestly against their expresse and avowed Pra∣ctice) yet do they go to God by them. For to speak of any Religious Prayer, and yet not to look on it in general as a going or coming to God, is a fond and sense∣less Imagination. Wherefore whenever they pray to Saints, as most of them do more than to Jesus Christ, their design is to go to God by them. But what is it that should enduce them hereunto? Our Lord Christ hath told us, that he is the way; and that no man cometh unto the Father but by him, John 14. 6. What rea∣son can any man give why he should not believe him, but although he hath said that no man cometh unto the Father but by him; should yet attempt to go another way? Have others more Power in these things than he, so as it is adviseable on that Ac∣count to make our Application unto them? Where is it said of any Saints or An∣gels, or all of them together, that they are able to save to the utmost all that come to God by them? Or where is any one word spoken of their Power or Interest in Hea∣ven unto that Purpose? But it will be said, that we may be relieved and saved, wee stand not in need of Power only, but of Love, Pity and Compassion: And although the Saints have less Ability than Christ, yet they may have more of Love and Compas∣sion for us. For some of them it may be were our Kindred, or Progenitors, or Coun∣try-men, or such as may have an especial kindness for us, especially the Blessed Virgin,
and other female Saints are by their natural constitution as well as their Grace, (who would not think so?) mightily enclined unto pity and compassion. And indeed they are marvellous things, which some of them tell us concerning the Blessed Virgin in this case, and her condescension in the pursuit of her Love and Pity. But yet this Imagination is the highest pitch of Folly and Ingratitude. Certainly nothing can more stir up the Indignation of God, than to have any Creatures in Heaven or Earth, or all together equalled in Love and Compassion with Jesus Christ. He that doth not know that there is an unparellel'd Eminency of these in him, who is not in some measure instructed in the cause and effect of them, knows no more of the Gospel than a Jew. There is more Love, Pity and Compassion in Christ Jesus towards every poor sinner, that comes unto God by him, than all the Saints in Hea∣ven are able to comprehend. And if Kindred or Alliance may be of consideration in this matter, he is more nearly related unto us, than Father or Mother, or wife or children, or all together, we being not only bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, but so joyned to him, as to be one spirit with him. But it will yet be said, that it is on none of these considerations that men choose to go unto God by other Mediators of Intercession, only whereas the Lord Christ is so great and so gloriously exalted at the right hand of the Majesty on high, they dare not alwaies presumptuously intrude into his glorious presence: and therefore they make use of the Saints, who are more cognate unto us, and not cloathed with such terrible Majesty. And in going unto God by the friends of Christ, they please him as well as if they went immediately by himself. Answ. (1) He is an Un∣believer, unto whom the Glorious Exaltation of the Lord Christ is a Discourage∣ment from going unto him, or by him unto God on the Throne of Grace. For all the Glory, Power and Majesty of Christ in Heaven is proposed unto Believers, to encourage them to come unto him, and to put their Trust in him. But this is the talk of men who, whatever Devotion they pretend unto, indeed know nothing re∣ally, of what it is to pray, to believe, to trust in Christ, or by him to draw near with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, see Heb. 4. 14, 15, 16. (2.) All the Glory, Power and Majesty of Jesus Christ as exalted in Heaven, as our Mediator, are but means effectually to exert and exercise his Love and Compassion towards us; He lives for ever to make Intercession for us. But we proceed. The close of this verse gives us the special Reason and Confirmation of all the efficacy that the Apostle hath assigned unto the Priesthood of Christ. ; alwaies living to make Intercession for them. And three things must be considered in these words. 1 The state and Condition of Christ as an High Priest. He liveth alwayes, or for ever. 2. What he doth as an High Priest in that state and Condition: He maketh Inter∣cession for us. 3. The Connexion of these things, their mutual regard, or the Relation of the work of Christ unto his state and condition; the one is the end of the other; He lives for ever to make intercession for us. 1. As to his state and condition, He lives for ever. He is alwayes living. The . Lord Christ in his Divine Person hath a threesold life in Heaven. The one he lives in himself: the other for himself: and the last for us. 1. The Eternal life of God in his Divine Nature; This he liveth in himself. As the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given unto the son to have life in himself, Joh. 5 26. He hath given it him by eternal Generation, in a communication unto him of all the divine Properties. And he that hath life in himself, a life indepen∣dent on any other, he is the living one, the living God. No creature can have life in himself. For in God we live, move, and have our being. He is hereby Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the Begining and end of all, Revel. 1. 11. because he is , the living one, ver. 18. And this Life of Christ is the foundation of the efficacy of all his Mediatory Actings, namely, that he was in his own divine Person the Living God, Act. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 2. 8. 1 Joh. 3. 16. But this is not the immediate cause of his Mediatory Effects, nor is it here intended. 2. There is a Life which he liveth for himself; namely, a Life of unconceivable Glory in his Humane Nature. He lead a mortal life in this world, a life obnoxious unto misery and death, and died accordingly. This life is now changed into that
of immortal eternal Glory. Hence forth he dyeth no more, death hath no more Power over him. And not only so, but this Life of his is unto him the cause of, and is attend∣ed with, all that ineffable Glory which he now enjoyes in Heaven. This Life he lives for himself, it is his reward, the Glory and Honour that he is crowned withal. All the endowments, all the enjoyments and the whole eternal exaltation of the Humane Nature in the Person of Christ belong unto this Life of Glory. And the glorious exaltation of that individual humane nature, which the son of God as∣sumed, far above all Principalities and Powers and every name that is named in this world, or the world to come, is the principal part of the Design of Infinite wisdom, in the work of the new Creation. But neither is this the Life here in∣tended. 3. The Lord Christ lives a Mediatory Life in Heaven, a Life for us. So saith our Apostle, he was made a Priest after the Power of an endless Life; whereof we have treated before. He lives as King, Prophet and Priest of the Church. So he describes himself, Revel. 1. 18. I am he that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of Hell and Death. As he died for us, so he liveth for us, and is entrusted with all Power over the Churches ad∣versaries, for its good. As he died for us, so he liveth for us in Heaven; and therefore tells us, that because he liveth we shall live also, Joh. 14. 19. Now this life differeth not essentially from that life of Glory in the Humane Nature which he liv∣eth for himself in Heaven: Only it denoteth one especial end of it, and that only for a season. The Lord Christ will have the life in himself, the divine life unto all Eternity; and so also will be the Life of Glory in the Humane Nature. But he shall cease to live this Mediatory Life for us, when the work of his Mediation is accomplished, 1 Cor. 15. 28. But he shall lead this life alwaies for us, until the whole work committed unto him be accomplished, and shall lead it as a Life of Glory in himself unto Eternity. Obs. It is a matter of strong consolation unto the Church, that Christ lives in Heaven for us. It is a spring of unspeakable Joy unto all true Believers, that he lives a Life of Immortality and Glory in and for himself in Heaven. Who can call to mind all the miseries which he underwent in this world, all the reproach and scorn that was cast upon him by his enemies of all sorts, all the wrath that the whole world is yet filled withal against him, but is refreshed, rejoyced, transported, with a spiritual view by Faith of all that Majesty and Glory, which he is now in the Eternal Posses∣sion of? so was it with Stephen; Act. 7. 56. And therefore in all the Appearan∣ces and Representations which he hath made of himself since his Ascension into Heaven, he hath manifested his present Glory, Act. 26. 13. Revel. 1. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And the due consideration hereof cannot but be a matter of unspeakable Refreshment unto all that love him in sincerity. But herein lyeth the Life of the Churches Consolation, that he continues to live a Mediatory Life in Heaven for us also. It is not I fear so considered, nor so im∣proved as it ought to be. That Christ dyed for us, all who own the Gospel profess in words: though some so explain their Faith or rather their Infidelity as to deny its proper use, and to evacuate its proper ends. That so he lived for us here in this world, so as that his Life was some way or other unto our Advantage, at least thus far that he could not have died if he had not lived before, all men will grant, even those by whom the principal end of this Life, namely, to fulfil the Law for us, is peremptorily denyed. But that Christ now lives a life of Glory in Hea∣ven, that most men think is for himself alone. But the Text speaks to the contra∣ry. He lives for ever to make Intercession for us. Neither is this the only end of his present Mediatory Life in Heaven, though this only be here expressed. Should I undertake to shew the ends of the present Mediatory Life of Christ for the Church, it would be too great and long a decursion from the Text. However the whole of the work of this Life of his may be reduced into these three heads. 1. His immediate Actings towards the Church it self, which respects his Prophe∣tical Office. 2. His Actings for the Church in the world, by Vertue and Power of his Kingly Office. 3. His Actings with God the Father in their behalf, in the dischage of his sacer∣dotal Office.
1. The first consisteth in his sending and giving the Holy Ghost unto the Church. He lives for ever to send the Holy Spirit unto his Disciples. Without this con∣stant effect of the present Mediatory Life of Christ, the Being of the Church would fail, it could not subsist one moment. For hereon depends; (1.) All saving Light to understand the word of God, or spiritual things in a spiritual manner, wherein he continueth the exercise of his Prophetical Office. (2.) All Habitual Grace whereby the souls of the Elect are quickned and regenerated. (3) All supplyes of actual Grace, which the whole Church hath from him every moment, and without which it could yield no Obedience unto God. (4.) All spiritual Gifts, the sole foundation and means of the Churches edification, and without which it can have no real benefit by any Gospel Ordinances or Administrations. (5.) All Comfort and all Consolation, which in all variety of occurrences the Church doth stand in need of; which things I have elsewhere spoken unto at large. 2. His Actings by vertue of his Mediatory Life for the Church in the world, are also various, wherein he exerciseth his Kingly Power; that Power which is given unto him as he is Head over all things unto the Church. Ephes. 1. 22. Hence is the whole preservation of the Church in this world, by glorious effects of divine wis∣dom and power. Hence doth proceed the present controuls that are given unto its Adversaries, and hence will proceed their future Destruction, for he must raign until all his Enemies be made his footstool. In the exercise of this Life, wherein the Keys of Hell and Death are committed unto him, doth he put forth his Mighty po∣wer over the World, Sathan, Death, the Grave, and Hell, for the Eternal securi∣ty and Salvation of the Church. Did he not live this Life for us in Heaven, nei∣ther the whole Church nor any one member of it could be preserved one moment from utter ruine. But hereby are all their adversaries continually disappointed. 3. By vertue of this Life he Acts with God on the behalf of the Church. And . the only way whereby he doth this, in the Discharge of his Priestly Office, is ex∣pressed here in the Text, He lives for ever to make intercession for them. Now this expression containing the whole of what the Lord Christ as the High Priest of the Church doth now with God for them, and whereon the certainty of our Salva∣doth depend, it must with some diligence be enquired into. Expositors, especially those of the Roman Church, enquire with many Disputes into the External form of the Intercession of Christ, as namely, whether it be oral and vocal, or no. And they produce many Testimonies out of the Antients upon the one side and the other. And great weight is laid by some on the Difference and Determination of it. For whereas Ribera grants that the Dispute is more about words and the manner of Expression, than the matter it self; Tena affirms that what he says is most false. And it is evident that the Testimonies produced by them∣selves out of the Antients, as Chrysostome, Theophylact, Ambrose, Austin, and so to Ruperus and Thomas are expresly contradictory to one another. Now although our principal concernment lyeth in the internal form and efficacy of the Intercession of our High Priest, rather than in the outward manner of it: yet so far as that also is revealed, we may enquire into it. And we shall find that the true stating of it tends unto the encouragement and establishment of our Faith. And the things ensuing may be observed unto this purpose. 1. The Socinian Figment about the Nature of the Intercession of Christ is of no consideration. For by a strange violence offered unto the nature of things, and the signification of words, they contend that this Intercession is nothing but the Po∣wer of Christ to communicate actually all good things, the whole effect of his Mediati∣on unto Believers. That Christ hath such a Power is no way questioned: But that this Power in the exercise of it is his Intercession, is a most fond Imagination. That which casts them on this absurd conception of things, is their hatred of the Priestly Office of Christ as exercised towards God on our behalf. But I have elsewhere sufficiently disputed against this fiction. 2. The Intercession of Christ was under the Old Testament Typed out three ways. (1.) By the Living fire that was continually on the Altar. Herewith were all sacrifices to be kindled and burned, which thence were called  Firings. But this principally Typified his Prayers, when he offered himself unto God through the Eternal Spirit, which he did with strong cryes and Supplications or Intercessions, Heb. 5. 7. Hereby, and the Actings of the Eternal Spirit therein, he kindled and
fired in himself a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour unto God, Eph. 5. 2. (2.) By the  or dayly sacrifice of morning and evening for the whole People. See the Institution of it, Exod. 29. ver. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. For although that sacri∣fice had in it the nature of an expiatory Oblation, because it was by blood; yet the principal end of it was to make continual Application of the great solemn annual expiation unto the Consciences of the People. (3.) By the Incense that was burn∣ed in the Sanctuary. And this was of two sorts, (1.) That wherewith the High Priest entred once a year into the most holy place on the Day of Expiation. For he might not enter in, yea he was to dye if he did, unless in his entrance he filled the place and covered the Ark and Mercy-Seat with a cloud of Incense, Levit. 16. 12, 13. Which Incense was to be fired with burning coals from the Altar of burnt∣offerings. So did our High Priest: He filled Heaven at his entrance with the sweet savour of his Intercession, kindled with the Coals of that Eternal Fire, where∣with he offered himself unto God. (2.) The Incense that was burned every day in the Sanctuary by the Priests in their courses. This represented Prayer, Psal. 141. 2. and was always accompanied with it, Luke 1. 9, 10. This also was a Type of the continual efficacy of the Intercession of Christ, Revel 8. 4. But this was the most solemn representation of it. In that anniversary Sacrifice, whereof we must treat afterwards at large, there was Attonement made for all the Sins and Transgressions of the People; Levit. 16. 21. And it was consummated by car∣rying some of the Blood as a representation of it into the most holy place, sprinkling it before the Ark of the Covenant and the Mercy-Seat. This was done but once in the year. To keep this in Remembrance and to make Application of the Benefits of it unto the Consciences of the Worshippers, the dayly sacrifice was appointed: So doth the intercession of Christ make continual Application of his great sacrifice and Attonement, whence it derives its efficacy. And as the Fire on the Altar kindled all the renewed sacrifices, which were to be repeated and multiplyed because of their weakness and imperfection; so doth the Intercession of Christ make effectual the one perfect sacrifice which he offered once for all in the varions applications of it unto the Consciences of Believers, Heb. 10. 2. 3. The actual Intercession of Christ in Heaven, as the second Act of his sacerdotal Office, is a fundamental Article of our Faith, and a principal Foundation of the Churches consolation. So is it asserted to be, 1 John 2. 1, 2. And it is expressed by our Apostle, as that whereby the Death of Christ is made effectual unto us, Rom. 8. 3, 4. For it comprizeth the whole care, and all the Actings of Christ as our High Priest with God, in the behalf of the Church. This therefore is the imme∣diate spring of all Gracious communications unto us. For hereby doth he act his own Care, Love, and Compassion; and from thence do we receive all Mercy, all Supplies of Grace and Consolation, needful unto our Duties, Temptations and Trials. Hereon depends all our encouragement to make our Application unto God, to come with boldness of Faith unto the Throne of Grace, Chap. 4. 15, 16. Chap. 10. 21, 22. Wherefore whatever Apprehensions we may attain of the manner of it, the thing it self is the center of our Faith, Hope, and Consolation. 4. It is no way unworthy or unbecoming the humane nature of Christ in its glorious Exaltation to pray unto God. It was in and by the humane Nature that the Lord Christ exercised and executed all the Duties of his Offices whilst he was on Earth. And he continueth to discharge what remains of them in the same Nature still. And however that Nature be glorified, it is the same essentially that it was, when he was in this world. To ascribe another kind of Nature unto him, under pretence of a more divine Glory, is to deny his Being; and to substitute a fancy of our own in his Room. So then the Humane Nature of Christ however exalted and glorify∣ed, is humane Nature still, subsisting in dependance on God and subjection unto him. Hence God gives him new Revelations now in his glorified condition, Revel. 1. 1. With respect hereunto he acted of old as the Angel of the Covenant with ex∣presse Prayers for the Church, Zech. 1. 12, 13. So the Command given him to intercede by the way of Petition, Request or Prayer, Psal. 2. 8. Ask of me; respects his state of Exaltation at the Right hand of God, when he was declared to be the Son of God with Power by the Resurrection from the dead, v. 7, 8. And the Incense which he offereth with the Prayers of the Saints, Rev. 8. 3, 4. is no other but his own Intercession, whereby their Prayers are made acceptable unto God.
5. This Praying of Christ at present is no other but such as may become him who sits down at the Right hand of the Majesty on High There must therefore needs be a great difference as to the outward manner between his present Intercession in Hea∣ven and his Praying whilst he was on the Earth, especially at some seasons. For being encompassed here with Temptations and Difficulties he cast himself at the foot of God with strong cryes, tears and supplications, Chap. 5. 7. This would not be∣come his present glorious state, nor is he liable or exposed unto any of the causes or occasions of that kind of treating with God. And yet at an another time whilst he was in this world, he gave us the best estimate and Representation of his present In∣tercession that we are able to comprehend. And this was in his Prayer recorded, John 17th. For therein his confidence in God, his Union in and with him, the De∣claration of his Will and Desires, are all expressed in such a manner, as to give us the best understanding of his present Intercession. For a created nature can rise no higher to expresse an Interest in God, with an Oneness of mind and Will, than is therein declared. And as the Prayers with cryes and tears, when he offered him∣self unto God, were peculiarly Typed by the Fire on the Altar; so was this so∣lemn Prayer represented by that cloud of Incense wherewith the High Priest cover∣ed the Ark and the Mercy-seat at his entrance into the most holy place. In the ver∣tue of this holy cloud of incense did he enter the Holy places not made with hands. Or we may apprehend its Relation unto the Types in this Order. His Prayer, John 17th. was the preparation of the sweet Spices whereof the Incense was made and compounded, Exod. 30. 34. His Sufferings that ensued thereon were as the break∣ing and bruising of those Spices wherein all his Graces had their most fervent ex∣ercise, as Spices yield their strongest savour under their bruising. At his entrance into the Holy place this Incense was fired with Coals from the Altar; that is, the efficacy of his Oblation wherein he had offered himself unto God, through the Eter∣nal Spirit, rendred his Prayer as Incense covering the Ark and Mercy-seat, that is procuring the fruits of the Attonment made before God. 6. It must be granted that there is no need of the use of Words in the immediate Presence of God. God needs not our words whilst we are here on Earth, as it were absent from him. For he is present with us, and all things are open and naked be∣fore him. But we need the use of them for many reasons, which I have elsewhere declared. But in the glorious presence of God, when we shall behold him as the Lord Christ doth in the most eminent manner Face to Face, it cannot be under∣stood, what need or use we can have of words to express our selves unto God, in Prayers or Praises. And the souls of men in their separate state and condition, can have no use of Voice or VVords; yet are they said to cry and pray with a loud voice, because they do so virtually and effectually, Rev. 6. 9, 10. However I will not determine what outward Transactions are necessary unto the glory of God in this matter before the Angels and Saints that are about his Throne. For there is yet a Church state in Heaven wherein we have Communion, Chap. 12. 22, 23, 24. What solemn outward and as it were visible Transactions of worship are required thereunto, we know not. And, it may be, the Representation of Gods Throne, and his worship, Revel. 4, 5. wherein the Lamb in the midst of the Throne hath the principal part, may not belong only unto what is done in the Church here be∣low. And somewhat yet there is, which shall cease, and not be any more after the Day of Judgment, 1 Cor. 15. 26, 28. 7. It must be granted that the vertue, efficacy and Prevalency of the Intercession of the Lord Christ depends upon and flows from his Oblation and Sacrifice. This we are plainly taught from the Types of it of Old. For the Incense and carrying of Blood into the Holy place after the Expiatory Sacrifice, the great Type of his Oblation of himself, did both of them receive their efficacy, and had respect unto the Sa∣crifice offered without. Besides, it is expresly said, that the Lord Christ by the one Offering of himself obtained for us eternal Redemption, and for ever perfected them that are sanctified. Wherefore nothing remains for his Intercession, but the Appli∣cation of the fruits of his Oblation unto all them for whom he offered himself in sa∣crifice, according as their conditions and occasions do require. Wherefore, 8. The safest Conception and Apprehension that we can have of the Intercession of Christ as to the manner of it, is his continual Appearance for us in the Presence of God by vertue of his Office as the High Priest over the house of God, representing the efficacy
of his Oblation, accompanied with tender Care, Love and Desires, for the welfare, supply, deliverance and Salvation of the Church. Three things therefore concurre hereunto. (1.) The Presentation of his Person before the Throne of God on our behalf, chap. 9. 24. This renders it sacerdotal. His Appearance in Person for us is required thereunto. (2.) The Representation of his Death, Oblation and Sacri∣fice for us, which gives Power, Life and Efficacy unto his Intercession. Thence he appears in the midst of the Throne as a Lamb that had been slain, Revel. 5. 8. Both these are required to make his Intercession Sacerdotal. But (3.) both these do not render it Prayer or Intercession. For Intercession is Prayer, 1 Tim. 2. 1. Rom. 8. 26. Wherefore there is in it moreover, a putting up, a requesting, and Offer∣ing unto God, of his desires and will for the Church, attended with Care, Love, and Compassion, Zech. 1. 12. Thus far then may we proceed. (1.) It is a part of his Sacerdotal Office; He intercedes for us as the High Priest over the House of God. (2.) It is the first and principal way whereby he Acts and exerciseth his Love, compassion and care towards the Church. (3.) That he hath respect therein unto every Individual Believer, and all their especial occasions; if any man sin we have an Advocate. (4.) That there is in his intercession, an effectual signification of his will and desire unto his Father; For it hath the nature of Prayer in it, and by it he expresseth his De∣pendance upon God. (5.) That it respects the Application of all the Fruits, Effects and Benefits of his whole Mediation unto the Church. For this is the formal na∣ture of it, that it is the way and means appointed of God in the holy dispensation of himself and his Grace unto mankind, whereby the continual Application of all the Benefits of the Death of Christ, and all effects of the Promises of the Covenant, shall be communicated unto us, unto his Praise and Glory. (6) The efficacy of this intercession as it is Sacerdotal depends wholly on the antecedent Oblation and sa∣crifice of himself, which is therefore as it were represented unto God therein. This is evident from the nature and order of the Typical institutions whereby it was prefigured, and whereunto by our Apostle it is accommodated. But what belongs unto the manner of the Transactions of these things in Heaven I know not. The third thing observed was the connexion of the two things mentioned, or their Relation, one unto another; namely, the perpetual life of Christ and his in∣tercession. He lives for ever to make intercession. His intercession is the end of his Mediatory Life; not absolutely, nor only, but principally. He lives to Rule his Church, he lives to subdue his Enemies, for he must raign until they are all made his footstool; He lives to give the Holy Spirit in all his blessed effects unto Believers. But because all these things proceed originally by an emanation of Power and Grace from God, and are given out into the hand of Christ upon his intercession, that may well be esteemed the principal end of his Mediatory Life. So he speaks expresly concerning that great fruit and effect of this Life of him, in sending of the Spirit, I will pray the Father, I will intercede with him for it, and he shall send you ano∣ther Comforter, John 14. 16. And the Power which he exerts in the subduing and destruction of the Enemies of his Kingdom, is expresly promised unto him upon his Intercession for it, Psal 2. 8, 9 For this intercession of Christ is the great Ordinance of God, for the exercise of his Power towards, and the Communication of his grace unto the Church unto his Praise and Glory. So doth our High Priest live to make intercession for us. Many things we may from hence observe. 1. So great and glorious is the work of saving Believers unto the utmost, that it is ne∣cessary that the Lord Christ should lead a Mediatory Life in Heaven, for the perfecting and accomplishment of it. He lives for ever to make intercession for us. It is generally acknowledged that sinners could not be saved without the Death of Christ; but that Believers could not be saved without the life of Christ following it, is not so much considered. See Rom. 5. 10. Chap. 8. 34, 35, &c. It is (it may be) thought by some, that when he had declared the name of God and revealed the whole counsel of his Will, when he had given us the great example of Love and Holiness in this life, when he had fulfilled all Righteousness, redeemed us by his blood, and made At∣tonement for our sins by the Oblation of himself, confirming his Truth and Ac∣ceptation with God in all these things by his Resurrection from the dead, wherein he was declared to be the Son of God with Power, that he might have now left us to deal for our selves, and to build our eternal safety on the Foundation that he had
laid. But, alas! when all this was done, if he had only ascended into his own glory, to enjoy his Majesty, Honour and Dominion, without continuing his Life and Office in our behalf, we had been left poor and helpless, so that both we and all our Right unto an Heavenly Inheritance, should have been made a prey unto every subtle and powerful Adversary. He could therefore no otherwise comfort his Dis∣ciples when he was leaving this world, but by promising that he would not leave them Orphans, John 14. 18. that is, that he would still continue to Act for them, to be their Patron, and to exercise the Office of a Mediator and Advocate with the Father for them. Without this he knew they must be Orphans, that is, such as are not able to defend themselves from injuries, nor secure their own Right unto their Inheritance. The sure Foundations of our eternal Salvation were laid in his Death and Resur∣rection. So it is said, that when God laid the Foundation of the Earth, and placed the corner-stone thereof, that the morning stars sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy, Job 38. 7. Although the Foundations were only laid, yet that be∣ing done by infinite Power and Wisdom, which would infallibly accomplish and perfect the whole, it was a blessed cause of Praise and ascribing glory to God. Yet were the continued Actings of the same Power required unto the Perfection of it. The Foundation of the new Creation was laid gloriously in the Death and Resur∣rection of Christ, so as to be the matter of triumphant Praises unto God. Such is the Triumph thereon described, Col. 2. 15 1 Tim. 3. 16. And it may be ob∣served, that as on the laying of the Foundation of the Earth, all the Holy Angels tri∣umphed in the expression and demonstration of the infinite Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God which they beheld; so in the Foundation of the New Creation, the Apostate Angels who repined at it, and opposed it unto their Power, were lead Captives, carried in Triumph, and made the Footstool of the glory of Christ. But all this Joy and Triumph is built on the security of the unchangeable Love, Care, and Power of Jesus Christ, gloriously to accomplish the work which he had under∣taken. For had he left it when he left the Earth, it had never been finished. For great was that part of the work which yet remained to be perfected. Neither could the Remainder of this work be committed unto any other hand. He employeth others under him in his work to act Ministerially in his name and Authority. So he useth the Ministery of Angels and Men. But did not he him∣self continue to act in them, by them, with them, and without them, the whole work would fail and be disappointed. In one instance of the Revelation of the will of God concerning the state of the Church by the opening of the Book, wherein it was recorded, there was none found worthy in Heaven or Earth to do it, but the Lamb that was slain, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel. 5. 5. Chap. 6. 1. How much less is any Creature able to accomplish all that remains for the saving of the Church unto the utmost. Who can expresse the opposition that continues to be made unto this work of compleating the Salvation of Believers? what Power is able to conflict and con∣quer the remaining strength of Sin, the opposition of Sathan and the World? How innumerable are the Temptations which every individual Believer is exposed unto, each of them in its own nature ruinous and pernitious? God alone knoweth all things perfectly in infinite wisdom, and as they are. He alone knows how great a work it is to save Believers unto the utmost; what Wisdom, what Power, what Grace and Mercy is requisite thereunto. He alone knows what is meet unto the way and manner of it, so as it may be perfected unto his own Glo∣ry. His infinite wisdom alone hath found out and determined the glorious and mysterious ways of the Emanation of Divine Power and Grace unto this End. Up∣on all these Grounds, unto all these Purposes hath he appointed the continual inter∣cession of the Lord Christ in the most Holy place. This he saw needful and expe∣dient unto the Salvation of the Church and his own glory. So will he exert his own Almighty Power unto those ends. The good Lord help me to believe and adore the Mystery of it. 2. The most glorious Prospect that we can take into the things that are within the vail, into the remaining Transactions of the work of our Salvation in the most Holy place, is in the Representation that is made unto us of the intercession of Christ. Of old when Moses went into the Tabernacle, all the People looked after him, until he en∣tred
in, and then the Pillar of the Cloud stood at the door of it, that none might see into the Holy place, Exod. 33. 8, 9. And when the Lord Christ was taken into Heaven the Disciples looked after him, until a cloud interposed at the Tabernacle door, and took him out of their sight, Act. 1. 9. And when the High Priest was to enter into the Tabernacle to carry the Blood of the sacrifice of Expiation into the most Holy place, no man, be he Priest or not, was suffered to enter into, or abide in the Tabernacle, Levit. 16. 17. Our High Priest is now likewise entred into the most Holy place, within the second vail, where no eye can pierce unto him. Yet is he there as an High Priest, which makes Heaven it self to be a glorious Temple, and a place as yet for the exercise of an instituted Ordinance, such as the Priesthood of Christ is. But who can look into, who can comprehend the Glories of those Heavenly Administrations? Some have pretended a view into the orders and ser∣vice of the whole Chore of Angels, but have given us only a Report of their own imaginations. What is the Glory of the Throne of God, what the Order and Mini∣stry of his Saints and Holy ones, what is the manner of the worship that is given unto him that sits on the Throne and to the Lamb, the Scripture doth sparingly deliver, as knowing our disability whilst we are cloathed with flesh and inhabit Tabernacles of clay, to comprehend aright such transcendent Glories. The best and most steady view we can have of these things, is in the Account which is given us of the intercession of Christ. For herein we see him by Faith yet vested with the Office of the Priesthood, and continuing in the Discharge of it. This makes Heaven a Tem∣ple, as was said, and the feat of instituted worship, Rev 7. 15. Hence in his Ap∣pearance unto John, he was cloathed with a Garment down to the Foot, and girt about the paps with a golden Girdle; both which were sacerdotal vestments, Rev. 1. 13. Herein is God continually glorifyed; hereby is the Salvation of the Church continually carried on and consummated. This is the work of Heaven which we may safely contemplate by Faith. 3. The intercession of Christ is the great evidence of the continuance of his Love and Care, his Pity and Compassion towards his Church. Had he only continued to Rule the Church as its King and Lord, he had manifested his glorious Power, his Righteousness and Faithfulness. The Scepter of his Kingdom is a Scepter of Righte∣ousness. But Mercy and Compassion, Love and Tenderness are constantly ascri∣bed unto him as our High Priest. See Chap. 4. 15. Chap. 5. 1, 2. So the great exercise of his sacerdotal Office in laying down his Life for us, and expiating our sins by his Blood, is still peculiarly ascribed unto his Love, Gal. 2. 20 Ephes. 5. 2. Revel. 1. 5. Wherefore these properties of Love and Compassion belong pecu∣liarly unto the Lord Christ as our High Priest. All Men who have any spiritual experience and understanding, will acknowledge how great the concernment of Be∣lievers is in these things, and how all their Consolation in this World depends up∣on them. He whose soul hath not been refreshed with a due Apprehension of the unspeakable Love, Tenderness, and Compassion of Jesus Christ, is a stranger unto the Life of Faith, and unto all true spiritual Consolation. But how shall we know that the Lord Christs is thus tender, Loving and Compas∣sionate, that he continueth so to be; or what evidence or Testimony have we of it? It is true he was eminently so when he was upon the Earth in the days of his Flesh, and when he laid down his life for us. We know not what change may be wrought in nature it self, by its investiture with glory; nor how inconsistent these affections, which in us cannot be separated from some weakness and sorrow, are with his present state and dignity. Nor can any solid satisfaction be received by curious contemplations of the nature of glorifyed Affections. But herein we have an infallible Demonstration of it, that he yet continueth in the exercise of that Office, with respect whereunto all these Affections of Love, Pity and Compassion are ascrib∣ed unto him. As our High Priest , he is able to suffer, to condole with, to have compassion on his poor tempted ones, Chap. 4. 15. All these affecti∣ons doth he continually act and exercise in his intercession. From a sense it is of their wants and weaknesses, of their distresses and Temptations, of their States and Duties, accompanied with inexpressible Love and Compassion, that he continually intercedes for them. For he doth so, that their sins may be pardoned, their Temp∣tations subdued, their sorrows removed, their Trials sanctified, and their Per∣sons saved. And doing this continually as an High Priest, he is in the continual ex∣cise of Love, Care, Pity and Compassion.
VER. xxvi. In this Verse the Apostle renders a Reason of his whole preceding Discourse, and why he laid so great weight upon the Description of our High Priest. And he hath probably in it a respect unto what he had last asserted in particular concerning his Ability to save them to the utmost that come to God by him. . ; Syr. . For yet also this High Priest was just to us: that is, it was just, right or meet that we should have this High Priest. All others, talis nos decebat. ; Syr. ; pure; Sanctus; Holy. , Syr. , without malice. Beza, ab omni malo alienus. Inno∣cens. Free from all evil. ; Syr. , without spot. Vul. impollutus. Beza, sine labe; unpolluted, without spot. . Syr. , separate from sins; all others, from sinners. The words will be farther explained in our enquiry into the things signified by them. VER. xxvi. For such an High Priest became us, who is Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, Sepa∣rate from sinners and made higher than the Heavens. There is something supposed and included in this Assertion; namely, that if we intend to come unto God, we had need of an High Priest to encourage and enable us thereunto. For if in particular we need such an High Priest, it is supposed that without an High Priest in general, we can do nothing in this matter. This there∣fore is the Foundation which in this Argument the Apostle proceedeth on; namely, that sinners, as we are all, can have no Access unto God, but by an High Priest. And there was no need for him much to labour with those Hebrews in the confir∣mation hereof. For from the first constitution of their Church, they had no other way of Approach unto God in and with their sacred services. And God had not only by the Institution of that Office among them, declared that this was the way whereby he would be worshipped; but also with Legal Prohibitions fortified with severe Penalties, he had forbidden all men, the highest, the greatest, the best and most holy, to come unto him any other way. Hereby were they taught the ever∣lasting necessity of an High Priest, and the discharge of his Office, whatever End or Issue their Typical Priests came unto. And herein lyes a great Aggravation of the present misery of the Jews. High Priest of their own they have none, nor have had for many Ages. Hereon all their solemn worship of God utterly ceaseth. They are the only Persons in the world, who, if all mankind would give them leave and assist them in it, cannot worship God as they judge they ought to do. For if Hierusalem were restored into their Possession, and a Temple reedified in it more glorious than that of Solomon, yet could they not offer one Lamb in Sacrifice to God. For they know that this cannot be done without an High Priest, and Priests in∣fallibly deriving their Pedigree from Aaron, of whom they have amongst them not one in all the world. And so must they abide under a sense of being judicially excluded and cast out from all solemn worship of God, until the vail shall be taken from their Hearts, and leaving Aaron, they return unto him who was Typed by Mel∣chisedec, unto whom even Abraham their Father acknowledged his Subjection. Whence this necessity of an High Priest for sinners arose, I have so largely en∣quired into, and declared in my Exercitations on the original and causes of the Priesthood of Christ, as that there is no need again to make mention of it. Every ones duty it is to consider it, and rightly improve it for himself: The want
of living up unto this Truth, evacuates the Religion of most men in the world. Upon this supposition of the necessity of an High Priest in General, the Apostle declares what sort of High Priest was needfull for us. And this he shews, 1. In his Personal Qualifications. 2. In his outward State and Condition, ver. 26. 3. In the nature of his Office and the manner of its Discharge, ver. 27. And he confirmeth the whole by the consideration of the Person who was this Priest, and of the way and manner how he became so, compared with them, and their conse∣cration unto their Office, who were Priests according unto the Law, ver. 28. The two first are contained in this verse; namely (1.) The Personal Qualifica∣tions of him who was meet to be a Priest for us, by whom we might come unto God; and (2.) His outward state and condition. And in the first place the necessity of such an High Priest as is here described, is . expressed by ; Became us. Decuit, decebat. It was meet, it was just for us, as the Syriack renders it. And respect may be had therein either unto the wisdom of God, or unto our state and condition, or unto both; such an High Priest it was meet for God to give, and such an High Priest it was needful that we should have. If the condecency of the matter, which lies in a contrivance of proper means unto an end, be intended, then it is God who is respected in this word; If the necessity of the kind of Relief mentioned be so, then it is we who are respected. The word is applyed unto God in this very case, Chap. 2. ver. 10. It became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things. Consider God as the Su∣preme Ruler and Governour of the world, as the first cause and last end of all, and it became, was necessary unto his infinite Wisdom and Holiness that having de∣signed the bringing of many sons unto Glory, he should make the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. So the Condecency here intended may respect, (1.) The Wisdom, Grace and Goodness of God. It became him to give us such an High Priest as we stood in need of; namely, one that was able in the Discharge of that Office to save all to the uttermost that come unto God by him. For to design our salvation by an High Priest, and not to provide such an one, as was every way able to effect it, became not the Wisdom and Grace of God. (2.) Respect may be had herein unto our state and condition. Such this was as . none but such an High Priest could relieve us in or save us from. For we stand in need of such an one as our Apostle declares, as (1.) could make Attonement for our sins, or perfectly expiate them. (2.) Purge our Consciences from dead works, that we might serve the living God; or sanctifie us throughout by his Blood. (3.) Procure Acceptance with God for us, or purchase eternal Redemption. (4.) Administer supplies of the spirit of Grace unto us to enable us to live unto God in all Duties of Faith, Worship, and Obedience. (5.) Give us assistance and consolation in our Trials, Temptations and Sufferings, with pity and compassion. (6.) Preserve us by Power from all ruining Sins and Dangers. (7.) Be in a continu∣al Readiness to receive us in all our Addresses to him. (8.) To bestow upon us the Reward of Eternal Life. Unless we have an High Priest that can do all these things for us, we cannot be saved to the uttermost. Such an High Priest we stood in need of, and such an one it became the wisdom and Grace of God to give unto us. And God in infinite wisdom, Love and Grace, gave us such an High Priest, as in the Qualifications of his Person, the Glory of his Condition, and the Discharge of his Office, was every way suited to deliver us from the state of Apostacy, sin and misery, and to bring us unto himself through a Perfect salvation. This the ensuing particu∣lars will fully manifest. The Qualifications of this High Priest are expressed first indefinitely in the word . A Difference from other High Priests is included herein. He must not . be one of an Ordinary sort, but one so singularly qualified unto his work, so exalted after his work, and so discharging his work unto such Ends. In all these things we stood in need of such an High Priest, as was quite of another sort, order and kind, than any the Church had enjoyed under the Law, as the Apostle expresly con∣cludes, ver. 28. His Personal inherent Qualifications are first expressed; and we shall consider first some things in general that are common unto them all, and then declare the especial intendment of every one of them in particular.
Such an High Priest became us, as is Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, Separate from sinners. And, 1. There is some Allusion in all these things unto what was Typically represented in the Institution of the Office of the Priesthood under the Law. For the High Priest was to be a Person without blemish, not maimed in any part of his body. He was not to marry any one that was defiled, nor to defile himself among the People. On his forehead in his ministrations he ware a Plate of Gold with that Inscription, Holiness to the Lord. And no doubt but Personal Holiness was required of him in an especial manner; for want whereof, God cast out the Posterity of Eli from the Priesthood. But all those things were only outward Representations of what was really re∣quired unto such an High Priest as the Church stood in need of. For they were mostly external, giving a Denomination unto the Subject, but working no real change in it. And where they were internal, they were encompassed with such a mixture of sins, weaknesses, infirmities, and the Intercision of Death, as that they had no Glory in comparison of what was required. All these things the Apostle observes, reducing them unto two Heads, namely, that they were obnoxious unto Sin and Death; and therefore as they died, so they offered sacrifices for their own sins. But the Church was taught by them from the Beginning, that it stood in need of an High Priest whose real Qualifications should answer all these Types and Represen∣tations of them. 2. It is possible that our Apostle in this Description of our High Priest, designed to obviate the prejudicate opinion of some of the Hebrews concerning their Messiah. For generally they looked on him as one that was to be a great earthly Prince and warriour, that should conquer many Nations, and subdue all their enemies with the sword, shedding the blood of men in Abundance. In opposition unto this vain and pernicious Imagination, our Saviour testifies unto them, that he came not to kill, but to save and keep alive. And our Apostle here gives such a Description of him in these holy gracious Qualifications, as might attest his Person and work to be quite of another nature than what they desired and expected; And their frustra∣tion herein was the principal occasion of their unbelief. See Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. 3. I am sorry that it hath fallen from the Pen of an able Expositor of our own on this place; that the Time when the Lord Christ was thus made an High Priest for ever, and that by an Oath, was after he had offered one sacrifice, not many; for the People, not for himself; once, not often; of everlasting vertue, and not effectual for some petty Expiations for a time; and after he was risen, ascended and set at the right hand of God. If by being made an High Priest, only a Solemn Declaration of being made so, is intended, these things may passe well enough. For we allow that in the Scripture, then a thing is oft-times said to be, when it is first manifested or declared. So was the Lord Christ determined to be the son of God with Power by the Resurre∣ction from the dead. But if it be intended, as the words will scarce admit of any other Interpretation, that then the Lord Christ was first made an High Priest after all this was performed, the whole real Priesthood of Christ, and his proper Sacrifice is overthrown. For it is said he was not made an High Priest until after that he had offered his one sacrifice. And if it were so, then he was not a Priest, when he so offered himself. But this implies a contradiction, for there can be no sa∣crifice, where there is no Priest. And therefore the Socinians who make the con∣secration of the Lord Christ unto his Sacerdotal Office to be by his entrance into Heaven, do utterly deny his Death to have been a Sacrifice, but only a Preparation for it, as they fancy the killing of the beast to have been of old. And the Truth is, either the Lord Christ was a Priest before and in the Oblation of himself on the Cross, or he was never any, nor needed so to be, nor could he so be; for af∣ter he was freed from death, he had nothing to offer. And it is a strange order of things, that the Lord Christ should first offer his onely Sacrifice, and after that be made a Priest. But the Order, Time, and manner of the Call and Consecration
of the Lord Christ unto his Priesthood I have elsewhere declared. Wherefore, 4. We may observe that all these Qualifications of our High Priest were pecu∣liarly necessary on the account of the Sacrifice which he had to offer. They were not only necessary for him, as he was to be the Sacrificer, but also as he was to be the Sacrifice; not only as he was to be the Priest, but as he was to be the Lamb. For the Sacrifices were to be without blemish, as well as the Sacrificers. So were we redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 19. But however the Sacrifices were chosen under the Law without blemish, yet were they still in their own nature, but Calves, and Goats, and Lambs. And therefore Priests who had weaknesses and infirmities and sins of their own, might be meet enough to offer them. But here both Priest and Sacrifice were to be equally pure and holy. 5. We must not pass by the wresting of this Text by the Socinians; nor omit its due Vindication. For they contend that this whole Description of our High Priest doth not respect his internal Qualifications in this world before and in the offer∣ing of himself by his Blood; but his glorious state and condition in Heaven. For they fear (as well they may) that if the Qualifications of a Priest were necessary to him, and required in him whilst he was in this world, that then he was so indeed. He who says such an High Priest became us as is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, doth affirm that when he was so, he was our High Priest. In that state wherein these things were necessary unto him, he was a Priest. To avoid this ruine unto their Pretensions, they offer violence unto the Text, and the significa∣tion of every word in it, and dangerously insinuate a negation of the things intend∣ed, to be in Christ in this world. So speaks Schlictingius on the place. Unde apparet se∣quentibus verbis, seu Epithetis Christo tributis, non mores ipsius seu vitam ab omni pec∣cati labe puram, sed felicem ac beatum statum describi ac designari, ob quem fiat ut in aeternum vivens, nostri quoque perpetuam gerat curam. Licet enim omnia ista rati∣one vitae & morum de Christo intellecta verissima sint, tamen nihil ad praesens Autho∣ris institutum faciunt. So also argues Smalcius de Reg. Christi, Cap. 23. whom we have elsewhere refuted. The Paraphrase of one of our own seems to comply herewith; which is as fol∣loweth. And this was a sort of High Priests which we sinful weak creatures had need of, (which by the way I do not understand, for we stood not in need of a new sort of High Priests, but of one single individual High Priest,) One that being mercifully disposed, is also incapable of suffering any hurt, of being defiled or corrupted, and consequently of dying, and to that end is exalted unto a pitch above our sinful cor∣ruptible condition here. So  and  are rendred in the Margin, free from evil, and undefileable. The sense is plainly the same with that of Schlictin∣gius, though there be some variety in the expressions of the one and the other. And therefore is Christ said to be exalted that he might be such as he is here de∣scribed, as though he was not so before in the sense here intended by the Apostle, however the words here in another sense might be applyed unto him. Three things seem to be aymed at in this Exposition. 1. To make way for another corrupt notion on the next verse, wherein these men with Grotius would have Christ in some sense offer for his own sins also; which there can be no pretence for, if these things be asscribed unto him, as he was a Priest in this world. 2. To take care that the Innocency, Holinesse and absolute Purity of our High Priest be not supposed to be necessary unto our Justification, neither as the material, nor formal cause of it. For if the Lord Christ in the Sacrifice of himself died for our Justification, and that he might do so, it was necessary that he should antece∣dently be holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners; then was his being so necessary unto our Justification, as a cause thereof. 3. To obviate an Apprehension of his being an High Priest before his death, and to have offered his one Sacrifice therein. For if he had not the Qualifications ne∣cessary unto an High Priest, before his Ascension into Heaven, he could not be so before. But these things are none of them compliant with the Truth. And, 1. This Exposition is contrary to the concurrent sense of all sober, antient and modern Expositors. And which is more, it is contrary to the common sense of all Christians. Not one of them who knoweth ought of these things, unless their
minds are perverted with these mens glosses, and that meerly to comply with other opinions wherein the text is no way concerned, but that in their first and last consideration of these words, they respect Jesus Christ as to his personal Holiness in this World. And that Exposition had need be well confirmed, which is not only contrary to the Judgement of all learned men, but also destructive of the common Faith of Christians. But as yet we have nothing beyond crude Assertions offered in the proof of it. 2. It is contrary unto, or inconsistent with the sense and use of the Words in all good Authors, sacred and prophane; and contrary unto the Application of them unto the Lord Christ in other places of the Scripture, as we shall see immedi∣ately. 3. It is contrary to the order of the Apostles words; For he placeth all these Pro∣perties as qualifications of this Person antecedently unto his Exaltation. He was first Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and then made Higher than the Heavens. But according unto this Exposition his being made higher than the Heavens, is the antece∣dent cause of his being made Holy, &c. 4. It is highly false that the blessed state pretended to be here set forth, was antece∣dently unto his being a Priest, and the sacrifice which he offered; yea, such an estate was inconsistent with the Oblation of himself. For he offered himself unto God in his Blood. Heb. 9. 14. and that with strong cryes and tears, Chap. 5. 7. which were inconsistent with such a state; for it is so described on purpose to be exclusive of every thing required thereunto. 5. Schlictingius pleads that although all these things were true with respect unto the life and manners of Christ, yet it was no way unto the purpose of the Apostle to mention them unto the end designed. But, (1) If that be the sense of the words which he contends for, not one of them is true with respect unto the life and manners of Christ in this world, for they all belong unto his blessed estate in the other. (2) We shall see on the next verse, how far he will allow them to be true of the life and manners of Christ in any sense, seeing in some sense he affirms him to have offered sacrifice for his own sins. And this he doth with an expresse contradiction unto his own main Hypothesis. For by sins he understands weakness and infirmities; and whereas he will not allow Christ to have offered himself before his entrance in∣to the Holy place, and makes it necessary that he should be antecedently freed from all weaknesses and Infirmities, it is the highest contradiction to affirm that he offered for them: seeing he could not offer himself until he was delivered from them. (2.) We have only his bare word for it, that the Asscription of those things unto our High Priest as inherent Qualifications, was not unto the purpose of the Apostle. And his Assertion is built on a false supposition, namely, that the Lord Christ was not an High Priest on the Earth, nor did offer himself unto God in his Death, which overthrows the Foundation of the Gospel. 6. The Vanity and Falshood of this novel Exposition, will yet farther and fully be evinced, in an enquiry into the proper signification of these words as here used by the Apostle; every one whereof is wrested to give countenance unto it. 1. He is, or was to be, , Sanctus, Holy, that is . For, Acts 2. 22.  is rendred , thy Holy one: from Psal. 16. 10. And the Lord Christ is there said to be  antecedently unto his Resurrection: which must be with respect unto his internal Holiness, Thou shalt not suffer thine Holy One to see Cor∣rupton. And in the New Testament the word is every where used for him, that is internally holy. 1 Tim. 2. 8. Tit. 1. 8. The Syriack renders it in this place by  pure; which is an inherent Qualification; as it doth, 1 Tim. 2. 8. and Tit. 1. 8. by  Pious, Holy, , saith Hesychius: ; Pure, Righteous, Godly, Peaceable, Chast. So  is used only for Holily, 1 Thes. 2. 10. and  is internal Holiness. Luk. 1. 75. Ephes. 4. 24. No where is it used for a merciful disposition, much less for venerable and sacred upon the Ac∣count of an immortal nature, or any other Priviledge, as it is pretended. Neither is the word used in any other Good Author to signifie any one but him that is Holy and Righteous, or free from all sin and wickedness. It is therefore the holy purity of the nature of Christ that is intended in this expres∣sion. His Life and Actions are expressed in the ensuing Epithets. His nature was pure and holy, absolutly free from any spot or taint of our original Defilement.
Hence as he was conceived in the Womb, and as he came from the Womb, he was that , holy thing of God; Luke 1. 35. All others since the fall have a polluted nature and are originally unholy. But his conception being miraculous, by the immediate operation of the Holy Ghost, and his nature not derived unto him by natural Generation, the only means of the Propagation of original Defilement, and in the first instant of its being, filled with all habitual seeds of Grace; He was , Holy. And such an High Priest became us, as was so. Had he had a nature touched with sin, he had not been meet either to be a Priest or Sacrifice. This Holiness of nature was needful unto him, who was to answer for the unholiness of our nature, and to take it away. Unholy Sinners, do stand in need of an Holy Priest and an Holy Sacrifice. What we have not in our selves we must have in him, or we shall not be accepted with the Holy God, who is of purer eyes than to be∣hold Iniquity. 2. He was to be , that is, saith Schlictingius, omnis mali expers, nullis am∣plius . miseriis obnoxius; incapable of suffering any hurt, saith another to the same Purpose. The word is but once more used in the New Testament, and that in a sense remote enough from, one not exposed to misery, or incapable of suffering, Rom. 16. 18. . Men Simple and Harmless, who for the most part are exposed to most Evils and Troubles in the World. (2.) It is never used in any good Author in such a sense, nor can any instance be produced unto that purpose: But it constantly signifies one Innocent, Harmless, free from malice, who doth no evil. Nor did any one before these Interpreters dream of a passive Interpretation of this Word. It is he who doth no evil; not he who can suffer no evil.  is malus, or qui dolo malo utitur; an Evil malitious Person.  is vitiositas in the Judgement of Cicero. Virtutis, saith he, contraria est vitiositas, sic enim malo quam malitiam appellare, quam Graeci  appellant; nam Malitia certi cujusdam vitii nomen est, vitiosit as omnium. We render it sometimes naughtiness, Jam. 1. 22. sometimes, malice or malitiousness, 1 Pet. 1. 16. All manner of evil with deceit∣ful guile. Wherefore  is he that is free from all evil, fraud or sin; the same absolutely with that of the Apostle Peter, 1 Epist. 2. 22. Who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth. , Holy is his Epithet with respect unto his Nature; , Harmless respects his Life. The first includes all positive Holiness; the other an Abnegation of all unholiness. As he was  he had not , sin present, as we have with us, Rom. 7. 18, 21. or , sin easily besetting, Heb. 12. 1. As he was , he was free from every effect of such a Principle. And we had need of such an High Priest. Had he not been innocent and every way blameless himself, he would have had other work to do, than always to take care of our Salvation, as the Apostle observes in the next verse. He must first have offered for his own sins, as the High Priest did of old, before he had offered for us or ours. And this added unto the merit of his Obedience. For whereas he was absolutely Innocent, Harmlesse, and free from all evil and Guile, he was reproached and charged with every thing that is evil; A Seducer, a Blasphemer, a Seditious Person, the worst of Malefactors. For herein also, as to the suffering part, he was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might become the Righteousness of God in him. And a great encouragement this is unto those who suffer in the like kind according to their measure. 3. He was to be , cujus felicitas & beatitas nulla vel minima adversitate . quasi labe pollui inficique possit, saith, Schlictingius; than which a more vain Ima∣gination, or more absurd Expression can be hardly thought on. But it is not for us to charge the Apostle with such obscurity and expressing of his Mind in such uncouth terms, never used by any others, nor by himself in any other place in such a sense or signification; Unpolluted, undefiled, that is, every way happy and blessed, not touched with the defilement of any Adversity. But the use of Adversity, is to purge and purifie. And as that word doth properly signifie, undefiled, unpolluted, that is, morally with any sin or evil, so it is not used in the New Testament in any o∣ther sense. See Heb. 13. 4. Jam. 1. 27. 1 Pet. 1. 4. The enquiry therefore is how this differs from , which contains a negation of all Moral evil. Answ. The one is, he did no evil in himself; the other, that he contracted none from any thing else, nor from any Persons with whom he conversed. This may fall out
sometimes. Hence the Prophet in his consternation at the Appearance of the Glory of God unto him, cryed out he was undone, not only because of his own sinfull de∣filements, but because of the uncleanness of the People among whom he dwelt. Isa. 6. 5. And on this Ground there was an Attonement of old to be made for the Holy Place and Tabernacle. Not that they had any uncleanness of their own, but because of the uncleanness of the People, and their remaining among them in the midst of their un∣cleannesses. Levit. 16. 16. And besides, many things might befall the High Priests of old, whereby they might be legally defiled, and so rendred uncapable for the discharge of the Office. And for this cause, they always had a second Priest in Readiness, at the great Solemn Festivals, especially at the Anniversary Expiation, that in case any such Pollution should befall the High Priest, the other might for that time take his place, and discharge his Office. So it was with them principally with respect unto Ceremo∣nials, though immoralities might also defile them, and incapacitate them for their Duty. But no such thing was our High Priest liable unto, either from himself or from converse with others. As he was unconcerned in ceremonials, so in all moral Obedience, nothing could affix on him either Spot or Blemish. And such an High Priest became us. For whereas it was his Design and work to sanctify and cleanse his Church, until it have neither spot nor wrinkle, but be holy and without blemish, as it was: Ephes. 5. 25, 26: how had he been meet to attempt or effect this work, had not he himself been every way undefiled? 4. He was : that is, saith Schlictingius, Loco & con∣ditione, . ut statim additur, excelsior caelis factus. He is at the bottom of his noti∣ons and end off his Invention, so that he can find out no sense for this expression, but puts us of to the next words, which are quite of another signification, or express a thing of another nature, and are distinguished from this expression by the Con∣junction, And separate from sinners; that is, saith he, made higher than the Hea∣vens. We must therefore enquire after another sense of these words, which rea∣dily offers it self unto us. Separate from sinners: From sins, saith the Syriack. But that was sufficiently se∣cured before; From Sinners as Sinners, and in their sins. He was like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. We must therefore consider wherein he was, and wherein he was not separate from sinners. 1. He was not separate from them as unto community of nature. For God sent his own son in the likeness of sinful flesh; Rom. 8. 3. He sent him in the flesh, for he sent him made of a woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. wherein the word was made flesh; Joh. 1. 14. but he sent him only in the likeness of sinful flesh. And that because he made him sin, who knew no sin; 2 Cor. 5. 21. He took our flesh, that is, our nature upon him without sin, yet so as that by Reason of the charge of sin with the consequences thereof that was upon him, he was in the likeness of sinful flesh. He was not therefore really separate from sinners as they were flesh, but as they were sinful flesh. He took upon him the seed of Abraham, and because the Children were partakers of flesh and blood he himself partook also of the same. Without this Relation unto us, and Union with us, in one common nature, where∣by he that sanctifyeth and they that are sanctifyed, are of one, he could not have been an High Priest or sacrifice for us. He was not therefore thus separated from sin∣ners, as to be of another nature from them. He took not on him the nature of An∣gels, nor was a meer Spirit but had flesh and bones, as he declared unto his Disci∣ples. And the same nature he hath still with him in Heaven, and in the same will appear at Judgment. It is equally destructive unto our Faith and comforts, to sup∣pose our High Priest not separate from us in point of sin: and to be separate from us as to his nature. 2. He was not separated from sinners as to the Duties of outward Conversation. He lived not in a wilderness, nor said unto the children of men, stand off, I am holyer than you. He conversed freely with all sorts of Persons, even Publicans and Harlots, for which he was reproached by the proud hypocritical Pharisees. His work was to call sinners to Repentance, and to set before their eyes an example of Holiness. This he could not have done, had he withdrawn himself from all communication with them. Yea, he condescended unto them beyond the legal Austerities of the Baptist. Matth. 11. 18, 19. Hence those who of old pretending more than ordinary
Holiness and Devotion did withdraw themselves into wildernesses from the converse of men, did quite forget the Example and work of their Master: Yea they did avowedly prefer the Example of the Baptist as they supposed, before that of our Saviour, which sufficiently reflects on his Wisdom and Holiness. Nor indeed did they in the least express the Pattern which they proposed unto themselves for Imitation. For although John lived in the wilderness of Judaea for the most part, yet was he the voice of one crying in the wilderness. He lived there where it was most convenient for him to discharge his Ministry, and preach the word of God. And his Austerities in Food and Raiment, were but to express outwardly the Doctrine of Repentance enforced by threats which he preached. But as these Persons forsook the Example of Christ and the Gospel to go back unto John and his Ministry, so they utterly mistook their pattern, and instead of making their Retirement a means and help to discharge the Ministry in calling others unto Faith and Repentance, they made it a Covert for their own Ignorance and Superstition. And for those Votaries of the Roman Church who pretend in the foolish Imitation of them to fancy a Wilder∣ness in the middest of populous Cities, there can be no course of life invented, more alien from the conduct of natural Light, more useless unto the Glory of God and the Good of the Community of Mankind, nor more contrary to the Example and Commands of our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles. 3. He is not said to be separate from Sinners, so in state and condition, as Kings and Potentates are from Persons poor and mean: and who therefore out of a sense of their own meanness, and the others State and Greatness of mind, dare not approach unto them. No, but as he was meek and lowly, and took up his whole converse with the lower sort of the People, the poor of this world; so he did by all ways and means, invite and encourage all sorts of sinners to come unto him. 4. He is not said to be separate from sinners, as though he had been ever in any communion with them, in any thing wherein he was afterwads separated from them. The Participle  hath the sense of an Adjective, declaring what is, and not how he came so to be. He was always in such a state and condition, so Holy, so Harmless, and Undefiled, as never to have a concern in any thing, from which he was to be separated. It appeareth hence plainly wherein it was that he was separate from sinners; namely, in Sin, in its Nature, causes and effects. Whatever of that sort he under∣went was upon our Account and not his own. He was every way, in the perfect Holiness of his Nature and his Life, distinguished from all sinners; not only from the greatest, but from those who ever had the least taint of Sin, and who other∣wise were most Holy. And so it became us that he should be. He that was to be a middle Person between God and Sinners, was to be separate from those sinners, in that thing, on the Account whereof he undertook to stand in their stead. And these are the Properties of the Humane Nature of our High Priest, and which were necessary antecedently unto the discharge of any Part or Duty of his Office. His present state and condition is in the next place expressed; and made higher than the Heavens. . Made higher. God is called , the most high God; God above. And Glory is to be asscribed unto him , in the High∣est, Luk. 2. 14. And the Lord Christ in his Exaltation is said to sit down at the right hand of the Majesty  chap. 1. 3. On high. He was for a season made lower than the Angels, made on the Earth, and descend∣ed into the lower parts of the Earth; and that for the Discharge of the principal Part of his Priestly Office, namely, the offering of himself for a Sacrifice unto God. But he abode not in that state nor could he discharge his whole Office and all the Duties of it therein; and therefore was made higher than the Heavens. He was not made higher than the Heavens that he might be a Priest: but being our High Priest and as our High Priest, He was so made, for the discharge of that part of his Office which yet remained to be performed; for he was to live for ever to make Inter∣cession for us. , as may be seen in the foregoing Instances, hath a double signification; (1) Of Place. (2) Of state and condition. 1. If it be Place that is meant, then by the Heavens which he is made above, those aspectable Heavens with all their Glory are intended. He is no longer on the Earth,
but exalted into a Throne of Majesty above these Heavens. So it is said that he passed through these Heavens when he went into the Presence of God, chap. 4. 14, 15. And there he abides. For although the Heaven of Heavens cannot con∣tain him as unto the Immensity of his divine Nature; yet as unto his humane Na∣ture here spoken of, the Heavens must receive him, until the time of the Restitution of all things, Act. 3. 21. He is in this sense no more on the Earth, nor Subject un∣to any of those inconveniences, which his abode here below must be exposed unto. Yea, had he always continued here, he could not have been such an High Priest as became us, as our Apostle declares, chap. 8. 4. 2.  may respect state and condition; or the Glorious state on the right hand of the Majesty on high which he is exalted unto. And in this sense by the Heavens, than which Christ is made higher, exalted above, the Angels the sacred Inhabitants of those Heavenly Places are intended. And this our Apostle in other places often insists upon, as a great manifestation of the Glory of Christ: See Ephes. 1. 21, 22. Phil. 2. 10, 11. Heb. 1. 4. chap. 2. 7, 8. I see no Reason but that both these may be included in this expression. He was so exalted as to the place of his Residence from the Earth, above those aspectable Heavens, as withal to be placed in Honour, Dignity and Power above all the Inhabitants of Heaven, he only excepted who puts all things under him. And so we have finished the Exposition of these words, with the vindication of the proper meaning of them. Two ends there are why the Apostle gives us such a Description of the High Priest that became us, or which we stood in need of. 1. To manifest that the Levitical Priests were no way qualifyed for this Office, no way meet or able to bring us unto God. Something they did represent, but nothing of themselves they did effect. They all of them came short in every Qua∣lification which was necessary unto this end. They were all sinners, and living and dying on the Earth, they never attained unto that condition of Glory and Dignity which were necessary unto the full and final discharge of that Office. So he de∣clares his mind to have been expresly in the next verses. 2. To encourage the Faith of Believers, by evidencing unto them, that what∣ever was needful in an high Priest, to bring them to God, and to save them to the utmost, was found in all Perfection in Christ Jesus. And we may observe, that, 1. Although these Properties of our High Priest are principally to be considered as ren∣dring him meet to be our High Priest, yet are they also to be considered as an Exemplar and Idea of that Holiness, and Innocency which we ought to be conformable unto. If we will give up our selves to the conduct of this High Priest, if by him alone we design to approach unto God; conformity unto him in Holiness of nature and Life according unto our Measure is indispensably required of us. None can more dis∣honour the Lord Christ, nor more pernitiously deceive and betray their own Souls, than by professing him to be their Priest, with their Trust thereby to be saved by him, and yet not endeavour to be holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, like unto him. 2. Seeing all these Properties were required unto Christ and in him, that he might be our High Priest; he was all that he is here said to be for us, and for our sakes; and benefit from them doth redound unto us. For seeing he was a Priest for us, all that he was that he might be a Priest, was for us also. Such an High Priest became us, and such an High Priest we have. 3. The infinite Grace and Wisdom of God are always to be admired by us in provid∣ing such an High Priest as was every way meet for us, with respect unto the Great End of his Office, namely, the bringing of us unto himself. 4. The Dignity, Duty, and Safety of the Gospel Church depend solely on the Na∣ture, Qualifications, and the Exaltation of our High Priest. Or Our High Priest every way answering the Mind, the Holiness and Wisdom of God, as also all our want, and necessities, our whole state and Condition, the work of our Salvation is ab∣solutely secured in his hand. The great Design of the Gospel is to satisfie Believers herein. And God would have it so, that he might provide not only for our future Salvation, but for our present consolation also. 5. If such an High Priest became us, was needful unto us, for the establishment of the New Covenant and the Communication of the Grace thereof unto the Church, then
all Persons, Christ alone excepted, are absolutely excluded from all Interest in this Priest∣hood. He that takes upon himself to be a Priest undere the Gospel, must be Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from Sinners, that is, absolutely so; or he is an Im∣postor, who endeavours to deceive the souls of men. 6. If therefore we consider aright what it is that we stand in need of, and what God hath provided for us, that we may be brought unto him in his Glory, we shall find it our wisdom to forego all other Expectations, and to betake our selves unto Christ alone. VER. XXVII. XXVIII. . The words used in this context have been opened in several places before. And in one thing only is there any material Difference among the Translators of them. And this is in those words . For the Syriack reads them, ; rendring the Article in the masculine Gender, who was after the Law; and so doth the Vulgar Latine also, qui post legem est, referring unto  as the antecedent, and not . And Erasmus renders  by supra legem, above the Law. But others think and that rightly, that  with an Ac∣cusative case, is never to be rendred by supra, or above. Who needeth not dayly, as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifices, first for their own sins, and then for the Peoples, for this he did once, when he offered up himself. For the Law maketh men High Priests which have Infirmity, but the word of the Oath, which was since the Law, the Son who is perfected for evermore. As these verses contain other instances of the Preeminence of our High Priest above those of the order of Aaron: so all those mentioned in the former of them, do depend directly on, and flow from the qualifications and endowments of his Per∣son expressed in that foregoing. For whereas he is such an one as is there described, Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, Separate from sinners, and made higher than the Hea∣vens, for such an one alone became us, he was above and freed from all those things and services which the Levitical Priests were obliged unto, for want of these Qualifications. For all the things asscribed ver. 27. unto them and denied concern∣ing him, were all effects of the weaknesse and imperfection of their Persons and their services, which he as unto his Person was absolutely exempt and free from, so that he had no need to do as they did. And this being declared, the whole mat∣ter, with the fundamental Reason of all the differences insisted on, is summarily expressed, ver. 28. as we shall see in the Exposition of the words. VER. XXVII. VVho needeth not dayly, &c. The words are a Negation as they respect our High Priest, and include an Affir∣mation with respect unto the Priests of the Law, both in sundry instances. And the design of them is to exclude all those Imperfections from him, which they were subject unto. And we may observe in the words. 1. The manner of the negation, , He needeth not; it is not neces∣sary  for him. The things expressed were not such as those Priests might do, or omit as they saw occasion; but they were necessarily obliged unto them. And the necessity the Apostle intends, was not only that which arose from Gods Institution, who appointed them to offer dayly, first for themselves and then for the People, but that also which arose from their own state and condition, and from the nature of the sacrifices that they offered. For themselves being weak, infirm, and sinful, and their offerings being only of earthly things that could never perfectly expiate sin, these things were necessary for them, and so God had ordained. Wherefore there
are three Grounds or Reasons of the necessity here asscribed unto these Priests. 1. God had appointed them so to do. This comes first to view although there be another Reason even of this Appointment. And God taught hereby both them and the Church, their utter incapacity to effect the work committed unto them, at once, whereon they were to multiply their Oblations. 2. The Nature of the Offerings and Sacrifices which they offered did make the manner of it here expressed, necessary unto them. For they were such as could not attain the end of expiating sin: but only could represent that which did so; and therefore the Repetition of them was needful, because their principal use was to be instructive only. Things that are really efficient themselves, may at once produce and perfect their effects: But those which are instructive only must be reite∣rated. 3. This Necessity arose from their own state before God, and the state of the People. For they themselves often sinned, and having no other to offer for them, it was necessary that they should often offer for themselves. And so it was with the People also. They sinned still, and still must be offered for. After one offering, their sins again encreased on them, and made another necessary. From all these considerations our High Priest was absolutely exempted; and that on a twofold Account, (1.) Of his Person, which being Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and Separate from sinners, he needed not offer for himself. (2.) Of his Offering, which being at once perfectly expiatory of the sins of the People, needed not to be repeated. And on these Grounds God also had appointed that he should offer himself only once for all. 2. The second thing in these words is the Declaration of them that lay under this necessity which our High Priest was not liable unto, , As the High Priests, that is, those High Priests of the Law concerning whom he had treated. So  we well render the words, as those High Priests, in like manner as they were, or as they had need. For the Apostle with respect unto the Levitical Priesthood carri∣eth on the comparison between Christ and them, especially in the instance of the High Priests and the Discharge of their Office; For they were the Head of the Priesthood, and the Glory of the Church of Israel. Howbeit all other priests em∣ployed in the holy Offerings and Sacrifices of the People, are included herein. And it is apparent that if the Priesthood of Christ doth so far excell that Office in the High Priests of the Old Testament, it must needs excell it in those of a subordinate Order or Degree. All these priests had need to offer in the manner here ex∣pressed. 3. A threefold Difference is intimated between our High Priest and them. As, 1. In the frequency of their Offerings, they were to offer dayly, which also in∣cludes the order of their Offering, first for themselves, and then for the People: Whereas he offered once only. 2. It is supposed they offered the sacrifices appointed by the Law which were of brute Creatures only, whence their insufficiency and frequent Repetition did pro∣ceed; as declared, Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3. He offered himself. 3. In the cause of their offering; they offered for their own sins, but he had none of his own to offer for. Now all the things here asscribed unto the Levitical priests, are weaknesses and imperfections in their Office. And hereby the main position of the Apostle, and which was destructive of the whole Fabrick of Mosaical worship, namely, that the Law whereby they were constituted made nothing perfect, was abundantly confirmed. For the greatest effect of that Law was the constitution of this Priesthood. And what perfection can be expected by such a Priesthood where the Priests were obliged continually to offer for their own sins? No sooner was one offering past, but they were providing matter, making another necessary. And so it was with respect un∣to the sins of the People. And what perfection could be comprized in an everlast∣ing Rotation of sins and sacrifices? Is it not manifest that this Priesthood and these sa∣crifices, could never of themselves expiate sin, nor make perfect them that came to God by them? Their instructive use was excellent: They both directed Faith to look unto the great future Priest and Sacrifice, and established it, in that they were Pledges given of God in Assurance thereof. The eye of them all was a con∣tinual guidance unto the Church, to look unto him who alone was to make Attone∣ment
for sin, and bring in Everlasting Righteousness. Howbeit they were of that nature, and were so ordained of God, that they should never give perfect ease and Peace unto them that were exercised in them. Some relief they found in them, but compleat Peace they did not afford. Nor can any thing do so, that is often to be repeated. The frequent Repetitions of the sacrifices of the masse in the Church of Rome, doth sufficiently manifest that there is no solid abiding Peace with God in that Church. For this is not to be attained by any thing that must be frequently re∣peated. So our Apostle affirms expresly, that if the Sacrifices of the Law could have made perfect them that came to God by them, or given them perfect Peace with God, they would have ceased to have been offered. And so it would be with the sacrifice of the Masse. Only by the one offering of Christ, they are perfected as to Peace with God, for whom he offered. And it gave great evidence unto their instructive efficacy, that in themselves they were so weak, so imperfect, and in∣effectual. It was therefore unbelief heightned unto Obstinacy, which caused the Hebrews to refuse this High Priest and Sacrifice when exhibited of God, whereas before they could never attain unto Peace firm and stable. But Love of carnal Worship, and adherence unto self Righteousnesse, are inseparable companions. Obs. God requireth our Faith and Obedience in and unto nothing, but what is as ab∣solutly needful for us, so highly reasonable unto the minds of them that are enlightned. Such was this Priesthood of Christ, now proposed unto the Faith of the Church, in comparison of what was before enjoyed. 4. There is in the words the Time and Season of the performance of what is here asscribed unto these High Priests, as necessary for them. They were to do it, . , Dayly: that is, so often as occasion required according unto the Law. For there is no Reason to confine the Apostles intention unto the annual ex∣piatory sacrifice only; as though  were the same with , Chap. 10. 1. Dayly as much as Yearly. It is true that in that sacrifice the High Priest offered first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the People. But  here u∣sed doth not expresse that order, as we shall see. Nor is it the  or Dayly sacrifice alone that is intended; though that be included also. For that juge sacrifi∣cium had respect unto the sins of the whole Church both Priests and People. As we are obliged to pray for the pardon of sin every day, by vertue of that sacrifice which is , new and living in its efficacy continually, and as occasion did require. And so there was an Obligation on the Priest to offer for himself a sin-offering, as often as he sinned according to the sins of the People, Levit. 4. 3. If the Priest that is anointed (that is, the High Priest) do sin according unto the sin of the People, then let him bring for his sin which he hath sinned, a young bullock without blemish, unto the Lord for a sin offering. And unto this institution the Apostle here hath respect. 5. What they were thus obliged unto, is declared; ; . to offer sacrifices for sins. All Propitiatory and expiatory sacrifices are intended. But possibly a principal regard is had unto the great Anniversary sacrifice in the feast of Expiation, Levit. 16. For although the Apostle mentions  sacrifices in the plural number, and that was but one; yet because of the Repetition of it, it being offered year by year continually, as he speaks, Chap. 10. 1. it may be signifyed hereby. And those sacrifices were . And in answer unto them our Lord Jesus Christ offered himself a sacrifice for sin. And this is expressed by  for sin only, without the mention of sacrifice. Rom. 8. 3 For because  sig∣nifies both the sin and the sacrifice for it, as the Verb  signifies in one conjuga∣tion to sin, and in another to expiate sin, the sacrifices it self is expressed by , For sin. 6. The order of these sacrifices is expressed by  and ; first and then. First for his own sins, and then for those of the People. Either the whole Dis∣charge . of the office of the High Priests may be intended in this order, or that which was peculiar unto the Feast of Expiation. For he was in general to take care in the first place about offering for his own sins according to the Law, Levit. 4 For if that were not done in due order, if their own legal Guilt were not expiated in its proper season according to the Law, they were no way meet to offer for the sins of the Congregation; yea, they exposed themselves unto the penalty of Excision.
And this order was necessary seeing the Law appointed men to be Priests who had infirmities of their own, as is expressed in the next verse. Or the order intended may respect in an especial manner the form and process prescribed in the solemn Anniversary sacrifice at the least of Expiation. Levit. 16. First he was to offer a Sin-offering for himself and his house, and then for the People, both on the same day. 1. ; for his own sins: And this upon a double Account. . First, because he was really a sinner as the rest of the People were. If he do sin ac∣cording to the sin of the People, Levit. 4. 3. Secondly, That upon the expiation of his own sins in the first place, he might be the more meet to represent him who had no sin. And therefore he was not to offer for himself in the offering that he made for the People, but stood therein as a sinless Person, as our High Priest was really to be. 2. For the sins of the People; , that is, for the whole congregation of . Israel; according to the Law; Levit. 16. 21. This was the Duty, the order and method of the High Priests of old in their offerings and sacred services. This their weaknesses, Infirmities and Sins, as also the Sacrifices which they offered, did require. All that could be learned from it was, that some more excellent Priest and Sacrifice was to be introduced. For no Perfection, no Consummation in divine Favour, no settled Peace of Conscience could in this way be obtained; all things openly declared that so they could not be. And hence have we an Evidence of what is affirmed, Joh. 1. 17. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. And the Priviledge or Ad∣vancement of the Church in its Deliverance from those various multiplyed obscure means of Instruction, into the glorious light of the way and causes of our Adoption, Justification and Salvation, is inexpressibly great and full of Grace. No longer are we now obliged unto a rigid observance of those things which did not effect what they did represent. An encrease in thankfulness, fruitfulness and holiness, can∣not but be expected from us. These are the things that are here denied of our High Priest: He had no need to offer Sacrifice in this way, order, and method. The offering of Sacrifice is not denied, that is, Sacrifice for the sins of the People; yea, it is positively asserted in the next words; but that he offered dayly, many sacrifices, or any for himself, or had need so to do, this is denied by the Apostle. That alone which he did, is asserted in the remaining words of the verse; For this he did once when he offered himself. And two things are in the words; (1) What he did in general; (2) In particu∣lar, how he did it. For the first, it is said, , This he did; , refers only unto one clause of the Antecedent, namely, offering for the sins of the People. This he did . once, when he offered himself; for himself he did not offer. But contrary unto the sense of the whole Church of God, contrary to the Analogie of Faith, and with no small Danger in the expression, Socinus first affirmed that the Lord Christ offered also for himself or his own sins. And he is followed herein by those of his own Sect, as Schlinctingius on this Place, and so he is also by Grotius and Hammond, which is the Chanel whereby many of his Notions and Concepti∣ons are derived unto us. It is true, that both he and they do acknowledge, that the Lord Christ had no sins of his own properly so called; that is, Transgressions of the Law; but his Infirmities, say some of them, whereby he was exposed unto Death, his sufferings, say others, are called his sins. But nothing can be more abhorrent from Truth and Piety than this Assertion. For, 1. If this be so, then the Apostle expresly in terms affirms that Christ offered for his own sins, and that distinctly from the sins of the People. And from this Blas∣phemy we are left to relieve our selves by an Interpretation that the Scripture no where gives countenance unto; namely, that by sins, infirmities or miseries are intended. It is true that Infirmity, , doth sometimes signify sin, or obnoxi∣ousness unto sin, but sin doth no where signify natural infirmities but moral evils al∣ways. It is true Christ was made sin, but where it is said so, it is also added, that it was for us; and to take off all Apprehensions of any thing in him that might be so called, that he knew no sin. He was made sin for us, when he offered for the sins
of the People. And other distinct offering for himself he offered none. And therefore in sundry places where mention is made of his offering himself, it is still observed, that he did no sin, but was as a Lamb without spot and without blemish. Let therefore men put what Interpretation they please on their own words (for they are not the words of the Apostle that Christ offered himself for his own sins) the lan∣guage is and must be offensive unto every Holy Heart, and hath an open appearance of express contradiction unto many other Testimonies of the Scripture. 2 The sole Reason pretended to give countenance unto this absurd Assertion is, that, , This, must answer to the whole preceding proposition which is its An∣tecedent. Now therein is mention of the Priests offering first for their own sins, then for the sins of the People, and this it is said Christ did, that is, he offered first for his own sins, and then for the People. But to answer the whole Antecedent in both parts of it, it is indispensably necessary that he must, as they did, offer two distinct offerings, one, namely the First, for himself, and the other, or then, for the Peo∣ple. For so did they, so were they obliged to do by the Law, and other offerings for themselves and the People in any other order or method there never was nor could be. But this is expresly contradictory unto what is here affirmed of the Lord Christ and his offering; namely, that he offered himself once only, and if but once, he could not offer first for himself, then for the People; Nor at all for himself and them in the same offering, which the High Priests themselves could not do. 3. This Insinuation not only enervates, but is contradictory unto the principal Design of the Apostle in the verse foregoing and in that which follows. For, ver. 26. He, on purpose describes our High Priest by such Properties and Qualifications as might evidence him to have no need to offer for his own sins, as those other Priests had. For from this consideration that he was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, the Apostle makes this Inference, that he needed not to offer for him∣self as those High Priests did. But according unto this interpretation, no such thing ensues thereon; but notwithstanding all those Qualifications he had need to offer for his own sins. And, ver. 28. the Difference he puts between him and them is this, that they were men Subject to infirmities, but he is the Son consecrated for ever; which apparently exempts him from any necessity of offering for himself. For as is apparent from the Antithesis, he was not subject unto any of those infirmities which made it necessary unto them, to offer for themselves. Wherefore the whole de∣sign of the Apostle in these verses is utterly perverted and overthrown by this In∣terpretation. 4. When those priests offered for their own sins, their sins were of the same na∣ture with the sins of the People. If the Priest that is anointed, shall sin after the man∣ner of the People, Levit. 4. 3. If therefore this be to be repeated , this he did when he offered for his own sins and of the People, sins being only expressed in the first place and understood in the later, sins properly so called must be intended, which is the height of Blasphemy. 5. If the Lord Christ offered for himself or his own Infirmities, then those Infir∣mities were such as were Obstructions and hinderances unto his offering for others; for that is the only Reason why he should offer for their removal or taking away. But this is so far otherwise as that indeed he was obnoxious unto no Infirmity, but what was necessary that he might be a meet High Priest and Sacrifice for us. For so was every thing that is inseparable from humane nature; which is utterly de∣structive of this Figment. 6. This Imagination will admit of no tolerable sense in its Exposition or Appli∣cation. For how can we conceive that the Lord Christ offered for his own infirmities, that is, his sorrows, sufferings, and obnoxiousness unto death? It must be by his suf∣ferings and death; for in and by them he offered himself unto God. But this is absurd and foolish: By his suffering he offered for his sufferings. What he offered for, he took away, as he did the sins of the People. But his own sorrows and sufferings he took not away, but underwent them all. 7. It is contradictory unto the principal Maxim of the Socinians with respect unto the Priesthood of Christ. For they maintain, that his one perfect offering or Expiatory Sacrifice was in Heaven only, and not on the earth. But he could not at his Appearance in the Holy place offer for his own infirmities and miseries, for
they were all past and finished, himself being exalted in Immortality and Glory. These things are sufficient to repress the vanity of this Figment. But because there is no small danger in the proposal that hath been made of it, I shall briefly examine what Reasons its Authors and Promoters do produce to give countenance unto it. Thus proceeds and argues Crellius or Schlictingius on the place. Peccata pre∣prie dicta, id est, divinar am legnm transgressiones, cum in Christo locum non habeant ullum, (1) Necesse est ut in voce peccatorum sit improprietas, significenturque Christi infirmitates & perpessiones, (2) Qua de re jam egimus. cap. 5. ver. 2. 3. (3) Sic vidi∣mus istarum infirmitatum & perpessionum contraria, Sanctitatis & innocentiae nomine paulo ante versu superiore describi; qui duo versiculi mutuo se illustrant: (seipsum offe∣rens.) (4) Docet quando Christus pro se obtulerit, preces nimirum & supplicationes ut cap. 5. ver. 7. vidimus: tunc nempe cum in eo esset, ut seipsum deo offerret, cum sese ad oblationem sui ipsius accingeret, hoc est, cum tanquam victima mactaretur. (5) Ob∣latio enim Christi sic hoc loco extendenda est ut mortem ipsius tanquam necessarium ante∣cedens, & quoddam veluti initium complectatur. (6) Cum vero hic versiculus ex supe∣riori commate pendeat & inferatur, vel hinc apparet, non agi isthic de moribus, sed de natura, deque felici statu ac conditione nostri Pontificis. Nec enim ideo Christus opus non habet amplius pro se offerre, quod Sanctus sit & inculpatus, ratione morum seu actionum suarum, cum semper talis fuerit; sed quod in perpetunm ab omnibus malis & afflictionibus sit liberatus. I have transcribed his words at large, because what is offered by others unto the same Purpose, is all included in them. But the whole of it will be easily re∣moved. For, 1. The Impropriety of speech pretended, that sins should be put for Infirmities, is that which the use of the Scripture will give no countenance unto. It is only feigned by these men at their pleasure. Let them, if they can, produce any one place, where by sins not moral evils, but natural infirmities are intended. But by feigning Impro∣prieties of speech at our pleasure we may wrest and pervert the Scripture, even also as we please. 2. Of the Infirmities of the Humane Nature of Christ, which were necessary that he might be a Sacrifice, and usefull unto his being a Priest, we have also treated in the place quoted; chap. 5. 2, 3. Whereunto the Reader is referred. 3. Not the contrary unto these Infirmities, but the contrary unto sin Original and Actual, is intended by Holiness and Innocency in the verse foregoing, as hath been proved in the Exposition of that verse, whereunto the Reader is referred. 4. The Lord Christ offered up prayers and supplications unto God, when he offered himself: not to expiate his own infirmities by his offering, but that he might be carried through and supported in his Oblation which he offered for the sins of the People; and had success therein. See the exposition on chap. 5. 7. 5. He is more kind than ordinary in extending the Oblation of Christ unto his death also. But he recalls his grant, affirming that he did only prepare himself for his offering thereby. And this also casts his whole Exposition into much confusion. Christ offered himself once, saith the Apostle; , once, and at one time. This I suppose is agreed. Then he offered for himself and his own sins, or not at all. For he offered but once, and at one time; Where then did he thus offer himself and when? In Heaven upon his Ascension, say the Socinians with one accord. Where then and when did he offer for himself? On the earth. Then he offered himself twice? No, by no means, he offered not himself on the Earth; how then did he offer for himself on the earth? He did not indeed offer himself on the Earth, but he prepared himself for his offering on the Earth, and therein he offered for himself; that is, he did, and he did not offer himself upon the earth. For they cannot evade by saying that he did it when he offered up prayers on the Earth: For the Apostle says expresly in this place, that what he did, he did it when he offered himself. And it must be by such an of∣fering as answered the offering of the high Priest for himself, which was bloody. 6. The close of his Discourse, whereby he would prove the Truth of his Exposi∣tion of the verse foregoing from his Interpretation of this, is absurd; as that which would give countenance, unto an evident falsehood, from what is more evi∣dently so.
Grotius adds little unto what Schlictingius offers in this case. Only he tells us that  is taken for those griefs which are commonly the punishment of sin; Rom. 6. 10. But it is a mistake: , in that place, signifies nothing but the Guilt of Sin, which Christ died to expiate and take away. He died once for sin, that is, he suffered once for sin. He says moreover, that profluvium mulierum is called  Levit. 12. 8. 15. 13. as also is the leprosie; chap. 14. 13. But herein also he is mistaken; both the one and the other subject unto those defiling Distempers, were appointed to offer a sin-offering for those sins, which those Defilements were tokens of, and the sin of Nature which they proceed from. Again he says, that Christ in his offering was freed from those infirmities and miseries, per mortem acceleratam. But his death was not hasted one moment until all was finished; nor did he offer for the hastening of his Death. And his ensuing words are most ambiguous; Christ offered, pro doloribus istis qui solent peccatorum poenae esse, & quos Christus occasione etiam peccatorum humani generis toleravit. If the sorrows intended were not true punishments of sin, they could not be offered for. And what sorrows Christ under∣went so far as they were penal, he offered for them when he offered for the sins of the People, and not otherwise. But those which are called his own sins, must be every way distinct from the sins of the People, and have no Relation unto them; as the sins of the High Priests of old had not. Wherefore if by the occasion of the sins of men, he intend, that his Sufferings and Griefs were for the sins of men, then he offered for them when he offered for the sins of the People, when he bare our sins and sorrows, and had no need to offer distinctly for them as his own. And if it were a sorrow that was not for sin, it cannot be called Sin. Christs sufferings on the occasion of the sins of mankind, is well understood by those who are any way skilled in the Socinian Mysteries. Hammond says the same. He both (saith he) offered for himself, that is, made expiation as it were (not to deliver himself from sin, for he was never guilty of any) but from the infirmities assumed by him, but especially from death it self; and so is now never likely to dye, and to determine his Melchisedecian Priesthood. Ans. (1) To make expiation as it were from the infirmities assumed by him, or to be delivered from them, is hard to be understood. (2) Much more is it, how by death wherein he offered himself, he should make expiation to be delivered from death it self. (3) And it is as hard to say, that Christ offered for himself once by death, that he might dye no more; seeing it is appointed unto all men only once to dye. I have digressed thus far to crush this novel Invention, which as it is untrue and alien from the sense of the Apostle, so it hath in the expression of it an ungrateful sound of Impiety. But I expect not so much Sobriety, as that considering the means of its conveyance unto the minds of men at present, it should not be vented again, until what hath been here pleaded in its confutation be answered. At pre∣sent I shall proceed with the Exposition of the remainder of the words. How, and what Christ offered for the sins of the People is declared in the words remaining. 1. For the way or manner of it. He did it , Once only. This is directly opposed unto the frequency of the legal Sacrifices repeated daily as there was occa∣sion. , Those High Priests offered , daily, on all occasions; He , Once only. And I cannot but observe by the way that this Assertion of the Apostle is no less absolutely exclusive of the Missatical Sacrifices of the Priests of the Roman Church, than it is of the Levitical Sacrifices of the High Priest of the Church of the Jews. Their Expositors on this place do generally affirm in plea for their Church, that they offer it not to make expiation of sins, but only to represent and make application of the one Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross. But in their Mass it self they speak otherwise, and expresly offer it to God a Sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead. Neither yet do we enquire unto what End they do what they do: and this is all they say, that they offer the same sacrifice that Christ did, that is, himself. And this they do a thousand times more frequently, than the Expiato∣ry Sacrifices were among the Jews. Neither were their Sacrifices offered pro∣perly by Gods Appointment to make Attonement for Sin by their own vertue and Efficacy; but only to be a Representation and Application of the Sacrifice of Christ to come. Whatever ends they therefore fancy unto themselves, by pretending to
offer the same sacrifice that Christ did, they contradict the words of the Apostle, and wholly evert the force of his Argument. For if the same sacrifice which the Lord Christ offered be often offered and had need so to be, the whole Argument to prove the excellency of his Priesthood in that he offered himself but once, above them who often offered the same sacrifices, falls to the ground. And hence also the Foundation of this fiction is rased. For it is, that the Lord Christ offered himself at the supper the night before he was hetraied, as the Trent Council affirms, Sess. 22. Cap. 1. For if he did so, he offered himself more than once, twice at least; which being a matter of Fact, is to give the Apostle the lye. What he offered is expressed in the last place, and therein the Reason is contained why he offered but once, and needed not to do so daily, as those Priests did. And this is taken from the excellency of his offering, he offered , him∣self.  And this gives the highest preference of the Priesthood of Christ above that of Levi. For, (1.) Those Priests had nothing of their own to offer, but must be furnished with offerings from among the other Creatures. (2.) Though they had the best from them, the blood and fat, yet it was but the blood of Calves, and Sheep, and Goats. And what can this do for the real Expiating of the sins of our souls? See Micah 6. 6, 7, 8. Wherefore when at any time the People were brought un∣der any serious conviction of sin, they could not but apprehend, that none of these sacrifices, however multiplyed, could deliver them from their Guilt. But the Lord Christ had something of his own to offer, that which was originally and abso∣lutely his own, not borrowed or taken from any thing among the Creatures. And this was himself, a sacrifice able to make Attonement for all the sins of Mankind. And from the words thus expounded we may observe, 1. That no sinful man was meet to offer the great Expiatory sacrifice for the Church; much less is any sinful man fit to offer Christ himself. As the first part of this Asser∣tion declares the insufficiency of the Priests of the Church of the Jews, so doth the latter the vain pretence of the Priests of the Church of Rome. The former the Apostle proves and confirms expresly. For no other high Priest but such a one as was in himself perfectly sinless, did become us, or our state and condition. He that was otherwise could neither have any thing of his own to offer, and must in the first place offer for himself, and this he must be doing day by day. And the latter on many accounts is a vile presumptuous Imagination. For a poor sinful worm of the Earth, to interpose himself between God and Christ, and offer the one in sacri∣fice unto the other, what an issue is it of Pride and Folly? 2. The Excellency of Christs Person and Priesthood freed him in his offering from many things that the Levitical Priesthood was obliged unto. And the due Apprehen∣sion hereof is a great guide unto us in the consideration of those Types. For many things we shall meet withal which we cannot see how they had a particular Accom∣plishment in Christ, nor find out what they did prefigure. But all of them were such that their own infirm state and condition did require. Such was their outward Call and Consecration which they had by the Law, in the sacrifice of beasts, with certain washings and unctions, their sacrificing often, and for themselves, their Succession one to another, their Purifications or legal Pollutions. These and sundry things of like nature were made necessary unto them from their own sins and infir∣mities, and so had no particular Accomplishment in Christ. However in general all the Ordinances and Institutions about them all, taught the Church thus much, that nothing of that was to be found in the true high Priest wherein they were de∣fective. 3. No Sacrifice could bring us unto God and save the Church to the utmost, but that wherein the Son of God himself was both Priest and Offering. Such an High Priest became us who offered himself once for all. And we may consider, (1.) That this was one of the greatest effects of infinite divine Wisdom and Grace. His Incarnation wherein he had a body prepared for him for this purpose, his call to his Office by the Oath of the Father and Unction of the Spirit, his sanctifying himself to be a sacrifice, and his offering up himself through the eternal Spirit unto God, are all full of Mysterious Wisdom and Grace. All these wonders of wis∣dom and love, were necessary unto this great End of bringing us unto God. (2.) Every part of this Transaction, all that belongs unto this sacrifice, is filled up with Perfection, that no more could be required on the part of God, nor is any thing
wanting to give countenance unto our unbelief. The Person of the Priest and the Offering it self are both the same, both the Son of God. One view of the Glory of this Mystery, how satisfactory is it unto the souls of Believers? (3.) A distinct consideration of the Person of the Priest and of his sacrifice will evidence this Truth unto the Faith of Believers. What could not this Priest pre∣vail for in his Interposition on our behalf? Must he not needs be absolutely preva∣lent in all he ayms at? Were our cause intrusted in any other hand; what security could we have that it should not miscarry? And what could not this offering make Attonement for? What sin, or whose sins could it not expiate? Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the World. 4. It was burdensom and heavy work to attain relief against sin and settled Peace of Conscience under the old Priesthood, attended with so many weaknesses and infirmities. Herein lyes the greatest part of that Yoke which the Apostle Peter affirms that nei∣ther they nor their Fathers were able to bear, Act. 15. 10. Which the Lord Christ gives us deliverance from, Math. 11. 27, 28, 29, 30. VER. XXVIII. For the Law maketh men High Priests which have Infirmity; but the Word of the Oath which was since the Law, maketh the Son, who is consecra∣ted for evermore. The Apostle in this verse summeth up the whole of his precedent Discourse, so as to evidence the true and proper Foundation, which all along he hath built and proceeded on. (1.) One Principle there was agreed upon between him and the Hebrews who adhered unto Mosaical Institutions; and this was, that an High Priest over the Church there must be; and without such an one there is no approach unto God. So it was under the Law, and if the same order be not continued, the Church must needs fall under a great disadvantage. To lose the High Priest out of our Religion, is to lose the Sun out of the firmament of the Church. This was a common Principle agreed on between them, whereon the Apostle doth proceed. (2.) He Grants unto them that the High Priests who officiated in the Taber∣nacle and the Temple were called and appointed by God unto their Office, in the Law. (3.) Hereon ensued the main Difference between him and them. They were perswaded and hoped that these Priests should continue for ever in the Church with∣out change or Alteration. He contends that there was a time designed wherein they were to be removed, and a Priest of another order to be introduced in their room; which would be so far from being any disadvantage unto the Church, as that the whole safety, glory, and blessedness thereof did depend thereon. And this he proves by many cogent and irrefragable Arguments unto them. As, 1. That before the erection of the Levitical Priesthood by the Law, there was another priest of the High God, who was far greater and more excellent than those Priests, yea, than Abraham himself from whom they derived all their Privi∣ledges. 2. Because after the giving of the Law and the setting up of the Levitical Priest∣hood thereby, God again promiseth to raise up another Priest, in another kind, af∣ter another order, after the manner of him who was called unto that office long before the giving of the Law. Wherefore he was prefigured before the Law, and promised after the Law, so that his Introduction could not be prejudiced by the Law. 3. That this High Priest thus promised, neither was to be nor could be, of the same stock, Nature, or Order with the Levitical priests, but one that was not only distinct from them, but really inconsistent with them. He manifests that there was no possibility they should be priests together, or that the Church should be under the conduct of them both. 4. Whereas hereon it may be said, who knows whether this change and Alte∣ration will be to the Advantage of the Church or no, whether it were not better to adhere unto these priests which we have already, than relinquishing them and all Be∣nefits by them, to betake our selves unto this new High Priest; the Apostle in an∣swer
unto this possible Objection, declares in sundry instances the excellency of this other Priest above them. And not only so, but he proves undeniably that by all which those other Priests did perform in divine service, and by all that the Law could effect, whereby they were constituted and made Priests, there was no Access unto God, no Perfection, nor Consummation in peace of Conscience to be obtained. For there were so many defects and weaknesses that accompanied them and their ser∣vices, as rendred them wholly unable to attain those great Ends. On the other hand he manifesteth and proveth that by this one single High Priest now introduced, and his one sacrifice offered once for all, by reason of the perfection of the one and the other, all those blessed Ends were compleatly accomplished. This being the Design of the Apostles Discourse in this Chapter, he giveth us a summary of the whole, and of the principal Grounds which he proceeds upon, with wonderful Brevity in this last verse. For upon an acknowledgement of the different Principles mentioned, he shews us in an elegant Antithesis, 1. The different means of the constitution of these different Priests; on the one hand, the Law; and on the other, the Word of the Oath. 2. The different times of their constitution; the one in the giving of the Law; the other after the Law. 3. The difference of their Persons; those of the first sort were Men, and no more; the other was the Son. 4. The Difference in their state and condition; the former had infirmities, the later is consecrated for ever. 5. This also is included in the words, that those of the first sort were many, men that had infirmities; he of the later was one only. And in these things, as we shall briefly see, be the springs of all the Arguments which the Apostle hath used in this case, and a plain Representation is given us of the Truth he contended for. 1. The first Difference is in the constituting Principles of these distinct Offices: That on the part of the Levitical Priesthood was  the Law, that is, the , ceremonial Law, as we call it; the Law given in Horeb, concerning Religious Rites, the way and manner of the Solemn worship of God in the Tabernacle. It was not the Moral Law, not immediatly the commands of the Decalogue, but the especial Law of divine Service and Worship that is intended. And what doth the Law do? , It appointeth. It did so Morally, God . appointed them in and by the Law. And he speaks in the Present Tense. So long as the Law continueth in force and Efficacy it appointeth such Priests. None other are to be looked for in, or expected from the Law. Now a Moral Rule or Institu∣tion is sufficient to convey power and Authority of office unto men. So is it under the New Testament. It is the Gospel that makes Ministers, and not the People or any others, who have no power but only to act in Obedience unto the Laws there∣of. Hereby those other Priests came so to be. Hereunto is opposed , the word of the Oath, as the constitut∣ing cause of this new Priest and Priesthood. Thus much it had in common with . the other way. It was a word as that was also. The Law was , The word spoken by Angels. chap. 2. 2. The word of God, though spo∣ken by them. And a word in this sense is either a meer word of command, or a word of Promise; either of which is sufficient to constitute an office, being De∣clarations of the Authority of God himself. By this Word was both the Office of the Priesthood of Christ consecrated, and himself called to be a Priest. See the Exposition on chap. 5. ver. 5, 6. But herein especially did this Word excel the Word of the Law, in that it was confirmed by the Oath of God. It was the Word, the Will, the Promise of God declared in and by his Oath. And herein hath it many Advantages above the Law, which was not so. As, 1. An high federal Solemnity. Things confirmed by an Oath are peculiarly Sa∣cred; and are distinguished from all things that are not so; And therefore the In∣terposition of an Oath was originally (it may be, solely) used in the confirmation of Covenants about things of moment, and wherein several Parties were highly con∣cerned. 2. An Oath declares the immutability of that Counsel whence the matter sworn unto doth proceed. In the giving of the Law, God declared his will, so far as to what he would have the People at present obliged unto. But he did not by any
means declare that he had in his unchangeable counsel determined, that the kind of worship, and state of the Church then erected, should continue for ever. Yea, he did many ways intimate that he did reserve unto himself the power of altering the whole. But now the Immutability of Gods Counsel is declared by his Oath. What was this Oath of God, and how the Lord Christ was made a Priest thereby, hath been before at large declared. The Apostle takes notice of it here only as it was given out in prophecy by David which was but a Solemn Declaration of the Eter∣nal compact between the Father and the Son. 2. The Difference of the Time wherein these Priesthoods were ordained, is in∣cluded on the one hand and expressed on the other. For the former, it was when the Law was given, whereby they were made Priests: the latter was , . after the Law, or the giving of it. This, I confess, doth not appear at first view to be to the advantage of the Apostles Design, namely, that this Oath was after the Law. For in another place he expresly argues on the other hand, that what is first in such cases hath the Preeminence; and cannot be disanulled by what doth ensue. Gal. 3. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot disanul, that it should make the Promise of none effect. May it not be as well said that this Oath, which was declared about four hundred years after the giving of the Law, could not disanul it, or make it of none effect? The Objection being not without its difficulty, I shall spend a lit∣tle time in the full solution of it. I answer therefore, That what followeth after can∣not Disanul what went before, 1. If that which is afterwards introduced be consistent with what was before esta∣blished. For in that case there is no intimation of the Pleasure of God that it should be disanulled. He may add what he will, unto what is already ordained, so it be consistent with it, without prejudicing the first Institution. 2. Especially it cannot do so, if it be inferior unto that which went before, either in Dignity or use and benefit, and so be made subservient unto it. 3. And it must be invalid unto any such Purpose, if it had no other antecedent foundation, that did indeed precede the former Grant: for if it have so, it may ra∣tionally be supposed to be farther declared on purpose to supersede it. Now thus it was with the Law in respect unto the Promise, which (as the Apo∣stle proves) going before it, could not be disanulled by it. For, 1. The Law as it was then ordained of God, was consistent with the Promise; Yea, and given in the pursuit of it; so as that there was no need that any should forsake the Promise to comply with the Will of God in giving the Law. 2. The Law as it was inferior in Dignity and Use unto the Promise, so it was made subordinate and subservient unto it. For the man end of giving the Law, was to guide and direct the Church unto the right use and benefit of the Promise. 3. The Promise had an absolute priority above the Law. There was no Ground or Foundation laid for the Law, no intimation of its future introduction, before the giving of the Promise: And therefore the Promise could not be disannulled by it. But in the present case all things are otherwise. For, 1. The Priesthood confirmed by an Oath, and introduced after the Law, was utterly inconsistent with the Law and the Priesthood thereof. This the Apostle hath fully proved before. Wherefore of necessity either the Law and the Priest∣hood of it must be disannulled, or the Oath of God must be of none effect; For what he had sworn unto was inconsistent with the continuance of what was before appointed for a time. 2. This new Priesthood could no way be made subordinate or subservient unto the other, so as to leave it a place in the Church. But as it was eminently above it in Dig∣nity and Benefit; so the use of the other was only to be an Introduction unto it, and therefore must cease thereon. 3. This Priesthood had its Reasons, Grounds, Foundation and Representation long before the giving of the Law. For besides that it had a virtual constitution in the first Promise 2000 years before the giving of the Law, it had also a Typical Re∣presentation before it in the Priesthood of Melchisedek; and it received only a De∣claration and Confirmation in the Account given of the Oath of God after the Law. Wherefore the direct contrary is here the matter in hand, unto what is spoken
unto in that other Argument of the Apostle. And therein the first thing, namely, the Promise was confirmed by an Oath, the latter was not. But here the latter which was after the Law, was confirmed by the Oath of God, which the Law was not. And hereon its being after the Law is a sufficient Evidence of its preeminence above the Law, and all the Institutions of it. For hereby was that introduced which was to supply all the defects and weaknesses of the Law and its Priesthood, and so to disanul them and take them out of the way. 3. The third Difference is, that the Law made , Men to be High Priests;  that is, those who were meer men and no more. And therefore notwithstanding the Office and Dignity which they were called and exalted unto, they were all but servants in the House of God, nor could they be any other as the Apostle proves, Chap. 3. 5. In opposition hereunto, the Word of the Oath makes , the Son an High Priest; that Son who is Lord over the whole House, and whose the House is,  as he declares in the same place, ver. 5, 6. And in this word the Apostle openeth the necessity and Dignity of the Priesthood of the New Testament. For it consists in the Dignity of the Person designed unto that Office. This was no other, nor could be other, but the Son, the Eternal Son of God. Filium, nempe Dei, non ho∣minem caeteris parem, nascendi sorte, saith Grotius; as though Christ were here called the Son, that is the Son of God, because he was differenced from other Men, in the way and manner of his birth, being born of a Virgin. But this is not the true and formal Reason of this Denomination. Christ is the Son of God by Eternal Gene∣ration, and thereon alone doth his Sonship depend. But many ways there were, whereby he was manifested so to be, especially by his miraculous Conception and Nativity, and by his Resurrection from the Dead. Hence with respect unto them he is sometimes called the Son of God; not that he became so thereby, but was only declared so to be. This therefore the Apostle resolves the force of his Argument into, namely, the Dignity of the Person of our High Priest, he was the Son of God; for hereon the whole excellency and efficacy of his Priesthood doth depend. 4. It is added in the last place that the Law made men Priests, , that had infirmity: subject to infirmities. And these were of two sorts, Moral and  Natural; neither could they be freed from either of them during the whole time of their Priesthood. The first were their Sins, hence they were obliged continually to offer sacrifice for their own sins, and that to the very last day of their Lives. The summe and issue of their natural weaknesse was death it self. This seized on every one of them, so as to put an Everlasting end unto their sacerdotal Administrations. But wherefore did the Law make such Priests, men, meer men, that had infirmity, subject to sin and death, so as to put an end unto their Office? The Reason is, be∣cause it could neither find any better, nor make them any better whom it found in that condition. The Law must be content with such as were to be had, and in it self it had no power to make them better. In opposition hereunto it is said the Word of the Oath made the Son , consecrated for ever. What was the consecration of the Lord Christ unto . his Office and wherein it did consist, I have before at large declared. That which the Apostle intends here, in an especial manner, is his absolute freedom from the infirmi∣ties which those other Priests were obnoxious unto, namely, such Infirmities in the first place as with respect whereunto, sacrifice was to be offered unto God, that is, their own sins. And the Apostle here opposing the Consecration of Christ, unto their having Infirmities, sheweth sufficiently that he intended not to insinuate that he offered for any infirmities of his own, seeing he is wholly different from them and opposed unto them who had such infirmities. And if he had offered for his own in∣firmities, the Apostle could not have objected it as the weaknesse of the Law; that it made Priests which had infirmity; for in that sense, the Word of the Oath should have done so also. But whereas his Exaltation into Heaven for the discharge of the remaining Duties of his Priesthood in his Intercession for the Church, belonged un∣to the perfection of his Consecration, he was therein also freed from all those natu∣ral Infirmities which were necessary unto him that he might be a sacrifice. The en∣suing Observations offer themselves unto us. 1. There never was, nor never can be any more than two sorts of Priests in the Church, the one made by the Law, the other by the Oath of God. Wherefore,
2. As the bringing in of the Priesthood of Christ after the Law and the Priesthood constituted thereby, did abrogate and disanul it; so the bringing in of another Priesthood after his, will abrogate and disanul that also. And therefore, 3. Plurality of Priests under the Gospel overthrows the whole Argument of the Apo∣stle in this place, and if we have yet Priests that have infirmities, they are made by the Law, and not by the Gospel. 4. The summe of the Difference between the Law and the Gospel, is issued in the Difference between the Priests of the one and the other state, which is inconceivable. 5. The great Foundation of our Faith, and the hinge whereon all our consolation de∣pends, is this, that our High Priest is the Son of God. 6. The Everlasting continuance of the Lord Christ in his Office, is secured by the Oath of God.
AN EXPOSITION OF THE Eighth Chapter OF THE EPISTLE OF THE HEBREWS. CHAP. VIII. There are Two General Parts of this Chapter. I. A Father Explication of the Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ, or of Christ himself, as vested with that Office; that is, both in his Personal Glo∣ry, and in the usefulness of his Office unto the Church, above those of the Order of Aaron. II. A further confirmation hereof; wherein is introduced the consideration of the two Covenants; the Old and the New. For unto the former was the whole Administration of the Levitical Priests confined. Of the latter Christ as our High Priest was the Mediator and Surety. And therefore the Apostle fully proves the excellency of this New Covenant above the Old, which redounds unto the Glory of its Mediator. The First part is contained in the first five verses: the latter extends from thence to the end of the Chapter. In the first Part two things are designed. (1.) A Recapitulation of some things before delivered. (2.) The Addition of some farther Arguments in the confirmation of the same Truth, so long before insisted on. Both of them he comprizeth in three instances of the excellency of Christ in his Priest∣hood or in the Discharge of his Office. 1. In his Exaltation and the Place of his present Residence: ver. 1. 2. In the Sanctuary whereof he is a Minister, and the Tabernacle wherein at present he doth administer, ver. 2. 3. In the Sacrifice he had to offer, or which he offered before his entrance into that Sanctuary, ver. 3. which he illustrates by two especial considerations, ver. 4, 5.
VER. 1. . ; Syr.  caput; vul. Capitulum, Summa; Beza. Caeterum eorum quae diximus haec summa est. Moreover this is the Sum of what we speak. Summatim au∣tem dicendo: to speak briefly, , Syr. —of all these things; the Head, Chief or Principal of all these things, vul. Super ea quae dicuntur. Rhem. the Sum concerning these things which be said. ; Syr. We have an High Priest, he who sitteth; omitting this word, or in∣cluding it in  is, ille. ; vul. magnitudinis; which the Rhemists render by Majesty, and retain Sedis for ; Beza. Majestatis illius; or, Throni, virtutis, magnificandi. VER. 1. Now of the things that are spoken, this is the sum: We have such an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the majesty in the Heavens. This first Verse contains two things. (1) A Preface unto that Part of the ensuing Discourse which immediately concerns the Priesthood of Christ, unto the end of ver. 5. (2) A Declaration of the first Preheminence of our High Priest, which the Apostle would have us in an especial manner to consider. The Preface is in these words; : which may be con∣sidered either as unto its Design in general, or as unto the Sense of the words. I. The Design of the Apostle in this Interlocution, (which is not unusual with him) is to stir up the Hebrews unto a diligent consideration of what he insisted on, and to leave an impression of it on their minds. And this he doth for two Reasons. 1. Least the Length and Difficulty of his preceding Discourse should have any way discomposed their minds, or wearied them in their Attention, so as that they could not well retain the substance of what he pleaded. In such cases it was always usual with them who pleaded important Causes before the wisest Judges, to recapitulate what had been spoken at length before, and to shew what hath been evinced by the Arguments they had used in their Plea. To this purpose speaks Quintilian, lib. 6. cap. 1. Perora∣tionis duplex ratio est posita, aut in rebus, aut in affectibus. Rerum repetitio aut congrega∣tio, quae Graece dicitur , a quibusdam Latinorum enumeratio, & memoriam Judicis reficit, & totam simul causam ante oculos ponit; & etiam si per singula minus moverat, turba valet. In hac, quae repetimus quam brevissime dicenda sunt, & (quod Graeco verbo patet) decurrendum per capita. How this whole course is steered by the Apostle in this place, is easie for any one to observe. 2. Because of the Importance of the matter in hand. He is treating of the very Head of all the Differences between the Law and the Gospel, between those who adhered unto Mosaical Institutions, and those who embraced the Faith. Hence he calleth them unto a renewed Attention unto what he delivered. For herein he set Life and Death before them, and was zealous for them, and earnest with them, that they would chuse Life, and not die in their Unbelief. II. The Sense of the words is to be considered. , is Capitulum, Caput, pro∣perly the Head of any living Creature. But the most frequent use of it is in a sense . metaphorical, as it is here used by the Apostle. And so it hath a double sense and use whereunto it is principally applied, for it hath also other significations; For (1) It is taken for that which is chief and principal in any matter, business or cause. , Isoc. The Head of the whole Business. , Plato, de Legib. lib. 1. The principal thing in Education or In∣struction. And so is Caput used among the Latines. Caput est in omni procuratione negotii & muneris publici, ut avaritiae pellatur etiam minima suspicio. This is the chief or
principal thing in the management of all publick Affairs, that all suspicion of Covetousness be far away. (2) It is taken for the sum and substance of what hath been spoken or declared, reduced into a short Scheme. , ut summatim dicam, Demosthenes. And so some render these words summatim dicendo. And Isocrates hath an expression directly answering that of the Apostle in this place, ad Nicoc. , the sum of what hath been spoken; so  Caput, the Head, is used in he Hebrew,  Exod. 30. 12. When thou takest the Head (the Sum) of the Children of Israel: So also Numb. 4. 2. And in this sense is  used by our Apostle as some think, Ephes. 1. 10. but it may have another sense in that place. In whether of these two significations it is here used by our Apostle, will best appear, from the consideration of what it is applied unto, . For these words also are capable of a double Interpretation. 1. , may be put for , in or among; and then the things themselves treated . of may be intended. And if so,  requires the first signification, the chief and principal thing or matter. Among all the things treated of, this is the principal; as indeed it is, and that which all other things in debate did depend upon. 2. If  be in a manner redundant, and no more is intended but , of the things spoken, then  is to be taken in the second signification, and denotes a Recapitulation of them. This is that which my Arguments amount unto, the Sum of what I have pleaded. Both these Senses are consistent. For the Apostle in this and the ensuing Verses doth both briefly Recapitulate, what he had evinced by his preceding Arguments, and also de∣clares what is the principal thing that he had contended for and proved. I incline unto the latter signification of the word, respected in our Translation; yet so as that the former also is true, and safely applicable unto the Text. And some Directions we may take from the wisdom of the Apostle in this manage∣ment of his present Subject, in our preaching or teaching of spiritual things. For, 1. When the nature and weight of the matter treated of, or the variety of Arguments wherein it is concerned, do require that our Discourse of it should be drawn forth unto a length more than ordinary, it is useful to refresh the minds, and relieve the memories of our Hearers, by a brief Recapitulation of the things insisted on. It is so, I say, some∣times; a this way is taken once, and but once by our Apostle. When it is necessary, is left unto the wisdom and choice of those who are called unto this work. I mean of such who labouring diligently and conscientiously in the discharge of it, do really consider at all times what is for the benefit and edification of their Hearers. But this is to be done onely on great and importent occasions; the usual way of the Repetition of the Heads of Sermons before preached, is in my judgment useless and unprofitable. 2. When Doctrines are important, and such as the eternal welfare of the Souls of men are immediately concerned in, we are by all means to endeavor an impression of them on the minds of our Hearers. Be they never so precious and worthy of all Acceptation, oft-times they will not obtain an Entrance into mens minds, unless they have an edge ministerially put upon them. Wherefore they are by all sutable means, with gravity and zeal to be called unto a diligent Attendance unto them. Weight is to be laid doctrinal∣ly in their delivery, on things that are of weight really in themselves. And this is the first Part of this Verse, or the Preface of what ensues. II. The second Part of it in the following words, contains the first general Prehemi∣nence of our High Priest, and that taken from his present and eternal state or con∣dition. And there are three things considerable in the words. (1.) Our Relation unto this High Priest. (2.) The general Denotation of him. (3.) His Eminency and Dignity in particular above all others. I. Our Relation unto him is expressed in the word , We have. For the Apo∣stle, together with his Assertion of the Priesthood of Christ, and the Declaration of the  Nature of it, doth frequently intersert the mention of our Interest therein, or our Re∣lation unto him in the Discharge of that Office; Such an High Priest became us, Chap. 7. 26. We have not an High Priest that cannot, &c. Chap. 4. 15. The High Priest of our Profession, Chap. 3. 1. And here, we have such un High Priest. And to the same purpose we have an Altar, Chap. 13. 10. And two things the Apostle seems to design herein.
1. The Dignity of the Christian Church, as now separated from the Church of the Jews. In all their confidence in their Worship, that which they principally boasted of was their High Friest and his Office. He was anointed with the Holy Oil. He wore the Garments that were made for Beauty and Glory. He had on his Forehead a Plate of Gold, with that glorious Inscription, Holiness unto Jehovah. And He alone entred into the Holy Place, having made Expiation of the Sins of the People. The Christians who were now separated from them, they despised, as those who had no lot nor portion in all this Glory; no such visible High Priest as they had. So the same Persons were afterwards reproached by the Pagans, that they had neither Temples, nor Altars, nor Images or visible Deities. So hard was it to call off the carnal minds of Men, from things vi∣sible and sensible in Divine Worship, unto those that are spiritual and heavenly. And herein lies the reproach of degenerated Christians, especially those of the Roman Church, that whereas the Gospel in asserting the pure, heavenly, spiritual Worship of God, had prevailed against the World, and triumphed over all that is carnal, invented to please the senses, and satisfie the superstitious minds of Men; they have made themselves the scorn and spoil of their conquered Enemies, by returning to the same kind of Worship in va∣rious degrees, which was before destroyed and triumphed over. And as therein they seem to make a publick acknowledgment, That the Gospel, in the management of their Predecessors, had much injured the World, in the Introduction of a Worship spiritual and divine, excluding all those visible Glories which it had found out to entertain the minds of Men; so it will appear in the issue that they have made themselves Transgres∣sors, by building up what was before destroyed. But the Primitive Christians did still oppose the spiritual Worship of sanctified Souls, in the observation of the Institutions of Christ, unto all the pretences of Glory and Beauty pleaded to be in their outward force. So the Apostle here, to evince the Dignity of the Christian Church against the Unbelief of the Jews, pleads their Relation unto an invisible spiritual High Priest, exalted in Glo∣ry and Dignity far above all that they could enjoy by virtue of a carnal Command∣ment. Whatever you think of us, whatever you boast of your selves, We have an High Priest; and that such an one, as he immediately declares. 2. He would teach us, that whatever be the Glory and Dignity of this High Priest, without an Interest in him, without an especial Relation unto him, unless we have an High Priest, we are not concerned therein. Many do give their assent unto this Truth, That Christ is an High Priest, but how or wherein he is so to them they know not, nor yet do they make any use of him as such. Yea, unto many, the principal mysteries of the Gospel are but meer Notions, and barren Speculations; what it is to be practically influenced by them, and to live in the power of them, they know not. That there is an High Priest they believe, but what it is for them to have an High Priest, they cannot understand. But this is that we are to look after, if we intend any benefit by it. And we may know whether we have an High Priest or no, really and substantially, by the use which we make of him as such in all our approaches unto God. For he presides over the whole House of God, and all the Sacred Services thereof. None can come unto the Father but by him. Through him have we Boldness, through him have we Ability, through him have we Access unto, and Acceptance with God. He presents both our Persons and Duties unto him. Without a daily improvement by Faith of the Office of Christ unto these ends, it cannot be said that we have an High Priest. 3. That the Office of the Priesthood of Christ is confined unto the Church, unto Believers. Theirs he is, and for them alone doth he administer before God in this Office. II. There is a general Denotation of this Priest, as to his Qualifications, in the word . He doth not now say, That we have an High Priest only, nor another High . Priest, not according to the Ordinances of the Law, which he had proved before, from the Type of Melchisedec, and the Testimony of the Psalmist; but moreover such an one as hath that Dignity and those Excellencies which he now ascribes unto him. The Salvation of the Church doth not depend meerly on its having an High Priest, which yet in it self is absolutely necessary thereunto, but on his Dignity and Excellency, his Exalta∣tion and Glory. Wherefore it is affirmed of him, That he is such an High Priest as is set on the right hand of the Throne of the glorious Majesty in the Heavens. And two things we must consider in these words: (1.) The Design of the Apostle in them: And (2) Their particular Interpretation.
1. The Design of the Apostle as we observed before, was not to prove the Reality of his Priesthood, that he was truly a Priest; nor yet absolutely the Qualifications of his Person, but his Dignity and Excellency. For our Lord Jesus Christ when he was on the earth, and whil'st he offer'd up to God his great propitiatory Sacrifice, was as unto his outward state and condition inferior unto the Levitical High Priests, who were in great honour and veneration among the People. But the state and condition of any in the bearing and discharge of an Office, is not to be esteemed and reckoned from what he condescends unto with respect unto any action or duty belonging unto that Office. For a King may condescend unto very mean Services, when the condition of his Subjects and good of the Kingdom require it of him. But it is to be reckoned from his durable estate, and perpetual abode therein. Now although our Lord Christ was for a season in a condition of deep humiliation, taking on him the form of a servant, and being esteem∣ed even as a worm and no man, which was necessary unto the Sacrifice he had to offer; yet as unto his durable state wherein he continues in the discharge of his Office, he is in∣comparably exalted above all the High Priests under the Law. And this is that which the Apostle designs here to declare. For what did the High Priest do, after he had offer∣ed the Anniversary Sacrifice of Expiation unto God? He entred indeed into the Holy Place, with the blood of the Sacrifice, presenting it there before the august Pledges of the presence of God. But all the while he was there, he stood before the Typical Throne or Ark and Mercy-seat, with Holy Awe and Reverence. And immediately on the dis∣charge of his present Duty, he was to withdraw and go out of the Holy Place. A great Priviledge this was, and a great Honor was herein put on the High Priest. For all others, both Priests and People, were everlastingly excluded out of that Sanctuary. But what is this unto the Glory of our High Priest? For after he had offered his great Sacrifice un∣to God, he entred not into the Holy Place made with hands, but into Heaven it self. And he entred not to stand with humble Reverence before the Throne, but to sit on the Throne of God at his right hand. Nor did he do so to abide there for a season, but for ever∣more. 2. As to the words themselves, we may observe that the Apostle three times in this Epistle maketh use of them with some little variety. Chap. 1. 3. Chap. 12. 2. And in this place. Chap. 1. 3. He sate down at the right hand of the Majesty on High: where there is no mention of the Throne. Chap. 12. 2. He is sate down at the right hand of the Throne of God: where Majesty is not added. Here we have both; the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty. In the first place, the Glory of his Kingly Power is intend∣ed, in the last, his Exaltation and Glory, as they ensued on his Sufferings; and in this place, the Declaration of his Glory in his Priestly Office. The same Glory and Advance∣ment hath respect unto various Acts and Powers in the Lord Christ. The manner of his enjoyment of this Dignity and Glory is expressed in the word . He sate down. Hereof there was nothing Typical in the Legal High Priest, . who never sate down in the Holy Place. But as he was in many things typed by the Levitical Priests, so in what they could not reach unto, he was represented in Melchisedec, who was both a King and a Priest. And hence he is prophesi'd of as a Priest upon his Throne, Zech. 6. 13. And the immutable stability of his state and condition is also in∣tended. 2. The Dignity it self consists in the place of his Residence, where he sate down; and this was, , at the right hand. See the Exposition hereof, Chap. 1. 3. : 3. This right hand is said to be . There is frequent mention in . the Scripture of the Thorne of God. A Throne is Insigne Regium, an Ensign of Royal Power. That intended by it, is the manifestation of the Glory and Power of God in his Authority and Sovereign Rule over all. 4. This Throne is here said to be, , of Majesty, or Glorious Greatness and . Power, that is, of God himself, for his essential Glory and Power is intended. The Right hand of the Throne of Majesty, is the same with the Right hand of God. Only God is represented in all his Glory, as on his Throne. Christ is sate down at the Right hand of God, as considered in all his glorious Power and Rule. Higher expression there cannot be used to lead us into an holy Adoration of the tremendous invisible Glory which is intended. And this is the eternal stable condition of the Lord Christ our High Priest. A state of inconceivable Power and Glory. Herein he dischargeth the remaining Du∣ties of his Mediation, according as the nature of his especial Offices do require. In this state doth he take care and provide for the application of the benefits of his Oblation or Sacrifice unto Believers; and that by Intercession whereof we have spoken.
5. Thus is he said to be , in the Heavens; as in the other place , in the Highest, that is, Heavens. And by the Heavens here, not these visible aspectable . Heavens are intended; for with respect unto them he is said to be exalted above all Heavens, and to have passed through them. But it is that which the Scripture calls the Heaven of Heavens, 1 Kings 8. 27. wherein is the especial residence and manifestation of the glorious presence of God. With respect hereunto our Saviour hath taught us to call on our Father which is in Heaven. And from the words we may observe that The principal Glory of the Priestly Office of Christ depends on the glorious Exaltation of his Person. To this end is it here pleaded by the Apostle, and thereby he evinceth his glorious Excellency above all the High Priests under the Law. To evidence and make useful this Observation, the things ensuing are to be observed. 1. The Divine Nature of Christ is capable of no real Exaltation by an addition of Glory, but only by the way of manifestation. So God absolutely is often in the Scri∣pture said to be exalted, that is, he is so, when he himself by any Acts of Grace or Pro∣vidence makes the eternal Glory of his Power, his Holiness, or any other properties of his Nature manifest and conspicuous; or when others ascribe unto him the Glory and Praise that are his due. So only may the Lord Christ be exalted or made glorious with re∣spect unto his Divine Nature, wherein he is essentially over all God blessed for ever. And there is in this way an Exaltation or Manifestation of Glory peculiar and proper unto the Person of Christ, as distinct from the Persons of the Father and the Holy Spirit. For he did in a peculiar way and manner for a season, forego and leave his Glory as to the Ma∣nifestation of it. For being (essentially) in the form of God, and counting it no rob∣bery to be equal with God, yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 6, 7. In his Incarnation, and his whole converse on the Earth, he cast a vail over his eternal Glory, so as that it appeared not in its own native lustre. Those indeed who believed on him, saw his Glory, the Glory as of the onely begot∣ten of the Father, full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. But they saw it darkly, and as in a Glass, during the time of his Humiliation. But after his Resurrection his Glory was unvailed and made conspicuous, even when he was declared to be the Son of God with power, according unto the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Rom. 1. 4. 2. The Person of Christ as to his Divine Nature, was always on the Throne, and is un∣capable of the Exaltation here mentioned, of sitting down at the right hand of it. Al∣though he came down from Heaven, though he descended into the lower parts of the Earth, although he was exposed unto all miseries, was obedient unto death, the death of the Cross, wherein God redeemed his Church with his own blood, yet did he all this in the humane nature that he assumed; his Divine Person can no more really leave the Throne of Majesty, than cease to be. So he saith of himself, No man hath ascended up to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in Hea∣ven, John 3. 13. His Ascension into Heaven in this place, which preceded the actual Ascension of his humane Nature, is nothing but his admission into the knowledge of heavenly things, of all the secrets of the counsel of God, see John 1. 18. Matth. 11. 27. For it is of the knowledge of heavenly mysteries, that he is there discoursing with Nico∣demus. In his Incarnation, he came down from Heaven, assuming a Nature upon the earth, the highest condescension of God. And whereas the actings of his power on the earth is often called his coming down from Heaven, Gen. 18. 21. Isa. 64. 1. How much more may this infinite condescension of the second Person in assuming our Nature be so called. But yet he was still in Heaven; the Son of man which is in Heaven. In his Divine Nature he was still on the Throne of Majesty. For this being an inseparable property of Divine Authority, he could never really forego it. Then 3. It is the Humane Nature of Christ, or Christ in his Humane Nature, or with re∣spect unto it, that is capable of this real Exaltation, by a real addition of Glory. It is not the manifestation of his Glary with respect unto his Humane Nature, but the real Colla∣tion of Glory on him after his Ascension, that is intended. This the whole Scripture testifieth unto, namely, a real communication of Glory unto Christ by the Father after his Ascension which he had not before. See Luke 24. 16. John 17. 24. Acts 2. 33. Acts 5. 31. Rom. 14. 9. Ephes. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. Phil. 2. 9, 10, 11. Hebr. 1. 3. Chap. 12. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 21. Rev. 5. 9. And concerning this Glory given him of God, we may observe 1. That it is not absolutely infinite and essentially divine Glory, This cannot be communicated unto any. A Creature, as was the Humane Nature of Christ, cannot be made God, by an essential communication of Divine Properties unto it. Neither are
they so communicable, nor is that a capable Subject of their inhesion. Wherefore they speak dangerously who assert a real communication of the Properties of the one Nature of Christ unto the other, so as that the Humane Nature of Christ shall be Omnipresent, Omnipotent and Omniscient: neither doth the Union of the two Natures in the Person of Christ, require any more the Transfusion of the Divine Properties into the Humane, than those of the Humane into the Divine. If therefore by that Union, the Humane Nature should be thought to be rendred subjectively omnipotent and omnipresent, the Di∣vine on the other hand must become limited and finite. But whatever belongs unto Christ with respect unto either Nature, belongs unto the Person of Christ, and therein he is all that he is in either Nature, and in both hath done and doth, what in either of them he hath done and doth, they yet continuing distinct in their essential Proper∣ties. 2. Yet this Exaltation and Glory of Christ in his Humane Nature is not only absolute∣ly above, but also of another kind, than the utmost of what any other created Being ei∣ther hath, or is capable of. It is more than any other Creature is capable of, because it is founded in the Union of his Person, a Priviledge which no other Creature can ever pre∣tend unto, or be made Partaker of unto Eternity, Hebr. 2. 16. This renders his Glory in his Exaltation of another kind than that of the most glorious Creatures in their best condition. Again, it consists greatly in that Power and Authority over the whole Cre∣ation and every individual in it, and all their Concerns, which is committed unto him. See our Explanation hereof at large on Chap. 1. ver. 3. 4. This Exaltation of the Person of Christ gives Glory unto his Office, as the Apostle here declares. It is the Person of Christ which is vested with the office of the Priest∣hood, or God could not have redeemed his Church with his own blood; although he ex∣ercise all the Duties of it, both here, below and above in the Humane Nature only. And it is the Person of Christ which is thus exalted and made glorious, although the es∣pecial Subject of this Exaltation and Glory be the Humane Nature only. And this gives Glory unto his Office. For 1. This is a manifest Pledge and Evidence of the absolute Perfection of his Oblati∣on, and that by one offering he hath for ever perfected them that are sanctified. When the High Priest of old appeared for awhile in the Holy Place, he returned again unto his former station, that he might be in a condition to offer another Sacrifice at the return of the year. And hence doth our Apostle prove, That none of the Worshippers were per∣fected by those Sacrifices. But our High Priest having offered himself once for all, now sitting down for ever at the right hand of God, in Glory and Majesty unconceivable, it is evident that he hath fully expiated the sins of all that come unto God by him. And this declares the Glory of his Office. 2. By his Glorious Power he makes all things subservient unto the ends of his medi∣ation. For he is given to be Head over all things to the Church. All things are in his Power and at his Disposal, as he is exalted at the right hand of God, and he will assu∣redly make them all work together for the good of them that do believe. And 3. He is able to render the Persons and Duties of Believers accepted in the sight of God. To present them unto God is the great remaining Duty of his Office. That they be so, is their only real concern in this world, and that alone which their minds are prin∣cipally exercised about. And what greater security can they have hereof, than the In∣terest and Glory which this their High Priest hath in Heaven? 1 John 2. 1, 2.
VER. 11. THE second Preeminence of our Lord Christ as our High Priest, which the Apo∣stle calls over in this Summary of his Discourse, is contained in this second Verse. . , Minister; , vul. Lat. Sanctorum. Rhem. of the Holies. Syr.  of the Holy House, or Domus Sanctuarii, of the House of the Sanctuary. Sanctuarii, of the Sanctuary; as we shall see. , vul. Lat. quod fixit Deus; which God hath fixed or pitched, Rhem. which our Lord pight; following the Original as to the word . Syr.  God.  and not a Son of man. Some Copies of the Vulgar Latine, Dominus. A Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man. There are two Parts of these words, expressing, 1. What is affirmed of our High Priest, namely, That he was a Minister of the San∣ctuary, and the true Tabernacle. 2. An Amplification of what is so affirmed, by the Description and Distinction of this Tabernacle; which the Lord fixed, and not man. In the first also there are two things. 1. The Assertion of his Office, He is a Minister. 2. The Assignation and Limitation of his Discharge of that Office; it is the San∣ctuary and true Tabernacle. 1. It is affirmed that he is , a Minister. Having declar'd the Glory and . Dignity which he is exalted unto, as sitting down at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in Heaven; what can be farther expected from him? There he lives, eternally happy in the enjoyment of his own Blessedness and Glory. Is it not reasonable it should be so, after all the hardships and miseries which he, being the Son of God, underwent in this world? Who can expect that he should any longer condescend unto Office and Duty? Neither generally have men any other thoughts concerning him. But where then would lie the advantage of the Church in his Exaltation, which the Apostle designs in an especial manner to demonstrate? Wherefore unto the mention of it he immediate∣ly subjoins the continuation of his Office. He is still , a Publick Minister for the Church. is to minister; either with God, or before God, as a Priest for others, or for God, in the Name of God towards others, as do Magistrates and Ministers of the Gospel. And therefore all these sorts are called , or said . The Lord Christ is expresly spoken of here as a Priest; it is a name of his Priestly Office wherein he acts towards God. Nor is he any where called or said to be  in any of his Actings from God towards us; although he be said therein to be , Rom. 15. 8. that is, he was so in the days of his flesh, but that name now no way belongeth unto him. He is not therefore styled a Minister, because he executeth the Purposes of God towards us, as Schlictingius fancieth; but he acts towards God and before God on our behalf, accord∣ing to the duty of a Priest. He went into Heaven to appear in the presence of God for us, and to discharge his Office before God on our behalf. And it is granted also, that by vertue thereof he doth also communicate all good things from God unto us. For the whole administration of things Sacred between God and the Church, is committed unto him. And we must observe, that
The Lord Christ in the Height of his Glory, condescends to discharge the Office of a pub∣lick minister in the behalf of the Church. We are not to bound our Faith on Christ, as unto what he did for us on the Earth. The Life and Efficacy of the whole of his Me∣diation depends on what he did antecedently thereunto, and what he doth consequently unto it. For in these things doth the Glory of his Love and Grace most eminently ap∣pear. Antecedently unto what he did on Earth, and to make way for it, there was his in∣finite condescension in assuming our Nature. He was in the forme of God, and in the eternal enjoyment of all the Blessedness which the Divine Nature is essentially accompa∣nied withal. Yet being thus Rich, this was his Grace, that for our sakes he became poor. This ineffable Grace and Love of Christ is the principal object of our Faith and Admi∣ration, as it is declared by the Apostle, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. And as he emptied himself and laid aside his Glory for a season, to undertake the Work of Meditation; So now he hath reassumed his Glory as to the manifestation of his Divine Power, and hath the highest Addition of Glory in his Humane Nature, by his exaltation at the right hand of God, yet he continueth his care of, and Love towards the Church, so as yet to dis∣charge the office of a Publick Minister in their behalf. As all the shame, reproach, mise∣ry with death that he was to undergo on the Earth deterred him not from undertaking this work: So all the Glory which he is environed withal in Heaven, diverts him not from continuing the Discharge of it. 2dly. There is a Limitation of this ministration of our High Priest, with respect unto its proper Object, and that in a double expression. For he is a Minister (1.) . (2.) . 1. He is so, . The word may be either of the Masculine or of the Neuter . Gender, and so respect either Persons or Things. If it be taken in the former way, it is of the Saints. And this is the ordinary sense of  in the Books of the New Testament; Saints, or Holy Persons. But they cannot be here precisely intended. And the Apostle useth this word frequently in another sense in this Epistle. from  of the Neuter Gender may have a double signification. (1.) Of Holy things in general. (2.) Of Holy Places. (1.) Of things, So the Uul. Lat. renders the word, Sanctorum, which the Rhemists translate Holies; that is, of Holy Persons or Holy things. And ours place Holy things in the Margen. And the sense is true, if the signification of the word be extended unto all Holy Things. For the ministration of them all is committed unto Jesus Christ. But the word hath yet a more peculiar significa∣tion. The inmost part of the Tabernacle, our Apostle calls , Chap. 9. 3. That is —the Holy of Holies, the most Holy Place. And absolutely he calls it , the Holyes. Chap 9. 8, 12, 24, 25. Chap. 13. 11. And in answer thereunto he calleth our Spiritual Presence before God, whereunto we have an Access by the Blood of Christ, by the same name; Chap. 10. 19. And hence the word is rendred by most Interpreters, the Sanctuary, as by the Syr. The House of the Sanctuary. Particular∣ly that Part of the Tabernacle whereinto the High Priest entred alone, and that but once a year. Take this Sanctuary properly and literally, and Christ was not the minister of it. He never entred into it, nor could, nor had any Right so to do, because it belonged and was ap∣propriated unto others as our Apostle declares, ver. 4. Wherefore we must take our Direction herein from the words following. For menti∣oning the whole Tabernacle, as he doth here one part of it, namely, the Sanctuary, he gives it a note of Distinction from the Old Tabernacle of Moses, the true Tabernacle. So must the Sanctuary be distinguished from that of Old. It is that which answers thereunto. And this is nothing but Heaven it self. Heaven not as considered absolutely, but as the Place of Gods glorious Presence, the Temple of the living God, where the worship of the Church is represented, and all its Affairs transacted. This is called Gods Sanctuary, Psal. 102. 19. He looked down from the height of his Sanctuary, from Heaven did the Lord be∣hold the Earth. And so the Apostle himself plainly interprets this place, Chap. 9. 24. Christ is not entred into the Holy Places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self. And this is called the Sanctuary, because there doth really dwell and abide all that was typically represented in the Sanctuary below. And therein doth the Lord Christ dis∣charge his Priestly Office for the good of the Church. It was a joyful time with the Church of Old, when the High Priest entred into the Holy Place. For he carried with him the Blood wherewith Attonement was made for all their sins. Yet he was quickly
again to leave that Place and his Ministration therein. But our High Priest abides in the Sanctuary, in the Holy Place for ever, alwaies representing the efficacy of the Blood whereby atonement was made for all our sins. As no Interposition between Heaven and us should discourage us, while Christ is there ministring for us; so his being there will draw our hearts and minds thither continually, if so be we are really interested in his Holy ministrati∣ons. These things are to some in darkness and obscurity if not wholly out of their sight, yet out of their Practice. In their Faith, Worship, and Obedience, they find no concernment in the Heavenly ministrations of this High Priest. Things within the Vail are hid from them. Yet would such Persons be esteemed Christians. But the Relief, the Direction, the Consolation, which true Believers do or may, in the due exercise of Faith, receive by the consideration hereof, are gracious and pleasant, yea full of Glory. The second Part of the Limitation of the ministration of our High Priest is in these . words, , and of that true Tabernacle, which is farther described by its efficient cause expressed both positively and negatively; which God pitched and not man. Expositors generally agree, that by True in this Place, that which is Substantial, Solid and abiding is intended. For it is opposed unto that which is Umbratile, Transitory and Pigurative. The Old Tabernacle could in no sense be said to be false or deceiving, for it was an Ordinance of God, set up and used by his Appointment, and gave true directions unto its proper end. But it was Figurative and Typical, denoting somewhat that was to be the true and substantial Tabernacle of God. So is the expression interpreted, John 6. 23. Moses gave you not the Bread from Heaven, but my Father giveth you the true Bread from Heaven; that is, Spiritually substantial and abiding, nourishing the soul un∣to eternal Life. But what is the Tabernacle here intended, deserves our diligent enquiry. And I find a fourfold sense to be given of these words; The true Tabernacle. 1. Some (as Grotius) take it for this whole Universe, the Fabrick of Heaven and Earth. This some, even among the Heathen, have called the Tabernacle and Temple of God. This he hath made as it were to dwell in, as a certain fixed Place for the manifestation of his Glory. And whereas the ministry of Christ, at least as unto the effects of it, is not confi∣ned unto any certain Place, above or below, to no material Tabernacle or Temple; The whole universe is called his Tabernacle, as being that which is true, substantial, and abiding. And thus it may answer what is affirmed of all Power being given unto him in Heaven and Earth, and his being given to be the Head over all things unto the Church. I see nothing absurd in this Opinion, nor contradictory unto the Analogy of Faith. But the Design of the Apostle in using these words and expressions, will not allow this to be his especial meaning. For somewhat he doth intend that the Old Tabernacle did typify and represent, which it did not the Fabrick of the Universe, but that especial pattern which was shewed unto Moses in the Mount. 2. Some with more probability do judge, that by the true Tabernacle, the Universal Spiritual, Catholick Church, is intended. For this is compared expressly unto a Taberna∣cle, Isa. 33. 20. Chap. 54. 2. And herein doth God dwell, and walk amongst men. Hereof Christ may be said to be the minister. For as he is the Head of it, so he dwelleth in it. And it is undoubtedly in the behalf of this Tabernacle, that he continueth to ad∣minister in the Holy Place: and all the Benefits of his Ministration do redound here∣unto. But yet all this doth not suffice to have the Lord Christ called the Minister of this Ta∣bernacle. This indeed is that which he ministreth for, but it is not that which he ministreth by. The Tabernacle and the things contained in it were the means of worship, and that which was materially employed in divine service, which the Catholick Church answereth not unto. Neither was the Tabernacle of Old which is here alluded unto, a Type of the Church, but of Christ himself. 3. Most Expositors take the Tabernacle, as they do the Sanctuary, for Heaven it self. And they would have the word true by a Zeugma to belong unto the Sanctuary, as well as unto the Tabernacle, which we have also before allowed. But yet this proveth not, that the Sanctuary and the Tabernacle must be the same, though both be equally true in the same sense. This way go the Greek Expositors, as Chrysostome, Theophylact and Oecumenius on the Place. And because this Tabernacle is said to be fixed of God, Chrysostome reproach∣eth them who say, that the Heavens do move and are Spherical, though he never had a prophetical dream of the Copernican Hypothesis. But yet as Beza well observes, they for∣sook
their own interpretation on Chap. 9. 11, 12. where the Tabernacle is spoken of in the same sense that here it is. But besides the Reasons that shall be given immediately for another interpretation, two things will not comply with this. For (1.) There is no reason why the Apostle should express the same thing, first under the name of the Sanctuary, and then of a Ta∣bernacle. (2.) There is no especial Reason why it should be added peculiarly concern∣ing the Heavens, which God hath fixed, and not man; for this was never questioned. 4. I say therefore that by this true Tabernacle, the Humane Nature of the Lord Christ himself is intended. Hereof he is the Minister, herein doth he minister before God above. For 1. Hereof the Old Tabernacle was a Type. Thence is the expression taken, and thereunto is opposition made in the Epithete, True. This therefore is our best direction and rule in the interpretation of this expression. For look what that Type did signifie, what was to be the substantial Antitype of it, that is the true Tabernacle whereof the Lord Christ is the Minister. For all agree that it is called true, in opposition and an∣swer unto that which was umbratile and figurative. Now that Tabernacle was not erected to be a Type of Heaven, nor is any such thing intimated in the Scripture. A token, pledge, and means it was of Gods presence with his People here on earth, of his nearness unto them, whence also he is said to dwell among them. But this he doth really and substantially only through Christ. He therefore alone is this true Tabernacle. For 2. In answer hereunto when he was incarnate, and came into the world, it is said that , He fixed his Tabernacle among us, John 1. 14. that is the signification of the word which we have translated to dwell, because the Tabernacle of old was the way and means of Gods dwelling among the People, in the pledges of his gracious presence. All that old curious Structure for an Habitation for God, did only represent his taking our nature upon him, fixing his Tent thereby among men. What was the pattern of this Tabernacle shewed unto Moses on the Mount we must enquire, on ver. 5. 3. He himself calleth his own Body his Temple, with respect unto the Temple at Je∣rusalem, which was of the same nature and use with the Tabernacle, John 2. 19, 22. And this he did, because his Body was that true substantial Temple and Tabernacle whereof he was the Minister. 4. That is the true Tabernacle which God truly and really inhabiteth, and on the ac∣count whereof he is our God. This was the nature, use and end of the Tabernacle of old. God dwelt therein in the signs and pledges of his presence, and was on the ac∣count thereof the God of that People, according to the terms of the Covenant between them, Exod. 25. 8. Rev. 21. 3. That therefore wherein God dwells really and substan∣tially, and on the account whereof he is our God in the Covenant of Grace, that and no other is the true Tabernacle. But this is in Christ alone; For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. Thus the Humane Nature of Christ is that true substantial Tabernacle, wherein God dwelleth personally. 5. He is the only way and means of our approach unto God in holy Worship, as the Tabernacle was of old; which we have elsewhere declared. That alone which seems to be of any force against this Interpretation, is, that the Humane Nature of Christ is that wherein he is the Minister of this Tabernacle; it can∣not therefore be the Tabernacle it self wherein he doth administer, and therefore the place of his abode must be intended by the Tabernacle whereof he is the Minister. Answ. By the same Rule it would follow, That because Christ is the High Priest, he is not the Sacrifice, for the Priest and the Sacrifice among men cannot be the same. How∣beit Christ offered himself only. And the reason of these things is, that he was in his own Person and what he did therein, to answer all those Types of Priest, Sacrifice, Altar, Tabernacle, and what belonged thereunto. He was the body and substance of them all, Col. 2. 17. No one of them was able to represent the fulness of Grace that was to be in Christ. Therefore were there many of them ordained, and those of various sorts. And therefore his being eminently intended in one of them, no way hinders his being so in another. He was all in himself, Priest, Tabernacle, Altar and Sacrifice. Lastly, The efficient cause of this true Tabernacle is declared both positively and . negatively; which God hath pitched, and not man. . It is in the Ar∣ticle , confined unto the Tabernacle, and extends not unto the Sanctuary mentioned be∣fore. Of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched. And hereby this Tabernacle is distinguished from both the Sanctuaries, the Typical here below, and the Real above,
even Heaven it self. For it was not of the same Building with either of them, as the Apostle declares, Chap. 9. 11. , pitched, fixed. It is a word proper unto the erection and establishment of a Tabernacle. The fixing of Stakes and Pillars, with the fastening of Cords thereunto, . was the principal means of setting up a Tabernacle, Isa. 54. 2. The preparation of the Humane Nature or Body of Christ is that which is intended. A Body hast thou pre∣pared me, Chap. 10. 5. And this Body was to be taken down, and folded up for a sea∣son, and afterwards to be erected again, without the breaking or loss of any part of it. This of all Buildings was peculiar unto a Tabernacle, and so was it with the Body of Christ in his Death and Resurrection. , The Author of this work was the Lord: This is the word or Name where∣by . the Writers of the New Testament do express the name Jehovah. And whereas in the revelation of that name, God declared that self-subsisting firmitude and unchangeable∣ness of his nature, whereby he would infallibly give subsistence unto his Word, and ac∣complishment unto his Promises, the Apostle hath respect unto it in this great work where∣in all the Promises of God became Yea and Amen. How this Tabernacle was prepared and fixed immediately by the Holy Ghost acting the infinite power of God alone there∣in, I have at large elsewhere declared. It is added negatively and not man. Some suppose a Pleonasm in the words, and that . this expression is redundant. For to say it was pitched by God, sufficiently includes that it was not done by man. But the expression is emphatical, and the Apostle hath an especial design in it. For 1. The Old Tabernacle itself may in some sense be said to be pitched by God. It was done by his command, order and direction, as were all other Ordinances of his appoint∣ment. But it cannot be said that God pitched it, and not man, which excludes the whole Service and Ministry of Man. For the Ministry of Men was used in the prepa∣ration, framing and erection of it. But the pitching of this true Tabernacle was the work of God alone, without any Ministry or Service of men; A Body hast thou pre∣pared me. 2. The Apostle hath an especial respect unto the Incarnation of Christ, without the concurrence of man in natural Generation. This is expressed in answer unto that enquiry of the blessed Virgin, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? Luke 1. 34, 35. This was the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and whereof Christ is the Mi∣nister. And we may observe, 1. That all spiritually sacred and holy things are laid up in Christ. All the utensils of Holy Worship of old, all means of Sacred Light and Purification, were all placed and laid up in the Tabernacle. And these were all Patterns of the heavenly things themselves, which are all laid up in Christ the true Tabernacle. They are all inclosed in him, and it will be in vain to seek for them elsewhere. For 2. He hath the Ministration of all these holy things committed unto him. He is the Minister both of the Sanctuary and Tabernacle, and of all things contained in them. Herein he stands in no need of help or assistance, nor can any take his work out of his hand. 3. The Humane Nature of Christ is the onely true Tabernacle wherein God would dwell personally and substantially. The dwelling of God with men, was ever looked on as an infinite condescension. So Solomon expressed it in his Prayer at the dedication of the Temple, But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee, 1 Kings 8. 27. But there are various degrees of this con∣descension, various kinds of this inhabitation of God among men. Under the Old Testa∣ment, he dwelt in the Tabernacle and Temple, by many symbols and pledges of his glorious presence. Such in especial was the Ark and Mercy-seat; whence that which was done before the Ark, is said to be done before the Lord, Exod. 30. 5, 8. This was as Solomon expresseth it, a great condescension in the infinite, incomprehensible God, and there was a great Glory accompanying this his presence. Under the New Testament God dwelleth in his Saints by his Spirit, whereby they become an holy Temple unto him. And of this inhabitation of God, I have treated elsewhere. But his dwelling in the Hu∣mane Nature of Christ is quite of another nature than either of these, and his love with his condescension, inconceivably more conspicuous than in them. Hence is that expression of our Apostle, In him dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodi∣ly, Col. 2. 9. It is not any sign or token, it is not any effect of the Divine Power, Goodness and Grace that dwells in him, but the fulness of the Godhead, that is, the Divine
Nature itself. And this dwelleth in him bodily; that is, by the Assumption of the Body, or the Humane Nature into Personal Subsistence with the Son of God. How glorious should this be in our eyes? How did they admire the condescension of God of old, in his dwelling in the Tabernacle and Temple by the glorious signs of his presence? And yet was it all but a dark representation and shadow of this glorious Love and Grace, whereby he dwells in our nature in Christ. 4. The Church hath lost nothing by the removal of the Old Tabernacle and Temple, all being supplied by this Sanctuary, true Tabernacle, and Minister thereof. The Glory and Worship of the Temple was that which the Jews would by no means part withall. They chose rather to reject Christ and the Gospel, than to part with the Temple, and its outward pompous worship. And it is almost increadible how the vain mind of man is addicted unto an outward beauty and splendor in Religious worship. Take it away, and with the most you destroy all Religion itself; as if there were no beauty but in painting, no evidence of health, or vigor of body, but in warts and wens. The Chri∣stians of old suffered in nothing more from the prejudice of the whole world, Jews and Gentiles, than in this, that they had a Religion, without Temples, Altars, Images, or any Solemnity of worship. And in latter Ages men ceased not, until they had brought into Christianity itself a worship vying for external Order, Ceremony, Pomp and Painting, with whatever was in the Tabernacle or Temple of old, coming short of it principally in this, that, that was of Gods institution for a time, this of the invention of weak, super∣stitious and foolish Men. Thus is it in the Church of Rome. And an hard thing it is to raise the minds of Men unto a satisfaction in things meerly spiritual and heavenly. They suppose they cannot make a worse change, nor more to their disadvantage, than to part with what is a present object and entertainment unto their Senses, Fancies, carnal Af∣fections and Superstitions, for that which they can have no benefit by, nor satisfaction in, but only in the exercise of Faith and Love, inclining us to that within the vail. Hence is there at this day so great a contest in the world, about Tabernacles, and Temples, Modes of Worship and Ceremonies, which Men have found out in the room of them, which they cannot deny but God would have removed; For so they judge that he will be satisfied with their carnal Ordinances in the Church, when the time is come that he would bear his own no longer. But unto them that believe Christ is precious. And this true Tabernacle with his Ministration is more unto them, than all the old pompous Cere∣monies and Services of Divine Institution, much more the Superstitious Observances of Humane Invention. 5. We are to look for the gracious presence of God in Christ only. Of old all the To∣kens and Symbols of Gods presence were confined unto and included in the Tabernacle. There were they to be found and nowhere else. Many Altars the People of old did erect elsewhere, many high places they found out and prepared, but they were all sin and misery unto them; God granted his presence unto none of them all. Hos. 8. 11. Chap. 12. 11. And many ways there are whereby Men may and do seek after the presence of God, after his favour and acceptance with him, not in and by this true Tabernacle. But they labour in vain, and spend their strength for that which doth not profit. Neither the Love, nor Grace, nor Goodness, nor Mercy of God are elsewhere to be found, nor can we by any other way be made partakers of them. 6. It is by Christ alone that we can make our approach unto God in his Worship. All Sacrifices of old were to be brought unto the door of the Tabernacle. What was offered elsewhere was an Abomination to the Lord. With the Instruments, with the Fire, with the Incense that belonged unto the Tabernacle, were they to be offered and no other∣wise. And it is now by Christ alone that we have an access in one Spirit unto the Father, Ephes. 2. 18. He is the only way of going to him, John 14. 6. And it is in and by his blood that he hath consecrated a new and living way unto the holy place, Chap. 10. 19, 20. 7. It was an Institution of God that the People in all their Distresses should look unto, and make their Supplications towards the Tabernacle or holy Temple. 1 Kings 8. 29, 30. And it is unto the Lord Christ alone who is both the true Tabernacle and the Minister thereof, that we are to look in all our spiritual Distresses. 8. If any one else can offer the Body of Christ, he also is the Minister of the true Taber∣nacle. For the Lord Christ did no more. He did but offer himself; and they that can offer him, do put themselves in his place.
VER. III. . THE Summary Description of our High Priest designed, is carried on in this Verse, And the Apostle manifests, that as he wanted nothing, which any other High Priest had, that was necessary unto the discharge of his Office; so he had it all in a more eminent manner than any other had. . Syr.  Qui stat ut offerat, Who standeth (that is at the Altar) that he may offer; rendering  neutrally, the whole sense is imperfect, For every High Priest who standeth (at the Altar) that he may offer gifts and sacrifices; therefore . Syr.  Oblationem, vul. Munera. Some rather use dona, and some do∣naria, sacred Gifts. . Syr.  that is,  Sacrifices, vul. Hostias; and the Rhemists, Hosts, it may be to countenance their name of the Host in the Mass. . Syr.  justum erat, aequum erat; it was just and equal. vul. ne∣cesse est, in the present tense, it is necessary. Beza, necesse fuit, it was necessary; pro∣perly; and so the Syriack renders the Verb Substantive understood in the Original, or included in the Infinitive Mood following, in the Preterimperfect Tense. , habere, hunc habere; Syr.  huic ut esset ei; To this Man that there should be to him, or with him. . vul. aliquid quod offerat; something that he may offer. Syr.  Something that he should offer. The Arabick adds for himself, corruptly. For every High Priest is ordained (appointed) to offer Gifts and Sacri∣fices: wherefore it is of necessity (it was necessary) that this man (should) have somewhat also to offer. The Connexion of these words unto what was before asserted, which giveth us the . design of the Apostle in them, is expressed in the causal Conjunction, , For. He both giveth a confirmation of what he had before affirmed, namely, that Christ was the Mi∣nister of the true Tabernacle, that is, of his Body, and rendereth a reason why it should so be; and this he farther confirms in the Verses ensuing. The Reason he insists on, is taken from the general nature of the Office of every High Priest. That the Lord Christ is our High Priest, he had sufficiently demonstrated and confirmed before; this therefore he now assumes as granted. And hereon what be∣longs unto him as such, he farther manifests, by shewing what the nature of that Office required, and what did necessarily belong unto every one that was Partaker thereof. There are therefore two things in the words. I. A general Assertion of the Nature, Duty, and Office of every High Priest. II. A particular Inference from thence, of what did necessarily belong unto the Lord Christ in the susception and discharge of this Office. In the first, the Universality of the expression is to be observed. , Eve∣ry . High Priest. By the context this Universal is cast under a Limitation with respect unto the Law; every High Priest, that is, made or appointed by the Law; for of those alone the Apostle treateth. There was indeed never any High Priest accepted of God, but those ordained by the Law; yet was it necessary unto the Apostle, to make mention of the Law also. And although they were many of them, yet were they all of the same order and Office, and so were all alike authorized and obliged unto the same Duties. Where∣fore the Apostle thus expresseth it by every High Priest, to evidence that there lay no ex∣ception against his argument, seeing that in the whole multitude of High Priests in their succession from first to last, there was no one but he was appointed unto this end, and had this Duty incumbent on him. Yea it is not one especial Duty of their Office that
might be omitted, which he insisteth on, but the general end for which they were ordain∣ed; as he expresseth it in the next word. 2. , is ordained; that is, appointed of God by the Law. Of the sense of this . word, I have spoken before, as also of the thing intended; see Chap. 5. 12. Gods Ordination or Appointment gives Rules, Measures and ends unto all sacred Offices and Employments. Whoever undertakes any thing in Religion or Divine Worship, with∣out it, besides it, beyond it, is a transgressour and therein worshippeth God in vain. He whom God doth not ordain in his service, is an Intruder; and that which he doth not appoint is an usurpation. Nor will he accept of any Dutys, but what he himself hath made so. 3. The principal end why the High Priests were ordained of God is expressed; it was . to offer Gifts and Sacrifices. This appears in their Original Institution, Exod. Chap. 28. 29. 1. They were to offer. God appointed Aaron and his successors, on purpose to offer Gifts and Sacrifices for the whole People. 2. None but they were to offer, that is, none but the Priests were so; none but they might approach unto God, to offer any thing sacredly unto him. The People might bring their Offerings unto God, but they could not offer them on the Altar. And some Offerings, as those at the Feast of Expiation were appropriated unto the High Priests only. So is the case stated by Azariah the High Priest, 2 Chrom. 26. 18. Not unto thee Uzziah to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests the Sons of Aaron who are consecrated, from Exod. 30. 7. Numb. 18. 7. And God hereby taught the People that nothing should ever be accepted from them, but in and by the hand of the great High Priest who was to come. And this is that which we are yet taught thereby. And whoever he be, if as great and prosperous as King Uz∣ziah who shall think to approach unto God immediately without the Interposition of this High Priest, he is smitten with the plague of Spiritual Leprosy. 4. What they were to offer is also declared. Gifts and Sacrifices. , Munera, dona∣ria, dona. Sometimes all  the Corbanes in general are intended by this word.  For all sacred Offerings of what sort soever, are so called at their first Institution, Lev. 1. 2. If any one among you bring his Corban unto the Lord. And thereon the especial Kinds of Offerings and Sacrifices are enumerated, which in general were all Corbans. So every thing that is brought unto the Altar is called , Matth. 5. 23, 24. , when thou bringest thy Gift; that is,  To Offer Gifts, sacred Gifts of all sorts, especially Sacrifices properly so called. Or by , the  Minchoth may be intended, as by , the Zebachim are. For these two contain the whole complex of sacred offerings. For Zebachim or , are bloody Sacrifices; Sacrifi∣ces by Immolation or killing of what sort soever the matter of it was, or unto what es∣pecial end soever it was designed. And the Minchoth were offerings of dead things, as of Corn, Oyl, Meats and Drinks. To offer all these was the Office of the Priesthood ordained. And we are taught thereby. That, There is no Approach unto God without continual respect unto Sacrifice and Attonement. The principal end of Sacrifices was to make Attonement for sin. And so necessary was this to be done, that the Office of the Priesthood was appointed for it. Men do but dream of the Pardon of sin or acceptance with God without Attonement. This the Apostle layeth down as that which was necessary for every High Priest by Gods Institution. There never was any High Priest, but his Office and Duty it was to Offer Gifts and Sacrifices, for unto that end was he ordained of God. Hence he infers that it was necessary that This Man should have somewhat to Offer. For being a Minister of the Heavenly Sanctuary, and the true Tabernacle, an High Priest he was. But this he could not be, unless he had somewhat to offer unto God. A Priest that had nothing to offer, that was not ordained unto that end, is indeed no Priest at all. And in this Assumption of the Apostle, we may observe. (1.) The note of inference; Wherefore; (2.) The Designation of the Person spoken of, This man. (3.) The Man∣ner of the Asscription made unto him; He must have; (4.) The matter of it, somewhat to offer. 1. The note of Inference is, . Wherefore, It is frequently used by the Apostle, in . this Epistle, when he proves his present Assertions, from the Old Institutions of the Law and their signification. Chap. 2. 17. 3. 1. 25. 9, 18. And the whole force of this In∣ference, especially that in this place, depends on this Supposition, that all the Old Typical
Institutions did represent what was really to be accomplished in Christ; whence it was neces∣sary, that he should be what they did signify and represent. Hence it is often observed in the Gospel, that he did or suffered such things or in such a manner, because things were so ordered under the Law. 2. The Designation of the Person is expressed. , This Man. He of whom we speak, . this High Priest of the New Testament, whom he had before described, and specified by his Name Jesus, and by his Dignity, the Son of God. That this Man, this Jesus the High Priest of the New Testament. 3. The subject being stated, that which he affirmes thereof, is that He, this Priest, . must have somewhat to offer. And this was of necessity, that so it should be. For what ever otherwise this Glorious Person were or might be, yet an High Priest he could not be, unless he had somewhat to offer; for to offer Gifts and Sacrifices is the sole end of that office. This necessity then was absolute. For without this no Office of Priesthood could be discharged, and consequently no Attonement be made, nor could we be brought unto God. And it is said, that it was thus necessary , that he should have. And it is not . Possession only that is intended; but Possession with respect unto use. He was so to have somewhat to offer, as to offer it accordingly. For it would not avail the Church to have an high Priest that should have somewhat to offer, if it were not actually offered. Wherefore respect is had both unto the meetness of Christ unto his Office, and his Faith∣fulness therein. He had what to offer, and he did offer it. 3. The matter of his offering is expressed. , somewhat to offer, that is, in Sacrifice unto God. The Apostle expresseth it indefinitely, , but what it is, which . he was to have, he doth not as yet declare. He was not ingaged farther by his present Argument. But he elsewhere declares expressly what this was that he had to offer, what was the matter of his Sacrifice, and what it was necessary that it should be. And this was himself, His whole Humane Nature Soul and Body. It may be it will be said, that it doth not necessarily follow, that if he have somewhat to offer, it must be himself. For he might offer somewhat else out of the Flocks and Herds, as they did of old. Nor indeed doth the Apostle intend directly to prove it in this place, namely, that it must be himself which he must offer. But it doth necessarily follow from the Arguments before insisted on; Chap. 7. For whatever else God had appointed or ap∣proved of to be offered in Sacrifice, he had ordained the Levitical Priesthood to offer, and appropriated the offering of it unto them, so as no such Sacrifice could ever be offered by any who was not of the seed of Aaron. Whereas therefore our High Priest was not of the Tribe of Levi, but of Judah, it is evident that he could not offer any of the things which were appropriated unto their ministry and service. And hence our Apostle in the next verse, affirmes directly, that if he was on the Earth, that is, to officiate in his Office with the things of the Earth after the manner of other Priests, he could not be so much as a Priest at all, seeing all such services were appropriated unto and performed by the Priests of another Order. Again; if he might have done so, and accordingly had done so, our Apostle manifests that his Priesthood must have been ineffectual as unto the pro∣per ends of it. For the Law could make nothing perfect; not only because of the In∣firmity and Imperfection of its Priests, but also because of the Insufficiency of its Sacrifices unto the great ends of expiating sin, by whomsoever they were offered. For it is impossi∣ble, as he declares, that the Blood of Bulls or Goats should ever take away sin, or purge the conscience of the sinner. Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3. &c. Wherefore as it was necessary that he should have somewhat to offer, so it was necessary that this somewhat should be himself and nothing else. Something must yet be added as unto the reading of the words themselves which influ∣enceth their proper sense. , necessary, of necessity must have the verb substantive added to determine its signification. Erasmus adds, est; it is necessary; and we render it, it is of necessity. Beza supplies, fuit, as doth the Syriack Interpreter  fuit, erat, it was necessary. And so he renders , by quod offerret, which he should offer, in both respecting the time past. Others render it by quod offerat, which he may offer, with respect unto the time present or to come. And Beza gives this account of his Translati∣on, namely, that the Apostle having respect unto the Sacrifice of Christ which was past, affirms, that it was necessary that he should have somewhat that he might offer; and not that it is necessary, that he should have somewhat to offer. And although I will not deny, but that the Lord by reason of the perpetual efficacy of his Oblation and the
Representation of it in his Intercession, may be said to offer himself, yet his Sacrifice and Oblation of himself were properly on the Earth, as I have fully proved else∣where. This Text being urged by Grotius with respect unto the Offering and Sacrifice of Christ, Crellius replies, Concludit Scriptor Divinus ex eo quod Christus sit Sacer∣dos, necesse esse ut habeat quod offerat; non ut loquitur Grotius necesse fuisse ut haberet quod offerret, quasi de re praeteritâ loquatur. Respons. ad cap. x. But as Beza very well observes, the Apostle had before mentioned the one offering of Christ, as already perfected and compleated, Chap. 7. 27. He cannot therefore speak of it now but as that which was past; and here he only shews how necessary it was that he should have himself to offer, and so to offer himself, as he had done. And from these words we may observe, 1. That there was no salvation to be had for us, no not by Jesus Christ himself, without his Sacrifice and Oblation. It was of necessity that he should have some∣what to offir, as well as those Priests had of old according to the Law. Some would have it that the Lord Christ is our Saviour, because he declared unto us the way of salvation, and gave us an example of the way whereby we may attain it, in his own personal obedience. But whence then was it of necessity that he must have some∣what to offer unto God as our Priest, that is, for us? For this belongeth neither unto his Doctrine nor Example. And it was necessary that he should have somewhat to offer, in answer unto those Sacrifices of old which were offered for the expiation of sin. Nor would our salvation be otherwise effected, by any other Acts or Duties of our High Priest. For the Church could not be saved without taking away the guilt of sin. And the whole design of the Priests and Sacrifices of old, was to teach and instruct the Church, how alone this might be performed. And this was only by making atonement for it by Sacrifice, wherein the Beast sacrificed did suffer in the room of the Sinner, and did by Gods institution bear his iniquity. And this our Apostle hath respect unto, and the realizing of all those Typical Representati∣ons in Christ, without which his whole discourse is useless and vain. Wherefore there was no other way for our salvation, but by a real propitiation or atonement made for our sins. And whosoever looketh for it otherwise, but in the faith and virtue thereof, will be deceived. 2. As God designed unto the Lord Christ the work which he had to do, so he provided for him, and furnished him with whatever was necessary thereunto. Some∣what he must have to offer. And this could not be any thing which was the mat∣ter of the Sacrifices of the Priests of old. For all those Sacrifices were appropria∣ted unto the discharge of the Priesthood. And besides, they were none of them able to effect that which he was designed to do. Wherefore a body did God pre∣pare for him, as is declared at large, Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. 3. The Lord Christ being to save the Church in the way of Office, he was not to be spared in any thing necessary thereunto. And in conformity unto him 4. Whatever state or condition we are called unto, what is necessary unto that state is indispensibly required of us. So is Holiness and Obedience required unto a state of Reconciliation and Peace with God.
VER. IV. VUl. Lat. si esset super terram; all others, in terra, to the same purpose. Syr.  in the Earth. . even also he should not be a Priest. , the Vulgar omits , and renders the words, cum essent qui offerrent. Rhem. Whereas there were who did of∣fer. The Syriack agrees with the Original; Manentibus illis Sacerdotibus; quum sint alii Sacerdotes. In the preceding Discourses the Apostle hath fully proved, that the Introduction of this new Priesthood under the Gospel had put an end unto the old; and that it was necessary so it should do, because as he had abundantly discovered in many instan∣ces, it was utterly insufficient to bring us unto God, or to make the Church-State perfect. And withall he had declared the nature of this new Priesthood. In par∣ticular he hath shewed, that although this High Priest offered his great expiatory Sa∣crifice once for all, yet the consummation of this Sacrifice, and the derivation of the Benefits of it unto the Church, depended on the following discharge of his Office, with his personal state and condition therein. For so was it with the High Priest under the Law, as unto his great Anniversary Sacrifice at the Feast of Expia∣tion, whose efficacy depended on his entrance afterwards into the holy place. Where∣fore he declares this state of our High Priest to be spiritual and heavenly, as consist∣ing in the Ministry of his own Body in the Sanctuary of Heaven. Having fully manifested these things, unfolding the mystery of them, he proceeds in this Verse to shew how necessary it was that so it should be, namely that he should neither offer the things appointed in the Law, nor yet abide in the state and condition of a Priest here on earth, as those other Priests did. In brief he proves that he was not in any thing to take on him the Administration of holy things in the Church, according as they were then established by Law. For whereas it might be objected, If the Lord Christ was an High Priest as he pleaded, why then did he not administer the holy things of the Church according to the duty of a Priest? To which he replies, That so he was not to do; yea a supposition that he might do so, was inconsistent with his Office, and destructive both of the Law and the Gospel. For it would utterly overthrow the Law, for one that was not of the Line of Aaron to officiate in the holy place; and God had by the Law made pro∣vision of others, that there was neither room nor place for his Ministry. And the Gospel also would have been of no use thereby, seeing the Sacrifice which it is built upon, would have been of the same nature with those under the Law. This the Apostle confirms in this Verse. For indeed if he were on earth, he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are Priests that offer Gifts according to the Law. The words are an Hypothetical Proposition, with the Reason or Confirmation of it. The Proposition is in the former part of the Verse; For if indeed he were on the earth, he should not be a Priest. Hereof the remainder of the words is the Reason or Confirmation, Seeing that there are Priests that offer Gifts according unto the Law. And we may consider first the Causal Connexion, For, which relates unto what he had discoursed immediately before, as introducing a Reason why things ought to be, as he had declared. He had in sundry instances manifested his present state and condition, with the way and manner of the discharge of his Office. A Priest he was, and therefore he must have somewhat to offer, which must be somewhat of his own, seeing the Law would not accommodate him with a Sacrifice, nor yet the whole Creation; the Law having prepossessed unto its own use, all that was clean
and fit to be offered unto God. A Sanctuary he must also have wherein to offi∣ciate, and this was to be Heaven itself, because he was himself exalted into Hea∣ven, and set down at the right hand of God. And of all this there was yet ano∣ther especial Reason; For if he were on the earth, &c. If indeed he were on earth. The Emphasis of the Particle Per is not to be omit∣ted. . If really it were so; or therein is Force granted unto the Concession that the Apostle here makes; truly it must be so. If he were on Earth, includes two things. . 1. His continuance and abode on the Earth. If he were not exalted into Heaven in the discharge of his Office, if he were not at the right hand of God, if he were not entred into the heavenly Sanctuary, but could have discharged his whole Office here on the Earth without any of these things. If he were thus on the Earth, or thus to have been on the Earth. 2. The state and condition of his Priesthood. If he were on the Earth, or had a Priesthood of the same order and constitution with that of the Law, if he were to have offered the same Sacrifices, or of the same kind with them, which were to be perfected on the Earth; if he were not to have offered himself, wherein his Sacri∣fice could not be absolutely consummate without the presentation of himself in the most holy place, not made with hands. These two things the Apostle was treating of; (1) His present state and con∣dition as to the Sanctuary wherein he administred, which was heavenly. (2) His Sacrifice and Tabernacle, which was himself; in opposition unto both these, is this Supposition made, If he were on the Earth. This therefore is the full sense of this Supposition, which is well to be observed to clear the meaning of the whole Verse, which the Socinians endeavor with all their skill and force, to wrest unto their Heresie. If we did aver him to have such a Priesthood, as in the discharge thereof he were always to continue on the Earth, and to administer in the Sanctuary of the Tabernacle or Temple with the blood of legal Sacrifices. On this Supposition the Apostle grants that he could not be a Priest. He had not been, or could not be so much as a Priest, or a Priest at all in any sense. That a . Priest he was to be, and that of necessity he must be so, he had proved before. And on the occasion thereof he declares the nature of his Sacrifice, Tabernacle and Sanctuary; and now proves that they were so necessary for him, that without them he could not have been a Priest. It will be said, that he was a Priest on the Earth, and that therein he offered his great Expiatory Sacrifice in and by his own blood. And it is true. But (1) This was not on the Earth in the sense of the Law, which alone appointed the Sacrifices on the Earth; it was not in the way, nor after the manner of the Sacrifices of the Law, which are expressed by that Phrase on the Earth. (2) Although his Ob∣lation or Sacrifice of himself was compleat on the Earth, yet the whole Service be∣longing thereunto, to make it effectual in the behalf of them for whom it was of∣fered, could not be accomplished on the Earth. Had he not entred into Heaven to make a representation of his Sacrifice in the holy place, he could not have been the High Priest of the Church, from that offering of himself, because the Church could have enjoyed no benefit thereby. Nor would he ever have offered that Sacrifice, if he had been to abide on the Earth, and not afterwards to have entred the heavenly Sanctuary to make it effectual. The High Priest on the great day of Expiation perfected his Sacrifice for his own sin, and the sins of the people without the Tabernacle. But yet he neither could nor would, nor ought to have attempted the offering of it, had it not been with a design to carry the blood into the holy place, to sprinkle it before the Ark and Mercy-seat, the Throne of Grace. So was Christ to enter into the holy place not made with hands, or he could not have been a Priest. The reason of this Assertion and Concession is added in the latter part of the Verse, Seeing there are Priests that offer Gifts according to the Law. . , Sacerdotibus existentibus, cum sint Sacerdotes, whereas there are Priests. The Apostle doth not grant that at that time when he wrote this Epistle, there were legal Priests de jure, offering Sacrifices according to the Law. De facto indeed there were yet such Priests ministring in the Temple which was yet stand∣ing.
But in this whole Epistle, as to right and acceptance with God, he proves that their Office was ceased, and their administrations useless. Wherefore  respects the legal Institution of the Priests, and their right to officiate then when the Lord Christ offered his Sacrifice. Then there were Priests who had a right to officiate in their Office, and to offer Gifts according to the Law. Two things are to be inquired into, to give us the sense of these words, and the force of the Reason in them. 1. Why might not the Lord Christ be a Priest, and offer his Sacrifice, continuing on the Earth, to consummate it, notwithstanding the continuance of these Priests according unto the Law. 2. Why did he not in the first place take away and abolish this order of Priests, and so make way for the Introduction of his own Priesthood. I answer unto the first, That if he had been a Priest on the Earth to have dis∣charged the whole work of his Priesthood here below, whil'st they were Priests al∣so; then he must either have been of the same order with them, or of another; and have offered Sacrifices of the same kind as they did, or Sacrifices of another kind. But neither of these could be. For he could not be of the same order with them. This the Apostle proves because he was of the Tribe of Judah, which was excluded from the Priesthood, in that it was appropriated unto the Tribe of Levi, and Fami∣ly of Aaron. And therefore also he could not offer the same Sacrifices with them, for none might do so by the Law but themselves. And of another order together with them he could not be. For there is nothing foretold of Priests of several Or∣ders in the Church at the same time. Yea, as we have proved before, the Intro∣duction of a Priesthood of another order was not only inconsistent with that Priest∣hood, but destructive of the Law itself, and all its Institutions. Wherefore whil'st they continued Priests according to the Law, Christ could not be a Priest among them, neither of their order nor of another; that is, if the whole administration of his Office had been upon the Earth together with theirs, He could not be a Priest among them. 2. Unto the second Inquiry, I say the Lord Christ could not by any means take away that other Priesthood, until he himself had accomplished all that ever was sig∣nified thereby, according unto Gods Institution. The whole end and design of God in its Institution had been frustrate, if the office bad ceased de jure before the whole of what was prefigured by its Being, Duties and Offices was fulfilled. And there∣fore although there was an Intercision of its administrations for Seventy years, during the Babylonish Captivity, yet was the Office itself continued in its right and digni∣ty, because what it designed to prefigure was not yet attained. And this was not done till the Lord Christ ascended into the heavenly Sanctuary, to administer in the presence of God for the Church. For until then, the High Priests entering into the holy place in the Tabernacle once a year, had not an accomplishment in what was prefigured thereby. Wherefore there was not an end put unto their Office and Ministration by the oblation of Christ on the Cross, but they still continued to offer Sacrifices according to the Law. For there yet remained unto the fulfilling of what was designed in their whole Office, his entring into the holy place above. Wherefore they were still to continue Priests, until he had compleated the whole Service prefi∣gured by them, in the oblation of himself, and entring thereon into the heavenly Sanctuary. This therefore is the sense of the Apostles reasoning in this place. The Priests of the Order of Aaron continued de jure their administrations of holy things, or were so to do, until all was accomplished that was signified thereby. This was not done until the Ascension of Christ into Heaven. For the first Tabernacle was to stand until the way was made open into the Holiest of all, as we shall see after∣wards. Now the Lord Christ was not a Priest after their Order, nor could he of∣fer the Sacrifices appointed by the Law. Hence it is evident, That he could not have been a Priest, had he been to continue in the Earth, and to administer on the Earth, for so their Priesthood with which his was inconsistent, could never have had an end. For this could not be without his entrance as a Priest into the heavenly Sanctuary.
It appears therefore how vain the pretence of the Socinians is from this place to prove that the Lord Christ did not offer his expiatory Sacrifice here on the Earth. For the Apostle speaks nothing of his Oblation, which he had before declared to have been once for all, before he entred into Heaven to make intercession for us. But he speaks only of the Order of his Priesthood, and the state and condition wherein the present administration of it was to be continued. Ob. 1. Gods Institutions rightly stated do never interfere. So we see those of the ancient Priesthood and that of Christ did not. They had both of them their proper bounds and seasons; nor could the latter compleatly commence and take place, until the former was expired. The entrance of Christ into the Holy Place, which stated him in that condition wherein he was to continue the exercise of his Priesthood unto the consummation of all things, put an absolute period unto the former Priesthood by accomplishing all that was signified thereby, with a due and seasonable end unto all legal worship, as to right and efficacy. When he had done all that was figured by them, he took the whole work into his own hand. 2. The discharge of all the Parts and Duties of the Priestly Office of Christ in their proper order were needful unto the salvation of the Church. His Oblation was to be on the Earth, but the continuation of the discharge of his Office was to be in Hea∣ven. Without this the former would not profit us; if he had done no more he could not have been a Priest. For (1) As this dependeth on the infinite wisdom of God, ordering and disposing all things that concern the discharge of this Office unto their proper times and seasons; so (2) Believers do find in their own expe∣rience, how all things are suited unto their conditions and wants. Unless the founda∣tion of a Propitiation for their sins be first laid, they can have no hopes of accept∣ance with God. This therefore was first done in the offering of the Body of Christ once for all. But when this is done, unless they have a continual application of the effi∣cacy of it unto their Souls, neither their Peace with God, nor their Access unto God can be maintained. And this is done by the Ministration of his Office in the heavenly Sanctuary which ensues thereon.
VER. V. . Qúi, ut qui; as those who, , deserviunt, inserviunt, Syr.  who ministred, (as in a sacred Office) properly. , Exemplari, Rhem. that serve the exemplar and shadow, every way imperfectly, Syr.  unto the similitude. , Eras. Coelestium; others, Rerum Coelestium, of heaven∣ly things, Syr.  of the things which are in Heaven. , sicut responsum est Mosi, Rhem. As it was answered Moses.  is not an Answer, but an Oracle, given out upon enquiry, and so any Divine Instruction. Quemadmadum divinitus dictum est, admonished of God say we Syr.  it was spoken, simply; which expresseth not the Original. VER. V. Who serve (in Sacred Worship) unto the example and shadow of hea∣venly things, even as Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle; For see (saith he) that thou make all things according to the pattern shewed to thee in the mount. WE must first consider the reading of these words by reason of the testimony which the Apostle quotes out of the Law, and his rendring thereof. The words in the original, Ex. 25. 40. are  And look (or take heed) and make after their pattern which was shewed thee in the mount. The Apostle adds , all things, which is not in the original, nor in the Version of the LXX. But (1) he might take it from ver. 9. of the Chapter, where the word is expressed  according unto all that I shall shew thee. (2) Things indefinitely expressed are to be expounded universally. 1 Kings 8. 39. and to give to every man according to his ways, that is, 2 Chron. 6. 30. and render to every man according to all his ways. Deut. 19. 15. At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall the matter be established, that is, 2 Cor. 13. 1. shall every word be established. Psal. 110. 1. Until I make thine enemies thy footstool, that is, 1 Cor. 15, 25. all thine enemies. Wherefore the Apostle by the addition of , all things, says no more but what is expressed in one place, and necessarily understood in the other. 2. —According to their Pattern, or the Pattern of them; the Apostle renders by  only, according to the Pattern, which comes all to one. , The word is from  to bind; and it is used for a prepared Pattern or similitude that any thing is to be framed unto. So whereas the Apostle renders it by , he intends  or , not , such a Type or Pattern as other things are to be framed by, and not that which is the effigies or Representa∣tion of somewhat else. 2. The Connexion of these words with the preceding Discourse which gives us the general Design of the Apostle, is nextly to be considered. He had before intima∣ted two things. (1.) That the High Priests according to the Law did not Minister the Heavenly things. (2.) That the Lord Christ alone did so: whence he concludes his Dignity and Preeminence above them, which is the Argument he hath in hand. Both these he confirmes in these words. For he confines their Ministry unto the Types of Heavenly things, exclusively unto the Heavenly things themselves. And by shewing, as in the verse preceding, that if Christ had been to continue on the Earth, he could not have been a Priest, he manifests that he alone was to administer those Heavenly things.
3. The Argument in general whereby the Apostle proves that they served unto the example and shaddow of Heavenly things, that is, only so and no more, is taken from the words of God to Moses. And the force of the Argument is evident. For God in those words declares that there was something above and beyond that ma∣terial Tabernacle which was prescribed unto him. For he shewed him either an Original or an Exemplar in the Top of the Mount, which what he was to do below did but shaddow and represent. And therefore they who ministred in what he was to make, could serve only therein to be the example and shadow of Heavenly things. This therefore is the Apostles Argument from this Testimony; If God shewed unto Moses on the Top of the Mount that which was Heavenly, and he was to make an ex∣ample or shaddow of it, then they that ministred therein served only unto the example and shaddow of Heavenly things. In the words may be observed; (1.) The Persons spoken of; who, (2.) What is ascribed unto them; they serve. (3.) The Limitation of that service; wherein there is. (1.) The present immediate Object of it; an example and shadow. (2.) The ultimate things intended; Heavenly things. (4.) The Proof of the whole Assertion; from the words of God to Moses; wherein there is (1.) The manner of the instructi∣on given him; he was warned of God. (2.) The instruction or warning it self; see that thou make, &c. 1. There is the Persons spoken of, , Who; It refers unto the Priests men∣tioned ver. 4. Seeing there are Priests that offer Gifts; who. But although that ex∣pression . comprized the whole order of Levitical Priests, yet it refers in particular unto the High Priests, verse 3. , every High Priest; Which High Priests. 2. What is ascribed unto them; , do serve. The general signification of the English word to serve is not intended, as any thing doth serve for an end, or . one Person serves another. For it is a sacred word, and signifies only to minister in sacred worship and service, as the Syriacke Translation renders it. And in parti∣ticular it respects here all the , the Ordinances of Divine Service which were appointed under the first Tabernacle Chap. 9. 1. They do serve: They do according unto the Law officiate in sacred things; That is, they did so de jure, in their first Institution, and continued de facto so to do still. And the word , is applied both unto the inward spiritual, and outward instituted holy worship of God, See Matth. 4. 10. Act. 7. 7. Rom. 1. 9. It respects therefore all that the High Priests did, or had to do in the worship of God, in the Tabernacle or Temple. 3. The Limitation of their sacred service, is, that it was , to an example and shadow.  is a Specimen of any thing: that whereby any . thing is manifested by a Part or Instance. It is used in the New Testament only Jude 7. , are set forth for an example, (speaking of Sodom and Gomorrah) or a particular Instance of what would be Gods dealing with provoking sinners at the last day. which is framed of , is but once used in the New Testament, Col. 2. 15. where we render it to make a shew; that is a Representation of what was done; , the word here used, is an example shewing or declaring any thing in a way of instance. Joh. 13. 15. , I have given you an example, saith our Saviour, when he had washed his Disciples feet; that is, shewed you in what I have done, what you ought to do also. So Jam. 5. 10. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets for an example. But whereas principally and commonly ex∣amples are Patterns of other things that which they are to be conformed unto, as in the places cited, Joh. 13. 15. Jam. 5. 10, this cannot be the sense of it in this Place. For the Heavenly things were not framed and fashioned after the ex∣ample of these, but on the contrary. Wherefore examples are of two sorts, Effi∣giantia and Effigiata: that is,  and ; such as other things are fra∣med by, or such as are framed by other things. In this latter sense it is here used; and I would chuse to render it by a Resemblance. It is less then , simile quiddam; an obscure Representation. Hence it is added. , and the shaddow. Some suppose a shaddow is taken artificially and op∣posed unto an express Image or compleat delineation of any thing, by a similitude . taken from the first lines and shaddows of any thing that is afterwards to be drawn
to the life; and so they say it is used Chap. 10. 1. The Law had only a shadow of good things to come, and not the express Image of the things themselves. But pro∣perly it is taken naturally and opposed unto a Body or Substance; Col. 2. 17. Which things have a shadow of things to come; but the Body is Christ. It is indifferent in whether sense we here take the word, for what is affirmed is true in both. If we take it in the first way, it intends that obscure delineation of Hea∣venly mysteries, which was in the legal Institutions. They did represent and teach them, and so were taught and represented in the divine service of those Priests. But it was so obscurely that none could see their beauty and excellency therein. If it be used in the latter way, then it declares that the substance of what God intended in all his worship was not contained nor comprized in the services of those Priests. There were some lines and shadows to represent the body, but the body it self was not there. There was something above them and beyond them, which they reached not unto. 4. The things themselves whence they are restrained by this Limitation is ex∣pressed; . of Heavenly things. The things intended in these words are no other, than what God shewed unto Moses in the Mount; and therefore we shall defer our en∣quiry into them, untill we come unto those words. This therefore is the mean∣ing of the words. The whole ministry of the Priests of old, was in and about earth∣ly things, which had in them only a resemblance and shaddow of things above. And we may observe by the way, 1. God alone limits the signification and use of all his own Institutions. We ought not to derogate from them nor to take any thing out of them, which God hath put into them; nor can we put any thing into them, that God hath not furnished them withal. And we are apt to err in both extremes. The Jews to this day believe, that the ministration of their Priests contained the Heavenly things themselves. They do so, contrary to the nature and end of them, which the Scripture so often speaks unto. This is one occasion of their Obstinacy and unbelief. They will imagine that there was nothing above or beyond their legal Institutions; no other Heavenly Mysteries of Grace and Truth, but what is comprized in them. They put more in them, then ever God furnished them withal, and perish in their vain confidence. It hath so fallen out also under the New Testament. God hath instituted his holy Sacraments, and hath put this vertue into them that they should represent and exhibit unto the Faith of Believers, the Grace which he intendeth and design∣eth by them. But men have not been contented herewith, and therefore they will put more into them, then God hath furnished them withal. They will have them to contain the Grace in them which they exhibit in the way of a Promise, and to communicate it unto all sorts of persons that are partakers of them. Thus some would have Baptisme to be Regeneration it self, and that there is no other Evange∣lical Regeneration but that alone, with the profession which is made thereon. Every one who is baptized is thereby regenerate. The sign and figure of Grace they would have to be the Grace it self. Nothing can be invented more pernitious unto the souls of men. For all sorts of Persons may be brought to a ruinous security about their spiritual condition by it, and diverted from endeavours after that real inter∣nal work in the change of their hearts and natures, without which none shall see God. This is to put that into it, which God never placed there. Some suppose it to be such a distinguishing or rather separating Ordinance that the Administration of it in such a way or such a season, is the fundamental Rule of all Church fellowship and Communion; whereas God never designed it un∣to any such end. In the Supper of the Lord, the Church of Rome in particular is not contented that we have a Representation and instituted Memorial of the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ in the signes of his Body as broken, and his Blood as shed for us, with an ex∣hibition of Grace in the word of Promise or the Gospel; but they will have the na∣tural Body and Blood of Christ, his flesh and bones to be contained therein, and to be eaten or devoured by all that partake of the outward signes. This is to put that into an Ordinance, which God never put into it, and so to overthrow it. And there are two Grounds or ends of what they do. The first is, to turn the Wisdom of Faith into a carnal Imagination. It requires the Light and Wisdom of Faith to appre∣hend
the Spiritual exhibition of Christ in the Sacrament unto us. It is a great Spi∣ritual Mystery, not at all to be apprehended, but by the supernatural Light of Faith. This the vain darkned minds of men like not, they cannot away with it, it is foolishness unto them. Wherefore under the name of a Mystery, they have invented the most horrible and monstrous figments, that ever befell the minds of men. This is easily received and admitted by a meer Act of carnal Imagination; and the more blind and dark men are, the more are they pleased with it. (2.) They do it to exclude the exercise of Faith in the Participation of it. As they deal with the wisdom of Faith, as unto its nature, So they do with the exercise of Faith as unto its use. God hath given this measure unto this Ordinance, that it shall exhi∣bit and communicate nothing unto us, that we shall receive no benefit by it, but in the actual exercise of Faith. This the carnal minds and hearts of men like not. It requires a peculiar exercise of this Grace and that in a peculiar manner unto a Parti∣cipation of any Benefit by it. But this under the Notion of bringing more into the Ordinance then ever God put into it, they exclude, and ease all men of. Let them but bring their mouths and their teeth, and they fail not of eating the Body and drinking the very blood of Christ. So under a pretence of putting that in the Ordinance which God never put into it, they have cast out of the hearts of men the necessity of those Duties, which alone render it usefull and beneficial. Some on the other side do derogate from them, and will nor allow them that sta∣tion or use which God hath appointed unto them in the church. (1.) some do so from their Dignity. They do so by joyning their own Appointments unto them, as of equal worth and Dignity with them. (2.) Some do so from their Necessity, practically setting light or by disregarding the Participation of them. (3.) Some do so from their use, openly denying their continuance in the Church of God. The Reasons why men are so prone to deviate from the Will of God in his In∣stitutions, and to despise the measures he hath given them; are (1.) Want of Faith in its principal Power and Act, which is submission and Resignation of soul unto the Sovereignty of God. Faith alone renders that an alsufficient reason of Obedience. (2.) Want of Spiritual Wisdom and understanding to discern the mystery of the Wis∣dom and Grace of God in them. 2. It is an Honour to be employed in any sacred service that belongs unto the worship of God, though it be of an inferior nature unto other parts of it. It is so I say if we are called of God thereunto. This was the greatest Honour that any were made Partakers of under the Old Testament, that they served unto the example and shadow of Heavenly things only. And if now God call any of us unto his service, wherein yet by the meaness of our gifts, or want of opportunities, we cannot serve him in so eminent a manner, as some others do; yet if we abide in our station and Duty, there is great Honour in the meanest Divine Service. 3. So great was the Glory of Heavenly ministration in the mediation of Jesus Christ, as God would not at once bring it forth in the Church, untill he had prepared the minds of men by Types, Shadows, Examples, and Representations of it. This was the end of all legal Institutions of Divine Worship and Service. And herein the Wisdom of God, provided in these to cases, that were necessary. First he filled them with Glory and Beauty that they might affect the mindes of men, with an admiration and expectation of that greater Glory which they represented and pointed unto. And this they did among all them who truly believed, so that they continually looked and longed after the coming of him, the glory of whose mini∣stry was represented in them. In these two things did their Faith principally act it self. (1.) In a diligent enquiry into the mediation and minstry of Christ with the Glory which it was to be accompanied withal, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. (2.) In earnest desires after the enjoyment of what they saw afar off, and which was obscurely repre∣sented unto them, Cant. 2. 18. Chap. 4. 6. From both these arose that fervent love unto, zeal for, and delight in those Ordi∣nances of Worship which did so lead them unto these things that were so glorious, which in the Scripture are everywhere expressed, and which were so well-pleasing unto God. Secondly, on the other hand, because these Institutions were to be so glorious, that they might be shadows of heavenly things, and the People unto whom they were given were carnal, and given to rest themselves in present outward Ap∣pearances,
God was pleased to intermix with them many Services that were hard to be born, and many Laws with Penalties severe and dreadful. This Provision was laid in by Divine Wisdom, that they might not rest in what he designed only to prepare their minds for the introduction of that which was far more glorious. And well is it for us, if we have a due apprehension of the glory of the heavenly Ministration of Christ, now it is introduced. It is too evident that with many, yea with most that are called Christians, it is far otherwise. For they are still seeking after the outward glory of a carnal Worship, as though they had no view of the spiritual Glory of the heavenly Ministration of the Gospel in the hand of Jesus Christ our High Priest. Nor will it be otherwise with any of us, unless we are enabled by Faith to look within the vail, and see the beauty of the appearance of Christ at the right hand of God. The Apostle tells us, that the Ministration of the Law was glorious; yet had it no Glory in comparison of that which doth excel. But if we are not able to discern this more excellent Glory, and satisfie our selves therein, it is a great sign that we our selves are carnal, and therefore are delighted with those things that are so. But we must proceed with our Exposition. 5. The proof of the foregoing Assertion is added by the Apostle, in the words which God spake unto Moses with respect unto his building the Tabernacle, which was the Seat of all the Divine Service they were to administer. And there are two things to be considered in this Testimony. (1) The manner of its Introduction. (2) The words of the Testimony itself. 1. The words of the Introduction are, ▪ Admonished . of God.  we render the Answer of God, Rom. 11. 4. But what saith unto him , the Divine Oracle; A Responsum, a Word or Answer from God, giving Caution or Direction. And it is used principally for such an Oracle of God, as hath a warning or caution in it, for the avoiding somewhat on the one hand, as well as doing what is given in charge on the other. So Joseph was , divinely warned to avoid the danger that was designed unto the Child Jesus, Matth. 2. 22. as the Wisemen were to avoid going unto Herod, ver. 12. so Hebr. 11. 7. Noah being , divinely warned, was moved with fear. Yet sometimes it is used for any immediate private Revelation, Luke 2. 26. Acts 10. 22. Wherefore two things are intended in this expression. (1) That Moses had an immediate Word, Command or Oracle from God to the purpose intended. And (2) That he was to use great caution and heed about what was enjoined him, that there might be no miscarriage or mistake. Admo∣nished of God. And the manner of the Expression in the Original carrieth Admonition in it  and look to it and do, Exod. 25. 40. take diligent care about it. The same is the sense of  when thus used, take heed, look well to it. When John upon surprisal would have fallen down before the Angel to worship him, he replied, , see thou do it not, avoid it with care, Rev. 22. 9. The matter was of the greatest importance, and the utmost diligence was to be used about it, whence the Divine Oracle was given out in a way of charge and admo∣nition, as we have well rendred the word. And we may observe, That our utmost care and diligence in the consideration of the mind of God, is re∣quired in all that we do about his Worship. There is nothing wherein men for the most part are more careless. Some suppose it belongs unto their own wisdom to order things in the Worship of God, as it seems most meet unto them; an Apprehen∣sion that I shall leave this world in admiration of, that ever it should befall the minds of so many good and honest men as it hath done. But the power of Preju∣dice is unexpressible. Some think they are no farther concerned in these things, than only to follow the Traditions of their Fathers. This unto the community of Christians is the only Rule of Divine Worship. To suppose that it is their duty to enquire into the way and manner of the Worship of God, the Grounds and Reasons of what they practise therein, is most remote from them. It was Moses that had the command to take care about the making of the Tabernacle, and not the Peo∣ple. There was nothing left unto them but to do and observe what he had ap∣pointed. And it is true, when God first reveals the way of his Worship immediately from himself, as he did first by Moses, and last of all by his Son Jesus Christ, the People have nothing to do therewith, but only to observe and do what is appointed,
as our Saviour expresly declares, Matth. 28. 20. But when his Worship is so re∣vealed and declared, there is not the meanest Person who professeth obedience unto him, who is exempted from this command of taking most diligent care about the due discharge of their duty herein. And this care and diligence is neces∣sary; First, From the aptness and proneness of the minds of men unto pernicious ex∣treams in this matter: For (1) The Generality of Men have been stupidly negligent herein, as if it were a matter wherein they were not at all concerned. What is provided for them, what is proposed unto them, what comes in the ordinary way whereunto they have been accustomed, whatever it be, that they follow. And as they take it upon light grounds, so they observe it with slight spirits. And this hath been the true cause of that inundation of Prophaness which is come on the Christian world. For when once Men come unto such an inconcernment in the Worship of God, as to ingage in it they know not well why, and to perform it they know not how, all manner of Im∣piety will ensue in their Lives, as is manifest in experience beyond the evidence of a thousand Arguments. (2) Many in all Ages have been prone to indulge unto their own Imaginati∣ons and Inventions in the disposal of Divine Worship. And this bitter Root hath sprung up into all the Superstition and Idolatry that the Earth is filled withall at this day. From these two poysoned Springs, hath proceeded that woful Apostasie from Christ and Evangelical Worship, which the world groans under. Where∣fore our utmost care and diligence is required herein. Secondly, The concernment of the Glory of God calls for the same care in like manner. It were no hard thing to demonstrate that the principal way and means whereby God expects that we should give glory unto him in this world, is by a due observation of the Divine Worship that he hath appointed. For herein do we in an especial manner ascribe unto him the glory of his Sovereignty, of his Wisdom, of his Grace and Holiness; when in his Worship we bow down our Souls under his Authority alone; when we see such an impress of Divine Wisdom on all his Institutions, as to judge all other ways folly in comparison of them, when we have experience of the grace represented and exhibited in them, then do we glorifie God aright. And without these things, whatever we pretend, we honour him not in the Solemnities of our Worship. But we return. In the charge given to Moses two things are observable. (1) The time when it was given him. (2) The charge itself. 1. The time when it was given. , when he was about to make the Tabernacle.  expresseth that which is immediately fu∣ture. . He was in procinctu, in readiness for that work; just as it were taking it in hand, and going about it. This made the divine warning seasonable. It was given him upon the entrance of his work, that it might make an effectual impres∣sion on his mind. And it is our duty upon an entrance into any work we are cal∣led unto, to charge our Consciences with a divine admonition. What immediate Revelation was to Moses, that the written Word is to us. To charge our Con∣sciences with Rule from it, and its Authority will preserve us in whatever may fall out in the way of our duty, and nothing else will do it. is perficere, to accomplish, to perfect, to finish. But it includes here . the beginning, as well as the end of the work, which he was to perfect. The same with , Acts 7. 44. where this whole passage is somewhat otherwise expres∣sed to the same purpose. , as he appointed who spake unto Moses (which was God himself, as our Apostle here declares, in the second Person the great Angel of the Covenant) that he should make it according to the pattern which he saw. Wherefore  compriseth the whole service of Moses, in making, framing, and finishing the Tabernacle. The warning and charge itself is, That he should make all things according to the Pattern shewed him in the Mount. What this Pattern was, how it was shewed unto Moses, and how he was to make all things according unto it, are all of them things not easie to be explained. In general it is certain that God intended to declare hereby, that the work which
Moses had to do, the Tabernacle he was to erect, and the Worship thereof, was not either in the whole, or in any part of it, or any thing that belonged unto it, a mat∣ter of his own invention or contrivance, nor what he set upon by chance, but an exact representation of what God had instructed him in, and shewed unto him. This was the foundation of all the Worship of God under the Old Testament, and the security of the Worshippers. Hence at the finishing of this work it is eight times repeated in one Chapter, that all things were done as God commanded Moses. And herein was that Truth fully consecrated unto the perpetual use of the Church in all Ages, That the Will and Command of God is the sole Reason, Rule and Mea∣sure of all Religious Worship. For the Pattern itself, Expositors generally agree, That on the Top of the Mount God caused to appear unto Moses, the form, fashion, dimensions and utensils of that Tabernacle which he was to erect. Whether this representation were made to Moses by the way of internal Vision, as the Temple was represented unto Eze∣kiel, or whether there were an aetherial Fabrick proposed unto his bodily senses, is hard to determine. And this  Exemplar or Pattern, our Apostle here calls heavenly things. For to prove that the Priests served only unto the resem∣blance and shadow of heavenly things, he produceth this Testimony, that Moses was to make all things according to the Pattern shewed him in the Mount. And this Pattern, with all that belonged unto it, is called heavenly things, because it was made to appear in the Air on the top of the Mount, with respect unto that which was to be made beneath. Or it may be called heavenly, because it was the immediate ef∣fect of the power of God, who worketh from Heaven. But supposing such an aetherial Tabernacle represented unto Moses, yet it cannot be said, that it was the substance of the heavenly things themselves, but only a shadow or representation of them. The heavenly things themselves, in the mind of God, were of another nature, and this Pattern on the Mount was but an external represen∣tation of them. So that here must be three things intended. (1) The heavenly things themselves. (2) The representation of them on the Mount. (3) The Tabernacle made by Moses in imitation thereof. Wherefore this Ta∣bernacle and its Worship, wherein the Levitical Priests administred their Office, was so far from being the substance of the heavenly things themselves, as that they were but a shadow of that shadow of them which was represented in the Mount. I know not that there is any thing in this Exposition of the words that is contrary unto the Analogy of Faith, or inconsistent with the design of the Apostle. But withall I must acknowledge, that these things seem to me exceeding difficult, and such as I know not how fully to embrace, and that for the Reasons follow∣ing. 1. If such a representation were made unto Moses in the Mount, and that be the Pattern intended, then the Tabernacle with all its Ministry was a shadow thereof. But this is contrary unto our Apostle in another place, who tells us that indeed all legal Institutions were only a shadow, but withall that the substance or body was of Christ, Col. 2. 17. And it is the body that the shadow doth immediately depend upon and represent. But according unto this Exposition, this Figure or Appearance made in the Mount, must be the body or substance which those legal Institutions did represent. But this Figure was not Christ. And it is hard to say, that this Figure was the body which the Tabernacle below was the shadow of, and that body was the shadow of Christ. But that Christ himself, his Mediation and his Church, that is, his Mystical Body, were not immediately represented by the Tabernacle, and the Service of it, but somewhat else that was a Figure of them, is contrary unto the whole dispute of the Apostle in this place, and the Analogy of Faith. 2. I do not see how the Priests could minister in the earthly Tabernacle as an ex∣ample and shadow of such an aetherial Tabernacle. For if there were any such thing, it immediately vanished after its appearance; It ceased to be any thing, and therefore could not be any longer an heavenly thing. Wherefore with respect there∣unto, they could not continue to serve unto the example of heavenly things, which were not. 3. No tolerable account can be given of the reason or use of such a represen∣tation. For God doth not dwell in any such Tabernacle in Heaven, that it should
be thought to represent his holy Habitation. And as unto that which was to be made on the earth, he had given such punctual instructions unto Moses, confirming the remembrance and knowledge of them in his mind by the Holy Spirit, by whom he was acted and guided, as that he needed no help from his imagination, in the view of the representation of such a Fabrick. 4. Whatever Moses did, it was for a Testimony unto the things which were to be spoken afterwards, Chap. 3. 5. But these were the things of Christ and the Gos∣pel, which therefore he was to have an immediate respect unto. 5. The sense of the words must be determined from the Apostle himself. And it is evident, (1) That the heavenly things unto whose resemblance the legal Priests did minister, and the Pattern shewed unto Moses in the Mount, were the same. Hereon depends the whole force of his Proof from this Testimony. (2) These heavenly things, he expresly tells us, were those which were conse∣crated, dedicated unto God, and purified by the Sacrifice of the blood of Christ, Chap. 9. 23. (3) That Christ by his Sacrifice did dedicate both himself, the whole Church and its Worship unto God. From these things it follows, (4) That God did spiritually and mystically represent unto Moses, the Incarna∣tion and Mediation of Christ with the Church of the Elect, and its spiritual Wor∣ship, which was to be gathered thereby. And moreover he let him know how the Tabernacle and all that belonged thereunto, did represent him and them. For the Tabernacle that Moses made was a sign and figure of the Body of Christ. This we have proved in the Exposition of the second verse of this Chapter, and it is positively affirmed by the Apostle, Col. 2. 17. For therein would God dwell really and substantially, Col. 2. 9. In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. And the Tabernacle was but to represent this Inhabitation of God in Christ. Therefore did he dwell therein typically by sundry pledges of his presence, that he might represent the real substantial Inhabitation of the Godhead in the Body, or Humane Nature of Christ. This therefore was the , whereunto the Tabernacle was to be framed, and this was that which was shewed unto Moses on the top of the Mount. These were the heavenly things, which they served unto the resemblance and shadow of. It is therefore most prodable, and most agreeable unto the mystery of the wisdom of God in these things, that before the building of the Tabernacle below, God did shew unto Moses what was to be signified and represented there∣by, and what he would introduce when that was to be taken away. He first shewed the true Tabernacle, then appointed a Figure of it, which was to abide and serve the Worship of the Church, until that true one was to be introduced, when this was to be taken down and removed out of the way, which is the substance of what the Apostle designeth to prove. It will be said that what was shewed unto Moses in the Mount, was only  and , as here, that is, a likeness, similitude and type of other things. This therefore could not be Christ himself and his Mediation, which are the substance of heavenly things, and not a resemblance of them. I answer (1) All Representations of Christ himself, antecedent unto his actual exhibition in the flesh, (as his appearances in humane shape of old) were but Resemblances and Types of what should be afterwards. (2) His manifestation unto Moses is so called, not that it was a Type of any other things above, but because it was the Prototype of all that was to be done be∣low. 1. This was the Foundation of the Faith of the Church of Israel in all Gene∣rations. Their Faith in God was not confined unto the outward things they en∣joyed, but on Christ in them, and represented by them. They believed that they were only Resemblances of him and his Mediation, which when they lost the Faith of, they lost all acceptance with God in their Worship. The relation of their Ordinances unto him, their expression of him, as their Prototype and Substance, was the line of life, wisdom, beauty, glory and usefulness that ran through them all. This being now taken away, they are all as a dead thing. When Christ was in
them they were the delight of God, and the joy of the Souls of his Saints. Now he hath uncloathed himself of them, and left them to be rolled up as a vesture, as a monument of the Garments he thought meet to wear in the immature Age of the Church, they are of no more use at all. Who now can see any beauty, any glory in the Old Temple Administrations should they be revived? Where Christ is, there is glory, if we have the light of Faith to discern it; and we may say of every thing wherein he is not, be it never so pompous unto the eyes of flesh, Ichabod; where is the glory of it, or it hath no glory. Jude tells us of a Contest between Michael and the Devil about the Body of Moses, ver. 9. It is generally thought that the Devil would have hindred the Burial of it, that in process of time it might have been an occasion of Idolatry among that People. But that which was signified hereby, was the Contest he made to keep the Body of Moses, the whole System of Mosaical Worship and Ceremonies, from being buried, when the life and soul of it was departed. And this hath proved the ruine of the Jews unto this day. 2. Consider the progress of these heavenly things; that is, of Jesus Christ, and all the effects of his Mediation in Grace and Glory. (1) The Idea, the original Pattern or Exemplar of them was in the mind, the counsel, the wisdom and will of God, Ephes. 1. 5, 8, 9. (2) Hereof God made various accidental Representations, preparatory for the full expression of the glorious eternal Idea of his mind. So he did in the appea∣rance of Christ in the form of humane nature to Abraham, Jacob, and others; so he did in the Pattern that he shewed unto Moses in the Mount, which infused a spirit of life into all that was made unto a resemblance of it. So he did in the Ta∣bernacle and Temple, as will be more fully declared afterwards. (3) He gave a substantial Representation of the eternal Idea of his Wisdom and Grace, in the Incarnation of the Son, in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwelt substantially, and in the discharge of his work of Mediation. (4) An Exposition of the whole is given us in the Gospel, which is Gods means of instructing us in the eternal counsels of his Wisdom, Love and Grace, as re∣vealed in Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The actings of Faith with respect unto these heavenly things, do begin where the Divine Progress of them doth end, and end where it begins. Faith in the first place respects and receives the Revelation of the Gospel, which is the means of its receiving and resting in Christ himself. And through Christ our Faith is in God, 1 Pet. 1. 20. as the eternal Spring and Fountain of all Grace and Glory.
VER. VI. . There is no material difference in any Translators ancient or modern in the ren∣dering of these words; their signification in particular will be given in the Expo∣sition. VER. VI. But now he hath obtained a more excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established on better Promises. IN this Verse beginneth the Second Part of the Chapter, concerning the differ∣ence between the two Covenants, the Old and the New, with the Preheminence of the latter above the former; and of the Ministry of Christ above the High Priests on that account. The whole Church state of the Jews, with all the Ordi∣nances and Worship of it, and the Priviledges annexed unto it, depend wholly on the Covenant that God made with them at Sinai. But the introduction of this new Priesthood whereof the Apostle is discoursing, did necessarily abolish that Cove∣nant, and put an end unto all sacred Ministrations that belonged unto it. And this could not well be offered unto them, without the supply of another Covenant which should excell the former in Priviledges and Advantages. For it was granted among them, that is was the design of God to carry on the Church unto a perfect state, as hath been declared on Chap. 7. Wherefore he would not lead it backward, nor deprive it of any thing it had enjoyed, without provision of what was better in its room. This therefore the Apostle here undertakes to declare. And he doth it after his wonted manner from such Principles and Testimonies as were admitted among themselves. Two things unto this purpose he proves by express Testimonies out of the Pro∣phet Jeremiah. 1. That besides the Covenant made with their Fathers in Sinai, God had pro∣mised to make another Covenant with the Church, in his appointed time and sea∣son. 2. That this other promised Covenant should be of another nature than the former, and much more excellent as unto spiritual Advantages, unto them who were taken into it. From both these fully proved, the Apostle infers the necessity of the Abrogation of that first Covenant, wherein they trusted, and unto which they adhered, when the appointed time was come. And hereon he takes occasion to declare the Na∣ture of the two Covenants in sundry instances, and wherein the differences between them did consist. This is the substance of the remainder of this Chapter. This Verse is a Transition from one Subject unto another, namely, from the Excellency of the Priesthood of Christ above that of the Law, unto the Excellency of the New Covenant above the Old. And herein also the Apostle artificially com∣priseth and confirmeth his last Argument, of the Preheminency of Christ, his Priest∣hood and Ministry above those of the Law. And this he doth from the Nature and Excellency of that Covenant whereof he was the Mediator in the discharge of his Office. There are two Parts of the words. 1. An Assertion of the Excellency of the Ministry of Christ. And this he ex∣presseth by way of comparison. He hath obtained a more excellent Ministry: and after declareth the degree of that comparison; By how much also.
II. He annexeth the Proof of this Assertion, in that he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, established on better or more excellent Promises. In the first of these there occur these five things. 1. The note of its Introduction; But now. 2. What is ascribed in the Assertion unto the Lord Christ, and that is a Mi∣nistry. 3. How he came by that Ministry; He hath obtained it. 4. The quality of this Ministry; it is better or more excellent than the other. 5. The measure and degree of this Excellency; By how much also: all which must be spoken unto, for the opening of the words. 1. The Introduction of the Assertion is by the Particles , But now; , . now, is a note of time, of the present time. But there are Instances where these Adverbial Particles thus conjoyned, do not seem to denote any time or season, but are meerly adversative, Rom. 7. 17. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Chap. 7. 14. But even in those places there seems a respect unto time also, and therefore I know not why it should be here excluded. As therefore there is an Opposition intended unto the Old Covenant, and the Levitical Priesthood; so the season is intimated of the Introduction of that Covenant, and the better Ministry wherewith it was accom∣panied. Now, at this time, which is the season that God hath appointed for the Introduction of the New Covenant and Ministry. To the same purpose the Apostle expresseth himself, treating of the same subject, Rom. 3. 26. to declare , at this instant season, now the Gospel is preached, his Righteousness; at. For Ob. God in his infinite wisdom gives proper times and seasons unto all his Dispensations unto and towards the Church. So the accomplishment of these things was in the fulness of times, Ephes. 1. 10. that is, when all things rendred it seaso∣nable and suitable unto the condition of the Church, and for the manifestation of his own glory. He hasteneth all his works of grace in their own appointed time, Isa. 60. 22. And our duty it is, to leave the ordering of all the Concerns of the Church in the accomplishment of promises, unto God in his own time, Acts 1. 7. 2. That which is ascribed unto the Lord Christ is , a Ministry. The Priests of old had a Ministry, they ministred at the Altar, as in the foregoing verse. . And the Lord Christ was a Minister also; so the Apostle had said before, he was , ver. 2. A Minister of the holy things. Wherefore he had a Liturgy, a Ministry, a Service committed unto him. And two things are included herein. 1. That it was an office of Ministry that the Lord Christ undertook. He is not called a Minister with respect unto one particular Act of Ministration; so are we said to minister unto the necessity of the Saints, which yet denotes no office in them that do so. But he had a standing Office committed unto him, as the word imports. In that sense also he is called , a Minister in office, Rom. 15. 8. 2. Subordination unto God is included herein. With respect unto the Church his Office is supreme, accompanied with Sovereign Power and Authority; He is Lord over his own house. But he holds his Office in subordination unto God, being faith∣ful unto him that appointed him. So the Angels are said to minister unto God, Dan. 7. 10. that is, to do all things according unto his will, and at his command. So had the Lord Christ a Ministry. And we may observe, 1. That the whole Office of Christ was designed unto the Accomplishment of the Will and Dispensation of the Grace of God. For these ends was his Ministry committed unto him. We can never sufficiently admire the Love and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in undertaking this Office for us. The greatness and glory of the duties which he performed in the discharge thereof, with the benefits we re∣ceive thereby are unspeakable, being the immediate cause of all grace and glory. Yet we are not absolutely to rest in them, but to ascend by Faith unto the eternal Spring of them. This is the Grace, the Love, the Mercy of God, all acted in a way of Sovereign Power. These are everywhere in the Scripture represented as
the original Spring of all Grace, and the ultimate Object of our Faith, with respect unto the benefits which we receive by the Mediation of Christ. His Office was committed unto him of God, even the Father, and his Will did he do in the dis∣charge of it. Yet also 2. The Condescension of the Son of God to undertake the Office of the Ministry on our behalf, is unspeakable, and for ever to be admired. Especially will it appear so to be, when we consider who it was who undertook it, what it cost him, what he did and underwent in the pursuance and discharge of it, as it is all expressed, Phil. 2. 6, 7, 8. Not only what he continueth to do in Heaven at the right hand of God belongeth unto this Ministry, but all that he suffered also upon the Earth. His Mi∣nistry in the undertaking of it, was not a Dignity, a Promotion, a Revenue, Matth. 20. 28. It is true, it is issued in glory, but not until he had undergone all the evils that humane nature is capable of undergoing. And we ought to undergo any thing chearfully for him, who underwent this Ministry for us. 3. The Lord Christ by undertaking this Office of the Ministry, hath consecrated and made honourable that Office unto all, that are rightly called unto it, and do rightly dis∣charge it. It is true, his Ministry and ours, are not of the same kind and nature; But they agree in this, that they are both of them a Ministry unto God, in the ho∣ly things of his worship. And considering that Christ himself was Gods Minister, we have far greater reason to tremble in our selves on an apprehension of our own insufficiency for such an Office, than to be discouraged with all the hardships and contests we meet withall in the world upon the account of it. 3. The general way whereby our Lord Christ came unto this Ministry, is ex∣pressed, , He obtained it.  is either sorte contingo, to have a lot or  portion, or to have any thing befall a Man, as it were by accident; or assequor, ob∣tineo, to attain, or obtain any thing which before we had not. But the Apostle de∣signeth not to express in this word the especial call of Christ, or the particular way whereby he came unto his Ministry, but only in general that he had it, and was possessed of it, in the appointed season, which before he had not. The way where∣by he entred on the whole office and work of his Mediation, he expresseth by , Chap. 1. 4. he had it by Inheritance, that is, by free Grant and per∣petual Donation, made unto him as the Son. See the Exposition on that place. There were two things that concurred unto his obtaining this Ministry. (1) The eternal purpose and counsel of God, designing him thereunto; an Act of the Divine Will accompanied with infinite Wisdom, Love and Power. (2) The actual call of God, whereunto many things did concur, especially his Unction with the Spirit above measure for the holy discharge of his whole Office. Thus did he obtain this Ministry, and not by any legal Constitution, Succession, or carnal Rite, as did the Priests of old. And we may see that Ob. The Exaltation of the Humane Nature of Christ into the Office of this glorious Ministry, depended solely on the Sovereign Wisdom, Grace and Love of God. When the Humane Nature of Christ was united unto the Divine, it became in the Person of the Son of God meet and capable to make satisfaction for the sins of the Church, and to procure Righteousness and Life Eternal for all that do believe. But it did not merit that Union, nor could do so. For as it was utterly impossible that any created Nature, by any Act of its own should merit the Hypostatical Union; so it was granted unto the Humane Nature of Christ antecedently unto any Act of its own in way of obedience unto God. For it was united unto the Person of the Son, by virtue of that Union. Wherefore antecedently unto it, it could merit no∣thing. Hence its whole Exaltation and the Ministry that was discharged therein, depended solely on the Sovereign Wisdom and Pleasure of God. And in this Election and Designation of the Humane Nature of Christ unto Grace and Glory, we may see the pattern and example of our own. For if it was not upon the consideration or foresight of the obedience of the Humane Nature of Christ, that he was predestinated and chosen unto the grace of the Hypostatical Union, with the Ministry and Glory which depended thereon, but of the meer Sove∣reign Grace of God; how much less could a foresight of any thing in us, be the cause why God should chuse us in him before the foundation of the world unto grace and glory?
4. The Quality of this Ministry thus obtained as unto a comparative excellency, . is also expressed, , more excellent. The word is used only in this Epistle in this sense, Chap. 1. 4. and in this place. The original word denotes only a difference from other things; but in the comparative degree as here used, it signifies a Difference with a Preference, or a comparative excellency. The Ministry of the Levitical Priests was good and useful in its time and season. This of our Lord Je∣sus Christ so differed from it, as to be better than it, and more excellent, . And 5. There is added hereunto the Degree of this Preheminence so far as it is intend∣ed . in this place, and the present Argument, in the word , by how much. So much more excellent by how much. The excellency of his Ministry above that of the Levitical Priests, bears proportion with the excellency of the Covenant whereof he was the Mediator, above the Old Covenant wherein they administred, whereof afterwards. So have we explained the Apostles Assertion, concerning the excellency of the Ministry of Christ. And herewith he closeth his Discourse which he had so long engaged in, about the Preheminence of Christ in his Office above the High Priests of old. And indeed this being the very hinge whereon his whole Controversie with the Jews did depend, he could not give it too much evidence, nor too full a confir∣mation. And as unto what concerns our selves at present, we are taught thereby, That Ob. It is our Duty and our Safety to acquiesce universally and obsolutely in the Ministry of Jesus Christ. That which he was so designed unto in the infinite wis∣dom and grace of God, that which he was so furnished for the discharge of, by the communication of the Spirit unto him in all fulness, that which all other Priesthoods were removed to make way for, must needs be sufficient and effectual for all the ends unto which it is designed. It may be said, this is that which all men do; all that are called Christians do fully acquiesce in the Ministry of Jesus Christ. But if it be so, why do we hear the bleating of another sort of Cattel? What mean those other Priests and reiterated Sacrifices which make up the Worship of the Church of Rome? If they rest in the Ministry of Christ, why do they appoint one of their own to do the same things that he hath done, namely, to offer Sacrifice unto God? The Proof of this Assertion lies in the latter part of these words. By how much he was the Mediator of a better Covenant, established on better Promises. The words are so disposed, that some think the Apostle intends not to prove the excellency of the Covenant, from the excellency of his Ministry therein. But the other sense is more suited unto the scope of the place, and the nature of the Argument which the A∣postle presseth the Hebrews withal. For on supposition that there was indeed ano∣ther and that a better Covenant to be introduced and established, than that which the Levitical Priests served in, which they could not deny; it plainly follows, that he on whose Ministry the dispensation of that Covenant did depend, must of necessi∣ty be more excellent in that Ministry, than they who appertained unto that Cove∣nant which was to be abolished. However it may be granted that these things do mutually testifie unto and illustrate one another. Such as the Priest is, such is the Covenant, such as the Covenant is in dignity, such is the Priest also. In the words there are three things observable. 1. What is in general ascribed unto Christ, declaring the nature of his Ministry, He was a Mediator. 2. The Determination of his Mediatory Office, unto the New Covenant, Of a better Covenant. 3. The Proof or Demonstration of the nature of his Covenant as unto its excellency, It was established on better Promises. 1. His Office is that of a Mediator, , one that interposed between God and man, for the doing of all those things whereby a Covenant might be establish∣ed  between them, and made effectual. Schlictingius on the place gives this descri∣ption of a Mediator; Mediatorem faederis esse nihil aliud est, quam Dei esse inter∣pretem, & internuntium in faedere cum hominibus pangendo; per quem scilicet & Deus
voluntatem suam hominibus declaret, & illi vicissim divinae voluntatis notitid in∣structi ad Deum accedant, cumque eo reconciliati, pacem in posterum colant. And Grotius speaks much unto the same purpose. But this Description of a Mediator is wholly applicable unto Moses, and suited unto his Office in giving of the Law, see Exod. 20. 19. Deut. 15. 27, 28. What is said by them doth indeed immediately belong unto the Mediatory Office of Christ, but it is not confined thereunto; yea, it is exclusive of the principal parts of his Mediation. And whereas there is nothing in it, but what belongs unto the Pro∣phetical Office of Christ, which the Apostle here doth not principally intend, it is most improperly applied as a Description of such a Mediator as he doth intend. And therefore when he comes afterwards to declare in particular what belonged unto such a Mediator of the Covenant as he designed, he expresly placeth it in his Death for the redemption of transgressions, Chap. 9. 15. affirming that for that cause he was a Mediator. But hereof there is nothing at all in the Description they give us of this Office. But this the Apostle doth in his elsewhere, 1 Tim. 2. 5, 6. There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all. The principal part of his Mediation consisted in the giving himself a ransom, or a price of redemption for the whole Church. Where∣fore this Description of a Mediator of the New Testament, is feigned only to ex∣clude his satisfaction, or his offering himself unto God in his death and blood-shed∣ding with the atonement made thereby. The Lord Christ then in his Ministry is called , the Mediator of the Cove∣nant, in the same sense as he is called , the Surety, whereof see the Expo∣sition on Chap. 7. 22. He is in the New Covenant, the Mediator, the Surety, the Priest, the Sacrifice, all in his own Person. The ignorance and want of a due con∣sideration hereof, is the great evidence of the degeneracy of Christian Re∣ligion. Whereas this is the first general Notion of the Office of Christ, that which comprizeth the whole Ministry committed unto him, and containeth in itself the especial Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet, whereby he dischargeth his Mediation, some things must be mentioned that are declarative of its nature and use. And we may unto this purpose observe, 1. That unto the Office of a Mediator, it is required that there be different Per∣sons concerned in the Covenant, and that by their own wills, as it must be in every compact of what sort soever. So saith our Apostle, A Mediator is not of one, but God is one, Gal. 3. 20. that is, if there were none but God concerned in this mat∣ter, as it is in an absolute Promise or sovereign Precept, there would be no need of, no place for a Mediator, such a Mediator as Christ is. Wherefore our consent in and unto the Covenant is required in the very notion of a Mediator. 2. That the Persons entering into Covenant be in such a state and condition, as that it is no way convenient or morally possible, that they should treat immediately with each other as to the ends of the Covenant. For if they are so, a Mediator to go between, is altogether needless. So was it in the original Covenant with Adam, which had no Mediator. But in the giving of the Law, which was to be a Covenant between God and the People, they found themselves utterly insufficient for an immediate Treaty with God, and therefore desired that they might have an Internuntius to go between God and them, to bring his Proposals, and carry back their consent, Deut. 5. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And this is the voice of all men really convinced of the Holiness of God, and their own condition; such is the state between God and sinners. The Law and the Curse of it did so interpose between them, that they could not enter into any immediate Treaty with God, Psal. 5. 3, 4, 5. This made a Mediator necessary, that the New Covenant might be established, whereof we shall speak afterwards. 3. That he who is this Mediator, be accepted, trusted, and rested in on both sides or the Parties mutually entering into Covenant. An absolute Trust must be repo∣sed in him, so that each Party be everlastingly obliged in what he undertaketh on their behalf; and such as admit not of his terms, can have no benefit by no in∣terest in the Covenant. So was it with the Lord Christ in this matter. On the part of God, he reposed the whole trust of all the concernments of the Covenant in him, and absolutely rested therein. Behold, saith he of him, my servant whom I
uphold, mine Elect in whom my Soul delighteth, or is well pleased, , Matth. 3. 17. When he undertook this Office, and said, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God, the Soul of God rested in him, Exod. 23. 21. Joh. 5. 20, 21, 22. And to him he gives an account at last of his discharge of this thing, Joh. 17. 4. And on our part, unless we resign our selves absolutely unto an uni∣versal trust in him, and reliance on him, and unless we accept of all the terms of the Covenant as by him proposed, and engage to stand unto all that he hath underta∣ken on our behalf, we can have neither share nor interest in this matter. 4. A Mediator must be a middle Person between both Parties entering into Covenant, and if they be of different natures, a perfect compleat Mediator ought to partake of each of their natures in the same Person. The necessity hereof, and the glorious wisdom of God herein, I have elsewhere at large demonstrated, and shall not therefore here again insist upon it. 5. A Mediator must be one who voluntarily and of his own accord underta∣keth the work of Mediation. This is required of every one who will effectually mediate between any Persons at variance to bring them unto an agreement on equal terms. So it was required that the will and consent of Christ should concur in his susception of this Office; and that they did so, himself expresly testifieth, Chap. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. It is true, he was designed and appointed by the Father unto this Office, whence he is called his Servant, and constantly witnesseth of himself, that he came to do the Will and Commandment of him that sent him. But he had that to do in the discharge of this Office, which could not according unto any Rules of Divine Righteousness be imposed on him without his own voluntary con∣sent. And this was the ground of the eternal compact that was between the Father and the Son, with respect unto his Mediation, which I have elsewhere explained. And the testification of his own Will, Grace and Love in the susception of this Office, is a principal motive unto that Faith and Trust which the Church placeth in him, as the Mediator between God and them. Upon this his voluntary underta∣king doth the Soul of God rest in him, and he reposeth the whole Trust in him of accomplishing his Will and Pleasure, or the design of his Love and Grace in this Covenant, Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12. And the Faith of the Church whereon Salvation doth depend, must have love unto his Person inseparably accompanying of it. Love unto Christ is no less necessary unto Salvation, than Faith in him. And as Faith is resolved into the sovereign Wisdom and Grace of God in sending him, and his own ability to save to the uttermost those that come to God by him; so Love ari∣seth from the consideration of his own Love and Grace in his voluntary undertaking of this Office, and the discharge of it. 6. In this voluntary undertaking to be a Mediator, two things were re∣quired. 1. That he should remove and take out of the way whatever kept the Cove∣nanters at distance, or was a cause of enmity between them. For it is supposed that such an enmity there was, or there had been no need of a Mediator. There∣fore in the Covenant made with Adam, there having been no variance between God and man, nor any distance but what necessarily ensued from the distinct natures of the Creator and a Creature, there was no Mediator. But the design of this Covenant was to make Reconciliation and Peace. Hereon therefore depended the necessity of Satisfaction, Redemption, and the making of atonement by Sacrifice. For man having sinned and apostatized from the Rule of God, making himself thereby obnoxious unto his wrath, according unto the eternal Rule of Righteous∣ness, and in particular unto the Curse of the Law, there could be no new Peace and Agreement made with God, unless due satisfaction were made for these things. For although God was willing in infinite Love, Grace and Mercy, to enter into a new Covenant with fallen man, yet would he not do it unto the prejudice of his Righ∣teousness, the dishonour of his Rule, and the contempt of his Law. Wherefore none could undertake to be a Mediator of this Covenant, but he that was able to satisfie the Justice of God, glorifie his Government, and fulfill the Law. And this could be done by none but him, concerning whom it might be said that God pur∣chased his Church with his own blood. 2. That he should procure and purchase in a way suited unto the glory of God, the actual communication of all the good things prepared and proposed in this
Covenant, that is, Grace and Glory, with all that belong unto them, for them and on their behalf whose Surety he was. And this is the foundation of the merit of Christ, and of the Grant of all good things unto us for his sake. 7. It is required of this Mediator as such, that he give assurance and undertake unto the Parties mutually concerned, of the accomplishment of the terms of the Covenant, undertaking on each hand for them. (1) On the part of God towards men, that they shall have peace and accept∣ance with him in the sure accomplishment of all the Promises of the Covenant. This he doth only declaratively, in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and in the Institu∣tion of the Ordinances of Evangelical Worship. For he was not a Surety for God, nor did God need any, having confirmed his Promise with an Oath, swearing by himself, because he had no greater to swear by. (2) On our part, he undertakes unto God, for our acceptance of the terms of the Covenant, and our accomplishment of them, by his enabling us there∣unto. These things, among others, were necessary unto a full and compleat Mediator of the New Covenant, such as Christ was. And The provision of this Mediator between God and Man, was an effect of infinite Wisdom and Grace: Yea, it was the greatest and most glorious external effect of them, that ever they did produce, or ever will do in this world. The Creation of all things at first out of nothing, was a glorious effect of infinite Wisdom and Pow∣er. But when the glory of that design was eclipsed by the entrance of sin, this provision of a Mediator, one whereby all things were restored and retrieved into a condition of bringing more glory unto God, and securing for ever the blessed estate of them whose Mediator he is, is accompanied with more evidences of the divine ex∣cellencies than that was, see Ephes. 1. 10. Two things are added in the description of this Mediator. (1) That he was a Mediator of a Covenant. (2) That this Covenant was a better than another which respect is had unto, whereof he was not the Mediator. 1. He was the Mediator of a Covenant. And two things are supposed herein. . First, That there was a Covenant made or prepared between God and man; that is, it was so far made, as that God who made it, had prepared the terms of it in a sovereign Act of Wisdom and Grace. The preparation of the Covenant consisting in the will and purpose of God graciously to bestow on all men the good things which are contained in it, all things belonging unto grace and glory, as also to make way for the obedience which he required herein, are supposed unto the constitution of this Covenant. Secondly, That there was need of a Mediator that this Covenant might be ef∣fectual unto its proper ends of the glory of God, and the obedience of Mankind with their reward. This was not necessary from the nature of a Covenant in general; for a Covenant may be made and entred into between different Parties without any Mediator, meerly on the equity of the terms of it. Nor was it so from the nature of a Covenant between God and man, as man was first created of God. For the first Covenant between them was immediate without the interpo∣sition of a Mediator. But it became necessary from the state and condition of them with whom this Covenant was made, and the especial nature of this Cove∣nant. This the Apostle declares, Rom. 8. 3. For what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. The Law was the moral Instrument or Rule of the Covenant that was made immediately between God and man: But it could not continue to be so after the entrance of sin, that is, so as that God might be glorified thereby, in the obedience and reward of men. Wherefore he sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, that is, provided a Mediator for a New Covenant. The persons with whom this Covenant was to be made, being all of them sinners, and apostatized from God, it became not the Holiness or Righteousness of God to treat immediately with them any more. Nor would it have answered his holy ends so to have done. For if when they were in a condition of uprightness and in∣tegrity, they kept not the terms of that Covenant which was made immediately
with them, without a Mediator, although they were holy, just, good, and equal; how much less could any such thing be expected from them in their depraved condition of Apostasie from God, and Enmity against him? It therefore became not the wisdom of God to enter anew into Covenant with Mankind, without secu∣rity that the terms of the Covenant should be accepted, and the grace of it made effectual. This we could not give; yea, we gave all evidences possible unto the contrary, in that God saw, that every imagination of the thoughts of mans heart was only evil continually, Gen. 6. 5. Wherefore it was necessary there should be a Mediator to be the Surety of this Covenant. Again, the Covenant itself was so prepared in the counsel, wisdom, and grace of God, as that the principal, yea in∣deed all the benefits of it, were to depend on what was to be done by a Mediator, and could not otherwise be effected. Such were satisfaction for sin, and the bring∣ing in of everlasting Righteousness, which are the foundation of this ove∣nant. 2. To proceed with the Text, this Covenant whereof the Lord Christ is the . Mediator, is said to be a better Covenant. Wherefore it is supposed that there was another Covenant, whereof the Lord Christ was not the Mediator. And in the following Verses there are two Covenants, a first and a latter, an old and a new compared together. We must therefore consider what was that other Covenant, then which this is said to be better: for upon the determination thereof depends the right understanding of the whole ensuing Discourse of the Apostle. And because this is a Subject wrapt up in much obscurity, and attended with many difficulties, it will be necessary that we use the best of our diligence both in the investigation of the truth, and in the declaration of it, so as that it may be distinctly apprehend∣ed. And I shall first explain the Text, and then speak to the difficulties which arise from it. 1. There was an original Covenant made with Adam and all Mankind in him. The Rule of Obedience and Reward that was between God and him, was not ex∣presly called a Covenant, but it contained the express nature of a Covenant. For it was the agreement of God and Man concerning Obedience, and Disobedience, Rewards, and Punishments. Where there is a Law concerning these things, and an agreement upon it, by all Parties concerned, there is a formal Covenant. Where∣fore it may be considered two ways. (1) As it was a Law only, so it proceeded from and was a consequent of the nature of God and man, with their mutual Relation unto one another. God being considered as the Creator, Governor and Benefactor of man; and man as an intel∣lectual Creature capable of moral Obedience. This Law was necessary, and is eternally indispensible. (2) As it was a Covenant; and this depended on the will and pleasure of God. I will not dispute whether God might have given a Law unto men, that should have had nothing in it of a Covenant properly so called, as is the Law of Creation unto all other Creatures which hath no Rewards nor Punishments annex∣ed unto it. Yet this God calls a Covenant also, inasmuch as it is an effect of his purpose, his unalterable will and pleasure, Jer. 33. 20, 21. But that this Law of our Obedience should be a formal compleat Covenant, there was moreover some things required on the part of God, and some also on the part of man. Two things were required on the part of God to compleat this Covenant, or he did so com∣pleat it by two things. First, By annexing unto it Promises and Threatnings of Reward and Punish∣ment; the first of Grace, the other of Justice. Secondly, The expression of these Promises and Threatnings in external signs; the first in the Tree of Life, the latter in that of the knowledge of good and evil. By these did God establish the original Law of Creation as a Covenant, gave it the nature of a Covenant. On the part of man, it was required that he accept of this Law as the Rule of the Covenant which God made with him. And this he did two ways. (1) By the innate Principles of Light and Obedience concreated with his Na∣ture. By these he absolutely and universally assented unto the Law, as proposed with Promises and Threatnings, as good, holy, just, what was meet for God to re∣quire, what was equal and good unto himself.
(2) By his acceptance of the Commands concerning the Tree of Life, and that of the knowledge of good and evil, as the signs and pledges of this Covenant. So was it established as a Covenant between God and man, without the interpositi∣on of any Mediator. This is the Covenant of Works, absolutely the old or first Covenant that God made with men. But this is not the Covenant here intended. For 1. The Covenant called afterwards the first, was , a Testament. So it is here called. It was such a Covenant as was a Testament also. Now there can be no Testament, but there must be death for the confirmation of it, Chap. 9. 16. But in the making of the Covenant with Adam, there was not the death of any thing whence it might be called a Testament. But there was the death of Beasts in Sacrifice in the confirmation of the Covenant at Sinai, as we shall see afterwards. And it must be observed, that although I use the name of a Covenant, as we have rendred the word , because the true signification of that word will more properly occur unto us in another place, yet I do not understand thereby a Cove∣nant properly and strictly so called, but such an one as hath the nature of a Testament also, wherein the good things of him that makes it, are bequeathed unto them for whom they are designed. Neither the word used constantly by the Apostle in this Argument, nor the design of his Discourse, will admit of any other Covenant to be understood in this place. Whereas therefore the first Covenant made with Adam was in no sense a Testament also, it cannot be here intended. 2. That first Covenant made with Adam, was, as unto any benefit to be expect∣ed from it, with respect unto acceptation with God, Life and Salvation, ceased long before, even at the entrance of sin. It was not abolished or abrogated by any Act of God, as a Law, but only was made weak and insufficient unto its first end, as a Covenant. God had provided a way for the salvation of sinners, declared in the first Promise. When this is actually embraced, that first Covenant ceaseth to∣wards them, as unto its Curse, all its Concerns as a Covenant, and obligation unto sinless obedience, as the condition of life, because both of them are answered by the Mediator of the New Covenant. But as unto all those who receive not the grace tendered in the Promise, it doth remain in full force and efficacy not as a Covenant, but as a Law, and that because neither the Obedience it requires, nor the Curse which it threatens are answered. Thence if any man believeth not, the wrath of God abideth on him. For its Commands and Curse depending on the necessary re∣lation between God and man, with the Righteousness of God as the Supreme Go∣vernor of Mankind, they must be answered and fulfilled. Wherefore it was never abrogated formally: But as all Unbelievers are still obliged by it, and unto it must stand or fall, so it is perfectly fulfilled in all Believers, not in their own persons, but in the person of their Surety. God sending forth his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and condemning sin in the flesh, that the righieousness of the Law might be ful∣filled in us, Rom. 8. 3, 4. But as a Covenant obliging unto personal, perfect, sin∣less Obedience, as the condition of Life, to be performed by themselves, so it ceased to be, long before that Introduction of the New Covenant which the Apostle speaks of, that was promised in the latter days. But the other Covenant here spoken of was not removed or taken away, until this New Covenant was actually estab∣lished. 3. The Church of Israel was never absolutely under the power of that Cove∣nant as a Covenant of Life. For from the days of Abraham, the Promise was given unto them and their Seed. And the Apostle proves that no Law could after∣wards be given, or Covenant made, that should disannul that Promise, Gal. 3. 17. But had they been brought under the Old Covenant of Works, it would have disan∣nulled the Promise. For that Covenant and the Promise are diametrically opposite. And moreover, if they were under that Covenant, they were all under the Curse, and so perished eternally, which is openly false. For it is testified of them that they pleased God by Faith, and so were saved. But it is evident that the Covenant intended, was a Covenant wherein the Church of Israel walked with God, until such time as this better Covenant was solemnly introduced. This is plainly declared in the ensuing Context, especially in the close of the Chapter, where speaking of this former Covenant, he says, it was become old, and so ready to disappear. Wherefore it is not the Covenant of Works made with Adam that is intended, when this other is said to be a better Covenant.
Secondly, There were other faederal Transactions between God and the Church before the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai. Two of them there were into which all the rest were resolved. 1. The first Promise given unto our first Parents immediately after the Fall. This had in it the nature of a Covenant, grounded on a Promise of Grace, and re∣quiring Obedience in all that received the Promise. 2. The Promise given and sworn unto Abraham, which is expresly called the Covenant of God, and had the whole nature of a Covenant in it, with a solemn outward Seal appointed for its confirmation and establishment. Hereof we have treated at large on the Sixth Chapter. Neither of these, nor any Transaction between God and man that may be re∣duced unto them, as Explanations, Renovations, or Confirmations of them, are the first Covenant here intended. For they are not only consistent with the New Co∣venant, so as that there was no necessity to remove them out of the way for its Introduction, but did indeed contain in them the essence and nature of it, and so were confirmed therein. Hence the Lord Christ himself is said to be a Minister of the Circumcision for the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made to the Fathers, Rom. 15. 8. As he was the Mediator of the New Covenant, he was so far from taking off from, or abolishing those Promises, that it belonged unto his Office to confirm them. Wherefore 3. The other Covenant or Testament here supposed, whereunto that whereof the Lord Christ was the Mediator is preferred, is none other but that which God made with the People of Israel on Mount Sinai. So it is expresly affirmed, ver. 9. The Covenant which I made with your Fathers in the day I took them by the hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt. This was that Covenant which had all the Institutions of Worship annexed unto it, Chap. 9. 1, 2, 3. whereof we must treat afterwards more at large. With respect hereunto it is, that the Lord Christ is said to be the Mediator of a better Covenant, that is, of another distinct from it, and more excellent. It remains unto the Exposition of the words; that we enquire what was this Co∣venant, whereof our Lord Christ was the Mediator, and what is here affirmed of it. This can be no other in general but that which we call the Covenant of Grace. And it is so called in opposition unto that of Works, which was made with us in Adam. For these two, Grace and Works, do divide the ways of our Relation unto God, being diametrically opposite, and every way inconsistent, Rom. 11. 6. Of this Covenant the Lord Christ was the Mediator from the foundation of the world, namely, from the giving of the first Promise, Rev. 13. 8. For it was given on his Interposition, and all the benefits of it depended on his future actual Me∣diation. But here ariseth the first difficulty of the Context, and that in two things. For (1) If this Covenant of Grace was made from the Beginning, and that the Lord Christ was the Mediator of it from the first, then where is the priviledge of the Gospel state in opposition unto the Law, by vertue of this Covenant? seeing that under the Law also the Lord Christ was the Mediator of that Covenant which was from the Beginning. (2) If it be the Covenant of Grace which is intended, and that be opposed unto the Covenant of Works made with Adam, then the other Covenant must be that Covenant of Works so made with Adam, which we have before disproved. The Answer hereunto is in the word here used by the Apostle concerning this New Coxenant, , whose meaning we must inquire into. I say there∣fore . that the Apostle doth not here consider the New Covenant absolutely, and as it was virtually administred from the foundation of the world, in the way of a Promise. For as such it was consistent with that Covenant made with the people in Sinai. And the Apostle proves expresly, that the renovation of it made unto Abraham, was no way abrogated by the giving of the Law, Gal. 3. 17. There was no interruption of its administration made by the introduction of the Law. But he treats of such an establishment of the New Covenant, as wherewith the old Covenant made at Sinai was absolutely inconsistent, and which was therefore to be
removed out of the way. Wherefore he considers it here as it was actually com∣pleated, so as to bring along with it all the Ordinances of Worship which are pro∣per unto it, the dispensation of the Spirit in them, and all the spiritual Priviledges wherewith they are accompanied, It is now so brought in as to become the en∣tire Rule of the Churches Faith, Obedience and Worship in all things. This is the meaning of the word , established, say we. But it is reduced into a fixed state of a Law or Ordinance. All the Obedience required in it, all the Worship appointed by it, all the Priviledges exhibited in it, and the Grace administred with them, are all given for a Statute, Law and Ordinance unto the Church. That which before lay hid in Promises, in many things obscure, the principal Mysteries of it being a Secret hid in God himself, was now brought to light; and that Covenant which had invisibly in the way of a Promise put forth its efficacy under Types and Shadows, was now solemnly sealed, ratified and con∣firmed in the Death and Resurrection of Christ. It had before the confirmation of a Promise, which is an Oath; it had not the confirmation of a Covenant, which is blood. That which before had no visible outward Worship, proper and peculiar unto it, is now made the only Rule and Instrument of Worship unto the whole Church, nothing being to be admitted therein, but what belongs unto it, and is ap∣pointed by it. This the Apostle intends by , the legal establishment of the New Covenant with all the Ordinances of its Worship. Hereon the other Covenant was disannulled and removed, and not only the Covenant itself, but all that System of Sacred Worship whereby it was administred. This was not done by the making of the Covenant at first. Yeal all this was superinduced into the Covenant as given out in a Promise, and was consistent therewith. When the New Covenant was given out only in the way of a Promise, it did not introduce a Worship and Priviledges expressive of it. Wherefore it was consistent with a form of Worship, Rites and Ceremonies, and those composed into a yoke of Bondage which belonged not unto it. And as these being added after its giving, did not overthrow its nature as a Promise, so they were inconsistent with it, when it was compleated as a Covenant. For then all the Worship of the Church was to proceed from it, and to be conformed unto it. Then it was established. Hence it follows, in answer unto the second difficulty, that as a Promise, it was opposed unto the Covenant of Works; as a Covenant, it was opposed unto that in Sinai. This Le∣galizing, or authoritative establishment of the New Covenant, and the Worship thereunto belonging did effect this alteration. In the last place the Apostle tells us whereon this establishment was made, and that is , on better Promises. For the better understanding . hereof we must consider somewhat of the original and use of Divine Promises in our Relation unto God. And we may observe, 1. That every Covenant between God and man, must be founded on, and re∣solved into Promises. Hence essentially a Promise and a Covenant are all one, and God calls an absolute Promise founded on an absolute Decree, his Covenant, Gen. 9. 11. And his Purpose for the continuation of the course of nature unto the end of the World he calls his Covenant with day and night, Jer. 33. 20. The Being and Essence of a Divine Covenant lies in the Promise. Hence are they called the Covenants of Promise, Ephes. 2. 12. Such as are founded on and consist in Promi∣ses. And it is necessary that so it should be. For 1. The Nature of God who maketh these Covenants requireth that so it should be. It becometh his Greatness and Goodness in all his voluntary Transactions with his Creatures, to propose that unto them, wherein their advantage, their hap∣piness and blessedness doth consist. We enquire not how God may deal with his Creatures as such; what he may absolutely require of them, on the account of his own Being, his absolute essential excellencies, with their universal dependance upon him. Who can express or limit the Sovereignty of God over his Creatures? All the Disputes about it are fond. We have no measures of what is infinite. May he not do with his own what he pleaseth? Are we not in his hands, as Clay in the hands of the Potter? And whether he make or marr a Vessel, who shall say unto him, What doest thou? He giveth no account of his matters. But upon supposition that he will condescend to enter into Covenant with his Creatures, and to come to agreement with them according unto the terms of it, it becometh his Greatness and
Goodness to give them Promises as the foundation of it, wherein he proposeth unto them the things wherein their Blessedness and Reward doth consist. For (1) Herein he proposeth himself unto them as the eternal Spring and Fountain of all Power and Goodness. Had he treated with us meerly by a Law, he had therein only revealed his Soveraign Authority and Holiness; the one in giving of the Law, the other in the nature of it. But in Promises he revealeth himself as the eternal Spring of Goodness and Power. For the matter of all Promises is somewhat that is good; and the communication of it depends on Soveraign Power. That God should so declare himself in his Covenant, was absolutely necessary to direct and encourage the Obedience of the Covenanters. And he did so accor∣dingly, Gen. 17. 1. Gen. 15. 1. Hereby he reserves the glory of the whole unto himself. For although the terms of agreement which he proposeth between him∣self and us, be in their own nature holy, just and good, which sets forth his praise and glory, yet if there were not something on his part, which hath no antecedent respect unto any goodness, obedience or desert in us, we should have wherein to glory in our selves, which is inconsistent with the glory of God. But the matter of those Promises wherein the Covenant is founded, is free, undeserved, and without respect unto any thing in us, whereby it may in any sense be procured. And so in the first Covenant which was given in a form of Law, attended with a Penal San∣ction, yet the foundation of it was in a Promise of a free and undeserved Reward, even of the eternal enjoyment of God, which no goodness or obedience in the Creature could possibly merit the attainment of. So that if a man should by vir∣tue of any Covenant be justified by Works, though he might have whereof to glo∣ry before men, yet could he not glory before God, as the Apostle declares, Rom. 4. 2. and that because the Reward proposed in the Promise doth infinitely exceed the Obedience performed. 2. It was also necessary on our part, that every Divine Covenant should be founded and established on Promises. For there is no state wherein we may be ta∣ken into Covenant with God, but it is supposed we are yet not arrived at that per∣fection and blessedness whereof our nature is capable, and which we cannot but de∣sire. And therefore when we come to Heaven, and the full enjoyment of God, there shall be no use of any Covenant any more, seeing we shall be in eternal rest in the enjoyment of all the blessedness whereof our nature is capable, and shall immutably adhere unto God without any farther expectation. But whilst we are in the way, we have still somewhat, yea principal parts of our blessedness, to desire, expect, and believe. So in the state of Innocency, though it had all the Perfection which a state of Obedience according unto a Law was capable of, yet did not the Blessedness of eternal Rest, for which we were made, consist therein. Now whil'st it is thus with us, we cannot but be desiring and looking out after that full and compleat happiness, which our nature cannot come to rest without. This therefore renders it necessary that there should be a Promise of it given as the foundation of the Covenant, without which we should want our principal encouragement un∣to Obedience. And much more must it be so in the state of Sin and Apostasie from God. For we are now not only most remote from our utmost happiness, but in∣volved in a condition of misery, without a deliverance from which, we cannot be any ways induced to give our selves up unto Covenant Obedience. Wherefore unless we are prevented in the Covenant with Promises of deliverance from our present state, and the enjoyment of future Blessedness, no Covenant could be of use or advantage unto us. 3. It is necessary from the nature of a Covenant. For every Covenant that is proposed unto men, and accepted by them, requires somewhat to be performed on their part, otherwise it is no Covenant. But where any thing is required of them that accept of the Covenant, or to whom it is proposed, it doth suppose that some∣what be promised on the behalf of them by whom the Covenant is proposed, as the foundation of its acceptance, and the reason of the duties required in it. All this appears most evidently in the Covenant of Grace, which is here said to be established on Promises; and that on two Accounts. For (1) At the same time that much is required of us in the way of Duty and Obedience, we are told in the Scripture, and find it by experience, that of our selves
we can do nothing. Wherefore unless the Precept of the Covenant be founded in a Promise of giving grace and spiritual strength unto us, whereby we may be en∣abled to perform those duties, the Covenant can be of no benefit or advantage un∣to us. And the want of this one consideration that every Covenant is founded in Promises, and that the Promises give life unto the Precepts of it, hath perverted the minds of many to suppose an ability in our selves of yielding Obedience unto those Precepts, without Grace antecedently received to enable us thereunto, which over∣throws the nature of the New Covenant. (2) As was observed, we are all actually guilty of sin before this Covenant was made with us. Wherefore unless there be a Promise given of the pardon of sin, it is to no purpose to propose any new Covenant terms unto us. For the wa∣ges of sin is death; and we having sinned must die, whatever we do afterwards, unless our sins be pardoned. This therefore must be proposed unto us as the foun∣dation of the Covenant, or it will be of none effect. And herein lies the great difference between the Promises of the Covenant of Works, and those of the Cove∣nant of Grace. The first were only concerning things future; eternal Life and Blessedness upon the accomplishment of perfect Obedience. Promises of present Mercy and Pardon it stood in need of none, it was not capable of. Nor had it any Promises of giving more Grace, or supplies of it; but man was wholly left unto what he had at first received. Hence the Covenant was broken. But in the Co∣venant of Grace, all things are founded in Promises of present Mercy, and con∣tinual supplies of Grace, as well as of future Blessedness. Hence it becomes to be ordered in all things and sure. And this is the first thing that was to be declared, namely, that every Divine Covenant is established on Promises. 2. These Promises are said to be better Promises. The other Covenant had its Promises peculiar unto it, with respect whereunto this is said to be established on better Promises. It was indeed principally represented under a System of Precepts, and those almost innumerable. But it had its Promises also, into the nature where∣of we shall immediately enquire. With respect therefore unto them is the New Covenant, whereof the Lord Christ was the Mediator, said to be established on bet∣ter Promises. That it should be founded in Promises, was necessary from its gene∣ral nature as a Covenant, and more necessary from its especial nature as a Covenant of Grace. That these Promises are said to be better Promises, respects those of the Old Covenant. But this is so said as to include all other degrees of comparison. They are not only better than they, but they are positively good in themselves, and absolutely the best that God ever gave, or will give unto the Church. And what they are we must consider in our Progress. And sundry things may be observed from these words. 1. There is infinite Grace in every Divine Covenant, inasmuch as it is established on Promises. Infinite condescension it is in God, that he will enter into Covenant with dust and ashes, with poor Worms of the earth. And herein lies the Spring of all Grace, from whence all the streams of it do flow. And the first expression of it is in laying the foundation of it in some undeserved Promises. And this was that which became the Goodness and Greatness of his Nature, the means whereby we are wrought to adhere unto him in Faith, Hope, Trust and Obedience, until we come unto the enjoyment of him. For that is the use of Promises to keep us in adherence unto God, as the first Original and Spring of all Goodness, and the ul∣timate satisfactory reward of our Souls, 2 Cor. 7. 1. 2. The Promises of the Covenant of Grace are better than those of any other Cove∣nant, as for many other Reasons, so especially because the grace of them prevents any condition or qualification on our part. I do not say, the Covenant of Grace is absolute without conditions, if by conditions we intend the duties of Obedience which God requireth of us in and by vertue of that Covenant: But this I say, the principal Promises thereof, are not in the first place remunerative of our Obedience in the Covenant, but efficaciously assumptive of us into Covenant, and establishing or confirming in the Covenant. The Covenant of Works had its Promises, but they were all remunerative, respecting an antecedent Obedience in us; (so were all those which were peculiar unto the Covenant of Sinai.) They were indeed also of Grace, in that the Reward did infinitely exceed the merit of our Obedience. But yet they all supposed it, and the Subject of them was formally Reward only.
In the Covenant of Grace it is not so: For sundry of the Promises thereof, are the means of our being taken into Covenant, of our entring into Covenant with God. The first Covenant absolutely was established on Promises, in that when men were actually taken into it, they were encouraged unto Obedience by the Promises of a future Reward. But these Promises, namely, of the pardon of sin, and writing of the Law in our hearts, which the Apostle expresly insisteth upon as the peculiar Pro∣mises of this Covenant, do take place and are effectual, antecedently unto our Cove∣nant Obedience. For although Faith be required in order of nature antecedently unto our actual receiving of the pardon of sin, yet is that Faith itself wrought in us by the Grace of the Promise, and so its precedency unto pardon respects only the Order that God hath appointed in the communication of the benefits of the Cove∣nant, and intends not that the pardon of sin is the reward of our Faith. This entrance hath the Apostle made into his Discourse of the two Covenants, which he continues unto the end of the Chapter. But the whole is not without its difficulties. Many things in particular will occur unto us in our progress, which may be considered in their proper places. In the mean time there are some things in general which may be here discoursed, by whose determination much light will be communicated unto what doth ensue. First therefore the Apostle doth evidently in this place dispute concerning two Covenants or two Testaments, comparing the one with the other, and declaring the disannulling of the one by the introduction and establishment of the other. What are these two Covenants in general, we have declared, namely, that made with the Church of Israel at Mount Sinai, and that made with us in the Gospel; not as absolutely the Covenant of Grace, but as actually established in the death of Christ, with all the worship that belongs unto it. Here then ariseth a difference of no small importance, namely, whether these are indeed two distinct Covenants, as to the essence and substance of them, or only different ways of the dispensation and administration of the same Covenant. And the reason of the difficulty lieth herein. We must grant one of these three things. (1) That either the Covenant of Grace was in force under the Old Testa∣ment; or (2) That the Church was saved without it, or any benefit by Jesus Christ who is the Mediator of it alone; or (3) That they all perished everlastingly. And neither of the two latter can be admitted. Some indeed in these latter days have revived the old Pelagian imagination, that before the Law men were saved by the conduct of natural light and reason, and under the Law by the directive Doctrines, Precepts and Sacrifices thereof, without any respect unto the Lord Christ or his Mediation in another Covenant. But I shall not here contend with them, as having elsewhere sufficiently refuted these imaginations. Wherefore I shall take it here for granted, that no man was ever saved but by vertue of the New Covenant, and the Mediation of Christ therein. Suppose then that this New Covenant of Grace was extant and effectual under the Old Testament, so as the Church was saved by vertue thereof, and the Media∣tion of Christ therein, how could it be that there should at the same time be another Covenant between God and them, of a different nature from this, accompanied with other Promises, and other Effects? On this consideration it is said, that the two Covenants mentioned, the New and the Old, were not indeed two distinct Covenants, as unto their essence and substance, but only different administrations of the same Covenant, called two Covenants from some different outward Solemnities and Duties of worship attending of them. To clear this it must be observed, 1. That by the Old Covenant, the original Covenant of Works made with Adam and all Mankind in him is not intended. For this is undoubtedly a Cove∣nant different in the essence and substance of it from the New. 2. By the New Covenant, not the New Covenant absolutely and originally as given in the first Promise, is intended; but in its compleat Gospel-administration, when it was actually established by the death of Christ, as administred in and by the Ordinances of the New Testament. This with the Covenant of Sinai were, as most say, but different administrations of the same Covenant.
But on the other hand there is such express mention made not only in this, but in sundry other places of the Scripture also, of two distinct Covenants or Testaments, and such different Natures, Properties and Effects ascribed unto them, as seem to consti∣tute two distinct Covenants. This therefore we must inquire into; and shall first declare what is agreed unto by those who are sober in this matter, though they dif∣fer in their judgments about this question, Whether two distinct Covenants, or only a twofold administration of the same Covenant be intended. And indeed there is so much agreed on, as that what remains seems rather to be a difference about the ex∣pression of the same Truth, than any real contradiction about the things themselves. For 1. It is agreed that the way of Reconciliation with God, of justification and sal∣vation was always one and the same; and that from the giving of the first Promise none was ever justified or saved but by the New Covenant, and Jesus Christ the Mediator thereof. The foolish imagination before-mentioned, that men were sa∣ved before the giving of the Law, by following the guidance of the light of na∣ture, and after giving of the Law by obedience unto the directions thereof, is re∣jected by all that are sober, as destructive of the Old Testament and the New. 2. That the Writings of the Old Testament, namely, the Law, Psalms and Pro∣phets, do contain and declare the Doctrine of Justification and Salvation by Christ, this the Church of old believed, and walked with God in the Faith thereof. This is undeniably proved, in that the Doctrine mentioned is frequently confirmed in the New Testament, by Testimonies taken out of the Old. 3. That by the Covenant of Sinai, as properly so called, separated from its figu∣rative relation unto the Covenant of Grace, none was ever eternally saved. 4. That the use of all the Institutions whereby the Old Covenant was admini∣stred, was to represent and direct unto Jesus Christ, and his Mediation. These things being granted, the only way of life and salvation by Jesus Christ under the Old Testament and the New is secured, which is the substance of the Truth wherein we are now concerned. On these grounds we may proceed with our enquiry. The judgment of most Reformed Divines is, that the Church under the Old Testament, had the same Promise of Christ, the same Interest in him by Faith, Re∣mission of Sins, Reconciliation with God, Justification and Salvation by the same way and means, that Believers have them all under the New. And whereas the essence and the substance of the Covenant consists in these things, they are not to be said to be under another Covenant, but only a different administration of it. But this was so different from that which is established in the Gospel after the coming of Christ, that it hath the appearance and name of another Covenant. And the differences between these two Administrations may be reduced unto the en∣suing Heads. 1. It consisted in the way and manner of the declaration of the mystery of the Love and Will of God in Christ; of the work of Reconciliation and Redem∣ption with our justification by Faith. For herein the Gospel, wherein Life and Immortality are brought unto light, doth in plainness, clearness and evidence, much ex∣cel the administration and declaration of the same Truths under the Law. And the greatness of the priviledge of the Church herein is not easily expressed. For here∣by with open face we behold the glory of God in a glass, and are changed into the same image, 2 Cor. 3. 18. The man whose eyes the Lord Christ opened, Mark 8. 23, 24. represents these two states. When he first touched him, his eyes were opened, and he saw, but he saw nothing clearly, whence when he looked, he said, I see men as trees walking, ver. 24. But upon his second touch he saw every man clearly, ver. 25. They had their sight under the Old Testament, and the Object was proposed unto them, but at a great distance, with such an interposition of Mists, Clouds and Shadows, as that they saw men like trees walking, nothing clearly and perfectly. But now under the Gospel, the Object, which is Christ, being brought near unto us, and all Clouds and Shadows being departed, we do or may see all things clearly. When a Traveller in his way on Downs or Hills is encompassed with a thick Mist and Fog, though he be in his way, yet he is uncertain, and no∣thing is presented unto him in its proper shape and distance; things near seem to be
afar off, and things afar off to be near, and every thing hath, though not a false, yet an uncertain appearance. Let the Sun break forth and scatter the Mists and Fogs that are about him, and immediately every thing appears quite in another shape unto him, so as indeed he is ready to think he is not where he was. His way is plain, he is certain of it, and all the Region about lies evident under his eye, yet is there no alteration made but in the removal of the Mists and Clouds that inter∣rupted his sight. So was it with them under the Law. The Types and Shadows that they were enclosed in, and which were the only medium they had to view spiritual things in, represented them not unto them clearly and in their proper shape. But they being now removed by the rising of the Sun of Righteousness with healing in his wings in the dispensation of the Gospel, the whole mystery of God in Christ is clearly manifested unto them that do believe. And the greatness of this priviledge of the Gospel above the Law is unexpressible, whereof as I sup∣pose we must speak somewhat afterwards. 2. In the plentiful communication of Grace unto the community of the Church. For now it is that we receive Grace for Grace, or a plentiful effusion of it by Jesus Christ. There was Grace given in an eminent manner unto many holy Persons under the Old Testament, and all true Believers had true, real, saving Grace com∣municated unto them. But the measures of Grace in the true Church under the New Testament, do exceed those of the Community of the Church under the Old. And therefore as God winked at some things in them, as Polygamy, and the like, which are expresly and severely interdicted under the New, nor are consistent with the present administrations of it; so are sundry Duties, as those of Self-denial, readiness to bear the Cross, to forsake Houses, Lands and Habitations, more expresly enjoined unto us than unto them. And the Obedience which God requireth in any Covenant, or administration of it, is proportionable unto the strength which the administration of that Covenant doth exhibit. And if those who profess the Gospel do content themselves without any interest in this priviledge of it, if they endeavor not for a share in that plentiful effusion of Grace which doth accompany its present administration, the Gospel itself will be of no other use unto them, but to increase and aggravate their condemnation. 3. In the manner of our access unto God. Herein much of all that is called Re∣ligion doth consist. For hereon doth all our outward Worship of God de∣pend. And in this the advantages of the Gospel-administration of the Covenant, above that of the Law is in all things very eminent. Our access now to God is immediate by Jesus Christ, with liberty and boldness, as we shall afterwards de∣clare. Those under the Law were immediately conversant in their whole Wor∣ship, about outward Typical things, the Tabernacle, the Altar, the Ark, the Mercy∣seat, and the like obscure representations of the presence of God. Besides, the man∣ner of the making the Covenant with them at Mount Sinai filled them with fear, and brought them into bondage, so as they had comparatively a servile frame of Spirit in all their Holy Worship. 4. In the way of Worship required under each administration. For under that which was legal, it seemed good unto God to appoint a great number of outward Rites, Ceremonies, and Observances; and these, as they were dark in their signifi∣cation, as also in their use and ends, so were they by reason of their nature, number and severe Penalties, under which they were enjoined, grievous and burdensom to be observed. But the way of Worship under the Gospel is spiritual, rational, and plainly subservient unto the ends of the Covenant itself, so as that the use, ends, bene∣fits and advantages of it are evident unto all. 5. In the Extent of the Dispensation of the Grace of God. For this is greatly en∣larged under the Gospel. For under the Old Testament it was upon the matter confined unto the Posterity of Abraham according to the flesh. But under the New Testament it extends it self unto all Nations under Heaven. Sundry other things are usually added by our Divines unto the same purpose. See Calvin. Institut. lib. 2. cap. 11. Martyr. loc. com. loc. 16. sect. 2. Bucan. loc. 22 &c. The Lutherans on the other side insift on two Arguments to prove, that not a twofold Administration of the same Covenant, but that two Covenants substantially distinct, are intended in this Discourse of the Apostle.
1. Because in the Scripture they are often so called and compared with one an∣other, and sometimes opposed unto one another; the first and the last, the new and the old. 2. Because the Covenant of Grace in Christ is eternal, immutable, alwayes the same, obnoxious unto no alteration, no change or abrogation, neither can these things be spoken of it with respect unto any administration of it, as they are spoken of the Old Covenant. To state our thoughts aright in this matter, and to give what light we can unto the Truth, the things ensuing may be observed. 1. When we speak of the Old Covenant, we intend not the Covenant of Works made with Adam, and his whole Posterity in him, concerning which there is no difference or difficulty, whether it be a distinct Covenant from the New or no. 2. When we speak of the New Covenant, we do not intend the Covenant of Grace absolutely, as though that were not before in being and efficacy before the In∣troduction of that which is promised in this place. For it was always the same as to the substance of it from the beginning. It passed through the whole dispensation of times before the Law, and under the Law, of the same nature and efficacy, unal∣terable, everlasting, ordered in all things and sure. All who contend about these things, the Socinians only excepted, do grant that the Covenant of Grace considered absolutely, that is, the Promise of Grace in and by Jesus Christ, was the onely way and means of Salvation unto the Church, from the first entrance of sin. But for two Reasons it is not expresly called a Covenant, without respect unto any other things, nor was it so under the Old Testament. When God renewed the Promise of it unto Abraham, he is said to make a Covenant with him, and he did so, but it was with respect unto other things, especially the proceeding of the promised Seed from his loins. But absolutely under the Old Testament, it consisted only in a Pro∣mise, and as such only is proposed in the Scripture, Acts 2. 39. Hebr. 6. 14, 15, 16. The Apostle indeed says, that the Covenant was confirmed of God in Christ, before the giving of the Law, Gal. 3. 17. And so it was not absolutely in itself, but in the Promise and Benefits of it. The , or full legal establishment of it, whence it became formally a Covenant unto the whole Church, was future only, and a Promise under the Old Testament. For it wanted two things there∣unto. (1) It wanted its solemn confirmation and establishment by the blood of the only Sacrifice which belonged unto it. Before this was done in the death of Christ, it had not the formal nature of a Covenant or a Testament, as our Apostle proves, Chap. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. For neither, as he shews in that place, would the Law given at Sinai, have been a Covenant, had it not been con∣firmed with the blood of Sacrifices. Wherefore the Promise was not before a for∣mal and solemn Covenant. (2) This was wanting, that it was not the Spring, Rule and Measure of all the Worship of the Church. This doth belong unto every Covenant, properly so called, that God makes with the Church, that it be the entire Rule of all the Worship that God requires of it, which is that which they are to restipulate in their entrance into Covenant with God. But so the Covenant of Grace was not under the Old Testament. For God did require of the Church many Duties of Worship that did not belong thereunto. But now under the New Testament, this Covenant with its own seals and appointments, is the only Rule and Measure of all acceptable Worship. Wherefore the New Covenant promised in the Scripture, and here op∣posed unto the Old, is not the Promise of Grace, Mercy, Life and Salvation by Christ absolutely considered, but as it had the formal nature of a Covenant given unto it, in its establishment by the death of Christ, the procuring cause of all its Benefits, and the declaring of it to be the only Rule of Worship and Obedience unto the Church. So that although by the Covenant of Grace, we oft-times under∣stand no more, but the way of Life, Grace, Mercy and Salvation by Christ; yet by the New Covenant, we intend its actual establishment in the death of Christ, with that blessed way of Worship which by it is setled in the Church. 3, Whil'st the Church enjoyed all the spiritual Benefits of the Promise, wherein the substance of the Covenant of Grace was contained, before it was confirmed
and made the sole Rule of Worship unto the Church, it was not inconsistent with the Holiness and Wisdom of God, to bring it under any other Covenant, or prescribe unto it what Forms of Worship he pleased. It was not so I say upon these three Suppositions. (1) That this Covenant did not disannul or make ineffectual the Promise that was given before, but that That doth still continue the only means of Life and Sal∣vation. And that this was so, our Apostle proves at large, Gal. 3. 17, 18, 19. (2) That this other Covenant, with all the Worship contained in it, or requi∣red by it, did not divert from, but direct and lead unto the future establishment of the Promise, in the Sclemnity of a Covenant, by the ways mentioned. And that the Covenant made in Sinai with all its Ordinances did so, the Apostle proves likewise in the place beforementioned, as also in this whole Epistle. (3) That it be of present use and advantage unto the Church in its present condition. This the Apostle acknowledgeth to be a great Objection against the use and efficacy of the Promise under the Old Testament, as unto Life and Salva∣tion; namely, to what end then serves the giving of the Law; whereunto he an∣swers, by shewing the necessity and use of the Law unto the Church in its then present condition, Gal. 3. 17. 4. These things being observed, we may consider that the Scripture doth plainly and expresly make mention of two Testaments or Covenants, and distinguish between them in such a way, as what is spoken can hardly be accommodated unto a twofold Administration of the same Covenant. The one is mentioned and described, Exod. 24. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Deut. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. namely, the Covenant that God made with the people of Israel in Sinai; and which is commonly called the Cove∣nant where the people under the Old Testament are said to keep or break Gods Covenant, which for the most part is spoken with respect unto that Worship which was peculiar thereunto. The other is promised, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33, 34. Chap. 32. 40. which is the New Gospel Covenant as before explained, mentioned Mat. 26. 28. Mark 14. 24. And these two Covenants or Testaments are compared one with the other, and opposed one unto another, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. Gal. 4. 24, 25, 26. Heb. 7. 22. Chap. 9. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. These two we call the Old and the New Testament. Only it must be observed that in this Argument, by the Old Testament, we do not understand the Books of the Old Testament, or the Writings of Moses, the Psalms and Prophets, or the Oracles of God committed then unto the Church. I confess they are once so called, 2 Cor. 3. 14. The vail remaineth untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament, that is, the Books of it. Unless we shall say that the Apostle intendeth only the reading of the things which concern the Old Testament in the Scripture. For this Old Covenant or Testament whatever it be, is abrogated and taken away, as the Apostle expresly proves. But the Word of God in the Books of the Old Testament abideth for ever. And those Writings are called the Old Testament, or the Books of the Old Testament, not as though they contained in them, nothing but what belongeth unto the Old Covenant, for they contain the Doctrine of the New Testament also. But they are so termed, because they were committed unto the Church, whil'st the Old Covenant was in force, as the Rule and Law of its Worship and Obe∣dience. 5. Wherefore we must grant two distinct Covenants, rather than a twofold Ad∣ministration of the same Covenant meerly, to be intended. We must I say do so, provided always that the way of Reconciliation and Salvation was the same under both. But it will be said and with great pretence of Reason, for it is that which is the sole foundation they all build upon, who allow only a twofold Administration of the same Covenant, that this being the principal end of a Divine Covenant, if the way of Reconciliation and Salvation be the same under both, then indeed are they for the substance of them but one. And I grant thut this would inevitably follow, if it were so equally by virtue of them both. If Reconciliation and Sal∣vation by Christ were to be obtained not only under the Old Covenant, but by vertue thereof, then it must be the same for substance with the New. But this is not so; for no Reconciliation with God, nor Salvation could be obtained by vertue of the Old Covenant, or the Administration of it, as our Apostle disputes at large, though all Believers were reconciled, justified and saved by vertue of the Promise,
whil'st they were under that Covenant. As therefore I have shewed in what sense the Covenant of Grace is called the New Covenant, in this distinction and oppo∣sition, so I shall propose sundry things which relate unto the nature of the first Co∣venant, which manifest it to have been a distinct Covenant, and not a meer admini∣stration of the Covenant of Grace. 1. This Covenant called the Old Covenant, was never intended to be of itself the absolute Rule and Law of Life and Salvation unto the Church, but was made with a particular design, and with respect unto particular ends. This the Apostle proves undeniably in this Epistle, especially in the Chapter foregoing, and those two that follow. Hence it follows that it could abrogate or disannul nothing which God at any time before had given as a general Rule unto the Church. For that which is particular cannot abrogate any thing that was general, and before it; as that which is general doth abrogate all antecedent particulars, as the New Cove∣nant doth abrogate the Old. And this we must consider in both the instances be∣longing hereunto. For 1. God had before given the Covenant of Works, or perfect Obedience unto all Mankind in the Law of Creation. But this Covenant at Sinai did not abrogate or disannual that Covenant, nor any way fulfill it; And the reason is, because it was never intended to come in the place or room thereof, as a Covenant, containing an entire Rule of all the Faith and Obedience of the whole Church. God did not in∣tend in it to abrogate the Covenant of Works, and to substitute this in the place thereof. Yea in sundry things it reinforced, established, and confirmed that Cove∣nant. For 1. It revived, decIared and expressed all the Commands of that Covenant in the Decalogue. For that is nothing but a Divine Summary of the Law written in the heart of man at his Creation. And herein the dreadful manner of its delivery or promulgation, with its Writings in Tables of Stone are also to be considered. For in them the nature of that first Covenant, with its inexorableness as unto perfect Obedience was represented. And because none could answer its demands, or com∣ply with it therein, it was called the Ministration of Death causing fear and bon∣dage, 2 Cor. 3. 7. 2. It revived the Sanction of the first Covenant in the Curse or Sentence of Death which it denounced against all Transgressors. Death was the penalty of the transgression of the first Covenant, In the day thou eatest thou shalt die the death. And this Sentence was revived and represented anew in the Curse wherewith this Covenant was ratified. Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this Law to do them, Deut. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. For the design of God in it was to bind a sense of that Curse on the Consciences of men, until he came by whom it was ta∣ken away, as the Apostle declares, Gal. 3. 14, 15, 16. 3. It revived the Promise of that Covenant, that of eternal Life upon perfect Obedience. So the Apostle tells us, that Moses thus describeth the Righteousness of the Law, that the man which doth these things shall live by them, Rom. 10. 5. as he doth, Lev. 18. 5. Now this is no other but the Covenant of Works revived. Nor had this Covenant of Sinai any Promise of eternal Life annexed unto it, as such, but only the Promise inseparable from the Covenant of Works which it revived, saying, Do this and live. Hence it is that when our Apostle disputeth against Justification by the Law, or by the Works of the Law, he doth not intend the Works peculiar unto the Cove∣nant of Sinai, such as were the Rites and Ceremonies of the Worship then insti∣tuted; but he intends also the Works of the first Covenant, which alone had the Promise of Life annexed unto them. And hence it follows also, that it was not a New Covenant of Works established in the place of the Old, for the absolute Rule of Faith and Obedience unto the whole Church; for then would it have abrogated and taken away that Covenant, and all the sorce of it, which it did not. 2. The other instance is in the Promise. This also went before it; neither was it abrogated or disannulled by the introduction of this Covenant. This Promise was given unto our first Parents immediately after the entrance of sin, and was established as containing the only way and means of the Salvation of Sinners. Now this Promise could not be abrogated by the introduction of this Covenant, and a
new way of Justification and Salvation be thereby established. For the Promise being given out in general for the whole Church, as containing the way appointed by God for Righteousness, Life and Salvation, it could not be disannulled or changed, without a change and alteration in the counsels of him with whom is no variableness or shadow of turning. Much less could this be effected by a particular Covenant such as that was, when it was given as a general and eternal Rule. But whereas there was an especial Promise given unto Abraham, in the Faith whereof he became the Father of the Faithful, he being their Progenitor, it should seem that this Covenant did wholly disannul or supersede that Promise, and take off the Church of his Posterity from building on that foundation, and to fix them wholly on this New Covenant now made with them. So saith Moses, The Lord made not this Covenant with our Fathers, but with us even us, who are all of us alive here this day, Deut. 5. 3. God made not this Covenant on Mount Sinai, with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, but with the People then present, and their Posterity, as he declares, Deut. 29. 14, 15. This therefore should seem to take them off wholly from that Promise made to Abraham, and so to disannul it. But that this it did not, nor could do, the Apostle strictly proves, Gal. 3. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Yea it did divers ways establish that Promise, both as first given and as afterwards con∣firmed with the Oath of God unto Abraham, two especially. 1. It declared the impossibility of obtaining Reconciliation and Peace with God, any other way but by the Promise. For representing the Commands of the Cove∣nant of Works requiring perfect sinless Obedience under the Penalty of the Curse, it convinced men that this was no way for Sinners to seek for Life and Salvation by. And herewith it so urged the Consciences of men, that they could have no rest nor peace in themselves, but what the Promise would afford them, whereunto they saw a necessity of betaking themselves. 2. By representing the ways and means of the Accomplishment of the Promise, and of that whereon all the efficacy of it unto the Justification and Salvation of Sinners doth depend. This was the Death, Bloodshedding, Oblation or Sacrifice of Christ the promised Seed. This all its Offerings and Ordinances of Worship di∣rected unto, as his Incarnation with the Inhabitation of God in his Humane Nature was typed by the Tabernacle and Temple. Wherefore it was so far from disan∣nulling the Promise, or diverting the minds of the People of God from it, that by all means it established it, and lead unto it. But 3. It will be said, as was before observed, that if it did neither abrogate the first Covenant of Works, and come in the room thereof, nor disannul the Promise made unto Abraham, then unto what end did it serve, or what benefit did the Church receive thereby? I answer 1. There hath been with respect unto Gods dealing with the Church, , a certain dispensation and disposition of times and seasons, reserved unto the sovereign will and pleasure of God. Hence from the beginning he revealed him∣self  and , as seemed good unto him, Chap. 1. 1. And this Dispensation of times had a , a fulness assigned unto it, wherein all things, namely, that belong unto the Revelation and Communication of God unto the Church, should come to their height, and have as it were the last hand given unto them. This was in the sending of Christ, as the Apostle declares, Eph. 1. 10. That in the dispensation of the fulness of times, he might bring all unto an Head in Christ. Until this season came, God dealt variously with the Church, , in manifold or various wisdom, according as he saw it needful and useful for it, in that season which it was to pass through, before the fulness of times came. Of this nature was his entrance into the Covenant with the Church at Sinai, the Reasons whereof we shall immediately inquire into. In the mean time if we had no other Answer to this Enquiry, but only this, that in the order of the disposal or dispensa∣tion of the seasons of the Church before the fulness of times came, God in his ma∣nifold wisdom saw it necessary for the then present state of the Church in that season, we may well acquiesce therein. But 2. The Apostle acquaints us in general with the ends of this dispensation of God, Gal. 3. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Wherefore then serveth the Law? it was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to whom the Promise was made, and
it was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. Now a Mediator is not of one, but God is one. Is the Law then against the Promises of God? God forbid; for if there had been a Law given which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law. But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the Pro∣mise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. But before Faith came, we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith, which should afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith. Much light might be given unto the mind of the Holy Ghost in these words, and that in things not commonly discerned by Exposi∣tors, if we should divert unto the opening of them. I will at present only mark from them what is unto our present purpose. There is a double Enquiry made by the Apostle with respect unto the Law, or the Covenant of Sinai. (1) Unto what end in general it served. (2) Whether it were not contrary to the Promise of God. Unto both these the Apostle answereth from the Nature, Office and Work of that Covenant. For there were, as hath been declared, two things in it. First, A Revival and Representation of the first Covenant of Works, with its Sanction and Curse. Secondly, A direction of the Church unto the Accomplishment of the Promise. From these two doth the Apostle frame his Answer unto the double Enquiry laid down. And unto the first Enquiry, Unto what end it served? he answers, it was added because of transgressions. The Promise being given, there seems to have been no need of it, why then was it added to it at that season? it was added because of transgressions. The fulness of time was not yet come wherein the Promise was to be fulfilled, accomplished and established as the onely Covenant wherein the Church was to walk with God, or the Seed was not yet come, as the Apostle here speaks, to whom the Promise was made. In the mean time some order must be ta∣ken about sin and transgression, that all the order of things appointed of God were not overflowed by them. And this was done two ways by the Law. (1) By reviving the Commands of the Covenant of Works, with the sanction of Death, it put an awe on the minds of men, and set bounds unto their lusts, that they should not dare to run forth into that excess which they were naturally incli∣ned unto. It was therefore added because of transgressions, that in the declaration of Gods severity against them, some Bounds might be fixed unto them; for the knowledge of Sin is by the Law. (2) To shut up Unbelievers, and such as would not seek for Righteousness, Life and Salvation by the Promise under the Power of the Covenant of Works, and Curse attending it. It concluded or shut up all under sin, saith the Apostle, ver. 20. This was the end of the Law, for this end was it added, as it gave a revival unto the Covenant of Works. Unto the second Enquiry, which ariseth out of this Sup∣position, namely, That the Law did convince of sin, and condemn for sin, which is, whether it be not then contrary to the grace of God? The Apostle in like manner returns a double Answer, taken from the second use of the Law before insisted on, with respect unto the Promise. And First, He says that although the Law doth thus rebuke sin, convince of sin, and condemn for sin, so setting bounds unto Transgressions and Transgressors, yet did God never intend it as a means to give Life and Righteousness, nor was it able so to do. The end of the Promise was to give Righteousness, Justification and Salva∣tion all by Christ to whom and concerning whom it was made. But this was not the end for which the Law was revived in the Covenant of Sinai. For although in itself it requires a perfect Righteousness, and gives a Promise of Life thereon, He that doth these things, he shall live in them; yet it could give neither Righteous∣ness nor Life, unto any in the state of sin, see Rom. 8. 3. Chap. 10. 4. Wherefore the Promise and the Law having divers ends, they are not contrary to one an∣other, Secondly, Saith he, The Law had a great respect unto the Promise, and was given of God for this very end, that it might lead and direct men unto Christ, which is sufficient to answer the Question proposed at the beginning of this Discourse, about the ends of this Covenant, and the advantage which the Church received thereby.
What hath been spoken, may suffice to declare the Nature of this Covenant in general; and two things do here evidently follow, wherein the substance of the whole Truth contended for by the Apostle doth consist. 1. That whil'st the Covenant of Grace was contained and proposed only in the Promise, before it was solemnly confirmed in the Blood and Sacrifice of Christ, and so legalized or established as the only Rule of the Worship of the Church, the In∣troduction of this other Covenant on Sinai, did not constitute a new way or means of Righteousness, Life and Salvation; but Believers sought for them alone by the Covenant of Grace as declared in the Promise. This follows evidently upon what we have discoursed, and it secures absolutely that great fundamental Truth, which the Apostle in this and all other his Epistles so earnestly contendeth for; namely, That there neither is, or ever was, either Righteousness, Justification, Life or Sal∣vation, to be attained by any Law, or the works of it, (for this Covenant at Mount Sinai comprehended every Law that God ever gave unto the Church) but by Christ alone, and Faith in him. 2. That whereas this Covenant being introduced in the pleasure of God, there was prescribed with it a form of outward Worship suited unto that dispensation of times, and present state of the Church, upon the Introduction of the New Cove∣nant in the fulness of times to be the Rule of all intercourse between God and the Church, both that Covenant and all its Worship must be disannulled. This is that which the Apostle proves with all sorts of Arguments, manifesting the great advantage of the Church thereby. These things I say do evidently follow on the preceding Discourses, and are the main Truths contended for by the Apostle. 4. There remaineth one thing more only to be considered, before we enter on the Comparison between the two Covenants here directed unto by the Apostle. And this is, how this first Covenant became to be an especial Covenant unto that Peo∣ple: wherein we shall manifest the reason of its Introduction at that season. And unto this end sundry things are to be considered concerning that People and the Church of God in them, with whom this Covenant was made, which will farther evidence both the nature, use and necessity of it. 1. This People were the Posterity of Abraham unto whom the Promise was made, that in his Seed all the Nations of the earth should be blessed. Wherefore from among them was the promised Seed to be raised up in the fulness of time, or its proper season. From among them was the Son of God to take on him the Seed of Abraham. To this end sundry things were necessary. 1. That they should have a certain abiding place or Countrey which they might freely inhabit, distinct from other Nations, and under a Rule or Scepter of their own. So it is said of them, That the People should dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the Nations, Numb. 23. 9. and the Scepter was not to depart from them until Shilo came, Gen. 49. 10. For God had regard unto his own glory in his faithful∣ness, as unto his Word and Oath given unto Abraham, not only that they should be accomplished, but that their Accomplishment should be evident and conspicu∣ous. But if this Posterity of Abraham, from among whom the promised Seed was to rise, had been, as it is at this day with them, scattered abroad on the face of the Earth, mixed with all Nations, and under their Power, although God might have accomplished his Promise really in raising up Christ from among some of his Posterity, yet could it not be proved or evidenced that he had so done, by reason of the confusion and mixture of the People with others. Wherefore God provided a Land and Countrey for them which they might inhabit by themselves, and as their own, even the Land of Canaan. And this was so suited unto all the ends of God towards that People, as might be declared in sundry instances, that God is said, to have espied this Land out for them, Ezek. 20. 6. He chose it out as most meet for his purpose, towards that People of all Lands under Heaven. 2. That there should be always kept among them an open Confession and visible Representation of the end for which they were so separated from all the Nations of the World. They were not to dwell in the Land of Canaan meerly for secular ends, and to make as it were a dumb shew; but as they were there maintained and preserved to evidence the faithfulness of God in bringing forth the promised Seed in the fulness of time; so there was to be a testimony kept up among them unto that
end of God whereunto they were preserved. This was the end of all their Or∣dinances of Worship, of the Tabernacle, Priesthood, Sacrifices and Ordinances, which were all appointed by Moses on the Command of God, for a testimony of those things which should be spoken afterwards, Hebr. 3. 5. These things were necessary in the first place with respect unto the ends of God towards that People. 2. It becomes not the Wisdom, Holiness, and Soveraignty of God, to call any People into an especial Relation unto himself, to do them good in an eminent and peculiar manner, and then to suffer them to live at their pleasure, without any re∣gard unto what he had done for them. Wherefore having granted unto this Peo∣ple those great Priviledges of the Land of Canaan, and the Ordinances of Worship relating unto the great end mentioned, he moreover prescribed unto them Laws, Rules, and Terms of Obedience, whereon they should hold and enjoy that Land, with all the Priviledges annexed unto the possession thereof. And these are both expres∣sed and frequently inculcated in the Repetition and Promises of the Law. But yet in the prescription of these terms, God reserved the Soveraignty of dealing with them unto himself. For had he left them to stand or fall absolutely by the terms prescribed unto them, they might and would have uttetly forfeited both the Land and all the Priviledges they enjoyed therein. And had it so fallen out, then the great end of God in preserving them a separate People until the Seed should come, and a Representation thereof among them had been frustrate. Wherefore although he punished them for their Transgressions, according to the Threatnings of the Law, yet would he not bring the  or Curse of the Law upon them, and utter∣ly cast them off, until his great end was accomplished, Mal. 4. 4, 5, 6. 3. God would not take this People off from the Promise, because his Church was among them, and they could neither please God, nor be accepted with him, but by Faith therein. But yet they were to be dealt withall according as it was meet. For they were generally a People of an hard-heart, and stiff-necked, lifted up with an opinion of their own righteousness and worth above others. This Moses endea∣voureth by all manner of Reasons and Instances unto the contrary to take them off from, in the Book of Deuteronomy. Yet was it not effected among the generality of them, nor is to this day. For in the middest of all their wickedness and misery, they still trust to and boast of their own righteousness, and will have it that God hath an especial Obligation unto them on that account. For this cause God saw it necessary, and it pleased him to put a grievous and heavy yoke upon them, to subdue the pride of their spirits, and to cause them to breathe after deliverance. This the Apostle Peter calls a yoke that neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear, Acts 15. 20. that is, with peace, ease, and rest, which therefore the Lord Christ invited them to seek for in himself alone, Matth. 11. 29, 30. And this yoke that God put on them, consisted in these three things. 1. In a multitude of Precepts hard to be understood, and difficult to be obser∣ved. The present Jews reckon up 613 of them, about the sense of most of which they dispute endlesly among themselves. But the truth is, since the days of the Pharisees they have increased their own yoke, and made obedience unto their Law, in any tolerable manner, altogether unpracticable. It were easie to manifest, for instance, that no man under Heaven ever did, or ever can keep the Sabbath according to the Rules they give about it in their Tal∣muds. And they generally scarce observe one of them themselves. But in the Law, as given by God himself, it is certain, that there were a multitude of arbitrary Precepts, and those in themselves not accompanied with any spiritual Advantages, as our Apostle shews, Chap. 9. 5. only they were obliged to perform them, by a meer soveraign Act of Power and Authority. 2. In the severity wherewith the observance of all those Precepts were enjoin∣ed them. And this was the threatning of death. For he that despised Moses's Law died without mercy, and every transgression and disobedience received a just re∣compence of reward. Hence was their complaint of old, Behold we die, we perish, we all perish; whosoever cometh near unto the Tabernacle of the Lord shall dye, shall we be consumed with dying? Numb. 17. 12, 13. And the Curse solemnly denoun∣ced against every one, that confirmed not all things written in the Law, was con∣tinually before them.
3. In a Spirit of Bondage unto Fear. This was administred in the giving and dispensation of the Law, even as a Spirit of Liberty and Power is administred in and by the Gospel. And as this respected their present Obedience, and manner of its performance, so in particular it regarded Death not yet conquered by Christ. Hence our Apostle affirms, that through fear of Death, they were all their life-time subject unto Bondage. This state God brought them into, partly to subdue the pride of their hearts trusting in their own righteousness, and partly to cause them to look out earnestly after the promised Deliverer. 4. Into this estate and condition, God brought them by a Solemn Covenant, con∣firmed by mutual consent between him and them. The Tenure, Force, and Solemn Ratification of this Covenant is expressed, Exod. 24. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Unto the terms and conditions of this Covenant was the whole Church obliged indispensibly on pain of Extermination, until all was accomplished, Mal. 4. 4, 5, 6. Unto this Covenant belonged the Decalogue, with all Precepts of Moral Obedience thence educed. So also did the Laws of Political Rule established among them, and the whole Systeme of Religious Worship given unto them. All these Laws were brought within the verge of this Covenant, and were the matter of it. And it had especial Promises and Threatnings annexed unto it as such, whereof none did exceed the Bounds of the Land of Canaan. For even many of the Laws of it were such as obliged no where else. Such was the Law of the Sabbatical year, and all their Sacrifices. There was Sin and Obedience in them, or about them in the Land of Canaan, none elsewhere. Hence 5. This Covenant thus made with these Ends and Promises, did never save nor condemn any man eternally. All that lived under the Administration of it, did at∣tain eternal life, or perished for ever, but not by vertue of this Covenant as for∣mally such. It did indeed revive the commanding Power and Sanction of the first Covenant of Works, and therein, as the Apostle speaks, was the Ministry of con∣demnation, 2 Cor. 3. 9. For by the deeds of the Law can no flesh be justified. And on the other hand, it directed also unto the Promise, which was the instrument of life and salvation unto all that did believe. But as unto what it had of its own, it was confined unto things temporal. Believers were saved under it, but not by ver∣tue of it. Sinners perished eternally under it, but by the Curse of the original Law of Works. And 6. Hereon occasionally fell out the ruine of that People; their Table became a snare unto them, and that which should have been for their welfare, became a trap, according to the Prediction of our Saviour, Psal. 69. 22. It was this Cove∣nant that raised and ruined them, it raised them to Glory and Honour when given of God; it ruined them when abused by themselves, contrary to express declarati∣ons of his mind and will. For although the generality of them were wicked and rebellious always, breaking the Terms of the Covenant which God made with them, so far as it was possible they should, whil'st God determined to reign over them unto the appointed season, and repined under the burden of it, yet they would have this Covenant to be the only Rule and Means of righteousness, life and salvation, as the Apostle declares, Rom. 9. 31, 32, 33. Chap. 10. 3. For, as we have often said, there were two things in it, both which they abused unto other ends than what God designed them. (1) There was the Renovation of the Rule of the Covenant of Works for righ∣teousness and life. And this they would have to be given unto them for those ends, and so sought for righteousness by the works of the Law. (2) There was ordained in it a Typical Representation of the way and means whereby the Promise was to be made effectual, namely, in the Mediation and Sacri∣fice of Jesus Christ, which was the end of all their Ordinances of Worship. And the outward Law thereof with the observance of its Institution, they looked on as their only relief when they came short of exact and perfect righteousness. Against both these pernicious Errors, the Apostle disputes expresly in his Epistle unto the Romans and the Galatians, to save them, if it were possible, from that ruine they were casting themselves into. Hereon the Elect obtained, but the rest were hard ned. For hereby they made an absolute renunciation of the Promise, wherein alone God had enwrapped the way of life and salvation.
This is the nature and substance of that Covenant which God made with that People; a particular temporary Covenant it was, and not a meer dispensation of the Covenant of Grace. That which remains for the declaration of the mind of the Holy Ghost in this whole matter, is to declare the differences that are between those two Covenants, whence the one is said to be better than the other, and to be built upon better Promises. Those of the Church of Rome, do commonly place this difference in three things. 1. In the Promises of them, which in the Old Covenant were temporal onely; in the New, spiritual and heavenly. 2. In the Precepts of them; which under the Old, required onely external Obe∣dience, designing the righteousness of the outward man; under the New, they are internal, respecting principally the inner man of the heart. 3. In their Sacraments: For these under the Old Testament, were only outward∣ly figurative, but those of the New, are operative of Grace. But these things do not express much, if any thing at all, of what the Scripture placeth this difference in. And besides, as by some of them explained, they are not true, especially the two latter of them. For I cannot but somewhat admire how it came into the heart or mind of any man to think or say, that God ever gave a Law or Laws, Precept or Precepts, that should respect the outward man onely, and the regulation of external duties. A thought of it is contrary unto all the essential Properties of the Nature of God, and meet only to ingenerate apprehensions of him unsuited unto all his glorious excellencies. The life and foundation of all the Laws under the Old Testament was, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy Soul, without which no outward Obedience was ever accepted with him. And for the third of the supposed differences, neither were the Sacraments of the Law so barely figurative, but that they did exhibit Christ unto Believers; for they all drank of the spiritual Rock, which Rock was Christ; nor are those of the Gos∣pel so operative of Grace, but that without Faith they are useless unto them that do receive them. The things wherein this difference doth consist, as expressed in the Scripture, are partly circumstantial, and partly substantial, and may be reduced unto the Heads ensuing. 1. These two Covenants differ in the circumstance of time as to their promul∣gation, declaration and establishment. This difference the Apostle expresseth from the Prophet Jeremiah in the 9th verse of this Chapter, where it must be more fully spoken unto. In brief, the first Covenant was made at the time that God brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, and took its date from the third month after their coming up from thence, Exod. 19. Chap. 24. From what is reported in the latter place, wherein the people give their actual consent unto the terms of it, it began its formal obligation as a Covenant. And we must afterwards enquire when it was abrogated and ceased to oblige the Church. The New Covenant was declared and made known in the latter days, Heb. 1. 1. in the dispensation of the fulness of time, Eph. 1. 10. And it took date as a Covenant formally obliging the whole Church from the Death, Resurrection, Ascension of Christ, and sending of the Ho∣ly Ghost. I bring them all into the Epocha of this Covenant, because though principally it was established by the first, yet was it not absolutely obligatory as a Covenant until after the last of them. 2. They differ in the circumstance of place as to their promulgation, which the Scripture also taketh notice of. The first was declared in Mount Sinai, the man∣ner whereof, and the station of the people in receiving the Law, I have in my Ex∣ercitations unto the first Part of this Exposition, at large declared, and thither the Reader is referred, Exod. 19. 18. The other was declared on Mount Sinai, and the Law of it went forth from Jerusalem, Isa. 2. 2. This difference, with many remarkable instances from it, our Apostle insists on, Gal. 4. 24, 25, 26. These are the two Covenants, the one from Mount Sinai, which gendreth unto bondage which is Agar. That is Agar the Bondwoman whom Abraham took before the Heir of Promise was born was a Type of the Old Covenant given on Sinai, before the in∣troduction
of the New, or the Covenant of Promise. For so he adds: For this Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth unto Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children. This Mount Sinai when the Old Covenant was given, and which was represented by Agar, is in Arabia, cast quite out of the Verge and Confines of the Church. And it answereth or is placed in the same Series, Rank and Order with Jerusalem, namely in the opposition of the two Covenants. For as the New Covenant, the Covenant of Promise giving freedom and liberty, was given at Jerusalem in the Death and Resurrection of Christ, with the Preaching of the Gospel which ensued thereon; so the Old Covenant that brought the Peo∣ple into Bondage, was given at Mount Sinai in Arabia. 3. They differ in the manner of their promulgation and establishment. There were two things remarkable that accompanied the Solemn Declaration of the first Covenant. 1. The dread and terror of the outward appearance on Mount Sinai which filled all the People, yea Moses himself, with fear and trembling, Hebr. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. Exod. 19. 16. Chap. 20. 18, 19. Together herewith, was a Spirit of Fear and Bondage administred unto all the People, so as that they chose to keep at a distance, and not draw nigh unto God, Deut. 5, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. 2. That it was given by the ministry and disposition of Angels, Acts 7. 13. Gal. 3. 19. Hence the People was in a sense put in subjection unto Angels, and they had an authoritative ministry in that Covenant. The Church that then was, was put into some kind of subjection unto Angels, as the Apostle plainly intimates, Hebr. 2. 5. Hence the worshipping or adoration of Angels began among the Peo∣ple, Col. 2. 18. Which some, with an addition unto their Folly and Superstition, would introduce into the Christian Church, wherein they have no such authorita∣tive Ministry as they had under the Old Covenant. Things are quite otherwise in the promulgation of the New Covenant. The Son of God in his own Person did declare it. This he spake from heaven, as the Apostle observes, in opposition unto the giving of the Law on the earth, Hebr. 12. 25. yet did he speak on the earth also; the mystery whereof himself declares, John 3. 13. And he did all things that belong unto the establishment of this Co∣venant, in a spirit of meekness and condescension, with the highest evidence of love, grace and compassion, encouraging and inviting the weary, the burdened, the heavy and laden to come unto him. And by his Spirit he makes his Disciples to carry on the same work until the Covenant was fully declared, Hebr. 2. 3. see John 1. 17, 18. And the whole Ministry of Angels in the giving of this Covenant, was meerly in a way of service and obedience unto Christ, and they owned themselves the Fel∣low-servants only of them that have the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 19. 10. So that this world to come as it was called of old, was no way put in subjection unto them. 4. They differ in their Mediators. The Mediator of the first Covenant was Moses. It was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. And this was no other but Moses who was a Servant in the House of God, Hebr. 3. 6. And he was a Mediator as designed of God, so chosen of the people in that dread and consternation which befell them, upon the terrible promulgation of the Law. For they saw that they could no way bear the immediate presence of God, nor treat with him in their own persons. Wherefore they desired that there might be an Internuntius, a Mediator between God and them, and that Moses might be the person, Deut. 5. 25, 26, 27. But the Mediator of the New Covenant, is the Son of God himself. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, 1 Tim. 2. 4, 5. He who is the Son, and the Lord over his own House, graciously undertook in his own Person to be the Mediator of this Covenant; and herein it is unspeakably preferred be∣fore the Old Covenant. 5. They differ in their subject matter, both as unto Precepts and Promises, the advantage being still on the part of the New Covenant. For (1) The Old Covenant in the preceptive part of it, renewed the Command of the Covenant of Works, and that on their original terms. Sin it forbad, that is all and every sin in matter and manner, on the pain of death, and gave the promise
of life unto perfect sinless obedience only. Whence the Decalogue itself, which is a Transcript of the Law of Works, is called the Covenant, Exod. 34. 28. And besides this, as we observed before, it had other Precepts innumerable, accommo∣dated unto the present condition of the People, and imposed on them with rigor. But in the New Covenant, the very first thing that is proposed, is the accomplishment and establishment of the Covenant of Works, both as unto its Commands and San∣ction, in the obedience and suffering of the Mediator. Hereon the Commands of it as unto the obedience of the Covenanters are not grievous, the yoke of Christ being easie, and his burden light. 2. The Old Testament absolutely considered, had (1) No promise of grace, to communicate spiritual strength, or to assist us in obedience; nor (2) Any of eternal life, no otherwise but as it was contained in the promise of the Covenant of Works, The man that doth these things, shall live in them; and (3) Had promises of temporal things in the Land of Canaan inseparable from it. In the New Covenant all things are otherwise, as will be declared in the Expo∣sition of the ensuing Verses. 6. They differ, and that principally, in the manner of their Dedication and San∣ction. This is that which gives any thing the formal nature of a Covenant or Testament. There may be a Promise, there may be an Agreement in general, which hath not the formal nature of a Covenant or Testament; and such was the Co∣venant of Grace before the death of Christ. But it is the solemnity and manner of the Confirmation, Dedication and Sanction of any Promise or Agreement that gives it the formal nature of a Covenant or Testament. And this is by a Sacrifice, wherein there is both Bloodshedding and Death ensuing thereon, Now this in the confirmation of the Old Covenant was only the Sacrifice of Beasts, whose blood was sprinkled on all the People, Exod. 24. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. But the New Testament was solemnly confirmed by the Sacrifice and Blood of Christ himself, Zech. 9. 11. Hebr. 10. 29. Chap. 13. 20. And the Lord Christ dying as the Mediator and Surety of the Covenant, he purchased all good things for the Church, and as a Testa∣tor bequeathed them unto it. Hence he says of the Sacramental Cup, that it is the New Testament in his Blood, or the Pledge of his bequeathing unto the Church all the Promises and Mercies of the Covenant, which is the New Testament, or the disposition of his Goods unto his Children. But because the Apostle expresly hand∣leth this difference between these two Covenants, Chap. 9. v. 18, 19. we must thither refer the full consideration of it. 7. They differ in the Priests that were to officiate before God in the behalf of the People. In the Old Covenant Aaron and his Posterity alone were to discharge that Office; in the New, the Son of God himself is the only Priest of the Church. This difference, with the advantage of the Gospel state thereon, we have handled at large in the Exposition of the Chapter foregoing. 8. They differ in the Sacrifices whereon the Peace and Reconciliation with God which is tendred in them, doth depend. And this also must be spoken unto in the ensuing Chapter, if God permit. 9. They differ in the way and manner of their solemn writing or enrollment. All Covenants were of old solemnly written in Tables of Brass or Stone, where they might be faithfully preserved for the use of the Parties concerned. So the Old Covenant as to the principal fundamental part of it, was engraven in Tables of Stone, which were kept in the Ark, Exod. 31. 18. Deut. 9. 10. 2 Cor. 3. 7. And God did so order it in his Providence, that the first draught of them should be bro∣ken, to intimate that the Covenant contained in them was not everlasting nor un∣alterable. But the New Covenant is written in the fleshly Tables of the hearts of them that do believe, 2 Cor. 3. 3. Jer. 31. 33. 10. They differ in their ends. The principal end of the first Covenant was to discover sin, to condemn it, and to set Bounds unto it. So saith the Apostle, It was added because of transgressions. And this it did several ways. (1) By Conviction; for the knowledge of sin is by the Law; it convinced sinners, and caused every mouth to be stopped before God.
(2) By condemning the Sinner in an application of the Sanction of the Law unto his Conscience. (3) By the judgments and punishments wherewith on all occasions it was accompanied. In all it manifested and represented the justice and severity of God. The end of the New Covenant is, to declare the love, grace and mercy of God, and therewith to give Repentance, Remission of Sin, and Life Eternal. 11. They differed in their effects. For the first Covenant being the ministra∣tion of death and condemnation, it brought the minds and spirits of them that were under it, into servitude and bondage, whereas spiritual liberty is the imme∣diate effect of the New Testament. And there is no one thing wherein the Spirit of God doth more frequently give us an account of the difference between these two Covenants, than this of the liberty of the one, and the bondage of the other, see Rom. 8. 15. 2 Cor. 3. 17. Gal. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 24, 25, 30, 31. Heb. 2. 14, 15. This therefore we must a little explain. Wherefore the bondage which was the effect of the Old Covenant, arose from several causes concurring unto the effecting of it. 1. The Renovation of the terms and sanction of the Covenant of Works contri∣buted much thereunto. For the People saw not how the Commands of that Cove∣nant could be observed, nor how its Curse could be avoided. They saw it not, I say, by any thing in the Covenant of Sinai, which therefore gendred unto bondage. All the prospect they had of deliverance was from the Promise. 2. It arose from the manner of the delivery of the Law, and Gods entring there∣on into Covenant with them. This was ordered on purpose to fill them with dread and fear. And it could not but do so, when ever they called it to remem∣brance. 3. From the severity of the Penalties annexed unto the Transgression of the Law. And God had taken upon himself, that where punishment was not exacted according to the Law, he himself would cut them off. This kept them always anxious and sollicitous, not knowing when they were safe or secure. 4. From the Nature of the whole Ministry of the Law, which was the ministra∣tion of death and condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 16. which declared the desert of every sin to be death, and denounced death unto every Sinner, administring by its self no relief unto the minds and consciences of men. So was it the letter that killed them that were under its power. 5. From the Darkness of their own minds in the means, ways and causes of de∣liverance from all these things. It is true, they had a promise before of Life and Salvation, which was not abolished by this Covenant, even the Promise made unto Abraham. But this belonged not unto this Covenant. And the way of its ac∣complishment by the Incarnation and Mediation of the Son of God was much hid∣den from them, yea from the Prophets themselves who yet foretold them. This left them under much bondage. For the principal cause and means of the liberty of Believers under the Gospel, ariseth from the clear light they have into the mystery of the love and grace of God in Christ. This faith and knowledge of his Incar∣nation, Humiliation, Sufferings and Sacrifice, whereby he made Attonement for Sin, and brought in everlasting Righteousness, is that which gives them liberty and boldness in their Obedience, 2 Cor. 3. 17, 18. whilest they of old were in the dark as unto these things, they must needs be kept under much bondage. 6. It was increased by the yoke of a multitude of Laws, Rites and Ceremonies imposed on them, which made the whole of their Worship a burden unto them, and unsupportable, Acts 15. 9. In and by all these ways and means there was a Spirit of Bondage and Fear ad∣ministred unto them. And this God did, thus he dealt with them, to the end that they might not rest in that state, but continually look out after delive∣rance. On the other hand, the New Covenant gives liberty and boldness, the liberty and boldness of Children unto all Believers. It is the Son in it that makes us free, or gives us universally all that liberty which is any way needful for us, or useful unto us. For where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, namely, to serve God not in the oldness of the Letter, but in the newness of the Spirit. And it is declared that this
was the great end of bringing in the New Covenant, in the accomplishment of the Promise made unto Abraham, namely, that we being delivered from the hands of all our enemies, might serve God without fear all the days of our lives, Luke 1. 72, 73, 74, 75. And we may briefly consider wherein this Deliverance and Liberty by the New Covenant doth consist, which it doth in the things ensuing. 1. In our freedom from the commanding power of the Law, as to sinless per∣fect Obedience in order unto Righteousness and Justification before God. Its com∣mands we are still subject unto, but not in order unto life and salvation. For un∣to those ends it is fulfilled in and by the Mediator of the New Covenant, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believeth, Rom. 10. 4. 2. In our freedom from the condemning power of the Law, and the Sanction of it in the Curse. This being undergone and answered by him, who was made a curse for us, we are freed from it, Rom. 7. 6. Gal. 3, 13, 14. And therein also are we delivered from the fear of death, Heb. 2. 15. as it was paenal, and an entrance into judgment or condemnation, John 5. 24. 3. In our freedom from conscience for sin, Heb. 10. 2. That is, Conscience dis∣quieting, perplexing and condemning our persons, the hearts of all that believe be∣ing sprinkled from an evil conscience by the blood of Christ. 4. In our freedom from the whole System of Mosaical Worship in all the Rites and Ceremonies, and Ordinances of it, which what a burden it was, the Apostles do de∣clare, Acts 15. and our Apostle at large in his Epistle to the Galatians. 5. From all the Laws of men in things appertaining unto the Worship of God, 1 Cor. 7. 23. And by all these, and the like instances of spiritual liberty, doth the Gospel free Believers from that Spirit of bondage unto fear, which was administred under the Old Covenant. It remains only that we point at the Heads of those Ways whereby this Liberty is communicated unto us under the New Covenant. And it is done 1. Principally, by the grant and communication of the Spirit of the Son as a Spirit of Adoption, giving the freedom, boldness and liberty of children, John 1. 12. Rom. 8. 15, 16, 17. Gal. 4. 6, 7. From hence the Apostle lays it down as a certain Rule, that where the Spirit of God is, there is liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Let men pretend what they will, let them boast of the freedom of their outward condition in this world, and of the inward liberty or freedom of their wills, there is indeed no true liberty where the Spirit of God is not. The ways whereby he giveth free∣dom, power, a sound mind, spiritual boldness, courage and contempt of the Cross, holy confidence before God, a readiness for obedience and enlargedness of heart in duties, with all other things wherein true liberty doth consist, or which any way belongs unto it, I must not here divert to declare. The world judges that there is no bondage, but where the Spirit of God is; For that gives that conscientious fear of Sin, that awe of God in all our Thoughts, Actions and Ways, that careful and circumspect walking, that temperance in things lawful, that abstinence from all ap∣pearance of evil, wherein they judge the greatest bondage on the earth to consist. But those who have received him, do know that the whole world doth lie in evil, and that all those unto whom spiritual liberty is a bondage, are the Servants and Slaves of Satan. 2. It is obtained by the evidence of our justification before God, and the causes of it. This men were greatly in the dark unto, under the first Covenant, although all stable peace with God doth depend thereon. For it is in the Gospel, that the Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, Rom. 1. 17. Indeed the Righ∣teousness of God without the Law, is witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, Rom. 3. 21. That is, Testimony is given to it in legal Institutions, and the Promises re∣corded in the Prophets; but these things were obscure unto them, who were to seek for what was intended under the vails and shadows of Priests and Sacrifices, Attonements and Expiations. But our Justification before God in all the causes of it, being now fully revealed and made manifest, it hath a great influence into spiri∣tual liberty and boldness. 3. By the spiritual light which is given to Believers into the mystery of God in Christ. This the Apostle affirms to have been hid in God from the beginning of the world, Eph. 3. 9. It was contrived and prepared in the counsel and wisdom of
God from all eternity. Some intimation was given of it in the first Promise, and was afterwards shadowed out by sundry legal Institutions. But the depth, the glo∣ry, the beauty and fulness of it was hid in God, in his mind and will, until it was fully revealed in the Gospel. The Saints under the Old Testament believed that they should be delivered by the promised Seed, that they should be saved for the Lords sake, that the Angel of the Covenant would save them, yea, that the Lord himself would come to his Temple; and they diligently enquired into what was foresignified concerning the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should ensue. But all this while their thoughts and conceptions were exceedingly in the dark as to those glorious things which are made so plain in the New Covenant, concerning the Incarnation, Mediation, Sufferings and Sacrifice of the Son of God, concerning the way of Gods being in Christ reconciling the World unto himself. Now as dark∣ness gives fear, so light gives liberty. 4 We obtain this liberty by the opening of the way into the Holiest, and the en∣trance we have thereby with boldness unto the Throne of Grace. This also the Apostle insists upon peculiarly in sundry places of his ensuing Discourses, as Chap. 9. 8. Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. where it must be spoken to, if God permit, at large. For a great part of the liberty of the New Testament doth consist herein. 5. By all the Ordinances of Gospel-Worship. How the Ordinances of Worship under the Old Testament did lead the People into Bondage, hath been declared. But all those of the New Testament, through their plainness in signification, their im∣mediate respect unto the Lord Christ, with their use and efficacy to guide Believers in their communion with God, do all conduce unto our Evangelical liberty. And of such importance is our liberty in this instance of it, that when the Apostles saw it necessary for the avoiding of offence and scandal, to continue the observance of one or two legal Institutions, in abstinence from some things in themselves indif∣ferent, they did it only for a season, and declared that it was only in case of scan∣dal, that they would allow this temporary abridgment of the liberty given us by the Gospel. 12. They differ greatly with respect unto the Dispensation and Grant of the Ho∣ly Ghost. It is certain, that God did grant the Gift of the Holy Spirit under the Old Testament, and his operations during that season as I have at large elsewhere de∣clared. But it is no less certain, that there was always a Promise of his more signal effusion upon the confirmation and establishment of the New Covenant. See in par∣ticular that great Promise to this purpose, Joel 2. 28, 29. as applied and expound∣ed by the Apostle Peter, Acts 2. 17, 18. yea, so sparing was the communication of the Holy Ghost under the Old Testament, compared with his effusion under the New, as that the Evangelist affirms, that the Holy Ghost was not yet, because that Jesus was not yet glorified, John 7. 39. that is, he was not yet given in that manner as he was to be given upon the confirmation of the New Covenant. And those of the Church of the Hebrews who had received the Doctrine of John, yet affirmed that they had not so much as heard whether there were any Holy Ghost or no, Acts 19. 2. that is, any such gift and communication of him, as was then proposed as the chief Priviledge of the Gospel. Neither doth this concern only the plentiful effusion of him with respect unto those miraculous gifts and operations wherewith the doctrine and establishment of the New Covenant was testified unto and confirmed; however that also gave a signal difference between the two Cove∣nants. For the first Covenant was confirmed by dreadful appearances and opera∣tions effected by the Ministry of Angels, but the new by the immediate operation of the Holy Ghost himself. But this difference principally consists herein, that un∣der the New Testament the Holy Ghost hath graciously condescended to bear the of∣fice of the Comforter of the Church. That this unspeakable Priviledge is peculiar unto the New Testament, is evident from all the Promises of his being sent as a com∣forter made by our Saviour John 14. 15, 16. especially that, wherein he assures his Disciples, that unless he went away, in which going away he confirmed the New Covenant, the comforter would not come, but if he so went away, he would send him from the father, Chap. 16. 7. And the difference between the two Covenants which ensued hereon is inexpressible.
13. They differ in the Declaration made in them of the Kingdom of God. It is the observation of Austin, that the very name of the Kingdom of Heaven is pecu∣liar unto the New Testament. It is true, God reigned in and over the Church un∣der the Old Testament; but his Rule was such, and had such a relation unto secu∣lar things, especially with respect unto the Land of Canaan, and the flourishing con∣dition of the People therein, as that it had an appearance of a Kingdom of this world. And that it was so, and was so to be, consisting in Empire, Power, Victory, Wealth and Peace was so deeply sixed on the minds of the generality of the Peo∣ple, that the Disciples of Christ themselves could not free themselves of that appre∣hension, until the New Testament was fully established. But now in the Gospel; the nature of the Kingdom of God, where it is, and wherein it consists, is plainly and evidently declared, unto the unspeakable consolation of Believers. For whereas it is now known and experienced to be internal, spiritual and heavenly, they have no less assured interest in it, and advantage by it, in all the troubles which they may undergo in this World, than they could have in the fullest possession of all earthly enjoyments. 14. They differ in their substance and end. The Old Covenant was typical, shadowy and removeable, Heb. 10. 1. The New Covenant is substantial and per∣manent, as containing the Body which is Christ. Now consider the Old Covenant comparatively with the New, and this part of its nature that it was typical and shadowy, is a great debasement of it. But consider it absolutely, and the things wherein it was so, were its greatest glory and excellency. For in these things alone, was it a Token and Pledge of the Love and Grace of God. For those things in the Old Covenant which had most of bondage in their use and practice, had most of light and grace in their signification. This was the design of God in all the Ordinances of Worship belonging unto that Covenant, namely to typisie, shadow and represent the heavenly substantial things of the New Covenant, or the Lord Christ, and the work of his Mediation. This the Tabernacle, Ark, Altar, Priests, and Sacrifices did do, and it was their glory that so they did. However compared with the substance in the New Covenant, they have no glory. 15. They differ in the extent of their administration, according unto the Will of God. The first was confined unto the Posterity of Abraham, according to the flesh, and unto them especially in the Land of Canaan, with some few Proselytes that were joined unto them, Deut. 5. 3. excluding all others from the participation of the benefits of it. And hence it was, that whereas the personal Ministry of our Sa∣viour himself in preaching of the Gospel, was to precede the introduction of the New Covenant, it was confined unto the People of Israel, Mat. 15. 24. And he was the Minister of the Circumcision, Rom. 15. 8. such narrow bounds and limits had the Administration of this Covenant affixed unto it by the will and pleasure of God, Psal. 141. 19, 20. But the Administration of the New Covenant is extend∣ed unto all Nations under Heaven, none being excluded on the account of Tongue, Language, Family, Nation, or place of Habitation. All have an equal interest in the rising Sun. The partition wall is broken down, and the gates of the new Jeru∣salem are set open unto all comers upon the Gospel invitation. This is frequently taken notice of in the Scripture; see Matt. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15. John 11. 51, 52. John 12. 32. Acts 11. 18. Acts 17. 30. Gal. 5. 6. Ephes. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Chap. 3. 8, 9, 10. Col. 3. 10, 11. 1 John 2. 12. Rev. 5. 9. This is the grand Charter of the poor wandering Gentiles. Having wilfully fallen off from God, he was pleased in his Holiness and Severity to leave all our Ancestors for many Generations to serve and worship the Devil. And the mystery of our reco∣very was hid in God from the foundation of the world, Ephes. 3. 8, 9, 10. And although it was so foretold, so prophesied of, so promised under the Old Testament; yet such was the Pride, Blindness and Obstinacy of the greatest part of the Church of the Jews, that its accomplishment was one great part of that stumbling Block whereat they fell; yea, the greatness and glory of this mystery was such, that the Disciples of Christ themselves comprehended it not, until it was testified unto them, by the pouring out of the Holy Ghost, the great Promise of the New Covenant, upon some of those poor Gentiles, Acts 11. 18. 16. They differ in their efficacy. For the Old Covenant made nothing per∣fect, it could effect none of the things it did represent, nor introduce that perfect or
compleat state which God had designed for the Church. But this we have at large insisted on in our Exposition of the foregoing Chapter. Lastly, They differ in their duration; for the one was to be removed, and the other to abide for ever, which must be declared on the ensuing Verses. It may be other things of an alike nature may be added unto these that we have mentioned, wherein the difference between the two Covenants doth consist; But these instances are sufficient unto our purpose. For some when they hear that the Covenant of Grace was always one and the same, of the same nature and efficacy under both Testaments, that the way of Salvation by Christ was always one and the same, are ready to think that there was no such great difference between their state and ours as is pretended. But we see that on this Supposition, that Covenant which God brought the People into at Sinai, and under the yoke whereof they were to abide until the New Covenant was established, had all the disadvantages attend∣ing it which we have insisted on. And those who understand not how excellent and glorious those Priviledges are, which are added unto the Covenant of Grace, as to the administration of it by the introduction and establishment of the New Cove∣nant, are utterly unacquainted with the nature of spiritual and heavenly things. There remaineth yet one thing more which the Socinians give us occasion to speak unto from these words of the Apostle, that the New Covenant is established on better Promises. For from hence they do conclude, that there were no Promises of Life under the Old Testament, which in the latitude of it is a sensless and bru∣tish Opinion. And 1. The Apostle in this place intends only those Promises whereon the New Testa∣ment was legally ratified and reduced into the form of a Covenant, which were, as he declares, the Promises of especial pardoning mercy, and of the efficacy of Grace in the renovation of our Natures. But it is granted that the other Covenant was legally established on Promises which respected the Land of Canaan. Wherefore it is granted that as to the Promises whereby the Covenants were actually establish∣ed, those of the New Covenant were better than the other. 2. The Old Covenant had express Promises of eternal life. He that doth these things shall live in them. It was indeed with respect unto perfect Obedience that it gave that Promise; however that Promise it had, which is all that at present we enquire after. 3. The Institution of Worship which belonged unto that Covenant, the whole Ministry of the Tabernacle as representing heavenly things, had the nature of a Promise in them; for they all directed the Church to seek for Life and Salvation in and by Jesus Christ alone. 4. The question is not what Promises are given in the Law itself, or the Old Covenant formally considered as such; but what Promise they had who lived under that Covenant, and which were not disannnlled by it. For we have proved suf∣ficiently, that the additions of this Covenant did not abolish or supersede the effica∣cy of any Promise that God had before given unto the Church. And to say, that the first Promise, and that given unto Abraham confirmed with the Oath of God were not Promises of eternal life, is to overthrow the whole Bible, both Old Testa∣ment and New. And we may observe from the foregoing Discourses, 1. That although one state of the Church hath had great Advantages and Priviledges above another, yet no State had whereof to complain, whilest they observed the terms prescribed unto them. We have seen in how many things, and those most of them of the highest importance, the state of the Church under the New Covenant, excel∣led that under the Old, yet was that in its self a state of unspeakable Grace and Priviledges. For 1. It was a state of near Relation unto God by vertue of a Covenant. And when all Mankind had absolutely broken Covenant with God by sin, to call any of them into a New Covenant Relation with himself, was an Act of Soveraign Grace and Mercy. Herein were they distinguished from the residue of Mankind, whom God suffered to walk in their own ways, and winked at their ignorance, whilest they perished all in the pursuit of their foolish imaginations. This a great part of the Book of Deuteronomy is designed to impress a sense of upon the minds of the People; and it is summarily expressed by the Psalmist, Psal. 147. 19, 20. And by
the Prophet, We are thine, thou never bearest Rule over them; thy Name was not called upon by them, Isa. 64. 19. 2. This Covenant of God was in it self holy, just and equal. For although there was in it an imposition of sundry things burthensom, they were such as God in his infinite wisdom saw necessary for that People, and such as they could not have been without. Hence on all occasions God refers it even unto themselves to judge whether his ways towards them were not equal, and their own unequal; and it was not only just, but attended with Promises of unspeakable advantages above all other People whatever. 3. God dealing with them in the way of a Covenant, whereunto the mutual consent of all Parties Covenanting is required, it was proposed unto them for their acceptance, and they did accordingly willingly receive it, Exod. 24. Deut. 5. so as that they had not whereof to complain. 4. In that state of Discipline wherein God was pleased to hold them, yet they enjoyed the way of life and salvation in the Promise; for as we have shewed at large, the Promise was not disannulled by the introduction of this Covenant. Wherefore although God reserved a better and more compleat state for the Church under the New Testament, having ordained better things for us, that they without us should not be made perfect; yet was that other state in itself good and holy, and sufficient to bring all Believers unto the enjoyment of God. 2. The state of the Gospel, or of the Church under the New Testament being ac∣companied with the highest spiritual Priviledges and Advantages that it is capable of in this world, two things do thence follow. 1. The great Obligation that is on all Believers unto holiness and fruitfulness in obedience unto the glory of God. We have here in the utmost condescension of Divine Grace, and the greatest effects of it that God will communicate on this side Glory. That which all these things tend unto, that which God requireth and ex∣pecteth upon them, is the thankful and fruitful obedience of them that are made partakers of them. And they who are not sensible of this obligation, are strangers unto the things themselves, and are not able to discern spiritual things, because they are to be spiritually discerned. 2. The Heinousness of their Sin by whom this Covenant is neglected or despi∣sed, is hence abundantly manifest. This the Apostle particularly asserts and insists upon, Chap. 2. 2, 3. Chap. 10. 28, 29.
VER. VII. . For if that first [Covenant] had been blameless, then should no place have been sought for the second. IN this Verse, and so also in those that follow unto the end of this Chapter, the Apostle designeth a confirmation of what he had before asserted and underta∣ken to prove. And this was, that there is a necessity of a new and better Covenant, accompanied with better Promises and more excellent Ordinances of Worship than the former. Hereon it follows, that the first was to be disannulled and abolished, which was the main Thesis he had to prove. And there are two parts of his Argument to this purpose. For first he proveth, that on the supposition of another better Co∣venant to be introduced, it did unavoidably follow, that the first was to be abo∣lished, as that which was not perfect, compleat or sufficient unto its end, which he doth in this Verse. Secondly, he proves that such a new, better Covenant was to be introduced, in the Verses following. What he had before confirmed in sundry particular Instances, he summarily con∣cludes in one general Argument in this Verse, and that built on a Principle gene∣rally acknowledged. And it is this, All the Priviledges, all the Benefits and Advan∣tages of the Aaronical Priesthood and Sacrifices, do all belong unto the Covenant where∣unto they were annexed, a chief part of whose outward administrations consisted in them. This the Hebrews neither could, nor did question. The whole of what they pleaded for, the onely Charter and Tenure of all their Priviledges, was the Covenant that God made with their Fathers at Sinai. Wherefore that Priesthood, those Sacrifices, with all the Worship belonging unto the Tabernacle or Temple, was ne∣cessarily commensurate unto that Covenant. Whilest that Covenant continued, they were to continue; and if that Covenant ceased, they were to cease also. These things were agreed between the Apostle and them. Hereon he subsumes; But there is mention of another Covenant to be made with the whole Church, and to be introduced long after the making of that at Sinai. Neither could this be denied by them. However to put it out of Controversie, the Apostle proves it by an express Testimony of the Prophet Jeremiah. In that Testimony it is peculiarly declared, that this New Covenant that was promised to be introduced in the latter days, should be better and more excellent than the former, as is ma∣fest from the Promises whereon it is established; yet in this verse the Apostle proceeds no further, but unto the general consideration of Gods promising to make another Covenant with the Church, and what would follow thereon. From this Supposition the Apostle proves, that the first Covenant is imperfect, blameable, and removeable; and the force of his Inference depends on a common Notion or Presumption that is clear and evident in its own light. And it is this, Where once a Covenant is made and established, if it will serve unto and effect all that he who makes it doth design, and exhibit all the good which he intends to com∣municate, there is no reason why another Covenant should be made. The making of a New for no other ends or purposes but what the Old was every way sufficient for, argues lightness and mutability in him that made it. Unto this purpose doth he argue, Gal. 3. 21. If there had been a Law given, that could have given life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law. Could the first Covenant have per∣fected and consecrated the Church, could it have communicated all the grace and mercy that God intended to indulge unto the children of men, the wise and holy Author of it would have had no thought about the introduction and establishment of another. It would have been no way agreeable unto his infinite wisdom and faithfulness so to do. Wherefore the Promise hereof doth irrefragably prove, that both the first Covenant, and all the Services of it were imperfect, and therefore to be removed and taken away.
Indeed this promise of a new Covenant diverse from that made at Sinai, or not like unto it, as the Prophet speaks, is sufficient of it self to overthrow the vain pre∣tences of the Jews wherein they are hardned to this day. The absolute perpe∣tuity of the Law and its worship, that is of the Covenant at Sinai is the principal fundamental article of their present faith or rather unbelief. But this is framed by them in direct opposition unto the Promises of God. For let it be demanded of them whether they believe that God wil make another covenant with the Church, not ac∣cording to the covenant which he made with their Fathers at Sinai. If they shall say they do not believe it, then do they plainly renounce the Prophets and the promi∣ses of God given by them. If they do grant it I desire to know of them, with what Sacrifices this new Covenant shall be established, by what Priest, with what Worship, it shall be administred. If they say that they shall be done by the Sacrifices, Priests and Worship of the Law, they deny what they granted before, namely that it is a new and another Covenant. For the Sacrifices and Priests of the Law cannot confirm or administer any other covenant but that which they belong and are confined un∣to. If it be granted that this new Covenant must have a new Mediator, a new Priest, a new Sacrifice, as it is undeniable it must, or it cannot be a new Covenant, then must the old cease and be removed that this may come into its place. No∣thing but obstinacy and blindness can resist the force of this argument of the Apostle. The general design of the Apostle in this verse being cleared, we may consider the words more particularly. And there are two things in them. 1. A positive assertion included in a supposition. If the first Covenant had been blameless, had not been defective; that is, it was so. 2. The proof of this assertion; if it had not been so, place would not have been sought for a second, which that there was he proves in the following verses. In the first part of the words there is. (1.) A causal conjunction rendring a rea∣son; For (2.) The subject spoken of; that former Covenant, (3.) What is affirmed of it as the affirmation is included in a negative supposition. It was not blameless, it is not blameless. 1. The conjunction , For sheweth that the Apostle intends the confirmation of what he had before discoursed. But he seems not to refer only unto what he . had immediately before affirmed concerning the better promises of the New Test∣ament, but unto the whole argument that he hath in hand. For the general Reason which here he insists upon, proves all that he had before delivered concerning the imperfection of the Levitical Priesthood and the whole worship of the first Covenant depending thereon. 2. The Subject spoken of is , that first; that is , . that former Covenant. The Covenant made with the Fathers at Sinai with all the Ordinances of worship thereunto belonging, whose nature and use we have before declared. 3. Hereof it is said , Vulg. Lat. Si culpâ vacasset. And so we, . if it had been faultless. I am sure the expression is a little too harsh in our Translation and such as the Original word will not bear, at least doth not require. For it seems to intimate, that absolutely there was something faulty or blame worthy in the Cove∣nant of God. But this must not be admitted. For besides that the Author of it which was God himself, doth free it from any such charge or imputation, it is in the Scripture every where declared to be Good, Just and Holy. There is indeed an intimation of a defect in it. But this was not with respect to its own particular end but with respect to another general end, whereunto it was not designed. That which is defective with respect unto its own particular end whereunto it is ordained, or which it is designed to accomplish, is really faulty. But that which is or may be so, with respect unto some other general end, which it was never designed to ac∣complish, is not so in it self. This the Apostle discourseth concerning, Gal. 3. 19, 20, 21, 22. We must therefore state the signification of the word from the subject matter that he treats about in this place: And this is the perfection and consummation, or the Sanctification and Salvation of the Church. With respect hereunto alone it is that he asserts the insufficiency and imperfection of the first Covenant. And the en∣quiry between him and the Hebrews was not whether the first Covenant was not in it self Good, Just, Holy and Blameless, every way perfect with respect unto its own
especial ends; but whether it were prefect and effectual unto the general ends men∣tioned. This it was not saith the Apostle, and proves it undeniably from the pro∣mise of the introduction of another general Covenant for the effecting of them. Whereas therefore, to be not , is either to have some fault or vice accom∣panying of any thing and adehering unto it, whereby it is unsuited unto or insuffi∣cient for its own proper end; or that whereunto some what is wanting with respect unto another general end which is much to be desired, but such as it was never designed to accomplish; As the art of Arithmetick if it be perfectly taught, is suffi∣cient to instruct a man in the whole science of numeration; If it be not, it is faul∣ty as unto its particular end: But it is no way sufficient unto the general end of making a man wise in the whole compass of wisdome, a thing far to be preferred be∣fore its particular end, be it never so perfect in its own kind. And it is in the lat∣ter sense only that the Apostle affirms that the first Covenant was not , or blameless. If it had been such as unto which nothing more was required or need∣ful perfectly to compleat and sanctify the Church, which was the general end God aimed at, it had been absolutely perfect. But this it was not, in that it never was designed for the means of it. To the same purpose he argues, Chap. 7. 11. 19. And with respect unto this end it is said that the Law was weak, Rom. 8. 3. Gal. 3. 21. Act. 13. 38, 39. In brief, that which the Apostle designeth to prove is that the first Covenat was of that constitution, that it could not accomplish the perfect administration of the Grace of God unto the Church, nor was ever designed unto that end, as the Jews then falsely, and their posterity still foolishly also imagin it to have done. The ensuing words in this verse include the general proof of his assertion concer∣ning the insufficiency of the first Covenant unto the ends of God towards the Church, . His argument is plainly this. The promise of a new Covenant doth unavoidably prove insufficiency of the former, at least unto the ends for which the new one is promised. For otherwise unto what end serves the promise and covenant promised? But there is some difficulty in the manner of the ex∣pression. The place of the second had not been sought; so the words lie in the Original. . But the place of the second is no more but the second taking place; the bringing in, the introduction and establishment of it. And this is said to be sought, but impro∣perly and after the manner of men. When men have entred into a Covenant which proves insufficient for some end they do intend, they take counsell and seek out after other waies and means, or an agreement and covenant on such other terms as may be effectual unto their purpose. Wherefore this signifies no alteration, no defect in the wisdome and counsel of God, as unto what is now to be done, but only the outward change which he would now effect in the introduction of the new Covenant. For as such changes among men are the issue of the alteration of their minds, and the effect of new counsels for the seeking out of new means for their end, so is this outward change in the taking away of the old Covenant and introduction of the new represented in God; being only the second part of his counsel or purpose which he had purposed in himself before the foundation of the World. And we may hence observe. 1. That what ever God had done before for the Church, yet he ceased not in his wis∣dom and grace, until he had made it partaker of the best and most blessed condition whereof in this world it is capable. He found out place for this better Covenant. 2. Let those unto whom the terms of the new Covenant are proposed in the Gospel take heed to themselves, that they sincerely embrace and improve them, for there is neither promsse nor hopes of any farther or fuller administration of grace.
VER. VIII. . For finding fault with them, [complaining of them] he saith, Be∣hold Ver. viii. the dayes come, saith the Lord, and I will make [when I will make] a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of Judah. IN this Verse the Apostle entreth upon the Proof of his Argument laid down in that foregoing. And this was, that the first Covenant was not , un∣blameable, or every way sufficient for Gods general end, because there was room left for the introduction of another, which was done accordingly. Of this Covenant so to be introduced, he declareth in the Testimony of the Pro∣phet afterwards two things. (1) The qualification of it, or its especial Adjunct; it was new, ver. 8. (2.) A description of it; first, Negative with respect unto the old, ver. 9. 2dly, Positive in its nature and effectual properties, ver. 10, 11, 12. From all which he inferreth the conclusion which he was contending for, inforced with a new consi∣deration confirming it, ver. 13. which is the Sum of the last Part of this Chapter. There are two general Parts of this Verse. (1) The Introduction of the Testimony to be improved from the occasion of it, as expressed by the Apostle. (2) The Testimony itself, which he insists on. The first is in these words; For finding fault with them he saith. Wherein we have (1) The note of Connexion; (2) The ground whereon the Testimo∣ny is built. (3) The true reading of the words is to be considered. 1. There is the causal Conjunction  For, which gives them connexion unto . the foregoing Verse. That which is designed, is the confirmation of the forego∣ing Argument. This is the Proof of the Assertion, that place was sought for ano∣ther Covenant, which evinced the insufficiency of the former, For; And the Rea∣son it intimates doth not consist in the word wherewith it is joined, finding fault with them; but respects those following, he saith: For he saith, the days come, which directly prove what he had affirmed. . 2. There is the ground intimated, of what is affirmed in the ensuing Testimo∣ny. For the New Covenant was not to be introduced absolutely without the con∣sideration of any thing foregoing; but because the first was not , or unblameable. Therefore the Apostle shews, that God brought it in in a way of blame. He did it finding fault with them. . 3. These words may be diversly distinguished and read. For (1) placing the note of distinction thus, , the sense is; For finding fault, complaining, blaming; he saith unto them: so that expression , finding fault, respects the Covenant itself. Piscator was the first that I know of, who thus distinguished the words, who is followed by Schlictingius and others. But place the note of distinction at , as it is by most Interpreters and Expositors, and then the sense of the words is rightly expressed in our English Translation; For finding fault with them (that is the People) he saith; and  may be regu∣lated either by  or . The Reasons for fixing the distinction in the first place are (1) Because , finding fault, answers directly unto , was not without fault. And this contains the true Reason why the New Covenant was brought in. And (2) It was not Gods complaint of the People, that was any cause of the introduction of the New Covenant, but of the Old Covenant itself, which was in∣sufficient to sanctifie and save the Church.
But these seem not of force to change the usual interpretation of the words. For (1) Although the first Covenant was not every way perfect with respect unto Gods general end towards his Church, yet it may be it is not so safe to say, that God complained of it. When things or persons change the state and condition wherein they were made or appointed of God, he may complain of them, and that justly. So when man filled the world with wickedness, it is said, that he repented him at his heart that he made man upon the earth. But when they abide unaltered in the state wherein they were made by him, he hath no reason to complain of them; and so it was with the first Covenant. So our Apostle disputes about the Law, that all the weakness and imperfection of it arose from sin, where there was no reason to com∣plain of the Law, which in itself was holy, just and good. (2) God doth in this Testimony actually complain of the People, namely, that they brake his Covenant, and expresseth his indignation thereon, he regarded them not. But there is not in this Testimony, nor in the whole Context or Prophesie whence it is taken, nor in any other place of Scripture any word of complaint against the Covenant itself, though its imperfection as unto the general end of perfecting the Church State, be here intimated. (3) There is an especial Remedy expressed in the Testimony against the evil which God complains of, or finds fault with in the People. This was, that they continued not in his Covenant. This is expresly provided against in the Promise of this New Covenant, ver. 10. Wherefore (4) God gives this Promise of a New Covenant, together with a complaint against the People, that it might be known to be an effect of free and soveraign grace. There was nothing in the People to procure it, or to qualifie them for it, unless it were that they had wickedly broken the former. And we may hence ob∣serve, 1. God hath oft-times just cause to complain of his People, when yet he will not utterly cast them off. It is meer mercy and grace that the Church at all seasons lives upon; but in some seasons, when it falls under great provocations, they are signa∣lized. 2. It is the Duty of the Church to take deep notice of Gods complaints of them. This indeed is not in the Text, but ought not to be passed by on this occasion of the mention of Gods complaining, or finding fault with them. And God doth not thus find fault only when he speaks immediately by new Revelations, as our Lord Jesus Christ found fault with, and rebuked his Churches, in the Revelation made unto the Apostle John, but he doth it continually by the Rule of the Word. And it is the especial Duty of all Churches, and of all Believers, to search diligently into what God finds fault withall, in his Word, and to be deeply affected therewith, so far as they find themselves guilty. Want hereof is that which hath laid most Churches in the world under a fatal security. Hence they say or think, or carry themselves, as though they were rich and increased in Goods, and had need of no∣thing, when indeed they are wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and na∣ked. To consider what God blames, and to affect our Souls with a sense of guilt, is that trembling at his word which he so approves of. And every Church that in∣tends to walk with God unto his glory, ought to be diligent in this duty. And to guide them herein, they ought carefully to consider (1) The times and seasons that are passing over them. God brings his Church under variety of seasons; and in them all, requires especial duties from them, as those wherein he will be glorified in each of them. If they miss it here∣in, it is that which God greatly blames and complains of. Faithfulness with God in their generation, that is, in the especial duties of the times and seasons wherein they live, is that which Noah and David, and other holy men are commended for. Thus there are seasons of the great abounding of wickedness in the world, seasons of great Apostasie from Truth and Holiness; seasons of Judgment and of Mercy, of Persecution and Tranquility. In all those, and the like, God requireth especial duties of the Church, whereon his glory in them doth much depend. If they fail here, if they are not faithful as unto their especial duty, God in his Word finds fault with them, and lays them under blame. And as much wisdom is required hereunto, so I do not judge that any Church can discharge its duty in any compe∣tent
measure, without a due consideration of it. For in a due observation of the times and seasons, and an application of our selves unto the duties of them, consists that Testimony which we are to give unto God and the Gospel in our Generation. That Church which considers not its especial duty in the days wherein we live, is fast asleep, and it may be doubted whether when it is awaked, it will find oil in its vessel or no. (2) The Temptations which are prevalent, and which unavoidably we are exposed unto. Every age and time hath its especial temptations. And it is the Will of God that the Church should be exercised with them and by them; and it were easie to manifest, that the darkness and ignorance of men in not discerning the especial tem∣ptations of the Age wherein they have lived, or neglecting of them, have been al∣ways the great causes and means of the Apostasie of the Church. Hereby hath Superstition prevailed in one Age, and Profaneness in another; as false and noxious opinions in a third. Now there is nothing that God requires more strictly of us, than that we should be wakeful against present prevalent temptations, and charg∣eth us with guilt where we are not so. And those which are not awake with re∣spect unto these Temptations which are at this day prevalent in the world, are far enough from walking before God unto all well-pleasing. And sundry other things of the like nature might be mentioned unto the same purpose. Ob. 3. God often surprizeth the Church with Promises of Grace and Mercy. In this place where God complaineth of the People, findeth fault with them, charging them for not continuing in his Covenant, and declares that as unto any thing in themselves he regarded them not, it might be easily expected that he would proceed unto their utter casting off and rejection. But instead hereof God surpriseth them as it were with the most eminent Promise of Grace and Mercy that ever was made or could be made unto them. So he doth in like manner, Isa. 7. 13, 14. Chap. 54. 17, 18, 19. And this he will do, (1) That he may glorifie the riches and freedom of his Grace. This is his principal end in all his dispensations towards his Church. And how can they be made more conspicuous than in the exercise of them, then when a People are so far from all appearance of any desert of them, as that God declares his judgment that they deserve his utmost displeasure? (2) That none who have the least remainder of sincerity, and desires to fear the Name of God, may utterly faint and despond at any time under the greatest confluence of discouragements. God can come in, and will oft-times, in a way of soveraign grace, for the relief of the most dejected sinners. But we must proceed with our Exposition. 2. The second thing contained in this Verse, is the Testimony itself insisted on. And there is in the Testimony, 1. The Author of the Promise declared in it, He saith; as afterwards, Saith the Lord. 2. The Note of its Introduction, signalizing the thing intended, Behold. 3. The time of the accomplishment of what is here foretold, and here promi∣sed; The days come wherein. 4. The thing promised is a Covenant, concerning which is expressed, (1) He that makes it, I; I will make. (2) Those with whom it is made, The House of Israel, and the House of Judah. (3) The manner of its making, . (4) The property of it, it is a New Covenant. 1. He who gives this Testimony is included in tht word , he saith. For . finding fault with them, he saith. He who complains of the People for breaking the Old Covenant, promiseth to make the New. So in the next Verse it is expres∣sed, Saith the Lord. The Ministry of the Prophet was made use of in the declara∣tion of these words and things, but they are properly his words from whom they are by immediate inspiration. 1. He saith, that is  saith the Lord, is the formal object of our faith and obedience. Hereinto are they to be refered, herein do they acquiesce, and in nothing else will they so do. All other foundations of Faith, as thus saith the Pope, or thus saith the Church, or thus said our Ancestors, are all but delusions. Thus saith the Lord, gives rest and peace.
2. There is the Note of Introduction calling unto attendance, , . Behold. It is always found eminent either in itself, or in some of its circumstances that is thus performed. For the word calls for a more than ordinary diligence in the consideration of an attention unto what is proposed. And it was needful to signalize this Promise; for the People unto whom it was given were very difficult∣ly drawn from their adherence unto the Old Covenant, which was inconsistent with that now promised. And there seems to be somewhat more intimated in this word besides a call unto especial attention. And that is, that the thing spoken of is plainly proposed unto them concerned, so as that they may look upon it, and behold it clearly and speedily. And so is this New Covenant, here proposed so evidently and plainly, both in the entire nature and properties of it, that unless men wilfully turn away their eyes, they cannot but see it. 2. Where God placeth a Note of Observation and Attention, we should carefully fix our Faith and Consideration. God sets not any of his marks in vain. And if upon the first view of any place or thing so signalized, the evidence of it doth not appear unto us, we have a sufficient call unto farther diligence in our enquiry. And if we are not wanting unto our Duty, we shall discover some especial impression of Divine Excellency or another upon every such thing or place. 3. The things and concernments of the New Covenant, are all of them Objects of the best of our consideration. As such are they here proposed; and what is spoken of the declaration of the nature of this Covenant in the next Verse, is sufficient to confirm this Observation. 3. The time is prefixed for the accomplishment of this Promise, , . The days come. Known unto God are all his works from the foun∣dation of the world, and he hath determined the times of their accomplishment. As to the particular precise times or seasons of them, whilest they are future, he hath reserved them unto himself, unless where he hath seen good to make some especial Revelation of them. So he did of the times of the sojourning of the children of Israel in Egypt, of the Babylonish Captivity, and of the coming of the Messiah after the return of the People, Dan. 9. But from the giving of the first Promise, wherein the foundation of the Church was laid, the accomplishment of it is fre∣quently referred unto the latter days. See our Exposition on Chap. 1. ver. 1. Hence under the Old Testament the days of the Messiah were called the world to come, as we have shewed, Chap. 2. 5. And it was a Periphrasis of him, that he was , Mat. 11. 3. He that was to come. And the Faith of the Church was principally exercised in the expectation of his coming. And this time is here intended. And the expression in the Original is in the Present Tense, , from the Hebrew  The days coming, not the days that come, but the days come. And two things are denoted thereby. 1. The near approach of the days intended. The time was now hastening apace, and the Church was to be awaken'd unto the expectation of it. And this accompanied with their earnest desires and prayers for it, which were the most ac∣ceptable part of the Worship of God under the Old Testament. 2. A certainty of the thing itself was hereby fixed in their minds. Long ex∣pectation they had of it, and now stood in need of new security, especially con∣sidering the tryal they were falling into in the Babylonish Captivity. For this seem∣ed to threaten a defeat of the Promise, in the casting away of the whole Nation. The manner of the expression is suited to confirm the Faith of them that were real Believers among them against such fears. Yet we must observe that from the giving of this Promise unto the accomplishment of it, was near 600 years. And yet about 90 years after, the Prophet Malachi speaking of the same season, affirms, That the Lord whom they sought, should suddenly come unto his Temple, Mal. 3. 1. Ob. There is a time limited and fixed for the accomplishment of all the Promises of God, and all the Purposes of his Grace towards the Church. See Hab. 2. 3, 4. And the Consideration hereof is very necessary unto Believers in all Ages. 1. To keep up their hearts from desponding, when difficulties against their accomplishment do arise, and seem to render it impossible. Want here∣of
hath turn'd aside many from God, and caused them to cast their lot and portion into the world. (2) To preserve them from putting themselves on any irregular ways for their accomplishment. (3) To teach them to search diligently into the wisdom of God, who hath dis∣posed times and seasons as unto his own glory, so unto the tryal and real benefit of the Church. 4. The Subject matter of the Promise given is a Covenant,  The LXX render it by , a Testament. And that is more proper in this place than a . Covenant. For if we take Covenant in a strict and proper sense, it hath indeed no place between God and man. For a Covenant strictly taken, ought to proceed on equal terms, and a proportionate consideration of things on both sides. But the Covenant of God is founded on Grace, and consists essentially in a free undeserved Promise. And therefore  a Covenant is never spoken of between God and man, but on the part of God it consists in a free Promise, or a Testament. And a Testament which is the proper signification of the word here used by the Apo∣stle, is suited unto this place, and nothing else. For (1) Such a Covenant is intended as is ratified and confirmed by the death of him that makes it. And this is properly a Testament. For this Covenant was con∣firmed by the death of Christ, and that both as it was the death of the Testator, and as it was accompanied with the blood of a Sacrifice, whereof we must treat after∣wards at large, if God will. (2) It is such a Covenant, as wherein the Covenanter, he that makes it, be∣queatheth his Goods unto others in the way of a Legacy. For this is done by Christ herein, as we must also declare afterwards. Wherefore our Saviour calls this Co∣venant the New Testament in his Blood. This the word used by the Apostle doth properly signifie, and it is evident that he intends not a Covenant absolutely and strictly so taken. With respect hereunto the first Covenant is usually called the Old Testament. For we intend not thereby the Books of Scripture, or Oracles of God committed unto the Church of the Jews (which yet as we have observed are once called the Old Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 14.) but the Covenant that God made with the Church of Israel at Sinai, whereof we have spoken at large. And this was called a Testament for three Reasons. 1. Because it was confirmed by death; that is, the death of the Sacrifices that were slain and offered at its solemn establishment. So faith our Apostle, The first Testament was not dedicated without blood, Chap. 9. 15. But there is more requi∣red hereunto; for even a Covenant properly and strictly so called, may be confirm∣ed with Sacrifices. Wherefore 2. God did therein make over and grant unto the Church of Israel the good things of the Land of Canaan, with the Priviledges of his Worship. 3. The principal Reason of this denomination, the Old Testament, is taken from its being typically significative of the Death and Legacy of the great Testator, as we have shewed. We have treated somewhat before concerning the Nature of the New Testament, as considered in distinction from, and opposition unto the Old. I shall here only briefly consider what concurreth unto the constitution of it, as it was then future, when this Promise was given, and as it is here promised. And three things do con∣cur hereunto. 1. A Recapitulation, Collection and Confirmation of all the Promises of Grace that had been given unto the Church from the beginning, even all that was spoken by the mouth of the holy Prophets that had been since the world began, Luke 1. 70. The first Promise contained in it the whole essence and substance of the Covenant of Grace. All those afterwards given unto the Church on various occasions, were but explications and confirmations of it. In the whole of them there was a full declara∣tion of the wisdom and love of God in sending his Son, and of his grace unto Mankind thereby. And God solemnly confirmed them with his Oath, namely, that they should be all accomplished in their appointed season. Whereas therefore the Covenant here promised included the sending of Christ for the accomplishment of those Promises, they are all gathered into one head therein. It is a constellation of all Promises of Grace.
2. All these Promises were to be reduced into an actual Covenant or Testament two ways. 1. In that as unto the accomplishment of the grace principally intended in them, they received it in the sending of Christ; and as to the confirmation and establish∣ment of them for the communication of grace unto the Church, they received it in the death of Christ, as a Sacrifice of Agreement or Attonement. 2. They are established as the Rule and Law of Reconciliation and Peace be∣tween God and man. This gives them the nature of a Covenant. For a Cove∣nant is the solemn expression of the terms of Peace between various Parties, with the confirmation of them. 3. They are reduced into such form of Law, as to become the only Rule of the Ordinances of Worship and Divine Service required of the Church. Nothing unto these ends is now presented unto us, or required of us, but what belongeth imme∣diately unto the administration of this Covenant, and the grace thereof. But the Reader must consult what hath been discoursed at large unto this purpose on the 6th verse. And we may see from hence, what it is that God here promiseth and foretelleth, as that which he would do in the days that were coming. For whereas they had the Promise before, and so virtually the grace and mercy of the New Covenant, it may be enquired what is yet wanting that should be promised solemnly under the name of a Covenant. For the full resolution of this question, I must, as before, re∣fer the Reader unto what hath been discoursed at large about the two Covenants, and the difference between them on ver. 6. Here we may briefly name some few things, sufficient unto the exposition of this place. As 1. All those Promises which had before been given out unto the Church from the beginning of the world, were now reduced into the form of a Covenant, or rather of a Testament. The name of a Covenant is indeed sometimes applied unto the Promises of Grace before or under the Old Testament. But  the word used in all those places, denoteth only a free, gratuitous Promise, Gen. 9. 9. Chap. 17. 4. But they were none of them, nor all of them together, reduced into the form of a Testament; which they could not be, but by the death of the Testator. And what blessed Priviledges and Benefits were included herein, hath been shewed before, and must yet further be insisted on in the Exposition of the 9th Chapter, if God permit. 2. There was another Covenant superadded unto the Promises which was to be the immediate Rule of the Obedience and Worship of the Church. And accord∣ing unto their observance of this superadded Covenant, they were esteemed to have kept or broken Covenant with God. This was the Old Covenant in Sinai, as hath been declared. Wherefore the Promises could not be in the form of a Cove∣nant unto the People, inasmuch as they could not be under the power of two Cove∣nants at once, and those, as it afterwards appeared, absolutely inconsistent. For this is that which our Apostle proves in this place, namely, That where the Promises were brought into the form, and had the use of a Covenant unto the Church, the former Covenant must needs disappear, or be disannulled. Only they had their place and effica∣cy to convey the benefits of the grace of God in Christ unto them that did believe; but God here foretelleth that he will give them such an order and efficacy in the administration of his grace, as that all the fruits of it by Jesus Christ shall be be∣queathed and made over unto the Church in the way of a Solemn Cove∣nant. 3. Notwithstanding the Promises which they had received, yet the whole System of their Worship sprang from, and related unto the Covenant made at Sinai. But now God promiseth a new state of spiritual Worship relating only unto the Promises of grace as brought into the form of a Covenant. The New Covenant as recollecting into one all the Promises of Grace given from the foundation of the World, accomplished in the actual exhibition of Christ, and confirmed in his death, and by the Sacrifice of his blood, thereby becoming the sole Rule of new spiritual Ordinances of Worship suited thereunto, was the great Object of the Faith of the Saints of the Old Testament, and is the great foundation of all our present mercies.
All these things were contained in that New Covenant, as such, which God here promiseth to make. For (1) There was in it a Recapitulation of all Promises of Grace. God had not made any promise, any intimation of his Love, or Grace unto the Church in gene∣ral, nor unto any particular Believer, but he brought it all into this Covenant, so as that they should be esteemed all and every one of them, to be given and spoken un∣to every individual person that hath an interest in this Covenant. Hence all the Promises made unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, with all the other Patriarchs, and the Oath of God whereby they were confirmed, are all of them made unto us, and do belong unto us no less than they did unto them to whom they were first given, if we are made partakers of this Covenant. Hereof the Apostle gives an instance in the singular promise made unto Joshua, which he applies unto Believers, Chap. 13. 5. There was nothing of love nor grace in any of them, but was gathered up into this Covenant. (2) The actual exhibition of Christ in the flesh, belonged unto this Promise of making a New Covenant; for without it, it could not have been made. This was the desire of all the Faithful from the foundation of the world; this they longed after, and fervently prayed for continually. And the prospect of it was the sole ground of their joy and consolation. Abraham saw his day and rejoiced. This was the great Priviledge which God granted unto them that walked uprightly be∣fore him; such an one, saith he, shall dwell on high, his place of defence shall be the munition of rocks; bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure; thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty, they shall behold the land that is very far off, Isa. 33. 16, 17. That prospect they had by faith of the King of Saints in his beauty and glory, though yet at a great distance, was their relief and their reward in their sincere Obedience. And those who understand not the glory of this Priviledge of the New Covenant, in the Incarnation of the Son of God, or his exhibition in the flesh, wherein the depths of the counsels and wisdom of God in the way of grace, mercy and love, opened themselves unto the Church, are strangers unto the things of God. (3) It was confirmed and ratified by the death and bloodshedding of Christ, and therefore included in it the whole work of his Mediation. This is the spring of the life of the Church; and until it was opened, great darkness was upon the minds of Believers themselves. What peace, what assurance, what light, what joy, depend hereon, and proceed from it, no Tongue can express. (4) All Ordinances of Worship do belong hereunto. What is the benefit of them, what are the advantages which Believers receive by them, we must declare when we come to consider that comparison that the Apostle makes between them, and the carnal Ordinances of the Law, Chap. ix. Whereas therefore all these things were contained in the New Covenant, as here promised of God, it is evident how great was the concernment of the Saints under the Old Testa∣ment to have it introduced, and how great also ours is in it now it is estab∣lished. 5thly, The Author or Maker of this Covenant is expressed in the words, as also those with whom it was made. The first is included in the Person of the Verb, I will make; I will make, saith the Lord. It is God himself that makes this Cove∣nant, and he takes it upon himself so to do. He is the principal Party covenant∣ing. I will make a Covenant; God hath made a Covenant. He hath made with me an everlasting Covenant. And sundry things are we taught therein. (1) The freedom of this Covenant, without respect unto any merit, worth or condignity in them with whom it is made. What God doth, he doth freely, ex mera gratia & voluntate. There was no cause without himself for which he should make this Covenant, or which should move him so to do. And this we are eminently taught in this place, where he expresseth no other occasion of his ma∣king this Covenant, but the Sins of the People in breaking that which he formerly made with them. And it is expressed on purpose to declare the free and soveraigns grace, the goodness, love and mercy, which alone were the absolute springs of this Covenant.
(2) The wisdom of its contrivance. The making of any Covenant to be good and useful, depends solely on the wisdom and foresight of them by whom it is made. Hence men do often make Covenants, which they design for their good and advantage, but they are so ordered for want of wisdom and foresight, that they turn unto their hurt and ruine. But there was infinite wisdom in the constitution of this Covenant, whence it is and shall be infinitely effective of all the blessed ends of it. And they are utterly unacquainted with it, who are not affected with an holy admiration of Divine Wisdom in its contrivance. A man might comfor∣tably spend his life in the contemplation of it, and yet be far enough from finding out the Almighty in it unto perfection. Hence is it, that it is so Divine a Mystery in all the parts of it, which the wisdom of the flesh cannot comprehend. Nor with∣out a due consideration of the infinite wisdom of God in the contrivance of it, can we have any true or real conceptions about it: . profane, unsan∣ctified minds can have no insight into this effect of Divine wisdom. (3) It was God alone who could prepare and provide a Surety for this Cove∣nant; considering the necessity there was of a Surety in this Covenant, seeing no Covenant between God and man could be firm and stable without one, by reason of our weakness and mutability. And considering of what a nature this Surety must be, even God and man in one person, it is evident that God himself alone must make this Covenant. And the provision of this Surety doth contain in it the glo∣rious manifestation of all the Divine Excellencies beyond any act or work of God whatever. (4) There is in this Covenant a soveraign Law of Divine Worship, wherein the Church is consummated, or brought into the most perfect estate whereof in this world it is capable, and established for ever. This Law could be given by God alone. (5) There is ascribed unto this Covenant such an efficacy of grace, as nothing but Almighty Power can make good and accomplish. The grace here mentioned in the promises of it, directs us immediately unto its Author. For who else but God can write the Divine Law in our hearts, and pardon all our sins? The San∣ctification or Renovation of our Natures, and the Justification of our Persons be∣ing promised herein, seeing infinite power and grace are required unto them, He alone must make this Covenant with whom all power and grace do dwell. God hath spoken once, twice have I heard this, that power belongeth unto God; also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy, Psal. 62. 11, 12. (6) The Reward promised in this Covenant is God himself. I am thy Re∣ward. And who but God can ordain himself to be our Reward? Ob. All the efficacy and glory of the New Covenant do originally arise from, and are resolved into the Author and Supreme Cause of it, which is God himself. And we might consider unto the encouragement of our Faith, and the strengthning of our consolation, (1) His infinite condescension to make and enter into Covenant with poor, lost, fallen, sinful man. This no heart can fully conceive, no tongue can express; only we live in hope to have yet a more clear prospect of it, and to have an holy admi∣ration of it unto Eternity. (2) His wisdom, goodness and grace in the nature of that Covenant which he hath condescended to make and enter into. The first Covenant he made with us in Adam which we brake, was in itself good, holy, righteous and just; it must be so, because it was also made by him. But there was no provision made in it ab∣solutely to preserve us from that woful disobedience and transgression which would make it void, and frustrate all the holy and blessed ends of it. Nor was God ob∣liged so to preserve us, having furnished us with a sufficiency of ability for our own preservation, so as we could no way fall but by a wilful Apostasie from him. But this Covenant is of that nature as that the grace administred in it, shall effectu∣ally preserve all the Covenanters unto the end, and secure unto them all the bene∣fits of it. For (3) His power and faithfulness are engaged unto the accomplishment of all the Promises of it. And these Promises do contain every thing that is spiritually and eternally good or desirable unto us. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name
in all the Earth? How glorious art thou in the ways of thy grace towards poor sin∣ful Creatures, who had destroyed themselves? And (4) He hath made no created good, but himself only to be our Re∣ward. Secondly, The Persons with whom this Covenant is made are also expressed. The House of Israel, and the House of Judah. Long before the giving of this Promise, that People were divided into two parts. The one of them in way of distinction from the other, retained the name of Israel. These were the Ten Tribes which fell off from the House of David, under the conduct of Ephraim, whence they are often also in the Prophets called by that name. The other consisting of the Tribe properly so called, with that of Benjamin and the greatest part of Levi, took the name of Judah; and with them, both the Promise and the Church remained in a peculiar manner. But whereas they all originally sprang from Abraham, who re∣ceived the Promise and sign of Circumcision for them all, and because they were all equally in their Forefather brought into the Bond of the Old Covenant, they are here mentioned distinctly, that none of the Seed of Abraham might be excluded from the tender of this Covenant. Unto the whole Seed of Abraham according to the flesh it was, that the terms and grace of this Covenant was first to be offered. So Peter tells them in his first Sermon, That the Promise was unto them and their Children who were there present, that is, the House of Judah, and to them that are afar off, that is the House of Israel in their dispersions, Acts 2. 39. So again he ex∣presseth the order of the dispensation of this Covenant with respect to the Pro∣mise made to Abraham, Acts 3. 25, 26. Ye are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying unto Abraham, and in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the earth be blessed; unto you first, God having raised his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you; namely, in the preaching of the Gospel. So our Apostle in his Sermon unto them, affirmed that it was necessary that the Word should be first spoken unto them, Acts 13. 46. And this was all the Priviledge that was now left unto them. For the Partition-wall was now broken down, and all Obstacles against the Gentiles taken out of the way. Wherefore this House of Israel and of Judah may be considered two ways: (1) As that People were the whole entire Posterity of Abraham. (2) As they were typical, and mystically significant of the whole Church of God. Hence alone it is that the Promises of Grace under the Old Testament are given unto the Church under those names, because they were Types of them who should really and effectually be made Partakers of them. In the first sense, God made this Covenant with them, and this on sundry ac∣counts. (1) Because He, in and through whom alone it was to be established and made effectual, was to be brought forth amongst them of the Seed of Abraham, as the Apostle plainly declares, Acts 2. 25. (2) Because all things that belonged unto the Ratification of it, were to be transacted amongst them. (3) Because in the outward dispensation of it, the terms and grace of it was first in the counsel of God to be tendred unto them. (4) Because by them, by the Ministry of men of their Posterity, the dispensa∣tion of it was to be carried unto all Nations as they were to be blessed in the Seed of Abraham; which was done by the Apostles and other Disciples of our Lord Jesus Christ. So the Law of the Redeemer went forth from Sion. By this means the Covenant was confirmed with many of them for one week before the calling of the Gentiles, Dan. 9. 27. And because these things belonged equally unto them all, mention is made distinctly of the House of Israel, and the House of Judah. For the House of Judah was at the time of the giving of this Promise, in the sole pos∣session of all the Priviledges of the Old Covenant, Israel having cut off themselves by their revolt from the House of David, being cast out also for their sins amongst the Heathen. But God, to declare that the Covenant he designed had no respect unto those carnal Priviledges which were then in the possession of Judah alone, but only unto the Promise made unto Abraham, he equals all his Seed with respect unto the mercy of this Covenant.
In the second sense, The whole Church of elect Believers is intended under these denominations, being typified by them. These are they alone, being one made of twain, namely, Jews and Gentiles, with whom the Covenant is really made and established, and unto whom the grace of it is actually communicated. For all these with whom this Covenant is made, shall as really have the Law of God written in their hearts, and their sins pardoned, according unto the promise of it, as the People of old were brought into the Land of Canaan, by vertue of the Covenant made with Abraham. These are the true Israel and Judah prevailing with God, and confessing unto his Name. Obs. The Covenant of Grace in Christ, is made only with the Israel of God the Church of the Elect. For by the making of this Covenant with any, the effectual communication of the grace of it unto them is principally intended. Nor can that Covenant be said to be made absolutely with any, but those whose sins are pardo∣ned by vertue thereof, and in whose hearts the Law of God is written, which are the express Promises of it. And it was with respect unto those, of this sort among that People, that the Covenant was promised to be made with them. See Rom. 9. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. Chap. 11. 7. But in respect of the outward dispensation of the Covenant, it is extended beyond the effectual commu∣nication of the grace of it. And in respect thereunto did the priviledge of the carnal Seed of Abraham lie. 2. Those who are first and most advanced as unto outward Priviledges, are often∣times last and least advantaged by the grace and mercy of them. Thus was it with these two Houses of Israel and Judah. They had the Priviledge and Pre∣eminence above all Nations of the World, as unto the first tender, and all the bene∣fits of the outward dispensation of the Covenant; yet though the number of them was as the sand of the Sea, a remnant only was saved. They came behind the Nations of the World as unto the grace of it. And this by reason of their unbe∣lief, and the abuse of the Priviledges granted unto them. Let not those therefore who now enjoy the greatest Priviledges be high-minded, but fear. 3. The manner of making this Covenant, is expressed by , perficiam, consummabo; I will perfect or consummate. In the Hebrew it is only  pan∣gam, . feriam, I will make; but the Apostle renders it by this word, to denote that this Covenant was at once perfected and consummate, to the exclusion of all additi∣ons and alterations. Perfection and unalterable establishment are the Properties of this Covenant. An everlasting Covenant ordered in all things and sure. 4. As unto its distinguishing Character, it is called a New Covenant; so it is with respect unto the Old Covenant made at Sinai. Wherefore by this Covenant as here considered, is not understood the promise of grace given unto Adam absolute∣ly; nor that unto Abraham, which contained the substance and matter of it, the grace exhibited in it, but not the compleat Form of it as a Covenant. For if it were only the Promise, it could not be called a New Covenant with respect unto that made at Sinai. For so it was before it absolutely 2500 years, and in the per∣son of Abraham 400 years at the least. But it must be considered as before de∣scribed in the establishment of it, and its Law of spiritual Worship. And so it was in time after that in Sinai 800 years. Howbeit it may be called a New Covenant in other respects also. As first because of its eminency. So it is said of an eminent work of God, Behold I work a new thing in the earth; And its duration and con∣tinuance as that which shall never wax old, is denoted thereby.
VER. IX. . For the Quotation and Translation of these words out of the Prophet Jere∣miah, the Reader may consult the Exercitations in the first Volume Exercit. V.  The Apostle in this place renders by , and in this place onely; the reason whereof we shall see afterwards.  which my Co∣venant they brake, rescinded, dissipated; the Apostle renders . And they continued not in my Covenant. For not to abide faithful in Covenant is to break it.  And I was an Husband unto them, or rather a Lord over them; in the Apostle, . And I regard∣ed them not. On what reason and grounds the seeming alteration is made, we shall enquire in the Exposition. , Non secundum Testamentum; secundum illud Testamentum, and so the Syriack,  Not according unto that Testament; others, faedus, and illud faedus. Of the different Translation of this word by a Testament and a Covenant, we have spoken before. , Syr.  which I gave; quod feci, which I made; , for  with the Fathers, for that is required to be joined to the Verb . And therefore the Syriack omitting the Preposition, turns the Verb into gave; gave to the Fathers which is proper,  cum Patribus eo∣rum. , vulg. non permanserunt; others, perstiterunt. So the Syriack,  they stood not, they continued not. Maneo is used to express stability in Pro∣mise and Covenants; ut tu dicti Albani maneres; and tu modo promissis maneas. So is permaneo in officio, in Armis, in Amicitia, to continue stedfast unto the end. Wherefore it is as well so rendred, as by persisto.  is so used by Thycidydes, , to abide firm and constant in Covenants. And  is he who is firm, stable, constant in Promises, and Engagements. , Ego neglexi, despexi, neglectui habui; Syr.  I despised, I ne∣glected, I rejected them.  is curae non habeo, negligo, contemno; a word deno∣ting a casting out of care with contempt. VER. IX. Not according to that Covenant which I made with their fathers, in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, saith the Lord. THE greatest and utmost mercies that God ever intended to communicate un∣to the Church, and to bless it withall, were enclosed in the New Covenant. Nor doth the efficacy of the Mediation of Christ extend itself beyond the verge and compass thereof. For he is onely the Mediator and Surety of this Covenant. But now God had before made a Covenant with his People, a good and holy Co∣venant it was, such as was meet for God to prescribe, and for them thankfully to accept of. Yet notwithstanding all the Priviledges and Advantages of it, it pro∣ved not so effectual, but that multitudes of them with whom God made that Co∣venant, were so far from obtaining the blessedness of Grace and Glory thereby, as that they came short, and were deprived of the temporal benefits that were included therein. Wherefore as God hereon promiseth to make a New Covenant with
them, seeing they had forfeited and lost the advantage of the former, yet if it should be of the same kind therewith, it might also in like manner prove ineffectual. So must God give, and the Church receive one Covenant after another, and yet the ends of them never be obtained. To obviate this Objection, and the Fear that thence might arise, God who pro∣videth not only for the safety of his Church, but also for their comfort and assu∣rance, declares before-hand unto them, that it shall not be of the same kind with the former, nor liable to be so frustrated, as to the ends of it, as that was. And there are some things remarkable herein. (1) That the Preface unto the Promise of this New Covenant, is a blame charged on the People finding fault with them, blaming them, charging them with sin against the Covenant that he had made with them. (2) That yet this was not the whole ground and reason of making this New Covenant. It was not so, I say, that the People were not stedfast in it, and unto the terms of it. For had it been so, there would have no more been needful to re-in∣state them in good condition, but only that God should pardon their former sins, and renew the same Covenant unto them again, and give them another venture or trial thereon. But inasmuch as he would do so no more, but will make another Covenant of another nature with them, it is evident that there was some defect in the Covenant itself, it was not able to communicate those good things which God designed to bless the Church withall. (3) These two things being the only reason that God gives, why he will make this New Covenant, namely, the sins of the People, and the insufficiency of the first Covenant to bring the Church into that blessed estate which he designed them; it is manifest that all his dealings with them for their spiritual and eternal good, are of meer soveraign grace, and such as he hath no motive unto, but in and from himself alone. There are sundry things contained in these words. 1. An Intimation that God had made a former Covenant with his People. . . There is in these Verses a repetition three times of making Covenant. And in every place in the Hebrew the same words are used  But the Apostle changeth the Verb in every place. First he expresseth it by , ver. 8. and in the last place by , which is most proper, v. 10. , are usual in other Authors; here he useth , in reference unto that Covenant which the People brake, and God disannulled. And it may be he did so, to distinguish their alterable Covenant from that which was to be unalterable, and was confirmed with greater Solemnity. God made this Co∣venant as others of his outward works, which he resolved to alter, change or abo∣lish at the appointed season. It was a work whose effects might be shaken, and it self afterwards be removed; so he speaks, Chap. 12. 27. The change of the things that are shaken, is , as of things that are made, made for a season; so made as to abide and endure for an appointed time only: such were all the things of this Covenant, and such was the Covenant itself. It had no Criteria Aeternitatis upon it, no evidences of an eternal duration. Nothing hath so but what is founded in the blood of Christ. He is  the everlasting Father, or the immediate Author and Cause of every thing that is or shall be everlasting in the Church. Let men labour and contend about other things whilest they please. They are all shaken, and must be removed. Obs. 1. The Grace and Glory of the New Covenant are much set off and manifested by the comparing of it with the Old. This is done here by God on purpose for the illustration of it. And it is greatly made use of in this Epistle, partly to prevail with us to accept of the terms thereof, and to abide faithful therein; and partly to declare how great is their sin, and how sore will be the destruction of them by whom it is neglected or despised. As these things are insisted on in other places, so are they the Subject of the Apostles discourse, Chap. 12. from ver. 15. unto the end. 2. All Gods Works are equally good and holy in themselves, but as unto the use and advantage of the Church, he is pleased to make some of them means of commu∣nicating more grace than others. Even this Covenant which the New was not to be
like unto, was in itself good and holy, which these with whom it was made, had no reason to complain of. Howbeit God had ordained that by another Covenant, he would communicate the fulness of his grace and love unto the Church. And if eve∣ry thing that God doth be improved in its season, and for its proper ends, we shall have benefit and advantage by it, though he hath yet other ways of doing us more good, whose seasons he hath reserved unto himself. But this is an Act of meer so∣veraign goodness and grace, that whereas any have neglected or abused mercies and kindnesses that they have received, instead of casting them off on that accounts, God takes this other course, of giving them such mercies as shall not be so abused. This he did by the introduction of the New Covenant in the room of the Old, and this he doth every day. So Isa. 57. 16, 17, 18. We live in days wherein men variously endeavour to obscure the grace of God, and to render it unglorious in the eyes of men, but he will for ever be admired in them that do be∣lieve. 3. Though God makes an alteration in any of his Works, Ordinances of Worship or Institutions, yet he never changeth his intention, or the purpose of his Will. In all outward Changes there is with him no variableness nor shadow of turning. Known unto him are all his works from the foundation of the world; and whatever change there seems to be in them, it is all effected in pursuance of the unchangeable purpose of his Will concerning them all. It argued not the least change or shadow of turning in God, that he appointed the Old Covenant for a season, and for some cer∣tain ends, and then took it away, by making of another that should excel it both in grace and efficacy. 2. It is declared with whom this former Covenant was made, , with their Fathers. Some Latine Copies read, cum Patribus vestris, with your Fathers. . But having spoken before of the House of Judah, and of the House of Israel in the third person, he continueth to speak still in the same. So likewise is it in the Pro∣phet  their Fathers. Their Fathers, their Progenitors, were those that this People always boasted of. For the most part, I confess, that they rose higher in their claim from them, than those here principally intended, namely, unto Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs. But in general their Fathers it was whereof they made their boast; and desired no more but only what might descend unto them in the right of these Fathers. And unto these God here sends them, and that for two ends. 1. To let them know that he had more grace and mercy to communicate unto the Church, than ever those Fathers of theirs were made partakers of. So would he take them off from boasting of them, or trusting in them. 2. To give warning by them to take heed how they behaved themselves under the tender of this new and greater mercy. For the Fathers here intended were those that God made the Covenant withall at Sinai. But it is known, and the Apostle hath declared at large in the third Chapter of this Epistle, how they brake and rejected this Covenant of God, through their unbelief and disobedience, so perishing in the Wilderness. These were those Fathers of the People with whom the first Covenant was made, and so they perished in their unbelief. A great warn∣ing this was unto those that should live when God would enter into the New Cove∣nant with his Church, lest they should perish after the same example. But yet was it not effectual towards them. For the greatest part of them rejected this New Covenant, as their Fathers did the Old, and perished in the indignation of God. Ob. The disposal of Mercies and Priviledges as unto Times, Persons, Seasons, is wholly in the hand and power of God. Some he granted unto the Fathers, some to their Posterity, and not the same to both. Our wisdom it is to improve what we enjoy, not to repine at what God hath done for others, or will do for them that shall come after us. Our present mercies are sufficient for us, if we know how to use them. He that wanteth not a believing heart, shall want nothing else. 2. Who these Fathers with whom God made this Covenant were, is farther evi∣dent from the Time, Season, and Circumstances of the making of it.
1. For the time of it, it was done , that is, , in that day. That a day is taken in the Scripture for an especial time and season, wherein any work or . duty is to be performed, is obvious unto all. The Reader may see what we have discoursed concerning such a day on the 3d Chapter. And the time here intended is often called the day of it, Ezek. 20. 6. In the day I lifted up my hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt; at that time or season. A certain, determinate, limited time, suited with means unto any work, occasion, or duty, is so called a day. And it answereth unto the description of the time of making the New Co∣venant given in the Verse foregoing; Behold the days are coming, the time or sea∣son approacheth. It is also used in a way of eminency; a day or a signal eminent season, Mal. 3. 2. Who may abide the day of his coming; the illustrious Glory and Power that shall appear, and be exerted at his coming. In the day, is, at that great eminent season so famous throughout all their Generations. 2. This day or season is described from the work of it,  that I firmly laid hold. And , is to take hold of, with . a design of helping or delivering, and sundry things are intimated, as the way and manner of the deliverance of that People at that time. 1. The woful helpless condition that they were in then in Egypt. So far were they from being able to deliver themselves out of their captivity and bondage, that like children they were not able to stand or go, unless God took them, and led them by the hand. So he speaks, Hos. 11. 3. I taught them to go, taking them by the arms. And certainly never were weakly froward children so awkward to stand and go of themselves, as that people were to comply with God in the work of their deliverance. Sometimes they refused to stand, or to make a trial of it. Sometimes they cast themselves down after they were set on their feet; and some∣times with all their strength went backwards as to what God directed them unto. He that can read the Story of their deliverance with any understanding, will easily discern what pains God was at with that people, to teach them to go when he thus took them by the hand. It is therefore no new thing, that the Church of God should be in a condition of itself able neither to stand nor go. But yet if God will take them by the hand for their help, deliverance shall ensue. 2. It expresseth the infinite condescension of God towards this people in that condition, that he would bow down to take them by the hand. In most other pla∣ces the work which he then accomplished is ascribed unto the lifting up, or stretching out of his hand, Ezek. 20. 6. See the description of it, Deut. 4. 34. Chap. 26. 8. It was towards their Enemies a work of mighty power, of the lifting up of his hand; but towards them it was a work of infinite condescension and patience. A bowing down to take them by the hand. And this was the greatest work of God. For such was the frowardness and unbelief, so multiplied were the provocations and temptations of that People, that if God had not held them fast by the hand with infinite grace, patience, forbearance and condescension, they had inevitably ruined themselves. And we know in how many instances they endeavoured frowardly and obstinately to wrest themselves out of the hand of God, and to have cast themselves into utter destruction. Wherefore this word, when I took them by the hand, for the end mentioned, compriseth all the grace, mercy and patience which God exerci∣sed towards that People, whilest he wrought out their deliverance, by lifting up his hand amongst and against their Adversaries. And indeed no heart can conceive, no tongue can express that infinite condescen∣sion and patience which God exerciseth towards every one of us, whilest he holds us by the hand to lead us unto rest with himself. Our own hearts, in some measure, know with what waywardness, and frowardness, with what wandrings from him, and withdrawing from his holy conduct, we exercise, and are ready to weary his patience continually. Yet do not mercy and grace let go that hold which they have taken on us. Oh that our Souls might live in a constant admiration of that divine grace and patience which they live upon; that the remembrance of the times and seasons wherein, if God had not strengthned his hand upon us, we had utterly destroyed our selves, might increase that admiration daily, and enliven it with thankful Obedience.
3. The power of this work intended is also included herein; not directly, but by consequence. For as was said, when God took them by the hand by his grace and patience, he lifted up the hand of his power by the mighty works which he wrought among their Adversaries. What he did in Egypt at the Red Sea, in the Wil∣derness, is all included herein. These things made the day mentioned eminent and glorious. It was a great day wherein God so magnified his name and power in the sight of all the world. 4. All these things had respect unto and issued in that actual deliverance which God then wrought for that People. And this was the greatest mercy which that People ever were, or ever could be made partakers of in that condition wherein they were under the Old Testament. As unto the outward part of it, consider what they were delivered from, and what they were led into, and it will greatly appear to be as great an outward mercy, as humane nature is capable of. But be∣sides, it was gloriously typical, and representative of their own and the whole Churches spiritual deliverance from Sin and Hell, from our bondage to Satan, and a glorious traduction into the liberty of the Sons of God. And therefore did God engrave the memorial of it on the Tables of Stone, I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage. For what was typified and signified thereby, is the principal motive unto Obedience through∣out all Generations. Nor is any moral Obedience acceptable unto God, that doth not proceed from a sense of spiritual deliverance. And these things are here called over in this promise of giving a new Covenant; partly to mind the People of the mercies which they had sinned against, and partly to mind them that no concurrence of outward mercies and priviledges, can secure our Covenant-relation unto God, without the special mercy which is administred in the New Covenant, whereof Jesus Christ is the Mediator and Surety. Thus great on all accounts was the day, and the glory of it, wherein God made the Old Covenant with the People of Israel, yet had it no glory in comparison of that which doth excell. The light of the Sun of Glory was on this day, seven fold, as the light of seven days, Isa. 30. 26. A perfection of light and glory was to accompany that day, and all the glory of Gods work and his rest therein, the light of seven days was to issue in it. From the things we have observed, it is fully evident both what was the Cove∣nant that God made, and who were the Fathers with whom it was made. The Covenant intended it is none other but that made at Sinai, in the third month after the coming of the People out of Egypt, Exod. 19. 1. which Covenant in the nature, use and end of it, we have before described. And the Fathers were those of that Generation, those who came out of Egypt, and solemnly in their own persons they and their Children entred into the Covenant, and took upon them to do all that was required therein, whereon they were sprinkled with the blood of it, Exod. 24. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Deut. 5. 27. It is true, all the Posterity of the People unto whom the Promise was now given, were bound and obliged by that Covenant, no less than those who first received it; But those only are intended in this place, who actually in their own persons enter'd into Covenant with God. Which consideration will give light unto what is affirmed, that they brake this Covenant, or continued not in it. A comparison being intended between the two Covenants, this is the first general part of the foundation of it with respect unto the Old. The second part of it is in the event of making this Covenant: and this is ex∣pressed both on the part of Man and God; or in what the People did towards God, and how he carried it towards them thereon. 1. The event on the part of the People in these words, Because they continued not in my Covenant, . which in the Original is expressed by , which we render, because  as it is sometimes a Relative, sometimes a Redditive, which, or because. If we follow our Translation, because, it seems to give a reason why God made a Covenant with them not like the former; namely, because they continued not in the former, or brake it. But this indeed was not the reason of it. The reason, I say, why God made this new Covenant not according unto the former, was not because they abode not in the first. This could be no reason of it, nor any motive unto it. It is therefore
mentioned only to illustrate the grace of God that he would make this New Co∣venant, notwithstanding the sin of those who brake the former; as also the excel∣lency of the Covenant itself, whereby those who are taken into it, shall be pre∣served from breaking of it by the grace which it doth administer. Wherefore I had rather render  here by [which] as we render  in the Prophet, which my Covenant, or for; for they abode not. And if we render it because, it respects not Gods making a New Covenant, but his rejecting them for breaking the Old. That which is charged on them is, that they continued not, they abode not in . the Covenant made with them. This God calls his Covenant; They continued not in my Covenant; because he was the Author of it, the sole contriver and pro∣poser of its terms and promises.  They brake, they rescinded, removed it, made it void. The Hebrew word expresseth the matter of fact what they did, they brake or made void the Covenant: the word used by the Apostle, the manner how they did it, namely, by not continuing faithful in it, not abiding by the terms of it. The use of the word , and , unto this purpose hath been before declared. And what is intended hereby, we must enquire. 1. God made this Covenant with the People in Sinai, in the authoritative propo∣sition of it unto them, and thereon the people solemnly accepted of it, and took it upon themselves to observe, do, and fulfill the terms and conditions of it, Exod. 19. 8. especially Chap. 24. 3, 7. The people answered with one voice, all the words which the Lord hath said, we will do. And all that the Lord hath said, we will do and be obedient. So Deut. 5. 27. Hereupon the Covenant was ratified and confirmed between God and them, and thereon the blood of the Covenant was sprinkled on them, Exod. 24. 8. This gave that Covenant its solemn Ratification. 2. Having thus accepted of Gods Covenant, and the terms of it, Moses ascend∣ing again into the Mount, the people made the Golden Calf. And this fell out so suddenly after the making of the Covenant, that the Apostle expresseth it by, they continued not in it; They made haste to break it. He expresseth the sense of the words of God hereon, Exod. 32. 7, 8. Go get thee down, for thy people which thou broughtest out of the Land of Egypt have corrupted themselves, they have turned aside greatly out of the way which I commanded them, they have made them a molten Calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto; And said these be thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. For therein they brake the Covenant wherein God had in a peculiar manner assumed the glory of that deliverance unto himself. 3. Wherefore the breaking of the Covenant, or their not continuance in it, was firstly and principally the making of the molten Calf. After this indeed that Gene∣ration added many other sins and provocations, before all things proceeded so far, that God sware in his wrath that they should never enter into his rest. This fell out on their professed unbelief, and murmuring at the return of the Spies, Numb. 14. whereof we have treated at large on Chap. 3. wherefore this expression is not to be extended unto the sins of the following Generation, neither in the Kingdom of Is∣rael, nor in that of Judah, although they variously transgressed against the Cove∣nant, disannulling it so far as it lay in them. But it is their sin who personally first entred into Covenant with God, that is reflected on. That Generation with whom God made that first Covenant, immediately brake it, continued not in it. And there∣fore let that Generation look well to themselves unto whom this New Covenant shall be first proposed. And it so fell out, that the unbelief of that first Generation who lived in the first dayes of the promulgation of the New Covenant, hath proved an occasion of the ruine of their Posterity unto this day. And we may observe. 1. That Sins have their Aggravations from Mercies received. This was that which rendred this first sin of that people of such a flagitious nature in itself, and so provoking unto God, namely, that they who contracted personally the guilt of it, had newly received the honour, mercy and priviledge of being taken into Covenant with God. Hence is that threatning of God with respect hereunto; Nevertheless in the day that I visit, I will visit their sin upon them, Exod. 32. 34. He would have a remembrance of this provoking sin in all their following visitations. Let us there∣fore take heed how we sin against received mercies, especially spiritual priviledges, such as we enjoy by the Gospel.
2. Nothing but effectual Grace will secure our Covenant Obedience one moment. Greater motives unto Obedience, or stronger outward Obligation thereunto, no Peo∣ple under Heaven could have than this People had newly received, and they had publickly and solemnly engaged themselves thereunto. But they quickly turned out of the way. And therefore in the New Covenant is this Grace promised in a pe∣culiar manner, as we shall see on the next Verse. 2. The acting of God towards them hereon is also expressed. And I regarded . them not. There seems to be a great difference in the Translation of the words of the Prophet, and these of the Apostle taken from them. In the former place we read, Although I was an Husband unto them: In this I regarded them not. And hereby the utmost difference that can be objected against the rendring of these words by the Apostle, is represented. But there was no need of rendering the words in the Prophet,  Although I was an Husband to them, as we shall see. Howbeit many learned men have exceedingly perplexed themselves and others in attempting a reconciliation between these passages or expressions, be∣cause they seem to be of a direct contrary sense and importance. I shall therefore premise some things which abate and take off from the weight of this difficulty, and then give the true Solution of it. And unto the first end we may ob∣serve, 1. That nothing of the main Controversie, nothing of the substance of the truth, which the Apostle proves and confirms by this Testimony, doth any way depend on the precise signification of these words. They are but occasional as to the principal design of the whole promise, and therefore the sense of it doth not depend on their signification. And in such cases liberty in the variety of Expositi∣ons may be safely used. 2. Take the two different senses which the words as commonly Translated do present, and there is nothing of contradiction, or indeed the least disagreement be∣tween them. For the words, as we have Translated that in the Prophet, express an aggravation of the Sin of the People. They broke my Covenant, although I was (that is therein) an Husband unto them, exercising singular kindness and care to∣wards them. And as they are rendered by the Apostle, they express the effect of that sin so aggravated. He regarded them not; that is, with the same tenderness as formerly; for he denied to go with them as before, and exercised severity to∣wards them in the Wilderness until they were consumed. Each way the design is, to shew that the Covenant was broken by them, and that they were dealt withall accordingly. But Expositors do find or make great difficulties herein. It is generally sup∣posed that the Apostle followed the Translation of the LXX, in the present Copy whereof the words are so expressed; but how they came to render  by , they are not agreed. Some say the Original Copies might differ in some letters from these we now enjoy. Therefore it is thought they might read as some think  neglexi, or  fastidivi, I neglected or loathed them. And those who speak most modestly, suppose that the Copy which the LXX made use of, had one of these words instead of  which yet is the truer Reading. And because this did not belong unto the substance of the Argument which he had in hand, the Apostle would not depart from that Translation which was then in use amongst the Hellenistical Jews. But the best of these Conjuectures are uncertain, and some of them by no means to be admitted. Uncertain it is that the Apostle made any of his quotations out of the Translation of the LXX; yea, the contrary is certain enough, and easie to be demonstrated. Neither did he write this Epistle unto the Hellenistical Jews, or those who lived in or belonged unto their dispersions, wherein they made use of the Greek Tongue; but unto the Nations of Hierusalem and Judaea principally and in the first place, who made no use of that Translation. He expressed the mind of the Scripture as he was directed by the Holy Ghost in words of his own. And the coincidence of them with those in the present Copies of the LXX, hath been ac∣counted for in our Exercitations. Dangerous it is as well as untrue, to allow of alterations in the Original Text, and then upon our Conjectures to supply other words into it, than what are con∣tained in it. This is not to explain, but to corrupt the Scripture. Wherefore
one learned man (Pocock in Miscellan.) hath endeavoured to prove, that  by all Rules of Interpretation in this place must signifie to despise and ne∣glect, and ought to have been so Translated. And this he confirms from the use of it in the Arabick Language. The Reader may find it in the place referred unto, with great satisfaction. My apprehensions are grounded on what I have before observed and proved. The Apostle neither in this, nor in any other place, doth bind up himself precifely unto the Translation of the words, but infallibly gives us the sense and meaning, and so he hath done in this place. For whereas  signifies an Husband, or to be an Husband or a Lord,  being added unto it in construction, as it is here,  it is as much as jure usus sum Maritali, I exercised the right, power and authority of an Husband towards them; I dealt with them as a Husband with a Wife that breaketh Covenant; that is, saith the Apostle, I regarded them not, with the love, tenderness and affection of an Husband. So he dealt indeed with that generation which so suddenly brake Covenant with him. He provided no more for them as unto the enjoyment of the inheritance, he took them not home unto him in his habitation, his resting place in the Land of Promise, but he suffered them all to wander, and bear their Whoredoms in the Wilderness, until they were consu∣med. So did God exercise the Right and Power, and Authority of an Husband to∣wards a Wife that had broken Covenant. And herein, as in many other things in that dispensation, did God give a representation of the nature of the Covenant of Works, and the issue of it. 4 There is a confirmation of the truth of these things in that expression, Saith the Lord. This Assertion is not to be extended unto the whole matter, or the pro∣mise . of the introduction of the New Covenant. For that is secured with the same expression, v. 8. , saith the Lord. But it hath a peculiar  in it being added in the close of the words  and respects only the sin of the People, and Gods dealing with them thereon. And this manifests the meaning of the preceding words to be Gods severity towards. I used the autho∣rity of a Husband, I regarded them not as a Wife any more, saith the Lord. Now God thus uttereth his severity towards them, that they might consider how he will deal with all those who despise, break or neglect his Covenant. So, saith he, I dealt with them, and so shall I deal with others who offend in an alike manner. This was the issue of things with them, with whom the first Covenant was made. They received it, entred solemnly into the bonds of it, took upon them∣selves expresly the performance of its terms and conditions, were sprinkled with the blood of it, but they continued not in it, and were dealt withall accordingly. God used the right and authority of an Husband with whom a Wise breaketh Covenant; he neglected them, shut them out of his house, he deprived them of their Dowry or Inheritance, and slew them in the Wilderness. On this Declaration, God promiseth to make another Covenant with them, where∣in all these evils should be prevented. This is the Covenant which the Apostle de∣signs to prove better and more excellent than the former. And this he doth prin∣cipally from the Mediator and Surety of it, compared with the Aaronical Priests, whose office and service belonged wholly unto the administration of that first Co∣venant. And he confirms it also from the nature of this Covenant itself, especially with respect unto its efficacy and duration. And hereunto this Testimony is ex∣press, evidencing how this Covenant is everlasting, by the grace administred in it, preventive of that evil success which the former had by the sin of the people. Hence, he says of it, , not according unto it, a Covenant agreeing with the former neither in promises, efficacy, nor duration. For what is principally pro∣mised here, namely the giving of a new heart, Moses expresly affirms, that it was not done in the administration of the first Covenant. It is neither a Renovation of that Covenant, nor a Reformation of it, but utterly of another nature, by whose introduction and establishment that other was to be abolished, abrogated and taken away, with all the Divine Worship and Service which was peculiar thereunto. And this was that which the Apostle principally designed to prove and convince the Hebrews of. And from the whole we may observe sundry things.
Obs. 1. No Covenant between God and man ever was, or ever could be stable and effectual as unto the ends of it, that was not made and confirmed in Christ. God first made a Covenant with us in Adam. There was nothing therein but the meer defectibility of our natures as we were creatures, that could render it ineffectual. And from thence did it proceed. In him we all sinned, by breach of Covenant. The Son of God had not then interposed himself, nor undertaken on our behalf. The Apostle tells us, that in him all things consist, without him they have no con∣sistency, no stability, no duration. So was this other Covenant immediately bro∣ken. It was not confirmed by the blood of Christ. And those who suppose that the efficacy and stability of the present Covenant doth depend solely on our own will and diligence, had need not only to assert our nature free from that depravation which it was under when this Covenant was broken, but also from that defectibili∣ty that was in it before we fell in Adam. And such as neglecting the interposition of Christ, do betake themselves unto imaginations of this kind, surely know little of themselves, and less of God. 2. No external administration of a Covenant of Gods own making, no obligation of mercy on the minds of men, can enable them unto stedfastness in Covenant obedi∣ence, without an effectual influence of grace from and by Jesus Christ. For we shall see in the next Verses, that this is the onely provision which is made in the wisdom of God to render us stedfast in obedience, and his Covenant effectual unto us. 3. God in making a Covenant with any, in proposing the terms of it, retains his right and authority to deal with persons according to their deportment in and towards that Covenant: They brake my Covenant, and I regarded them not. 4. Gods casting men out of his especial care upon the breach of his Covenant, is the highest judgment that in this world can fall on any persons. And we are concerned in all these things. For although the Covenant of Grace be stable and effectual unto all who are really partakers of it, yet as unto its exter∣nal administration, and our entring into it by a visible profession, it may be broken unto the temporal and eternal ruine of Persons and whole Churches. Take heed of the golden Calf.
VER. X, XI, XII. . THE design of the Apostle, or what is the general Argument which he is in pursuit of, must still be born in mind throughout the consideration of the Testimonies he produceth in the confirmation of it. And this is to prove, that the Lord Christ is the Mediator and Surety of a better Covenant than that wherein the Service of God was managed by the High Priests according unto the Law. For hence it follows, that his Priesthood is greater and far more excellent than theirs. To this end he doth not only prove that God promised to make such a Covenant, but also declares the nature and properties of it in the words of the Prophet. And so by comparing it with the former Covenant, he manifests its excellency above it. In particular in this Testimony the imperfection of that Covenant is demonstrated from its issue. For it did not effectually continue peace and mutual love between God and the people; but being broken by them, they were thereon rejected of God. This rendered all the other benefits and advantages of it useless. Wherefore the Apostle insists from the Prophet on these properties of this other Covenant, which infallibly prevent the like issue, securing the peoples obedience for ever, and so the love and relation of God unto them as their God. Wherefore these three Verses give us a description of that Covenant whereof the Lord Christ is the Mediator and Surety not absolutely and entirely, but as unto those properties and effects of it wherein it differs from the former, so as infallibly to secure the Covenant relation between God and the people. That Covenant was bro∣ken, but this shall never be so, because provision is made in the Covenant itself against any such event. And we may consider in the words, 1. The Particle of Introduction , answering the Hebrew . 2. The Subject spoken of, which is , with the way of making it, , which I will make. 3. The Author of it, The Lord Jehovah; I will, saith the Lord. 4. Those with whom it was to be made, The House of Israel. 5. The time of making it, After those days. 6. The Properties, Priviledges, and Benefits of this Covenant, which are of two sorts. First, Of Sanctifying, Inherent Grace; described by a double Conse∣quent. (1) Of Gods relation unto them, and theirs to him; I will be their God, and they shall be my people, ver. 10. (2) Of their advantage thereby, without the use of such other aids as former∣ly they stood in need of, ver. 11. 2dly, Of Relative Grace, in the pardon of their sins, ver. 12. And sundry things of great weight will fall into consideration under these several Heads.
VER. X. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel after those days, saith the Lord, I will give my Laws into their mind, and write them upon their hearts: and I will be unto them a God, and they shall be to me a people. THE Introduction of the declaration of the New Covenant is by the Particle . . The Hebrew  which is rendered by it, is variously used, and is sometimes redundant. In the Prophet some translate it by an Exceptive, Sed; some by an Illative, Quoniam. And in this place  is rendered by some Quamobrem, Wherefore; and others Nam, or Enim, as we do it by For. And it doth intimate a reason of what was spoken before, namely, that the Covenant which God would now make, should not be according unto that, like unto it, which was before made and broken. 2. The thing promised is a Covenant, in the Prophet , here : . and the way of making it, in the Prophet  which is the usual word whereby the making of a Covenant is expressed. For signifying to cut, to strike, to divide, respect is had in it unto the Sacrifices wherewith Covenants were con∣firmed. Thence also were faedus percutere, and faedus ferire. See Gen. 15. 9, 10, 18.  or  that is cum, which is joined in construction with it, Gen. 15. 18. Deut. 5. 2. The Apostle renders it by , and that with a dative case without a preposition, , I will make or confirm unto. He had used before  to the same purpose. We render the words  &  in this place by a Covenant, though af∣terward the same word is translated by a Testament. A Covenant properly is a Compact or Agreement on certain terms mutually stipulated by two or more Par∣ties. As Promises are the foundation and rise of it, as it is between God and man; so it compriseth also Precepts, or Laws of Obedience which are prescribed unto man on his part to be observed. But in the description of the Covenant here annexed, there is no mention of any condition on the part of man, of any terms of Obedi∣ence prescribed unto him, but the whole consists in free gratuitous Promises, as we shall see in the explication of it. Some here conclude that it is onely one part of the Covenant that is here described. Others observe from hence, that the whole Cove∣nant of Grace as a Covenant is absolute, without any conditions on our part; which sense Estius on this place contends for. But these things must be farther enquired into. 1. The word Berith used by the Prophet, doth not only signifie a Covenant or Compact properly so called; but a free, gratuitous Promise also. Yea, sometimes it is used for such a free purpose of God with respect unto other things, which in their own nature are uncapable of being obliged by any moral condition. Such is Gods Covenant with day and night, Jer. 33. 20, 25. And so he says, that he made his Covenant not to destroy the World by water any more with every living creature, Gen. 9. 10, 11. Nothing therefore can be argued for the necessity of Conditions to belong unto this Covenant from the name or term whereby it is ex∣pressed in the Prophet. A Covenant properly is , but there is no word in the whole Hebrew Language of that precise signification. The making of this Covenant is declared by  But yet neither doth this require a mutual stipulation upon terms and conditions prescribed unto an entrance into Covenant. For it refers unto the Sacrifices wherewith Covenants were con∣firmed. And it is applied unto a meer gratuitous Promise, Gen. 15. 18. In that day did God make a Covenant with Abraham, saying, Unto thy Seed will I give this Land.
As unto the word , it signifies a Covenant improperly; properly it is a testamentary disposition. And this may be without any conditions on the part of them unto whom any thing is bequeathed. 2. The whole of the Covenant intended is expressed in the ensuing description of it. For if it were otherwise, it could not be proved from thence, that this Cove∣nant was more excellent than the former; especially as to security that the Covenant Relation between God and the People should not be broken or disannulled. For this is the principal thing which the Apostle designs to prove in this place; and the want of an observation thereof, hath led many out of the way in their exposition of it. If therefore this be not an entire description of the Covenant, there might yet be something reserved essentially belonging thereunto which might frustrate this end. For some such conditions might yet be required in it as we are not able to observe, or could have no security that we should abide in the observation of them. And thereon this Covenant might be frustrated of its end, as well as the former; which is directly contrary unto Gods declaration of his design in it. 3. It is evident that there can be no condition previously required, unto our entering into, or participation of the benefits of this Covenant antecedent unto the making of it with us. For none think there are any such with respect unto its original constitution; nor can there be so in respect of its making with us, or our entering into it. For 1. This would render this Covenant inferior in a way of Grace unto that which God made with the people at Horeb. For he declares that there was not any thing in them that moved him either to make that Covenant, or to take them into it with himself. Everywhere he asserts this to be an Act of his meer Grace and Favor. Yea, he frequently declares, That he took them into Covenant, not only without respect unto any thing of good in them, but although they were evil and stub∣born. See Deut. 7. 7, 8. Chap. 9. 4, 5. 2. It is contrary unto the Nature, Ends and express Properties of this Covenant. For there is nothing that can be thought, or supposed to be such a condition, but it is comprehended in the Promise of the Covenant itself. For all that God requi∣reth in us, is proposed as that which himself will effect by vertue of this Cove∣nant. 4. It is certain, That in the outward dispensation of the Covenant, wherein the Grace, Mercy and Terms of it are proposed unto us, many things are required of us in order unto a participation of the benefits of it. For God hath ordained, that all the Mercy and Grace that is prepared in it, shall be communicated unto us ordi∣narily in the use of outward means, wherewith a compliance is required of us in a way of Duty. To this end hath he appointed all the Ordinances of the Gos∣pel, the Word and Sacraments, with all those Duties publick and private, which are needful to render them effectual unto us. For he will take us ordinarily into this Covenant in and by the rational faculties of our natures, that he may be glorified in them and by them. Wherefore these things are required of us, in order unto the participation of the benefits of this Covenant. And if therefore any one will call our attendance unto such Duties the condition of the Covenant, it is not to be contended about, though properly it is not so. For (1) God doth work the Grace of the Covenant, and communicate the Mercy of it, antecedently unto all ability for the performance of any such duty; as it is with elect Infants. (2) Amongst those who are equally diligent in the performance of the duties intended, he makes a discrimination, preferring one before another. Many are cal∣led, but few are chosen; and what hath any one that he hath not received, (3) He actually takes some into the Grace of the Covenant, whilest they are engaged in an opposition unto the outward dispensation of it. An example of this Grace he gave in Paul. 5. It is evident, That the first grace of the Covenant, or Gods putting his Law in our hearts, can depend on no condition on our part. For whatever is antecedent thereunto, being only a work or act of corrupted nature, can be no condition whereon the dispensation of spiritual Grace is superadded. And this is the great ground of them, who absolutely deny the Covenant of Grace to be conditional; namely, that the first grace is absolutely promised, whereon and its exercise the whole of it doth depend.
6. Unto a full and compleat interest in all the Promises of the Covenant, Faith on our part, from which Evangelical Repentance is inseparable, is required. But whereas these also are wrought in us by vertue of that Promise and Grace of the Covenant which are absolute, it is a meer strife about words to contend whether they may be called conditions or no. Let it be granted on the one hand, that we cannot have an actual participation of the relative grace of this Covenant in Adoration and Justification, without Faith or Believing; and on the other, that this Faith is wrought in us, given unto us, bestowed upon us, by that Grace of the Covenant which depends on no condition in us as unto its discriminating administration, And I shall not concern my self what men will call it. 7. Though there are no conditions properly so called of the whole grace of the Covenant, yet there are conditions in the Covenant, taking that term in a large sense for that which by the order of divine constitution precedeth some other things, and hath an influence into its existence. For God requireth many things of them whom he actually takes into Covenant, and makes Partakers of the Pro∣mises and Benefits of it. Of this nature is that whole Obedience which is prescribed unto us in the Gospel, in our walking before God in uprightness; and there being an order in the things that belong hereunto, some acts, duties and parts of our gra∣cious Obedience, being appointed to be means of the farther additional supplies of the grace and mercies of the Covenant, they may be called conditions required of us in the Covenant, as well as duties prescribed unto us. 8. The Benefits of the Covenant are of two sorts: (1) The Grace and Mercy which it doth collate. (2) The future Reward of glory which it doth promise. Those of the former sort are all of them means appointed of God, which we are to use and improve unto the obtaining of the latter; and so may be called conditi∣ons required on our part. They are only collated on us, but conditions as used and improved by us. 9. Although ; the word here used, may signifie, and be rightly rendred a Covenant, in the same manner as  doth, yet that which is intended is pro∣perly a Testament, or a Testamentary disposition of good things. It is the Will of God in and by Jesus Christ, his death and bloodshedding, to give freely unto us the whole inheritance of grace and glory. And under this notion the Covenant hath no condition, nor are any such either expressed or intimated in this place. Obs. 1. The Covenant of Grace as reduced into a form of a Testament confirmed by the blood of Christ, doth not depend on any condition or qualification in our persons, but in a free grant and donation of God, and so are all the good things prepared in it. 2. The Precepts of the Old Covenant are turned all of them into Promises under the New. Their preceptive commanding power is not taken away, but grace is promised for the performance of them. So the Apostle having declared that the People brake the Old Covenant, adds that in the New, grace shall be supplied for all the Duties of Obedience that are required of us. 3. All things in the New Covenant being proposed unto us by the way of promise, it is Faith alone whereby we may attain a participation of them. For Faith onely is the grace we ought to exercise, the duty we ought to perform, to render the pro∣mises of God effectual to us, Heb. 3. 1. 4. Sense of the loss of an interest in and participation of the benefits of the Old Covenant, is the best preparation for receiving the mercies of the New. Thirdly, The Author of this Covenant is God himself. I will make it, saith the . Lord. This is the third time that this expression, saith the Lord, is repeated in this Testimony. The work expressed in both the parts of it, the disannulling of the Old Covenant, and the establishment of the New, is such as calls for this solemn inter∣position of the authority, veracity and grace of God. I will do it, saith the Lord. And the mention hereof is thus frequently inculcated, to beget a reverence in us of the work which he so emphatically assumes unto himself. And it teacheth us, that God himself, in and by his own soveraign Wisdom, Grace, Goodness, Allsufficiency and Power, is to be considered as the onely Cause and Author of the New Covenant.
Or the abolishing of the Old Covenant, with the introduction and establishment of the New, is an act of the meer soveraign wisdom, grace and authority of God. It is his gracious disposal of us, and of his own grace. That whereof we had no contrivance, nor indeed the least desire. Fourthly, It is declared who this New Covenant is made withall. With the . House of Israel, ver. 8. They are called distinctly▪ the House of Israel, and the House of Judah. The distribution of the Posterity of Abraham into Israel and Judah ensued upon the division that fell among the people in the days of Rehoboam. Be∣fore they were called Israel only. And as before they were mentioned distinctly, to testifie that none of the Seed of Abraham should be absolutely excluded from the grace of the Covenant, however they were divided among themselves; so here they are all jointly expressed by their ancient name of Israel, to manifest that all distinctions on the account of precedent Priviledges should be now taken away, that all Israel might be saved. But we have shewed before, that the whole Is∣rael of God, or the Church of the Elect, are principally intended hereby. Fifthly, The Time of the accomplishment of this Promise, or making of this Covenant is expressed, After those days. There are various conjectures about the . sense of these words, or the determination of the time limited in them. Some sup∣pose respect is had unto the time of giving the Law on Mount Sinai. Then was the Old Covenant made with the Fathers. But after those days another should be made. But whereas that time, those days were so long past before this Prophesie was given out by Jeremy, namely, about 800 years, it was impossible but that the New Covenant which was not yet given, must be after those days. Wherefore it was to no purpose so to express it that it should be after those days, seeing it was impossible that otherwise it should be. Some think that respect is had unto the Captivity of Babylon, and the return of the People from thence. For God then shewed them great kindness, to win them unto Obedience. But neither can this time be intended; for God then made no New Covenant with the People, but strictly obliged them unto the terms of the Old, Mal. 4. 3, 4, 5. But when this New Covenant was to be made, the old was to be abolished and removed, as the Apostle expresly affirmeth, ver. 13. The promise is not of new obligation, or new assistance unto the observance of the Old Cove∣nant, but of making a New one quite of another nature, which then was not done. Some judge that these words, After those days, refer unto what went immediately before, And I regarded them not: which words include the total rejection of the Jews. After those days wherein both the House of Judah and Israel shall be rejected, I will make a New Covenant with the whole Israel of God. But neither will this hold the Tryal. For (1) Supposing that expression, And I regarded them not, to intend the re∣jection of the Jews, yet it is manifest, that their excision and cutting off absolute∣ly, was not in nor for their non-continuance in the Old Covenant, or not being faith∣ful therein, but for the rejection of the New when proposed unto them. Then they fell by unbelief, as the Apostle fully manifests, Chap. 3. of this Epistle, and Rom. 11. Wherefore the making of the New Covenant cannot be said to be after their re∣jection, seeing they were rejected for their-refusal and contempt of it. (2) By this interpretation, the whole House of Israel, or all the natural Posteri∣ty of Abraham would be utterly excluded from any interest in this Promise. But this cannot be allowed. For it was not so de facto, a Remnant being taken into Covenant; which though but a remnant in comparison of the whole, yet in themselves so great a multitude, as that in them the Promises made unto the Fathers were confirmed. Nor on this Supposition would this Prediction of a New Cove∣nant have been any promise unto them, or any of them, but rather a severe denun∣ciation of judgment. But it is said expresly, that God would make this Covenant with them, as he did the former with their Fathers, which is a promise of grace and mercy. Wherefore after those days, is as much as in those days; an indeterminate season for a certain. So, in that day, is frequently used in the Prophets, Isa. 24. 21, 22. Zech. 12. 11. A time therefore certainly future, but not determined, is all that is intended in this expression, After those days. And herewith most Expositors are satis∣fied. Yet is there, as I judge, more in the words.
Those days seem to me to comprize the whole time alotted unto the oeconomy of the Old Testament, or dispensation of the Old Covenant. Such a time there was appointed unto it in the counsel of God; during this season, things fell out as de∣scribed, ver. 9. The certain period fixed unto these days, is called by our Apostle the time of Reformation, Chap. 9. 10. After those days; that is in or at their expi∣ration, when they were coming unto their end, whereby the first Covenant waxed old and decayed, God would make this Covenant with them. And although much was done towards it before those days came absolutely unto an end, and did actual∣ly expire, yet is the making of it said to be after those days, because being made in the wane and declension of them, it did by its making, put a full and final end unto them. This in general was the time here designed for the making and establishing of the New Covenant. But we must yet farther enquire into the precise time of the accomplishment of this Promise. And I say, the whole of it cannot be limited unto any one season absolutely, as though all that was intended in Gods making of this Covenant, did consist in any one individual act. The making of the Old Covenant with the Fathers, is said to be in the day wherein God took them by the hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt. During the season intended, there were many things that were preparatory to the making of that Covenant, or to the solemn establishment of it. So was it also in the making of the New Covenant. It was gradually made and established, and that by sundry Acts preparatory for it, or confirmatory of it. And there are six degrees observable in it. 1. The first peculiar entrance into it was made by the Ministry of John the Baptist. Him had God raised to send under the name, in the spirit and power of Elijah, to prepare the way of the Lord, Mal. 4. Hence is his Ministry called the beginning of the Gospel, Mark 1. 1, 2. Until his coming, the People were bound absolutely and universally unto the Covenant in Horeb, without alteration or ad∣dition in any Ordinance of Worship. But his Ministry was designed to prepare them, and to cause them to look out after the accomplishment of this promise of making the New Covenant, Mal. 4. 4, 5, 6. And those by whom his Ministry was despised, did reject the counsel of God against themselves, that is unto their ruine; and made themselves liable to that utter excision, with the Threatnings whereof the Writings of the Old Testament are closed, Mal. 4. 6. He therefore called the People off from resting in, or trusting unto the Priviledges of the first Covenant, Mat. 3. 8, 9, 10. preached unto them a Doctrine of Repentance, and in∣stituted a new Ordinance of Worship, whereby they might be initiated into a new state or condition, a new Relation unto God. And in his whole Ministry he point∣ed at, directed and gave Testimony unto him who was then to come to establish this New Covenant. This was the beginning of the accomplishment of this Pro∣mise. 2. The coming in the Flesh and personal Ministry of our Lord Jesus Christ himself, was an eminent advance and degree therein. The dispensation of the Old Cove∣nant did yet continue. For he himself as made of a Woman, was made under the Law, yielding Obedience unto it, observing all its Precepts and Institutions. But his coming in the Flesh laid an Axe unto the Root of that whole dispensation. For therein the main end that God designed thereby towards that People was accom∣plished. The interposition of the Law was now to be taken away, and the Pro∣mise to become all unto the Church. Hence upon his Nativity this Covenant was proclaimed from Heaven, as that which was immediately to take place, Luk. 2. 13, 14. But it was more fully and evidently carried on in and by his personal Ministry. The whole doctrine thereof was preparatory unto the immediate introduction of this Covenant. But especially there was therein and thereby, by the truth which he taught, by the manner of his teaching, by the miracles which he wrought, in conjunction with an open accomplishment of the Prophesies concerning him, evi∣dence given that he was the Messiah, the Mediator of the New Covenant. Herein was a declaration made of the Person in and by whom it was to be established; and therefore he told them, That unless they believed it was he who was so promised, they should dye in iheir sins. 3. The way for the introduction of this Covenant being thus prepared, it was solemnly enacted and confirmed in and by his death. For herein he offered that
Sacrifice to God whereby it was established. And hereby the Promise properly be∣came , a Testament, as our Apostle proves at large, Chap. 9. 14, 15, 16. And he declares in the same place, that it answered those Sacrifices whose blood was sprinkled on the People, and the Book of the Law, in the confirmation of the first Co∣venant, which things must be treated of afterwards. This was the Center where∣in all the Promises of Grace did meet, and from whence they derived their effica∣cy. From henceforward the Old Covenant, and all its administrations, having re∣ceived their full accomplishment, did abide only in the patience of God, to be ta∣ken down and removed out of the way in his own time and manner. For really and in themselves, their force and authority did then cease, and was taken away. See Eph. 2. 14, 15, 16. Col. 2. 14, 15. But our obligation unto Obedience, and the observance of Commands, though formally and ultimately it be resolved into the Will of God, yet immediately it respects the Revelation of it, by which we are directly obliged. Wherefore although the causes of the removal of the Old Cove∣nant had already been applied thereunto; yet the Law and its Institutions were still continued not only lawful but useful unto the Worshippers, until the Will of God concerning their abrogation was fully declared. 4. This New Covenant had the complement of its making and establishment in the Resurrection of Christ. For in order hereunto the Old was to have its perfect end. God did not make the first Covenant, and therein revive, represent and con∣firm the Covenant of Works with the Promise annexed unto it, meerly that it should continue for such a season, and then die of its self, and be arbitrarily remo∣ved. But that whole dispensation had an end which was to be accomplished, and without which it was not consistent with the wisdom or righteousness of God to remove it, or take it away. Yea nothing of it could be removed, until all was fulfilled. It was easier to remove Heaven and Earth, than to remove the Law as unto its Right and Title to rule the Souls and Consciences of men before all was fulfilled. And this end had two parts. (1) The perfect fulfilling of the Righteousness which it required. This was done in the Obedience of Christ, the Surety of the New Covenant, in the stead of them with whom the Covenant was made. (2) That the Curse of it should be undergone. Until this was done, the Law could not quit its claim unto power over sinners. And as this Curse was under∣gone in the Suffering, so it was absolutely discharged in the Resurrection of Christ. For the pains of death being loosed, and he delivered from the state of the dead, the sanction of the Law was declared to be void, and its curse answered. Hereby did the Old Covenant so expire, as that the Worship which belonged unto it, was only for a while continued in the patience and forbearance of God towards that People. 5. The first solemn promulgation of this New Covenant, so made, ratified and established, was on the day of Pentecost seven weeks after the Resurrection of Christ. And it answered the promulgation of the Law on Mount Sinai, the same space of time after the delivery of the people out of Egypt. From this day for∣ward the Ordinances of Worship, and all the Institutions of the New Covenant became obligatory unto all Believers. Then was the whole Church absolved from any duty with respect unto the Old Covenant, and the Worship of it, though it were not manifest as yet in their Consciences. 6. The Question being stated about the continuance of the obligatory force of the Old Covenant, the contrary was solemnly promulged by the Apostles under the infallible conduct of the Holy Ghost, Acts 15. These were the Articles, or the degrees of the time intended in that expression, After those days, all of them answering the several degrees whereby the Old vani∣shed and disappeared. The circumstances of the making of this Covenant being thus cleared, the nature of it in its Promises is next proposed unto us. And in the exposition of the words, we must do these two things. (1) Inquire into the general nature of these Pro∣mises. (2) Particularly and distinctly explain them. 1. The general nature both of the Covenant, and of the Promises, whereby it is here expressed, must briefly be enquired into, because there are various apprehen∣sions about them. For some suppose that there is an especial efficacy towards the
thing mentioned, intended in these Promises and no more; some judge that the things themselves, the event and end are so promised. In the first way Schlictingius expresseth himself on this place, Non ut olim cu∣rabo leges meas in lapideis tantum tabulis inscribi, sed tale faedus cum illis feriam ut meae leges ipsis eorum mentibus & cordibus insculpantur—Apparet haec verba intra vim & efficaciam accipienda esse, non vero ad ipsum inscriptionis effectum necessariò por∣rigenda, qui semper in libera hominis potestate positus est; quod ipsum docent & sequen∣tia Dei verba, v. 12. Quibus ipse Deus causam seu modum ac rationem bujus rei aperit, quae ingenti illius gratia ac misericordia populo exhibenda continetur. Hac fu∣turum dicit ut populus tanto ardore sibi serviat, suásque leges observet.—Sensus ergo est; tale percutiam faedus quod maximas & sufficientissimas vires habebit populum meum in officio continendi. And another, I will instead of these external carnal Ordinances and Observati∣ons, give them spiritual Commands for the regulating of their Affections, Precepts most agreeable unto all men, (made) by the exceeding greatness of that grace and mercy: In this and many other particulars, I shall incline their affections willingly to receive my Law. The sense of both is, that all which is here promised, consisteth in the nature of the means, and their efficacy from thence, to incline, dispose, and engage men unto the things here spoken of; but not to effect them certainly and infallibly in them to whom the Promise is given. And it is supposed that the efficacy granted, ariseth from the nature of the Precepts of the Gospel which are rational, and suited unto the principles of our intellectual natures. For these Precepts enlivened by the Pro∣mises made unto the observance of them, with the other mercies wherewith they are accompanied in Gods dealing with us, are meet to prevail on our minds and wills unto Obedience; but yet when all is done, the whole issue depends on our own wills, and their determination of themselves one way or other. But these things are not only liable unto many just exceptions, but do indeed overthrow the whole nature of the New Covenant, and the Text is not expounded, but corrupted by them; wherefore they must be removed out of the way And 1. The Exposition given, can no way be accommodated unto the words, so as to grant a Truth in their plain literal sense. For whereas God says, he will put his Laws in their mind, and write them in their heart, and they shall all know him, which declares what he will effectually do; the sense of their Exposition is, that indeed he will not do so, only he will do that which shall move them, and persuade them to do that themselves which he hath promised to do himself, and that whether they ever do so or no. But if any one concerning whom God says that he will write his Law in his heart, have it not so written, be it on what account it will, sup∣pose it be that the man will not have it so written, how can the Promise be true, that God will write his Law in his heart? It is a sorry Apology to say, that God in making that Promise, did not foresee the obstruction that would arise, or could not remove it when it did so. 2. It is the event, or the effect itself that is directly promised, and not any such efficacy of means as might be frustrate. For the weakness and imperfection of the first Covenant was evidenced hereby, that those with whom it was made continued not in it. Hereon God neglected them, and the Covenant became unprofitable, or at least unsuccessful as unto the general end of continuing the Relation between God and them, of his being their God, and they being his people. To redress this evil, and prevent the like for the future, that is, effectually to provide that God and his people may always abide in that blessed Covenant Relation, he promiseth the things themselves, whereby it might be secured. That which the first Covenant could not effect, that God promised to work in and by the New. 3. It is nowhere said nor intimated in the Scripture, that the efficacy of the New Covenant, and the accomplishment of the promises of it, should depend on and arise from the suitableness of its Precepts unto our Reason, or natural principles, but
it is universally and constantly ascribed unto the efficacy of the spirit and grace of God, not only enabling us unto Obedience, but enduing of us with a spiritual, su∣pernatural, vital principle, from which it may proceed. 4. It is true, that our own wills, or the free actings of them, are required in our Faith and Obedience; whence it is promised, that we shall be willing in the day of his power. But that our wills are left absolutely herein unto their own liberty and power, without being inclined and determined by that grace of God, is that Pela∣gianism which hath long attempted the Church, but which shall never absolutely prevail. 5. The putting the Laws of God in our minds, and the writing of them in our hearts, that we may know him, and fear him always, is promised in the same way and manner, as is the forgiveness of sin, ver. 11. And it is hard to affix such a sense unto that Promise, as that God will use such and such means, that our sins may be pardoned, which yet may all of them fail. 6. As this Exposition is no way suited unto the words of the Text, nor of the Context, or scope of the place, so indeed it overthrows the nature of the New Co∣venant, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ which comes thereby. For 1. If the effect itself, or the thing mentioned are not promised, but only the use of means left unto the liberty of mens wills whether they will comply with them or no, then the very Being of the Covenant whether it shall ever have any existence or no, depends absolutely on the wills of men, and so may not be. For it is not the Proposal of the terms of the Covenant, and the means whereby we may enter into it, that is called the making of this Covenant with us, but our real parti∣cipation of the grace and mercy promised in it. This alone gives a real existence unto the Covenant itself, without which it is not a Covenant: Nor without it, is it properly made with any. 2. The Lord Christ would be made hereby the Mediator of an uncertain Cove∣nant. For if it depend absolutely on the wills of men, whether they will accept of the terms of it, and comply with it or no, it is uncertain what will be the event, and whether ever any one will do so or no. For the will being not determined by Grace, what its actings will be, is altogether uncer∣tain. 3. The Covenant can hereon in no sense be a Testament, which our Apostle af∣terwards proves that it is, and that irrevocably ratified by the death of the Testator. For there can on this supposition be no certain Heir unto whom Christ did bequeath his Goods, and the inheritance of Mercy, Grace and Glory. This would make this Testament inferior unto that of a wise man, who determines in particular unto whom his Goods shall come. 4. It takes away that difference between this and the former Covenant, which it is the main scope of the Apostle to prove; at least leave the difference, to consist only in the gradual efficacy of outward means, which is most remote from his purpose. For there were by the Old Covenant means supplied to induce the Peo∣ple unto constant Obedience, and those in their kind powerful. This is pleaded by Moses, in the whole Book almost of Deuteronomy. For the scope of all his exhor∣tation unto Obedience, is to shew that God had so instructed them in the knowledge of his Will by giving of the Law, and had accompanied his teachings with so ma∣ny signal mercies, such effects of his mighty power, goodness and grace, that the Co∣venant, accompanied with such Promises and Threatnings, that therein life and death, temporal and eternal were set before them, all which made their Obedience so rea∣sonable and necessary, that nothing but Profligacy in wickedness could turn them from it. To this purpose are discourses multiplied in that Book. And yet notwith∣standing all this, it is added, That God had not circumcised their hearts to fear him and obey him always, as it is here promised. The communication of grace effectual, producing infallibly the good things proposed and promised in the minds and hearts of men, belonged not unto that Covenant. If therefore there be no more in the making of the New Covenant, but only the adding of more forcible outward means and motives, more suitable unto our Reasons, and meet to work on our Af∣fections, it differs only in some unassignable degrees from the former. But this is
directly contrary unto the promise in the Prophet, That it shall not be according un∣to it, or of the same kind, no more than Christ the High-Priest of it should be a Priest after the Order of Aaron. 5. It would on this Supposition follow, That God might fulfill his promise of putting his Laws in the minds of men, and writing them in their hearts, and yet none have the Law put into their minds, nor written in their hearts; which things are not reconcileable by any distinction unto the ordinary reason of Man∣kind. Wherefore we must grant, That it is the effect, the event in the communication of the things promised, that is ascribed unto this Covenant, and not only the use and application of means unto their production. And this will yet further appear in the particular Exposition of the several parts of it. But yet before we enter thereon, two Objections must be removed, which may in general be laid against our interpretation. 1. This Covenant is promised as that which is future, to be brought in at a cer∣tain time, after those days, as hath been declared. But it is certain, that the things here mentioned, the grace and mercy expressed were really communicated unto ma∣ny both before and after the giving of the Law, long ere this Covenant was made. For all who truly believed and feared God, had these things effected in them by grace; wherefore their effectual communication cannot be esteemed a property of this Covenant which was to be made afterwards. Ans. This Objection was sufficiently prevented in what we have already discour∣sed concerning the efficacy of the grace of this Covenant, before itself was solemn∣ly consummated. For all things of this nature that belong unto it do arise and spring from the mediation of Christ, or his interposition on the behalf of sinners wherefore this took place from the giving of the first Promise, the administration of the grace of this Covenant did therein and then take its date. Howbeit the Lord Christ had not yet done that whereby it was solemnly to be confirmed, and that whereon all the vertue of it did depend. Wherefore this Covenant is promised now to be made, not in opposition unto what grace and mercy was derived from it both before and under the Law, nor as unto the first administration of grace from the Mediator of it; but in opposition unto the Covenant of Sinai, and with respect unto its outward solemn confirmation. 2. If the things themselves are promised in the Covenant, then all those with whom this Covenant is made, must be really and effectually made partakers of them. But this is not so; they are not all actually sanctified, pardoned and saved, which are the things here promised. Ans. The making of this Covenant may be considered two ways. (1) As un∣to the preparation and proposition of its terms and conditions. (2) As unto the in∣ternal stipulation between God and the souls of men. In this sense alone God is properly said to make this Covenant with any. The preparation and proposition of Laws is not the making of the Covenant. And therefore all with whom this Co∣venant is made, are effectually sanctified, justified and saved. These things being premised, as it was necessary they should be, unto the right understanding of the mind of the Holy Ghost, I shall proceed unto the particular parts of the Covenant as here expressed; namely, in the blessed properties and ef∣fects of it, whereby it is distinguished from the former. The two first expressions are of the same nature and tendency, I will put my Laws in their mind, and write them in their hearts. In general it is the reparation of our nature, by the restauration of the image of God in us, that is, our sanctifica∣tion, which is promised in these words. And there are two things in the words both doubly expressed. (1) The Subject wrought upon, which is the mind and the heart. (2) The manner of producing the effect mentioned in them, and that is by putting and writing. And (3) The things by these means so communicated, which is the Laws of God. 1. The Subject spoken of, is the mind and heart. When the Apostle treats of the depravation and corruption of our nature, he placeth them ,
Ephes. 4. 18. that is, the mind and the heart. These are in the Scripture the seat of natural corruption, the residence of the principle of alienation from the life of God, which is in us. Wherefore the renovation of our natures consists in the recti∣fying and curing of them, in the furnishing them with contrary Principles of Faith, Love and Adherence unto God. And we may observe, that The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in the New Covenant, in its being and existence, in its healing repairing efficacy, is as large and extensive as sin in its residence and pow∣er to deprave our natures. This is the difference about the extent of the New Co∣venant, and the grace of it. Some would have it to extend unto all persons in its tender and conditional Proposition, but not unto all things, as unto its efficacy in the reparation of our natures. Others assert it to extend unto all the effects of sin in the removal of them, and the cure of our natures thereby, but as unto persons it is really extended unto none, but those in whom these effects are produced, whatever be its outward administration, which was also always limited, unto whom I do sub∣scribe. . The first thing mentioned is the mind,  the Apostle renders by , the inward part. The mind is the most secret inward part or power of the Soul. And the Prophet expresseth it by the inward part, because it is the onely safe and useful Repository of the Laws of God. When they are there laid up, we shall not lose them, neither Men nor Devils can take them from us. And he also de∣clares wherein the excellency of Covenant Obedience doth consist. It is not in the conformity of our outward actions unto the Law that be required therein also; but it principally lieth in the inward parts, where God searcheth for, and regardeth truth in sincerity, Psal. 51. 6. wherefore  is the mind and understanding, whose natural depravation is the spring and principle of all disobedience, the cure where∣of is here promised in the first place. In the outward administration of the means of grace the affections, and if I may so speak, the more outward part of the Soul are usually first affected and wrought upon. But the first real effect of the internal promised grace of the Covenant, is on the mind, the most spiritual and inward part of the Soul. This in the New Testament is expressed by the renovation of the mind, Rom. 12. 1. Col. 3. 5. And the opening of the eyes of our understandings, Ephes. 1. 17, 18. God shining into our hearts, to give us the knowledge of his glory in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4. 6. Hereby the enmity against God; the vanity, darkness and alienation from the life of God, which the mind naturally is possessed and filled withall, are taken away and removed. Of the nature of which work I have treated at large elsewhere. For the Law of God in the mind, is the saving knowledge of the mind and will of God, whereof the Law is the Revelation, com∣municated unto it, and implanted in it. 2. The way whereby God in the Covenant of Grace thus works on the mind, is expressed by , so the Apostle renders  and I will give.  giv∣ing, . may by an Exallage be put for , I will give. So is it expressed in the next clause,  in the future Tense, I will write. The word in the Prophet is, I will give; we render it, I will put. But there are two things intimated in the word. (1) The freedom of the Grace promised; it is a meer grant, gift or donation of Grace. (2) The efficacy of it. That which is given of God un∣to any is received by them, otherwise it is no gift. And this latter is well expres∣sed by the word used by us, I will put, which expresseth an actual communication, and not a fruitless tender. This the Apostle renders emphatically, , that is, , this is that which I do, am doing in this Covenant; namely, freely giving that Grace whereby my Laws shall be emplanted on the minds of men. To shew in general before we proceed to the nature of this work, so far as is necessary unto the exposition of the words, we may here consider what was obser∣ved in the third place, namely, what it is that is thus promised to be communicated, and so carry it on with us unto the other clause of this Promise. That which is to be put into this spiritual Receptacle, is in those words, , my Laws, in the plural number. Expositors inquire what Laws are here in∣tended, . whether the moral Law only, or others also. But there is no need of such enquiry. There is a Metonomy of the subject and effect in the words. It is that knowledge of the mind and will of God, which is revealed in the Law, and taught
by it which is promised. The Laws of God therefore are here taken largely, for the whole revelation of the mind and will of God. So doth  originally signifie Doctrine, or Instruction. By what way or revelation soever God makes known himself and his will unto us, requiring our obedience therein, it is all com∣prised in that expression of his Laws. From these things we may easily discern the nature of that Grace which is con∣tained in this first branch of the first promise of the Covenant. And this is the effectual operation of his Spirit in the renovation and saving illumination of our minds, whereby they are habitually made conformable unto the whole Law of God, that is, the Rule and the Law of our obedience in the New Covenant, and enabled unto all Acts and Duties that are required of us. And this is the first grace promised and communicated unto us by vertue of this Covenant, as it was necessary that so it should be. For (1) The mind is the principal seat of all spiritual obedience. (2) The proper and peculiar actings of the mind in discerning, knowing, judg∣ing, must go before the actings of the will and affections, much more all outward practices. (3) The depravation of the mind is such by blindness, darkness, vani∣ty, and enmity, that nothing can inflame our Souls, or make an entrance towards the reparation of our natures, but an internal, spiritual, saving operation of Grace up∣on the mind. (4) Faith itself is principally ingenerated by an infusion of saving light into the mind, 2 Cor. 4. 4, 6. So All the beginnings and entrances into the saving knowledge of God, and thereon of obedience unto him, are effects of the Grace of the Covenant. Secondly, The second Part of this first Promise of the Covenant is expressed in . these words, And will write them upon their hearts; which is that which renders the former part actually effectual. Expositors generally observe, that respect is had herein unto the giving of the Law on Mount Sinai, that is, in the first Covenant. For then the Law, that is the ten words, was written in Tables of Stone. And although the original Tables were broken by Moses when the People had broken the Covenant, yet would not God alter that dispensation, nor write his Laws any other way, but commanded new Ta∣bles of Stone to be made, and wrote them therein. And this was done, not so much to secure the outward letter of them, as to represent the hardness of the hearts of the people unto whom they were given. God did not, God would not by vertue of that Covenant otherwise dispose of his Law. And the event that ensued hereon, was, that they brake these Laws, and abode not in obedience. This event God promiseth to obviate and prevent under the New Covenant, and that by writing these Laws now in our hearts, which he wrote before only in Tables of stone; that is, he will effectually work that obedience in us which the Law doth require, for he worketh in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. The heart as distin∣guished from the mind, compriseth the will and the affections; and they are com∣pared unto the Tables wherein the letter of the Law was engraven. For as by that writing and engraving, the Tables received the impression of the letters and words wherein the Law was contained, which they did firmly retain and represent, so as that although they were stones still in their nature, yet were they nothing but the Law in their use; so by the grace of the New Covenant there is a durable impres∣sion of the Law of God on the wills and affections of men, whereby they answer it, represent it, comply with it, and have a living principle of it abiding in them. Wherefore as this work must necessarily consist of two parts, namely, the removal out of the heart of whatever is contrary unto the Law of God, and the implant∣ing of principles of obedience thereunto; so it comes under a double description or denomination in the Scripture. For sometimes it is called a taking away of the heart of stone, or circumcising of the heart; and sometimes the giving of an heart of flesh, the writing of the Law in our hearts, which is the renovation of our natures into the image of God in righteousness and the holiness of truth. Wherefore in this promise the whole of our sanctification in its beginning and progress, in its work upon our whole Souls, and all their faculties is comprized. And we may ob∣serve, 1. The work of Grace in the New Covenant passeth on the whole Soul in all its faculties, powers and affections, unto their change and renovation. The whole was
corrupted, and the whole must be renewed. The image of God was originally in and upon the whole, and on the loss of it the whole was depraved; see 1 Thess. 5. 23. 2. To take away the necessity and efficacy of renewing, changing, sanctifying Grace, consisting in an internal, efficacious operation of the principles, habits and acts of inter∣nal grace and obedience, is plainly to overthrow and reject the New Covenant. 3. We bring nothing to the New Covenant but our hearts as Tables to be writters in, with the sense of the insufficiency of the Precepts and Promises of the Law with respect unto our own ability to comply with them. The last thing in the words, is the Relation that ensues hereon between God and his people. I will be unto them a God, and they shall be my people. This is indeed  a distinct Promise by itself, summarily comprizing all the Blessings and Priviledges of the Covenant. And it is placed in the center of the account given of the whole, as that from whence all the grace of it doth spring, wherein all the blessings of it do consist, and whereby they are secured. Howbeit in this place it is pecu∣liarly mentioned, as that which hath its foundation in the foregoing Promise. For this Relation which implies mutual Acquiescency in each other, could not be, nor ever had been, if the minds and hearts of them who are to be taken into it, were not changed and renewed. For neither could God approve of, and rest in his love towards them, whilest they were enemies unto him in the depravation of their na∣tures; nor could they find rest or satisfaction in God, whom they neither knew, nor liked, nor loved. This is the general expression of any Covenant-relation between God and men; He will be unto them a God, and they shall be a people unto him. And it is frequent∣ly made use of with respect unto the first Covenant, which yet was disannulled. God owned the People therein for his peculiar Portion, and they avouched him to be their God alone. Nor can this be spoken of God and any People, but on the ground of an es∣pecial Covenant. It is true, God is the God of all the world, and all People are his, yea, he is a God unto them all. For as he made them, so he sustains, rules, and go∣verneth them in all things by his Power and Providence. But with respect here∣unto, God doth not freely promise that he will be a God unto any, nor can so do. For his power over all, and his rule of all things is essential and natural unto him, so as it cannot otherwise be. Wherefore as thus declared, it is a peculiar expression of an especial Covenant Relation. And the nature of it is to be expounded by the na∣ture and properties of that Covenant which it doth respect. Two things we must therefore consider, to discover the nature of this Relation. (1) The foundation of it. (2) The mutual actings in it by vertue of this Relation. Unto the manifestation of the foundation of it, some things must be pre∣mised. 1. Upon the entrance of Sin there continued no such Covenant Relation between God and man, as that by virtue thereof, he should be their God, and they should be his people. God continued still in the full enjoyment of his Soveraignty over men, which no Sin, nor Rebellion, nor Apostasie of man could in the least impeach. And man continued under an obligation unto dependance on God, and subjection unto his will in all things. For these cannot be separated from his nature and being, un∣til final judgment be executed, after which God rules over them only by power, with∣out any respect unto their wills or obedience. But that especial Relation of mu∣tual interest by virtue of the first Covenant ceased between them. 2. God would not enter into any other Covenant with sinful fallen man to be a God unto them, and to take them to be a peculiar people unto him immediately in their own persons; nor was it consistent with his wisdom and goodness so to do. For if man was not stedfast in Gods Covenant, but brake and disannulled it when he was sinless and upright, only created with a possibility of defection, what expectations could there be that now he was fallen, and his nature wholly depraved, any new Covenant should be of use unto the glory of God, or advantage of man? To enter into a new Covenant that must necessarily be broken unto the aggravation of the
misery of man, became not the wisdom and goodness of God. If it be said, God might have so made a New Covenant immediately with man, so as to secure their future obedience, and so to have made it firm and stable; I answer it would not have become the Divine wisdom and goodness to have dealt better with men after their Rebellion and Apostasie than before, namely on their own account. He did in our first Creation communicate unto our nature all that grace, and all those pri∣viledges which in his wisdom he thought meet to endow it withall, and all that was necessary to make them who were partakers of it everlastingly blessed. To suppose that on its own account alone he would immediately collate more grace upon it, is to suppose him singularly well pleased with our Sin and Rebellion. This then God would not do. Wherefore 3. God provided in the first place that there should be a Mediator, a Sponsor, an Undertaker, with whom alone he would treat about a New Covenant, and so establish it. For there were in the contrivance of his grace and wisdom concerning it, many things necessary unto it that could no otherwise be enacted and accomplished. Nay there was not any one thing in all the good which he designed unto Mankind in this Covenant in a way of love, grace and mercy, that could be communicated unto them, so as that his honor and glory might be advanced thereby, without the con∣sideration of this Mediator, and what he undertook to do. Nor could Mankind have yielded any of that obedience unto God, which he would require of them, without the interposition of this Mediator on their behalf. It was therefore with him that God firstly made this Covenant. How it was needful that this Mediator should be God and man in one person; how he became so to undertake for us, and in our stead; what was the especial Co∣venant between God and him as unto the work which he undertook personally to perform, have according unto our poor weak measure and dark apprehension of these heavenly things, been declared at large in our Exercitations on this Epistle, and yet more fully in our Discourse of the Mystery and Glory of the Person of Christ. Wherefore as unto this New Covenant, it was firstly made with Jesus Christ the Surety of it and Undertaker in it. For, 1. God neither would, nor Salvâ justitiâ, sapientiâ & honore, could treat im∣mediately with sinful rebellious men on terms of grace for the future, until satis∣faction was undertaken to be made for sins past, or such as should afterwards fall out. This was done by Christ alone, who was therefore the  of this Covenant, and all the grace of it. See 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Gal. 3. 13, 14. Rom. 3. 25. 2. No Restipulation of obedience unto God could be made by man, that might be a ground of entering into a Covenant intended to be firm and stable. For whereas we had broken our first Covenant engagement with God in our best condition, we were not likely of our selves to make good a new engagement of an higher nature than the former. Who will take the word or the security of a Bankrupt for Thou∣sands, who is known not to be worth one farthing; especially if he have wasted a former estate in Luxury and Riot, continuing an open Slave to the same lusts? wherefore it was absolutely necessary, that in this Covenant there should be a Surety to undertake for our answering and firm standing unto the terms of it. Without this the event of this New Covenant which God would make as a singular effect of his wisdom and grace, would neither have been glory to him, nor advantage un∣to us. 3. That Grace which was to be the Spring of all the blessings of this Covenant unto the glory of God, and salvation of the Church, was to be deposited in some safe hand, for the accomplishment of these ends. In the first Covenant God at once committed unto man that whole stock of grace which was necessary to enable him unto the obedience of it. And the grace of reward which he was to receive up∣on the performance of it, God reserved absolutely in his own hand; yea so as that perhaps man did not fully understand what it was. But all was lost at once that was committed unto our keeping, so as that nothing at all was left to give us the least relief as unto any new endeavors. Wherefore God will now secure all the good things of this Covenant, both as to grace and glory, in a third hand, in the hand
of a Mediator. Hereon the Promises are made unto him, and the fulness of grace is laid up in him, John 1. 14. Col. 1. 17. Chap. 2. 2. Eph. 3. 8. 2 Cor. 1. 21. 4. As he was the Mediator of this Covenant, God became his God, and he be∣came the Servant of God in a peculiar manner. For he stood before God in this Covenant, as a publick Representative of all the Elect. See our Comment on Chap. 1. 5, 8. Chap. 2. 13. God is a God unto him in all the Promises he received on the behalf of his mystical Body; and he was his Servant in the accomplishment of them, as the pleasure of the Lord was to prosper in his hand. 5. God being in this Covenant a God and Father unto Christ, he became by vertue thereof to be our God and Father, John 20. 17. Heb. 2. 12, 13. And we became heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ; and his People to yield him all sincere obedience. And these things may suffice briefly, to declare the foundation of that Covenant Relation which is here expressed. Wherefore The Lord Christ God and man undertaking to be the Mediator between God and man, and a Surety on our behalf, is the spring and head of the New Covenant, which is made and established with us in him. Secondly, The nature of this Covenant-Relation is expressed on the one side and the other; I will be unto them a God, and they shall be to me a People. 1. On the part of God it is, I will be unto them a God; or as it is elsewhere ex∣pressed, . I will be their God. And we must make a little enquiry into this unspeak∣able Priviledge, which Eternity only will fully unfold. 1. The person speaking is included in the Verb, , I will be; I Jehovah who make this Promise. And herein God proposeth unto our Faith all the glori∣ous Properties of his Nature. I who am that I am, Jehovah, Goodness and Being itself, and the cause of all Being and Goodness to others; infinitely wise, power∣ful, righteous, &c. I that am all this, and in all that I am, will be so. Here lies the eternal Spring of the infinite Treasures of the supplies of the Church here and for ever. Whatever God is in himself, whatever these Properties of his Nature extend to, in it all God hath promised to be our God. Gen. 17. 1. I am God Almighty, walk before me. Hence to give establishment and security unto our Faith, he hath in his Word revealed himself by so many names, titles, properties, and that so fre∣quently; it is that we may know him who is our God, what he is, and what he will be unto us. And the knowledge of him as so revealing himself, is that which se∣cures our confidence, faith, hope, fear and trust. The Lord will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble; and they that know thy Name, will put their trust in thee, Psal. 9. 9, 10. 2. What he promiseth is, that he will be a God unto us. Now although this compriseth absolutely every thing that is good, yet may the notion of being a God unto any, be referred unto two general Heads. (1) An all-sufficient Preserver; and (2) An all-sufficient Rewarder: So himself declares the meaning of this ex∣pression, Gen. 17. 1. Gen. 15. 1. I will be all this unto them that I am a God unto in the way of preservation and recompence, Heb. 11. 6. 3. The declared rule and measure of Gods actings towards us as our God, is the promises of the Covenant both of mercy, grace, pardon, holiness, perseverance, pro∣tection, success and spiritual victory in this world, and of eternal glory in the world to come. In and by all these things will he, in all that he is in himself, be a God unto those whom he takes into this Covenant. 4. It is included in this part of the Promise, that they that take him to be their God, they shall say, Thou art my God, Hos. 2. 23. and carry it towards him accord∣ing unto what infinite goodness, grace, mercy, power and faithfulness do re∣quire. And we may observe, 1. As nothing less than God becoming our God could relieve, help and save us, so nothing more can be required thereunto. 2. The efficacy, security and glory of this Covenant depend originally on the nature of God, immediately and actually on the mediation of Christ. It is the Covenant that God makes with us in him as the Surety thereof. 3. It is from the engagement of the properties of the Divine Nature that this Cove∣nant is ordered in all things and sure. Infinite wisdom hath provided it, and infinite power will make it effectual.
4. As the Grace of this Covenant is inexpressible; so are the obligations it puts upon us unto obedience. The Relation of man unto God is expressed in these words, And they shall be . unto me a People, or they shall be my People. And two things are contained herein. (1) Gods owning of them to be his in a peculiar manner, according to the tenor and promise of this Covenant, and dealing with them accordingly. , 1 Pet. 2. 5. A peculiar People. Let others take heed how they meddle with them, lest: they intrench on Gods propriety, Jer. 2. 3. (2) There is included in it that which is essentially required unto their being his People, namely, the profession of all subjection or obedience unto him, and all de∣pendence upon him. Wherefore this also belongs unto it, namely, their avouching this God to be their God, and their free engagement unto all that obedience which in the Covenant he requireth. For although this expression. And they shall be unto me a People, seem only to denote an Act of Gods Grace, assuming of them into that Relation unto himself; yet it includes their avouching him to be their God, and their voluntary engagement of obedience unto him as their God. When he says, Ye are my People; they also say, Thou art my God, Hos. 2. 23. yet is it to be observed, 1. That God doth as well undertake for our being his People, as he doth for his being our God. And the Promises contained in this Verse do principally aim at that end, namely the making of us to be a People unto him. 2. Those whom God makes a Covenant withall, are his in a peculiar manner, And the profession hereof is that which the world principally maligneth in them, and ever did so from the beginning.
V E R. XI. And they shall not teach every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest. THE second general Promise declaring the nature of the New Covenant, is expressed in this Verse. And the matter of it is set down, (1) Negatively, in opposition unto what was in use and necessary under the first Covenant. (2.) Po∣sitively, in what should take place in the room of it, and be enjoyed under this New Covenant, and by vertue of it. 1. In the former part we may observe the vehemency of the negation in the re∣doubling  of the negative Particle, . They shall by no means do so, that shall not be the way and manner with them whom God makes this Covenant withall. And this is designed to fix our minds on the consideration of the priviledge which is enjoyed under the New Covenant, and the greatness of it. 2. The thing thus denied is Teaching, not absolutely, but as unto a certain way  and manner of it. The Negation is not universal as unto Teaching, but restrained unto a certain kind of it, which was in use and necessary under the Old Covenant. And this necessity was either from Gods institution, or from practice taken up among themselves which must be inquired into. 3. The subject matter of this Teaching, or the matter to be taught, was the know∣ledge . of God, Know the Lord. The whole knowledge of God prescribed in the Law is here intended. And this may be reduced unto two Heads. (1) The know∣ing of him, and the taking him thereon to be God, to be God alone which is the first command. (2) His mind and will as unto the obedience which the Law required in all the institutions and precepts thereof; all the things which God re∣vealed for their good, Deut. 29. 29. Revealed things belong unto us and our chil∣dren, that we may do all the words of this Law. 4. The manner of the Teaching whose continuation is denied, is exemplified in a . distribution into Teachers, and them that are taught; every man his brother, and every man his neighbour. And herein (1) The universality of the Duty, every one, is expressed; and therefore it was reciprocal. Every one was to teach, and every one was to be taught, wherein yet respect was to be had unto their several capacities. (2) The opportunity for the discharging of the Duty is also declared from the mu∣tual Relation of the Teachers, and them that are taught; every one his neighbour, and his brother. Secondly, The positive part of the Promise consists of two Parts. 1. The things promised, which is the knowledge of God, They shall all know me. And this is placed in opposition unto what is denied; They shall not teach one another, . saying, Know the Lord. But this opposition is not as unto the Act or Duty of Teach∣ing, but as unto the effect, or saving knowledge itself. The principal efficient cause of our learning the knowledge of God under the New Covenant, is included in this part of the Promise. This is expressed in another Prophet and Promise, They shall be all taught of God. And the observation hereof will be of use unto us in the exposition of this Text. 2. There is added the universality of the Promise with respect unto them with . whom this Covenant is made; All of them from the least udto the greatest. A pro∣verbial Speech, signifying the generality intended without exception, Jerem. 8. 10. Every one from the least unto the greatest, is given unto covetousness. This Text hath been looked on as attended with great difficulty and much obscu∣rity, which Expositors generally rather conceal, than remove. For from the vehe∣ment denial of the use of that sort or kind of Teaching which was in use under the Old Testament, some have apprehended and contended that all outward stated ways of instruction under the New Testament are useless and forbidden. Hereon
by some all the Ordinances of the Church, the whole Ministery and Guidance of it hath been rejected; which is in sum, that there is no such thing as a professing Church in the world. But yet those who are thus minded, are no way able to advance their opinion, but by a direct contradiction unto this Promise in their own sense of it. For they endeavor in what they do to teach others their opinion, and that not in the way of a publick Ordinance, but every one his neighbor; which if any thing, is here denied in an especial manner. And the truth is, that if all outward Teaching be absolutely and universally forbidden, as it would quickly fill the world with darkness and brutish ignorance, so if any one should come to the knowledge of the sense of this or any other Text of Scripture, it would be absolutely unlawful for him to communicate it unto others. For to say know the Lord, or the mind of God in this Text, either to neighbor or brother would be forbidden. And of all kinds of Teaching that by a Publick Ministery in the administration of the Ordinances of the Church, which alone is contended against from these words, seems least to be intended. For it is private, neighborly, brotherly instruction only that is expressed. Wherefore if on a Supposition of the Prohibition of such outward instruction any one shall go about to teach another, that the Publick Ordinances of the Church are not to be allowed as a means of Teaching under the New Testament, he direct∣ly falls under the Prohibition here given in his own sense, and is guilty of the viola∣tion of it. Wherefore these words must necessarily have another sense, as we shall see they have, in the exposition of them, and that plain and obvious. Howbeit some learned men have been so moved with this Objection, as to affirm, that the accomplishment of this Promise of the Covenant belongs unto Heaven, and the state of glory. For therein alone they say we shall have no more need of Teach∣ing in any kind. But as this Exposition is directly contrary unto the design of the Apostle, as respecting the Teaching of the New Covenant, and the Testator thereof, when he intends only that of the Old, and exalts the New above it; so there is no such difficulty in the words, as to force us to carry the interpretation of them into another world. Unto the right understanding of them sundry things are to be observed. 1. That sundry things seem in the Scripture oft-times to be denied absolutely as unto their nature and being, when indeed they are so only comparatively with re∣spect unto somewhat else which is preferred before them. Many instances might be given hereof. I shall direct only unto one that is liable to no exception, Jerem. 7. 22, 23. I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offerings or sacrifices; but this thing commanded I them, saying, obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my People, and walk in all the ways that I commanded you, that it may be well unto you. The Jews of that time preferred the Ceremonial Worship by Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices above all moral Obedience, above the great Duties of Faith, Love, Righ∣teousness and Holiness. And not only so, but in a pretended diligent obser∣vation thereof, they countenanced themselves in an open neglect and contempt of moral Obedience; placing all their confidence for acceptance with God in these other Duties. To take them off from this vain ruining presumption, as God by sundry other Prophets declared the utter insufficiency of these Sacrifices and Burnt∣offerings by themselves to render them acceptable unto him, and then prefers moral Obedience above them; so here he affirms, that he commanded them not. And the instance is given in that time wherein it is known that all the Ordinances of Wor∣ship by Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices were solemnly instituted. But a comparison is made between Ceremonial Worship, and Spiritual Obedience, in respect whereof God says, he commanded not the former, namely, so as to stand in competition with the latter, or to be trusted unto in the neglect of it, wherein the evils and miscar∣riages reproved did consist. So our Blessed Saviour expounds this and the like pas∣sages in the Prophets, as a comparison between the lowest instances of the Ceremo∣nial Law, such as tything of mint and cummin, with the great Duties of Love and Righteousness. These things, saith he, speaking of the latter, you ought to have done, that is principally and in the first place have attended unto, as those which the Law chiefly designed. But what then shall become of the former? why, saith he, them also you ought not to leave undone; in their proper place Obedience was to be yielded unto God in them also. So is it in this present case; there was an outward teach∣ing
of every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, enjoined under the Old Testament. This the People trusted unto and rested in, without any regard unto Gods teaching by the inward circumcision of the heart. But in the New Covenant there being an express Promise of an internal effectual teaching by the Spirit of God, by writing his Law in our hearts, without which all outward Teaching is useless and ineffectual, it is here denied to be of any use. That is, it is not so absolutely, but in comparison of, and in competition with this other effectual way of teaching and instruction. Even at this day we have not a few who set these teachings in op∣position unto one another, whereas in Gods institution they are subordinate. And hereon rejecting the internal efficacious Teaching of the Spirit of God, they betake themselves only unto their own endeavors, in the outward means of Teaching, wherein for the most part there are none more negligent than themselves. But so it is, that the ways of Gods grace are not suited, but always lie contrary unto the corrupt reasonings of men. Hence some reject all the outward means of Teaching by the Ordinances of the Gospel, under a pretence that the inward Teaching of the Spirit of God is all that is needful or useful in this kind. Others on the other hand adhere only unto the outward means of instruction, despising what is affirmed con∣cerning the inward teaching of the Spirit of God, as a meer imagination. And both sorts run into these pernicious mistakes, by opposing those things which God hath made subordinate. 2. The Teaching intended whose continuance is here denied, is that which was then in use in the Church; or rather was to be so when the New Covenant state was solemnly to be introduced. And this was twofold, (1) That which was insti∣tuted by God himself; And (2) that which the People had superadded in the way of Practice. The first of these is, as in other places, so particularly expressed, Deut. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart. And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou sit∣test in thy house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind them for a sign on thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them on the posts of thy house, and on thy gate. Add hereunto the institution of Fringes for a memorial of the Commandments, which was one way of saying, Know the Lord, Numb. 15. 38, 39. Two things may be considered in these Institutions. (1) What is natural and moral, included in the common mutual Duties of men one towards another. For of this nature is that of seeking the good of others, by instructing them in the knowledge of God, wherein their chiefest happiness doth consist. (2) That which is Ceremonial, as to the manner of this Duty, is described in sundry instan∣ces, as those of Frontlets and Fringes, writing on Posts and Doors. The first of these is to abide for ever. No Promise of the Gospel doth evacuate any Precept of the Law of Nature; such as that of seeking the good of others, and that their chiefest good by means and ways proper thereunto, is. But as unto the later, which the Jews did principally attend unto and rely upon, it is by this Promise, or the New Covenant, quite taken away. 2. As unto the Practice of the Church of the Jews in these Institutions, it is not to be expressed what extremities they ran into. It is probable that about the time spoken of in this Promise, which is that of the Babylonian Captivity, they began that intricate, perplexed way of Teaching, which afterwards they were wholly ad∣dicted unto. For all of them who pretended to be serious, gave up themselves un∣to the teaching and learning of the Law. But herewithall they mixed so many vain Curiosities and Traditions of their own, that the whole of their endeavor was dis∣approved of God. Hence in the very entrance of their Practice of this way of teaching, he threatens to destroy all them that attended unto it, Mal. 2. 12. The Lord will cut off the Master and the Scholar out of the Tabernacles of Jacob. It is true, we have not any Monuments or Records of their teaching all that time, nei∣ther what they taught, nor how: But we may reasonably suppose, it was of the same kind with what flourished afterwards in their famous Schools derived from these first Inventers. And of such reputation were those Schools among them, that none was esteemed a wise man, or to have any understanding of the Law who was
not brought up in them. The first Record we have of the manner of their teach∣ing, or what course they took therein, is in the Mishna. This is their interpretation of the Law, or their sayings one to another, Know the Lord. And he that shall se∣riously consider but one Section or Chapter in that whole Book, will quickly discern of what kind and nature their Teaching was. For such an operous, laborious, curious, fruitless work, there is not another instance to be given of in the whole world. There is not any one Head, Doctrine or Precept of the Law, suppose it be of the Sabbath, of Sacrifices, or Offerings, but they have filled it with so many needless, foolish, curious, superstitious Questions and Determinations, as that it is almost im∣possible that any man in the whole course of his life should understand them, or guide his course according unto them. These were the Burdens that the Pharisees bound for the shoulders of their Disciples, until they were utterly weary and faint∣ed under them. And this kind of Teaching had possessed the whole Church then, when the New Covenant was solemnly to be introduced, no other being in use. And this is absolutely intended in this Promise, as that which was utterly to cease. For God would take away the Law, which in itself was a burden, as the Apostles speak, which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear. And the weight of that Burden was unspeakably increased by the expositions and additions whereof this teaching consisted. Wherefore the removal of it is here proposed in the way of a Promise, evidencing it to be a matter of grace and kindness unto the Church. But the removal of teaching in general, is always mentioned as a threatning and punishment. Wherefore the denial of the continuation of this Teaching may be considered two wayes. (1) As it was external in opposition unto and comparison of the effectual inter∣nal Teaching by the grace of the New Covenant; so it is laid aside, not absolutely, but comparatively, and as it was solitary. (2) It may be considered in the manner of it, with especial respect unto the Ceremonial Law, as it consisted in the observance of sundry Rites and Ceremonies. And in this sense it was utterly to cease; above all with respect unto the additions which men had made unto the Ceremonial Institutions wherein it did consist; Such was their Teaching by writing parts of the Law on their Fringes, Frontlets, and Doors of their Houses; especially as these things were enlarged, and Precepts con∣cerning them multiplied in the practice of the Jewish Church. It is promised con∣cerning these things, that they shall be absolutely removed as useless, burdensom, and inconsistent with the spiritual Teaching of the New Covenant. But as unto that kind of instruction, whether by publick, stated preaching of the Word, or that which is more private and occasional, which is subservient unto the promised Teach∣ing of the Spirit of God, and which he will and doth make use of in and for the communication of the knowledge itself here promised, there is nothing intimated that is derogatory unto its use, continuance or necessity. A Supposition thereof would overthrow the whole Ministery of Jesus Christ himself, and of his Apostles, as well as the ordinary Ministery of the Church. And these things are spoken in exposition of this place, taken from the meaning and intention of the word Teaching, or the Duty itself, whose continuance and far∣ther use is denied. But yet, it may be, more clear light into the mind of the Ho∣ly Spirit may be attained, from a due consideration of what it is that is so to be taught. And this is, know the Lord. Concerning which, two things may be ob∣served. 1. That there was a knowledge of God under the Old Testament, so revealed as that it was hidden under Types, wrapt up in Vails, expressed only in Parables and Dark-sayings. For it was the mind of God, that as unto the clear perception and revelation of it, it should lie hid, until the Son came from his bosom to declare him; to make his name known, and to bring life and immortality to light; yea, some things belonging hereunto, though virtually revealed, yet were so compassed with darkness in the manner of their Revelation, as that the Angels themselves did not clearly and distinctly look into them. But that there were some such great and ex∣cellent things concerning God and his Will laid up in the Revelation of Moses and the Prophets, with their Institutions of Worship, they did understand. But the best
and wisest of them knew also, that notwithstanding their best and utmost enquiry; they could not comprehend the time, nature and state of the things so revealed. For it was revealed unto them, that not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister in their Revelation of those things, 1 Pet. 1. 12. And as our Apostle informs us, Moses in his Ministery and Institutions, gave testimony unto the things which were to be spoken (that is clearly) afterwards, Chap. 3. 5. This secret hidden knowledge of God principally concerned the Incarnation of Christ, his mediation and suffering for Sin, with the Call of the Gentiles thereon. These and such like Mysteries of the Gospel they could never attain the comprehension of. But yet they stirred up each other diligently to enquire into them as to what they were capable of attain∣ing, saying one to another, Know the Lord. But it was little that they could attain unto, God having provided some better things for us, that they without us should not be made perfect. And when that Church ceased to make this the principal part of their Religion, namely, a diligent enquiry into the hidden knowledge of God, in and by the promised Seed, with a believing desire and expectation of its full ma∣nifestation, contenting themselves with the letter of the Word, looking on types and shadows as things present and substances, they not only lost the glory of their Pro∣fession, but were hardened into an unbelief of the things signified unto them in their real exhibition. Now this kind of teaching by mutual encouragement to look into the vailed things of the Mystery of God in Christ, is now to cease at the solemn Introduction of the New Covenant, as being rendered useless by the full, clear reve∣lation and manifestation of them made in the Gospel. They shall no more, that is, they shall need no more, to teach, so to teach this knowledge of God, for it shall be made plain to the understanding of all Believers. And this is that which I judge to be principally intended by the Holy Ghost in this part of the Promise, as that which the positive part of it doth so directly answer unto. 2. The knowledge of the Lord may be here taken not objectively and doctrinally, but subjectively, for the renovation of the mind in the saving knowledge of God. And this neither is, nor can be communicated unto any by external teaching alone, in respect whereunto it may be said comparatively to be laid aside, as was intimated before. We have, I hope, sufficiently freed the words from the difficulties that seem to attend them, so as that we shall not need to refer the accomplishment of this pro∣mise unto Heaven with many ancient and modern Expositors; nor yet with others, to restrain it unto the first Converts in Christianity, who were miraculously illumi∣nated; much less so to interpret them, as to exclude the Ministery of the Church in teaching, or any other effectual way thereof. Somewhat may be observed of the particular expressions used in them. 1. There is in the original Promise the word , amplius, no more. This is omitted by the Apostle, yet so, as that it is plainly included in what he ex∣presseth. For the word denotes the time and season which was limited unto that kind of teaching which was to cease. This season being to expire at the publica∣tion of the Gospel, the Apostle affirms absolutely then they shall not teach, what the Prophet before declared with the limited season now expired, they shall do so no more. 2. The Prophet expresseth the Subject spoken of indefinitely , A man his neighbour, a man his brother; that is any man; the Apostle by the uni∣versal , every man, which is also reducible unto any one; every one that is or may be called to this work, or hath occasion or opportunity for it. For of this teaching the Rule is Ability and Opportunity. He that can do it, and hath an op∣portunity for it. 3. That which they taught, or intended in that expression, Know the Lord, is the same with what is promised in the latter part of the Verse, where it must be spo∣ken unto. Some things according to our method and design may be observed from the exposition of these words. 1. The instructive Ministry of the Old Testament, as it was such only, and with respect unto the carnal Rites thereof, was a Ministery of the Letter, and not of the Spirit, which did not really effect in the hearts of men the things which it taught. The spi∣ritual benefit which was obtained under it, proceeded from the promise, and not from
the efficacy of the Law, or the Covenant made at Sinai. For as such, as it was le∣gal and carnal, and had respect only unto outward things, it is here laid aside. 2. There is a Duty incumbent on every man to instruct others according to his abili∣ty and opportunity, in the knowledge of God; the Law whereof being natural and eternal, is always obligatory on all sorts of persons. This is not here either prohi∣bited or superseded, but only it is foretold, that as unto a certain manner of the performance of it, that it should cease. That it generally ceaseth now in the world, is no effect of the promise of God, but a cursed fruit of the unbelief and wicked∣ness of men. The highest degree in Religion which men now aim at, is but to attend unto and learn by the publick teaching of the Ministery. And alas how few are there who do it conscientiously unto the glory of God, and the spiritual benefit of their own Souls! The whole business of teaching and learning the knowledge of God, is generally turned into a formal spending, if not mispence of so much time. But as for the teaching of others according unto ability and oppor∣tunity, to endeavor for abilities, or to seek for opportunities thereof, it is not only for the most part neglected, but despised. How few are there who take any care to instruct their own Children and Servants! but to carry this Duty farther accord∣ing unto opportunities of instructing others, is a thing that would be looked on al∣most as madness in the days wherein we live. We have far more that mutually teach one another Sin, Folly, yea Villany of all sorts, than the knowledge of God, and the duty we owe unto him. This is not what God here promiseth in a way of grace, but what he hath given up careless, unbelieving Professors of the Gospel unto, in a way of vengeance. 3. It is the Spirit of Grace alone as promised in the New Covenant, which frees the Church from a laborious, but ineffectual way of teaching. Such was that in use among the Jews of old; and it is well if somewhat not much unlike it, do not prevail among many at this day. Whoever he be who in all his teaching doth not take his encouragement from the internal, effectual teaching of God under the Covenant of Grace, and bends not all his endeavors to be subservient thereunto, hath but an Old Testament Ministery, which ceaseth as unto any divine approba∣tion. 4. There was an hidden treasure of Divine wisdom, of the knowledge of God laid up in the mystical Revelations and Institutions of the Old Testament, which the people were not then able to look into, nor to comprehend. The confirmation and explanation of this truth, is the principal design of the Apostle in this whole Epistle. This know∣ledge those among them that feared God, and believed the Promises, stirred up themselves and one another, to look after and to enquire into, saying unto one ano∣ther, Know the Lord; howbeit their attainments were but small, in comparison of what is contained in the ensuing Promise. 5. The whole knowledge of God in Christ is both plainly revealed and savingly communicated by virtue of the New Covenant unto them who do believe, as the next words declare. The positive part of the Promise remaineth unto consideration. And two things must be enquired into, (1) Unto whom it is made. (2) What is the subject mat∣ter of it. 1. Those unto whom it is made, are so expressed in the Prophet, . The expression of them absolutely, and then by a distribution is emphatical. The former the Apostle renders in the plural num∣ber, as the words are in the Original, . But the terms of the distri∣bution . he rendereth in the singular number, which encreaseth the Emphasis, . The Proposition is universal, as to the modification of the Subject , all; but in the word , of them, it is restrained unto those alone with whom this Covenant is made. The distribution of them is made in a Proverbial Speech, from the least to the . greatest, used in a peculiar manner by this Prophet, Chap. 6. 13. Chap. 8. 10. Chap. 31. 32. Chap. 42. 1. Chap. 44. 12. It is only once more used in the Old Testament, and not elsewhere, Jon. 3. 5. And it may denote either the univer∣sality,
or the generality of them that are spoken of, so as none be particularly ex∣cluded or excepted, though all absolutely be not intended. Besides, several sorts and degrees of persons are intended. So there ever were, and ever will be naturally, politically and spiritually in the Church of God. None of them upon the account of their difference from others on the one hand, or the other, be they the least, or the greatest, are excepted or excluded from the grace of this Promise. And this may be the sense of the words, if only the external administration of the grace of the New Covenant be intended. None are excluded from the tender of it, or from the outward means of the communication of it in the full, plain revelation of the knowledge of God. But whereas it is the internal, effectual Grace of the Covenant, and not only the means, but the infallible event thereon, not only that they shall be all taught to know, but that they shall, all actually know the Lord, all individuals are intended; that is that whole Church, all whose Children are to be taught of God, and so to learn as to come unto him by saving Faith in Christ. So doth this part of the Promise hold proportion with the other, of writing the Law in the hearts of the Covenanters. As unto all these it is promised absolutely, that they shall know the Lord. But yet among them there are many distinctions and degrees of persons, as they are variously differenced by internal and external circumstances. There are some that are greatest, and some that are least, and various intermediate degrees between them. So it hath been, and so it ever must be, whilest the natural, acquired and spiritual abilities of men have great variety of degrees among them; and whilest mens outward advantages and opportunities do also differ. Whereas therefore it is promised that they shall all of them know the Lord, it is not implied that they shall all do so equally, or have the same degree of spiritual wisdom and understand∣ing. There is a measure of saving knowledge due unto, provided for all in the Covenant of Grace, such as is necessary unto the participation of all other blessings and priviledges of it. But in the degrees hereof, some may and do very much ex∣cell others. And we may observe, 1. There are and ever were different degrees of persons in the Church, as unto the saving knowledge of God. Hence is that distribution of them into Fathers, Young men and Children, 1 John 2. 13, 14. All have not one measure, all arrive not to the same stature; but yet as to the ends of the Covenant, and the duties required of them in their walk before God, they that have most have nothing over, nothing to spare; and they that have least, shall have no lack. Every ones duty it is to be content with what he receives, and to improve it unto the uttermost. 2. Where there is not some degree of saving knowledge, there no interest in the New Covenant can be pretended. Secondly, The thing promised, is the knowledge of God. They shall all know me. No duty is more frequently commanded than this is, nor any grace more frequently promised. See Deut. 30. 6. Jer. 24. 7. Ezek. 11. 19. Chap. 36. 26, 27. For it is the foundation of all other duties of obedience, and of all communion with God in them. All graces as unto their exercise, as Faith, Love and Hope are founded therein. And the woful want of it which is visible in the world, is an evidence how little there is of true Evangelical Obedience among the generality of them that are called Christians. And two things may be considered in this Promise. (1) The object, or what is to be known. (2) The knowledge itself, of what kind and nature it is. The first is God himself; They shall know me, saith the Lord. And it is so not absolutely, but as unto some especial Revelation of himself. For there is a know∣ledge . of God, as God, by the light of nature. This is not here intended, nor is it the subject of any gracious promise, but is common unto all men. There was more∣over a knowledge of God by Revelation under the Old Covenant, but attended with grear obscurity in sundry things of the highest importance. Wherefore there
is something farther intended, as is evident from the Antithesis between the two states herein declared. In brief, it is the knowledge of him as revealed in Jesus Christ un∣der the New Testament. To shew what is contained herein doctrinally, were to go over the principal Articles of our Faith, as declared in the Gospel. The sum is, to know the Lord, is to know God as he is in Christ personally, as he will be unto us in Christ graciously, what he requires of us and accepts in us through the Beloved. In all these things, notwithstanding all their teachings and diligence therein, the Church was greatly in the dark under the Old Testament. But they are all of them more clearly revealed in the Gospel. 2. The knowledge of these things, is that which is promised. For notwithstand∣ing the clear revelation of them, we abide in our selves unable to discern them, and receive them. For such a spiritual knowledge is intended, as whereby the mind is renewed, being accompanied with Faith and Love in the heart. This is that know∣ledge which is promised in the New Covenant, and which shall be wrought in all them who are interested therein. And we may observe, 1. The full and clear declaration of God as he is to be known of us in this life, is a priviledge reserved for and belonging unto the days of the New Testament. Before it was not made, and more than is now made, is not to be expected in this world. And the reason hereof is, because it was made by Christ. See the Exposition on Chap. 1. v. 1, 2. 2. To know God as he is revealed in Christ, is the highest priviledge whereof in this life we can be made partakers. For this is life eternal, that we may know the Father the onely true God, and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent, John 17. 3. 3. Persons destitute of this saving knowledge, are utter strangers unto the Covenant of Grace. For this is a principal promise and effect of it, wherever it doth take place.
VER. XII. For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more. THis is the great fundamental Promise and Grace of the New Covenant. For though it be last expressed, yet in order of nature it precedeth the other mer∣cies and priviledges mentioned, and is the foundation of the collation or communi∣cation of them unto us. This the causal , whereby the Apostle rendereth  in the Prophet, doth demonstrate. What I have spoken, faith the Lord, shall be accom∣plished, For I will be merciful, &c. without which there could be no participation of the other things mentioned. Wherefore not only an addition of new grace and mercy is expressed in these words, but a reason also is rendered why or on what grounds he would bestow on them those other mercies. The House of Israel and Judah with whom this Covenant was made in the first place, and who are spoken of as Representatives of all others who are taken into it, and who thereon become the Israel of God, were such as had broken and disannul∣led Gods former Covenant by their disobedience; which my Covenant they brake. Nor is there any mention of any other qualification, whereby they should be prepa∣red for, or disposed unto an entrance into this New Covenant, Wherefore the first thing in order of nature that is to be done unto this end, is the free pardon of sin. Without a supposition hereof, no other mercy can they be made partakers of. For whilest they continue under the guilt of sin, they are also under the curse. Where∣fore a reason is here rendred, and that the onely reason, why God will give unto them the other blessings mentioned, For I will be merciful. Free and sovereign, undeserved grace in the pardon of sin, is the original spring and foundation of all Covenant mercies and blessings. Hereby and hereby alone is the glory of God, and the safety of the Church provided for. And those who like not Gods Covenant on those terms, as none do by nature, will eternally fall short of the grace of it. Hereby all glorying, and all boasting in our selves is excluded, which was that which God aimed at in the contrivance and establishment of this Covenant, Rom. 3. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31. For this could not be, if the fun∣damental grace of it did depend on any condition or qualification in our selves. If we let go the free pardon of sin without respect unto any thing in those that receive it, we renounce the Gospel. Pardon of sin is not merited by antecedent duties, but is the strongest obligation unto future duties. He that will not receive pardon, un∣less he can one way or other deserve it, or make himself meet for it; or pretends to have received it, and finds not himself obliged unto universal obedience by it, nei∣ther is nor shall be partaker of it. In the Promise itself we may consider, (1) Who it is made unto. (2) What it is that is promised. The first is expressed in the Pronoun , their, three times repeated. All those absolutely, and only those with whom God makes this Covenant, are intended. . Those whose sins are not pardoned, do in no sense partake of this Covenant, it is not made with them. For this is the Covenant that God makes with them, that he will be merciful unto their sins, that is unto them in the pardon of them. Some speak of an universal conditional Covenant made with all Mankind. If there be any such thing, it is not that here intended. For they are all actually pardoned with whom this Cove∣nant is made. And the indefinite declaration of the nature and terms of the Co∣venant, is not the making of a Covenant with any. And what should be the con∣dition of this grace here promised of the pardon of sin? It is, say they, that men repent and believe, and turn to God, and yield obedience unto the Gospel. If so, then men must do all these things, before they receive the remission of sins: yes. Then must they do them whilest they are under the Law, and the curse of it, for so
are all men whose sins are not pardoned. This is to make obedience unto the Law, and that to be performed by men whilest under the curse of it, to be the condition of Gospel-mercy, which is to overthrow both the Law and Gospel. But then on the other hand it will follow, they say, that men are pardoned before they do believe, which is expresly contrary unto the Scripture. And (1) The communication and donation of faith unto us, is an effect of the same grace where∣by our sins are pardoned, and they are both bestowed on us by virtue of the same Covenant. (2) The application of pardoning mercy unto our souls, is in order of nature consequent unto believing, but in time they go together. (3) Faith is not required unto the procuring of the pardon of our sins, but unto the receiving of it. That they may receive the remission of sins. But that which we shall observe from hence is, That The New Covenant is made with them alone, who effectually and eventually are made partakers of the grace of it. This is my Covenant that I will make with them, I will be merciful unto their unrighteousness, &c. Those with whom the Old Covenant was made, were all of them actual Partakers of the benefits of it; and if they are not so with whom the New is made, it comes short of the Old in efficacy, and may be utterly frustrate. Neither doth the indefinite Proposal of the terms of the Covenant prove that the Covenant is made with them, or any who enjoy not the benefits of it. Indeed this is the excellency of this Covenant, and so it is here declared, that it doth effectually communicate all the grace and mercy con∣tained in it unto all and every one with whom it is made; whoever it is made withall, his sins are pardoned. Secondly, The subject matter of this Promise, is the pardon of sin. And that which we have to consider for the exposition of the words, is (1) What is meant by sins. (2) What by the pardon of them. (3) What is the reason of the pecu∣liar expression in this place. Sin is spoken of with respect unto its guilt especially, so is it the object of mercy and grace. Guilt is the desert of punishment, or the obligation of the sinner un∣to punishment, by and according unto the sentence of the Law. Pardon is the dis∣solution of that obligation. Sin is here expressed by three terms, , unrighteousness, sin and transgression, as we render the words. In the Prophet there is only  is wanting. But they are elsewhere all three used, where mention is made of the pardon of sin, or the causes of it. As (1) in the declaration of the Name of God with respect thereunto, Exod. 34.  pardoning iniquity, transgression and sin. (2) In the confession of sin for the re∣moval of it, by the expiatory Sacrifice, Lev. 16. 21. Aaron shall confess over him,  all their iniquities, all their transgressions, in all their sins. (3) In the expression of the forgiveness of sin in justifica∣tion, Psal. 32. 1, 2. Wherefore the Apostle might justly make up the expression and general enumeration of sins here defective in the Prophet, seeing it is elsewhere so constantly used to the same purpose, and on the like occasion. Nor are those terms needlesly multiplied, but sundry things we are taught there∣by. As (1) That those whom God graciously takes into Covenant, are many of them antecedently obnoxious unto all sorts of sins. (2) That in the grace of the Covenant there is mercy provided for the pardon of them all, even of them from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Acts 13. 42. And that (3) Therefore none should be discouraged from resting on the faithfulness of God in this Covenant, who are invited unto a compliance therewith. But there is yet more intended in the use of these words. For they do distinct∣ly express all those respects of sin in general, by which the Conscience of a sinner is affected, burdened and terrified; as also whereon the equity of the curse and punish∣ment for sin doth depend. The first is , unrighteousness. This is usually taken for sins against the second Table, or the transgression of that rule of righteousness amongst men, which . is given by the Moral Law. But here, as in many other places, it expresseth a gene∣ral affection of sin with respect unto God. A thing unequal and unrighteous it is, that man should sin against God his Sovereign Ruler and Benefactor. As God is the Supreme Lord and Governor of all, as he is our onely Benefactor and Re∣warder,
as all his laws and ways towards us are just and equal, the first notion of Righteousness in us is the rendering unto God what is due unto him, that is, univer∣sal Obedience unto all his Commands. Righteousness towards man is but a branch springing from this root; and where this is not, there is no Righteousness amongst men whatever is pretended. If we give not unto God the things that are Gods, it will not avail us to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars, nor unto other men what is their own. And this is the first consideration of sin, that renders the sin∣ner obnoxious unto punishment, and manifests the equity of the sanction of the Law. It is an unrighteous thing. Herewith the Conscience of the sinner is affect∣ed, if he be convinced of sin in a due manner. The original perfection of his nature consisted in this Righteousness towards God, by rendering his due unto him in a way of obedience. This is overthrown by sin, which is therefore both shame∣ful and ruinous, which distresseth the Conscience when awaken'd by Con∣viction. The second is . This is properly a missing of, an erring from that end and scope which it is our duty to aim at. There is a certain end for which we . were made, and a certain rule proper unto us whereby we may attain it. And this end being our onely blessedness, it is our interest, as it was in the principles of our natures, to be always in a tendency towards it. This is the glory of God, and our eternal salvation in the enjoyment of him. Thereunto the Law of God is a perfect Guide. To sin therefore, is to forsake that Rule, and to forgo therein our aim at that end. It is to place self and the world as our end, in the place of God and his glory, and to take the imaginations of our hearts for our Rule. Wherefore the perverse folly that is in sin, in wandering away from the chiefest good as our end, and the best guide as our rule, embracing the greatest evils in their stead, is , rendering punishment righteous, and filling the sinner with shame and fear. 3. There is . We have no one word in our language properly to ex∣press . the sense hereof, nor is there so in the Latine. We render it Transgression of the Law.  is a lawless person; whom the Hebrews call a Son of Belial, one who owns no yoke nor rule. And  is a voluntary unconformity unto the Law. Herein the formal nature of sin consists, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Joh. 3. 4. And this is that which in the first place passeth on the Conscience of a sinner. Wherefore as all sorts of particular sins are included in these multiplied names of sin; so the general nature of sin in all its causes and respects, terrifying the sinner, and manifesting the righteousness of the Curse of the Law, are declared and represent∣ed by them. And we may learn, 1. That the aggravations of Sin are great and many, which the Consciences of convinced Sinners ought to have regard unto. 2. There is grace and mercy in the New Covenant provided for all sorts of sins, and all aggravations of them, if they be received in a due manner. 3. Aggravations of Sin do glorifie grace in pardon. Therefore doth God here so express them, that he may declare the glory of his grace in their re∣mission. 4. We cannot understand aright the glory and excellency of pardoning mercy, unless we are convinced of the greatness and vileness of our sins in all their ag∣gravations. Secondly, That which is promised with respect unto these sins, is two ways expres∣sed, (1) , I will be merciful. (2) , I will remem∣ber . no more. It is pardon of sin that is intended in both these expressions; the one respecting the cause of it, the other its perfection and assurance. And two things are considerable in the pardon of sin. (1) A respect unto the Mediator of the Covenant, and the propitiation for sin made by him. Without this, there can be no remission, nor is any pro∣mised. (2) The dissolution of the obligation of the Law binding over the guilty sin∣ner unto punishment. These are the essential parts of Evangelical Pardon, and respect is had in these words unto them both.
1. , which we translate merciful, is propitious, gracious through a propitia∣tion. But the Lord Christ is the onely , or propitiation under the New Testament, Rom. 3. 25. 1 John 2. 2. And he died, , to propitiate God for sin; to render him propitious unto sinners, Heb. 2. 17. in him alone God is , merciful unto our sins. 2. The Law with the sanction of it was the means appointed of God to bring . sin unto a judicial remembrance and tryal. Wherefore the dissolution of the obli∣gation of the Law unto punishment, which is an Act of God the Supreme Rector and Judge of all, belongeth unto the pardon of sin. This is variously expressed in the Scripture, here by remembring sin no more. The Assertion whereof is fortified by a double Negative: Sin shall never be called legally to remembrance. But the whole Doctrine of the Pardon of Sin, I have so largely handled in the Exposition of Psalm 130. that I must not here again reassume the same Argument. VER. XIII. . HAving in the foregoing Verses proved in general the insufficiency of the Old Covenant, the necessity of the New, the difference between the one and the other, with the preference of the later above the former, in all confirming the ex∣cellency of the Priesthood of Christ, above that of Aaron: In this last Verse of the Chapter he maketh an especial inference from one word in the Prophetical Testi∣mony, wherein the main truth which he endeavoured to confirm with respect unto these Hebrews, was asserted. It was their persuasion, that of what sort soever this promised Covenant should be, yet the former was still to continue in force obliging the Church unto all the Institutions of Worship thereunto appertaining. Hereon depended the main Controversie that the Apostle had with them: For he knew that this persuasion was destructive to the Faith of the Gospel, and would, if per∣tinaciously adhered unto, prove ruinous unto their own Souls. Wherefore the con∣trary hereunto, or the total cessation of the first Covenant he presseth on them, with all sorts of Arguments, as from the nature, use and end of it, from its insuf∣ficiency to consecrate or make perfect the state of the Church; from the various Prefigurations, and certain Predictions of the introduction of another Covenant, Priesthood and Ordinances of Worship which were better than those that belong∣ed unto it, and inconsistent with them, with many other cogent evidences to the same purpose. Here he fixeth on a new argument in particular, to prove the neces∣sity and certainty of its abolition; and hereby, according unto his wonted manner, he makes a transition unto his following discourses, wherein he proves the same truth from the distinct consideration of the use and end of the Institutions, Ordinances and Sacrifices belonging unto that Covenant. This he pursues unto the 24 ver. of the Tenth Chapter, and so returns unto the paraenetical part of the Epistle, making due applications of what he had now fully evinced. In that he saith a new [Covenant] he hath made the first old. Now that which decayeth and waxeth old, is ready to vanish away. A double Argument the Apostle here maketh use of. (1) From a special word or testimony. (2) From a general Maxim of truth in all kinds. In the former we may consider, (1) The Testimony he makes use of. (2) The Inference unto his own purpose which he makes from it. 1. The first consisteth in the Adjunct of this other promised Covenant. It is by God himself called New; , in that, or whereas it is said a .
New, or in that he calleth it, nameth it, a New. So it is expresly in the Prophet, Behold I will make a new Covenant. Thus every word of the Holy Ghost, though but occasional unto the principal Subject spoken of, is a sufficient evidence of what may be deduced from it. And by this kind of arguing are we taught, that the Word of God is full of holy mysteries, if with humility and under the conduct of his holy Spirit, we do, as we ought, diligently enquire into them. This therefore he layeth down as the foundation of his present Argument; That God himself doth not call this promised Covenant another Covenant, or a second; nor only declare the excellency of it; but signally calls it a New Covenant. 2. That which he infers from hence, is that , he hath made the first Old. The force of the Argument doth not lie in this, that he calleth  the second New; but that he would not have done so, had not he made the first Old. For  is of an active signification, and denotes an authoritative act of God upon the Old Covenant, whereof the calling the other New was a Sign and evi∣dence. He would not have done so, but that he had made the other Old: For with respect thereunto this is called New. But yet it was the designation of the New Covenant, that was the foundation of making the other Old. The word respecting the time past, we must enquire what time it doth refer un∣to. And this must be either the time of the prediction and promise of the New Covenant, or the time of its introduction and establishment. And it is the first sea∣son that is intended. For the introductin of the New Covenant did actually take away and abolish the Old, making it to disappear: But the act of God here intend∣ed, is only his making it Old in order thereunto. And he did this upon and by the giving of this Promise, and afterwards by various acts, and in various de∣grees. 1. He did it by calling the Faith of the Church from resting in it, through the expectation of the bringing in of a better in the room of it. This brought it un∣der a decay in their minds, and gave it an undervaluation unto what it had before. They were now assured, that something much better would in due time be introdu∣ced. Hence although they abode in the observation of the Duties and Worship it required, it being the Will of God that so they should do, yet this expectation of and longing after the better Covenant now promised, made it decay in their minds and affections. So did God make it Old. 2. He did it by a plain declaration of its infirmity, weakness and insufficiency for the great ends of a perfect Covenant between God and the Church. Many things unto this purpose might have been collected out of the nature of its institutions and promises, from the first giving of it, as is done by our Apostle in his present dis∣courses. But these things were not clearly understood by any in those days; and as to the most, the vail was on them that they could not see at all unto the end of the things that were to be done away. But now when God himself comes positively to declare by that Prophet, that it was so weak and insufficient, and that therefore he would make another, a better with them; this made it Old, or declared it to be in a tendency unto a dissolution. 3. From the giving of this Promise, God did variously by his Providence break in upon and weaken its administration, which by its decaying age was more and more manifested. For, 1. Immediately after the giving of this Promise, the Babylonian Captivity gave a total intercision and interruption unto the whole administration of it for seventy years. This, having never before fallen out from the making of it on Mount Si∣nai, was an evident token of its approaching period, and that God would have the Church to live without it. 2. Upon the return of the People from their Captivity, neither the Temple, nor
the Worship of it, nor any of the administrations of the Covenant, nor the Priest∣hood, were ever restored unto their pristine beauty and glory. And whereas the People in general were much distressed at the apprehension of its decay, God com∣forts them not with any intimation that things under that Covenant should ever be brought into a better condition, but only with an expectation of his coming amongst them, who would put an utter end unto all the administrations of it, Hag. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. And from that time forwards it were easie to trace the whole pro∣cess of it, and to manifest how it continually declined towards the end. Thus did God make it Old, by variously disposing of it unto its end; and to give an evidence thereof, called the other Covenant which he would make, a New One. And it did not decay of it self. For no institution of God will ever wax old of it self; will ever decay, grow infirm, nor perish, unless it be disannulled by God himself. Length of time will not consume Divine Institutions, nor can the sins of Men abate their force. He only that sets them up, can take them down. And this is the first Argument of the Apostle, taken from this testimony, to prove that the first Covenant was to be abolished. But whereas it may be questioned, whether it directly follows or no, that it must be taken away because it is made old, he confirms the truth of his Inference from a general maxim, which hath the nature of a new argument also. Now, saith he, that which decayeth and waxeth old, is ready to vanish away. Old is significative of that which is to have an end, and which draws towards its end. Every thing that can wax old hath an end; and that which doth so, draws towards that end. So the Psalmist affirming that the Heavens themselves shall perish, adds as a proof thereof, they shall wax old as a garment; and then none can doubt but they must have an end, as unto their substance or their use. There is in the words, 1. The Notation of the Subject, , but that, or that  whatever it be. The general Rule gives evidence unto the former inference, what∣ever it be that waxeth old. 2. The description of it in a double expression, . The words are generally supposed to be synonyma, and to be used for emphasis onely.  We express the first by decay, that which decayeth, to avoid the repetition of the same word, we having no other to express waxing old, or made old by. But , is not properly that which decayeth, it is that which hath the effect passively of , that which is made old; and it properly respecteth things. Things are so said to be made old, not persons. But the other word , re∣spects persons, not things. Men and not Inanimate things are said . Where∣fore although the Apostle might have used a Pleonasm to give Emphasis unto his assertion, and to aver the certainty of the end of the Old Covenant; yet nothing hinders but that we may think that he had respect unto the things and persons that belonged unto its administration. That which is affirmed of this subject of the Proposition, is, that it is  , near unto a disappearance, that is an abolition, and taking out of the way. The Proposition is universal, and holds absolutely in all things, as is evident in the light of nature. Whatever brings things unto a decay and age, will bring them unto an end; for decay and age are the expressions of a tendency unto an end. Let an Angel live never so long, he waxeth not old, because he cannot dye. Waxing old is absolutely opposed unto an eternal duration, Psal. 102. 26, 27. It being the removal of the Old Covenant and all its administrations that is re∣spected, it may be inquired why the Apostle expresseth it by , a disap∣appearance
or vanishing out of sight. And respect may be had herein, (1) To the glorious outward appearance of the administrations of it. This was that which greatly captivated the minds and affections of those Hebrews unto it. They were carnal themselves, and these things, the Fabrick of the Temple, the Ornaments of the Priests, the Order of their Worship had a glory in them, which they could be∣hold with their carnal eyes, and cleave unto with their carnal affections. The mini∣stration of the letter was glorious. All this glory, saith the Apostle, shall shortly disappear, shall vanish out of your sight, according to the Prediction of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 24. (2) To the gradual removal of it. It departed as a thing will by its removal out of our sight. We by little and little lose the pros∣pect of it until it utterly disappear. How it was made so to disappear, at what time, in what degrees, by what Acts of Divine Authority, must be spoken unto di∣stinctly elsewhere. All the glorious institutions of the Law were at best but as Stars in the Firmament of the Church, and therefore were all to disappear at the rising of the Sun of righteousness. .
AN EXPOSITION OF THE Ninth Chapter OF THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. CHAP. IX. THE general Design of the Apostle in these Discourses, is to manifest and prove that the Old Covenant made with the Church at Sinai, with all the Ordinances of Worship and Priviledges thereunto be∣longing, was taken away, or ceased to be of any force in the Church. Hereon did a total Alteration of the whole present Church state of the Hebrews depend; which, it is easy to think how difficult it was with them, to fore∣go. For they both looked on it to be of Gods own appointment, as it was, and expected all their happiness by a strict adherence unto it. Wherefore that they might with the more readiness embrace the Truth, he not only de∣clares that de facto that Covenant was ceased, but evinceth by all sorts of Rea∣sons that it was necessary that so it should do; and that unspeakable Advantages did accrue unto the Church thereby. In the pursuit of this Design, he unfolds unto them the greatest Mysteries of the Wisdom and Counsel of God, that ever were revealed unto the Church before he spake unto us by the Son. For 1. On this occasion he takes off the vail from the face of Moses, declaring the nature and end of the Old Covenant, the use, Signification and Efficacy of all the Institutions and Ordinances of Worship thereunto belonging. They were all prescribed unto the diligent Observation of the Church of the Old Testa∣ment; and their adherence unto them, was the great Trial of their Obedi∣ence unto God, whilst that Church state continued, Mal. 4. 4, 5. Howbeit the best among them were much in the dark, as unto their proper use and sig∣nification. For the Vail was so on the face of Moses, that the Children of Israel
could not look stedfastly to the end of that which was to be abolished. 2 Cor. 3 13. This he now doctrinally removes; and the sole reason why the Hebrews did not hereon behold the Glory of God in the face of Iesus Christ, nor yet do unto this day, is because there was and is a Vail of blindness on their minds, as well as there was a Vail of darkness on the face of Moses; and it is only converting Grace that can remove it. When they shall turn to the Lord, the Vail shall be taken away. ver. 16. 2. He takes occasion from hence to declare the great Mystery of the Redemp∣tion of the Church by Christ; of the Office that he bare, and the work that he performed therein. This was that which he principally designed, as being indeed the sole Foundation of Christian Religion. Wherefore we have in this Epistle, as a clear Exposition of the first Promise, with all those which were given in the Explication or Confirmation of it; so also of the Law and its Worship which were afterwards introduced; that is in general of the whole Old Testament; or God instruction of the Church under it. Hence that blessed Light which now shines forth in the Promises and Legal Institutions of the Old Testament, is derived unto us through the Exposition of them given unto us by the Holy Ghost in this Epistle. We are therefore to remember, that in our Enquiries into these things, we are conversant in the deepest Myste∣ries of the Wisdom and Counsel of God; those which animated the Faith and Obedience of both Churches; which calls not only for our utmost Diligence, but for continual Reverence and Godly Fear. Unto the general end mentioned, the Apostle makes use of all sorts of Ar∣guments, taken from the Constitution, Nature, Use, Efficacy, Officers and Or∣dinances of the one Covenant and the other; comparing them together. And in all his arguings he openly designes the Demonstration of these two things; (1.) That the Old Covenant with all its Administrations was to cease. (2.) That it was not only unto the advantage of the Church that they should so do, but absolutely necessary, that it might be brought unto that Perfect State which it was designed unto. In order unto the first of these, he hath done two things in the Preceding Chapters. (1.) He hath declared that there were Prefigurations and Predictions of the Cessation of the first Covenant and all its Administrations. As also that God had so ordered all things in and under that Covenant, as that they must ne∣cessarily expire and cease at a certain appointed time. (2.) He hath evinced the Necessity hereof, because that Covenant could not consummate the state of the Church, nor give assured Rest and Peace unto the consciences of them that ap∣proached unto God in and by its services. And both these he confirmes by the consideration of the Typical Nature of all its Ordinances and Institutions. For whereas there was in and by them a Representation made of Heavenly things, those Heavenly things themselves could not be introduced without their Removal. It is the second thing mentioned, or the Advantage of the Church by the taking away of the first Covenant, and all its sacred Administrations, that he principally insists upon. For herein he designed (as was before observed) to declare the Glorious Mystery of the Counsell of God, concerning the Redemption and Salvation of the Church by Jesus Christ. But whereas this in general is the substance of the Gospel, and the Subject of all his other Epistles, he doth not here consider and declare it absolutely, but as it was Prefigured and Typed out by those Institutions of Worship, whereby God both instructed the Church and exercised their Faith and Obedience, under the Old Testament. Three things there were, which were the Glory of those Administrations, and which the Hebrews so rested in, as that they refused the Gospel out of an Adherence unto them. (1.) The Priestly Office. (2.) The Tabernacle with all its furniture, wherein that Office was exercised. (3.) The Duties and Worship of the Priests in that Tabernacle by Sacrifices; Especially those wherein there was a solemne Expiation of the sins of the whole Congregation. In reference unto these, the Apostle proves three things. 1. That neither any, nor all of them could consummate or make perfect the
State of the Church; nor yet really effect assured Peace and Confidence be∣tween God and the Worshippers. 2. That they were all Typical and Figurative, ordained to represent things that were far more Sublime, Glorious and Excellent than themselves. 3. That indeed the Lord Christ in his Person and Mediation was all those things really and substantially, which they did but Obumbrate and Prefigure; that he was and did what they could only direct unto an expectation of. 1. These things he declareth and evinceth fully with respect unto the Priest∣ly Office, in the Seventh Chapter, in our exposition whereof we have endea∣voured to declare the sense and force of his arguings unto that Purpose. 2. He doth the same as unto the Tabernacle in general in the Eighth Chap∣ter, confirming his Discourse with that great collateral Argument taken from the Nature and Excellency of that Covenant whereof the Lord Christ was the Surety and Mediator. Wherefore, 3. There remains only the consideration of the Services and Sacrifices which belonged unto the Priestly Office in that Tabernacle. Herein the Hebrews pla∣ced their greatest confidence for Reconciliation with God, and with respect unto them, boasted of the excellency of their Church-State and Worship. This the Apostle knew to be the great point in Difference between him and them, and that whereon the whole Doctrine of the Iustification of Sinners before God did depend. This therefore was exactly to be discussed, from the nature of the things themselves, and the Testimonies of the Holy Ghost in the Scripture, on which Principles alone he deals with these Hebrews. This is that which he now in particular ingageth into, handling it at large in this and the next Chapter unto ver. 23. where he returns unto his first Exhortation, in an use of the Truth which he had evinced. Two things unto this Purpose he designs in general. (1.) To declare the Nature, Use and Efficacy of the Rites, Services and Sacrifices of the Law. (2.) To manifest the Nature, Glory and Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, where∣by those other had an end put unto them, and so were to be taken away. And in comparing these things together, he wonderfully sets out the Wisdom and Grace of God in dealing with the Church, so as to manifest that all his Counsels, from the Beginning, did aim at, and center in the Person and Medi∣ation of Christ. And those things are duly to be considered by all who desire to understand the mind of the Holy Ghost in this Epistle. This Chapter hath two general Parts. 1. A Proposition and Declaration of the Fabrick of the Tabernacle, its Furni∣ture, and the Services performed therein; from the beginning unto ver. 11. 2. A Declaration of the Nature of the Tabernacle and Sacrifice of the Lord Christ, with the end and Efficacy thereof; from ver. 11. unto the end. Of the first general there are four Parts. 1. A Proposition of the Constitution of the Tabernacle of Old, with all its Uten∣sils and Furniture, as it was prepared for the Service of the Priests. V. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 2. The Use of that Tabernacle and the things in it, in and unto the sacred Du∣ties and Services of the Priests. Ver. 6. 7. 3. The Iudgement of the Apostle upon the Whole both of the Fabrick and its Use, ver. 8. 4. The Reasons of that Judgment; ver. 9. 10. In the first Part there is; (1.) A General Proposition of the whole, ver. 1. (2.) A particular Explanation of it; ver. 2, 3, 4, 5.
VER. 1. . SOme things must be premised unto the Reading of these Words. , the first, doth in the original answer in Gender unto all things which the Apostle treats of; namely, the Priesthood, the Tabernacle, and the Covenant. But many Greek Copies do expresly read , The Tabernacle. So is the Text expressed in Stephen's Edition, wherein he followed sixteen antient Manuscripts, adhering generally unto the Concurrent Agreement of the greatest number: And the Word is retained in the most common Edition. But there are antient Copies also, where it is omitted: And they are attested unto by all antient Translations, as the Syriack and Vulgar Latine, the Arabick supplying, Cove∣nant, in the room of it. Wherefore Beza left it out, and is followed by the Generality of Expositors, as he is by our Translators. Camero contends for retaining of it. But the Reasons for its Rejection are cogent and unde∣niable. As first; In the last verse of the preceding Chapter whereunto this imme∣diately succeeds, the Apostle mentioning the Old Covenant, calleth it absolute∣ly , the first, without the addition of , and immediately repeating , that is that first, it is irrational to think that he refers it to another Subject. 2. His Design requires that the first Covenant be intended. For he is not in∣gaged in a comparison between the Tabernacle and the New Testament; but between the Old Covenant, and the New. And the words of the Text with those that follow, contain a concession of what belonged unto the Old Cove∣nant, particularly in the Administration of Divine Worship; as it is observed by Photius and Oecumenius. 3. The Expression in the close of the verse, A Worldly Sanctuary, is no more nor less, but the Tabernacle: For it is that which the Apostle immediately describes in its Parts and Furniture, which are the Parts of the Tabernacle, and no other. And if the word , the Tabernacle, be here retained, the sense must be; and verily the first Tabernacle had Ordinances of Worship and the Ta∣bernacle. 4. In the next verse adding an Account of what he had affirmed, he saith, For there was a Tabernacle prepared; the first; which would render this sense to the context; For the first Tabernacle, had a Tabernacle; for there was a Taber∣nacle prepared: Wherefore I shall adhere unto the supplement made by our Translators; the first Covenant. . Some read these words by an , and not in con∣struction, from the Ambiguity of the case and number of , which may . be either of the Genitive Singular or Accusative Plural. Ordinances, Services. This it is supposed the following Phrase of speech doth intimate, , and also a worldly Sanctuary: which requires that the preceding words should be construed by Apposition. And a Difference there is between  and ; But whereas it is evident, that the Apostle intends no , or service here, but what was performed , by vertue of Ordinances or Institutions, the word ought to be read in construction, Ordi∣nances of Worship. ; Syr: But in the first there were in it. As the Arab: In the first Co∣venant there was contained. Vul. Lat. habuit quidem & prius; the Comparative for the Positive unto the sense of the Apostle: And the first truely had also. Beza. Habuit igitur prius faedus et; transferring  unto the words following. Wherefore the first Covenant had also; as we after him. Others, habuit igitur etiam prius. Most, in rendring the Particles , have principal respect
unto the note of inference , and include the Assertory Particle, , in it. I think the principal respect is to be had thereunto, as it is in the Vulgar Latine; And verily that first also had. , Syr. commands of Ministry or Precepts; which gives us the plain sense and true meaning of the Apostle, as we shall see afterwards. Ordinances concerning the Administration of Divine Worship. Vul. Lat. Justificationes Culturae, Rhem. Justifications of Service; most obscurely, and in words leading from the sense of the Holy Ghost. Others; Ritus cultûs; constitutos ritus cultuum, appointed rites of Worship or Service. All agree what it is that the Apostle intends, namely, the Ordinances of Levitical worship, which are expressed in the vulgar by Justificationes culturae, both barbarously and besides the mind of the Apo∣stle. . Syr. a worldly holy house. The Tabernacle was frequently called the House of God, and the House of the Sanctuary. Vul: Sanctum seculare. Rhem: a secular Sanctuary; which the Interlinear changeth into mundanum: seculare de∣notes duration but it is not the Design of the Apostle to speak of the duration of that, which he is proving to be ceased. Beza. Sanctuarium mundanum, some respect the particles ; and render them illudque. VER. 1. Then verily even that first Covenant, had Ordinances of worship, and also a worldly Sanctuary. PRoceeding unto the comparison designed between the old Covenant and the new, as unto the services and sacrifices wherewith the one and the other was established and confirmed, He introduceth the  of the first by way of concession, as unto what really belonged thereunto. And this is the constant Me∣thod of the Apostle in all the comparisons he makes. He still allows full weight and measure unto that comparate which he prefers the other above. And as this, on the one hand, taketh away all cause of complaint, as though the worth and value of what he determineth against, were concealed; so it tends unto the real exaltation of that which he gives the Preference unto. It is an Honour un∣to the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ, that they are so much more glorious and excellent than those of the old Covenant, which yet were excellent and glorious also. There is in this Verse, 1. An Introduction of the concession intended. . The contexture of these  Particles is some what unusual. Hence some would have, , to be redundant; some joyn it in construction with  that follows. This was the judg∣ment of Beza, whom our translators follow, For the word, Also; [had also Or∣dinances;] renders, , in the original: and thereon they omit it in the first place, not saying, And then verily, but then verily, that is, . If this be so, the As∣sertion of the Apostle seems to be built on a tacit supposition that the latter Covenant hath ordinances of worship. Hence he grants the first had so also. E∣ven that had also ordinances of worship, as the new hath. But I see not at all, that any such supposition is here made by the Apostle; yea, he doth rather op∣pose those Ordinances of Divine worship unto the Priviledges of the new Cove∣nant, than allow the same things to be under both. And this is evident in the worldly Sanctuary, which he ascribes unto the first Covenant, for he had expresly denyed that there was any such under the new. Chap. 8. 2. Wherefore although . and, seems to be redundant, yet it is emphatical and increaseth the significa∣tion of the other Particles, as it is often used in the Scripture. And the Intro∣duction . of the concession, intimated by this contexture of the Notes of it, (then verily even that) shews both the reality of it, and the weight that he lays upon it. ; we render, then; most do it by igitur, therefore. But the connexion unto the foregoing Discourse is rather real than verbal. It is not an Inference made
from what was before declared, but a continuation of the same Design. And yet moreover it is granted; or therefore it is granted; verily so it was. And so   serves unto the Protasis of the comparison, whereunto  answereth, ver. 11th. But; Christ being come. The subject spoken of is , the first, that is, ; that first Covenant whereof we treat. The Covenant made with the Fathers at Sinai, which as unto the Administrations of it the Hebrews as yet adhered unto. The nature of this Covenant we have spoken unto at large on the foregoing chapter, and thither re∣fer the Reader. Of this Covenant it is affirmed in general, that it had two things, (1) Ordinances of worship. (2) A worldly Sanctuary; and the Relation of them unto it, is, that it had them. 1. It had them . It refers unto the time past. The Apostle saith not it hath them, but, it had them. That is, say some, it had so whilest that Tabernacle was standing, and whilest these things were in force; but now the Covenant is  abolished and it hath none of them. But this answers not the Apostle's Intenti∣on. For he acknowledgeth that Covenant and all its Ordinances de facto to have been yet in Being, in the patience and forbearance of God. Only he af∣firms that it was , chap. 8. 13. ready to disappear. Nor was he to take for granted, what was the principal  between him and the He∣brews, but to prove it, which he doth accordingly. Hence he grants that there were Priests that offered Gifts according to the Law; chap. 8. 4. and some who served at the Tabernacle. chap. 13. 10. But the Apostle hath respect unto the time wherein that Covenant was first made. Then it had these things annexed unto it, which were the Priviledges and Glory of it. For the Apostle hath in the whole Discourse, continual respect unto the first making of the Covenant, and the first institution of its Administrations. It had them; that is, they belonged unto it as those wherein its Administration did consist. Every Covenant of God had its proper Priviledges and Advantages, Even the first Covenant had so, and those such as were excellent in themselves, though not comparable with them of the new. For to make any Covenant with men, is an eminent fruit of Goodness, Grace and Condescention in God, whereon he will annex such Priviledges thereunto, as may evince it so to be. 2. This first Covenant had two things in general. 1.  Both Translations and Interpreters have cast some difficulty on the meaning of these words, in themselves plain and evident. ; are . And the word is generally rendred by  in the Greek Versions; and next unto that by , that which is legal and right. The Vulgar Latine rendets it by Iustificationes; from the inclusion of Ius, Iustum in  the signification of it. In the new Testament it is used, Luk. 1, 6. Rom. 1. 32. chap. 2. 26. chap. 5. 16. chap, 8. 4. Heb. 9. 1. ver. 10. Rev. 15. 4. chap. 19. 8. And in no one place doth it signifie Institution, but it may be better ren∣dred Righteousness when alone we so translate it. Rom. 5. 16. In the context and construction wherein it is here placed, it can have no signification, but that of Ordinances, Rites, Institutions, Statutes, the constant sense of  de∣termined both by its derivation, and invariable use. Wherefore all inquiries on these words, in what sense the Rites of the Law may be called Iustificati∣ons, or whether because the Observation of them did Iustifie before men, or were signs of our Iustification before God, are all useless and needless. What there is of Iust and Right in the signification of the word, respects the Right of God in the constitution and imposition of these Ordinances. They were Appoint∣ments of God which he had Right to prescribe, whence their Observation on the Part of the Church was just and equal. These Ordinances, or Statutes were so (, of service) that is, as we render it divine service.  is originally of as large a signification . as , and denotes any service whatever. But it is here, and constantly in the new Testament, as is also the verb , restrained unto Divine service, Ioh. 16. 2. Rom. 9. 4. chap. 12. 1. Cultus, of worship, and so were it better rendred, than by Divine service. In one place it signifies by it self, as much as  doth here: Rom. 9. 4, unto whom belonged the giving of the Law, , and the worship; that is,
, the Ordinances of worship. The Ordinances of the Ceremoni∣al Law. For although God were served in and according to the commands of the Moral Law, or the unchangeable prescriptions the ten words; and also in the duties required in the due Observance of the Iudicial Law; yet this  or  was the immediate worship of the Tabernacle; and the services of the Priests that belonged thereunto. Hence the Jews call all Idolatry and superstition; , strange worship. And this was that part of Divine worship about which God had so many controversies with the People of Israel under the Old Testament. For they were always apt to run into noxious extreams about it: For the most part they were prone to neglect it, and to run into all manner of superstition and Idolatry. For the Law of this worship was an hedge that God had set about them to keep them from those Abominations. And if at any time they brake over it, or neglected it, and let it fall, they failed not to rush into the most a∣bominable Idolatry. On the other hand, ofttimes they placed all their trust and confidence for their acceptance with God and blessing from him, on the external observance of the ordinances and institutions of it. And hereby they countenanced themselves not only in a neglect of moral Duties and spiritual Obedience, but in a course of flagitious sins and wickednesses. To repress these exorbitances with respect unto both these extreams, the ministry of the Prophets was in an especial manner directed. And we may observe some things here in our passage, as included in the Apostle's assertion, though not any part of his present Design. 1. There was never any Covenant between God and man, but it had some Or∣dinances or Arbitrary Institutions of external Divine worship annexed unto it. The original Covenant of works had the Ordinances of the Tree of Life, and of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, the Laws whereof belonged not unto that of na∣tural Light and Reason. The Covenant of Sinai whereof the Apostle speaks had a multiplication of them. Nor is the new Covenant destitute of them or their necessary observance. All Publick worship in, and the Sacraments of the Church are of this nature. For whereas it is ingrafted in natural Light that some external worship is to be given unto God, He would have it of his own prescription, and not as unto the modes of it, be left unto the inventions of men. And because God hath alwayes in every Covenant prescribed the external wor∣ship and all the Duties of it which he will accept, it cannot but be dangerous for us, to make any Additions thereunto. Had he prescribed none at any time, seeing some are necessary in the Light of nature, it would follow by just con∣sequence that they were left unto the finding out and appointment of men. But he having done this himself, let not us add unto his words, lest he reprove us, and we be found lyars. And in his Institution of these Ordinances of external wor∣ship, there is both a Demonstration of his Sovereignty, and an especial trial of our Obedience in things whereof we have no Reason but his meer will and pleasure. 2. It is an hard and rare thing to have the minds of men kept upright with God in the Observation of the Institutions of Divine worship. Adam lost himself and us all by his failure therein. The Old Church seldom attained unto it, but continually wandred into one of the extreams mentioned before. And at this day there are very few in the world who judge a diligent observation of Di∣vine Institutions to be a thing of any great importance. By some they are neg∣lected, by some corrupted with additions of their own, and by some they are exalted above their proper place and use, and turning into an occasion of neg∣lecting more important Duties. And the Reason of this difficulty is because Faith hath not that assistance and encouragement from innate Principles of Reason, and sensible experience of this kind of Obedience, as it hath in that which is moral, internal, and spiritual. That these Ordinances of divine worship might be duly observed and right∣ly performed under the first Covenant, there was a Place appointed of God for their solemnization. It had, ; also a worldly Sanctuary: He renders  by ; properly an holy Place, a Sanctuary. And why . he calls it , or worldly, we must enquire. And some things must be pre∣mised unto the exposition of these words.
1. The Apostle treating of the services, sacrifices, and place of worship un∣der the Old Testament, doth not instance in, nor insist upon the Temple, with its fabrick, and the order of its services; but in the Tabernacle set up by Mo∣ses in the wilderness. And this he doth for the ensuing Reasons. 1. Because his principle Design is to confirm the preeminence of the New Covenant above the Old. To this end he compares them together in their first Introduction and establishment with what did belong unto them therein. And as this in the new Covenant was the Priesthood, Mediation, and Sacrifice of Christ; so in the old it was the Tabernacle with the services and sacrifices that belonged unto it. These the first covenant was accompained with and established by; and therefore were they peculiarly to be compared with the Tabernacle of Christ, and the sacrifice that he offered therein. This is the principle Reason why in this disputation he hath all along respect unto the Tabernacle, and not unto the Temple. 2. Although the Temple with its glorious fabrick and excellent order added much unto the outward Beauty and Splendor of the sacred worship, yet was it no more but a large exemplification of what was vertually contained in the Tabernacle and the institutions of it, from whence it derived all its Glory. And therefore these Hebrews principally rested in, and boasted of the Revelation made unto Moses and his institutions. And the excellency of the worship of the new Covenant being manifested above that of the Tabernacle there is no plea left for the additional outward Glory of the Temple. 2. Designing to treat of this Holy Tent or Tabernacle, he confines himself unto the first general Distribution of it. Exod. 26. 33. And thou shalt hang up the Vail under the Taches, that thou mayst bring in thither the Ark of the Testi∣mony, and the Vail shall divide unto you, between the Holy and the most Holy; the Holy Utensils of which two parts he afterwards distinctly describes. The whole was called , which he renders by , the holy Place or Sanctu∣ary. The Tabernacle of witness erected in the wilderness in two parts, the Holy and the most Holy, with the Utensils of them, is that whose Description he undertakes. It is observed by the Apostle that the first Covenant had this Sanctuary; (1) Because so soon as God had made that Covenant with the people, he prescrib∣ed unto them the Erection and making of this Sanctuary, containing all the solemn means of the Administration of the Covenant itself. (2) Because it was the principle mercy, priviledg and advantage that the people were made partakers of by vertue of that Covenant. And it belongs unto the exposition of the Text, as to the design of the Apostle in it, that we consider what that priviledge was, or wherein it did consist. And 1. This Tabernacle with what belonged thereunto was a Visible Pledge of the presence of God among the people, owning, Blessing and protecting of them. And it was a pledge of Gods own Institution, in imitation whereof, the su∣perstitious Heathens invented ways of obliging their Idol-Gods to be present among them for the same ends. Hence was that prayer at the removal of the Tabernacle and the Ark therein. Numb. 10. 35, 36. Rise up Lord and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee, fly before thee. And when it rested he said, Return O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel. And thence the Ark was called the Ark of Gods strength; see Psal. 68. 1, 2. 13. 2, 8. 2 Chron. 6. 41. because it was a pledg of Gods putting forth his strength and power in the behalf of the people. And according unto this Institution it was a most effectual means to strengthen their faith and confidence in God. For what could they desire more in Reference thereunto, than to enjoy such a gracious earnest of his powerful presence among them? But when they ceased to trust in God, and put their confidence in the things themselves, which were no otherwise useful but as they were Pledges of his Presence, they proved their Ruine. Hereof we have a fatal instance in their bringing the Ark into the field, in their battell against the Philistines. 1 Sam. 4. 5, 6. And it will fare no better with others who shall rest satisfied with outward Institutions of divine worship, neglecting the end of them all, which is faith and trust in God. Ierem. 7. 4. But men of corrupt minds had rather place their trust in any
thing but God: For they find that they can do so, and yet continue in their sins, as those did in the Prophet. ver. 8, 9, 10. But none can trust in God, unless he relinquish all sin whatever. All other pretended trust in him, is but the entitling of him unto our own wickedness. 2. It was the Pledge and means of Gods Residence or dwelling among them, which expresseth the peculiar manner of his presence mentioned in ge∣neral before. The Tabernacle was Gods house; nor did he promise at any time to dwell among them but with respect thereunto. Exod. 15. 17. Chap. 25. 8. Chap. 29. 44, 45, 46. Numb. 5. 3. And the consideration hereof was a powerful motive unto Holiness, Fear and Reverence; unto which ends it is e∣very where pressed in the scripture. 3. It was a fixed Seat of all divine worship wherein the truth and purity of it was to be preserved. Had the observation of the Ordinances of divine ser∣vice been left unto the memories of private persons, it would quickly have issued in all manner of foolish practices, or have been utterly neglected. But God appointed this Sanctuary for the preservation of the purity of his worship, as well as for the solemnity thereof: see Deut. 12. 8, 9, 10, 11. Here was the Book of the Law laid up, according unto the Prescript whereof the Priests were obliged in all generations to take care of the publick worship of God. 4. It was principally the priviledge and glory of the Church of Israel, in that it was a continual Representation of the Incarnation of the Son of God; a Type of his coming in the flesh to dwell among us, and by the one sacrifice of himself to make Reconciliation with God, and Atonement for sins. It was such an expression of the Idea of the mind of God concerning the person and me∣diation of Christ, as in his Wisedom and Grace he thought meet to intrust the Church withal. Hence was that severe injunction that all things concern∣ing it, should be made according unto the pattern shewed in the mount. For what could the wisdom of men do in the prefiguration of that mystery, which they had no comprehension of? But yet the Sanctuary the Apostle calls ; worldly. Expositors both antient and modern do even weary themselves in their enquiries why the A∣postle calls this Sanctuary worldly. But I think they do so without cause, the Reason of the Appellation being evident in his design and the context. And there is a difficulty added unto it by the Latine translation which renders the word Seculare, which denotes Continuance or duration. This expresseth the Hebrew : but that the Apostle renders by  not by ; and therefore here hath no respect unto it. The sense that many fix upon is, that he intends the outward Court of the Temple, whereunto the Gentiles or men of the world were admitted, whence it was called worldly and not sacred: But this exposition though countenanced by many of the Ancients, is contrary unto the whole design of the Apostle. For (1) He speaks of the Tabernacle, where∣in was no such outward Court; nor indeed was there any such belonging to the Temple, whatever some pretend. (2) The whole Sanctuary, whereof he speaks, he immediately distributes into two parts, as they were divided by the Vail; namely, the Holy and the most Holy Place, which were the two parts of the Tabernacle itself. (3) He treats of the Sanctuary only with respect unto the divine service to be performed in it by the Priests, which they did not in any outward court whereunto the Gentiles might be admitted. Wherefore the Apostle terms this Sanctuary worldly, because it was every way in and of this world. For (1) The Place of it was on the earth in this world, in opposition whereunto the Sanctuary of the new Covenant is in Heaven. chap. 8. 2. (2) Although the materials of it were as durable as any thing in that kind could be procured, as Gold and Shittim wood, because they were to be of a long continuance, yet were they worldly; that is, ca∣duca, fading and perishing things, as are all things of the world; God intimat∣ing thereby that they were not to have an everlasting continuance. Gold, and wood, and silk, and hair, however curiously wrought and carefully preser∣ved, are but for a time. (3) All the services of it, all its Sacrifices in them∣selves, seperated from their Typical representative use, were all worldly; and their efficacy extended only unto worldly things, as the Apostle proves in
this Chapter. (4) On these accounts the Apostle calls it worldly; yet not ab∣solutely so, but in opposition unto that which is Heavenly. All things in the Ministration of the new Covenant are Heavenly. So is the Priest, his Sa∣crifice, Tabernacle, and Altar as we shall see in the process of the Apostle's discourse. And we may observe from the whole, 1. That Divine institution alone is that which renders any thing acceptable un∣to God. Although the things that belonged unto the Sanctuary, and the Sanctuary itself, were in themselves but worldly; yet being divine Ordinances, they had a Glory in them, and were in their season accepted with God. 2. God can animate outward carnal things with an hidden invisible Spring of Glory and Efficacy; so he did their Sanctuary with its relation unto Christ; which was an Object of faith, which no eye of flesh could behold. 3. All divine service or worship must be resolved into divine ordination or In∣stitution. A worship not ordained of God is not accepted of God. It had Or∣dinances of worship. 4. A worldly Sanctuary is enough for them whose service is worldly; and these things the men of the world are satisfied with. VER. 2. TWo things were ascribed unto the first Covenant in the verse foregoing. (1) Ordinances of worship; (2) A worldly Sanctuary. In this verse the A∣postle enters upon a description of them both, inverting the Order of their proposal, beginning with the latter, or the Sanctuary itself. . Vul. Lat. Tabernaculum enim factum est primum, The first Tabernacle was made, ambiguously, as we shall see. Syr. , in Taberna∣culo primo quod factum erat. In the first Tabernacle that was made. ; Vul. Lat. Candelabra Candlesticks. Syr. , In it was the Can∣dlestick. ; Vul. Propositio panum; the Proposition of Loaves. O∣thers, Propositi panes; Syr. , and the bread of faces. ; Vul. quae dicitur sancta; quae dicitur sanctum; quod sancta vocant. For some read , some . Syr. , and it was called The Holy House. For there was a Tabernacle made, (prepared) The first wherein was the Candlestick and the Table, and the shew-bread; which is called the Sanctuary. Our Translation thus rendring the words avoids the ambiguity mentioned in the Vulgar Latine. First of all there was a Tabernacle made. But where∣as our rendring is also obscure, the First being mentioned, where only one thing went before, which yet includes a distribution supposed, I would supply it with two parts. There was a Tabernacle made consisting of two parts. Tabernaculum bipartitè extructum. For the following words are a distinct de∣scription of these two parts. 1. The subject spoken of is the Tabernacle. 2. That which in general is affirmed of it is, that it was made. 3. There is a distribution of it into two parts in this and the following verse. 4. These parts are described and di∣stinguished by (1) Their names. (2) Their situation with respect unto one another. (3) Their Contents or sacred Utensils. The one is so de∣scribed in this verse. (1) By its situation; it was the first, that which was first entred into. (2) By its Utensils which were three. (1) The Candlesticks. (2) The Table. (3) The Shew-bread. (3) By its name it was called the Sanctuary. 1 The subject treated of is ; that is  the Tabernacle; the .
common name for the whole fabrick, as the Temple was afterwards of the House built by Solomon. An Eminent Type this was of the Incarnation of Christ, whereby the ful∣ness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily; Col. 2. 9. Substantially in the humane nature, as it dwelt Typically and by Representation in this Tabernacle. Hence is it so expressed, He was made flesh, . Joh. 1. 14. and pitched his Tabernacle amongst or with us. The consideration hereof, the Apostle on set purpose fixed on, as the great Concomitant, Priviledge or Glory of the first Covenant whereof he treats; and whose consideration was excellently suited unto his Design. Immediately on the giving of the Law and making that Covenant in Horeb, which was accepted of by the People and solemnly ratified, (Exod. 24. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.) the whole of their remaining station in that place for some months, was taken up, in Moses his receiving Revelations, and the People's making provi∣sion about and for this Tabernacle with what belonged thereunto. Forty daies was Moses in the Mount with God, whilest he instructed him in all things that belonged unto it; so great and glorious was the Design of Divine wisdom in this Tabernacle and its appurtenances. For it was the House wherein his Glory was to dwell; and not only so but a Type and Representa∣tion of the Depth of his counsel in the incarnation of his Son, whereby the Divine Nature would personally dwell in the Humane for ever. 2. It is affirmed of this Tabernacle that it was made. Tabernaculum ex∣tructum, . constructum, praeparatum, ornatum, adornatum; built, prepared, ad∣orned. There is more included in the word than the meer building of the Fa∣brick. For the Apostle in this one word, reflects on and compriseth, (1.) The Provision of materials made by the people; (2) The Workings of those materials by Bezaliel; (3) The Erection of the whole by the Direction of Moses; (4) The Adorning of it unto its use; that is the substance of the Book of Exodus from Chap. 25th. to the end. First, Preparation was made for it; then the materials were wrought; and that with such curious workmanship, accompanied with such rich devoted Ornaments, that it was adorned in its making. It was prepared in its materials, it was wrought into its form, it was beautified in its ornaments, unto all which respect is had in this word. That which principally gave unto it, its Order, Beauty, Glory, and use, was that it was en∣tirely, and in all the Parts and appurtenances of it, made according to the Pattern which God shewed Moses in the Mount. And therefore when it was finished and Erected, all the Parts belonging unto it, and all that was in it was distinctly recounted, and it is added concerning them all, seperately and in con∣junction, they were all made as the Lord commanded Moses. Exod. 40. and 19, 22. For it is the Authority and wisdom of God alone, that gives beauty, use, and order unto all that belongs unto his worship. The first Part of this Tabernacle being so prepared it had its furniture, that was to abide and be used in it. 1. There was in it , the Candlestick. The Vulgar Latine reads can∣delabra in the plural number. Hence many disputes arise among the exposi∣tors . who adhere unto that Translation. Some of them contend that the Apostle hath respect unto the Temple of Solomon wherein were ten Candle∣sticks, five on the one side and five on the other. 1 Kings 7. 49. which is directly contrary to his scope and the words of the Text. Some suppose that the one Candlestick which was in the Tabernacle was intended, but is spoken of in the plural number, because of the six Branches that came out of it, three on each side, and that which went directly upwards made seven, having lamps in them all. Exod. 25. 31. But whereas it is constantly called the Candlestick, and spoken of as one Utensil only, the Apostle could not call it the Candlesticks, for that was but one. Wherefore the most sober of them depart from their common translation, and adhere unto the Original; and make use of the expression to prove that it was the Tabernacle of Moses, and not the Temple of Solomon wherein were ten Candlesticks, that the Apostle refers unto. The making of this Candlestick is particularly described; Exod. 25. 31. to
the end of the chapter. Its frame, measures and use, are not of our present con∣sideration, they may be found in Expositors on that place. It was placed on the South side of the Tabernacle near the Vails that covered the most Holy Place; and over against it on the North side was the Table with the Shew-bread. And in the midst, at the very entrance of the most Holy Place was the Altar of Incense. see Exod. 40. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And this Candlestick was made all of beaten Gold, of one peice, with its lamps and appurtenances without either joynts or screws, which is not without its Mystery. To fit it for its service pure Oyl Olive was to be provided by the way of offering from the People. Exod. 27. 20. And it was the office of the High Priest to order it, that is, to dress its Lamps, every evening and e∣very morning, supplying them with fresh Oyl, and removing whatsoever might be offensive. Exod. 27. 21. And this is called a statute for ever un∣to the Generations of the Priests; on the behalf of the Children of Israel; which manifests the great concernment of the Church in this holy Utensil. On the other side of the Sanctuary over against the Candlestick was the Table and the Shew-bread, which the Apostle reckons as the second Part of the fur∣niture  of this first part of the Tabernacle; distinguishing them from each other; The Table and the Shew-bread. The making of this Table with its measures and use, its form, and fashion, are recorded; Exod. 25. 23, 24. 25, 26, 27. 28, 29. chap, 37. 10, &c.  Table. The manner of its Covering when it was to be carried whilest the Tabernacle was movable, is described, Numb. 4. 7, 8. And it was an Utensil fashioned for Beauty and Glory. Upon this Table, which the Apostle adds, was the Shew-bread. It is here rendred by the Apostle ; the Proposition of the Bread or Leaves; by an Hypallage for ; the Bread of Proposition as it is . rendred; Matth. 12. 4. the Bread that was proposed or set forth. In the Hebrew it is  Bread in the singular number; which the Apostle renders by  in the Plural, as also doth the Evangelist. For that Bread consisted of many loaves; as  properly signifies a loaf. So the LXX render it by  Exod. 25. 30. The number of these leaves or cakes as we call them, was, twelve; and they were set on the Table in two Rows, six in a Row, being laid one upon the other. The Jews say that every loaf was ten hands breadth long, and five hands breadths broad, and seven fingers thick. But this cannot well be reconciled unto the Proportion of the Table. For the Table itself was but two cubits long, and one cubit broad. And whereas it had a Border of an hands breadth round about, nothing could lie on the Table but what was placed within that Border. And seeing a cubit was but five hands breadth, it cannot be con∣ceived how two Rows of loaves, that were ten hands breadth long, and five hands breadth broad, could be placed within that Border. Wherefore they suppose that there were Props of Gold coming up from the Ground that bore the ends of the Cakes. But if so, It could not be said that they were placed on the Table which is expresly affirmed. Wherefore it is certain that they were of such shape, proportion, and measures, as might fitly be placed on the Table within the Border; and more we know not of them. These Cakes were renewed every Sabbath in the morning; the renovation of them being part of the peculiar worship of the Day. The manner of it, as also of the making of them is described; Levit. 24. 5. 9. And because the new Bread was to be brought in and immediately placed in the Room of that which was taken away, it is called absolutely  the continual Bread; Numb. 4. 7. For God says it was to be before him  jugiter; Exod. 25. 30; alwaies or continually. Why it is called  the Bread of faces there is great enquiry. One of the Targums render it inward Bread, for the word is used sometimes for that which looks inward. The LXX , present Bread; or Bread presented. Many think they were so called because they were set forth before the faces of the Priests, and stood in their view when they first entred the Tabernacle. But the Reason of it is plain in the Text.  The Shew∣bread before my face, saith God. They were presented before the Lord as a me∣morial
12 of them, in answer to the 12 Tribes of Israel. The Jews think they were called Bread of faces, because being made in an oblong square, they appeared with many faces, that is, as many as they had sides. But they cannot evince this to have been the fashion of them; and it is absurd to imagine that they had such a name given unto them, for their outward form. This is all that the Apostle observes to have been in the first Part of the Ta∣bernacle. There was in it moreover the Altar of Incense. But this was not placed in the midst of it at any equal distances from the sides, but just at the west end where the Vail opened to give an entrance into the most Holy Place; wherefore by our Apostle it is reckoned unto that Part of the Sanctu∣ary, as we shall see on the next verse. Concerning this Part of the Tabernacle, the Apostle affirmes that it was called , Holy. This name of it was given and stated; Exod. 26. 33. The . Vail shall divide  between the Holy, that is, that Part of the Sanctuary, and the most Holy, which our Apostle de∣scribes in the next Place. And we may observe; that, Every Part of Gods House, and the Place wherein he will dwell, is filled and adorned with Pledges of his Presence, and meanes of communicating his Grace; Such were all the Parts of the furniture of this Part of the Tabernacle. And so doth God dwell in his Church, which in some sense is his Tabernacle with men. But the Principal enquiry about these things is concerning their mystical sig∣nification and use. For by the Apostle they are only proposed in general, un∣der this notion, that they were all Typical Representations of things spiritual and evangelical. Without this He had no concernment in them. This there∣fore we shall enquire into. We may in this matter be supplyed by expositors with variety of Conject∣ures. But none of them, so far as I have observed, have at all endeavour∣ed to fix any certain Rule for the Trial and Measure of such conjectures, nor to guide us in the interpretation of this mystery. Some say the Candlestick with its Branches, represented the seven Planets, the Sun in the midst, as the Scapus of the Candlestick was in the midst of the six Branches, three on the one side and three on the other. And the Loaves of Bread, say they, did represent the fruits of the earth, as influenced by the Heaven∣ly Bodys. This is the Interpretation of Philo, a Iew and Platonical Philosopher; and it doth not unbecome his Principles. But that any Christian writer should approve of it, I somewhat wonder, nor doth it deserve a confutation. Some say that the Altar of Incense signified those that are of a contemplative Life; the Table of Shew-bread those that follow the active Life; and the Candle∣stick those that follow both of them. The pretended Reasons of this Applica∣tion of these things may be seen in the commentaries of Ribera and Tena on this Place. Some with more Sobriety and Probability, affirm the Candlestick to repre∣sent the Ministry of the Church, appointed for the Illumination of it, and the Table with the Shew-bread, the Ordinances as administred by them; which things are declared succinctly by Gomarus on this Place; and unto them they may have safely a secondary Application. But as was said, a Rule is to be fixed to guide us in the Interpretation of the mystical signification of these things and the application of them, without which we shall wander in uncertain and unapproveable conjectures. And it is plainly given us in the context. For therein are two things manifest. (1) That the Tabernacle and all contained in it were Typical of Christ. This is di∣rectly affirmed, chap. 8. 2. as hath been evinced in the exposition of that place. And it is the Design of the Apostle further to declare and confirm it in what remaines of this chapter. (2) That the Lord Christ in this Repre∣sentation of him by the Tabernacle its Utensils and Services, is not considered absolutely, but as the Church is in mystical Union with him. For he is pro∣posed, set forth, and described in the discharge of his mediatory Office. And these things give us an evident Rule in the investigation of the Original signi∣ficancy
of the Tabernacle, with all the Parts, Furniture, and Services of it, and the design of God therein. They were all Representative of Christ in the Discharge of his Office, and by them did God instruct the Church as unto their faith in him and expectation of him. This is excellently observed by Cyrill. in Iohan. lib. 4. chap. 28. Christus licét unus sit, multifariam tamen à nobis intelligitur. Ipse est Tabernaculum prop∣ter carnis tegumentum; Ipse est mensa, quia noster cibus est et vita; Ipse est Arca habens legem Dei reconditam, quia est verbum Patris; Ipse est candelabrum, quia est Lux Spiritualis; Ipse est Altare incensi, quia est odor suavitatis in Sancti∣ficationem; Ipse est Altare Holocausti, quia est hostia pro totius mundi vit a in cruce oblata. And other Instances he gives unto the same purpose. And al∣though I cannot comply with all his particular Applications, yet the Ground he builds upon, and the Rule he proceeds by are firm and stable, And by this Rule we shall enquire into the signification of the things mentioned by the A∣postle in the first part of the Tabernacle. 1. The Candlestick with its seven Branches and its perpetual Light with pure Oyl, giving Light unto all Holy Administrations, did represent the fullness of Spiritual Light, that is in Christ Jesus, and which by him is communi∣cated unto the whole Church. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men; Ioh. 1. 4. God gave unto him the Spirit not by measure; Ioh. 3. 34. And the Holy Spitit rested on him in all variety of his Gifts and Operations, especially those of Spiritual Light, Wisdom and Understanding Isa. 11. 2. 3. And in allusion unto this Candlestick with its seven Lamps, is called the seven Spirits that are before the Throne of God; Revel. 1. 4; as He, in and by whom the Lord Christ gives out the fullness and perfection of spirituall Light and Gifts unto the illumination of the Church; even as the Light of the Ta∣bernacle depended on the seven Lamps of the Candlestick. Wherefore by the Communication of the fullness of the Spirit in all his Gifts and Graces un∣to Christ, he became the fountain of all spiritual Light unto the Church. For he subjectively enlightens their minds by his Spirit; Ephes. 1. 17, 18, 19. and objectively and doctrinally conveys the means of Light unto them by his word. Again; There was one Candlestick which contained the holy Oyl, (a Type of the spirit) in it self. Thence was it communicated unto the Branches on each side of it, that they also should give Light unto the Tabernacle; Yet had they originally no oyl in themselves, but only what was continually com∣municated unto them from the body of the Candlestick. And so the communi∣cations from Christ of spiritual Gifts unto the Ministers of the Gospel whereby they are instrumental In the Illumination of the Church, was signified thereby. For unto every one of us is given Grace according unto the measure of the Gift of Christ even as he pleaseth. Ephes. 4. 7. But hereon we must also remember, that this Candlestick was all one beaten work of pure Gold both the Scapus, the Body, and all the Branches of it. There were neither joynts, nor screws, nor pins in or about it. Exod. 25. 36. Where∣fore unless ministers are made Partakers of the divine nature of Christ, by that faith which is more precious than Gold, and are intimately united unto him, so as mystically to become one with him, no pretended conjunction unto him by joynts and screws of outward order, will enable them to derive that pure oyl from him, with whose burning Light they may illuminate the Church. But this I submitt unto the Judgment of others. This is of faith herein. That which God instructed the Church in by this holy Utensil and its Use, was that the promised Messiah, whom all these things typed and represented, was to be by the fullness of the spirit in himself, and the communication of all Spiritual Graces and Gifts unto others, the only cause of all true saving Light unto the Church. He is the true Light which lighteneth every man coming into the world, namely, that is savingly enlightened. Upon the entrance of Sin, all things fell into Darkness; spiritual darkness covered mankind, not unlike that which was on the face of the deep, before God said let there be Light and there was Light. 2 Cor. 4, 6. And this darkness had two parts; first, that which was external
with respect unto the will of God concerning Sinners and their acceptance with him; secondly, on the minds of men in their incapacity to receive such divine Revelations unto that end as were or should be made. This was the double Vail, the Vail vailed and the Covering covered over the face of all Nations, which was to be destroyed; Isa. 25. 7. And they are both removed by Christ alone, the former by his Doctrine, the latter by his Spirit. Moreo∣ver there was no Light at all in the Sanctuary for the performance of any holy Administrations, but what was given unto it by the Lamps of this Candlestick. And therefore was it to be carefully dressed every morning and evening by a perpetual Statute. And if the communication of spiritual Gifts and Graces do cease, the very Church it self notwithstanding its outward order, will be a place of Darkness. Obs. 1. The Communication of sacred Light from Christ in the Gifts of the Spirit, is absolutely necessary unto the due and acceptable performance of all holy Offices and Duties of worship in the Church. And, 2. No man by his utmost endeavours in the use of outward means can obtain the least beam of saving Light, unless it be communicated unto him by Christ, who is the only fountain and cause of it. The Table and the Shew-bread mentioned in the next place, respected him also under another consideration. The use of the Table which was all overlaid with Gold was only to bear the bread which was laid upon it. What resem∣blance there might be therein unto the Divine Person of Christ, which sustain∣ed the humane nature in its duties, that Bread of Life which was provided for the Church, It may be is not easie to declare. Howbeit the Head of Christ is said to be as the most fine Gold; Cant. 5. 11. Wherefore the matter of it be∣ing most precious, and the form of it beautifull and glorious, it might as far re∣present it, as any thing would do which is of this Creation, as all these things were; ver. 11. But that the Lord Christ is the only Bread of life unto the Church, the only Spiritual Food of our Souls, he himself doth fully testifie. Ioh. 6. 32. 35. He therefore, He alone was represented by this continual Bread of the Sanctuary VER. 3, 4, 5. ; But after the second Vail, or Covering. Our Latine Translation reads; post medium velum; that is, after the Vail that was in the midst; For there were not three Vails whereof this should be in the midst, but two only. The Syriack somewhat changeth the words. The inner Tabernacle which was within the face of the second Gate. The same thing is intended; but the inner is added; and after the second Vail is expressed by an Hebraism. what  is, which is rendred velum, and velamentum, a Vail, a Coverng, and by the Syriack a Gate of entrance; we shall see afterwards. ; quod dicitur; quod vocatur. Syr. it was called. ; aureum habens thuribulum; having the Golden Censer; Syr. and there were in it the house of incense of Gold; whereby either the Altar or the Censer may be understood. . Syr. and there was in it; refer∣ring plainly to the Ark. ; non est tempus; non est propositum; It is not a time or place; It is not my purpose to speak; non est mode di∣cendum; ; singulatim; Vul. Lat. per singula, Arias per partes. Syr.
by one and one, apart, particularly, according to the parts laid down distinctly. The Syriak adds the following words unto these; it is not time to speak of these things by one and one, which were thus disposed. But the Original refers that expression unto what follows. VER. 3, 4, 5. And after the Vail the Tabernacle which is called the Holiest of all; which had the Golden Censer and the Ark of the Covenant overlaid (covered) round about (on every side) with Gold; wherein was the Golden Pot that had Manna; and Aaron's Rod that budded, and the Tables of the Covenant; and over it the Cherubims of Glory shadowing the Mercy-seat; of which (things) we cannot (shall not) now speak particularly. The Apostle in these verses proceedeth unto the description of the second part of the Tabernacle, with the things contained in it, or the holy fur∣niture thereof. His design is not to give us an exact description of these things, as he declares in the close of the sift verse, but only to declare their use and signification. Wherefore he doth not propose an accurate account of their station and relation one to another, but makes such mention of them in general as was sufficient unto his end, namely, to manifest their use and signification. Wherefore they deal injuriously both with him and the Text, who rigidly examine every word and passage, as though he had designed an exact account of the frame, positure, fashion, and measure of this part of the Tabernacle, and every thing con∣tained in it; whereas the use and signification of the whole is all that lie intends. A due consideration hereof renders the anxious enquiry, that hath been made about the assignation of holy Utensils unto this part of the Sanctu∣ary, and the placing of them with respect unto one another, which was no part of his design, altogether needless. For with respect unto the end he aimed at, the words he useth are exactly the truth. He describes this part of the Tabernacle; (1) From its Situation; it was after the second Vail. (2) From its name given unto it by God himself; it was called the Holiest of all, or the Holy of Holies. (3) From its Utensils or Vessels which were, (1) The Golden Censer. (2) The Ark. (3) What was in it or with it. (1) The Golden Pot that had Manna. (2) Aaron's Rod. (3) The Tables of the Covenant. (4) The Cherubims; which he describes, (1) From their Quality; Cheru∣bims of Glory. (2) Their Use; they shadowed the Mercy-seat. (5) The Mercy-seat it self. But this is mentioned as it were only occasional∣ly with respect unto the use of the Cherubims. And this sufficiently manifests that in the rehearsal of these things the Apostle designeth not Accuracy and order. For the Mercy-seat was for glory and significati∣on far above the Cherubims wherewith it was overshadowed. With respect unto these things among others in another place, he affirms that the ministration of divine worship under the Law was glorious. But withal he adds that it had no glory in comparison of that which doth excel; namely, the spiritual ministration of divine worship under the Gospel. 2 Cor. 3. 1. And this is that which we should always mind in the consideration of these things. For if we yet look after, and value such an outward glory as they did exhibit, we are carnal, and cannot be∣hold the beauty of spiritual things. The verbal difficulties which occur in this context, have occasioned Critical Expositors to labour greatly about them. That is the Field where∣in they choose to exercise their skill and diligence. But as unto the things themselves, and the difficulties that are in the real interpretation
of them, little light is contributed by most of their endeavours. Where∣fore some of these words have been so belaboured with all sorts of con∣jectures, that there is no room left for any addition in the same kind: And it were but lost labour to repeat what must be confuted if it were mentioned. I shall therefore take no farther notice of any difficulty in the words, but as the explication of it is necessary unto the interpreta∣tion of the context, and so far nothing shall be omitted. The first thing mentioned by the Apostle, is the Situation of this part of the Tabernacle; it was after the second Vail. It was so unto  them that entered into the Tabernacle, they were to pass through the whole length of the first part, before they came unto this; nor was there any other way of entrance into it. And by calling this Partition of the two parts of the Sanctuary, the second Vail, the Apostle intimates that there was a former. Howbeit that former was not a seperating Vail of any part of the Tabernacle as this was. It was only the hanging of the Door of the Tent. This the Apostle here reckons as a Vail, because as by this Vail the Priests were hindred from entering into, or looking into the most Holy Place, so by that other the People were forbidden to enter or look into the first part of the Sanctuary, whereinto the Priests entered daily. The making of the first Vail is declared, Exod. 26. 36.r 37. and it is called  the hanging or covering for the door. The making of this second Vail is declared, Exod 26. ver. 31, 32, 33. and it is cal∣led the Vail or Covering. The Apostle renders it by ; as also it is Matth. 27. 51. where it is spoken of in the Temple: And so it is rendred by the LXX. Exod. 26. 31. As the former is called , a Covering. From , which is to ex∣tend, to stretch out so as to cover with it what is so extended, is , a Vail to be a Covering unto any thing; dividing one thing from another; as , is that which covereth any thing round about; such was this Vail. The End, Use and Signification of it the Apostle expresly declares ver. 8th. where they must be spoken unto. 2. He describes this Part of the Tabernacle by its name; it is called the most Holy; the Holy of Holies.  So it is called by God him∣self;  Exod. 26. 33, 34. The Holy of Holies; that is, most Holy; the Super∣lative Degree expressed by the Repetition of the Substantive, as is usual in the Hebrew. Some give instances of this kind of Phraseology in Greek wri∣ters, remote enough from Hebraisms; as Sophocles. ; mise∣ra miserarum es; that is, miserrima. But however the phrase of  may be Greek, the Apostle intends to express the Hebraism itself. And Holy in the Hebrew is of the singular number; Holies of the plu∣ral; but in the Greck both are of the plural number. And what is thus called was most eminently Typical of Christ who is called by this name, Dan. 9. 24. to anoint the most Holy. The place in the Tabernacle which was most sacred, and most secret, which had the most eminent Pledges or Symbols of the divine presence, and the clearest Representations of God in Christ, reconciling the word unto himself, is so called. The more of Christ by the way of representation or exhibition any instituti∣ons of divine worship do contain or express, the more sacred and Holy are they in their use and exercise. But It is Christ alone who in himself is really the Most Holy, the Spring and Fountain of all holiness unto the Church. 3. The first Utensil reckoned unto this second part of the Tabernacle is, ; and the relation of it thereunto is, that it had it; .  He doth not say it was in it, but it had it. If any one would see the various conjectures of learned men about this assertion of the Apostle, as also about that following concerning what was contained in the Ark, He may consult the collections of Mr. Pool on the place, where he will find them represented in one view. My design being only to declare what I conceive consonant unto the truth, I shall not spend time in repeating or refuting the conjectures of other men.
, we translate a Censer; but it may as well be rendred the Al∣ar of Incense; as it is by the Syriack the House of Spices; the place for the Spices whereof the Incense was compounded. The Altar of Incense was all overlaid with beaten Gold, hence it is here said to be , of Gold. And whereas it was one of the most glorious vessels of the Tabernacle, and most significant, if the Apostle intended it not in this word, he takes no notice of it at all, which is very unlikely. And of this Altar he says not, that it was in the second Tabernacle, but that it had it. And in that expression he respects not its situation, but its Use. And the most Holy Place may well be said to have the Altar of Incense; be∣cause the High Priest could never enter into that place nor perform any ser∣vice in it, but he was to bring Incense with him, taken in a Censer from this Altar. Whereas therefore there was a two fold use of the Altar of Incense; the one of the Ordinary Priests, to burn Incense in the Sanctuary every day, and the other of the High Priest to take Incense from it when he entered into the most Holy Place, to fill it with a cloud of its smoak; the Apostle intending a comparison peculiarly between the Lord Christ and the High Priest only in this Place, and not the other Priests in the daily discharge of their office, he takes no notice of the use of the Altar of Incense in the Sanctuary, but only of that which respected the most Holy Place, and the entrance of the High Priest thereinto. For so he expresly applyes it ver. 12. And therefore he affirms this Place to have had this Golden Altar, its principal use and end being designed unto the service thereof. This I judge to be the true meaning of the Apostle, and sense of his words, and shall not therefore trouble my self nor the reader with the repetition or confutation of other conjectures. And that this was the principal use of this Altar is plainly declared in the order for the making and disposal of it. Exod. 30. 6. Thou shalt put it before the Vail, that is, by the Ark of the Testi∣mony before the Mercy-seat, that is, over the Testimony where I will meet with them. Although it was placed without the Vail, and that for this end, that the High Priest might not enter one step into the most Holy Place, until the smoak of the Incense went before him; yet had it peculi∣ar respect unto the Ark and Mercy-seat, and is therefore reckoned in the same place and service with them by the Apostle. And this is yet made further evident in that when the High Priest en∣tred into the most Holy Place, and had no service to perform but with respect unto the things pertaining thereunto, he was to make atonement on this Altar with the blood of the Sin-offering, as he did on the Ark and Mercy-seat, Exod. 30. 10. This is an undeniable demonstration that as unto the use of it, it belonged principally unto the most Holy Place, and is here so declared by the Apostle. Wherefore the assignation hereof unto that place by the Author is so far from an objection against the Authority of the Epistle, unto which end it hath by some been made use of, as that it is an argument of his divine wisdom and skill in the nature and use of these institutions. The manner of the service of this Altar intended by the Apostle was briefly thus. The High Priest on the solemn day of expiation that is once a year, took a Golden Censer from this Altar: After which going out of the Sanctuary he put fire into it, taken from the Altar of Burnt-Offer∣ings without the Tabernacle in the Court where the perpetual fire was preserved. Then returning into the Holy Place, he filled his hands with Incense taken from this Altar, the place of the residence of the Spices. And this Altar being placed just at the entrance of the most Holy Place over a∣gainst the Ark and Mercy-seat, upon his entrance he put the Incense on the fire in the Censer, and entred the Holy Place with a cloud of the smoak thereof. see Levit. 16. 12. 13. The composition and making of this In∣cense is declared. Exod. 30. 34. 35. &c. And being compounded it was beaten small, that it might immediately take fire, and so placed on this Al∣tar before the Ark, ver. 36. And the placing of this Incense before the Testimony, as is there affirmed, is the same with what our Apostle affirms, that the most Holy Place had it.
That in general by Incense, Prayer is signified, the Scripture expressly testi∣fieth. Let my Prayer come before thee as Incense, Psal. 141. 2. And there is a fourfould Resemblance between them. (1.) In that it was Beaten and Pound∣ed before it was used. So doth acceptable Prayer proceed from a broken and contrite Spirit, Psal. 51. 17. (2.) It was of no use untill fire was put under it, and that taken from the Altar. Nor is that Prayer of any Vertue or Essi∣cacy, which is not kindled by the fire from above, the Holy Spirit of God, which we have from our Altar Christ Jesus. (3.) It naturally ascended upwards towards Heaven, as all Offerings in the Hebrew are called  aseensions risings up. And this is the Design of Prayer, to ascend unto the Throne of God: I will direct unto thee, and look up; that is, Pray, Psal. 5. 3. (4.) It yielded a sweet savour which was one end of it in Temple services, wherein there was so much burning of flesh and blood. So doth prayer yeild a sweet savour un∣to God; a savour of Rest wherein he is well pleased. In this general sense even the Prayers of the Saints might be typified and represented in that daily burning of Incense which was used in the Sanctuary. But it must be granted that this Incense is distinguished from the Prayers of the Saints, as that which is in the hand of Christ alone, to give Vertue and Efficacy unto them, Revel. 8. 4. Wherefore this Golden Altar of Incense as placed in the Sanctuary, and whereon Incense burned continually every Morning and Evening, was a Type of Christ, by his Mediation and Intercessi∣on giving Efficacy unto the continual Prayers of all Believers. But that which the Apostle in this place hath alone respect unto, was the burning of the Incense in the Golden Censer on the day of Expiation when the High Priest entered into the most Holy Place. And this Represented only the personal Mediatory Prayer of Christ himselfe. Concerning it we may observe. 1. That the time of it was after the Sacrifice of the Sin-Offering. For the High Priest was to take along with him the Blood of that Sacrifice, to carry with him into the Holy Place, Levit. 16. 2. That the Incense was kindled with Fire taken from the Altar, where the Blood of the Sacrifices was newly offered. And two things in the Mediatory Prayer of Christ are hereby intimated unto us. 1. That the Efficacy of them ariseth from, and dependeth on the Sacrifice of himself. Hence Intercession is best apprehended, as the Representation of himself, and the Efficacy of his sacrifice in Heaven before the Throne of God. 2. That this Prayer was quickened and enlivened by the same fire where∣with the Sacrifice of himself was kindled, that is, by the eternal spirit, whereof we shall treat on ver. 14th. Yet we must not so oblige our selves unto the times, seasons, and order of these things, as to exclude the prayers which he offered unto God, before the oblation of himself. Yea that solemn prayer of his recorded Ioh. 17. wherein he sanctified himself to be an oblation, was principal∣ly prefigured by the cloud of incense which filled the most Holy Place, covering the Ark and Mercy-seat. For by reason of the imperfection of these Types and their accommodation unto the present service of the Church so far as it was carnal, they could not represent the order of things as they were to be accomplished in the person of Christ, who was both Priest and Sacrifice, Altar, Tabernacle and Incense. For the Law had on∣ly a shadow of these things and not the perfect image of them. Some obscure lines of them were drawn therein, but their beautiful order was not represented in them. Although therefore the offering of incense from the Golden Altar in the most holy Place, was after the offering of Sacrifice on the Altar of burnt-offerings, yet was the mediatory Prayer of Christ for the Church of the elect, wherein he also prepared and sanctified him∣self to be a sacrifice, thereby typified. So also the beating or bruising of the incense before its firing did represent the Agony of his soul, with strong cryes and supplications that he offered unto God therein. And we may observe.
1. The mediatory intercession of Iesus Christ was a sweet savour unto God, and essicacious for the salvation of the Church. The smoak of this perfume was that which covered the Ark and Mercy-seat. Hereby the Law itself which was contained in the Ark, became compliant unto our salvation. For here∣in Christ was declared to be the end of the Law for righteousness unto them that do believe. 2. The efficacy of Christs Intercession dependeth on his oblation. It was fire from the Altar of Burnt-Offerings, wherewith the incense was kindled. 3. The Glory of these Types did no way answer the Glory of the Antitype, or that which was represented by them. It is acknowledged that the ser∣vice of the High Priest at and from this Golden Altar, and his entrance with a cloud of incense into the most Holy Place, had great Glory in it, and was suited to ingenerate a great veneration in the minds of the People. Howbeit they were all but carnal things, and had no glory in comparison of the spiritual Glory of Christ in the discharge of his office. We are apt in our minds to admire these things, and almost to wish that God had or∣dained such a service in the Gospel so outwardly Glorious. For there is that in it which is suited unto these Images of things which men create and are delighted withal in their minds. And besides, they love in divine service to be taken up with such a bodily exercise, as carries Glory with it, an appearance of solemn veneration. Wherefore many things are found out by men unto these ends. But the reason of all is because we are car∣nal. We see not the Glory of spiritual things, nor do know how to be exercised in our minds about them, with pure acts of Faith and Love. 4. We are alwaies to reckon that the Efficacy and Prevalency of all our Prayers depends on the Incense which is in the hand of our merciful High Priest. It is offered with the Prayers of the Saints, Revel. 8. 4. In themselves our Prayers are weak, and imperfect, it is hard to conceive how they should find acceptance with God. But the unvaluable Incense of the Intercession of Christ, gives them Acceptance and Prevalency. The second thing in this Part of the Tabernacle mentioned by the Aposte is the Ark. This he describes(1.)from its Appellation; the Ark of the Covenant. (2.) From one particular in its Fabrick, it was overlaid round about with Gold. (3.) From the things that were in it, accompanied it, and had no other use but to be laid up in it; The Golden Pot that had Manna; and Aarons Rod that Blossomed. (4.) From what was Placed in it, which to preserve was its principal use; The Tables of the Covenant. This Vessel in the Hebrew is called , As the Ark in the flood . was called . But the Greeks render both by , as the La∣tines by Arca. This with the Mercy-Seat wherewith it was covered, was the most Glorious and Mysterious Utensil of the Tabernacle and afterwards of the Temple; the most eminent Pledge of the Divine presence the most Mysterious Representation of the Holy Properties of his Nature in Christ. This, as the Heart of all Divine service, was first formed; all other things had a Relation unto it, Exod. 25. 10, 11. To treat of the Fabrick, that is, the Materials, Dimensions and Fashion of this Ark is not unto our present purpose. For these things the Apostle him∣self here declares, as being no season to treat of them particularly. This he in∣tends in those words, which we shall not now speak of and their mystical signi∣fication which he gives afterwards. 1. The Name of it is the Ark of the Covenant. Sometimes it is called the Ark of the Testimony, Exod. 26. 33. Chap. 29. 35. Chap. 40. 3, 5. Most com∣monly . the Ark of the Covenant. Numb. 10. 33. Chap. 14. 44. Deut. 10. 8. &c. Sometimes the Ark of God, 1 Sam. 3. 3. Sam. 6. 2. &c. The Ark of the Testi∣mony it was called, because God called the Tables of the Covenant by the name of his Testimony or that which testified his Will unto the People, and by the Peoples acceptance of the Termes of it, was to be a perpetual witness between God and them, Exod. 25. 16. Chap. 31. 18. &c. On the same account is it called the Ark of the Covenant, namely because of what was contained in it, or the Tables of the Covenant, which as I have shewed elsewhere were usually called
the Covenant itself. And so they are called the Tables of Testimony, Exod. 31. 18. That is, the Covenant which was the Testimony of God. And lastly it was called the Ark of God, because it was the most eminent Pledge of the especial Presence of God among the People. 2. As to the Fabrick of it, the Apostle observes in particular that it . was on every side overlaid or covered with Gold. , every way, within and without, with Plates of beaten Gold. This, as I said before, was the most sacred and glorious Instrument of the San∣ctuary; Yea, the whole Sanctuary as unto its use in the Church of Israel, was built for no other end but to be as it were an house and habit ation for this Ark, Exod. 26. 33. Chap. 40. 21. Hence Sanctification proceeded unto all the other Parts of it; for, as Solomon observed, the places were holy whereunto the Ark of God came. 2 Chron. 8. 11. And of such sacred veneration was it among the People, so severe was the Exclusion of all flesh from the sight of it, the High Priest only excepted, who entered that holy Place once a year and that not without Blood; as that the Nations about, took it to be the God that the Is∣raelites worshiped. 1 Sam. 4. 8. And it were not difficult to evidence that many of the pretended Mysterious ceremonies of Worship, that prevailed among the Nations of the World afterwards, were invented in compliance with what they had heard concerning the Ark and Worship of God there∣by. This was the most signal Token, Pledge or Symbol of the Presence of God among the People. And thence Metonymically it hath sometimes the name of God, ascribed unto it, as some think; and of the Glory of God, Psal. 73. 61. And all neglects about it, or contempt of it were most severely punished. From the Tabernacle it was carried into the Temple built by Solomon; where it continued untill the Babylonian Captivity; and what became of it afterwards is altogether uncertain. God gave this Ark that it might be a Representation of Christ, as we shall shew; and he took it away, to increase the desire and expectation of the Church, after him and for him. And, As it was the Glory of God to hide and cover the mysterious counsels of his Will under the Old Testament, whence this Ark was so hidden from the Eyes of all men; so under the New Testament it is his Glory to reveal and make them open in Iesus Christ. 2 Cor. 3. 18. 4. In this Ark, as it was placed in the Tabernacle, the Apostle affirmeth that there were three things. (1.) The Golden Pot that had Manna. When the Man∣na . first fell, every one was commanded to gather an Omer, for his own eating Exod. 16. 16. Hereon God appointed that a Pot should be provided, which should hold an Omer, to be filled with Manna to be laid up before the Lord for their generations, ver. 33. There was it miraculously preserved from Pu∣tresaction, whereas of it self it would not keep two daies unto an end. And it is added, that as the Lord commanded Moses so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony to be kept, ver. 34. But there is a Prolepsis in the words; Aaron is said to do what he did afterwards. For the Testimony was not yet given, nor Aaron yet consecrated unto his Office. It is not said in this Place where the making of it is appointed, that it is of Gold; nor is there any mention of what matter it was made. That it was of Gold the Apostle here declares who wrote by Inspiration, and the thing is evident it self: For it was to be placed in that part of the Sanctuary wherein all the Vessels were either of pure Gold, or at least overlaid with it; and a Pot of another Nature would have been unsuitable thereunto. And it was to be made of that which was most durable, as being to be kept for a Memorial through∣out all Generations. The Reason of the sacred Preservation of this Manna in the most Holy Place  was, because it was a Type of Christ; as himself declares; Ioh. 6. 48, 49, 50, 51. 5. The next thing mentioned is Aaron's Rod that budded. This Rod origi∣nally was that where with Moses fed the sheep of his Father-in-Law Iethro, in the Wilderness, which he had in his hand when God called unto him out of the Bush. And thereon God ordained it to be the Token of the putting forth of his
Power in the working of Miracles, having by a trial confirmed the Faith of Moses concerning it, Exod. 4. 17. Hereby it became sacred; and when Aaron was called unto the Office of the Priesthood, it was delivered unto his keep∣ing. For on the budding of it on the trial about the Priesthood, it was laid up before the Testimony, that is, the Ark, Numb. 17. 10. That same Rod did Moses take from before the Testimony, when he was to smite the Rock with it, and work a miracle, whereof this was consecrated to be the outward sign, Numb. 20. 8, 9, 10, 11. Hereof the Apostle affirms only that it budded; but in the story it is, that it brought forth Buds and Bloomed Blossoms, and yielded Almonds; being originally cut from an Almond Tree, Numb. 17. 8. But the Apostle mentions what was sufficient unto his Purpose. This Rod of Moses belonged unto the Holy Furniture of the Tabernacle; be∣cause the Spiritual Rock, that followed them, was to be smitten with the Rod of the Law; that it might give out the Waters of Life unto the Church. 6. The last thing mentioned is the Tables of the Covenant. The two Tables of Stone cut out by Moses and written on with the finger of God, contain∣ing . the Ten Commandments, which were the substance of Gods Covenant with the People. This Testimony, this Covenant, these Tables of Stone with the Moral Law engraven in them, were by the express command of God put into the Ark, Exod. 25. 16. Chap. 33. 18. Chap. 40. 20. Deut. 10. 5. And there was nothing else in the Ark but these two Tables of Stone with the Law written in them; as is expresly affirmed, 1 Kings 8. 9. 2 Chron. 5. 10. Wherefore whereas it is said of Aaron's Rod, and the Pot of Manna, that they were placed before the Testimony, Exod. 16. 34. Numb. 17. 10. that is, the Ark; and the Book of the Law was also put into the side of it, that is, laid beside it; Deut. 31. 26. and not only are the Tables of Stone appointed expresly to be put into the Ark; but also it is likewise affirmed that there was nothing else in the Ark but these Tables of Stone; This Place of the Apostle hath been exceedingly tor∣tured and perplexed by Criticks, and all sorts of Expositors, with multiplied conjectures, Objections and Solutions. I know not that the Repetition of them in this place would be of any use; Those who have a mind to exercise themselves about them, do know where to find them. I shall therefore give only that interpretation of the words, which, for the Substance of it, all sober Expositors do at least betake themselves unto. The true real positure of these things was after this manner. In the closed Ark, there was nothing at all but the two Tables of Stone. Before it, or at the ends of it, adjoyning unto it, were the Pot of Manna, and the miracle-working Rod. Neither of these were of any actual use in the service of God, but only were kept as sacred Memorials. Unto this end being placed by it, they were joyned unto, and reckoned with the Ark. This appurtenance of them unto the Ark, the Apostle expresseth by the Preposition  from the Hebrew  Now this preposition is so frequently used in the Scripture to signify, adhesion, conjunction, approximation, Appurtenance of one thing unto another, that it is meer Cavilling to assign it any other signification in this place, or to restrain it unto inclusion only, the things themselves requiring that sense. See Job 19. 20. Deut. 6. 7. 1 Sam. 1. 42. Hos. 4. 3. Luke 1. 17. Iosh. 10. 10. Matth. 21. 12. And a Multitude of In∣stances are gathered by others.
VER. 5. And over it the Cherubims of Glory, Shadowing the Mercy-Seat; of which things we cannot now speak particularly. THE Apostle proceedeth in his Description of the immediate appurte∣nances of the Ark. He hath declared what was disposed with reference unto it, as the Golden Censer; what was before it, as the Pot of Manna and Aaron's Rod; what was within it, namely, the Tables of the Covenant. Now he sheweth what was over it, so giving an account of its whole Furniture, and all that any way belonged unto it. Two things he adds; namely, (1.) The Cherubims; (2.) The Mercy-Seat. And first he describes the Cherubims; (1.) By their positure; they were over the Ark. (2.) By their Title; Cherubims of Glory. (3.) Their use; they Shadow∣ed the Mercy-Seat. The Making, Form, Fashion and Use of these Cherubims is declared Exod. 25. . The signification of the Name, and their original shape or form, any farther then that they were alata animata, winged Creatures, are not certainly known. Most as unto the Derivation of the Name follow Kimchi; who affirms the Letter Caph to be servile and a note of Similitude; and the word to signify a Youth or a Child. Such these Images are thought to represent; only they had Wings instead of Arms, as we now usually paint Angels; for their Bodies, Sides and Feet are mentioned in other places, Isa. 6. 2. Ezek. 1. 5, 6, 7. where they are expresly said to have the Shape of a man. Wherefore both as they were first▪ framed for the Tabernacle, and afterwards for the Temple, when their Dimensions were exceedingly enlarged, they were of humane shape; only with wings to denote the Angelical Nature. They were two of them, one at each end of the Ark or Mercy-Seat. Their faces were turned inwards one towards another, so as that their wings touched one another. This Posture, gave unto the whole work of the Ark, Mercy-Seat and Cherubims, the form of a Seat, which represented the Throne of God. From thence he spake, whence the whole was called  the Oracle. As unto their place and posture, they were over the Ark. For these Che∣rubims had feet whereon they stood, 2 Chron. 3. 13. And these feet were joyn∣ed . in one continued beaten work unto the ends of the Mercy-Seat which was upon the Ark; Wherefore they were wholly over it, or above it, as the Apostle here speaks. 2. As unto the Apellation whereby he describes them, it is Cherubims of . Glory: That is say Expositors generally, ; Glorious Cherubims. If so, this term is not given them from the matter whereof they were made. Those indeed in the Tabernacle were of beaten Gold, being but of a small mea∣sure or proportion, Exod. 25. 18. Those in the Temple of Solomon were made of the wood of the Olive Tree only overlaid with Gold. For they were very large extending their wings unto the whole breadth of the Oracle which was twenty Cubits, 1 King. 6. 23. 2 Chron. 3. 10. But such was the matter of other utensils also, as the Candlesticks, which yet are not called the Can∣dlesticks of Glory. Nor are they so called from their shape and fashion: For this, as I have shewed, most probably was humane shape with wings, wherein there was nothing peculiarly glorious. But they are so called from their po∣sture and use. For stretching out their wings on high, and looking inwards with an appearance of veneration, and so compassing the Mercy-Seat with their wings, all but the forepart of it, they made a Representation of a Glorious Seat or Throne, wherein the Majestatical Presence of God did sit and reside. And from between these Cherubims, above the Mercy-Seat it was that God spake
unto Moses, and gave out his Oracles, Exod. 25. 22. As a man on a Throne, speaks above the place where he sits and rests. Hence may they be called the Glorious Cherubims. But I must add, that by glory here, the Majestatical Presence of God him∣self is intended. The Cherubims, that represented the glorious Presence of God himself, as he dwelt among the People. So the Apostle reckoning up the Priviledges of the Hebrews, Rom. 9. 4. affirms that unto them apper∣tained the Adoption and the Glory. And therein not the Ark is intended, al∣though it may be that is sometimes called the Glory, or signified under that name, as 1 Sam. 4. 21, 22. Psal. 26. 8. But it is God himself in his peculiar Residence among the People; that is, in the Representation of his Presence which is in Christ, who is Immanuel, and therefore called the Glory of Israel Luk. 2. 32. The Cherubims being designed to make a Representation hereof, as we shall immediately declare, are called the Cherubims of Glory. As unto their use it is expressed by . The Hebrew word in that . Language is of the Masculine Gender, but the Apostle here useth it in the Neu∣ter, as appeares by this Participle, and so do the LXX where they make menti∣on of them. This, as some suppose, is done because for the most part, they had the form of brute Creatures. For so they say they had four faces, of a man, of a Lyon, of an Oxe, and of an Eagle. But although there was this form in the appearance of them made unto Ezekiel, Chap. 1. 10; Yet was it not so of these Images in the Tabernacle, nor of them afterwards in the Tem∣ple. But the only Reason of this construction is, that Hebrew word not being translated as unto its signification, but literally transformed into the Greek Lan∣guage, is looked on as indeclinable, as all words foreign unto a Language are, and belonging unto the Neuter Gender. Shadowing, Covering, Protecting,  Exod. Chap. 25. Verse 20. They shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering over the Mercy-Seat with their wings; or their wings covering over the Mercy-Seat. But this Office of the Cherubims we cannot understand, untill we have declared what was that Mercy-Seat, which they so covered over, and which the Apostle makes men∣tion of in the last place. The making and frame of it is declared, Exod. 25. 17. In the Hebrew it is called Capporeth or Cipporeth; from Caphar. The verb in Kal, signifies to cover, . to pitch over and thereby to cover, Gen. 6. 14. Thence is Capporeth a Cove∣ring. But this Cipporeth is rendred by our Apostle  a Propitiatory, a Mercy-Seat; as it is also by the LXX sometimes, and sometimes by  an imposed Covering. But whereas in Allusion hereunto, the Lord Christ is said to be ; Rom. 3. 25. and ; 1 Ioh. 2. 2. that sense must be taken in, and so it is constantly rendred by our Translation the Mercy-Seat. And in that sense it is derived from Cipper in Pihel which signifies to remove or take away, and consequently to be propitious and merciful in taking away of sin, as also to appease, atone, reconcile, and purge, whereby sin is taken away. See Gen. 32. 20. to appease; Prov. 16. 14. to pacify; Psal. 65. 3. to purge away, applied to sin. Psal. 78. 38. to forgive Iniquities. Deut. 21. 8. to be merciful, Psal. 79. 9. to expiate. Thence is the day of expiation; the great day of fast unto the Iews. This is the fast which was said to be over, in the storm that Paul and his compa∣nions were in; For it was on the tenth day of the seventh month, about which season Navigation is dangerous. Hence Cipporeth is rendred . A Mercy-seat. Yet if we will have respect also unto the first sense of the verb, and its use in Exodus; we may render it a covering Mercy-seat. The matter of this Mercy-seat was of pure beaten Gold; the measures of it exactly commensurate and answering unto that of the Ark; two cubits and an half the length of it, and a cubit and an half the breadth of it. Exod. 25. 10, 17. As unto the use of it was put  ver. 21. above upon the Ark. What was the Thickness of it, there is no mention. The Jews say it was an hand breadth, which is not likely. However it was of considerable substance; For the Cherubims were beaten out of it, at its ends. ver. 18, 19.
For the Situation and Posture of it; some suppose that it was held in the hands of the Cherubims at a good distance from the Ark: And the reason they give for this conjecture is, that so it did best represent a Throne. The Mercy-seat was as the seat of it, and the Ark as the footstool, for so they say it is called when the Church is invited to worship at his footstool. Psal. 99. 5. But this reason indeed everts the supposition which it was produced to confirm. For the Ark and Mercy-seat being exactly commensurate, and the one placed directly over the other, it could have no appearance of a footstool, which must be placed before the seat itself: Nor is there any mention of the hands of the Cherubims, as there is directly of their feet in those made by Solomon. Nor is it probable they had any, but only wings instead of them; although those in Ezekiel's vision, as they served the providence of God, had the hands of a man under their wings. Chap. 1. 8. Nor could it be called a covering unto the Ark, if it were at that distance from it, as this conceit will make it to be. It was therefore laid immediately on the Ark, so as the Cherubims were represented to be above the Throne; as the Seraphims were in Isaiah's vision. chap. 6. 2. It had, as we observed, the just dimension of the Ark. But the Ark had a crown of Gold round about it; that is, on its sides and its ends. Exod. 25. 11. chap. 37. 2. But this crown or fringe of Gold, was so placed on the outsides of it, that it diminished nothing of its Proportion of two cubits and an half in length, and a cubit and an half in breadth. Wherefore the Mer∣cy-seat being exactly of the same measure, it fell in upon it, on the inside of the border or crown of Gold. It remains only that we enquire whether it were itself the covering of the Ark, or whether the Ark had a covering of its own which it was placed upon. It is certain that the Ark was open when the Testimony or Tables of stone with the Law written in them were put into it. And there is no mention of of the opening or shutting of it, how it should be closed and fastened when the tables were put into it. These things I suppose would not have been omitted had it had a Cover∣ing of its own. Besides it is certain that this Propitiatory, and the Cherubims belonging thereunto, were never to be seperated from the Ark; but when the Ark was removed and carried by the staves, they were carried upon it. This is evident from hence, because whereas all the other golden Utensils had rings and staves wherewith they were born, these had none, but must be carried in the hands of men, if they were not inseparable from the Ark. And when the men of Bethshemesh looked into the Ark, it doth not appear that they first took off the Mercy-seat with the Cherubims, and then brake up the covering of the Ark; but only lifted up the Mercy-seat by the Cherubims, which o∣pened the Ark, and discovered what was therein. Iudg. 6. 19. I do judge therefore that this Mercy-seat was the only covering of the Ark above, fall∣ing in close within the crown of Gold, exactly answering it in its dimensions. Out of this Mercy-seat, of the same substance of it and contiguous unto it the Cherubims being formed, their wings which were above, some distance from it, being turned towards it, did overshadow it, giving a representation of a glorious Throne. This is a brief description of the Utensils of the most holy place. The Ark which was as the heart and center of the whole was placed at the West end of it, with its ends towards the sides of the place, the face as unto the entrance, and the back part unto the West end. Before it, was placed the pot of Manna, and the Rod that budded as afterwards; at one end of it was placed the book of the Law. In the Ark was the Testimony or the 2 Tables of stone with the Law written in them by the finger of God, and nothing else. When they were put into it, it was covered with the Mercy-seat, and that shadowed with the wings of the Cherubims. At the entrance into it was the Golden Altar of Incense with the Golden Censer; which although, as our Apostle shews, it did in its use principally respect the service of this part of the Tabernacle, yet could not
be placed within the vail, because the High Priest was not to enter himself until he had raised a cloud of Incense through which he entred. The Apostle having given this account of the Sanctuary in both parts of it, . and what was contained in them, adds, of which we now cannot speak particu∣larly; or rather, concerning which things it is not now a season to speak particu∣larly, or of the several parts of it, one by one. And the Reason hereof was, because he had an especial design to manage, from the consideration of the whole fabrick, the service of the High Priest in it; which the particular consideration of each part by it self would have too much diverted him from. Howbeit he plainly intimates that all and every one of them in particular were of singular consideration, as Typical of the Lord Christ and his Ministry. For unto this end doth he reckon them up in order. Only it seemed good unto the Holy Ghost, not to give unto the Church a particular application of them in this place, but hath lest it unto our humble diligence to seek after it out of the Scripture, according unto the Analogy of faith, and such rules of the interpretation of those Mysteries as himself giveth in the ensuing declaration of their nature, use and end in general. This therefore I shall briefly endea∣vour, yet so as, according unto the example of the Apostle, not to divert from the especial design of the place. As was said before, so must I say again, expositors either pass by these things without any notice, or indulge unto various conjectures without any certain rule of what they assert. Those of the Roman Church, are generally so taken up with their fourfold sense of the Scripture, Literal, Allegorical, Tropological, and Anagogical, wherein for the most part they know not how to distinguish one from another, that they wrest this and the like passages unto what sense they please. I shall keep my self unto a certain rule, and where that will not guide me, I shall not venture on any conjectures. When Ezekiel had his vision of God in the administration of his providence, he sayes of it, this was the appearance of the likeness of the Glory of the Lord; chap. 1. 28. And we may say of this Holy Place with its furniture; This was the appearance of the likeness of the Glory of the Lord in the administration of Grace. Why God would in this manner, by these means, represent himself and the Glory of his Grace absolutely, we can give no reason but his own holy will and infinite wisdom. But this we find he did, and that with great solemnity. For first he made a glorious Representation of it immediately by his own power in the Mount. He shewed a pattern of it in the Mount, which was not only an Exemplar of what he would have framed here below, but expressive of the Idea in his own mind of good things to come. And thereon he gave com∣mand that it should in all things be made exactly according unto that Pattern, enabling certain persons with wisdom, skill and understanding so to do. And some things we may observe concerning the whole in general. 1. The Nature of the things themselves, or the materials of the whole, being earthly, and the state of the Church unto whose service it was allotted being imperfect and designed so to be, two things did necessary follow thereon; 1. That sundry concernments of it, as the outward shape, form, and dimen∣sions both of the Tabernacle and all its Utensils were accomodated unto the present state of the Church. Hence were they made outwardly glorious and venerable; for the People being comparatively carnal were affected with such things. Hence were they all portable also at their first institution, to comply with the state of the People in the wilderness; whence alterations were made in all of them, excepting the Ark and Mercy-seat, on the building of the Temple. In these things therefore we are not to seek for any mystical signifi∣cation, for they were only in compliance with present use. They served, as the Apostle immediately declares, unto the use of carnal ordinances, which were to continue unto the time of Reformation only. 2. That the resemblance of heavenly things in them, was but dark and obscure as the Apostle expresly affirms, chap. 10. 1. This both the nature of the
things themselves, being earthly and carnal, with that state wherein the Church was to be kept unto the fullness of time, did require, 2. This yet is certain and indubitable, which gives us our stable rule of the Interpretation of their significancy, that God chose this way and these means to represent his glorious presence in and with the Lord Christ, unto all the ends of his mediation. For with respect unto them it is said, that the full∣ness of the Godhead dwelt in him bodily, Col. 2. 9. namely, as it dwelt Typi∣cally in the Tabernacle by the outward Pledges of his especial presence. Whence he concludes that they were all a shadow whereof the body was Christ, ver. 17. But we need seek for no further Testimony hereunto, than the express design of the Apostle in this place. For his whole discourse in this and the en∣suing chapter, is to manifest the representation of Christ in them all. And those who would have only an application to be made of something unto Christ by way of accomodation or allusion, as the Socinians contend, do reject the wisdom of God in their institution, and expresly contradict the whole scope of the Apostle. We have therefore nothing else to do, but to find out the resemblance, which, as an effect of divine wisdom, and by vertue of divine institution, was in them, unto Gods being in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. And to this end the things ensuing may be observed. 1. The Spring, the Life and Soul of all this service was the Decalogue, the ten words written in Tables of stone, called the Tables of the Covenant. This is the eternal unalterable rule of our Relation unto God, as rational creatures capable of moral obedience, and eternal rewards. Hereunto all this service related, as prefiguring the way whereby the Church might be freed from the guilt of its transgressions, and obtain the accomplishment of it in them and for them. For, (1.) It was given and prescribed unto the People, and by them accepted as the Terms of Gods Covenant, before any of these things were revealed or ap∣pointed. Deut. 5. 27. Wherefore all these following institutions did only manifest, how that Covenant should be complyed withal and fulfilled. (2.) It was written in Tables of stone, and those renewed after they were broken, before any of these things were prepared or erected. Exod. 34. 1. God by the occasional breaking of the first Tables, on the sin of the People, declared that there was no keeping, no fullfiling of that Covenant, before the Provision made in these Ordinances was granted unto the People. (3.) The Ark was made and appointed for no other end, but to preserve and keep these Tables of the Covenant or Testimony of God. Exod. 25. 16. And it was hereon the great token and Pledge of the presence of God among the People, wherein his glory dwelt among them. So the wife of Phinehas the Priest made the dying confession of her faith, she said, the Glory is de∣parted from Israel for the Ark of God is taken. 1 Sam. 4. 22. Wherefore, (4.) All other things, the whole Tabernacle with all the furniture, Utensils and services of it, were made and appointed to minister unto the Ark, and when the Ark was removed from them they were of no use nor signification. Wherefore when it was absent from the Tabernacle, all the House of Israel lamented after the Lord, 1 Sam. 7. 2. For the remaining Tabernacle was no longer unto them a Pledge of his presence. And therefore when Solomon afterwards had finished all the Glorious work of the Temple, with all that belonged unto it, he assembled all the Elders of Israel, and all the Heads of the Tribes, the chief of the Fathers of the Children of Israel, to bring the Ark of the Covenant into its place in the Temple, 1. Kings 8. 1, 2, 3, 4. Before this was done, all that glorious and costly structure was of no sacred use. This order of things doth sufficiently evidence, that the Spring of all these services lay in the Tables of the Covenant. 2. This Law as unto the substance of it, was the only Law of creation, the rule of the first Covenant of works. For it contained the summe and sub∣stance of that obedience which is due unto God from all rational creatures made in his Image, and nothing else. It was the whole of what God design∣ed in our creation unto his own Glory and our everlasting Blessedness. What was in the Tables of stone was nothing but a transcript of what was written in
the heart of man originally; and which is returned thither again by the Grace of the new Covenant. Ier. 32. 35. 2 Cor. 3. 3. 3. Although this Law as a Covenant, was broken and disanulled by the en∣trance of sin, and became insufficient as unto its first ends of the Justification and Salvation of the Church thereby. Rom. 8. 3. Yet as a Law and Rule of obedience it was never disanulled, nor would God suffer it to be. Yea, one principal design of God in Christ was that it might be fulfilled and established. Matt. 5. 17, 18. Rom. 3. 31. For to reject this Law, or to abrogate it, had been for God to have laid aside that Glory of his Holiness and Righte∣ousness which in his infinite wisdom he designed therein. Hence after it was again broken by the People as a Covenant, he wrote it a second time him∣self in Tables of stone, and caused it to be safely kept in the Ark as his perpe∣tual Testimony. That therefore which he taught the Church by & in all this, in the first place was, that this Law was to be fulfilled and accomplished, or they could have no advantage of, or benefit by the Covenant. 4. This Law was given unto the People with great dread and terrour. Hereby were they taught and did learn, that they were no way able of them∣selves, to answer or stand before the holiness of God therein. Hereon they desired that on the account thereof, they might not appear immediately in the presence of God, but that they might have a Mediator to transact all things between God and them. Deut. 5. 22, 23, 24, 25. 5. God himself by all ways declared, that if he should deal with the Peo∣ple according unto the Tenor and Rigor of this Law, they could not stand be∣fore Him. Wherefore on all occasions he calls them to place their confidence not in their own Obedience thereunto, but in his Mercy and Grace. And that this was their Faith themselves professed on all occasions. See Psal. 130. 3, 4. Psal. 142. 3. 6. All this God instructed them in, by those mystical Vessels of the most Holy Place. For after the Tables were put into the Ark, as under his Eye and in his presence; he ordained that it should be covered with the Mercy-seat. For hereby he did declare both that the Law was to be kept and fulfilled, and yet that mercy should be extended unto them. 7. This great mystery he instructed them in three ways. (1.) In that the Covering of the Ark was a Propitiatory, a Mercy-Seat, and that its use was to cover the Law in the Presence of God. This was a great Instruction. For if God should mark Iniquities according unto the Law, who should stand? (2.) In that the Blood of Atonement for sin was brought into the Holy Place and sprinkled on the Mercy-seat. Levit. 16. 14. And this was done seven times to denote the Perfection of the Reconciliation that was made. And herein were they also taught, that the covering of the Law by the Mercy-seat, so as that Mercy and Pardon might be granted notwithstanding the sentence and curse of the Law, was from the Atonement made for sin, by the expiatory Sacrifice. (3.) By the cloud of Incense that covered both Ark and Mercy-seat, testifying that God received from thence a savour of Rest, Levit. 16. 13. 8. The Cherubims, or Angels under that denomination, were the Ministers of God in executing the curse and Punishment on man when after his sin, he was driven out of the Garden of God. Gen. 3. 24. Hence ensued a fear and dread of Angels on all mankind, which they abused unto manifold superstitions. But now to testifie that all things in Heaven and Earth, should be reconciled and brought under one Head; Ephes. 1. 10. There was a representation of their Ministry, in this great mystery of the Law and the Mercy-seat. Wherefore they are ready unto the Ministry of the Church of mankind, all things being now reconciled Heb. 1. 14. purely with respect unto the Mercy-seat which their faces were turned towards, and which they shadowed with their wings. 9. Yet was this Mystery so great, namely, that which was represented by these Types, that the Angels themselves were to bow down to look into it. 1 Pet. 1. 11. So are they here represented in a posture of admiration and adoration. And in their overshadowing of the Mercy-seat with their wings, they declared how this Mystery in the fullness of it was hid from the eyes of all men. See Eph. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
10. The Ground was originally blessed of God, to bring forth food for man, for the preservation of his life in that state and condition wherein he was to live unto God according unto the Covenant of works, Gen. 1. 29. But upon the entrance of sin it was cursed, neither are the fruits of it any more a Token or Pledge of the favour of God, nor are they sufficient to maintain a life unto God. Gen. 3. 17, 18. Wherefore God declared that there must be bread given the Church from Heaven, which might maintain a spiritual life in them. This God did by giving them Manna in the wilderness. And that all in∣structions in Grace and mercy might be reduced into an head in this Holy Place, because of that whereof it was a Type, a Pot filled with it was placed for a memorial in this Holy Place before the Ark and Mercy-Seat. See Psal. 78. 24, 25. Iohn 6. 31. Hereby were they taught to look for the bread of life from Heaven, which should maintain them in their spiritual, and nourish them unto eternal life. 11. When the whole Church was ready to perish for want of water; a Rock was smitten with the Rod of Moses, which brought water out of it unto their refreshment; God taught them thereby, that the Rock of Ages was to be smitten with the Rod of the Law, that the waters of life might be brought forth thereby. 1 Cor. 10. 4. Wherefore this Rod also was laid up for an in∣structive memorial before the Ark. In all these things did God instruct the Church, by the Tabernacle, es∣pecially this most Holy Place, the Utensils, Furniture, and Services of it. And the end of them all was to give them such a representation of the myst∣ery of his grace in Christ Jesus, as was meet for the state of the Church be∣fore his actual exhibition in the flesh. Hence he is declared in the Gospel to be the Body and Substance of them all. And I shall endeavour with all humble reverence, to make that application of them unto him, which Scripture Light guides us unto. 1. In his Obedience unto God according unto the Law, he is the true Ark wherein the Law was kept inviolate, that is, was fullfilled, answered and accomplished, Matt. 5. 17. Rom. 8. 3. chap. 10. 3. Hence by Gods gra∣cious dealing with sinners, pardoning and justifying them freely, the Law is not disanulled but established. Rom. 3. 31. That this was to be done, that without it no Covenant between God and man could be firm and stable, was the principal design of God to declare in all this Service; without the consideration whereof it was wholly insignificant. This was the original myst∣ery of all these institutions, that in and by the Obedience of the promised seed, the everlasting unalterable Law should be fulfilled. In him, as the Jews speak, was the Law restored unto its pristine Crown, signifyed by that Crown of Gold which was round about the Ark, wherein the Law was kept. Then had the Law its crown and glory when it was fulfilled in Christ. This the Church of Israel ought to have learned and believed, and did so whilest they conti∣nued to pray for mercy for the Lord's sake, as Dan. 9. 17. But afterwards when they rejected the knowledge hereof, and adhered unto the Law abso∣lutely as written in Tables of stone, they utterly perished. Rom. 9. 31, 32, 33. chap. 10. 2, 4. And they do all yet, what lieth in them, return unto the material Ark and Tables of stone, who reject the accomplishment of the Law, in and by Jesus Christ. 2. He was the Mercy-Seat, that is, he was represented by it. So the Apostle speaks expresly, God set him forth to be , Rom. 3. 25. A Propitiation, that is, to answer the Mercy-Seat and what was signifyed there∣by. And this was to cover the Law under the eye of God. He interposeth between God and his Throne and the Law, that he may not enter into judg∣ment with us, in pursuit of the curse of it. The Law required Obedience, and threatned the curse in case of disobedience. With respect unto the obe∣dience which it required, Christ was the Ark in whom it was fulfilled: And with respect unto the Curse of the Law, he was the Mercy-Seat or Propitiation whereby Atonement was made, that the curse should not be inflicted. Gal. 3. 13. 3. It was his blood in figure that was carried into the Holy Place to make Atonement; as the Apostle declares at large in this Chapter. The Efficacy of
his blood when he offered himself an expiatory Sacrifice for sin unto God, that prevailed for an atonement in the Holy Place not made with hands. See chap. 10. 11, 12, 13. 4. It is his Intercession that is the cloud of Incense which covers the Ark and Mercy Seat. This gives a continual sweet Savour unto God from his ob∣lation, and renders acceptable all the worship of the Church in their ap∣proaches unto him. Rev. 8. 3. These things did God instruct the Church in by Types and figures, to prepare their faith for the receiving of him at his actu∣al oblation: And on the representation so made of him, all that truly believed lived in the expectation of him and longing after him, with the departure of these shadows of good things to come. Cant. 2. 7. chap. 4. 6. chap. 8. 14. Luk. 10. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 11. And the refusal of this instruction was that which ruin∣ed this Church of the Hebrews. 5. It was He who took off the original curse of the Law, whose first execu∣tion was committed unto the Cherubims when man was driven out of the Gar∣den, and kept from all approaches unto the Tree of Life. Hereby he made reconciliation between them and the elect Church of God. Ephes. 1. 10. Hence have they now a ministery with respect unto the Mercy-Seat, for the good of the heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. 14. 6. He was the Bread of Life typed by the Manna kept in the Golden Pot before the Mercy-Seat. For he alone is the nourishment of the spiritual life of men. The mystery hereof, himself at large declares. John. 6. 31, 32, 33, 34. This were they taught to expect in the memorial of that heavenly food which was preserved in the Sanctuary. 7. He was that Spiritual Rock which was smitten with the Rod of Moses, the curse and stroke of the Law: Hereon the waters of Life flowed from him; for the quickning and refreshment of the Church. 1 Cor. 10. 3, 4. Thus was the Lord Christ All and in All from the beginning. And as the general design of the whole structure of the Tabernacle with all that belonged there∣unto, was to declare that God was reconciled to sinners, with a blessed provision for the glory of his Holiness and the honour of the Law, which is in and by Jesus Christ alone; so every thing in it directed unto his Person, or his Grace, or some Act of his Mediation. And two things do now attend all these in∣stitutions. (1) As they are interpreted by Gospel Light, they are a glo∣rious representation of the wisdom of God, and a signal confirmation of saith in him who was prefigured by them. (2) Take them in themselves se∣parated from this end, and they give no representation of any one holy property of the nature of God; nothing of his wisdom, Goodness, Greatness, Love or Grace, but are low and carnal, base and beggarly. And that we may have a due apprehension of them, some things in general concerning them may be considered. 1. The whole Scheme, Frame, Fashion, Use and Service of the Tabernacle with all that belonged thereunto, was a meer arbitrary effect of the sove∣raign will and pleasure of God. Why he would by this way and by these means declare himself appeased unto the Church, and he would graciously dwell amongst them; why he would by them type out and prefigure the in∣carnation and mediation of Christ, no other reason can be given but his own will which in all things is to be adored by us. Other wayes and means unto the same ends were not wanting unto divine wisdom, but this in the good pleasure of his will he determined on. In the supreme authority of God was the Church absolutely to acquiesce whilest it was obliged unto the observation of these ordinances, and other reason of them they could not give. And where∣as their use is now utterly ceased, yet do they abide on the Holy Record, as some think the fabrick of Heaven and Earth shall do after the final judgment, to be monuments of his wisdom and soveraignty. But the principal ends of the preservation of this memorial in the sacred Record are two. (1) That it may be a perpetual Testimony unto the praescience, faithfulness and power of God. His infinite praescience is testified unto, in the prospect which therein he declares himself to have had of the whole future frame of things under the Gospel which he represented therein; His faithfulness and power in the ac∣complishment
of all these things which were prefigured by them. (2) That it might testifie the abundant Grace and Goodness of God unto the Church of the new Testament, which enjoyeth the substance of all those spiritual things, whereof of old he granted only the Types and shadows. Wherefore, 2. It must be acknowledged, that the Instruction given by these things in∣to the mysteries of the will of God, and consequently all those teachings which were influenced and guided by them, were dark, obscure and diffi∣cult to be rightly apprehended and duly improved. Hence the way of Teaching under the old Testament was one reason for the abolishing of that Cove∣nant, that a more effectual way of instruction and Illumination might be intro∣duced. This is declared at large in the exposition of the preceding chapter. There was need for them all to go up and down, every one unto his Brother, andevery one unto his Neighbour, saying, know the Lord. For the true knowledge of him and of the mysteries of his will was by these means very difficultly to be obtain∣ed. And now the Jews have lost all that prospect unto the promised seed which their forefathers had in these things, it is sad to consider what work they make with them. They have turned the whole of all legal institutions into such an endless, scrupulous, superstitious observance of carnal Rites in all ima∣ginable circumstances as never became the divine wisdom to appoint, as is mar∣vellous that any of the race of mankind should enbondage themselves unto. Yea, now all things are plainly fullfilled in Christ, some among our selves would have the most of them to have represented Heaven and the Planets, the fruits of the Earth, and I know not what besides. But this was the way which the infinite wisdom of God fixed on for the instruction of the Church in the state then al∣lotted unto it. 3. This instruction was sufficient unto the end of God in the edification and salvation of them that did believe. For these things being diligently and humbly enquired into, they gave that Image and Resemblance of the work of Gods Grace in Christ, which the Church was capable of in that state, before its actual accomplishment. Those who were wise and holy among them, knew full well that all these things in general were but Types of better things, and that there was something more designed of God in the Pattern shewed unto Moses, than what they did contain. For Moses made and did all things for a Testimony unto what should be spoken afterwards. chap. 3. 5. In brief, they all of them believed, that through the Messiah, the promised seed, they should really receive all that Grace, Goodness, Pardon, Mercy, Love, Fa∣vour and Priviledges, which were testified unto in the Tabernacle and all the Services of it. And because they were not able to make distinct, particular ap∣plications of all these things unto his mediatory actings, their faith was prin∣cipally fixed on the person of Christ as I have elswhere demonstrated. And with respect unto him, his sufferings, and his glory, they diligently enquired into these things. 1 Pet. 1. 11. And this was sufficient unto that faith and o∣bedience which God then required of the Church. For 4. Their diligent enquiry into these things and the meaning of them was the principal exercise of their faith and subjection of soul unto God. For even in these things also did the Spirit testify beforehand the sufferings of Christ and the Glory that did ensue. And as the exercise of faith herein was acceptable unto God, so the discoveries of Grace which they received therein were refreshing unto their souls. For hereby they often saw the King in his Beauty, and be∣held the pleasant land, which was far off. Isa. 33. 17. 5. That worship which was outwardly performed in and by these things was full of Beauty and Glory. 2 Cor. 3. It was also suited to beget a due reve∣rence of the Majesty and Holiness of God. It was God's way of worship; It was God's order, and so had characters of divine wisdom upon it. Wherefore although the People were originally obliged unto the observance of it, by the meer soveraign will and pleasure of God, yet the things themselves were so beautiful and glorious, as nothing but the substance of the things themselves in Christ could excel. This made the Devil as it were steal away so many rites of the Tabernacle worship, and turn them unto his own use in the Idolatry of the nations.
6. It is a sad instance of the degeneracy of the corrupted nature of man; that, whereas all these things were appointed for no other end but to signify beforehand the coming of Christ, his sufferings, and the Glory that ensued; the principal reason why the Church of the Jews rejected him at his coming was, that they preferred these institutions and their carnal use above and before him who was the substance and life of them all. And no otherwise will it fall out with them all, who prefer any thing in religion before him, or suppose that any thing is accepted with God without him. Some things we may al∣so observe in general for our own instruction, from what we have discoursed on this occasion. 1. Although the soveraign will and pleasure of God be the only reason and origi∣nal cause of all instituted worship, yet there is, and ever was in all his institutions such an evidence of divine wisdom and Goodness, as gives them beauty, desirable∣ness and usefulness unto their proper end. There is that in them which unto an enlightned mind will distinguish them for ever, from the most plausible in∣ventions of men, advanced in the imitation of them. Only a diligent en∣quiry into them is expected from us: Psal. 111. 2. 3. When men have sleight considerations of any of Gods institutions, when they come unto them without a sense that there is divine wisdom in them, that which becomes him from whom they are, it is no wonder if their glory be hid from them: But when we diligently and humbly enquire into any of the ways of God, to find out the characters of his divine excellencies that are upon them, we shall ob∣tain a satisfying view of his glory. Hos. 4. 9. 2. All the Counsels of God concerning his worship in this world, and his eternal glory in the salvation of the Church, do center in the Person and Me∣diation of Christ. The Life, Glory and Usefulness of all things whereof we have discoursed, arose from hence, that there was in them all a representati∣on of the Person and Mediation of Christ. Hereunto were they designed by divine wisdom. In him alone is God well pleased, in him alone will he be glorifyed. VER. VI, VII. HAving given an account of the Structure or Fabrick of the Tabernacle in the two parts of it, and the furniture of those several parts distinctly, to compleat his argument, the Apostle adds in these verses the considerati∣on of the uses they were designed unto in the service of God. For in the Ap∣plication of these things unto his purpose and the Argument he designeth from them, both of these in conjunction, namely, the Structure of the Taber∣nacle with its furniture and the services performed therein, were to be made use of. . . Vul. Lat. His verò ita compositis; so composed, so framed and put together, Syr.  Quae ita disposita erant; which things were sodisposed; altering the absolute construction of the words, and carrying on the sense of the former thus far. Others; His verò ita ordinatis; ia praeparatis; thus ordered, thus prepared, thus ordained. Ornatis; adorn∣ed, Beza. Constructis. , is the ordering, placing or fixing of vessels or any materials prepared for use. , Vul. Lat. in priori Tabernaculo; for in prius Taberna∣culum. Syr.  into the outward Tabernacle; that is, of those parts mentioned by the Apostle. , Vul. Lat. Semper, alwayes. Syr.  in omni tempore;
Others generally, quovis tempore; at every season, at any time, as occasion required. , Vul. Lat. Sacrificiorum Officia consummantes, perfecting to this part or offices of the sacrifices. But the sacrifices belonged not at all un∣the duties of the Tabernacle, Syr.  and they were perfecting their Ministry; Ritus obeuntes, cultus obeuntes; Beza. Ritus cultûs ob∣euntes; performing the Rites of sacred worship. , Vul. Lat. in secundo autem. Syr.  and into the Tabernacle that was within it, or within the other. In secundum autem: sed in alterum; but into the second, or the other. , Syr.  which Boderus renders substantively; unum est; that inward Tabernacle was one. But the reference is unto what follows, and is better rendred adverbial∣ly; semel, once. , Non sine sanguine; Syr. cum sanguine illo, with that blood. ; Vul. Lat. Eras. quem offert; Syr. which he was offering; which he offereth. . Vul. Lat. Pro sua et populi ignoran∣tia, very corruptly. Syr.  for his own soul and the errors of the People, rightly. VER. 6, 7. Now when these things were thus ordained, the Priests went alwayes in∣to the first Tabernacle, accomplishing the service of God. But into the second went the High Priest alone every year, not without blood which he offered for himself and the errors of the People. I follow the common Translation, but shall take notice of what it seems defect∣ive in. And there is in the words. (1) A supposition of what was before declared, as the foundation of what he was now farther to assert. Now when these things were thus ordained. And there is therein, 1. The manner of its Inference. 2. The Subject spoken of. 3. What is spoken of it. 1. The manner of the Inference is the particle, . which we render now when; verò, but; now, when, is included in the tense of the participle. . 2. The subject spoken of, , these things; that is, the things spoken of . in the precedent verses; namely, the two parts of the Tabernacle, and the sacred furniture of them. 3. That which is affirmed of them is, that they were ordained, and the manner thereof is also added that they were thus ordained; , Be∣za . once rendred it by, ordinatis, whom I suppose ours follow, rendring it by ordained. But ordinatis is rather ordered than ordained. To be ordained, sig∣nifies the appointment and designation of them, and so they were ordained of God. But that which is here expressed, is their building, framing, finish∣ing, and disposition into their actual Order. So the word is used for the making of the Tabernacle, ver. 2. A Tabernacle was made. These things being prepared, made and finished. The preparation, structure and finish∣ing of the Tabernacle and all its Utensils, with their disposition into their sa∣cred order are respected in this word. They were disposed , thus; . that is in the manner declared; that the Tabernacle should consist of two parts, that the one should contain such and such holy Utensils, and the other those of another sort. When these things were thus prepared and ordered they stood not for a magnificent shew, but were designed unto constant use in the service of God. This the Apostle declares in the same order wherein he had described the parts of the Tabernacle in their distribution into the first and the second; the outward and inward Tabernacle. As to the first Tabernacle wherein were the Candlestick and the Tables and
the Shew-bread, he declares the use of it. 1. With respect unto the per∣sons for whose Ministry it was ordained. (2) Of that Ministry itself. (3) Of the time and season of its performance. 1. The Persons who administred therein were the Priests. They, and they alone, entred into the Sanctuary. All others were forbidden to approach un∣to it on pain of Excision. These Priests who had this priviledge were all the posterity of Aaron unless they fell under exception by some legal incapacitating blemish. For a long time, that is, from the preparing of the Tabernacle un∣to the building of the Temple, they administred in this Sanctuary promiscu∣ously, under the care of God, and directions of the High Priest. For the In∣spection of the whole was committed in an especial manner unto the High Priest. Numb. 4. 10. Zech. 3. 7. Yea, the actual performance of the daily service of this part of the Sanctuary, was in the first place charged on him. Exod. 27, 21. But the other Priests being designed to help and assist him on all occasions, this service in process of time was wholly devolved on them. And if the High Priest did at any time minister in this part of the Sanctuary, he did it not as the High Priest, but as a Priest only; for all his peculiar service belonged unto the most Holy Place. In process of time when the Priests of the Posterity of Aaron were multi∣plyed, and the services of the Sanctuary were to be encreased by the building of the Temple, wherein instead of one candlestick there were ten; David by Gods direction cast all the Priests into 24 courses or orders, that should serve in their turns, two courses in a month, which rule continued unto the destruction of the second Temple. 1 Chron. 24. Luk. 1. 5. And he did it for sundry ends. (1) That none of the Priests of the Posterity of Aaron might be utterly excluded from this Priviledge of approaching unto God in the Sanctuary; and if they were, it is likely they would have disposed of them∣selves into other wayes and callings, and so have both neglected and defiled the Priesthood. (2) That there might be no neglect at any time in the so∣lemn Ministry, seeing that which lies on all promiscuously, is too often neglected by all. For although the High Priest were to keep the charge, to judge the house, and to keep the courts, Zech. 3. 7. and so take care for the due attendance unto the daily Ministration; yet was the provision more certain, when being ordained by Law or by divine Institution, all Persons concerned herein knew the times and seasons wherein they might and wherein they ought to attend on the Altar. These were the officers that belonged unto the Sanctuary: The Persons who alone might enter into it on a sacred account. And when the Structure of the whole was to be taken down, that it might be removed from one place to another, as it was frequently in the wilderness, the whole was to be done by the Priests, and all the holy Utensils covered, before the Levites were ad∣mitted to draw nigh to carry them, so as they might not touch them at all. Numb. 4. 15. Yet must it be observed, that although this were the peculiar service of the Priests, yet was it not their only service. Their whole sacred imployment was not confined unto this their entrance into the Sanctuary. There was a work committed unto them, whereon their whole service in the Sanctuary did depend. This was the offering of Sacrifices which was accomplished in the court without, on the brazen Altar, before the door of the Tabernacle; which belonged not unto the purpose of the Apostle in this Place. This was the great priviledge of the Priests under the old Testament, that they alone might and did enter into the Sanctuary, and make an approach unto God. And this priviledge they had as they were Types of Christ, and no otherwise. But withal it was a great part and a great means of that state of servitude and fear, wherein the People or the Body of the Church was kept. They might not so much as come nigh the Pledges of Gods Presence, it was forbidden them under the penalty of death and being cut off, whereof they sadly complained. Numb. 17. 12, 13. This state of things is now changed under the Gospel. It is one of the principal priviledges of Believers, that, being made Kings and Priests unto God
by Jesus Christ, this distinction as unto especial gracious access unto God is taken away. Rev. 1. 5. Ephes. 2. 18. Rom. 5. 2. Neither doth this hinder but that yet there are and ought to be Officers and Ministers in the house of God, to dispense the holy things of it, and to minister in the name of Christ. For in their so doing they do not hinder but promote the approach of the Church into the presence of God, which is the principal end of their of∣fice. And as this is their peculiar honour for which they must be accountable, Heb. 13. 17. So the Church of Believers itself, ought alwayes to consider how they may duely improve, and walk worthy of this Priviledge, purchased for them by the blood of Christ. 2. The general foundation of the service of these Priests in the Sanctuary . was, that they went or entred into it: . This also itself was a divine Ordinance. For this entrance both asserted their Priviledge, allothers being excluded on pain of Death, and gave bounds unto it. Hereinto they were to enter, but they were to go no further: they were not to go into nor look into the most Holy Place, nor to abide in the Sanctuary when the High Priest en∣tred into it, which the Apostle here hath an especial regard unto. They en∣tred into the first Tabernacle, but they went no further. Hereinto they en∣tred through the first Vail, or the covering of the Door of the Tabernacle. Exod. 26. 36, 37. Through that vail by turning it aside, so as that it closed immediately on their entrance, the Priests entred into the Sanctuary. And this they were to do with an especial Reverence of the Presence of God which is the principal design of that command, thou shalt Reverence my Sanctuary. Levit. 19. 30. which is now supplyed by the holy reverence of the presence of God in Christ, which is in all Believers. But moreover the equity of the command extends itself unto that especial reverence of God which we ought to have in all holy services. And although this be not confined unto any Postures or Gestures of the Body, yet those that naturally express a reverential frame of Spirit, are necessary unto this duty. 3. The time of this their entrance into the Sanctuary to discharge their . service, is expressed. They entred it ; that is, , quovis tempo∣re; alwayes, say we; jugiter, that is, every day. There was no divine Prohi∣bition as unto any days or times, wherein they might not enter into the Sanct∣uary, as there was with respect unto the entrance of the High Priest into the most Holy place, which was allowed only once a year. And the services that were required of them, made it necessary that they should enter into them every day. But the word doth not absolutely signify every day, seeing there was a special service for which they entred only once a week. But, always, is, at all times, as Occasion did require. There was also an especial service when the High Priest entred into this Sanctuary, which was neither daily nor weekly, but occasional, which is men∣tioned, Levit. 4. 6, 7. For when the anointed Priest was to offer a Sacri∣fice for his own sins, he was to carry some of the blood of it into the Sanctuary, and sprinkle it towards the vail that was before the most Holy Place. This he was to do seven times, which is a mystical number, denoting that perfect Atonement and expiation of sin, which was to be made by the blood of Christ. But this being an occasional service, the Apostle seems to have had no respect unto it. 4. The service itself performed by them is expressed, , . accomplishing the services. The expression is sacred, respecting mystical rites and ceremonies, such as were the things here intended. Officiating in the Mi∣nistry of the sacred ceremonies. For  is not perfecting or accom∣plishing only, but sacredly ministring. In discharge of the Priestly office, ac∣complishing the sacred services committed unto them. And these services were of two sorts. (1) Daily. (2) Weekly. Their daily services were two. (1) The dressing of the Lamps of the Candlestick, supplying them with the holy oyl, and taking care of all things necessary unto the cleansing of them, that their light might be preserved. This was done morning and evening, a continual service in all generations. The service of the Candlestick. .
(2) The service of the Golden Altar, the Altar of Incense in the midst of the Sanctuary, at the entrance of the most Holy Place, before or over against the Ark of the Testimony. Hereon the Priests burnt Incense every day with fire taken from the Altar of Burnt-offerings that was in the court before the door of the Ta∣bernacle. This service was performed evening and morning immediately after the offering of the daily Sacrifice on the Altar of burnt-offerings. And whilest this service was performed the People gave themselves to Prayer without, with respect unto the Sacrifice offered. Luk. 1. 10. For this offering of In∣cense on the Sacrifice, and that fired with a coal from the Altar, whereon the Sacrifice was burned, was a Type, as we have declared, of the Intercession of Christ. For although they understood it not clearly in the notion, yet were true Believers guided to express it in their practice. The time of the Priests offering Incense, they made the time of their own solemn prayers, as believ∣ing that the efficacy and acceptance of their prayers depended on what was Typified by that Incense. Psal. 141. 2. These were the daily services. It is uncertain whether they were all performed at the same time or no; namely, those of the Candlestick and the Altar of Incense: If they were, it should seem that they were done by no more but one Priest at one time, that is, e∣very morning and evening. For of Zechariah it is said that it was his Lot to burn Incense in the Temple, and no other was with him there when he saw the vision, Luk. 1. 8, 9, 21, 22, 23. Wherefore whereas it is said in the Institution of these things, Aaron and his Sons shall do this service; it is in∣tended that some one of them should do it at any one time. 2. The weekly service of the Sanctuary was the change of the bread on the Table of Shew-bread. This was performed every sabbath day in the morning and not else. Now all this daily service was Typical. And that which it did re∣present was the continual application of the Benefits of the Sacrifice and whole mediation of Christ unto the Church here in this world. That the Tabernacle itself and the Inhabitation of God therein was a Type of the Incarnation of the Son of God, we have shewed before. And have also declared that all the Utensils of it were but representations of his Grace in the discharge of his of∣fice. He is the Light and Life of the Church, the Lamp and the bread there∣of. The Incense of his Intercession renders all their obedience acceptable unto God. And therefore there was a continual application made unto these things without Intermission every day. And we may thence observe that, A continual application unto God by Christ, and a continual application of the Benefits of the Mediation of Christ by faith, are the Springs of the Light, Life and comfort of the Church.
VER. VII. But into the second went the High Priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself and the errors of the Peo∣ple. THe use and service of the second part of the Tabernacle or the most Holy Place, which the Apostle designeth principally to apply unto his present argument, are declared in this present verse. And he describes them; (1) By the person who alone might perform the service which belonged unto this part of the sanctuary. And this was the High Priest. (2) By that which in general was required unto the other parts of it. He went into it. This is not here expressed, but the sense of it is traduced from the foregoing verse, The other Priests entred into the Sanctuary; and the High Priest into this; that is, he entred or went into it. (3) From the time and season of this his entrance, which was once a year only; in opposition unto the entrance of the Priests into the other part, which was at all times, every day. (4) By the manner of his entrance, or what he carried with him to administer or perform the holy service of the Place, expressed negatively; not without blood; that is, with blood. (5) From the use of the Blood which he so carried in with him; it was that which he offered for himself and the errors of the People. That which the Apostle here respects and describes was the great Anniver∣sary Sacrifice of expiation, whose Institution, Rites and Solemnities are at large declared. Lev. 16. And herein, 1. The Person designed unto this service was the High Priest alone and no . other Person. Levit. 16. 2, 32. And he was to be so alone, as that none were to attend, assist or accompany him in any part of the service. Yea, it was so far from it, that any person entred with him into the Holy Place, that no one was allowed to be in the other part of the Sanctuary where he might so much as see the vail opened, or look in after him whilst he performed his ser∣vice. ver. 17. As all the People were kept out of the Sanctuary whilst the Priests entred daily into it and waited at the door; so all the Priests were kept without the Sanctuary, whilst the High Priest entred into the most Ho∣ly Place. Hence there was one alwayes provided who was next in succession unto that office, to perform this office in case of Sickness or occasional Polluti∣ons of him who was actually High Priest. And he was called the second Priest. 1 Kings 25. 16. From whence in times of disorder and confusion they had afterwards two High Priests at once. Iohn 18. 13, 24. Thus sacredly was the presence of God in the Holy Place made inaccessible not only to all the People, but even unto all the Priests themselves. Some say that indeed the High Priest went alone into the Holy Place once a year only, but with other Priests and on other occasions he might enter often∣er. But this is weak beneath consideration. For the express institution was, that he should go alone, and go but once. And this was that great Truth which in this ordinance God stated unto the Church; namely, that there is no entrance into the gracious presence of God but by the High Priest. That the true High Priest should take along all Believers with him, and give them admission with boldness unto the Throne of Grace, was as the Apostle declares in the next verse, not as yet made known. 2. The way whereby he ingaged into this service was that he went into this Holy Place. This, as we observed before, is not here expressed, but is ne∣cessarily traduced from the foregoing verse. And it is his entrance through the vail that is intended; which also was a part of his service. For it was a Type both of the entrance of Christ into Heaven, and of our entrance by him unto the Throne of Grace. ver. 24. chap. 10. 19, 20. This was that vail which in the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom upon the death of our Sa∣viour.
Matth. 27. 51. For hereby the way was laid open into the Holy Place, and the gracious Presence of God discovered unto all that come unto him by Christ. 3. The Time of this service is expressed, that it was once only every year. . The first order unto this purpose was a Prohibition or negative precept that the High Priest should not come at all times into the Holy Place, Lev. 16. 2. that is, not every day, as he did into the Sanctuary; not at any time of his own choice. He might not choose, he might not appoint a time for the service of this Holy Place; whatever occasion he apprehended of it, or necessity for it. Times of sacred worship are the Lords, no less then the things of it. Our own stated times are no less disapproved by him, than any other parts of sacred worship of our own finding out. 1 Kings 12. 32, 33. And as this time of the entrance of the High Priest into the most Holy Place was limited unto once a year, which our Apostle observes; so the pre∣cise day of the year was determined by the Law. It was fixed unto the tenth day of the seventh month or Tizri, which reckoning from Nisan the beginning of their ecclesiastical year answers unto our September. This was the great day of Atonement, which with the fruits of it ensued thereon. Lev. 16. 29. But whereas it is said that he entred once every year, the meaning is, that upon one day in the year only he did so, and had liberty so to do: For it is evi∣dent that on that day he went twice into it, yea, most probable that he did so four times. He had three offerings or sacrifices to offer on the day of expia∣tion. The first was of a Bullock and a Ram for himself and his houshold. Lev. 16. 3. This the Apostle notes distinctly, which he offered for himself. Secondly, a Goat, for a Sin-offering, which he offered for the People, for the errors of the People, ver. 9. Thirdly, the service of the scape Goat, which also had the nature of a Sacrifice, ver. 10. Of the two first whose blood was offered on the Altar, it is said distinctly, that he carried of the blood into the most Holy Place. He did so, first that of the Bullock and the Ram, before he offered the Goat for the sins of the People. He killed not the Goat until he came out of the Holy Place, after he had carried in the blood of the Sacrifice for himself, ver. 11, 12, 13, 14. After this he carried in the blood of the Goat that was offered for the sins of the People, ver. 15. So that of neces∣sity he must enter twice distinctly on that one day into the most Holy Place. Yea, it is most probable and almost very certain that he entred into it four times on that day: For before he carried in the blood he was to go in with the Incense to make a cloud over the Mercy-seat. And it is evident that he could not carry in the Incense and the blood at the same time: For when he went in with the Incense, he had in one hand a Censer full of burning coals from the Altar, and he so carried it, 'that besides both his hands were filled with Incense, ver. 12. that he could carry no blood with him at that time. For when he carried in the blood also, both his hands were in like manner em∣ployed. For with the finger of one he was to sprinkle the blood upon and be∣fore the Mercy-seat; whence it is of necessity that he must have the blood which he sprinkled in his other hand. For he was to sprinkle it seven times, which could not be done with the blood that was at once upon the finger wherewith he sprinkled it. Wherefore this once every year is on one day on∣ly; for that day he entred four times into the Holy Place within the Vail, as is plain in the order of the service according unto its Institution. When all this was done, that there might be a full representation of the Atonement to be made by the Lord Christ, and of the plenary remission of sins by his blood, the High Priest laid all the sins of the People on the Head of the scape Goat who carried them away into the wilderness of everlasting ob∣livion, ver. 20, 21, 22. As these Institutions were multiplyed to typifie the one single sacrifice and oblation of the body of Christ, because of the imperfection inseparable from the nature of earthly things, whereby no one of them could absolutely re∣present it; so in this distinction and distribution of them, the Condescention, Love, and Grace of God were adorable and glorious. For in the shedding of the blood of the Sacrifice, and offering it by fire on the Altar, he plainly
declared the imputation of the guilt of their sins unto the Sacrifice, its bear∣ing of them and the expiation of their guilt thereby. By carrying of the blood into the Holy Place he testified his acceptance of the Atonement made and his reconciliation unto the People. And hereon the full remission and par∣don of all their sins, no more to be had in remembrance, was manifested in the sending away of the scape Goat into the wilderness. Hence the Jews have a saying that on the day of expiation all Israel was made as innocent as in the daies of creation. How all this was accomplished in and by the Sacrifice of Christ must be afterwards declared. 4. As to the nature of this service, the Apostle tells us that is was not with∣out . blood. He so expresseth it to shew the impossibility of entring into the Holy Place any otherwise. And from hence he takes his ensuing argument of the necessity of the Death and blood-shedding of the Mediator or High Priest of the new Testament. Not without blood; as he might not do it otherwise, so he did it by blood. And this was the manner of the service. After the High Priest had filled the Holy Place with a cloud of Incense, he returned to the Altar of Burnt-offerings without the Tabernacle, where the Sacrifice had been newly slain: And whilst the blood of the beast was fresh and as it were liv∣ing, Heb. 10. he took of it in his hand, and entring again into the Holy Place, he sprinkled it seven times with his finger towards the Mercy-seat. Lev. 16. 11, 12, 13, 14. And there is, as was said, an Emphasis in the expres∣sion, not without blood, to manifest how impossible it was that there should be an entrance into the gracious presence of God, without the blood of the sa∣crifice of Christ. The only Propitiation of sins is made by the blood of Christ, and it is by saith alone that we are made Partakers thereof. Rom. 3. 25, 26. 5. This blood is farther described by the use of it; which he offereth. Where . or when he offered it is not expressed. In the Holy Place there was no use of this blood, but only the sprinkling of it: But the sprinkling of blood was always consequential unto the offering or oblation properly so called. For the oblation consisted principally in the atonement made by the blood at the Altar of burnt-offerings. It was given and appointed for that end, to make atonement with it at that Altar, as is expresly affirmed. Lev. 17. 11. After this, it was sprinkled for purification. Wherefore by , the Apostle here renders the Hebrew  used in the Institution. Lev. 16. 15. which is only to bring and not to offer properly. Or he hath respect unto the offering of it that was made at the Altar without the Sanctuary. The blood which was there offered he brought a part of it with him into the most Holy Place, to sprinkle it according unto the Institution. 6. The Apostle declares for whom this blood was offered; and this was for himself and the People; first for himself and then for the People. For he . hath respect unto the distinct Sacrifices that were to be offered on that day; The first was of a Bullock and a Ram which was for himself. And this argued, as the Apostle observes, the great imperfection of that Church-state. They could have no Priests to offer Sacrifices for the sins of the People, but he must first offer for himself, and that the blood of other creatures. But the true High Priest was to offer his own blood and that not for himself at all, but for others only. He offered for himself; that is, for his own sins. Lev. 16. 6. Wherefore the Vul. Lat. reads the words, pro suâ et Populi ignoran∣tiâ, very corruptly, changing the number of the substantive, but very tru∣ly applying  to the Priest as well as unto the People. Others would supply the words by adding  before , and so repeat . But the Apostle expresseth the words of the Institution  which for himself, leaving the application unto the series of the context and the nature of the service: For himself, that is, his own sins. 2. The blood was offered also for the People, that is, the People of Isra∣el, the People of God, the Church, the whole congregation. And as the . High Priest herein bore the Person of Christ, so did this People of all the elect of God who were represented in them and by them. It was that People, and not the whole world that the High Priest offered for. And it is the e∣lect
People alone for whom our great High Priest did offer, and doth inter∣cede. 7. That which he offered for; it was their errors; or their sins. The So∣cinians, . some of them, not for want of understanding, but out of hatred un∣to the true sacrifice of Christ, contend from hence, that the Anniversary Sa∣crifice on the great day of expiation, the principal representation of it, was only for sins of ignorance, of imbecillity and weakness. But it is a fond Imagi∣nation; at least the argument from these words for it, is so. For besides that the scripture calls all sins by the name of errors. Psal. 19. 12. Psal. 25. 7. and the worst, the most provoking of all sins, is expressed by erring in heart. Psal. 95. 10. and the LXX frequently render, to sin by , 2 Chron. 16. 9. 1 Sam. 16. 22. Hos. 4. 16. &c. Besides I say this application of the word elswhere unto all sorts of sins, in the enumeration of those errors of the People which the High Priest offered for, they are said to be all their ini∣quities, and all their transgressions in all their sins. Lev. 16. 21. Wherefore to offer for the errors of the People, it is to offer for all their sins, of what nature soever they were. And they are thus called, because indeed there is no such Predominancy of malice in any sin in this world, as wherein there is not a mixture of error, either notional or practical, of the mind or of the heart, which is the cause or a great occasion of it. See 1 Tim. 1. 13. Matth. 12. 31, 32. Here indeed lies the original of all sin. The mind being filled with Darkness and Ignorance, alienates the whole soul from the life of God. And as it hath superadded prejudices which it receives from corrupt affections, yet neither directs nor judgeth aright, as unto particular acts and duties, under all present circumstances. And what notions of good and evil it cannot but retain, it gives up in particular instances unto the occasions of sin. Where∣fore (1) spiritual illumination of the mind, is indispensably necessary unto our walking with God. (2) Those who would be preserved from sin, must take care that spiritual Light do alwayes bear sway in their minds. And there∣fore (3) constantly to watch against the prevalency of corrupt prejudices and affections in their mind. And (4) when the light of the mind is solli∣cited by temptations, to suspend its conduct and determination on present circumstances, to know that sin lies at the door; this is its last address for admission. And (5) If error grow strong in the heart through the love of sin, truth will grow weak in the mind, as to the preservation of the soul from it. And (6) Nothing ought to influence the soul more unto repent∣ance, sorrow, and humiliation for sin, than a due apprehension of the shameful error and mistake that is in it.
VER. VIII. . , Vul. Lat. Hoc significante. Hoc declarante. Hoc innuente. Syr.  by this manifesting. Manifestans, Patefaciens, notum faciens, making known. , is openly manifest. , which a blind man may see. And , is manifestly, plainly, perspicuously to declare. , Vul. Lat. nondum propalatam esse; made palàm, open, ma∣nifest. Syr.  not yet revealed, manifestata, facta manife∣sta; not made evidently to appear. , Vul. Lat. Viam sanctorum, the way of the Holies; Beza, Viam ad sacrarium, the way into the sanctuary. Viam in Sancta Sanctorum, the way into the most Holy Place. None suspect  to be of the masculine gender. , Vul. Lat. habente statum; having or continuing its state or condi∣tion; and  is sometimes so used. Having its station, adbuc consistente, as yet abiding, continuing its state; standing, consisting. VER 8. The Holy Ghost this signifying, (Syr. signifying hereby) evidently de∣claring, that the way into the Holiest of all, (the way of the most Holy Place; of the Holies) was not as yet made manifest, whilst yet the first Tabernacle was standing, (kept its station,) THe Apostle in this verse, enters on a declaration of the use which he de∣signed to make of the description of the Tabernacle, its furniture, and its Utensils, which he had before laid down. Now this was not to give a particu∣lar account of the nature, use and signification of every thing in them, which he declineth in his close of this recounting of them, affirming that it belong∣ed not to his purpose to treat of them particularly on this occasion: But from the consideration of the whole, in its structure, order, and services, he would prove the Dignity, Preheminence and Efficacy of the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ, above those which belonged thereunto. And hence would he manifest the unspeakable advantage of the Church in the removal of the one, and introduction of the other. The first Inference which he makes unto this purpose, is laid down in this verse. And it is taken from what he had observed immediately before concern∣ing the time and manner of the High Priests entrance into the most Holy Place. It was done by him alone, and that only once a year, and that not without the blood of the Sacrifices which he offered. None of the People were ever suf∣fered to draw nigh thereunto, nor might the rest of the Priests themselves come into the Sanctuary, the Place of their daily ministration, whilst the High Priest went in, and was in the most Holy Place. In this order, this disposal of the Institutions of divine service, saith he, there was that Instruction provided for the use of the Church which I shall now declare. And three things he ex∣presseth with respect hereunto: 1. Who gave that Instruction; it was the Holy Ghost. 2. The way whereby he gave it; It was by the manifest signification of his mind, in and by what he did, appointed, ordered or prescribed. 3. What was the Instruction he gave; namely, that the way into the Ho∣liest
of all was not yet made manifest, whilst the first Tabernacle was standing. And concerning this we must enquire, 1. What is here intended by the Holiest of all. 2. What is the way into this Holiest of all; or the way of the Holies. 3. How this way was manifest; and how it was not manifest. 4. What was the duration of that state wherein this way was not manifest; namely, whilst the first Tabernacle was standing. 1. The Author of this Instruction was the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost  this signifying, that is, saith Grotius, Deus per afflatum suum Mosi praecipiens. So they speak by whom the divine personality of the Holy Ghost is denyed. But it is not only here supposed, but it may be hence undeniably proved. For he that by his word and works teacheth and instructeth the Church, is a per∣son: For acts of Understanding, Will, Power, and Authority, such as these are, are the acts of a Person. We intend no more by a Person, but one that hath an understanding, will and power of his own, which he is able to act and exert. Moreover he is a divine Person: For he who by his authority and wisdom disposed of the worship of God under the old Testament, so as it might typifie and represent things afterwards to come to pass, and be reveal∣ed, is so and none other. He who doth these things and can do them, is he in whom we believe, the holy Spirit. And as he is the immediate Author and Appointer of all divine worship; so there are characters of his wisdom and holiness on all the Parts of it. 2. The way whereby he gave this Instruction was by the signification of . the things intended, signifying, declaring manifestly, evidently, openly. He did it not by any especial revelation made unto Moses about it, he did not in words declare it, or express it as a doctrinal truth: But this signification was made in the nature and order of the things appointed by him. The framing of the Tabernacle and the constitution of the services belonging thereunto, made this declaration. For things in his wisdom were thus disposed, that there should be the first Tabernacle whereinto the Priests did enter every day, ac∣complishing the divine services that God required. Howbeit in that Taber∣nacle there were not the Pledges of the gracious presence of God. It was not the especial residence of his glory: But the peculiar habitation of God was separated from it by a vail, and no person living might so much as look into it on pain of death. But yet lest the Church should apprehend, that indeed there was no approach here nor hereafter for any person into the gracious presence of God; He ordained that once a year, the High Priest, and he alone, should enter into that Holy Place with blood. Hereby he plainly signified, that an entrance there was to be, and that with boldness thereinto. For unto what end else did he allow and appoint that once a year, there should be an entrance into it by the High Priest, in the name of, and for the service of the Church? But this entrance being only once a year by the High Priest only, and that with the blood of atonement, which was always to be observed whilst that Tabernacle continued, he did manifest that the access represented was not to be obtained during that season. For all believers in their own per∣sons were utterly excluded from it. And we may hence observe, 1. [That the divine ordinances and institutions of worship are filled with wisdom sufficient for the instruction of the Church in all the mysteries of faith and obedience.] How eminent was the divine wisdom of the Holy Ghost, in the structure and order of this Tabernacle? What Provision of Instruction for the present and future use of the Church, was laid up and stored in them? What but infinite wisdom and praescience could order things so in their typical signification? He that considers only the outward frame and state of these things, may see a curious and beautiful structure, a beautiful order of external worship: Yet can he find nothing therein, but what the wisdom and contrivance of men might attain unto: At least, they might find out things that should have as glorious an outward appearance. But take them in their proper state, as unto their signification and representation of spiritual and hea∣venly things in Christ Jesus, and there is not the least concernment of them, but it infinitely transcends all humane wisdom and projection. He alone in
whose divine understanding the whole mystery of the Incarnation of the Son God, and his Mediation did eternally reside, could institute and appoint these things: And to instruct us unto an humble adoration of that wisdom, is the framing of the whole fabrick, and the institution of all its ordinances contain∣ed in the sacred Record for the use of the Church. 2. It'is our duty with all humble diligence to enquire into the mind of the Holy Ghost in all Ordinances and Institutions of divine worship. Want hereof lost the Church of Israel. They contented themselves with the consideration of outward things, and the external observance of the services enjoyned unto them. Unto this day the Jews perplex themselves in numberless curious enqui∣ries into the outward frame and fashion of these things, the way, manner, and circumstances of the external observation of the services of it. And they have multiplyed determinations about them all and every minute circum∣stance of them, so as it is utterly impossible that either themselves or any living creature should observe them according to their traditions and pre∣scriptions. But in the mean time, as unto the mind of the Holy Ghost in them, their true use and signification, they are stark blind and utterly igno∣rant. Yea, Hardness and Blindness is so come upon them unto the utmost, that they will not believe nor apprehend that there is either spiritual wisdom, in∣struction, or signification of heavenly things in them. And herein whilst they pro∣fess to know God, are they abominable and disobedient: For no creatures can fall into higher contempt of God, than there is in this imagination; name∣ly, that the old Institutions had nothing in them, but so much Gold and Sil∣ver, and the like, framed into such shapes, and applyed to such outward uses, without regard unto things spiritual and eternal. And it is a great evidence of the Apostate condition of any Church, when they rest in and lay weight up∣on the external parts of worship, especially such as consist in corporeal obser∣vances, with a neglect of spiritual things contained in them, wherein are the effects of divine wisdom in all sacred Institutions. And whereas the Apostle affirms that this frame of things did plainly sig∣nify (as the word imports) the spiritual mysteries which he declares, it is evident with what great diligence we ought to search into the nature and use of divine Institutions. Unless we are found in the exercise of our duty here∣in, the things which in themselves are plainly declared, will be obscure un∣to us, yea, utterly hidden from us. For what is here said to be clearly signi∣fied, could not be apprehended but by a very diligent search into, and conside∣ration of the way and means of it. It was to be collected out of the things he ordained with the order of them, and their respect unto one another. Most men think it not worth while to enquire with any diligence into sacred Institutions of divine worship. If any thing seem to be wanting or defective therein; if any thing be obscure and not determined as they suppose in the express words, without more adoe they supply it with somewhat of their own. But there are many things useful and necessary in the worship of God which are to be gathered from such intimations of the mind of the Holy Ghost, as he hath in any place given of them; And those who with humility and diligence do exercise themselves therein, shall find plain satisfactory significations of his mind and Will, in such things as others are utterly ignorant of. 3. That which the Holy Ghost did thus signifie and instruct the Church in, . the , This, in the words, was that the way into the most Holy Place, the way of the Holies was not yet made manifest. And for the explication hereof, we must consider the things before proposed. 1. What the Apostle intends by the Holies; It is generally supposed by ex∣positors, . that it is Heaven itself which is hereby intended. Hence some of the Antients, the School-men and sundry expositors of the Roman Church have concluded, that no believers under the old Testament, none of the antient Pa∣triarchs Abraham, Isaac or David were admitted into Heaven whilst the first Tabernacle stood, that is, untill the Ascension of Christ. Hereon they framed a Limbus for them in some subterranean Receptacle, whither they suppose the soul of Christ went, when it is said that he descended into hell where they were detained, and whence by him they were delivered. But whatever becomes
of that imagination, the most learned expositors of that Church of late, such as Ribera, Estius, Tenae, Maldenat, A Lapide do not fix it on this Text: For the supposition whereon it is founded, is wholly alien from the scope of the Apostle, and no way useful in his present argument: For he discourseth about the Priviledges of the Church by the Gospel and Priesthood of Christ in this world, and not about its future state and condition. Besides he saies not that there was no entrance into the Holies during that season, but only that the way of it was not yet manifest. Wherefore they might enter into it, although the way whereby they did so was not yet openly declared; for they had but a shadow, or dark, obscure representation of good things to come. And this is the interpretation that most sober expositors do give of the words. Heaven with eternal Blessedness was proposed unto the Faith, Hope and expectation of the Saints under the old Testament. This they believed, and in the hopes of it walked with God, as our Apostle proves at large, chap. 11. How∣beit the way, that is, the means and cause of communicating the Heavenly Inheritance unto them, namely, by the Mediation and Sacrifice of Christ, was but obscurely represented, not illustriously manifested as it is now; Life and Immortality being brought to Light by the Gospel. And as these things are true, so this Interpretation of the words being consonant unto the Ana∣logy of faith, is safe, only we may enquire whether it be that which is peculi∣arly intended by the Apostle in this Place or no? The Comment of Grotius on these words is, that the Apostle signifies, su∣per aetherias sedes, via eò ducens est evangelium praecepta habens verè coelestia. Eam viam Christus primus patefecit; aditumque fecit omnibus ad summum coe∣lum. Pervenit quidem eò, Abrahamus, Jacobus, ut videre est, Mat. 8. 11. & alii viri eximii, ut videbimus infra, cap. 11. 40. Sed hi eò pervenerunt quasi per machinam, non viam; extraordinariâ quâdum et rarâ Dei dispensatio∣ne. But these things are most remote from the mind of the Holy Ghost, not only in this Place, but in the whole Scripture also. For, 1. How far the Gospel is this way into the Holiest, shall be declared imme∣diately. That it is so because of the Heavenly precepts which it gives, that is, which were not given under the old Testament is most untrue. For the Gos∣pel gives no precepts of Holiness and obedience that were not for the sub∣stance of them contained in the Law. There is no precept in the Gospel ex∣ceeding that of the Law, thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy Neighbour as thy self. Only the Gospel adds new motives unto O∣bedience, new encouragements, and enforcements of it, with directions for its due performance. 2. That Christ should be no otherwise the way, but only as he revealed and declared the Gospel and the precepts of it, is not only untrue and injurous unto the honour of Christ, but directly contrary unto the design of the Apostle in this Place. For he is treating of the Sacerdotal office of Christ only, and the Benefit which the Church doth receive thereby. But the revelation of the Doctrine, or precepts of the Gospel was no duty of that office, nor did it be∣long thereunto. That he did as the Prophet of the Church. But all his Sa∣cerdotal Actings are towards God in the behalf of the Church, as hath been proved. 3. That the antient Patriarchs went to Heaven by a secret Engine, and that some of them only in an extraordinary way, is plainly to deny that they were saved by faith in the promised seed, that is, that they were not saved by the mediation of Christ, which is contrary unto the whole Oeconomy of God in the salvation of the Church, and many express Testimonies of the Scripture. These Socinian fictions do not cure but corrupt the Word of God, and turn away the minds of men from the truth unto fables. We shall there∣fore yet farther enquire into the true meaning of the Holy Ghost in these words. The Apostle by  here, , intends the same with ver. 3. he called , the Holy of Holies; the second part of the Sanctuary . whereinto the High Priest alone could enter once a year, as he declares in
the foregoing Verse: Only whereas he there spake of the material Fabrick of the Tabernacle, and the things contained in it, here he designs what was signified thereby: For he declares not what these things were, but what the Holy Ghost did signifie in and by them. Now in that most Holy Place were all the Signs and Pledges of the gracious Presence of God; the Testimonies of our Reconciliation by the Blood of the Atonement, and our Peace with him thereby. Wherefore to enter into these Holies, is nothing but an Access with liberty, freedom and boldness, into the gracious Presence of God, on the ac∣count of Reconciliation and Peace made with him. This the Apostle doth so plainly and positively declare, Chap. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. that I somewhat admire so many worthy and learned Expositors should utterly miss of his mean∣ing in this place. The Holies then is the Gracious Presence of God, whereunto Believers draw nigh, in the confidence of the Atonement made for them, and acceptance thereon: see Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3. Ephes. 2. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Heb. 4. 14, 15. Chap. 10. 19. The Atonement being made and received by Faith, Conscience being purged, Bondage and Fear being removed, Believers do now under the Gospel, enter with Boldness into this Gracious Presence of God. 2. We must consider what is the way into these Holies, which was not yet made manifest. And here also Expositors indulge unto many Conjectures, very needlesly, as I suppose. For the Apostle doth elsewhere expresly declare himself, and interpret his own meaning, namely, Chap. 10. 19, 20. This way is no other but the Sacrifice of Christ, the true High Priest of the Church. For by the entrance of the High Priest into the most Holy Place with Blood, the Holy Ghost did signifie that the way into it, namely, for Believers to enter by, was only the one true Sacrifice which he was to offer, and to be. And ac∣cordingly to give an Indication of the accomplishment of their Type, when he expired on the Cross, having offered himself unto God for the Expiation of our Sins; the Vail of the Temple which enclosed and secured this Holy Place from any entrance into it, was rent from the top to the bottom, where∣by it was laid open unto all, Matth. 27. 51. And an evidence this is, that the Lord Christ offered his great expiatory Sacrifice in his Death here on Earth, a true and real Sacrifice, and that it was not an Act of Power after his Ascen∣sion, metaphorically called a Sacrifice, as the Socinians dream. For until that Sacrifice was offered, the way could not be opened into the Holies; which it was immediately after his Death, and signified by the renting of the Vail. This , the onely way whereby we enter into the most Holy Place, the Gracious Presence of God, and that with boldness. 3. Of this way it is affirmed that it was not yet made manifest, whil'st the first Tabernacle was standing. And a word is peculiarly chosen by the Apostle . to signifie his intention. He doth not say, that there was no way then into the most Holy Place; none made, none provided, none made use of. But there was not a , an open manifestation of it. There was an entrance under the Old Testament into the Presence of God, as unto Grace and Glory, namely, the vertue of the Oblation of Christ: But this was not as yet made manifest. Three things were wanting thereunto. 1. It was not yet actually existent, but only was vertually so. The Lord Christ had not yet actually offered himself unto God, nor made Atonement for Sin. Howbeit by vertue of the Eternal Agreement that was between the Fa∣ther and him, concerning what he should accomplish in the fulness of time, the benefit of what he was so to do, was applied unto them that do believe, they were saved by Faith even as we are. Hence is he called, a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world; that is, in and from the giving of the first Pro∣mise. 2. Although the coming of his Person was promised, and his Sacrifice va∣riously shadowed out, or represented unto the Church, yet their perception and understanding thereof, was weak and dark, proportionate unto the means of its Revelation. Hence whatever were its vertue and efficacy, yet was it not in it self and its own nature made manifest. 3. There were many blessed Priviledges that attended the opening of this
way in the actual existence of it, in the oblation of Christ which the Church of the old Testament was not acquainted with, nor made partaker of. And although these things belonged not unto the essence of the way, yet they did so as unto our entrance into it. We could not without them, that is, the Administration of the spirit in Gospel-Ordinances, make use of this way though prepared and set open unto the Glory of God, and our own spiritual advantage. Wherefore the plain open manifestation of the way into the Holiest, which the Apostle denies unto the Church under the old Testament, consists in these three things. 1. In the actual exhibition of Christ in the flesh, and his Sacrifice of himself, making atonement for sin: For hereby alone was the way laid open unto an access with boldness into the gracious presence of God. Without this the Law and its Curse were like the Cherubims and flaming Sword that turned every way to keep sinners from drawing nigh unto God. Hereby were they re∣moved, a new and living way being consecrated for our access unto him. 2. In the full plain declaration of the nature of his Person and of his Medi∣ation. And therefore although the Gospel be not this way in the Precepts of obedience which it gives unto us, yet is it the declaration and manifestation of this way, and our sole direction how to make use of it, or how to enter by it into the most Holy Place. This they enjoyed not under the old Testament but were limited unto typical institutions directing the Priests how to enter into the Sanctuary made with hands, which were but an obscure representa∣tion of these things. 3. In the Introduction or Revelation and Establishment of those Priviledges of Gospel-worship, whereby believers are led comfortably into the presence of God, as our Apostle declares; cap. 10. 19, 20. For they are full of Light and Grace, and a Guide unto all the steps of faith and obedience in this way. Hereunto may be added all those things which we have declared to belong unto that perfection or consummation of the Church-state which the Law could not bring it unto; on chap. 7. ver. 11. In these things consisted that manifestation of the way into the most Holy Place, which is here denyed unto the old Testament. 4. The continuance of this state is added: Whilst the first Tabernacle was standing .. 1. By the first Tabernacle the Apostle understands not that first Part of the Tabernacle into which the Priests entred continually accomplishing the divine services, which before he had so called: But he intends the whole Taberna∣cle with respect unto the true Tabernacle of the Body of Christ which succeed∣ed into its room. Neither yet doth he understand precisely, that Tent or Tabernacle which was erected in the wilderness, which was not in itself of any long continuance, nor designed thereunto: For it was only suited unto the service of the Church whilest it was in an unsettled condition. But he intends the whole worship instituted together with it, and belonging unto it, cele∣brated afterwards in the Temple according unto the Laws of that Tabernacle. For there was the same worship and the same order of things in the one and the other; and so the same signification made at first by the Holy Ghost in the constitution of the Tabernacle was still continued under the Temple also. 2. It was continued whilst this first Tabernacle, or the Tabernacle in this sense, . was standing. Having its station, that is, according unto the mind of God, it had its state and use in the Church. This it had absolutely until the death of Christ and no longer: For until then both the Lord Christ himself and all his Disciples continued the observation of all its services according to the mind of God: For he was made under the Law of it whilst it was in force. Declaratively it continued until the day of Pentecost: For then was in the com∣ing of the Holy Ghost, the foundation of the Gospel-Church State, Order, and Worship solemnly laid, whereon a new way of worship being established, the abrogation of the old was declared. And this was yet farther made known by the Determination put unto the Observation of it by the Holy Ghost
among the Gentile converts in the Council of the Apostles and Elders at Ieru∣salem. Actually it continued until the destruction of the Temple, City and People some years after. Its first station it had in Gods appointment, the second in his connivence, and the third in his patience. It is the first of these that is here intended. The Tabernacle, that is, the Laws and Service of it, preserved its station and use in the Church, by Gods ordinance and appointment unto the Death of Christ. Then did he pronounce concerning it and all things belonging unto it; It is finished. Then was the Vail rent, and the way into the Holiest laid open. Then was peace with God publickly confirmed by the blood of the Cross, Ephes. 2. 14, 15. and the na∣ture of the way of our access unto him made known. And some things we may hence observe, which also tend unto the further explication of the mind of the Holy Ghost in the Text. 1. Although the Lord Christ were not actually exhibited in the flesh under the old Testament, nor had actually offered himself unto God for us, yet had Believers then an access into the Grace and favour of God, though the way, the cause and means of it was not manifestly declared unto them. The Apostle doth not exclude them all from the Grace and Favour of God, but only shew their disadvantage in comparison of Believers under the Gospel, in that this way was not manifested unto them. 2. The design of the Holy Ghost in all the Tabernacle, Ordinances and Institu∣tions of worship, was to direct the faith of Believers unto what was signifyed by them. 3. Typical Institutions attended diligently unto, were sufficient to direct the faith of the Church, unto the expectation of the real expiation of sin, and accep∣tance with God thereon. God was never wanting unto the Church in what was necessary unto it in its present condition, so as that it might be guided in its faith and encouraged unto obedience 4. Though the standing of the first Tabernacle was a great Mercy and Privi∣ledge, yet the removal of it was a greater; for it made way for the bringing in of that which was better. 5. The divine wisdom in the Oeconomy and disposal of the Revelation of the way into the Holiest, or of Grace and acceptance with himself, is a blessed object of our contemplation. The several degrees of it we have considered, on chap. 1. ver. 1. 6. The clear manifestation of the way of Redemption, of the Expiation of sin, and peace with God thereon, is the great Priviledge of the Gospel. 7. There is no access into the gracious Presence of God, but by the sacrifice of Christ alone.
VER. IX, X. . , Vul. Lat. quae Parabola est, Syr.  an Exemplar or Example; so all render it, though it answer the Hebrew  a Pa∣rable or Proverb; Quod erat Exemplar, so Beza and others. , Vul. Lat. Tempor is instantis, of the instant time or season; which Arias rectifies into, in tempus praesens, for the time present; Beza, pro tempore illo praesente, for that present time; pro tempore tum praesente, for the time that was then present, Syr.  for that time, omitting . , Vul. Lat. juxta quam; it being uncertain what he refers quam unto, Arias rectifieth it, juxta quod; for  answereth unto , and not unto  quo, wherein; Syr. in quo, wherein. , Vul. Lat. Munera & Hostiae, Dona & Sacrificia; Syr. Gifts; that is, Meat and Drink Offerings, and Sacrifices by Blood, Syr.  Oblations and Victims, or bloody Sacrifices. , vul. Lat. juxta Conscientiam perfectum fa∣cere servientem; make him that did the service perfect according to Con∣science: others, in Conscientia sanctificare cultorem: others, consummare: of the sense of the word we have spoken before. Syr. Perfect the Conscience of him that offered them. , Syr. in Meat and Drink, in the singular number. , Syr.  and in the washing of kinds; Kinds, that is, various kinds; with respect not unto the various rites of washing, but the various kinds of things that were washed. , Vul. Lat. Iustitiis Carnis; so it renders , by Iustitia, or Iustificatio, constantly but very improperly; Syr.  Pre∣cepts of the flesh; Ritibus carnalibus, Ordinances, Institutions, Rites of the flesh, concerning fleshly things. , Vul. Lat. Impositis; others, Imposita, incumbent on, lying on them. VER. IX, X. Which was a figure for the time then present, in which were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make him that did the ser∣vice perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, Which stood onely in meats and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal Ordinances impo∣sed until the time of Reformation. I shall not alter the Translation, but shew what might be more properly ex∣pressed as unto some Instances in our Exposition. Expositors have made use of various Conjectures in their Commentaries on this place. What is material in the most eminent of them, the Reader may see in Mr. Pool's Collections. But I must needs say, that in my judgment, they have brought more difficulty unto the Text, than they have freed it from. Wherefore I shall not detain the Reader in the examination of them; but I shall give that interpretation of the Text, which I hope will evidence its Truth unto such who impartially seek after it, and are in any measure acquaint∣ed with the things treated of.
The Apostle in these two Verses gives a summary Account and Reason of the Imperfection of the Tabernacle, and all its Services, wherein the Admini∣stration of the Old Covenant did consist. This was direct and proper unto his present Argument. For his design is to prove the Preeminence of the New Covenant above the Old, from the excellency of the High Priest thereof, with his Tabernacle and Sacrifice. Unto this end a discovery of the imperfections and weakness of the first Tabernacle and Services, was indispensably necessary. And if notwithstanding its outward Excellency and Glory, it was no other but what it is here declared to be, as evidently it was not, then was it not only an unreasonable thing, and a plain rejection of the Wisdom and Grace of God, to adhere unto it in opposition unto the Gospel, which was done by the most of the Hebrews; but it was altogether unmeet and useless to be retained with the Profession of the Gospel, which the residue of them earnestly contended for. This was that which the Apostle designed ultimately to convince them of; and a work herein both great and difficult was committed unto him. For there is nothing more difficult, than to dispossess the minds of men of such Persuasions in Religion, as they have been bred up in, and received by a long Tract of Tradition from their Fathers. So we find it to be in such Persua∣sions and Observances, as are evidently false and impious unto the understand∣ings of all, that are not under the power of such Prejudices: So is it at present with them of the Roman Church, and others. But these Hebrews had a Pretence or Plea for their obstinacy herein, which none other ever had in the like case but themselves. For the things which they adhered unto, were confessedly of Divine Institution. Wherefore the Apostle labours principally to prove, that in the Will and Wisdom of God, they were to continue only for a season, and also that the season of their Expiration was now come. And this he doth in this place, by a declaration of their nature and use whil'st they did continue, whence it is evident, that God never designed them a perpetual station in the Church; and that because they could not effect what he pur∣posed and had promised to do for it. This is the substance of his present Ar∣gument. There is in the words themselves, 1. The Subject spoken of, , Which. 2. The proper Use and End of it, It was a Figure. 3. The limitation of that Use as unto Time, For the Time then present. 4. The especial Nature of it, The offering of Gifts and Sacrifices. 5. The Imperfection of it therein, They could not consummate the Worshippers in Conscience. 6. The reason of that Imperfection, It stood only in Meats and Drinks, &c. 7. The manner of its Establishment, It was imposed. 8. The time alotted for its Continuance, Until the Time of Reformation. 1. The Subject spoken of is expressed by , Which. Some would re∣fer . it unto  following; and so read the words, which figure was for the time present. But there is no cause for this Traduction of the words. The Verb Substantive  is deficient, as usually, and is to be supplied as in our Translation, Which was; Which, that is, , the Tabernacle. Not only the Fabrick and Structure of it, but the Tabernacle in both parts of it, with all its Furniture, Vessels, Utensils and Services, as before described. 2. As unto its proper Use and End, the Apostle affirms that it was ,  Figura, Exemplar, Exemplum, Comparatio, Similitudo, Typus, Representatio: So variously is this word rendred by Interpreters. Most fix on Exemplar or Exemplum; but they are  and , not . And in all these Versions the proper sense of the word as used in the Scripture, is missed. It is not  that the Apostle intends, but  as it is rendred by the Syriack.
And this many have observed, namely, that it answers unto  but yet have missed in the interpretation of it.  is the same with  wherewith it is joyned as of the same signification and importance. Psal. 49. 4. Psal. 78. 2. And whereas it is said that the Queen of Sheba tried the wis∣dom of Solomon  1 Kin. 10. 1. The Targum renders it by , the Chaldee,  and the Syriack  being the same with the Hebrew . Now  is anigma, problema, ; a Riddle, an hard Question; and  is to speak anigmatically, obscurely, so as that one thing is to be ga∣thered out of another. So is  used also. Ezek. 20. 49. is he not  Proverbiator Proverbiorum; one that speaks darkly, and ob∣scurely; that expresseth one thing and intends another, using similitudes and Metaphors: An obscure mystical Instruction by figures, signs, symbols, meta∣phors and the like. Thus is  almost constantly used in the new Testament. So our Lord Jesus Christ expresly opposeth speaking in parables, unto a clear, plain, open teaching, so as to be understood of all. See Mat. 13. 10, 11, 12, 13. Ioh. 16. 28, 29. Now speakest thou openly, and no Parable. Wherefore  in this place, is an obscure mystical Metaphorical Instruction. God taught the Church of old, the mysteries of our Redemption by Christ, by the Ta∣bernacle, its Fabrick, Parts, Utensils and Services: But it was but an obscure, parabolical, a figurative Instruction. So should the word here be rendred, a figurative Instruction, or the word Parable be here retained as it is in other plac∣es. This was Gods way of teaching the mysteries of his wisdom and grace; which as it was sufficient for the state of the Church which was then present; so it instructs us in what he requires, what he expects from us, unto whom all these things are unfolded, made plain and evident. 3. The third thing in the Text is the time or season wherein the Tabernacle was so parabolically or mystically instructive. It was   some few copies for  read  as doth that now before  Vnto this present time. This reading is generally rejected by Expositors; as not suited unto the mind of the Apostle in this Place. For he intends not the time that was then present when he wrote the Epistle, not the times of the Gospel, not the time after the resurrection of Christ until the destruction of the Temple, which the addition of that word would denote: For God had prepared ano∣ther kind of Instruction for that season, and not by Parables, or mystical Me∣taphors. But yet the word may be retained, and a sense given of the words both sound and proper. For, , may well signifie as much as until; or be taken  as it is often.  unto this season; until the time that God would grant another kind of teaching, which now he hath done. It served until this present season wherein the Gospel is preached, and all the things signified by it are accomplished. But I shall rather follow the reading of the most copies though the Vulgar Latine reading temporis instantis seems to favour the first. And Arias recti∣fying it into, in tempus praesens, gives the same sense also. But the word  being of the praeterimperfect tense, signifies a time that was then present, but is now past. And it is therefore well rendred by our Translators, the time then present; as if  had been in the Text. The time then present when the Tabernacle was made and erected.  The season of the Church which was then present. For the Apostle in this whole discourse, not only respects the Tabernacle, and not the Temple, but he considers the first Erect∣ion of the Tabernacle in a peculiar manner: For then was it proposed as the means of the Administration of the first Covenant and the worship thereunto belonging. It is the Covenants which he principally designeth a comparison between. And he doth in that way of the disposition and administration of them, which was given and appointed at their first establishment. As this in the new Covenant was the Person, office, sacrifice, and ministry of Christ; so as unto the first, it was the Tabernacle and all the services of it. Wherefore the time then present was the state and condition of the Church
at the first setting up of the Tabernacle. Not as though this time was con∣fined unto that or those Ages wherein the Tabernacle was in use, before the building of the Temple. But this Instruction which was then signally given, was the whole of what God granted unto the Church, during that state where∣in it was obliged unto the Ordinances and services which were then instituted. The Instructions which God thought meet to grant unto the Church at that season were obscure, mystical and figuratively representative; yet was it suffici∣ent for the faith and obedience of the Church, had it been diligently attend∣ed unto, and what the Holy Ghost signified thereby. So are all Gods ways of Instruction in all seasons. We cannot erre but either by a neglect of enqui∣ry into them, or by looking for more than God in his wisdom hath committed unto them. And this sense those who render  by a Figure, Type, or Example, must come unto: For the use of it is confined unto the time of the erection of the Tabernacle and the Institution of the ordinances thereunto belonging. But a Type or Figure was unto them of no use, but so far as it was instructive, which was obscurely and mystically. And that this is the sense of the word the Apostle declares, ver. 8. Where he shews the substance of what the Holy Ghost signified by the building, disposal, and services of the Tabernacle; that is, what he taught the Church thereby, parabolically and figuratively. This kind of Instruction, whatever now it seem to us, was meet and fit for them unto whom it was given. And by the administration of Grace in it, it was a blessed means to ingenerate Faith, Love and Obedience in the hearts and lives of many unto an eminent degree. And we may consider from hence what is required of us unto whom the clear Revelation of the Wisdom, Grace, and Love of God are made known from the Bosome of the Father by the Son himself. 4. The especial nature and use of this Tabernacle and its service is declared.  In which were offered both gifts and sacrifices.  the Vulgar Latine reads juxta quam; making the Relative to answer unto , or to . But the Gender will not allow it in the Original.  is as much as  in which time; during which season: For immediately upon the setting up of the Tabernacle, God gave unto Moses Laws and Institutions for all the Gifts and Sacrisices of the People, which were to be offered therein. This was the first direction which God gave after the setting up of the Tabernacle, name∣ly, the way and manner of offering all sorts of Gifts and Sacrifices unto him. And the Apostle here distributes all the  all the sacred offerings in∣to  and , that is, unbloody and bloody Sacrifices; as he did be∣fore, . chap. 5. 10. where the distinction hath been explained. Of them all he affirms, , they are offered; not that they were so: . For the Apostle erects a Scheme at the first Tabernacle and all its services at its first Institution, and presents it unto the consideration of the Hebrews, as if it were then first erected. He doth indeed sometimes speak of the Priests and Sacrifices as then in being, with respect unto that continuance of the Temple and its worship which it had in the Patience of God, as we have shewed on chap. 8. ver. 4. But here treating only of the Tabernacle and its worship, as that which was granted in the confirmation, and for the ad∣ministration of the old Covenant then entred into, as the Tabernacle, Priest∣hood and Sacrifice of Christ were given in the confirmation of the new; he represents that as present, which was past long before. The Tabernacle serv∣ed aptly for the use whereunto it was designed. It was meet for the offer∣ing of gifts and sacrifices. And so alone is the Tabernacle of Christ for its proper end also. 5. On these concessions the Apostle declares the imperfection of this whole order of things, and its impotency as unto the great end that might be expect∣ed from it; For these Gifts and Sacrifices could not make perfect him that did the service as pertaining unto the conscience. This was the end aimed at; this was represented in them and by them. And if they could not really effect it,
they were weak and imperfect, and so not always to be continued. The end represented in and by them, was to make Atonement for Sin, that the Anger of God being pacified, they might have Peace with him. The Covenant was then newly established between God and the Church, be∣fore any Laws were given about these Offerings and Sacrifices, Exod. 24. God knew that there would be among the People, and even the Priests themselves many sins and transgressions against the Rules and Laws of that Covenant. This of it self it could not dispense withal. For its Sanction was the Curse against every one that continued not in all things written in the Book of it; wherefore if this Curse on all just and righteous occasions should rigidly have∣been put in execution, the Covenant would only have proved the means and cause of the utter destruction and excision of the whole People. For there is no man that liveth, and sinneth not. And on many occasions sin abounded in that state of the Church, wherein Light and Grace were but sparingly dispen∣sed, in comparison of the times of the New Covenant: Wherefore God in his Mercy and Patience provided, that by sacred Gifts and Offerings atonement should be made for sin, so as that the Curse of the Covenant should not be put in immediate execution against the sinner, Lev. 17. 11. But there were two things to be considered in those sins which God had appointed that atonement should be made for. The first was, the external temporal Punishment which was due unto them according unto the Place which the Law or Covenant had in the Politie or Commonwealth of Israel. The other, that eternal Punishment was due unto every sin by the Law, as the Rule of all Moral Obedience; For the wages of sin is death. In the first of these, the Person of the Sinner in all his outward circumstances, his Life, his Goods, his Liberty, and the like, were concerned. In the latter, here his Conscience, or the inward man alone was so. And as unto the first of them, the Gifts and Sacrifices mentioned being rightly offered, were able in themselves ex opere operato, to free the Sinner from all temporal political inconvenience or detriment, so as that his Life and In∣heritance should be continued in the Land of Canaan, or his state preserved entire in the Commonwealth of Israel. This the Apostle here tacitely acknow∣ledgeth, namely, that the Gifts and Sacrifices were able to free the Sinner from temporal Punishment, and give him outward Peace in his Possessions. But as unto the latter, wherein Conscience was concerned, he denies that they had any such efficacy. They were not able, . It agrees in Gender with  only, and not with , which being of the Neuter Gender, usually regulates the con∣struction . in such conjunctions. But as most think it equally respects both the antecedent Substantives. And instances may be given where a Participle re∣specting more antecedent Substantives than one, may agree in Gender with either of them. As Leges & Plebiscita coactae. But I rather think that the Apostle confines the Impotency he mentions unto Sacrifices only; that is, , slain and bloody Sacrifices. For these things which were , Gifts and no more, were not designed to make Atonement for Sin; that was to be done by Blood, and no otherwise, so the words should be read; offered Gifts and Sacrifices that could not persect. These Sacrifices were impotent and ineffectual unto this end, . What the  which the Apostle so frequently mentions in this Epistle, I have . before declared, and so what it is . It is indeed to persect, to consum∣mate, to sanctifie, to dedicate, to consecrate. But whereas these Sacrifices did all these things outwardly, and as unto the flesh, as the Apostle grants, ver. 7. he doth not here absolutely deny it unto them, but in a certain respect only. They could not do it , as unto the Conscience of the Sinner before God. What he intends hereby, he doth more fully declare, Chap. 10. ver. 2. . There is a Conscience condemning for sin. This could not be taken away by these Sacrifices. They were not able to do it; for if they could have done so, the sin∣ner would have had compleat Peace with God, and would not have had need to have offered these Sacrifices any more: But they were multiplied and often re∣peated, because of their disability unto this end; wherefore ,
is to give Peace of Conscience unto men, through a sense of perfect Atone∣ment made for sin, in the sight of God, with an interest in his love and favor thereon. This it is to be persect or consummate, as pertaining to Conscience in the sight of God, namely, to have a Conscience condemning for sin taken away. This those Sacrifices of the Law could not effect. It will be said then, Unto what end did they serve? Were they of no use but only to free men from the Penalties of the Law or Covenant, as it was a Rule of the Politie or Com∣monwealth of Israel, and the Tenure of their Possessions in Canaan? Yes, they were moreover part of the , or mystical instruction which God grant∣ed the Church in those days, directing them unto the one Sacrifice and Offer∣ing of Christ, typically representing it, and through Faith applying the vertue and efficacy of it unto their Consciences every day. 6. The Person is described towards whom this effect of purifying the Con∣science . is denied. They could not thus perfect , Him that did the Service, saith our Translation, I think not so properly. He that did the Service was the Priest only. But respect is had unto every one that brought his Gift or Offering unto the Altar. , sacredly to accom∣plish the Services was the work of the Priest alone, ver. 6. But , is the same with , Chap. 10. 1. that is, every one who brought his Sacrifice to be offered, that Atonement might be made for him. And  comprehends the whole of Divine Worship in all Individuals. , Mat. 4. 10. But he also may be said to do the Service, on whose account and in whose stead it was performed. But the Defect charged, doth not in the first place reflect on the Persons, as though it was by their default. They worshiped God according unto his own Institutions, but it was in the Sacrifices themselves. And if they could not make the Worshipers, those who did the Service, perfect, they could make none so, for it was they alone who had the benefit of them. The Note of Grotius on this place is, Isti cultus non possunt Sectatorum suo∣rum animos purgare à vitiis quemadmodum Evangelium; most remote from the mind of the Holy Ghost. For he speaks not of purging our minds from Vices, but of purifying Conscience by Atonement made for the guilt of sin; and op∣poseth not those Sacrifices unto the Doctrine of the Gospel, but unto the Sa∣crifice of Christ. And we may hence observe, 1. There is a state of perfect Peace with God to be attained under imperfect Obedience. For it is charged as a weakness in the legal Administrations, that they could not give such a Peace, where any sin remained. It is therefore to be found in the Sacrifice of Christ, as is proved at large in the next Chapter. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God. 2. Nothing can give perfect peace of Conscience with God, but what can make Atonement for sin. And whoever attempt it any other way but by vertue of that Atonement, will never attain it in this world nor hereafter.
VER. X. Onely in Meats and Drinks, and divers Washings, and carnal Ordinan∣ces imposed on them until the time of Reformation. IT is acknowledged that there is no small difficulty in the connexion of these words, or their relation unto what doth immediately precede; and therefore Expositors have multiplied conjectures about it, in whose ex∣amination we are not concerned. I shall therefore no farther consider any of them, but as they relate unto what I judge to be their true Coherence. Two things are plain and evident unto this purpose. 1. That the design of the Apostle in the words themselves, is to manifest and declare the weakness of the services of the Tabernacle, and their insufficien∣cy for attaining the end proposed in them. This end in general was the per∣fecting of the Church-State in Religious Worship; and in particular to make the Worshipers perfect as unto their Consciences before God. And he gives such a description of them, as of it self will sufficiently evince their weakness and insufficiency. For what is it possible that things of that kind and nature, which is here described, can contribute unto these ends? 2. That the things instanced in, do comprise a great part of the Levitical Institutions, and his Assertion concerning them may by a parity of Reason be extended unto them all. For to render his description of them comprehen∣sive, the Apostle (1) expresseth them in a particular enumeration of the Heads whereunto they might be reduced, Meats and Drinks, and divers Washings. And then (2) to shew that he intends all things of an alike nature with them, he adds the general nature of them all, they were carnal Ordinances. 1. A great part of their Levitical Religious Observances, may be reduced unto these Heads of Meats and Drinks, and various Washings. Laws and In∣stitutions were multiplied about these things; what they might eat, and what they might not; what was clean, and what was unclean unto that end; what they might drink, and what vessels defiled all liquors; what were to be their eatings and drinkings, and when upon their Peace-offering, and at their solemn Feasts; their great variety of Washings, of the Priests, of the People, of their Garments, and their Flesh, stated and occasional, do take up a great part of the entire System of their Ordinances. And as Laws were multiplied concerning these things, so many of them were enforced with very severe Penalties. Hence they were difficultly to be learned, and always impossible to be observed. The Mishna and Talmud, that is, the whole Religion of the present Iews consists almost wholly in scrupulous Enquiries, and endless Determinations, or rather Con∣jectures about these things, and their Circumstances. 2. All the Laws concerning these things were carnal, Carnal Ordinances; such as for the matter, manner of performance, and end of them, were Car∣nal. This being their nature, it evidently follows, that they were instituted only for a time, and were so far from being able themselves to perfect the state of the Church, as that they were not consistent with that perfect state of spiritual things which God would introduce, and had promised so to do. The scope and design of the Apostle being thus fixed, the Coherence and In∣terpretation of the words will not be so difficult, as at first view they may ap∣pear. , Onely in Meats and Drinks, &c. Our Translators observ∣ing the sense Elliptical, have supplied it with, Which stood; Which stood onely in
Meats and Drinks; And that Supplement may give a double sense. (1) It may respect the substance of the things spoken of: Which, relates to Gifts and Sacrisices. And so the sense intended is, that they consisted in Meats and Drinks, and divers Washings. And this was the natural substance of them. They consisted in such things as might be eat and drunk, being duly prepared, as Flesh, Flower, Salt, Oyl and Wine. Hence were they called Meat and Drink∣offerings. And they had Washings also that belonged unto them, as the wash∣ing of the inwards, Exod. 29. 17. and of the Burnt-offerings peculiarly, Ezek. 40. 38. of the hands and feet of the Priests, Exod. 30. 18. and of the Leper, Lev. 14. 9. Howbeit it cannot be said, that the Gifts and Sacrifices, as they were such, did consist in these things, though in them, things of this na∣ture were offered unto God. Wherefore the supplement of, Which stood, can∣not be admitted in that sense. (2) It may respect the consummation of these Gifts and Sacrifices, or the Celebration of the whole Service that belonged un∣to them, and all their necessary Circumstances or Consequents: which stood in these things; that is, which were accompanied with them, and not perfected without them. The Argument in the words, is to prove the insufficiency of the Gifts and Sacrifices of the Law, unto the end mentioned of perfecting Conscience be∣fore God. And this is evidenced by the consideration of their necessary Ad∣juncts, or what belonged unto them, and were inseparable from them. It is not said, that these Gifts and Sacrifices were onely Meats and Drinks, and so things of no value. For neither doth the Apostle treat of the old Institutions with such contempt, nor would the truth of his assertion been evident unto the Hebrews: But he argues unto a discovery of their use and end, from the things that did always accompany them, and were inseparable from them. For those by whom they were offered, were obliged by the same Divine Insti∣tution at the same time, unto sundry Meats and Drinks, and divers Washings; which proves both the Gifts and Sacrifices to have been of the same kind, and to have had respect unto carnal things as they had. For if those Gifts and Sa∣crifices had an immediate effect on the Consciences of men unto their purifica∣tion before God, by any vertue inherent in them, whence is it that the Ob∣servances which by the same Law accompanied them, were onely about Meats and Drinks, and divers Washings? And this sense is not to be refused. But whereas there is an Ellipsis in the Connexion of the words, it may be otherwise supplied. For having mentioned the Gifts and Sacrifices of the Law, . the Apostle makes an addition unto them, of the remaining Institutions and Ceremonies of it, whose very nature and use declared their insufficiency unto the end enquired after. And other Laws, onely concerning Meats and Drinks, and divers Washings; which in general he calls Carnal Rites. Hereby is the Argument in hand carried on and compleated. There are four things in the words. (1) An Account of the legal Institu∣tions under several Heads. (2) Their Nature in general, with that of others of the same kind; they were carnal Ordinances, or fleshly Rites. (3) The way of the Relation of the People unto them, they were imposed on them. (4) The Time for which they were imposed, or the measure of their dura∣tion; which was, until the time of Reformation. 1. For the Nature of them, they consisted in Meats and Drinks. Take the . words in their full extent, and they may be comprehensive of four sorts of In∣stitutions. (1) Of all those which concerned meats, or things to be eaten or not eaten, as being clean or unclean; an account whereof is given, Lev. 11. throughout. With reference thereunto doth the Apostle reflect on the Le∣vitical Institutions, in those words, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, which all are to perish with their using, Col. 2. 21, 22. are all carnal things. (2) The Portion of the Priests out of the Sacrifices, especially what they were to eat in the Holy Place; as the Portion of the Sin-offering, Exod. 29. 31, 32, 33. Lev. 10. 12, 13, 17. and what they were to eat of the Peace-offerings in any clean place, ver. 14, 15. And the prohibition of drinking wine or strong drink in the Holy Place, ver. 8, 9. may be here respected in Drinks about which these In∣stitutions were. And these were such, as without which, the service of the
Sacrifices could not be acceptably performed, ver. 17, 18. And therefore are they intended in this place in an especial manner, if it be the design of the Apostle to prove the insufficiency of the Sacrifices from the nature of their inseparable Adjuncts, which were carnal and perishing things. (3) The eat∣ing of the Remainder of the Peace-offering, whether of a Vow, or of Thanks∣giving, the Law whereof is given as an holy Ordinance, Lev. 7. 14, 15, 16, 17. (4) The Laws concerning the Feasts of the whole People, with their eating and drinking before the Lord, Lev. 23. All these Divine Ordinances were , concerning meats and drinks, that were necessary to be observed, with their offering of Gifts and Sacrifices, declaring of what nature they were. And the observation of them all was at the same time imposed on them. 2. They consisted in, or were concerning divers Washings.  is any kind of washing, whether by dipping or sprinkling; putting the thing to be wash∣ed . into the water, or applying the water unto the thing it self to be washed. Of these washings there were various sorts or kinds under the Law. For the Priests were washed, Exod. 29. 4. and the Levites, Numb. 8. 12. and the People after they had contracted any impurity, Lev. 15. 8, 16. But the Apostle seems to have particular respect unto the washings of the Priests, and of the Offerings, in the Court of the Tabernacle before the Altar; For these were such, as without which the Gifts and Sacrifices could not be rightly offered unto God. 3. It is added in the description of these things, , insti∣tutis carnalibus, ritibus, ceremoniis, justitiis justificationibus carnis. Carnal Or∣dinances . say we. The signification of  in this place hath been spoken unto before. Rites of Worship arbitrarily imposed, whose Ius or Right de∣pended on the will or pleasure of God. And they are said to be of the flesh, for the reason given, ver. 13. they sanctified unto the purifying of the flesh, and no more. The words may be an expression of the nature in general of the Law, about Meats, Drinks, and Washings, they were carnal Ordinances. But the distinctive copulative , and, will not admit of that sense. It seems therefore to con∣tain an addition of all those other legal Ordinances which any way belonged . unto the Purifications of the Law. The force of the reasonings in these words is evident. For the design of the Apostle is to prove, that in the perfect Church-state which God would bring in under the New Covenant, the Worshipers were to enjoy peace of Conscience, with joy and boldness in the presence of God, from a perfect Atonement and Purification of Sin. How this is effected by the one Sacrifice of Christ, he afterwards declares. But the Ordinances of the Law, and the Le∣vitical Sacrifices were weak and imperfect as unto this end. For in them, and by them, men were conversant wholly in carnal things, in meats, drinks, wash∣ings, and such like carnal observances, which could reach no farther than the sanctification of the flesh, as he evidenceth in the application of all these things unto his present argument, ver. 13. And the Faith of Believers is rather weakned than confirmed, by all things of the like nature, that divert their minds from an immediate respect unto, and total dependance on the one Sacri∣fice of Christ. 3. Concerning all these things it is affirmed, that they were imposed on the People, . There is a difficulty in the Syntax of this word, which all . Interpreters take notice of. If it refers unto the Substantives immediately foregoing , &c. it agrees not with them in Case; if unto  in the other Verse, it agrees not with it in Gender. And the Apostle had before adjoined unto it a Participle of the Feminine Gender, . Some think that the letter Iota is added unto the first word, or taken from the lat∣ter, so that originally they were both of the same Gender. But whereas the Apostle had put together , the one of the Neuter, the other of the Feminine Gender, he might apply his Adjectives either to one or both, without offence to Grammar. Yet I rather judge that in this word he had re∣spect unto all the things whereof he had discoursed from the very beginning
of the Chapter. Concerning them all he declares that they were thus impo∣sed, and so the use of the word in the Neuter Gender is proper. Many judge that there is an Objection anticipated in these words. For up∣on the description of the nature and use of the Tabernacle with all its Furni∣ture and Services, he declares that they could not all of them, nor any of them, perfect the Worshipers that attended unto them. Hereon it might be well enquired, To what purpose then were they appointed? Unto what end did they serve? Hereunto he replies, That they were never designed unto per∣petual use, but only imposed on the people unto the time of Reformation. But whether there be a respect unto any such Objection or no, he plainly declares their use and duration according unto the mind of God, which were such as their nature did require. And hereby also he confirms his Argument, of their insufficiency unto the great end of perfecting, sanctifying, or conse∣crating the state of the Church. And hereof there are two evidences in these words. 1. They were things imposed; that is, on the people under the Law. They were laid on them as a Burden. The word is properly, incumbentia, lying on them, that is, as a Burden. There was a weight in all these legal Rites and Ceremonies, which is called a Yoke, and too heavy for the people to bear, Acts 15. 10. And if the imposition of them be principally intended, as we render the word, imposed, it respects the Bondage they were brought into by them. Men may have a weight lying on them, and yet not be brought into Bondage thereby. But these things were so imposed on them, as that they might feel their weight, and groan under the burden of it. Of this Bondage the Apostle treats at large in the Epistle unto the Galatians. And it was im∣possible that those things should perfect a Church-state, which in themselves were such a Burden, and effective of such a Bondage. 2. As unto the duration assigned unto them, they were thus imposed . , for a determined limited season. They were never designed to con∣tinue for ever. And this is the great Controversie which we have at this day with the Iews. The principal foundation of their present unbelief is, That the Law of Moses is eternal, and that the observation of its Rites and Institu∣tions is to be continued unto the end of the world. The contrary hereunto the Apostle had evidently proved in the foregoing Chapters. Whereas therefore he had undeniably demonstrated that they were not to be of perpetual use in the Church, nor could ever effect that state of Perfection which God designed unto it, he now declares that there was a certain determinate season fixed in the purpose and counsel of God, for their cessation and removal. And this he describes in the last word. This was the season, . Correction, say some; Direction, others; . we, of Reformation; restraining the word unto the things spoken of, and re∣taining its usual signification most improperly. For Reformation is the amend∣ment and reduction of any thing in the Church, unto its primitive Institution, by abolishing and taking away the Abuses that have crept into it, or corrupt Additions that have been made unto it: But nothing of that nature is here in∣tended. Many such seasons there were under the Old Testament, wherein the things belonging unto the Worship of God were so reformed. But now not the Reduction of the Tabernacle and its Services unto its first Institution is intended, but its utter removal and taking away out of the Service of God in the Church. But if respect be had unto the whole state of the Church in general, and what God designed unto it, taking the word Reformation in an universal sense, for the Introduction of a new animating form and life, with new means and ways of their expression and exercise in new Ordinances of Worship, the word may be of use in this place.
Those who render it, of Correction, are no less out of the way. For Cor∣rection might be applied unto the Abuses that had crept into the Worship of God; so it was by our Saviour with respect unto Pharisaical Traditions. But the Apostle treats here of the Worship it self as it was first instituted by God, without respect unto any such Abuses. This was not the object of any just Correction. The Time intended is sufficiently known and agreed upon. It is the great time or season of the coming of the Messiah, as the King, Priest and Prophet of the Church, to order and alter all things, so as it might attain its perfect state. This was the season that was to put an end unto all legal observances, wherein they were to expire. Unto the bringing in of this season, God had ordered and disposed all things from the foundation of the world. See Luke 1. 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74. And it is called , because there∣in God finally disposed and directed all things in the Church unto his own glo∣ry, and the eternal salvation thereof: see Ephes. 1. 10. And we may observe from the whole Verse, 1. That there is nothing in its own nature so mean and abject, but the Will and Authority of God can render it of sacred use, and sacred efficacy, where he is plea∣sed to ordain and appoint it. Such were the meats and drinks, and divers wash∣ings under the Law, which however contemptible in themselves, had a Reli∣gious use from the appointment of God. For others to attempt the like, as they do with their Salt and Oil, and the like in the Papacy, is foolishly to imi∣tate his Sovereignty, and proudly to usurp his Authority. 2. The fixing of Times and Seasons, for the state of things in the Church, is solely in the hand of God, and at his sovereign disposal. He alone appointed this time of Reformation; the Church could neither hasten it, nor was to re∣fuse it. Wherefore quiet waiting alone is our duty, as unto the accomplish∣ment of all Promises concerning the state of the Church in this world. 3. It is a great part of the blessed Liberty which the Lord Christ brought into the Church, namely, its freedom and liberty from legal Impositions, and every thing of the like nature in the worship of God. 4. The time of the coming of Christ, was the time of the general final Refor∣mation of the worship of God, wherein all things were unchangeably directed unto their proper use.
VER. XI. UNto this verse the account of the Levitical Priesthood, its Sanctuary and Services is continued. Amongst them the service of the High Priest in the most Holy Place on the day of expiation was principally designed: For this was looked on and trusted unto by the Hebrews, as the principal Glory of their worship, and of the greatest efficacy as unto Atonement and Reconci∣liation with God. And so it was in its proper place. Hence they have a say∣ing yet common amongst them, that on the day of Expiation, when the High Priest entred into the most Holy Place, all Israel were made as innocent as in the day of Creation. In what sense it neither was nor could be so shall be declared on chap. 10. ver. 1, 2, 3. But in these things the Glory of the administration of the old Covenant did consist, which the Apostle allows unto it in his de∣monstration of the excellency of the new above it. Wherefore this Ministry of the High Priest on that day he hath an especial respect unto, in the account he gives of the Priesthood of Christ and its Administration. But yet although he hath a principal regard hereunto, yet he doth not res∣pect it only and singly. The whole description of the Sanctuary and its ser∣vices he also regards in the comparison he intends between the Lord Christ in his office, and these things. In him, his office, sanctuary and sacrifice doth the excellency and efficacy of the new Covenant consist, in opposition unto all those of the like kind under the Law. The want of a due observation hereof hath lead some Expositors into mistakes: For they would confine all that he sayes unto a correspondency with what was done on that solemn day by the High Priest; whereas he doth also expresly declare that the Truth, Reality and Substance of the Tabernacle, all its Utensils, its Services and Sacrifices were to be found in him alone: For unto this end doth he give us such a description of them all in particular. But as was said, that which he principally respects in the comparison he makes between the Type and the Antitype, is the High Priest and his especi∣al service in the most Holy Place, which he makes an entrance into in this verse. VER. 11. Vul. Assistens; assisting; Syr.  who cometh; adveni∣ens; coming. , Syr.  was an High Priest, or was made an High Priest; whereunto it adds, instead of good things to come, of the good things which he hath wrought. . Vul. Lat. per amplius & perfectius Tabernacu∣lum; barbarously for majus, et praestantius. Syr.  And he entred into that great and perfect Tabernacle. . Vul. Lat. non hujus Creationis. Syr.  or from among these Creatures. most, hujus structurae, of this building.
VER. XI. But Christ being come, an High Priest of Good Things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands, that is to say, not of this Building. THe Introduction of the comparison in the redditive Conjunction 5 But, answers unto  in the first verse of the Chapter, which are the com∣mon notes of comparison and opposition. , That had truly; But Christ, &c. In this and the next verse, the Apostle lays down in general what he proves and confirms by Instances in this, and unto the twentieth verse of the following chapter. And there are two things which he declares in this and the verse en∣suing. 1. Who is the High Priest of the new Covenant, and what is the Taberna∣nacle wherein he administred his Office, ver. 11. 2. What are the especial services he performed in answer unto those of the Legal High Priest, and their Preference above them, ver. 12. In this verse he expresseth the subject whereof he treats, or the Person of the High Priest concerning whom he treats. And he describes him (1) By his name, it is Christ. (2) By his entrance on his office: being come. (3) His Office itself; an High Priest. (4) The effects of his office, or the especi∣al object of it; Good things to come. (5) The Tabernacle wherein he ad∣ministreth or dischargeth his office; which is described by a comparison with the old Tabernacle, and that two ways. (1) Positively; that it was greater and more perfect or more excellent than it. (2) By a double negation, the latter exegetical of the former; not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building or Creation. All these particulars must be distinctly opened to give a right understanding of the sense of the place and meaning of the words. 1. The Person spoken of is Christ. I have observed before the variety of Ap∣pellations or names whereby the Apostle on various occasions expresseth him in this epistle, otherwise than he is wont to do in any other of his Epistles. Sometimes he calls him Iesus only, sometimes Christ, sometimes Iesus Christ, sometimes the Son, and sometimes the Son of God. And he had respect here∣in unto the various notions which the Church of the Jews had, concerning his Person from the Prophesies and Promises of the old Testament. And he useth none of them peculiarly but when there is a peculiar reason for it; as we have already observed on sundry occasions. And so there is in this Place. He doth not say Iesus is come, or the Son, or the Son of God, but Christ being come; that is, the Messiah being come. Under that name and notion was he promised from the beginning, and the fundamental Article of the faith of the Church was, that the Messiah was to come; all their desires and expect∣ations were fixed on the coming of the Messiah. Hence , he that was to come, was the name whereby they expressed their faith in him. ; Matth. 11. 3. Art thou he who is to come? And the coming of Christ or the Messiah, was the time and the cause wherein and whereby they expected the last Revelation of the Will of God, and the utmost perfect∣ion of the Church. Wherefore the Apostle on this occasion mentions him by his name, He who was promised of old that he should come, upon whose coming the faith of the Church was built, by whom and at whose coming they expected the last Revelation of the Will of God, and consequently a change
in their present Administrations, the promised Messiah being come. The Church was founded of old on the name Iehovah, as denoting the unchange∣ableness and faithfulness of God in the accomplishment of his Promises, Exod. 6. 3. And this Name of Christ is declarative of the accomplishment of them. Wherefore by calling him by this name, as it was most proper when he was to speak of his coming, so in it he minds the Hebrews of what was the anti∣ent faith of their Church concerning him, and what in general they expected on his coming. He had now no more to offer unto them, but what they had for many ages expected, desired, and earnestly prayed for. 2. As a general foundation of what is afterwards ascribed unto him, or as the way whereby he entred on his office, he affirms that he is come. Christ be∣ing . come; . The word is no where else used to express the Ad∣vent or Coming of Christ. Hence by the Vulgar, it is rendred assistens, which as it doth not signifie to come, so the sense is corrupted by it. The Rhemists render that translation, but Christ assisting an High Priest. But this encreaseth the ambiguity of the mistake of that Translation, as not declar∣ing that Christ himself was this High Priest which is the direct assertion of the Apostle. That which is intended is the accomplishment of the promise of God in the send∣ing and exhibition of Christ in the flesh; He being now come, according as was promised from the foundation of the world. For although the word is insepa∣rable in its construction with what followeth, an High Priest; being come an High Priest; yet his coming itself in order unto the susception and discharge of that office is included in it. And upon this coming itself depended the demonstration of the faithfulness of God in his promises. And this is the great fundamental Article of Christian Religion in opposition unto Iudaism; as it is declared, 1 Iohn 4. 2, 3. Wherefore by his being come in this place, no one single act is intended, as his Advent or Coming doth usually signifie his Incarnation only; But the sense of the word is comprehensive of the whole Accomplishment of the promise of God in sending him, and his performance of the work whereunto he was designed thereon. In that sense is he fre∣quently said to come, or to be come. 1 Iohn 5. 20. And, as was before observed, there is not only Argument herein unto the Apostle's design, but that which being duly weighed, would fully deter∣mine all the controversy he had with these Hebrews. For all their legal Ad∣ministrations were only subservient unto his coming, and Representations thereof, all given in confirmation of the truth of the promises of God, that so he should come. Wherefore upon his coming they must all necessarily cease and be removed out of the Church. 3. There is in the words a determination of the especial end of his coming un∣der . present consideration; An High Priest; Being come an High Priest; that is, in answer unto, and in the room of the High Priest under the Law. This states the subject of the Apostles argument. He had before proved that he was to be a Priest, that he was a Priest, and how he came so to be. He now asserts it as the foundation of those Actings which he was to ascribe unto him in answer unto those of the legal High Priests, whose offices and services with the effects of them, he had before declared. Those High Priests did so, but Christ being come an High Priest, &c. 4. He adds the especial object of his office, or the things about which he : is conversant in the discharge of it; Of the good things to come. As the as∣sertion is positive, so there is a comparison and opposition included in it. The High Priests of the Law were not so. They were not Priests of Good things, that is absolutely, or such as were necessary unto the purification, sanctifica∣tion and justification of the Church; and so far as they were Priests of Good things, they were so of Good things present; not of the Good things promised, that were for to come. And this is the force of the article  Of the Good things; namely, that God had promised unto the Church.
A Priest, or an High Priest, may be said to be the Priest of the things that he doth in the execution of his office; or of the things which he procureth there∣by. He is the Priest of his duties and of the effects of them. As a Minister may be said to be a Minister of the word and Sacraments which he admini∣streth, or of the Grace of the Gospel which is communicated thereby. Both are here included; both the duties which he performed and the effects which he wrought. The things whereof Christ is an High Priest, are said to be things to come; that is, they are yet so, absolutely so; or they were so called with respect unto the state of the Church under the old Testament. Most Expositors embrace the first sense, these good things to come, they say are that future eternal salvation and glory which were procured for the Church by the Priesthood of Christ; and were not so by the Levitical Priesthood. To the Administration of the Priesthood under the Law he assigns only things pre∣sent, temporal things, as unto what could be effected by them in their own vertue and power. But unto that of Christ he assigns eternal things, as he speaks immediately, he hath procured for us eternal Redemption. The eternal Salvation and Glory of the Church was procured by the Priesthood of Christ, or Christ himself in the discharge of that office, and were not so by the Levi∣tical Priests. These things are true, but not the meaning, at least not the whole meaning of the Apostle in this place. For, 1. This confines the relation of the Priesthood of Christ in this place unto the effects of it only, and excludes the consideration of his sacerdotal actings in the great sacrifice of himself: For this was not now to come, but was already past and accomplished. But this is so far from being excluded by the Apostle, as that it is principally intended by him. This is evident from the words ensuing, wherein the Tabernacle is described in which he was thus an High Priest of Good things to come: For this was his humane nature wherein he offered himself, as we shall see. 2. He doth not in this place compare together and oppose the future state of Glory which we shall have by Christ, with and unto the state of the Church in this world under the old Testament, which were not equal, nor would be cogent unto his purpose, seeing the Saints of old were also made Partakers of that Glory. But he compares the present state of the Church, the Privi∣ledges, Advantages and Grace which it enjoyed by the Priesthood of Christ, with what it had by the Aaronical Priesthood: For the fundamental Prin∣ciple which he confirms, is, that the  or present Perfection of the Church is the effect of the Priesthood of Christ. Wherefore the Apostle expresseth these things by that notion of them which was received under the old Testament and in the Church of the He∣brews; namely, the Good things to come. That is, they were so from the be∣ginning of the world, or the giving of the first promise. Things which were fore-signifyed by all the ordinances of the Law, and which thereon were the desire and expectation of the Church in all preceding ages. The things which all the Prophets foretold, and which God promised by them, directing the faith of the Church unto them. In brief, all the Good things in spiritual Redemption and Salvation which they looked for by the Messiah are here call∣ed the Good things to come. Of these things Christ was now come the High Priest; the Law having only the shadow, and not so much as the perfect Image of them, chap. 10. 1. And these things may be referred unto two Heads. 1. Those wherein the actual Administration of his Office did consist: For as we said, he was the High Priest of the duties of his own office; he by whom they were performed. These in general were his Oblation and Intercessi∣on: For although his Intercession be continued in Heaven, yet was it begun on the earth; as his oblation was offered on the earth, but it is continued in Heaven, as unto the perpetual exercise of it. The whole preparation unto, and actual oblation of himself, was accompanied with most fervent and ef∣fectual Intercessions, chap. 5. 7. And such was his solemn Prayer recorded, Ioh. 17. These things themselves in the first Place were the Good things to
come: For these they were which were designed in, and the substance of the first promise; as also of all those which were afterwards given for the con∣firmation of the faith of the Church therein. These did all the legal Institu∣tions direct unto and represent. And that they are here intended by the A∣postle, he plainly declares in the next verse: For with respect unto these Good things to come, he opposeth his own blood and sacrifice with the Atone∣ment he made thereby, unto the blood of Bulls and of Goats with whatever could be effected thereby. 2. The effects of these Sacerdotal actings are also intended: For these also are reckoned hereunto in the close of the next verse, in the Instance of one of them; namely, eternal Redemption, which is comprehensive of them all. And these also were of two sorts. 1. Such as immediately respected God himself. Of this nature was the Atonement and Reconciliation which he made by his blood, and peace with God for sinners thereon. See 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. Ephes. 2. 14, 15, 16. 2. The Benefits which hereon are actually collated on the Church, where∣by it is brought into its consummate state in this world. What they are we have discoursed at large on chap. 7. 11. These therefore are the Good things to come, consisting in the bringing forth and accomplishing the glorious effects of the hidden wisdom of God according unto his promises from the beginning of the world, in the sacrifice of Christ with all the benefits and priviledges of the Church, in Righteousness, Peace and Spiritual Worship which ensued thereon. And we may observe; 1. These things alone were the true and real Good things that were intended for and promised unto the Church from the beginning of the world. The Iews had now utterly lost the true notion of them, which proved their ruine; and yet do they continue in the same fatal mistake unto this day. They found that great and glorious things were spoken of by all the Prophets, to be brought in at the coming of the Messiah. And the Hope of Good things to come they lived upon, and continue yet so to do. But being carnal in their own minds, and obstinately fixed unto the desire of earthly things, they fancied them to consist in things quite of another nature; Honour, Riches, Power, a Kingdom and Dominion on the earth, with a possession of the wealth of all nations were the Good things which they hoped were to come. As to Recon∣ciliation and Peace with God by a full and perfect Atonement for Sin, Righte∣ousness, Deliverance from spiritual Adversaries with an holy worship accept∣able unto God, they are things which they neither desired nor regarded. Wherefore choosing the world and the things of it, before these which are spiritual and Heavenly, unto the world they are left, and the curse which it lieth under. And it is to be feared that some others also have deceived them∣selves with carnal apprehensions of the Good things, if not of the Priesthood, yet of the Kingdom of Christ. 2. These things alone are absolutely Good unto the Church; all other things are good or evil as they are used or abused. Outward Peace and Prosperity are Good in themselves, but oftentimes they prove not so to the Church. Many a time have they been abused unto its great disadvantage. They are not such things as are too earnestly to be desired, for who knows what will be the end of them? But these things are absolutely Good in every state and condition. 3. So excellent are these Good things, as that the performance and procuring of them, was the cause of the coming of the Son of God, with his susception and dis∣charge of his sacerdotal office. They are excellent in their Relation unto the Wisdom, Grace and Love of God, whereof they are the principal effects; and excellent in Relation unto the Church, as the only means of its eternal Re∣demption and Salvation. Hadthey been of a lower or meaner nature, so glorious a means had not been designed for the effecting of them. Woe unto them by whom they are despised. How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? And, 4. Such a Price and value did God put on these things, so good are they in his eyes, as that he made them the subject of his promises unto the Church from the
foundation of the world. And in all his promises concerning them, he still op∣posed them unto all the good things of this world, as those which were in∣comparably above them and better than them all. And therefore he chose out all things that are precious in the whole Creation, to represent their ex∣cellencie, which makes an Appearance of Promises of earthly Glories in the old Testament, whereby the Jews deceived themselves. And because of their worth, he judged it meet to keep the Church so long in the desire and expectation of them. 5. That which the Apostle hath immediate respect unto in the declara∣tion of the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ, is what he had newly at large declared concerning the Tabernacle and the Service of the High Priest therein. Wherefore he assigns a Tabernacle unto this High Priest, in answer unto that under the Law whereby he came, or wherein he administred the duties of his office. And concerning this he (first) asserts, that he came by a Taber∣nacle. (2) Describes this Tabernacle, in comparison with the former; (1) Positively, that it was greater and more excellent; (2) Negatively, in that being not made with hands, it was not of the same Building with it. 1. He came by a Tabernacle. These words may have prospect unto what is afterwards declared in the next verse, and belong thereunto. As if he had said, being come an High Priest he entred into the Holy Place by a perfect Taber∣nacle with his own blood; for so the High Priest of the Law entred into the Holy Place, by or through the Tabernacle, with the blood of others. But the words do rather declare the constitution of the Tabernacle intended, than the Use of it, as unto that one solemn service: For so before he had described the frame and constitution of the old Tabernacle, before he mentioned its use. Being come an High Priest by such a Tabernacle; that is, wherein he admi∣nistred that office. What is the Tabernacle here intended, there is great variety in the judgment of expositors. Some say it is the Church of the new Testament, as Chrysostome who is followed by many. Some say it is Heaven itself. This is embraced and pleaded for by Schlictingius who labours much in the explanation of it. But whereas this is usually opposed, because the Apostle in the next verse affirms that Christ entred into the Holies, which he ex∣pounds of Heaven itself, by this Tabernacle, which therefore cannot be Hea∣ven also, he endeavours to remove it: For he saies there is a double Ta∣bernacle in Heaven: For as the Apostle hath in one and the same place de∣scribed a double Tabernacle here on earth, a first and a second, with their Utensils and services, distinguished the one from the other by a vail; so there are two places in Heaven answering thereunto. The first of these he would have to be the dwelling Place of the Angels; the other the Place of the Throne of God himself, represented by the most Holy Place in the Tabernacle. Through the first of these he saies the Lord Christ passed into the second, which is here called his Tabernacle. And it is indeed said that the Lord Christ in his exaltation did pass through the Heavens, and that he was made higher than the Heavens, which would seem to favour that conceit, though not ob∣served by him. But there is no ground to conceit or fancy such distinct Places in Hea∣ven above; yea, it is contrary to the Scripture so to do: For the Residence of the Holy Angels is before and about the Throne of God. So are they always placed in the Scripture, Dan. 7. 10. Mat. 18. 10. Revel. 5. 11. And these aspectable Heavens which Christ passed through, were not so much as the vail of the Tabernacle in his holy service, which was his own flesh. chap. 10. 20. The only Reason of this ungrounded cu∣rious Imagination, is a design to avoid the acknowledgment of the Sa∣crifice of Christ whilst he was on the earth: For this cause he refers this Ta∣bernacle unto his entrance into the most Holy Place as the only means of of∣fering himself. But the design of the Apostle is to shew, that as he was an High Priest, so he had a Tabernacle of his own wherein he was to minister un∣to God. This Tabernacle whereby he came an High Priest, was his own humane na∣ture.
The Bodies of men are often called their Tabernacles. 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2 Pet. 1. 14. And Christ called his own Body the Temple; Ioh. 2. 19. His flesh was the vail. Heb. 10. 20. and in his incarnation he is said to pitch his Tabernacle among us. Ioh. 1. 14. Herein dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bo∣dily. Col. 2. 9. that is, substantially; represented by all the Pledges of Gods presence in the Tabernacle of old. This was that Tabernacle wherein the Son of God administred his Sacerdotal Office in this world, and wherein he continueth yet so to do in his Intercession. For the full proof hereof, I refer the Reader unto our exposition on chap. 8. ver. 2. And this gives us an understanding of the description given of this Taber∣nacle . in the Adjuncts of it, with reference unto that of old. This is given us, (1) Positively, in a double comparative property. (1) That it was Greater than it. Greater in dignity and worth, not quantity and measures. The Hu∣mane nature of Christ, both in itself, its Conception, Framing, gracious Qualifi∣cations and Endowments, especially in its Relation unto, and Subsistence in the Divine Person of the Son, was far more excellent and glorious than any material fabrick could be. In this sense, for comparative Excellency and Dig∣nity is  almost constantly used in the new Testament. So is it in this Epistle. chap. 6. 13, 16. The humane nature of Christ doth thus more excel the old Tabernacle, than the Sun doth the meanest Star. 2. More perfect. This respects its Sacred use. It was more perfectly fitted . and suited unto the end of a Tabernacle, both for the inhabitation of the divine nature, and the means of exercising the Sacerdotal Office in making A tonement for sin, than the other was. So it is expressed chap. 10. 5. Sa∣crifice and Burnt-offering thou wouldst not have, but a body hast thou prepared me. This was that which God accepted, wherewith he was well pleased, when he rejected the other as insufficient unto that end. And we may hence ob∣serve, That, The humane nature of Christ wherein he discharged the duties of his Sacerdotal Office in making Atonement for sin, is the greatest, the most perfect and excellent Ordinance of God; far excelling those that were most excellent under the old Testa∣ment. An Ordinance of God it was, in that it was what he designed, ap∣pointed and produced unto his own Glory; And it was that which answered all Ordinances of worship under the old Testament, as the substance of what was shadowed out in them and by them. And I have laboured else∣where to represent the Glory of this ordinance as the principal effect of di∣vine wisdom and goodness, the great means of the manifestation of his eter∣nal Glory. The wonderful provision of this Tabernacle will be the object of holy admiration unto eternity. But the Glory of it is a subject which I have elsewhere peculiarly laboured in the demonstration of. And unto the compa∣rison with those of old here principally intended, its excellency and glory may be considered in these as in other things. (1) Whatever they had of the Glory of God in Type, Figure and Representation, that it had in Truth, Rea∣lity and Substance. (2) What they only shadowed out as unto Reconcili∣ation and Peace with God, that it did really effect. (3) Whereas they were capable only of an Holiness by dedication and consecration which is ex∣ternal, giving an outward denomination, not changing the nature of the things themselves; This was Glorious in real internal Holiness wherein the Image of God doth consist. (4) The matter of them all was earthly, car∣nal, perishing; His humane nature was Heavenly as unto its original; the Lord from Heaven; and immortal or eternal in its constitution; he was made a Priest after the Power of an endless life: For although he dyed once for sin, yet his whole nature had always its entire subsistence in the Person of the Son of God. (5) Their Relation unto God, was by vertue of an outward In∣stitution or word of command only; That of his was by Assumption into per∣sonal union with the Son of God. (6) They had only outward Typical Pledges of Gods Presence; in him dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily. (7) They were exposed unto the injuries of time and all other outward oc∣currences, wherein there was nothing of the glory or worship of God. He never did not would suffer any thing, but what belonged unto his office, and
is now exalted above all Adversities and Oppositions. And other considera∣tions of the like nature might be added. 2. The Son of God undertaking to be the High Priest of the Church, it was of necessity that he should come by, or have a Tabernacle wherein to discharge that Office. He came by a Tabernacle. So it is said unto the same purpose, that it was of necessity that he should have somewhat to offer, chap. 8. 3. For being to save the Church by vertue of and in the discharge of that Office, it could not be otherwise done, than by the Sacrifice of himself, in and by his own Taber∣nacle. Secondly, He describes this Tabernacle by a double Negation; (1) That it was not made with hands. (2) That it was not of this building. And this latter clause is generally taken to be exegetical of the former only, and that because of its introduction by , that is to say. I shall consider both. 1. It was , not made with hands. The Old Tabernacle whil'st . it stood, was the Temple of God. So it is constantly called by David in the Psalms. Temples were generally sumptuous and glorious Fabrics, always an∣swering the utmost ability of them that built them; not to have done their best therein they esteemed irreligious. For they designed to express some∣what of the greatness of what they worshiped, and to beget a veneration of what was performed in them. And this men in the degenerate state of Chri∣stianity are returned unto, endeavouring to represent the Greatness of God, and the Holiness of his Worship, in magnificent Structures, and costly Ornaments of them. How beit the best of them all were made by the hands of men; and so were no way meet habitations for God, in the way he had designed to dwell among us. This Solomon acknowledgeth concerning the Temple which he had built, which yet was the most glorious that ever was erected, and built by God's own appointment. 2 Chron. 2. 5, 6. The house which I build, is great: for great is our God above all Gods. But who is able to build him an house, seeing the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain him? who am I then, that I should build him an house, save onely to burn sacrifice before him? And 1 Kings 8. 27. Will God indeed dwell on the earth? behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee: how much less this house that I have builded? Service was to be done unto God in that Temple according unto his appointment, but a meet habitation for him it was not. And our Apostle lays it down as a Prin∣ciple suited unto natural light, that God, who made all things, could not dwell , Acts 14. 24. in Temples made with hands. Such was the Tabernacle of Old, but such was not that wherein our Lord Jesus admini∣streth his Office. There seems to me to have been an apprehension among the Iews, that there should be a Temple wherein God would dwell, that should not be made with hands. Our Lord Jesus Christ in the first year of his Ministry, upon his pur∣ging of the Temple, upon their requiring a sign for the justification of his Au∣thority in what he had done, says no more, but only, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up, John 2. 19. He spake of the same Temple as to their destruction of it, and his own raising it again. Thus he called his own Body; he spake, saith the Evangelist, of the Temple of his Body. That other Fabric was a Type thereof, and so partook of the same name with it; but yet was no farther a Temple, or an habitation of God, but as it was Typical of that Body of his, wherein the fulness of the Godhead did dwell. This testi∣mony of his seemeth to have provoked the Iews above any other; unless it was that when he plainly declared his Divine Nature unto them, affirming that he was before Abraham; For this cast them into so much madness, as that im∣mediately they took up stones to cast at him, John 8. 58, 59. But their ma∣lice was more inveterate against him, for what he thus spake concerning the Temple: For three years after, when they conspired to take away his life, they made these words the ground of their Accusation. But as is usual in
such cases, when they could not pretend that his own words, as he spake them, were criminal, they variously wrested them to make an appearance of a Crime, though they knew not of what nature. So the Psalmist prophesied that they should do, Psal. 56. 5, 6. Some of them affirmed him to have said, I am able to destroy the Temple of God, and to build it in three days, Mat. 26. 61. Which was apparently false, as is evident in comparing his words with theirs. Wherefore others of them observing that the Witness was not yet home unto their purpose, and the design of the Priests, they sware posi∣tively that he said, I will destroy this Temple made with hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands, Mark 14. 58. For they are not the words of the same persons, variously reported by the Evangelist. For these in Mark are other Witnesses, which agreed not with what was sworn before, as he observes, ver. 59. But neither so did their Witness agree together. How∣ever they fix on a Notion that was passant among them, of a Temple to be built without hands. And sundry things there are in the Prophets which lead them into an apprehension, that God would dwell among men in a Temple or Taber∣nacle that should not be made with hands. And all their Predictions were ac∣complished, when the eternal Word, by the assumption of our nature, fixed his Tabernacle among us, John 1. 14. This is that which the Apostle intimates. Whereas Solomon openly affirms, that the Habitation of God could not be in the Temple that he had built, be∣cause it was made with hands; and it is a principle of natural light, that he who made the world, and all things contained therein, could not dwell in such a Temple; and whereas it seems to have belonged unto the Faith of the Church of old, that there should be a Temple wherein God would dwell that was to be , in comparing the Humane Nature of Christ with the Old Ta∣bernacle, he affirms in the first place that it was not made with hands. Respect also is had herein unto the framing of the Fabric of the Old Ta∣bernacle by Bezaliel. For although the pattern of it was shewn unto Moses in the Mount from Heaven, yet the actual framing and erection of it, was by the hands of Workmen, skilful to work in all kind of earthly materials, Exod. 32. 3, 4, 5, 6. Chap. 36. 1. And although by reason of the wisdom, cunning and skill which they had received in an extraordinary way, they framed, made and reared a Tabernacle most artificial and beautiful; yet when all was done, it was but the work of mens hands. But the Constitution and Production of the Humane Nature of Christ, was an immediate effect of the Wisdom and Power of God himself, Luke 1. 36. Nothing of Humane Wisdom or Contrivance, nothing of the Skill or Power of Man, had the least influence into or concurrence in the provision of this glo∣rious Tabernacle, wherein the work of the Redemption of the Church was effected. The Body of Christ indeed was made of a Woman, of the substance of the blessed Virgin; but she was purely passive therein, and concurrent in no efficiency either Moral or Physical thereunto. It was the contrivance of Divine Wisdom, and the effect of Divine Power alone. 2dly, The Apostle adds, as a farther dissimilitude unto the other Tabernacle; that is not of this Building. Expositors generally take these words to be . meerly exegetical of the former; not made with hands; that is, not of this Building. To me there seems to be an  in them. It is so not made with hands like unto that Tabernacle, as that it is not of the order of any other created thing; not of the same make and constitution with any thing else in the whole Creation here below. For although the substance of his Humane Nature were of the same kind with ours, yet the Production of it in the World was such an Act of Divine Power, as excels all other Divine Operations whatever. Wherefore God speaking of it, saith, The Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass a man, Jer. 31. 22. or conceive him without natural Generation.
is the word whereby the creation of all things is Constantly expressed in the new Testament, and sometimes it signifies the things that are created. Neither is it ever used, or  whence it is derived, to signifie the consti∣tution of the Ordinances of the old Testament, the Tabernacle, the Temple or any thing belonging thereunto. Wherefore  here doth not limit it un∣to that constitution, so as that, not of this Building, should be, not made with hands as that Tabernacle was. It is therefore not of the order of created things here below, either such as were immediately created at the beginning, or educed out of them by a creating Act or Power. For although it was so as unto its substance, yet in its constitution and production it was an effect of the divine power above the whole order of this Creation, or things created. God is so far from being obliged unto any means for the effecting of the Holy Counsels of his Will, as that he can when he pleaseth exceed the whole order and course of the first creation of all things, and his providence in the rule thereof. VER. XII. FRom the comparison between the Tabernacle of old, and that of the High Priest of the new Covenant, there is a procedure in this verse unto a∣nother, between his Sacerdotal actings and those of the High Priest under the Law. And whereas in the description of the Tabernacle and its especial ser∣vices, the Apostle had insisted in a peculiar manner on the entrance of the High Priest every year into the most Holy Place, which was the most solemn and most mystical part of the Tabernacle-service; in the first Place he gives an account of what answered thereunto in the Sacerdotal Administrations of Christ; and how much on all accounts, both of the Sacrifice, in the vertue whereof he entred into the most Holy Place, and of the Place itself whereinto he entred, and of the Time when it did in Glory and Efficacy excel that ser∣vice of the High Priest under the Law. . , Syr.  By the blood of his own Soul or Life. He made his soul an offering for sin; Isa. 5. 3. Blood is the Life of the Sa∣crifice. . Syr.  one time; not many times, not once every year as they did under the Law. , Syr.  into the House of the Sanctuary; less properly; for by that expression the old Tabernacle is in∣tended; but the Apostle respects Heaven itself; in Sancta, Sancta Sanctorum, Sacrarium. That which answers unto the most Holy Place in the Taberna∣cle where was the Throne of God, the Ark, and Mercy-seat . Vul. aeterna Redemptione inventa; aeternam Redemptionem nactus; ae∣terna Redemptione acquisita; most properly, and according unto the use of the word in all good Authors.
VER. XII. Neither by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own Blood he entered in once into the (most) Holy Place, having obtained eternal Redemption. IN this Verse there is a direct entrance into the great Mystery of the Sa∣cerdotal Actings of Christ, especially as unto the Sacrifice he offered to make Atonement for Sin. But the method which the Apostle proceedeth in, is what he was led unto by the Proposal he had made of the Types of it un∣der the Law. Wherefore he begins with the complement or consequent of it, in answer unto that Act or Duty of the High Priest wherein the Glory of his Office was most conspicuous, which he had newly mentioned. And here because part of our design in the Exposition of this whole Epistle, is to free and vindicate the Sense of it, from the corrupt Glosses which the Socinians, and some that follow them, have cast upon it; I shall on this great Head of the Sacrifice of Christ, particularly insist on the removal of them. And indeed the substance of all that is scattered up and down their Writings against the proper Sacrifice of Christ, and the true nature of his Sacerdotal Office, is comprised in the Comment on this Epistle composed by Crellius and Schlictingius. I shall therefore first examine their corrupt wrestings of the words, and false interpretations of them, before I proceed unto their Expo∣sition. They begin; Nunc etiam opponit Sacrificium ipsius Christi, Sacrificio Pontifi∣cis antiqui. This is the  of their Interpretation of this and the following Verses. If this be not so, all that they afterwards assert, or infer from it, falls of it self. But this is most false. There is not any thing direct∣ly, either of the Sacrifice of Christ, or of the High Priest, but only what was consequent unto the one and the other: Yea, there is that which excludes them from being intended. The entrance of the High Priest into the Holy Place was not his Sacrifice. For it supposed his Sacrifice to be offered before, in the ver∣tue whereof, and with the memorial of it, he so entred; that is, with the Blood of Goats and Calves. For all Sacrifices were offered at the Brazen Al∣tar. And that of the High Priest on the day of Expiation is expresly decla∣red so to have been, Lev. 16. And the entrance of Christ into Heaven was not his Sacrifice, nor the Oblation of himself; For he offered himself unto God with strong cryes and supplications; but his entrance into Heaven was Triumphant: So he entred into Heaven by vertue of his Sacrifice, as we shall see; but his entrance into Heaven was not the Sacrifice of himself. They add in Explication hereof, Pontifex antiquus per sanguinem Hircorum & Vitulorum ingrediebatur in Sancta, Christus verò non per sanguinem tam vilem, sed pretiosissimum; quod alius esse non potuit quam ipsius proprius. Nam san∣guis quidem humanus sanguine Brutorum, sed sanguis Christi, sanguine caetero∣rum omnium hominum longe est pretiosior; cum ipse quoque caeteris hominibus om∣nibus imò omnibus creaturis longe sit praestantior, Deoque charior & proprior, utpote unigenitus cjus filius. What they say of the preciousness of the Blood of Christ, above that of brute Creatures, is true: But they give two Reasons for it, which comprise not the true Reason of its excellency as unto the ends of his Sacrifice. (1) They say, It was the Blood of a Man. (2) That this Man was more dear to God than all other Creatures, as his onely begotten Son. Take these last words in the sense of the Scripture, and the true Reason of the preciousness and efficacy of the Blood of Christ in his Sacrifice is assigned. Take them in their sense, and it is excluded. The Scripture by them intends his Eternal Generation, as the Son of the Father; they only his Nativity of
the Blessed Virgin, with his Exaltation after his Resurrection. But the true ex∣cellency and efficacy of the Blood of Christ in this Sacrifice, was from his Divine Person, whereby God purchased his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. Nor do I know of what consideration the Preciousness of the Blood of Christ can be with them in this matter; for it belonged not unto his Sacrifice, or the Oblation of himself, as they pretend. For they would have the Offering of himself to consist onely in his entrance into Heaven, and appearing in the pre∣sence of God, when as they also imagine he had neither Flesh nor Blood. They proceed unto a Speculation about the use and signification of the Preposition, Per, By, or . Not andum est Autorem, ut elegantiae istius compa∣rationis consuleret, usum esse in priori membro voce, Per; licet Pontifex legalis non tantum per sanguinem hircorum & vitulorum, hoc est, fuso prius sanguine istorum animalium, seu interveniente sanguinis eorum fusione, sed etiam cum ip∣sorum sanguine in Sancta fuerit ingressus, ver. 7. Verùm quia in Christi Sacrificio similitudo eòusque extendi non potuit, cum Cbristus non alienum sed suum sangui∣nem fuderit, nec sanguinem suum post mortem, sed seipsum, & quidem jam im∣mortalem, deposit is carnis & sanguinis exuviis, quippe quae regnum Dei possidere nequeant, in coelesti illo Tabernaculo obtulerit; proindeque non cum sanguine, sed tantum fuso prius sanguine, seu interveniente sanguinis sui fusione in Sancta fuerit ingressus; idcirco Autor minus de legali Pontifice dixit quam res erat; vel potius ambiguitate particulae, Per, quae etiam idem quod, Cum, in sacris literis significare solet, comparationis concinnitati consulere voluit. The design of this whole Discourse, is to overthrow the Nature of the Sa∣crifice of Christ, and to destroy all the real similitude between it and the Sa∣crifice of the High Priest; the whole of its Sophistry being animated by a fan∣cied signification of the Preposition Per, or falsly pretended Reason of the use of it by the Apostle. For (1) the High Priest did indeed carry of the Blood of the Sacrifice into the Holy Place, and so may be said to enter into it with Blood; as it is said he did it, Not without Blood, ver. 7. Yet is it not that which the Apostle hath here respect unto; but it was the Sacrifice at the Al∣tar, where the Blood of it was shed and offered, which he intends, as we shall see immediately. (2) There is therefore nothing less ascribed unto the High Priest herein, than belonged unto him; for all that is intended, is, that he entred into the Holy Place by vertue of the Blood of Goats and Calves which was offered at the Altar; less than his due is not ascribed unto him, to make the comparison fit and meet, as is boldly pretended. Yea (3) the Nature of the Comparison used by the Apostle is destroyed by this Artifice; especially if it be not considered as a meer Comparison, but as the Relation that was be∣tween the Type and the Antitype. For that is the nature of the Comparison, that the Apostle makes between the entrance of the High Priest into the Ho∣ly Place, and the entrance of Christ into Heaven. That there may be such a Comparison, that there may be such a Relation between these things, it is need∣ful that they should really agree in that wherein they are compared, and not by Force or Artifice be fitted to make some kind of Resemblance, the one of the other. For it is to no purpose to compare things together, which disagree in all things; much less can such things be the Types one of another. Where∣fore the Apostle declares and allows a treble dissimilitude in the Comparates, or between the Type and the Antitype. For Christ entred by his own Blood, the High Priest by the Blood of Calves and Goats; Christ onely once, the High Priest every year; Christ into Heaven, the High Priest into the Tabernacle made with hands. But in other things he confirms a similitude between them; namely, in the entrance of the High Priest into the Holy Place by the Blood of his Sacrifice, or with it. But by these men this is taken away, and so no ground of any Comparison left; only the Apostle makes use of an ambiguous word to frame an appearance of some similitude in the things compared, whereas indeed there is none at all. For unto these ends he says by the Blood, whereas he ought to have said with the Blood; but if he had said so, there would have been no appearance of any similitude between the things compa∣red. For they allow not Christ to enter into the Holy Place by or with his
own Blood in any sense; not by vertue of it as offered in Sacrifice for us; nor to make application of it unto us in the fruits of his Oblation for us. And what similitude is there between the High Priest entring into the Holy Place, by the Blood of the Sacrifice that he had offered, and the Lord Christ's entring into Heaven without his own Blood, or any respect unto the vertue of it, as offered in Sacrifice? (3) This Notion of the Sacrifice or Oblation of Christ to consist onely in his appearance in Heaven without Flesh or Blood, as they speak, overthrows all the Relation of Types or Representations, between it and the Sacrifices of old. Nay, on that supposition they were suited rather to deceive the Church, than instruct it in the Nature of the great Expiatory Sacrifice that was to be made by Christ. For the universal Testimony of them all, was that Atonement and Expiation of Sin, was to be made by Blood, and no otherwise. But according unto these men, Christ offered not himself unto God for the Expiation of our Sins, until he had neither Flesh nor Blood. (4) They say, it's true, he offered himself in Heaven, fuso prius sanguine. But it is an order of Time, and not of Causality which they intend. His Blood was shed before, but therein was no part of his Offering or Sacrifice. But herein they expresly contradict the Scripture and themselves. It is by the Of∣fering of Christ that our Sins are expiated, and Redemption obtained. This the Scripture doth so expresly declare, as that they cannot directly deny it. But these things are constantly ascribed unto the Blood of Christ, and the shed∣ding of it; and yet they would have it, that Christ offered himself then only, when he had neither Flesh nor Blood. They encrease this confusion in their ensuing Discourse. Aliter enim ex parte Christi res sese habuit, quam in illo antiquo. In antiquo illo, ut in aliis quae pro peccato lege divina constituta erant, non offerebatur ipsum animal mactatum, hoc est, nec in odorem suavitatis, ut Scriptura loquitur, adolebatur, sed renes ejus & adeps tantum; nec inferebatur in Sancta, sed illius sanguis tantum. In Christi autem Sacrificio, non sanguis ipsius quem mactatus effudit, sed ipse offerri, & in illa Sancta coelestia ingredi debuit. Idcirco infra ver. 14. dicitur, seipsum, non vero sanguinem suum Deo obtulisse; licet alias comparatio cum Sacrificiis expia∣toriis postulare videretur, ut hoc posterius potius doceretur. 1. Here they fully declare that according to their Notion, there was indeed no manner of similitude between the things compared; but that, as to what they are compared in, they were opposite, and had no agreement at all. The ground of the comparison in the Apostle is, that they were both by Blood; and this alone. For herein he allows a dissimilitude in that Christ was by his own Blood, that of the High Priests by the Blood of Calves and Goats. But according unto the sense of these men, herein consists the difference between them, that the one was with Blood, and the other without, which is expresly contradictory to the Apostle. 2. What they observe of the Sacrifices of old, that not the Bodies of them, but only the Kidneys and Fat were burned, and the Blood only carried into the Holy Place, is neither true, nor any thing to their purpose. For (1) the whole Bodies of the Expiatory Sacrifices were burnt and consumed with fire; and this was done without the Camp, Lev. 16. 27. to signifie the suffering of Christ, and therein the offering of his Body without the City, as the Apostle observes, Chap. 13. 11, 12. (2) They allow of no use of the Blood in Sa∣crifices, but only as to the carrying of it into the Holy Place; which is ex∣presly contradictory unto the main end of the Institution of Expiatory Sacri∣fices. For it was that by their Blood Atonement should be made on the Altar, Lev. 17. 11. Wherefore there is no Relation of Type and Antitype, no similitude for a ground of comparison between the Sacrifice of Christ, and that of the High Priest, if it was not made by his Blood. (3) Their obser∣vation that in ver. 14. the Lord Christ is said to offer Himself, and not to offer his Blood, is of no value. For in the offering of his Blood, Christ offered himself; or he offered himself, by the offering of his Blood; his Person giving the efficacy of a Sacrifice unto what he offered. And this is unde∣niably asserted in that very Verse. For the purging of our Consciences from dead works, is the Expiation of Sin. But Christ, even according to the Socinians,
procured the Expiation of Sin by the offering of himself. Yet is this here expresly assigned unto his Blood; How much more shall the Blood of Christ purge your Consciences from dead works? Wherefore in the offering of himself, he offered his Blood. They add, as the Exposition of these words, He entred into the Holiest; Ingressus in Sancta, necessario ad Sacrificium istud requiritur. Nec ante Oblatio, in qua Sacrificii ratio potissimum consistit, peragi potuit, cum ea in Sanct is ipsis fieri debuerit. Hinc manifestum est Pontificis nostri Oblationem & Sacrificium non in Cruce, sed in Coelis per actam esse, & adhuc per agi. Ans. (1) What they say at first is true; but what they intend and infer from thence is false. It is true that the entrance into the Holy Place, and car∣rying of the Blood in thither, did belong unto the Anniversary Sacrifice in∣tended. For God had prescribed that Order unto its Consummation and Complement. But that the Sacrifice or Oblation did consist therein is false. For it is directly affirmed, that both the Bullock and Goat for the Sin-offer∣ing, were offered before it at the Altar, Lev. 16. 6, 9. (2) It doth not therefore hence follow as is pretended, that the Lord Christ offered not himself a Sacrifice unto God on the earth, but did so in Heaven only; but the direct contrary doth follow. For the Blood of the Sin-offer∣ing was offered on the Altar, before it was carried into the Holy Place; which was the Type of Christ's entrance into Heaven. (3) What they say that the Sacrifice of Christ was performed or offered in Heaven, and is yet so offered; utterly overthrows the whole Nature of his Sa∣crifice. For the Apostle everywhere represents that to consist absolutely in one Offering once offered, not repeated, or continued. Herein lies the foundation of all his Arguments for its excellency and efficacy. Hereof, the making of it to be nothing but a continued Act of Power in Heaven, as is done by them, is utterly destructive. What they add in the same place about the Nature of Redemption, will be removed in the consideration of it immediately. In the close of the whole they affirm, that the obtaining of everlasting salvation by Christ, was not an Act antecedent unto his entering into Heaven, as the word seems to import, , having obtained; but it was done by his entrance it self into that Holy Place, whence they would rather read the word  in the present tense, Obtaining. But whereas our Redemption is everywhere constantly in the Scripture assign∣ed unto the Blood of Christ, and that alone, Eph. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Rev. 5. 9. hast redeemed us unto God by thy Blood; it is too great a confi∣dence to confine this work unto his entrance into Heaven, without any offer∣ing of his Blood, and when he had no Blood to offer. And in this place, the Redemption obtained, is the same upon the matter with the purging of our Con∣sciences from dead works, ver. 14. which is ascribed directly unto his Blood. These Glosses being removed, I shall proceed unto the Exposition of the words. The Apostle hath a double design in this Verse, and those two that follow. 1. To declare the Dignity of the Person of Christ in the discharge of his Priestly Office, above the High Priest of old. And this he doth, (1) From the excellency of his Sacrifice, which was his own Blood. (2) The Holy Place whereinto he entred by vertue of it, which was Heaven it self. And (3) the effect of it, in that by it he procured Eternal Redemption; which he doth in this Verse. 2. To prefer the efficacy of this Sacrifice of Christ for the purging of Sin, or the purification of Sinners, above all the Sacrifices and Ordinances of the Law, ver. 13, 14. In this Verse, with respect unto the end mentioned, the entrance of Christ in∣to the Holy Place, in answer unto that of the Legal High Priest described, v. 7. is declared. And it is so, (1) As unto the way or means of it. (2) As unto its season. (3) As unto its effects; in all which respects, Christ was manifested in and by it, to be far more excellent than the Legal High Priest.
1. The manner and way of it is expressed; (1) Negatively; It was not by the blood of Goats and Calves. (2) Positively; it was by his own blood. 2. For the Time of it, it was once, and but once. 3. The Effect of that blood of his, as offered in Sacrifice, was, that he ob∣tained thereby eternal Redemption. The thing asserted is the entrance of Christ the High Priest into the Holy Place. That he should do so, was necessary, both to answer the Type, and for the rendring his sacrifice effectual in the Application of the Benefits of it unto the Church, as it is afterwards declared at large. And I shall open the words not in the order wherein they lie in the Text, but in the natural or∣der of the things themselves. And we must shew (1) What is the Holy Place whereinto Christ entred. (2) What was that Entrance. (3) How he did it once; whereon will follow the consideration of the means where∣by he did it, with the effect of that means. 1. For the Place whereinto he entred, it is said he did so, . Into . the Holies. It is the same word whereby he expresseth the Sanctuary, the second Part of the Tabernacle whereinto the High Priest entred once a year. But in the Application of it unto Christ, the signification of it is changed. He had nothing to do with, he had no right to enter into that Holy Place, as the Apostle affirms, chap. 8. 4. That therefore he intends which was signified thereby; that is, Heaven itself, as he explains it in ver. 24. The Heaven of Heavens, the Place of the glorious Residence of the Presence or Majesty of God, is that whereinto he entred. 2. His Entrance itself into this Place is asserted. He entred. This entrance . of Christ into Heaven upon his Ascension may be considered two ways (1) As it was Regal, Glorious and Triumphant; so it belonged properly unto his Kingly Office, as that wherein he triumphed over all the enemies of the Church. See it described, Ephes. 4. 8, 9, 10. from Psal. 68. 18. Sa∣tan, the World, Death and Hell being conquered, and all power com∣mitted unto him, he entred triumphantly into Heaven. So it was Regal. (2) As it was Sacerdotal. Peace and Reconciliation being made by the blood of the Cross, the Covenant being confirmed, eternal Redemption ob∣tained, He entred as our High Priest into the Holy Place, the Temple of God above, to make his Sacrifice effectual unto the Church, and to apply the be∣nefits of it thereunto. This he did once only, once for all. In the foregoing description of the . service of the High Priest, he shews how he went into the Holy Place, once every year; that is, on one day, wherein he went to offer. And the repetiti∣on of this service every year proved its imperfection, seeing it could never ac∣complish perfectly that whereunto it was designed, as he argues in the next chapter. In opposition hereunto our High Priest entred once only into the Holy Place, a full demonstration that his one Sacrifice had fully expiated the sins of the Church. Of this entrance of Christ into, it is said, (1) Negatively, that he did not do it by the blood of Goats and Calves; and this is introduced with the dis∣junctive . negative; , neither; which refers unto what was before denied of him, as unto his entrance into the Tabernacle made with hands. He did not do so, neither did he make his entrance by the blood of Calves and Goats. A difference from and opposition unto the entrance of the High Priest annually into the Holy Place is intended. It must therefore be considered how he so entred. This entrance is at large described. Lev. 16. And (1) It was by the blood of a Bullock and a Goat which the Apostle here renders in the plural number, Calves and Goats; because of the annual repetition of the same Sacrifice. (2) The order of the Institution was that first the Bullock or Calf was offered, then the Goat; the one for the Priest, the other for the People. This or∣der belonging not at all unto the purpose of the Apostle, he expresseth it o∣therwise, Goats and Calves. , is a Goat; a word that expresseth Totum genus Caprinum; that whole kind of Creature, be it young or old. So the Goats of his offering
were,  Kids; ver. 5. that is, young He-Goats; for the precise time of their age is not determined. So the Bullock the Priest offered for himself, was  juvencus ex genere bovino; which is  for it expresseth genus vitulinum; all young Cattel Concerning these it is intimated in this negative as unto Christ, that the High Priest entred into the Holy Place , by their blood; which we must enquire into. Two things belonged unto the office of the High Priest with respect unto this blood. For (1) He was to offer the blood both of the Bullock and the Goat at the Altar for a sin-offering. Lev. 16. 6, 11. For it was the blood wherewith alone Atonement was to be made for sin, and that at the Altar. Lev. 17. 11. so far is it from truth, that expiation for sin was made only in the Holy Place; and that it is so by Christ, without blood, as the Socinians imagine. (2) He was to carry some of the blood of the Sacrifice into the San∣ctuary to sprinkle it there to make Atonement for the Holy Place, in the sense be∣fore declared. And the enquiry is, which of these the Apostle hath respect unto? Some say it is the latter; and that  here is put for , by for with. He entred with the blood of Goats and Calves; namely, that which he carried with him into the Holy Place. So plead the Socinians and those that follow them; with design to overthrow the Sacrifice which Christ offered in his Death and bloodsheding, confining the whole expiation of sin in their sense of it unto what is done in Heaven. But I have before disproved this surmise. And the Apostle is so far from using the particle  improperly for  so to frame a comparison between things wherein indeed there was no similitude, as they dream, that he useth it on purpose to exclude the sense which , with, would intimate: For he doth not declare with what the High Priest entred into the Holy Place, for he entred with Incense as well as with blood; but what it was by vertue whereof he so entred as to be accepted with God. So it is expresly directed. Lev. 16. 2, 3. Speak unto Aaron that he come not at all times into the Holy Place, with a young Bullock for a sin-offering, and a Ram for a burnt-offering shall he come. Aaron was not to bring the Bullock into the Holy Place, but he had Right to enter into it by the Sacrifice of it at the Altar. Thus therefore the High Priest entred into the Holy Place by the blood of Goats and Calves; namely, by vertue of the Sacrifice of their blood which he had offered without at the Altar. And so all things do exactly cor∣respond between the Type and the Antitype. For, 2. It is affirmed positively of him that he entred by his own blood; and that in opposition unto the other way;  ( for ) but by his own . blood. It is a vain speculation contrary to the Analogie of faith, and destructive of the true nature of the oblation of Christ, and inconsistent with the dignity of his Person, that he should carry with him into Heaven a part of that mate∣rial blood which was shed for us on the earth. This some have invented to maintain a comparison in that wherein is none intended. The design of the Apostle is only to declare by vertue of what he entred as a Priest into the Holy Place. And this was by vertue of his own blood when it was shed, when he offered himself unto God. This was that which laid the foundation of, and gave him right unto the administration of his Priestly office in Heaven. And hereby were all those good things procured which he effectually communicates unto us in and by that Administration. This Exposition is the Center of all Gospel-Mysteries, the object of the Admiration of Angels and Men unto all eternity. What heart can con∣ceive, what tongue can express the Wisdom, Grace and Love that is con∣tained therein? This alone is the stable foundation of faith in our access un∣to God. Two things present themselves unto us. 1. The unspeakable Love of Christ in offering himself and his own blood for us. See Gal. 2. 20. Rev. 1. 5. 1 Ioh. 3. 16. Ephes. 5. 26, 27. There being no other way whereby our sins might be purged and expiated, chap. 10. 5, 6, 7. out of his infinite Love and Grace he condescended unto this way whereby God might be glorified, and his Church sanctified and saved. It
were well if we did always consider aright, what Love, what Thankfulness, what Obedience are due unto him on the account hereof. 2. The Excellency and Efficacy of his Sacrifice is hereby demonstrated, that through him our faith and hope may be in God. He who offered this Sacri∣fice was the onely begotten of the Father, the Eternal Son of God. That which he offered, was his own Blood. God purchased his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. How unquestionable, how perfect must the Atonement be that was thus made, how glorious the Redemption that was procured thereby? This is that which the Apostle mentions in the close of this Verse, as the effect of his Blood-shedding; Having obtained eternal Redemption. The word .  is variously rendered, as we have seen. The Vulgar Latin reads, Redem∣ptione aeterna inventa. And those that follow it, do say, that things rare and so sought after, are said to be found. And Chrysost. inclines unto that Notion of the word. But  is used in all good Authors, for not only to find, but to obtain by our endeavors; so do we render it, and so we ought to do. Rom. 4. 1. Heb. 4. 16. He obtained effectually Eternal Redemption by the price of his Blood. And it is mentioned in a Tense denoting the time past, to signifie that he had thus obtained Eternal Redemption, before he entred into the Holy Place. How he obtained it, we shall see in the consideration of the nature of the thing it self that was obtained. Three things must be inquired into, with what brevity we can, for the Ex∣plication of these words. (1) What is Redemption. (2) Why is this Re∣demption called Eternal. (3) How Christ obtained it. 1. All Redemption respects a state of Bondage and Captivity, with all the Events that do attend it. The Object of it, or those to be redeemed, are on∣ly persons in that estate. There is mention, ver. 15. of the Redemption of Transgressions, but it is by a Metonymy, of the Cause for the Effect. It is Transgressions which cast men into that state from whence they are to be re∣deemed. But both in the Scripture, and in the common Notion of the word, Redemption is the deliverance of persons from a state of Bondage. And this may be done two ways: (1) By Power; (2) By payment of a Price. That which is in the former way is only improperly and metaphorically so called. For it is in its own nature a bare deliverance, and is termed Redemption only with respect to the state of Captivity from whence it is a deliverance. It is a vindication into liberty by any means. So the deliverance of the Israelites from Egypt, though wrought meerly by Acts of Power, is called their Re∣demption. And Moses from his Ministry in that work is called , a Redeemer, Acts 7. 35. But this Redemption is only metaphorically so called, with respect unto the state of Bondage wherein the people were. That which is properly so, is by a Price paid, as a valuable consideration.  is a Ransom, a price of Redemption. Thence are , Redemption and a Redeemer. So the Redemption that is by Christ, is every∣where said to be a Price, a Ransom. See Mat. 20. 28. Mark 10. 45. 1 Cor. 6. 20. 1 Tim. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. It is the deliverance of persons out of a state of Captivity and Bondage, by the payment of a valuable price or Ransom. And the Socinians offer violence not only to the Scripture, but to common sense it self, when they contend that the Redemption which is con∣stantly affirmed to be by a Price, is metaphorical; and that only proper, which is by Power. The Price or Ransom in this Redemption is two ways expressed: (1) By that which gave it its worth and value, that it might be a sufficient Ransom for all. (2) By its especial nature. The first is the Person of Christ himself, He gave himself for us, Gal. 2. 20. He gave himself a Ransom for all, 1 Tim. 2. 6. He offered himself to God, ver. 14. Eph. 5. 2. This was that which made the Ransom of an infinite value, meet to redeem the whole Church. God pur∣chased the Church with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. The especial nature of it is, that it was by Blood, by his own Blood. See Eph. 1. 7. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. And this Blood of Christ was a Ransom or Price of Redemption, partly from the unvaluableness of that Obedience which he yielded unto God in the shed∣ding of it; and partly because this Ransom was also to be an Atonement, as it
was offered unto God in Sacrifice. For it is by Blood, and no otherwise, that Atonement is made, Lev. 17. 11. Wherefore he is set forth to be a Pro∣pitiation through Faith in his Blood, Rom. 3. 24, 25. That the Lord Jesus Christ did give himself a Ransom for Sin; that he did it in the shedding of his Blood for us, wherein he made his Soul an offer∣ing for Sin; that herein and hereby he made Atonement, and expiated our Sins, and that all these things belonged unto our Redemption, is the substance of the Gospel. That this Redemption is nothing but the Expiation of Sin, and that Expiation of Sin nothing but an Act of Power and Authority in Christ now in Heaven, as the Socinians dream, is to reject the whole Gospel. Though the nature of this Redemption be usually spoken unto, yet we must not here wholly put it by. And the nature of it will appear in the considera∣tion of the state from whence we are redeemed, with the causes of it. (1) The Meritorious Cause of it was Sin, or our Original Apostasie from God. Here∣by we lost our primitive liberty, with all the rights and priviledges thereun∣to belonging. (2) The Supreme Efficient Cause is God himself: As the Ru∣ler and Iudge of all, he cast all Apostates into a state of Captivity and Bon∣dage; For Liberty is nothing but peace with him. But he did it with this difference: Sinning Angels he designed to leave irrecoverably under this con∣dition; For Mankind he would find a Ransom. (3) The Instrumental Cause of it, was the Curse of the Law. This falling on men, brings them into a state of Bondage. For it separates as to all relation of love and peace be∣tween God and them; and gives life unto all the actings of sin and death, wherein the misery of that state consists. To be separate from God, to be under the power of sin and death, is to be in Bondage. (4) The External Cause, by the application of all other causes unto the Souls and Consciences of men, is Satan. His was the power of darkness, his the power of death over men in that state and condition; that is, to make application of the terror of it unto their Souls, as threatned in the Curse, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Hence he ap∣pears as the Head of this state of Bondage, and men are in Captivity unto him. He is not so in himself, but as the external application of the causes of Bondage is committed unto him. From hence it is evident, that four things are required unto that Redemption, which is a deliverance by Price or Ransom, from this state. For (1) it must be by such a Ransom, as whereby the Guilt of Sin is expiated; which was the Meritorious Cause of our Captivity. Hence it is called the Redemption of Transgressions, ver. 14. that is, of persons from that state and condition where∣into they were cast by sin or transgression. (2) Such as wherewith in respect of God Atonement must be made, and satisfaction unto his Justice, as the Supreme Ruler and Judge of all. (3) Such as whereby the Curse of the Law might be removed, which could not be without undergoing of it. (4) Such as whereby the Power of Satan might be destroyed. How all this was done by the Blood of Christ, I have at large declared elsewhere. 2. This Redemption is said to be Eternal. And it is so on many ac∣counts: . (1) Of the Subject Matter of it, which are things eternal, none of them are carnal or temporal. The state of Bondage from which we are de∣livered by it in all its causes, was spiritual, not temporal; and the effects of it in liberty, grace and glory, are eternal. (2) Of its Duration. It was not for a season, like that of the people out of Egypt, or the deliverances which they had afterwards under the Judges, and on other occasions. They endu∣red in their effects only for a season, and afterwards new troubles of the same kind overtook them. But this was eternal in all the effects of it; none that are partakers of it, do ever return into a state of Bondage. So (3) it en∣dures in those effects unto all eternity in Heaven it self. 3. This Redemption Christ obtained by his Blood. Having done all in the Sacri∣fice of himself that was in the Justice, Holiness and Wisdom of God required thereunto, it was wholly in his power to confer all the benefits and effects of it, on the Church, on them that do believe. And sundry things we may ob∣serve from this Verse.
1. The Entrance of our Lord Iesus Christ as our High Priest into Heaven, to appear in the presence of God for us, and to save us thereby unto the uttermost, was a thing so great and glorious, as could not be accomplished but by his own blood. No other Sacrifice was sufficient unto this end. Not by the Blood of Bulls and Goats. The reason hereof the Apostle declares at large, Chap. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Men seldom rise in their thoughts unto the greatness of this Mystery. Yea with the most this Blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified unto the remainder of his work, is a common thing. The ruine of Christian Religion lies in the slight thoughts of men about the Blood of Christ; and pernicious Errors do abound in opposition unto the true nature of the Sacrifice which he made thereby. Even the faith of the best is weak and imperfect as to the comprehension of the glory of it. Our relief is, that the uninterrupted contemplation of it, will be a part of our blessedness unto eter∣nity. But yet whil'st we are here, we can neither understand how great is the salvation which is tendred unto us thereby, nor be thankful for it, with∣out a due consideration of the way whereby the Lord Christ entred into the Holy Place. And he will be the most humble and most fruitful Christian, whose faith is most exercised, most conversant about it. 2. Whatever difficulty lay in the way of Christ as unto the accomplishment and perfection of the work of our Redemption, he would not decline them, nor desist from his undertaking, whatever it cost him. Sacrifice and Burnt-offering thou would'st not have; then said I, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God. He made his way into the Holy Place by his own Blood. What was required of him for us that we might be saved, he would not decline, though never so great and dreadful; and surely we ought not to decline what he requires of us, that he may be honoured. 3. There was an Holy Place meet to receive the Lord Christ after the Sacrifice of himself; and a sutable Reception for such a Person, after so glorious a Perfor∣mance. It was a place of great glory and beauty whereinto the High Priest of old entred by the Blood of Calves and Goats; the visible pledges of the presence of God were in it, whereunto no other person might approach. But our High Priest was not to enter into any Holy Place made with hands, unto outward visible pledges of the presence of God, but into the Heaven of Heavens, the place of the glorious residence of the Majesty of God it self. 4. If the Lord Christ entred not into the Holy Place until he had finished his work, we may not expect an entrance thereinto until we have finished ours. He fainted not, nor waxed weary, until all was finished. And it is our duty to arm our selves with the same mind. 5. It must be a glorious Effect, which had so glorious a Cause; and so it was, even Eternal Redemption. 6. The Nature of our Redemption, the way of its procurement, with the Duties required of us with respect thereunto, are greatly to be considered by us.
VER. XIII, XIV. THere is in these Verses an Argument and Comparison. But the Comparison is such, as that the ground of it is laid in the Relation of the Comparates the one unto the other; namely, that the one was the Type, and the other the Antitype, otherwise the Argument will not hold. For although it follows, that he who can do the greater, can do the less, whereon an Argument will hold à majori ad minus; yet it doth not absolutely do so, that if that which is less can do that which is less, then that which is greater can do that which is greater; which would be the force of the Argument, if there were nothing but a naked comparison in it. But it necessarily follows hereon, if that which is less, in that less thing which it doth or did, was therein a Type of that which was greater, in that greater thing which it was to effect. And this was the case in the thing here proposed by the Apostle. The words are: ; The words have no difficulty in them as to their Grammatical Sense; nor is there any considerable variation in the rendring of them in the old Transla∣tions. Only the Syriac retains  that is , from ver. 11. instead of  here used. And both that and the Vulgar, place  here before , as in the foregoing Verse, contrary unto all Copies of the Original, as to the order of the words. For , the Vulgar reads , per Spiritum Sanctum. The Syriac follows the Original,  by the Eternal Spirit. , the Original Copies vary, some reading , our, but most , your; which our Translators follow. For if the blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifieth unto the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot unto God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? The words are Argumentative, in the form of an Hypothetical Syllogism; wherein the Assumption of the Proposition is supposed, as proved before. That which is to be confirmed, is what was asserted in the words foregoing; name∣ly, That the Lord Iesus Christ by his blood hath obtained for us eternal redemption.  This the Causal Redditive Conjunction, For, doth manifest; whereunto the Note of a Supposition, If, is premised as a Note of an Hypothetical Argumen∣tation. There are two Parts of this Confirmation: (1) A most full declaration of the way and means whereby he obtained that Redemption; it was by the offering himself through the Eternal Spirit without spot unto God. (2) By com∣paring this way of it with the Typical Sacrifices and Ordinances of God. For arguing ad homines, that is, unto the satisfaction and conviction of the He∣brews, the Apostle makes use of their Confessions, to confirm his own Asser∣tions. And his Argument consists of two Parts. (1) A Concession of their efficacy unto their proper end. (2) An Inference from thence unto the
greater and more noble efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, taken partly from the relation of Type and Antitype that was between them, but principally from the different nature of the things themselves. To make evident the force of his Argument in general, we must observe, (1) That what he had proved before, he takes here for granted, on the one side and the other. And this was that all the Levitical Services and Ordinan∣ces were in themselves carnal, and had carnal ends assigned unto them, and had only an obscure representation of things spiritual and eternal; and on the other side, that the Tabernacle, Office and Sacrifice of Christ were spiritual, and had their effects in eternal things. (2) That those other carnal earthly things were Types and Resemblances in God's appointment of them, of these which are spiritual and eternal. From these Suppositions the Argument is firm and stable, and there are two Parts of it; (1) That as the Ordinances of old being carnal, had an efficacy unto their proper end to purifie the unclean as to the flesh; so the Sacrifice of Christ hath a certain efficacy unto its proper end; namely, the purging of our Consciences from dead works. The force of this Inference depends on the Re∣lation that was between them in the appointment of God. (2) That there was a greater efficacy; and that which gave a greater evidence of it self in the Sacrifice of Christ with respect unto its proper end, than theirs was in those Sacrifices and Ordinances with respect unto their proper end. How much more. And the reason hereof is, because all their efficacy depended on a meer arbi∣trary Institution. In themselves, that is, in their own Nature, they had neither worth, value nor efficacy, no not as unto those Ends whereunto they were by Divine Institution designed: But in the Sacrifice of Christ, who is therefore here said to offer himself unto God through the eternal Spirit, there is an innate glorious worth and efficacy, which sutably unto the Rules of Eternal Reason and Righteousness, will accomplish and procure its effects. VER. XIII. THere are two things in this Verse, which are the ground from whence the Apostle argueth and maketh his Inference in that which follows. (1) A Proposition of the Sacrifices and Services of the Law which he had respect unto. (2) An Assignation of a certain efficacy unto them. The Sacrifices of the Law he refers unto two Heads. (1) The Blood of Bulls and Goats. (2) The Ashes of an Heifer. And the distinction is, (1) from the matter of them, (2) the manner of their performance. For the man∣ner of their performance, the Blood of Bulls and Goats were offered, which is supposed and included; the Ashes of the Heifer was sprinkled, as it is ex∣pressed. The matter of the first is the Blood of Bulls and Goats. The same, say some, . with the Goats and Calves mentioned in the Verse foregoing. So generally do the Expositors of the Roman Church; and that because their Translation reads Hircorum & Vitulorum, contrary unto the Original Text. And some instances they give of the same signification of  and . But the Apostle had just reason for the alteration of his expression. For in the foregoing Verse, he had respect only unto the Anniversary Sacrifice of the High Priest, but here he enlargeth the Subject unto the consideration of all other expiatory Sacrifices under the Law. For he joins unto the Blood of Bulls and Goats, the Ashes of an Heifer, which was of no use in the Anniver∣sary Sacrifice. Wherefore he designed in these words summarily to express all Sacrifices of Expiation, and all Ordinances of Purification that were ap∣pointed under the Law. And therefore the words in the close of the Verse, expressing the end and effects of these Ordinances, purified the unclean as unto the flesh, are not to be restrained unto them immediately foregoing, the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkled; but an equal respect is to be had unto the other sort, or the Blood of Bulls and Goats.
The Socinian Expositor, in his entrance into that wresting of this Text wherein he labors in a peculiar manner, denies that the water of sprinkling is here to be considered as Typical of Christ, and that because it is the Anniver∣sary Sacrifice alone which is intended, wherein it was of no use. Yet he adds immediately that in it self, it was a Type of Christ; so wresting the Truth against his own Convictions, to force his design. But the Conclusion is strong on the other hand; because it was a Type of Christ, and is so here considered, whereas it was not used in the great Anniversary Sacrifice, it is not that Sa∣crifice alone which the Apostle hath respect unto. Wherefore by Bulls and Goats, by an usual Synecdoche, all the several kinds of clean Beasts, whose blood was given unto the People to make Atonement withal, are intended. So is the matter of all Sacrifices expressed, Psal. 50. 13. Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? Sheep are contained under Goats, being all Beasts of the Flock. And it is the Blood of these Bulls and Goats which is proposed as the first way or means of the Expiation of Sin, and Purification under the Law. For it was by their Blood, and that as offered at the Altar, that Atonement was made, Lev. 17. 11. Purification was also made thereby, even by the sprink∣ling of it. The second thing mentioned unto the same end, is the Ashes of an Heifer; . and the use of it, which was by sprinkling. The Institution, use and end of this Ordinance, is described at large, Numb. 19. And an eminent Type of Christ there was therein, both as unto his suffering, and the continual efficacy of the cleansing vertue of his Blood in the Church. It would too much di∣vert us from the present Argument, to consider all the particulars wherein there was a Representation of the Sacrifice of Christ, and the purging ver∣tue of it in this Ordinance; yet the mention of some of them is of use unto the Explication of the Apostles general design. As, (1) It was to be a Red Heifer, and that without spot or blemish, whereon no yoke had come, ver. 2. Red is the colour of guilt, Isa. 1. 18. yet was there no spot or blemish in the Heifer; so was the guilt of Sin upon Christ, who in himself was absolutely pure and holy. No yoke had been on her; nor was there any constraint on Christ, but he offered himself willingly through the eternal Spirit. (2) She was to be had forth without the Camp, ver. 3. which the Apostle alludes unto Chap. 13. 11. representing Christ going out of the City unto his Suffering and Oblation. (3) One did slay her before the face of the Priest, and not the Priest him∣self. So the hands of others, Iews and Gentiles were used in the slaying of our Sacrifice. (4) The Blood of the Heifer being slain, was sprinkled by the Priest seven times directly before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, ver. 4. So is the whole Church purified by the sprinkling of the Blood of Christ. (5) The whole Heifer was to be burned in the sight of the Priest, ver. 5. So was whole Christ, Soul and Body, offered up to God in the fire of love, kindled in him by the eternal Spirit. (6) Cedar wood, Hysop and Scarlet were to be cast into the midst of the burning of the Heifer, ver. 6. which were all used by God's Institution in the purification of the unclean, or the sanctification and dedication of any thing unto sacred use; to teach us that all spiritual vertue unto these ends, really and eternally, was contained in the one offering of Christ.
(7) Both the Priest who sprinkled the Blood, the men that slew the Heifer, and he that burned her, and he that gathered her ashes, were all un∣clean, until they were washed, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. So when Christ was made a Sin-offering, all the legal Uncleannesses, that is, the Guilt of the Church, were on him, and he took them away. But it is the use of this Ordinance which is principally intended. The Ashes of this Heifer being burned, was preserved, that being mixed with pure water, it might be sprinkled on persons, who on any occasion were legally unclean. Whoever was so, was excluded from all the Solemn Worship of the Church. Wherefore without this Ordinance, the worship of God, and the holy state of the Church could not have been continued. For the means, cau∣ses, and ways of legal defilements among them were very many, and some of them unavoidable. In particular every Tent and House, and all persons in them were defiled, if any one died among them, which could not but con∣tinually fall out in their Families. Hereon they were excluded from the Ta∣bernacle and Congregation, and all Duties of the Solemn Worship of God, until they were purified. Had not therefore these Ashes, which were to be mingled with living water, been always preserved and in a readi∣ness, the whole worship of God must quickly have ceased amongst them. It is so in the Church of Christ. The Spiritual Defilements which befal Believers are many, and some of them unavoidable unto them whil'st they are in this world; yea, their Duties, the best of them, have defilements adhering unto them. Were it not but that the Blood of Christ, in its purifying ver∣tue, is in a continual readiness unto Faith, that God therein had opened a Foun∣tain for Sin and Uncleanness, the Worship of the Church would not be ac∣ceptable unto him. In a constant application thereunto, doth the exercise of Faith much consist. The nature and use of this Ordinance is farther described by its object, the . unclean, , that is, those that were made common. All those who had a liberty of approach unto God in his Solemn Worship, were so far sancti∣fied, that is, separated, and dedicated. And such as were deprived of this priviledge were made common, and so unclean. The Unclean especially intended in the Institution, were those who were defiled by the dead. Every one that by any means touched a dead body, whether dying naturally or slain, whether in the house or field, or did bear it, or assist in the bearing of it, or were in the Tent or House where it was, were all defiled; no such person was to come into the Congregation, or near the Tabernacle. But it is certain that many Offices about the dead, are works of Humanity and Mercy, which morally defile not. Wherefore there was a pe∣culiar reason of the constitution of this defilement, and this severe Interdiction of them that were so defiled from Divine Worship. And this was to repre∣sent unto the People the Curse of the Law, whereof Death was the great visible effect. The present Iews have this Notion, that defilement by the dead, arose from the poyson that is dropt into them that dye by the Angel of death, whereof see our Exposition on Chap. 2. 14. The meaning of it is, that Death came in by Sin, from the poysonous temptation of the old Serpent, and befel men by the Curse which took hold of them thereon. But they have lost the understanding of their own Tradition. This belonged unto the bondage under which it was the Will of God to keep that People, that they should dread Death as an effect of the Curse of the Law, and the fruit of Sin, which is ta∣ken away in Christ, Heb. 2. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 47. And these works which were unto them so full of defilement, are now unto us accepted Duties of Piety and Mercy.
These and many others were excluded from an interest in the Solemn Wor∣ship of God, upon ceremonial defilements. And some vehemently contend that none were so excluded for moral defilements; and it may be it is true, for the matter is dubious. But that it should thence follow, that none under the Gospel should be so excluded, for moral and spiritual Evils, is a fond imagi∣nation. Yea, the Argument is firm, that if God did so severely shut out from a participation in his Solemn Worship, all those who were legally or ceremo∣nially defiled, much more is it his Will, that those who live in spiritual or mo∣ral defilements, should not approach unto him by the holy Ordinances of the Gospel. The manner of the application of this purifying water, was by sprinkling. . Being sprinkled; or rather transitively, sprinkling the unclean. Not only the Act, but the Efficacy of it is intended. The manner of it is declared, Numb. 19. 17, 18. The Ashes was kept by it self. Where use was to be made of it, it was to be mingled with clean living water, water from the Spring. The vertue was from the Ashes; as it was the Ashes of the Heifer, slain and burnt as a Sin-offering. The water was used as the means of its application. Being so mingled, any clean person might dip a Bunch of Hysop (see Psal. 51. 7.) into it, and sprinkle any thing or person that was defiled. For it was not con∣fined unto the Office of the Priest, but was left unto every private person, as is the continual application of the Blood of Christ. And this Rite of sprink∣ling was that alone in all Sacrifices whereby their continued efficacy unto Sanctification and Purification was expressed. Thence is the Blood of Christ called the blood of sprinkling, because of its efficacy unto our Sanctification, as applied by Faith unto our Souls and Consciences. The effect of the things mentioned is, that they sanctified unto the purifying of the flesh; namely, that those unto whom they were applied, might be made Levitically clean, be so freed from the carnal defilements, as to have an admis∣sion unto the Solemn Worship of God, and Society of the Church. Sanctifieth,  in the New Testament doth signifie for the most part, to . purifie and sanctifie internally and spiritually. Sometimes it is used in the sense of  in the Old Testament, to separate, dedicate, consecrate. So is it by our Saviour, Iohn 17. 19. . And for them, I san∣ctifie my self; that is, separate and dedicate my self to be a Sacrifice. So is it here used. Every defiled person was made common, excluded from the privi∣ledge of a right to draw nigh unto God in his Solemn Worship: But in his Purification he was again separated to him, and restored unto his sacred Right. The word is of the singular number, and seems only to respect the next An∣tecedent, , the Ashes of an Heifer. But if so, the Apostle men∣tions the Blood of Bulls and Goats, without the ascription of any effect or ef∣ficacy thereunto. This therefore is not likely, as being the more Solemn Or∣dinance. Wherefore the word is distinctly to be referred by a Zeugma unto the one and the other. The whole effect of all the Sacrifices and Institutions of the Law is comprised in this word. All the Sacrifices of Expiation, and Ordinances of Purification had this effect, and no more. They sanctified unto the purifying of the flesh. That is, those who were . legally defiled, and were therefore excluded from an interest in the worship of God, and were made obnoxious unto the curse of the Law thereon, were so legally purified, justified, and cleansed by them, as that they had free admission into the Society of the Church, and the Solemn Worship thereof. This they did, this they were able to effect, by vertue of Divine Institu∣tion.
This was the state of things under the Law, when there was a Church-Purity, Holiness and Sanctification, to be obtained by the due observance of external Rites and Ordinances, without internal purity or holiness. Where∣fore these things were in themselves of no worth nor value. And as God himself doth often in the Prophets declare, that meerly on their own account he had no regard unto them; so by the Apostle they are called worldly, car∣nal, and beggarly Rudiments. Why then, it will be said, did God appoint and ordain them? Why did he oblige the People unto their observance? I an∣swer, It was not at all on the account of their outward use and efficacy, as un∣to the purifying of the flesh, which as it was alone God always despised; but it was because of the representation of good things to come, which the wis∣dom of God had inlaid them withal. With respect hereunto they were glo∣rious, and of exceeding advantage unto the Faith and Obedience of the Church. This state of things is changed under the New Testament. For now neither Circumcision availeth any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. The thing signified, namely, internal Purity and Holiness, is no less necessary unto a Right unto the Priviledges of the Gospel, than the observance of these ex∣ternal Rites was unto the Priviledges of the Law. Yet is there no countenance given hereby unto the impious opinion of some, that God by the Law required only external Obedience, without respect unto the inward spiritual part of it. For although the Rites and Sacrifices of the Law, by their own vertue, purified externally, and delivered only from temporary Punishments, yet the Precepts and the Promises of the Law, re∣quired the same Holiness and Obedience unto God, as doth the Gospel.
VER. XIV. How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot unto God, purifie your Conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? THis Verse contains the Inference or Argument of the Apostle, from the preceding Propositions and Concessions. The Nature of the Argument is à minori, and à proportione. From the first the Inference follows, as unto its truth, and formally; from the latter as to its greater evidence and mate∣rially. There are in the words considerable, 1. The Subject treated of, in opposition unto that before spoken unto, and that is the Blood of Christ. 2. The means whereby this Blood of Christ was effectual unto the end de∣signed, in opposition unto the way and means of the efficacy of legal Ordi∣nances. He offered himself (that is, in the shedding of it) unto God without spot, through the eternal Spirit. 3. The end assigned unto this Blood of Christ in that offering of himself, or the effect wrought thereby, in opposition unto the end and effect of legal Ordinances; which is, to purge our Consciences from dead works. 4. The benefit and advantage which we receive thereby, in opposition un∣to the benefit which was obtained by those legal administrations; that we may serve the living God. All which must be considered, and explained. 1. The Nature of the Inference is expressed by, How much more. This is . usual with the Apostle, when he draws any Inference or Conclusion from a Comparison between Christ and the High Priest, the Gospel and the Law, to use an  in expression, to manifest their absolute pre-eminence above them: See Chap. 2. 2, 3. Chap. 3. 3. Chap. 10. 28, 29. Chap. 12. 25. Al∣though these things agreed in their general Nature, whence a Comparison is founded; yet were the one incomparably more glorious than the other. Hence elsewhere although he alloweth the administration of the Law to be glorious, yet he affirms that it had no Glory in comparison of what doth excel. 2 Cor. 3. 10. The Person of Christ is the Spring of all the Glory in the Church, and the more nearly any thing relates thereunto, the more glorious it is. There are two things included, in this way of the Introduction of the pre∣sent Inference, How much more. 1. An equal certainty of the Event and Effect ascribed unto the Blood of Christ, with the effect of the legal Sacrifices, is included in it. So the Argu∣ment is à minori. And the Inference of such an Argument is expressed by, much more, though an equal certainty be all that is evinced by it. If these Sa∣crifices and Ordinances of the Law were effectual unto the ends of legal Ex∣piation and Purification, then is the Blood of Christ assuredly so, unto the spiritual and eternal effects whereunto it is designed. And the force of the Argument is not meerly, as was observed before, à comparatis, and à minori; but from the nature of the things themselves, as the one was appointed to be typical of the other. 2. The Argument is taken from a Proportion between the things themselves that are compared, as to their efficacy. This gives a greater evidence and validity unto the Argument, than if it were taken meerly à minori. For there is a greater reason in the nature of things, that the Blood of Christ should purge our Consciences from dead works, than there is, that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should sanctifie unto the purifying of the flesh. For that had all
its efficacy unto this end from the sovereign pleasure of God in its Institution. In it self it had neither worth nor dignity, whence in any proportion of Justice or Reason, men should be legally sanctified by it. The Sacrifice of Christ al∣so, as unto its Original, depended on the sovereign pleasure, wisdom and grace of God. But being so appointed, upon the account of the infinite dignity of his Person, and the nature of his Oblation, it had a real efficacy in the justice and wisdom of God, to procure the effect mentioned in the way of purchase and merit. This the Apostle refers unto in these words, Who through the eter∣nal Spirit offered himself unto God. That the Offering was himself, that he of∣fered himself through the eternal Spirit in his Divine Person, is that which gives assurance of the accomplishing the effect assigned unto it by his Blood, above any grounds we have to believe, that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should sancti∣fie unto the purifying of the flesh. And we may observe from this, How much more; That There is such an Evidence of Wisdom and Righteousness, unto a spiritual Eye, in the whole Mystery of our Redemption, Sanctification and Salvation by Christ, as gives an immoveable foundation unto Faith to rest upon, in its receiving of it. The Faith of the Church of Old, was resolved into the meer sovereign plea∣sure of God, as to the efficacy of their Ordinances; nothing in the nature of the things themselves, did tend unto their establishment. But in the dispensa∣tion of God by Christ, in the work of our Redemption by him, there is such an Evidence of the Wisdom and Righteousness of God in the things them∣selves, as gives the highest security unto Faith. It is Unbelief alone, made obstinate by prejudices insinuated by the Devil, that hides these things from any, as the Apostle declares, 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4. And hence will arise the great ag∣gravation of the Sin, and condemnation of them that perish. 2. We must consider the things themselves. The Subject spoken of, and whereunto the Effect mentioned is ascribed, is the Blood of Christ. The Per∣son  unto whom these things relate is Christ. I have given an account before on sundry occasions, of the great variety used by the Apostle in this Epistle, in the naming of him. And a peculiar Reason of every one of them, is to be taken from the place where it is used. Here he calls him Christ; For on his being Christ, the Messias, depends the principal force of his present Argu∣ment.  It is the Blood of him who was promised of Old to be the High-Priest of the Church, and the Sacrifice for their Sins. In whom was the Faith of all the Saints of Old, that by him their Sins should be expiated, that in him they should be justified and glorified. Christ who is the Son of the living God, in whose Person God purchased his Church with his own Blood. And we may observe, That The Efficacy of all the Offices of Christ towards the Church, depends on the Dig∣nity of his Person. The Offering of his Blood was prevalent for the Expiation of Sin, because it was his Blood, and for no other Reason. But this is a Sub∣ject which I have handled at large elsewhere. A late learned Commentator on this Epistle, takes occasion, in this place, to reflect on Dr. Gouge, for affirming that Christ was a Priest in both Natures, which as he says, cannot be true. I have not Dr. Gouge's Exposition by me, and so know not in what sense it is affirmed by him. But that Christ is a Priest in his entire Person, and so in both Natures, is true, and the constant Opinion of all Protestant Divines. And the following words of this learned Author, being well explained, will clear the difficulty. For he saith, that, He that is a Priest is God, yet as God he is not, he cannot be a Priest. For that Christ is a Priest in both Natures, is no more, but that in the discharge of his Priestly Office, he acts as God and Man in one Person, from whence the Dignity and Efficacy of his Sacerdotal Actings do proceed. It is not hence required, that whatever he doth in the discharge of his Office, must be an immediate Act of the Divine, as well as of the Humane Nature. No more is required unto it, but that the Person whose Acts they are, is God and Man, and acts as God and Man, in each Nature sutably unto its essential Properties. Hence although God cannot dye, that is, the Divine Nature cannot do so, yet God purchased his
Church with his own Blood; and so also the Lord of Glory was Crucified for us. The sum is, That the Person of Christ is the Principle of all his Media∣tory Acts; although those Act be immediately performed in and by vertue of his distinct Natures, some of one, some of another, according unto their distinct Properties and Powers. Hence are they all Theandrical; which could not be, if he were not a Priest in both Natures. Nor is this impeached by what ensues in the same Author; namely, That a Priest is an Officer, and all Officers, as Officers, are made such by Commission from the Sovereign Power, and are Servants under them. For, (1) It may be this doth not hold, among the Divine Persons; it may be no more is required in the dispensation of God towards the Church unto an Office in any of them, but their own infinite condescension, with respect unto the order of their subsistence. So the Holy Ghost is in peculiar the Com∣forter of the Church by the way of Office, and is sent thereon by the Father and Son. Yet is there no more required hereunto, but that the order of the operation of the Persons in the blessed Trinity should answer the order of their subsistence; and so he who in his Person proceedeth from the Father and the Son, is sent unto his work by the Father and the Son; no new Act of Au∣thority being required thereunto; but only the determination of the Divine Will, to act sutably unto the order of their subsistence. (2) The Divine Nature considered in the Abstract cannot serve in an Office; yet He who was in the Form of God, and counted it no robbery to be equal unto God, took on him the form of a Servant, and was obedient unto death. It was in the Humane Nature that he was a Servant, nevertheless it was the Son of God, he who in his Divine Nature was in the Form of God, who so served in Of∣fice, and yielded that Obedience. Wherefore he was so far a Mediator and Priest in both his Natures, as that whatever he did in the discharge of those Offices, was the Act of his entire Person, whereon the dignity and efficacy of all that he did, did depend. That which the Effect intended is ascribed unto, is the Blood of Christ. And  two things are to be enquired hereon. (1) What is meant by the Blood of Christ. (2) How this Effect was wrought by it. 1. It is not only that Material Blood which he shed absolutely considered, that is here and elsewhere called the Blood of Christ, when the work of our Redemption is ascribed unto it, that is intended. But there is a double con∣sideration of it with respect unto its Efficacy unto this End. (1) That it was the pledge and the sign of all the internal Obedience and Sufferings of the Soul of Christ, of his Person. He became obedient unto death, the death of the Cross, whereon his blood was shed. This was the great instance of his Obe∣dience, and of his Sufferings, whereby he made Reconciliation and Atonement for Sin. Hence the Effects of all his Sufferings, and of all Obedience in his Sufferings, are ascribed unto his Blood. (2) Respect is had unto the Sacri∣fice and Offering of Blood under the Law. The reason why God gave the People the Blood to make Atonement on the Altar, was, because the life of the flesh was in it, Lev. 17. 11, 14. So was the life of Christ in his Blood, by the shedding whereof, he laid it down. And by his death it is, as he was the Son of God, that we are redeemed. Herein he made his Soul an Offering for Sin, Isa. 53. 10. Wherefore this Expression of the Blood of Christ, in order unto our Redemption, or the Expiation of Sin, is comprehensive of all that he did and suffered for those Ends, inasmuch as the shedding of it, was the way and means whereby he offered it, or himself (in and by it) unto God. 2. The second Enquiry is, How the Effect here mentioned was wrought by the Blood of Christ. And this we cannot determine, without a general con∣sideration of the Effect it self; and this is, the purging of our Conscience from dead works. , shall purge: That is, say some, shall purifie and sanctifie,  by internal, inherent sanctification. But neither the sense of the word, nor the Context, nor the Exposition given by the Apostle of this very expression, Chap. 10. 1, 2. will admit of this restrained sense. I grant it is included here∣in, but there is somewhat else principally intended, namely, the Expiation of Sin, with our Justification and Peace with God thereon.
(1) For the proper sense of the word here used, see our Exposition on Chap. 1. 3. Expiation, Lustration, carrying away punishment by making Atonement; are expressed by it in all good Authors. (2) The Context requires this sense in the first place. For, First, The Argument here used is immediately applied to prove that Christ hath obtained for us eternal Redemption. But Redemption consists not in inter∣nal Sanctification only, although that be a necessary consequent of it: But it is the pardon of Sin through the Aronement made, or a price paid. In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, Eph. 1. 7. Secondly, In the Comparison insisted on, there is distinct mention made of the Blood of Bulls and Goats, as well as of the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkled. But the first and principal use of Blood in Sacrifice, was to make Atonement for sin, Lev. 17. 11. Thirdly, The End of this Purging, is to give boldness in the service of God, and peace with him therein, that we may serve the living God. But this is done by the expiation and pardon of Sin, with justification thereon. Fourthly, It is Conscience that is said to be purged. Now Conscience is the proper seat of the guilt of Sin; it is that which chargeth it on the Soul, and which hinders all approach unto God in his service with liberty and boldness, unless it be removed; which, Fifthly, Gives us the best consideration of the Apostle's Exposition of this expression, Chap. 10. 1, 2. For he there declares, that to have the Conscience purged, is to have its condemning power for sin taken away and cease. There is therefore under the same name a twofold Effect here ascribed unto the Blood of Christ; the one in answer and opposition unto the Effect of the Blood of Bulls and Goats being offered; the other in answer unto the Effect of the Ashes of an Heifer being sprinkled. The first consisting in making Atone∣ment for our sins; the other in the sanctification of our persons. And there are two ways whereby these things are procured by the Blood of Christ. (1) By its offering, whereby Sin is expiated. (2) By its sprinkling, whereby our persons are sanctified. The first ariseth from the satisfaction he made unto the justice of God, by undergoing (in his death) the punishment due to us, being made therein a Curse for us, that the blessing might come upon us; therein as his death was a Sacrifice, as he offered himself unto God in the shed∣ding of his Blood, he made Atonement. The other from the vertue of his Sacrifice applied unto us by the Holy Spirit, which is the sprinkling of it; so doth the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleanse us from all our Sins. The Socinian Expositor on this place, endeavors by a long perplexed dis∣course, to evade the force of this testimony, wherein the expiation of Sin is directly assigned unto the Blood of Christ. His pretence is to shew how ma∣ny ways it may be so, but his design is to prove that really it can be so by none at all. For the Assertion, as it lies in terms, is destructive of their Here∣sie. Wherefore he proceeds on these Suppositions. (1) That the Expiation of Sin, is our deliverance from the punishment due unto Sin, by the power of Christ in Heaven. But this is diametrically as oppo∣site unto the true Nature of it, so unto its Representation in the Sacrifices of old, whereunto it is compared by the Apostle, and from whence he argueth. Neither is this a tolerable Exposition of the words. The Blood of Christ in answer unto what was represented by the Blood of the Sacrifices of the Law, doth purge our Consciences from dead works; that is, Christ by his power in Heaven, doth free us from the punishment due to Sin. (2) That Christ was not a Priest until after his Ascension into Heaven. That this Supposition destroys the whole Nature of that Office, hath been sufficient∣ly before declared. (3) That his offering himself unto God, was the presenting of himself in Hea∣ven before God, as having done the Will of God on the earth. But as this hath nothing in it of the nature of a Sacrifice, so what is asserted by it, can, ac∣cording to these men, be no way said to be done by his Blood, seeing they affirm that when Christ doth this, he hath neither flesh nor blood.
(4) That the Resurrection of Christ gave all Efficacy unto his Death. But the truth is, it was his Death, and what he effected therein, that was the ground of his Resurrection. He was brought again from the dead through the blood of the Covenant. And the efficacy of his death depends on his Re∣surrection, only as the evidence of his acceptance with God therein. (5) That Christ confirmed his Doctrine by his Blood; that is, because he rose again. All these Principles I have at large refuted in the Exercitations about the Priesthood of Christ, and shall not here again insist on their examination. This is plain and evident in the words, unless violence be offered unto them; namely, that the Blood of Christ, that is, his suffering in Soul and Body, and his obedience therein, testified and expressed in the shedding of his Blood, was the procuring cause of the expiation of our Sins, the purging of our Consciences from dead works, our justification, sanctification and acceptance with God thereon. And There is nothing more destructive unto the whole Faith of the Gospel, than by any means to evacuate the immediate efficacy of the Blood of Christ. Every opini∣on of that tendency breaks in upon the whole mystery of the wisdom and grace of God in him. It renders all the Institutions and Sacrifices of the Law whereby God instructed the Church of Old in the Mystery of his Grace, useless, and unintelligible, and overthrows the foundation of the Gospel. The second thing in the words, is the means whereby the Blood of Christ came to be of this efficacy, or to produce this effect. And that is, because in the shedding of it, he offered himself unto God through the eternal Spirit without spot. Every word is of great importance, and the whole Assertion filled with the mystery of the wisdom and grace of God, and must therefore be distinct∣ly considered. There is declared what Christ did unto the End mentioned, and that is ex∣pressed in the matter and manner of it. (1) He offered himself. (2) To whom; that is to God. (3) How, or from what principle, by what means by the eternal Spirit. (4) With what qualifications; without spot. He offered himself. To prove that his Blood purgeth our Sins, he affirms . that he offered himself. His whole Humane Nature was the Offering; the way of its Offering, was by the shedding of his Blood. So the Beast was the Sa∣crifice, when the Blood alone or principally was offered on the Altar. For it was the Blood that made Atonement. So it was by his Blood that Christ made Atonement, but it was his Person that gave it efficacy unto that end. Wherefore by, Himself, the whole Humane Nature of Christ is intended. And that, (1) Not in distinction or separation from the Divine. For although the Humane Nature of Christ, his Soul and Body, only was offered, yet he offered himself through his own eternal Spirit. This Offering of himself therefore was the Act of his whole Person, both Natures concurred in the Offering, though one alone was offered. (2) All that he did or suffered in his Soul and Body when his Blood was shed, is comprised in this Offering of himself. His Obedience in Suffering was that which rendred this Offering of himself, a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor unto God. And he is said thus to offer himself, in opposition unto the Sacrifices of the High Priest under the Law. They offered Goats and Bulls, or their blood; but he offered himself. This therefore was the Nature of the Offering of Christ; It was a Sacred Act of the Lord Christ as the High Priest of the Church, wherein according unto the Will of God, and what was required of him by vertue of the eternal Compact between the Father and him, concerning the Redemption of the Church, he gave up himself in the way of most profound Obedience, to do and suffer whatever the Iustice and Law of God required unto the expiation of Sin, expressing the whole by the shedding of his Blood, in answer unto all the Typical Re∣presentations of this his Sacrifice, in all the Institutions of the Law. And this Offering of Christ was proper Sacrifice.
(1) From the Office whereof it was an Act; it was so of his Sacerdotal Office; he was made a Priest of God for this end, that he might thus offer himself, and that this Offering of himself should be a Sacrifice. (2) From the Nature of it; For it consisted in the sacred giving up unto God the thing that was offered in the present destruction or consumption of it. This is the Nature of a Sacrifice; it was the destruction and consumption by Death and Fire, by a sacred Action, of what was dedicated and offered unto God. So was it in this Sacrifice of Christ. As he suffered in it, so in the giving himself up unto God in it, there was an effusion of his Blood, and the destruction of his Life. (3) From the End of it, which was assigned unto it in the wisdom and sovereignty of God, and in his own intention, which was to make Atonement for Sin, which gives an Offering the formal Nature of an Expiatory Sa∣crifice. (4) From the way and manner of it. For therein, 1. He sanctified or dedicated himself unto God to be an Offering, Iohn 17. 19. 2. He accompanied it with Prayers and Supplications, Heb. 5. 7. 3. There was an Altar which sanctified the Offering, which bore it up in its Oblation, which was his own Divine Nature, as we shall see imme∣diately. 4. He kindled the Sacrifice with the fire of Divine Love, acting it self by zeal unto God's Glory, and compassion unto the souls of men. 5. He tendred all this unto God, as an Atonement for Sin, as we shall see in the next words. This was the free, real, proper Sacrifice of Christ, whereof those of old were only Types, and obscure Representations; the Prefiguration hereof was the sole cause of their Institution. And what the Socinians pretend, namely, that the Lord Christ offered no real Sacrifice, but only what he did was called so Metaphorically, by the way of allusion unto the Sacrifices of the Law, is so far from truth, as that there never had been any such Sacrifices of Divine Appointment, but only to prefigure this which alone was really and substan∣tially so. The Holy Ghost doth not make a forced accommodation of what Christ did unto those Sacrifices of old, by way of allusion, and by reason of some resemblances, but shews the uselesness and weakness of those Sacrifices in themselves, any farther but as they represented this of Christ. The Nature of this Oblation and Sacrifice of Christ is utterly overthrown by the Socinians. They deny that in all this there was any offering at all; they deny that his shedding of his Blood, or any thing which he did or suffered therein, either actually or passively, his obedience, or giving himself up unto God therein was his Sacrifice, or any part of it, but only somewhat required previously thereunto, and that without any necessary cause or reason. But his Sacrifice, his Offering of himself, they say is nothing but his appearance in Heaven, and the Presentation of himself before the Throne of God, whereon he receiveth power, to deliver them that believe in him from the punishment due to sin. But, (1) This appearance of Christ in Heaven is no where called his Oblation, his Sacrifice, or his Offering of himself. The places wherein some grant it may be so, do assert no such thing, as we shall see in the Explanation of them, for they occur unto us in this Chapter. (2) It no ways answers the Atonement that was made by the Blood of the Sacrifices at the Altar, which was never carried into the Holy Place: yea, it overthrows all Analogy, all Resemblance and Typical Representation be∣tween those Sacrifices and this of Christ, there being no similitude, nothing alike between them. And this renders all the reasoning of the Apostle not only invalid, but altogether impertinent. (3) The Supposition of it utterly overthrows the true Nature of a proper and real Sacrifice, substituting that in the room of it which is only metaphori∣cal, and improperly so called. Nor can it be evidenced wherein the Metaphor
doth consist, or that there is any ground why it should be called an Offering or a Sacrifice. For all things belonging to it are distinct from, yea, contrary unto a true real Sacrifice. (4) It overthrows the Nature of the Priesthood of Christ, making it to consist in his actings from God towards us in a way of power; whereas the Na∣ture of the Priesthood is to act with God, for and on the behalf of the Church. (5) It offers violence unto the Text; For herein Christ's offering of him∣self is expressive of the way whereby his Blood purgeth our Consciences, which in their sense is excluded. But we may observe unto our pur∣pose, 1. This was the greatest expression of the unexpressible love of Christ; he of∣fered himself: What was required thereunto, what he underwent therein, have on various occasions been spoken unto. His condescension and love in the undertaking and discharge of this work, we inay, we ought to admire, but we cannot comprehend. And they do what lies in them to weaken the Faith of the Church in him, and its love towards him, who would change the Na∣ture of his Sacrifice in the offering of himself, who would make less of diffi∣culty or suffering in it, or ascribe less efficacy unto it. This is the foundation of our faith and boldness in approaching unto God, that Christ hath offered himself for us. Whatsoever might be effected by the glorious dignity of his Divine Person, by his profound Obedience, by his unspeakable Sufferings, all offered as a Sacrifice unto God in our behalf, is really accomplished. 2. It is hence evident, how vain and insufficient are all other ways of the expi∣ation of sin, with the purging of our consciences before God. The sum of all false Religion consisted always in contrivances for the expiation of sin, what is false in any Religion hath respect principally thereunto. And as Superstition is restless, so the Inventions of men have been endless, in finding out means unto this end. But if any thing within the power or ability of men, any thing they could invent or accomplish, had been useful unto this end, there would have been no need that the Son of God should have offered himself. To this purpose, see Chap. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8. Micah 6. 8, 9. 2dly, The next thing in the words, is unto whom he offered himself, that is . to God. He gave himself an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God. A Sacrifice is the highest and chiefest Act of Sacred Worship; especially it must be so, when one offereth himself according unto the Will of God. God as God, or the Divine Nature, is the proper Object of all Religious Worship, unto whom as such alone, any Sacrifice may be offered. To offer Sacrifice unto any, under any other Notion, but as he is God, is the highest Idolatry: But an offering an expiatory Sacrifice for Sin, is made to God as God, under a peculiar Notion or Consideration. For God is therein considered as the Author of the Law against which Sin is committed, as the Supreme Ruler and Governor of all un∣to whom it belongs to inflict the punishment which is due unto sin. For the end of such Sacrifices is averruncare malum, to avert displeasure and punish∣ment, by making atonement for sin. With respect hereunto, the Divine Na∣ture is considered, as peculiarly subsisting in the person of the Father. For so is he constantly represented unto our Faith, as the Judge of all, Heb. 12. 23. With him, as such, the Lord Christ had to do in the offering of himself, con∣cerning which, see our Exposition on Chap. 5. v. 7. It is said if Christ was God himself, how could he offer himself unto God? That one and the same Person should be the Offerer, the Oblation, and he unto whom it is offered, seems not so much a mystery, as a weak imagination. Ans. 1. If there were one Nature onely in the Person of Christ, it may be this might seem impertinent. Howbeit there may be cases, wherein the same individual Person, under several capacities, as of a good man on the one hand, and a Ruler or Judge on the other, may for the benefit of the Publick, and the preservation of the Laws of the Community, both give and take satisfaction himself. But whereas in the one Person of Christ there are two Natures so infinitely distinct as they are, both acting under such distinct capacities as they
did, there is nothing unbecoming this mystery of God, that the one of them might be offered unto the other. But, 2. It is not the same Person that offereth the Sacrifice, and unto whom it is offered. For it is the Person of the Father, or the Divine Nature, con∣sidered as acting it self in the Person of the Father unto whom the Offering was made. And although the Person of the Son is Partaker of the same Na∣ture with the Father, yet that Nature is not the object of this Divine Wor∣ship as in him, but as in the Person of the Father. Wherefore the Son did not formally offer himself unto himself, but unto God, as acting Supreme Rule, Go∣vernment and Judgment in the Person of the Father. As these things are plainly and fully testified unto in the Scripture, so the way to come unto a blessed satisfaction in them, unto the due use and com∣fort of them, is not to consult the cavils of carnal wisdom, but to pray that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, would give unto us the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the knowledge of him, that the eyes of our understandings being enlightned, we may come unto the full assurance of under∣standing, to the acknowledgment of the mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ. 3dly, How he offered himself is also expressed, it was by the eternal Spi∣rit. By, . It denotes a concurrent operation, when one works with an∣other. . Nor doth it always denote a subservient instrumental cause, but sometimes that which is principally efficient, John 1. 5. Rom. 11. 34. Heb. 1. 2. So it doth here; the eternal Spirit was not an inferior instrument whereby Christ offered himself, but it was the principal efficient cause in the work. The Variety that is in the reading of this place, is taken notice of by all. . Some Copies read by the Eternal Spirit, some, by the Holy Spirit; the latter is the reading of the Vulgar Translation, and countenanced by sundry ancient Copies of the Original. The Syriac retains, the Eternal Spirit, which also is the reading of most ancient Copies of the Greek. Hence follows a double interpretation of the words; some say, that the Lord Christ offered himself unto God, in and by the acting of the Holy Ghost in his Humane Nature. For by him were wrought in him that servent zeal unto the glory of God, that love and compassion unto the souls of men, which both carried him through his sufferings, and rendered his obedience therein acceptable unto God as a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor; which work of the Holy Spirit in the Humane Nature of Christ, I have elsewhere declared. Others say, that his own Eternal Deity, which supported him in his sufferings, and rendred the Sa∣crifice of himself effectual, is intended. But this will not absolutely follow to be the sense of the place upon the common reading, by the Eternal Spirit. For the Holy Spirit is no less an Eternal Spirit, than is the Deity of Christ him∣self. The truth is, both these concurred in, and were absolutely necessary unto, the offering of Christ. The acting of his own Eternal Spirit was so unto the efficacy and effect. And those of the Holy Ghost in him were so, as unto the manner of it. Without the first, his offering of himself could not have purged our Consciences from dead works. No Sacrifice of any meer creature could have produced that effect. It would not have had in itself a worth and dignity whereby we might have been discharged of sin unto the glory of God. Nor without the subsistence of the Humane Nature in the Divine Person of the Son of God, could it have undergone and passed through unto victory, what it was to suffer in this offering of it. Wherefore this sense of the words is true. Christ offered himself unto God, through or by his own Eternal Spirit, the Divine Nature acting in the person of . the Son. For (1) it was an Act of his entire Person, wherein he discharged the office of a Priest. And as his Humane Nature was the Sacrifice, so his Person was the Priest that offered it, which is the only distinction that was between the Priest and Sacrifice herein. As in all other Acts of his Mediation, the ta∣king
our nature upon him, and what he did therein, the Divine Person of the Son, the Eternal Spirit in him, acted in love and condescension; so did it in this also, of his offering himself. (2) As we observed before, hereby he gave dignity, worth and efficacy unto the Sacrifice of himself. For herein God was to purchase his Church with his own blood. And this seems to be principally respected by the Apostle. For he intends to declare herein, the dignity and efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, in opposition unto those under the Law. For it was in the will of man, and by material fire, that they were all offered. But he offered himself by the Eternal Spirit, voluntarily giving up his Humane Nature to be a Sacrifice, in an Act of his Divine Power. (3) The Eternal Spirit is here opposed unto the Material Altar, as well as unto the Fire. The Altar was that whereon the Sacrifice was laid, which bore it up in its Oblation and Ascension. But the Eternal Spirit of Christ was the Altar whereon he offered himself. This supported, and bore it up under its sufferings, whereon it was presented unto God as an acceptable Sacrifice. Wherefore this reading of the words gives a sense that is true and proper unto the matter treated of. But on the other side it is no less certain that he of∣fered himself in his Humane Nature by the Holy Ghost. All the gracious act∣ings of his mind and will were required hereunto. The Man Christ Iesus, in the gracious voluntary acting of all the faculties of his Soul, offered himself unto God. His Humane Nature was not only the matter of the Sacrifice, but therein and thereby, in the gracious actings of the faculties and powers of it, he offered himself unto God. Now all these things were wrought in him by the Holy Spirit wherewith he was filled, which he received not by measure. By him was he filled with that love and compassion unto the Church, which acted him in his whole Mediation, and which the Scripture so frequently proposeth unto our Faith herein. He loved me, and gave himself for me. He loved the Church, and gave himself for it. He loved us, and washed us in his own blood. By him there was wrought in him that zeal unto the glory of God, the fire whereof kindled his Sacrifice in an eminent manner. For he designed with ar∣dency of love to God, above his own life, and present state of his Soul, to declare his righteousness, to repair the diminution of his glory, and to make such way for the communication of his love and grace to sinners, that he might be eternally glorified. He gave him that holy submission unto the Will of God, under a prospect of the bitterness of that Cup which he was to drink, as en∣abled him to say in the height of his conflict, Not my Will, but thy Will be done. He filled him with that faith and trust in God, as unto his supportment, deliverance and success, which carried him steadily and safely unto the issue of his tryal, Isa. 50. 7, 8, 9. Through the actings of these graces of the Holy Spirit in the Humane Nature, his offering of himself was a free voluntary Ob∣lation and Sacrifice. I shall not positively determine on either of these Senses unto the exclusion of the other. The latter hath much of spiritual light and comfort in it on many accounts: But yet I must acknowledge that there are two Considerati∣ons, that peculiarly urge the former interpretation. 1. The most, and most ancient Copies of the Original read by the Eternal Spi∣rit; and are followed by the Syriac, with all the Greck Scholists. Now al∣though the Holy Spirit be also an Eternal Spirit in the unity of the same Di∣vine Nature with the Father and the Son, yet where he is spoken of with re∣spect unto his own personal actings, he is constantly called the Holy Spirit, and not as here, the Eternal Spirit. 2. The design of the Apostle is to prove the efficacy of the Offering of Christ above those of the Priests under the Law. Now this arose from hence, partly that he offered himself, whereas they offered only the blood of Bulls and Goats; but principally from the dignity of his Person in his Offering, in that he offered himself by his own Eternal Spirit, or Divine Nature. But I shall leave the Rea∣der to chuse whether sense he judgeth suitable unto the scope of the place, either of them being so unto the Analogy of Faith.
The Socinians understanding that both these Interpretations are equally destructive to their Opinions, the one concerning the Person of Christ, the other about the Nature of the Holy Ghost, have invented a sense of these words never before heard of among Christians. For they say that by the Eternal Spirit, a certain Divine Power is intended, whereby the Lord Christ was freed from Mortality, and made Eternal, that is, no more obnoxious unto death. By virtue of this Power, they say, he offered himself unto God when he entred in∣to Heaven; than which nothing can be spoken more fond or impious, or con∣trary unto the design of the Apostle. For, (1) Such a Power as they pretend, is no where called the Spirit, much less the Eternal Spirit; and to feign significations of words without any counte∣nance from their use elsewhere, is to wrest them at our pleasure. (2) The Apostle is so far from requiring a Divine Power rendering him immortal antecedently unto the offering of himself; as that he declares that he offered himself by the Eternal Spirit in his death, when he shed his blood, whereby our consciences are purged from dead works. (3) This Divine Power rendering Christ immortal is not peculiar unto him, but shall be communicated unto all that are raised unto glory at the last day. And there is no colour of an opposition herein unto what was done by the High Priests of old. (4) It proceeds on their  in this matter; which is, that the Lord Christ offered not himself unto God, before he was made immortal; which is utterly to exclude his death and blood from any concernment therein, which is as contrary unto the truth and scope of the place, as darkness is to light. (5) Wherever there is mention made elsewhere in the Scripture of the Holy Spirit, or the Eternal Spirit, or the Spirit absolutely with reference unto any actings of the Person of Christ, or on it, either the Holy Spirit, or his own Divine Nature is intended. See Isa. 61. 1, 2. Rom. 1. 3. 1 Pet. 3. 18. Wherefore Grotius forsakes this Notion, and otherwise explains the words. Spiritus Christi qui non tantum fuit vivus ut in vita terrena, sed in aeternum cor∣pus sibi adjunctum vivificans. If there be any sense in these words, it is the rational Soul of Christ that is intended. And it is most true, that the Lord Christ offered himself in and by the actings of it. For there are no other in the Humane Nature, as to any duties of obedience unto God. But that this here should be called the Eternal Spirit, is a vain conjecture. For the spirits of all men are equally eternal, and do not only live here below, but quicken their Bodies after the Resurrection for ever. This therefore cannot be the ground of the especial efficacy of the blood of Christ. This is the second thing wherein the Apostle opposeth the Offering of Christ unto the offerings of the Priests under the Law. (1) They offered Bulls and Goats; He offered Himself. (2) They offered by a material Altar and Fire, He by the Eternal Spirit. That Christ should thus offer Himself unto God, and that by the Eternal Spirit, is the center of the mystery of the Gospel. An attempt to corrupt, to per∣vert this glorious Truth, are designs against the Glory of God, and Faith of the Church. The depth of this mystery we cannot dive into, the height we cannot comprehend. We cannot search out the greatness of it; of the wisdom, the love, the grace that is in it. And those who chuse rather to reject it, than to live by Faith in an humble admiration of it, do it at the peril of their souls. Unto the Reason of some men it may be Folly, unto Faith it is full of Glory. In the consideration of the Divine Actings of the Eternal Spirit of Christ in the offering of himself, of the holy exercise of all grace in the humane nature that was offered, of the nature, dignity and efficacy of this Sacrifice, Faith finds life, food, and refreshment. Herein doth it contemplate the wisdom, the righteousness, the holiness and grace of God; herein doth it view the won∣derful condescension and love of Christ, and from the whole is strengthned and encouraged.
Thirdly, It is added that he thus offered himself, without spot. This Ad∣junct is descriptive not of the Priest, but of the Sacrifice; it is not a qualifi∣cation . of his Person, but of the Offering. Schlictingius would have it, that this word denotes not what Christ was in him∣self, but what he was freed from. For now in Heaven where he offered him∣self, he is freed from all infirmities, and from any spot of mortality, which the High Priest was not when he entered into the Holy Place; such irrational fan∣cies do false Opinions force men to take up withal. But, (1) There was no spot in the mortality of Christ, that he should be said to be freed from it, when he was made immortal. A spot signifies not so much a desect as a fault. And there was no fault in Christ from which he was freed. (2) The Allusion and respect herein unto the legal institutions is evident and manifest. The Lamb that was to be slain and offered was antecedently thereunto, to be without blemish; it was to be neither lame, nor blind, nor have any other defect. With express respect hereunto, the Apostle Peter affirms, that we were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 18. And Christ is not only called the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the world, John 1. 29. that is, by his being slain and offered; but is represented in the worship of the Church as a Lamb slain, Rev. 5. 6. It is therefore to offer violence unto the Scripture and common un∣derstanding, to seek for this qualification any where but in the humane nature of Christ, antecedently unto his death and blood-shedding. Wherefore this expression, without spot, respects in the first place the puri∣ty of his Nature, and the holiness of his Life. For although this principally be∣longed unto the necessary qualifications of his Person, yet were they required unto him as he was to be the Sacrifice. He was the Holy One of God, holy, barmless, undefiled, separate from sinners; he did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; he was without spot. This is the moral sense and signification of the word. But there is a legal sense of it also. It is that which is meet and fit to be a Sacrifice. For it respects all that was signified by the legal institution concerning the integrity and perfection of the Creatures, Lambs or Kids that were to be sacrificed. Hence were all those Laws fulfilled and accomplished. There was nothing in him, nothing wanting unto him, that should any way hinder his Sacrifice from being accepted with God, and really expiatory of Sin. And this was the Church instructed to expect by all those legal Insti∣tutions. It may be not unuseful to give here a brief Scheme of this great Sacrifice of Christ, to fix the thoughts of Faith the more distinctly upon it. 1. God herein, in the Person of the Father, is considered as the Law-giver, the Governor and Judge of all, and that as on a Throne of Judgment, the Throne of grace being not as yet erected. And two things are ascribed, or do belong unto him. (1) A Denunciation of the sentence of the Law against Mankind; Dying ye shall dye, and cursed be every one that continues not in all things written in the Law to do them. (2) A Resusal of all such ways of Atonement, Satisfaction, and Recon∣ciliation that might be offered from any thing, that all or any creatures could perform; sacrifice and offerings, and whole burnt-offerings for sin he would not have, Heb. 10. 5, 6. he rejected them as insufficient to make Atonement for sin. 2. Satan appeared before this Throne with his Prisoners; he had the power of death, Heb. 2. 14. and entered into judgment as unto his right and title, and therein was judged, John 16. 11. And he put forth all his power and policy in opposition unto the deliverance of his Prisoners, and to the way or means of it. That was his hour wherein he put forth the power of darkness, Luke 22. 53. 3. The Lord Christ the Son of God, out of his infinite love and compassion appears in our Natures before the Throne of God, and takes it on himself to an∣swer
for the sins of all the Elect, to make Atonement for them, by doing and suf∣fering whatever the holiness, righteousness and wisdom of God required thereunto. Then said I, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God; Above when he said Sacrifice and Offerings, and Burnt-offerings for sin thou wouldst not, neither hadst pleasure therein, which are offered by the Law; then said he, Lo I come to do thy Will, O God; he taketh away the first, that he might establish the second, Heb. 10. 7, 8, 9. 4. This stipulation and engagement of his, God accepteth of, and withal as the sovereign Lord and Ruler of all, prescribeth the way and means whereby he should make Atonement for sin, and Reconciliation with God thereon. And this was that he should make his soul an offering for sin, and therein bear their iniqui∣ties, Isa. 53. 10, 11. 5. The Lord Christ was prepared with a Sacrifice to offer unto God, unto this end. For whereas every High Priest was ordained to offer Gifts and Sacrifices, it was of necessity that he also should have somewhat to offer, Heb. 8. 3. This was not to be the Blood of Bulls and Goats, or such things as were offered by the Law, ver. 4. But this was, and was to be himself, his humane nature, or his body. For (1) this body or humane nature was prepared for him, and given unto him for this very end, that he might have somewhat of his own to offer, Heb. 10. 5. (2) He took it, he assumed it unto himself to be his own, for this very end, that he might be a sacrifice in it, Heb. 2. 14. (3) He had full power and authority over his own body, his whole humane nature, to dispose of it in any way, and into any condition, unto the glory of God. No man, saith he, taketh my life from me, I lay it down of my self, I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again, John 10. 18. 6. This therefore he gave up to do and suffer according unto the Will of God. And this he did, (1) In the Will, Grace and Love of his Divine Nature, he offered himself unto God through the eternal Spirit. (2) In the gracious holy actings of his humane nature, in the way of zeal, love, obedience, patience, and all other graces of the Holy Spirit, which dwelt in him without measure, acted unto their utmost glory and efficacy. Hereby he gave himself up unto God to be a Sacrifice for Sin, his own Divine Nature be∣ing the Altar and Fire, whereby his Offering was supported and confirmed, or brought unto the Ashes of Death. This was the most glorious spectacle unto God, and all his holy Angels. Hereby he set a Crown of Glory on the head of the Law, fulfilling its precepts in matter and manner unto the uttermost, and undergoing its penalty or curse, establishing the truth and righteousness of God in it. Hereby he glorified the holiness and justice of God, in the demonstration of their nature and compliance with their demands. Herein issued the eter∣nal Councils of God for the salvation of the Church, and way was made for the exercise of grace, and mercy unto sinners. For, 7. Herewith God was well pleased, satisfied and reconciled unto sinners. Thus was he in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing our sins un∣to us, in that he was made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in him. For in this tender of himself a Sacrifice to God, 1. God was well pleased with and delighted in his obedience; it was a Sacrifice unto him of a well-smelling savor. He was more glorified in that one instance of the Obedience of his onely Son, than he was dishonoured by the sin of Adam, and all his Posterity, as I have elsewhere declared. 2. All the demands of his Justice were satisfied, unto his eternal glory. Wherefore, 8. Hereon Satan is judged, and destroyed as unto his power over sinners, who receive this Atonement, all the grounds and occasions of it are hereby remo∣ved, his Kingdom is overthrown, his Usurpation and unjust Dominion defeated, his Arms spoiled, and Captivity led captive. For of the anger of the Lord against sin it was that he obtained his power over sinners, which he abused un∣to
his own ends. This being atoned, the Prince of this world was judged and cast out. 9. Hereon the poor condemned sinners are discharged. God says deliver them, for I have found a ransom. But we must return to the Text. The effect of the Blood of Christ through the offering of himself, is the purging of our Consciences from dead works. This was somewhat spoken unto in general before, especially as unto the nature of this purging. But the words require a more particular Explication. And, The word is in the Future Tense, Shall purge. The blood of Christ as of∣fered . hath a double respect and effect. (1) Towards God, in making Atonement for sin. This was done once, and at once, and was now past. Herein by one Offering he for ever perfected them that are sanctified. (2) Towards the Consciences of men, in the application of the vertue of it unto them; this is here intended. And this is expressed as future; not as though it had not this effect already on them that did believe, but upon a double account. 1. To declare the certainty of the event, or the infallible connexion of these things, the blood of Christ, and the purging of the Conscience; that is, in all that betake themselves thereunto. It shall do it; that is, effectually and infallibly. 2. Respect is had herein unto the generality of the Hebrews, whether already professing the Gospel, or now invited unto it. And he proposeth this unto them as the advantage they should be made partakers of, by the relin∣quishment of Mosaical Ceremonies, and betaking themselves unto the Faith of the Gospel. For whereas before by the best of legal Ordinances, they attain∣ed no more but an outward sanctification as unto the flesh, they should now have their Conscience infallibly purged from dead works. Hence it is said, your Conscience. Some Copies read , our. But there is . no difference in the sense. I shall retain the common reading, as that which refers unto the Hebrews, who had been always exercised unto thoughts of Purification and Sanctification by one means or another. For the Explication of the words we must enquire, (1) What is meant by dead works. (2) What is their relation unto Conscience. (3) How Con∣science is purged of them by the blood of Christ. 1. By dead works, sins as unto their guilt and defilement are intended, as all . acknowledge. And several Reasons are given why they are so called. As, (1) Because they proceed from a principle of spiritual death, or are the works of them who have no vital principle of holiness in them, Eph. 2. 1, 5. Col. 2. 13. (2) Because they are useless and fruitless, as all dead things are. (3) They deserve death, and tend thereunto. Hence they are like rotten bones in the Grave, accompanied with worms and corruption. And these things are true. Howbeit I judge there is a peculiar reason why the Apostle calls them dead works in this place. For there is an allusion herein unto dead bodies, and legal defilement by them. For he hath respect unto Purification by the Ashes of the Heifer. And this respected principally uncleanness by the dead, as is fully declared in the institution of that Ordinance. As men were purified by the sprinkling of the Ashes of an Heifer mingled with living water from defilements contracted by the dead, without which they were separated from God and the Church; so, unless men are really purged from their moral defile∣ments by the blood of Christ, they must perish for ever. Now this defilement from the dead, as we have shewed, arose from hence, that Death was the ef∣fect of the Curse of the Law; wherefore the guilt of sin with respect unto the Curse of the Law, is here intended in the first place, and consequently its pollution. This gives us the state of all men who are not interessed in the Sacrifice of Christ, and the purging vertue thereof. As they are dead in themselves, dead
in trespasses and sins; so all their works are dead works: Other works they have none. They are as a Sepulchre filled with bones and corruption. Every thing they do is unclean in it self, and unclean unto them. Unto them that are defiled nothing is pure, but even their mind and conscience is defiled, Tit. 1. 15. Their works come from spiritual death, and tend unto eternal death, and are dead in themselves. Let them deck and trim their carkases whil'st they please, let them end their faces with paintings, and multiply their ornaments with all excess of bravery; within they are full of dead bones, of rotten, defiled, polluting works. That world which appears with so much outward beauty, lustre and glory, is all polluted and defiled under the eye of the most Holy. 2. These dead works are further described by their relation unto our persons, . as unto what is peculiarly affected with them, where they have, as it were, their seat and residence: And this is the Conscience. He doth not say purge your souls, or your minds, or your persons, but your conscience. And this he doth, (1) In general, in opposition unto the purification by the Law. It was there the dead body that did defile, it was the body that was defiled; it was the body that was purified; those Ordinances sanctified to the purifying of the flesh. But the defilements here intended are spiritual, internal, relating unto Conscience, and therefore such is the purification also. (2) He mentions the respect of these dead works unto Conscience in particu∣lar, because it is Conscience which is concerned in peace with God, and confi∣dence of approach unto him. Sin variously affects all the faculties of the soul, and there is in it a peculiar defilement of Conscience, Tit. 1. 15. But that wherein Conscience in the first place is concerned, and wherein it is alone con∣cerned, is a sense of guilt. This brings along with it fear and dread, whence the sinner dares not approach into the presence of God. It was Conscience which reduced Adam into the condition of hiding himself from God, his eyes being opened by a sense of the guilt of sin. So he that was unclean by the touching of a dead body, was excluded from all approach unto God in his wor∣ship. Hereunto the Apostle alludes in the following words, That we may serve the living God. For the word , properly denotes that service which consists in the observation and performance of solemn worship. As he who was unclean by a dead body, might not approach unto the worship of God un∣til he was purified: So a guilty sinner whose Conscience is affected with a sense of the guilt of sin, dares not to draw nigh unto, or appear in the presence of God. It is by the working of Conscience that sin deprives the soul of peace with God, of boldness or confidence before him, of all right to draw nigh un∣to him. Until this relation of sin unto the Conscience be taken away, until there be no more conscience of sin, as the Apostle speaks, Chap. 10. 2. that is, Con∣science absolutely judging and condemning the person of the sinner in the sight of God, there is no right, no liberty of access unto God in his service, nor any acceptance to be obtained with him. Wherefore the purging of Conscience from dead works, doth first respect the guilt of sin, and the vertue of the blood of Christ in the removal of it. But 2dly, there is also an inherent defilement of Conscience by sin, as of all other faculties of the soul. Hereby it is ren∣dred unmeet for the discharge of its office in any particular duties. With re∣spect hereunto Conscience is here used Synecdochically for the whole soul, and all the faculties of it, yea, our whole spirit, souls and bodies, which are all to be cleansed and sanctified, 1 Thes. 5. 23. To purge our Conscience, is to purge us in our whole persons. This being the state of our Conscience, this being the respect of dead works, and their defilement to it and us, we may consider the relief that is necessary in this case, and what that is which is here proposed. 1. Unto a compleat relief in this condition, two things are necessary. (1) A discharge of Conscience from a sense of the guilt of sin, or the con∣demning power of it, whereby it deprives us of peace with God, and of boldness in access unto him. (2) The cleansing of the Conscience, and consequently our whole persons
from the inherent defilement of sin. The first of these was typified by the blood of Bulls and Goats offered on the Altar, to make Atonement. The latter was represented by the sprinkling of the unclean with the Ashes of the Heiser unto their purification. Both these the Apostle here expresly ascribes unto the Blood of Christ, and we may briefly enquire into three things concerning it. (1) On what ground it doth produce this blessed effect. (2) The way of its operation and efficacy unto this end. (3) The Reason whence the Apostle affirms that it shall much more do this, than the legal Ordinances could, sanctifying unto the purifying of the flesh. 1. The grounds of its efficacy unto this purpose are three. (1.) That it was Blood offered unto God. God had ordained that Blood should be offered on the Altar to make Atonement for sin, or to purge Con∣science from dead works. That this could not be really effected by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, is evident in the nature of the things themselves, and de∣monstrated in the event. Howbeit this must be done by Blood, or all the in∣stitution of legal Sacrifices were nothing but means to deceive the minds of men, and ruine their souls. To say that at one time or other, real Atonement is not to be made for Sin by Blood, and Conscience thereby to be purged and pu∣rified, is to make God a Lyar in all the Institutions of the Law. But this must be done by the Blood of Christ, or not at all. (2) It was the Blood of Christ. Of Christ, the Son of the living God, Mat. 16. 18. whereby God purchased his Church with his own Blood, Acts 20. 28. The dignity of his Person gave efficacy unto his Office and Offering. No other per∣son in the discharge of the same Offices that were committed unto him, could have saved the Church; and therefore all those by whom his Divine Person is denied, do also evacuate his Offices. By what they ascribe unto them, it is im∣possible the Church should be either sanctified or saved. They resolve all in∣to a meer Act of Sovereign Power in God, which make the Cross of Christ of none effect. (3) He offered this Blood or himself by the eternal Spirit. Though Christ in his Divine Person was the Eternal Son of God, yet was it the humane nature only that was offered in Sacrifice. Howbeit it was offered by and with the concurrent actings of the Divine Nature, or Eternal Spirit, as we have de∣clared. These things make the Blood of Christ as offered, meet and fit for the accomplishment of this great effect. 2. The second Enquiry, is concernig the way whereby the Blood of Christ doth thus purge our Conscience from dead works. Two things, as we have seen, are contained therein. (1) The expiation, or taking away the guilt of sin, that Conscience should not be deterred thereby from an access unto God. (2) The cleansing of our souls from vicious defiling habits, inclinations and acts, or all inherent uncleanness. Wherefore under two considerations doth the Blood of Christ produce this double effect. First, As it was offered; so it made Atonement for Sin, by giving satisfacti∣on unto the Justice and Law of God. This all the expiatory Sacrifices of the Law did prefigure, this the Prophets foretold, and this the Gospel witnesseth unto. To deny it, is to deny any real efficacy in the Blood of Christ unto this end, and so expresly to contradict the Apostle. Sin is not purged from the Con∣science, unless the guilt of it be so removed, as that we may have peace with God, and boldness in access unto him. This is given us by the Blood of Christ as offered. Secondly, As it is sprinkled, it worketh the second part of this effect. And this sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, is the communication of its sanctifying ver∣tue unto our souls, see Eph. 5. 26, 27. Tit. 2. 14. so doth the Blood of Christ the Son of God cleanse us from all our sins, 1 John 1. 7. Zech. 13. 2. 3. The Reason why the Apostle affirms that this is much more to be expected from the Blood of Christ, than the Purification of the Flesh was from legal Ordinances hath been before spoken unto.
The Socinians plead on this place, that this effect of the death of Christ doth as unto us depend on our own duty. If they intended no more, but that there is duty required on our part unto an actual participation of it, namely Faith, whereby we receive the Atonement, we should have no difference with them. But they are otherwise minded. This purging of the conscience from dead works, they would have to consist in two things. (1) Our own relinquishment of sin. (2) The freeing us from the punishment due to sin, by an act of power in Christ in Heaven. The first they say hath therein respect unto the blood of Christ; in that thereby his doctrine was confirmed in obedience whereunto we forsake sin, and purge our minds from it. The latter also relates thereunto, in that the sufferings of Christ were antecedent unto his Exaltation, and Power in Heaven. Where∣fore this effect of the blood of Christ, is what we do our selves in obedience unto his doctrine, and what he doth thereon by his power, and therefore may well be said to depend on our duty. But all this while there is nothing ascribed unto the blood of Christ, as it was offered in Sacrifice unto God, or shed in the offering of himself, which alone the Apostle speaks unto in this place. Others chuse thus to oppose it. This purging of our consciences from dead works, is not an immediate effect of the death of Christ; but it is a benefit con∣tained therein, which upon our faith and obedience we are made partakers of. But, (1) This is not, in my judgment, to interpret the Apostles words with due reverence; he affirms expresly, that the blood of Christ doth purge our con∣science from dead works, that is, it doth make such an Atonement for sin, and Expiation of it, as that conscience shall be no more pressed with it, nor con∣demn the sinner for it. (2) The blood of Christ is the immediate cause of every effect assigned unto it, where there is no concurrent nor intermediate cause of the same kind with it in the production of that effect. (3) It is granted that the actual communication of this effect of the death of Christ unto our Souls is wrought according unto the method which God in his sovereign wisdom and pleasure hath designed. And herein (1) the Lord Christ by his blood made actual and absolute Atonement for the sins of all the Elect. (2) This Atonement is proposed unto us in the Gospel, Rom. 3. 25. (3) It is required of us unto an actual participation of the benefit of it, and peace with God thereby, that we receive this atonement by faith, Rom. 5. 11. but as wrought with God, it is the immediate effect of the blood of Christ. The last thing in these words, is the consequent of this purging of our con∣sciences, or the advantage which we receive thereby. To serve the living God. The words should be rendred, that we may serve; that is, have right and liber∣ty so to do, being no longer excluded from the priviledge of it, as persons were under the Law whilest they were defiled and unclean. And three things are required unto the opening of these words, that we consider (1) why God is here called the living God; (2) What it is to serve him; (3) What is re∣quired that we may do so. 1. God in the Scripture is called the living God. (1) Absolutely; and that (1) As he alone hath life in himself, and of him∣self.  (2) As he is the onely Author and cause of life unto all others. (2) Comparatively; with respect unto Idols and false Gods, which are dead things; such as have neither life nor operation. And this Title is in the Scri∣pture applied unto God. (1) To beget faith and trust in him, as the Author of temporal, spiritual, and eternal life, with all things that depend thereon, 1 Tim. 1. 10. (2) To beget a due fear and reverence of him, as he who lives and sees, who hath all life in his power; so it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. And this Epistle being written principally to warn the He∣brews of the danger of Unbelief and Apostasie from the Gospel, the Apostle in several places makes mention of God with whom they had to do, under
this title, as Chap. 3. 12. Chap. 10. 31. and in this place. But there is some∣thing peculiar in the mention of it in this place. For (1) the due conside∣ration of God as the living God, will discover how necessary it is that we be purged from dead works, to serve him in a due manner. (2) The nature of Gospel-worship and service is intimated to be such, as becomes the living God, our reasonable service, Rom. 12. 1. 2. What is it to serve the living God? I doubt not but the whole life . of Faith in universal obedience, is consequentially required hereunto. That we may live unto the living God in all ways of holy obedience, not any one act or duty of it can be performed as it ought, without the antecedent purging of our consciences from dead works. But yet it is sacred and solemn worship that is intended in the first place. They had of old sacred Ordinances of wor∣ship, or of Divine Service. From all these those that were unclean were ex∣cluded, and restored unto them upon their purification. There is a solemn spi∣ritual worship of God under the New Testament also, and Ordinances for the due observance of it. This none have a right to approach unto God by, none can do so in a due manner, unless their conscience be purged by the blood of Christ. And the whole of our relation unto God depends hereon. For as we therein express or testifie the subjection of our souls and consciences unto him, and solemnly engage into universal obedience, (for of these things all acts of outward worship are the solemn pledges;) so therein doth God testifie his ac∣ceptance of us, and delight in us by Jesus Christ. 3. What is required on our part hereunto, is included in the manner of the . expression of it, , that we may serve. And two things are requi∣red hereunto. 1. Liberty. 2. Ability. The first includes right and boldness, and is expressed by , our holy worship is , an access with freedom and confidence. This we must treat of on Chap. 10. v. 19, 20, 21. The other respects all the supplies of the holy Spirit, in grace and gifts. Both these we receive by the blood of Christ, that we may be meet and able in a due manner to serve the living God. We may yet take some obser∣vations from the words. 1. Faith hath ground of Triumph in the certain efficacy of the blood of Christ for the expiation of sin. [How much more.] The Holy Ghost here and else∣where teacheth Faith to argue it self into a full assurance. The reasonings which he proposeth, and insisteth unto this end are admirable, Rom. 8. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Many Objections will arise against believing, ma∣ny difficulties do lie in its way. By them are the generality of Believers left under doubts, fears and temptations all their days. One great relief provi∣ded in this case, is a direction to argue à minore ad majus; If the blood of Bulls and Goats did so purifie the unclean, how much more will the blood of Christ purge our Consciences? How heavenly, how divine is that way of arguing unto this end, which our blessed Saviour proposeth unto us, in the Parable of the un∣just Judge and the Widow, Luke 18. 1, 2, 3. And in that other, of the man and his friend that came to seek bread by night, Chap. 11. 5, 6, 7. Who can read them, but his Soul is surprized into some kind of confidence of being heard in his supplication, if in any measure compliant with the Rule prescribed? And the Argument here managed by the Apostle leaves no room for doubt or ob∣jection. Would we be more diligent in the same way of the exercise of Faith, by arguings and expostulations upon Scripture Principles; we should be more firm in our assent unto the Conclusions which arise from them, and be enabled more to triumph against the assault of unbelief. 2. Nothing could expiate sin and free conscience from dead works, but the blood of Christ alone, and that in the offering himself to God through the eternal Spirit. The redemption of the souls of men is precious, and must have ceased for ever, had not infinite wisdom found out this way for its accomplishment. The work was too great for any other to undertake, or for any other means to effect. And the glory of God is hid herein, only unto them that perish.
3. It was God as the Supreme Ruler and Lawgiver, with whom atonement for sin was to be made, [He offered himself unto God.] It was he whose Law was violated, whose Justice was provoked; to whom it belonged to require and re∣ceive satisfaction. And who was meet to tender it unto him, but the man that was his Fellow, who gave efficacy unto his oblation by the dignity of his Per∣son? In the contemplation of the glory of God herein, the life of Faith doth principally consist. 4. The Souls and Consciences of men are wholly polluted, before they are purged by the blood of Christ. And this Pollution is such, as excludes them from all right of access unto God in his worship, as it was with them who were le∣gally unclean. 5. Even the best works of men, antecedently unto the purging of their Con∣sciences by the blood of Christ, are but dead works. However men may please themselves in them, perhaps think to merit by them, yet from death they come, and unto death they tend. 6. Justification and Sanctification are inseparably conjoined in the design of God's grace by the blood of Christ. Purge our Consciences that we may serve the living God. 7. Gospel-worship is such in its spirituality and holiness, as becometh the living God; and our duty it is always to consider, that with him we have to do in all that we perform therein.
VER. XV. . , Vul. Et ideo; and therefore; Syr.  propter hoc, For this; or propterea, itaque ob id; And for this cause. Syr. ; He himself was the Mediator. He is the Mediator. Heb. ; A man coming between. Vul. ut morte intercedente; by the Interposition of death. The Syriac reads the passage; who by his death was a redeemer unto them who had transgressed against the first Testament; probably to avoid the difficulty of that Expression: For the Redemption of transgressions. The Aethiopic corrupts the whole Text. , In Redemptionem eorum praevaricationum. Vul. Ad Redemptionem eorum transgressionum; properly, for the Redemption of trans∣gressions, or those transgressions which were. , Vul. Syr. That they may receive the promise who are call∣ed to the eternal Inheritance. But in the Original and in the Vulgar, eternal inhe∣ritance is joyned unto and regulated by the Promise; the promise of an eternal Inheritance. VER. XV. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of death, for the Redemption of the transgressions under the first Testa∣ment, they who are called might receive the promise of eternal Inhe∣ritance. THe things which are to be considered in this verse are, (1) The note of Connexion in the Conjunction; And. (2) The Ground of the ensuing Assertion. For this cause. (3) The Assertion itself. He is the Mediator of the new Testament. (4) The especial Reason why he should be so. For the Re∣demption of Transgressions under the first Testament. (5) The way whereby that was to be effected. By the means of death. (6) The End of the whole; That those who are called might receive the promise of eternal Inheritance. But before we proceed unto the Exposition of the whole or any part of it, a difficulty must be removed from the words as they lie in our Translation: For an enquiry may be justly moved, why we render the word  by a Testament in this place, whereas before we have constantly rendred it by a Covenant. And the plain reason of it is, because from this verse unto the end of the Chapter, the Apostle argues from the nature and use of a Testament among men, as he directly affirms in the next verse. Hereby he confirms our faith in the expectation of the Benefits of this , that is Covenant or Testament. We may answer he doth it because it is the true and proper sig∣nification of the word.  is properly a Testamentary disposition of things; as  is a Covenant. For in the Composition of the word there is nothing to intimate a mutual compact or agreement, which is necessary unto a Covenant; and is expressed in . However there is a great affinity in the things themselves: For there are Covenants which have in them free Grants and Donations, which is of the nature of a Testament. And there are Testaments whose force is resolved into some Conventions, Conditions and Agreements which they borrow from the nature of Covenants. So there is such an affi∣nity
between them as one name may be expressive of them both. But against this it will be replied that what the Apostle speaks unto is in the Hebrew called , that is a Covenant and no where signifies a Testa∣ment; so that from thence the Apostle could not argue from the nature of a Testament what is required thereunto, and what doth depend thereon. Here∣unto it is answered that the LXX constantly rendring  Berith by , and not by , the Apostle made use of that Translation and that significa∣tion of the word. But this will not solve the difficulty; For it would resolve all the Apostles arguings in this great and important Mystery, into the Au∣thority of that Translation which is fallible throughout, and (at least as it is come to us) filled with actual mistakes. We must therefore give another an∣swer unto this Objection. Wherefore I say, (1) The word  could not be more properly rendred by any one word than by . For it being mostly used to express the Covenant between God and Man, it is of that nature as cannot properly be termed , which is a Covenant or Compact upon equal terms of distributive Iustice between dis∣tinct parties. But Gods Covenant with man, is only the way and the declara∣tion of the terms whereby God will dispose and communicate Good things unto us, which hath more of the nature of a Testament than of a Covenant in it. (2) The word  is often used to express a free promise with an effec∣tual donation and communication of the thing promised, as hath been declar∣ed in the foregoing chapter; But this hath more of the nature of a Testament than of a Covenant. (3) There is no word in the Hebrew language whereby to express a Testa∣ment but  only. Nor is there so in the Syriack: Their  is nothing but . The Hebrews express the thing by  to order, dispose, give command concerning the house or houshold of a dying man. Isa. 38. 2. 2 Sam. 17. 23. But they have no other word but Berith to signifie it; and therefore where the nature of the thing spoken of requires it, it is properly rendred a Testament and ought so to be. Wherefore there is no force used unto the signification of the word in this place by the Apostle. But that which makes the proper use of it by him evident in this place, is that he had respect unto its signification in the making of the Covenant with the people at Sinai: For this he compares the New Testament unto in all its causes and effects. And in that Covenant there were three things; 1. The Prescription of Obedience unto the People on the part of God, which was received by their consent in an express compliance with the Law and Terms of it, Deut. 5. 14. Herein the nature of it, so far as it was a Covenant, did consist. 2. There was a Promise and Conveyance of an Inheritance unto them, name∣ly of the Land of Canaan, with all the Priviledges of it. God declared that the land was his, and that he gave it unto them for an Inheritance. And this Promise or Grant was made unto them without any consideration of their pre∣vious Obedience, out of meer love and Grace. The principal design of the Book of Deuteronomy is to inlay this Principle in the foundation of their obedience. Now the free Grant and Donation of an Inheritance of the Goods of him that makes the Grant is properly a Testament. A free disposition it was of the Goods of the Testator. 3. There was in the confirmation of this Grant, the intervention of Death. The Grant of the Inheritance of the Land that God made was confirmed by death, and the Blood of the Beasts offered in sacrifice, whereof we must treat on v. 18, 19, 20. And although Covenants were confirmed by Sacrifices, as this was, so far as it was a Covenant, namely, with the Blood of them; yet as in those Sacrifices death was comprised, it was to confirm the Testamenta∣ry Grant of the Inheritance. For death is necessary unto the Confirmation of a Testament, which then could only be in Type and Representation; the Testator himself was not to die, for the establishment of a Typical Inhe∣ritance.
Wherefore the Apostle having discoursed before concerning the Covenant as it prescribed and required Obedience, with Promises and Penalties annexed unto it: He now treats of it, as unto the Donation and Communication of Good things by it, with the Confirmation of the Grant of them by death; in which sense it was a Testament and not a Covenant properly so called. And the arguing of the Apostle from this word, is not only just and reasonable; but without it we could never have rightly understood the Typical Representati∣on that was made of the Death, Blood and Sacrifice of Christ in the Confir∣mation of the New Testament as we shall see immediately. This difficulty being removed, we may proceed in the Exposition of the words. That which first occurs is the Note of Connexion in the Conjunction, And. . But it doth not here, as sometimes, infer a Reason of what was spoken before, but is emphatically expletive, and denotes a progress in the present Argument; As much as, Also, Moreover. 2. There is the Ground of the ensuing Assertion, or the manner of its Intro∣duction; For this cause. Some say that it looks backward, and intimates a . Reason of what was spoken before, or why it was necessary that our Consci∣ences should be purged from dead works by the Blood of Christ, namely, because he was the Mediator of the new Covenant; others say it looks forward and gives a reason why he was to be the Mediator of the new Testament; namely, that by the means of Death for the Transgressions, &c. It is evident that there is a reason rendred in these words of the necessity of the death and Sacrifice of Christ, by which alone our Consciences may be purg∣ed from dead works. And this reason is intended in these words, . For this cause. And this necessity of the death of Christ, the Apostle proves both from the nature of his office, namely, that he was to be the Mediator of the new Covenant, which, being a Testament, required the death of the Testator; and from what was to be effected thereby, namely, the Redemption of Transgressions and the purchase of an eternal Inheritance. Wherefore these are the things which he hath respect unto in these words For this cause. But withal the Apostle in this verse enlargeth his discourse, as designing to comprehend in it the whole dispensation of the will and Grace of God unto the Church in Christ, with the Ground and Reason of it. This reason he layeth down in this verse, giving an account of the effects of it in those that follow: Here∣unto respect is had in this expression. For the exposition of the words themselves, that is the declaration of the mind of the Holy Ghost, and nature of the things contained in them, we must leave the order of the words and take that of the things themselves. And the things ensuing are declared in them. (1) That God designed an eternal Inheritance unto some persons. (2) The way and manner of conveying a Right and Title thereunto was by promise. (3) That the Persons unto whom this Inheritance is designed, are those that are called. (4) That there was an obstacle unto the enjoyment of this Inheritance, which was Transgres∣sion against the first Covenant. (5) That this obstacle might be removed, and the Inheritance enjoyed, God made a New Covenant; because none of the Rites, Ordi∣nances, or Sacrifices of the first Covenant could remove that Obstacle, or expiate those Sins. (6) The Ground of the Efficacy of the New Covenant unt o this End, was, That it had a Mediator, an High Priest, such as had been already described. (7) The way and means whereby the Mediator of the New Covenant did expiate Sins under the Old, was by death; nor could it otherwise be done, seeing this New Covenant, being a Testament also, required the death of the Testator. (8) This Death of the Mediator of the new Testament did take away sins by the Redemption of them. For the Redemption of Transgressions. All which must be opened for the due Exposition of these words. 1. God designed unto some an Eternal Inheritance. And both the Reason of this grant, with the nature of it must be enquired into. (1) As unto the . Reason of it; God in our first Creation gave unto man, whom he made his Son and Heir as unto things here below, a great Inheritance of meer Grace and Bounty. This Inheritance consisted in the use of all the Creatures here below,
in a just Title unto them, and dominion over them. Neither did it consist absolutely in these things, but as they were a Pledge of the present favour of God, and of mans future blessedness upon his Obedience. This whole Inheri∣tance man forfeited by sin. God also took the forfeiture, and ejected him out of the possession of it, and utterly despoiled him of his Title unto it. Ne∣vertheless he designed unto some another Inheritance; even that should not be lost, that should be eternal. It is altogether vain and foolish to seek for any other Cause or Reason of the preparation of this Inheritance, and the de∣signation of it unto any person, but only his own Grace, Bounty, his sove∣reign Will and Pleasure. What merit of it, what means of attaining it could be found in them, who were considered under no other Qualifications but such as had wofully rejected that Inheritance which before they were instated in? And therefore is it called an Inheritance, to mind us that the way whereby we come unto it, is gratuitous Adoption, and not purchase or merit. (2) As unto the Nature of it; it is declared in the Adjunct mentioned, it is eternal. And it is so called in opposition unto the Inheritance which by vertue of the first Testament God granted unto the Israelites in the Land of Canaan. That was an Inheritance and was conveyed by a Promise. And when God threatned to deprive them of that Land, he said he would disinherit them, Numb. 14. 12. And this Inheritance consisted not only in the Land itself, but principally in the Priviledges of Holy Worship and Relation unto God which they enjoyed therein, Rom, 9. 5. But yet all things that belonged unto it, were in themselves carnal and temporary, and only Types of Good things to come. In opposition hereunto God provided an eternal Inheritance. And as the State of those who are to receive it, is twofold, namely, that in this life, and that in the life to come; so there are two parts of their Inheritance; namely, Grace and Glory: For although Grace be bestowed and continued only in this life, yet the things we enjoy by vertue of it are Eternal. The other part of their Inheri∣tance is, Glory, which is the way of the full, unchangeable possession and en∣joyment of it. This therefore is not to be excluded from this Inheritance, at least as the end and necessary consequent of it. But that which is principally and in the first Place intended by it, is that state of things whereinto believers are admitted in this life. The whole inheritance of Grace and Glory was in the first place given and committed unto Jesus Christ. He was appointed Heir of all things, chap. 1. 3. By him is it communicated unto all believers, who thereby become Heirs of God, and joynt Heirs with Christ, Rom. 8. 15, 16, 17. For the Lord Christ as the Great Testator did in and by his Death bequeath unto them all his Goods, as an eternal Legacy. All that Grace, Mercy and Glory, all the riches of them which are prepared in the Cove∣nant are comprised herein. And a Goodly Inheritance it is, the Lines are fallen unto Believers in pleasant Places. And the way whereby we be∣come interested in this Inheritance, is by gratuitous Adoption. If Sons, then Heirs. This is that which is the end of all, and regulates all that preceeds in this verse. It declares the way whereby God would communicate unto some persons the Inheritance which in free Grace and Bounty he had provided. And, It is an Act of meer sovereign Grace in God to provide such a blessed Inheri∣tance for any of them, who had sinfully cast away what they were before entrusted withal. And into this are all Gods following dealings with the Church to be resolved. If there were nothing in us to move God to provide this Inheritance for us, no more is there of the communication of any part of it unto us, as we shall see further on the next words. 2. The way whereby God did convey or would communicate this Inheritance unto any, was by promise [Might receive the promise of an eternal Inheritance.] . The Syriac Translation refers the Inheritance unto the called: Those that are called to an eternal Inheritance. But in the Original it respects the Promise; the Promise of an eternal Inheritance: For by the Promise is assurance given of it, and it is the means of the actual conveyance of it unto us. And the Apostle
hath respect unto what he had discoursed about the promise of God, and the Confirmation of it by his Oath, Chap. 6. 15, 16, 17, 18. So he declares it also, Gal. 3. 18. The promise made unto Abraham and confirmed by the Oath of God, was concerning the eternal Inheritance by Christ. The Inheri∣tance of Canaan was by the Law, or the first Covenant; But this was by Pro∣mise. And we may consider three things. (1) What is the Promise intended. (2) How and why it was by Promise. (3) How we do receive the Promise of it. 1. The Promise principally intended, is that which was given unto Abra∣ham and confirmed by the Oath of God: For the Inheritance, that is, the eternal Inheritance was of the Promise, Gal. 3. 18. namely, that in the seed of Abraham all Nations should be blessed. It includes indeed the first promise made unto our first Parents, which was the spring and foundation of it, and respects all the following Promises concerning the Lord Christ and the Benefits of his Mediation, with all the Grace which is administred by them, which were further declarations and confirmations of it; but that great solemn Promise is principally intended: For the Apostle designes to convince the Hebrews that neither by the Law, nor the Sacrifices, nor Ordinances of it, they could come unto the Inheritance promised unto Abraham and his seed. This was the Promise of eternal Inheritance, whereof that of the Land of Canaan was a Type only. 2. We must enquire how and why this Inheritance is conveyed by Promise. And God made this settlement by Promise for these ends; (1) To evince the absolute freedom of the preparation and grant of it. The Promise is everywhere opposed unto every thing of works or aesert in our selves. It hath no respect unto what we were or did deserve. The Land of Canaan was given to the Posterity of Abraham by Promise. And therefore doth God so often mind them of the freedom of it, that it was an act of meer Love and sovereign Grace, which in themselves they were so far from deserving as that they were altogether unworthy of it, Deut. 9. 4, 5. chap. 7. 7, 8. Much less hath the Promise of the eternal Inheritance respect unto any thing of works in our selves (2) To give security unto all the Heirs of it unto whom it was designed. Hence in this Promise and the Confirmation of it, there was the highest engagement of the faithfulness and veracity of God. There was so unto the end that the Promise might be sure unto all the seed, Rom. 4. 16. Wherefore God doth not only declare the Relation of it unto his essential Truth; God who cannot lye hath given this promise of eternal life, Tit. 1. 1. but confirmed it with his Oath, that by two immutable things wherein it was impossible that God should lye, it might be established. The Reasons of the use and necessity hereof, have been declared on chap. 6. 17, 18. (3) It was thus conveyed and is communicated by Promise unto all the Heirs of it in their sucessive Generations, that the way of obtaining this Inheritance on our part, might be by faith and no otherwise: For what God had only promis∣ed doth necessarily require faith unto its reception and faith only. There is nothing can contribute ought unto an interest in the Promise, but the mix∣ing of it with faith, chap. 4. 2. And it is of saith that it may be of Grace, Rom. 4. 16. namely, that it may be evidenced to be of the meer Grace of God in opposition unto all worth, works and endeavours of our own. And if all Grace and Glory, all Benefits of the Mediation of Christ, our Sanctification, Justification and Glorification, be an Inheritance prepared in Grace, conveyed by Promise, and received by saith, there is no place left for our own works with reference unto the procurement of an Interest in them. Freely it was provid∣ed, freely it is proposed, and freely it is received. 3. We may enquire what it is to receive the promise. And it hath a double sense. (1) As the Promise may be considered formally or materially. To receive the Promise formally as a Promise, is to have it declared unto us, and
to mix it with faith, or to believe it. This it is to receive the Promise in op∣position unto them by whom it is rejected through Unbelief. So Abraham is said to receive the Promises, Heb. 11. 17. in that when they were given unto him, he staggered not through Unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving Glo∣ry to God, Rom. 4. 21, 22. As the Promise is materially considered, so to receive it, is to receive the thing promised. So it is said of the Saints un∣der the old Testament that they obtained a good report through faith, but re∣ceived not the Promise, Heb. 11. 39. They received the Promises by faith in them as proposed; but the principal thing promised, that was the coming of Christ in the flesh, they received not. The receiving of the Promise here mentioned is of both kinds according to the distinct parts of this Inheritance. As unto the future state of Glory, we receive the promise in the first way; that is, we believe it, rest upon it, trust unto the truth of God in it, and live in the expectation of it. And the Benefit we receive hereby, as unto our spiritual life and consolation, is inexpressible. As unto the foundation of the whole Inheritance in the oblation and Sacrifice of Christ, and all the Grace, Mercy and Love, with the fruits of them, whereof in this life we are made Partakers, and all the priviledges of the Gospel, Believers under the new Testament receive the Promise in the second sense; namely, the things promised. And so did they also under the old Testament, according to the measure of the divine Dispensation towards them. And we may ob∣serve, 1. All our Interest in the Gospel Inheritance depends on our receiving the Pro∣mise by faith. Though it be prepared in the Counsel of God, though it be proposed unto us in the dispensation of the Gospel, yet, unless we receive the Promise of it by faith, we have no Right or Title unto it. 2. The conveyance and actual communication of the eternal Inheritance by Pro∣mise to be received by faith alone, tends exceedingly unto the exaltation of the Glo∣ry of God, and the security of the salvation of them that do believe. For, as unto the latter, it depends absolutely on the veracity of God, confirmed by his Oath. And faith on the other hand is the only way and means of ascribing unto God the Glory of all the Holy properties of his nature which he designs to exalt in this dispensation of himself. Thirdly, The Persons unto whom this Inheritance is designed, and who do receive the promise of it, are those that are called. It is to no purpose to dis∣course  here about outward and inward calling, effectual and ineffectual, com∣plied with or not: no other are intended but those that actually receive the Promise. It was the design of God in this whole dispensation that all the call∣ed should receive the Promise, and if they do not so, his Counsel, and that in the greatest work of his Wisdom, Power and Grace, is frustrate. They are the called according to his purpose, Rom. 8. 28. Those who obtain the Inhe∣ritance being predestinated according unto the purpose of him who worketh all things after the Counsel of his own will, Ephes. 1. 11. God here puts forth his Almighty power, that his purpose or the Counsel of his will may be esta∣blished in giving the Inheritance unto all that are called. Whom he did pre∣destinate, them he also called, and whom he called, them he also justified, and whom he justified, them he also glorified, or gave them the whole eternal Inheri∣tance, Rom. 8. 10. Hence Estius an Expositor of the Roman Church charg∣eth the contrary opinion in Catharinus as unorthodox. It is not a general Call wherein those who are so called, may or may not receive the Inheritance: But what God designs unto them that are intended, they are so called as that they shall assuredly be made Partakers of it. This is the end that God de∣signed in the dispensation of himself by Jesus Christ here declared, and there∣fore respect is had thereunto, in the whole of it.
Some think that by the called here, those only are intended, who were so under the Old Testament. For mention is made only of the Redemption of Transgressions under that Covenant; in what sense, shall be immediately decla∣red. But this is contrary both unto the design of the Apostle, and the use of the word. For on that supposition he says no more, but that Christ was the Mediator of the New Testament, that those might be saved who lived and dyed under the Old. But his principal design is to prove the advantage that we now have, even above the Elect themselves under the Old Testament; yet so, as not to exclude them from the same benefit with us by the Mediation of Christ as unto the substance of it. And the called in the language of this Apostle, doth principally signifie the called in Christ Jesus. Effectual Vocation is the onely way of entrance into the eternal inheritance. For it is accompanied with Adoption, which gives us right and title thereunto, John 1. 12. In vain do they expect it who are not so called. Fourthly, Things being thus prepared in the Counsel and Grace of God, yet there was an obstacle in the way of actual receiving the Promise; namely, the  transgressions that were under the first Testament. God designed unto the Elect an eternal inheritance; yet can they not be made partakers of it, but in such a way as was suited unto his glory. It was unjust and unreasonable that it should be otherwise. Whereas therefore they were all of them guilty of sin, their sins must be expiated, and taken out of the way, or they cannot receive the promise of the inheritance. Our word Transgressions doth properly express the original word. And in the distribution of sins by their names into  and  Lev. 16. 21. We render  by it. But it compriseth all sorts of sins whereby the Law is transgressed, be they great or small. Every thing that hath the nature of sin must be expiated, or the Inheritance cannot be enjoyed. Though God will give Grace and Glory unto his Elect, yet he will do it in such a way, as wherein and whereby he may be glorified also himself. Satisfaction must be made for Transgression, unto the honour of his Righteousness, Holiness and Law. There are yet sundry difficulties in this Expression, which must be enquired into. For, 1. The Redemption or Expiation of Sins, is confined unto those under the Old Testament; whence it should seem that there is none made for those un∣der the New. Ans. The Emphasis of the Expression, Sins under the Old Testament, respect either the Time when the sins intended were committed, or the Testament against which they were committed. And the Preposition  will admit of either sense. Take it in the first way, and the Argument follows à fortiori, as unto the Sins committed under the New Testament, though there be no Ex∣piation of Sins against it, which properly are only final Unbelief and Impeni∣tency. For the Expiation intended is made by the Mediator of the New Testament. And if he expiated the Sins that were under the first Testament, that is of those who lived and dyed whil'st that Covenant was in force, much more doth he do so, for them who live under the Administration of that Testament, whereof he is the Mediator. For Sins are taken away by vertue of that Testament whereunto they do belong. And it is with peculiar respect unto them, that the blood of Christ is called the blood of the New Testament, for the Redemption of Sins. But yet more probably the meaning may be, the Sins that were and are committed against that first Covenant, or the Law and Rule of it. For whereas that Covenant did in its Administration comprise the Moral Law, which was the substance and foundation of it, all Sins whatever have their form and na∣ture with respect thereunto. So Sins under the first Covenant, are all Sins whatever: For there is no Sin committed under the Gospel, but it is a Sin against that Law which requires us to love the Lord our God with all our hearts, and all our strength. Either way the Sins of them who are called under the New Testament, are included.
2. It is enquired whether it is the Nature of the Sins intended, that is re∣spected, or the Persons guilty of them also under that Testament. The Syriac Translation avoids this difficulty, by rendring the words of the Abstract, the Redemption of Transgressions, in the Concrete, a Redeemer unto them who had transgressed. That it is a certain sort of Sins that is intended, Socinus was the first that invented. And his invention is the foundation of the Exposition not only of Schlictingius, but of Grotius also on this place. Such Sins they say they are, as for which no Expiation was to be made by the Sacrifices of the Law; Sins of a greater Nature than could be expiated by them. For they only made Expiation of some smaller Sins, as Sins of Ignorance, or the like. But there is no respect unto the Persons of them who lived under that Testament, whom they will not grant to be redeemed by the blood of Christ. Wherefore according unto them, the difference between the Expiation of Sin by the Sa∣crifices of the Law, and that by the Sacrifice of Christ, doth not consist in their nature, that the one did it only typically, and in an external representation by the purifying of the flesh, the other really and effectually; but in this, that the one expiated lesser Sins only, the other greater also. But there is nothing sound or consonant unto the Truth in this Interpreta∣tion of the words. For, (1) It proceeds on a false Supposition, that there were Sins of the people, (not only presumptuous Sins, and which had impenitency in them) for which no Atonement was made, nor Expiation of them allowed, which is expresly contrary unto Lev. 16. 16, 21. And whereas some offences were capital amongst them, for which no Atonement was allowed to free the Sinner from death, yet that belonged unto the Political Rule of the people, and hindred not but that typically all sorts of Sins were to be expiated. (2) It is contrary unto the express design of the Apostle. For he had pro∣ved before by all sorts of Arguments, that the Sacrifices of the Law could not expiate any Sin, could not purge the Conscience from dead works; that they made nothing perfect. And this he speaks not of this or that Sin, but of every Sin wherein the Conscience of a Sinner is concerned, Chap. 10. 2. Hence two things follow. First, That they did not, in and of themselves, really expiate any one Sin, small or great. It was impossible, saith the Apostle, that they should do so, Heb. 10. 4. only they sanctified to the purifying of the flesh; which overthrows the foundation of this Exposition. Secondly, That they did typifie and represent the Expiation of all sorts of Sins whatever, and made application of it unto their Souls. For if it was so, that there was no Atonement for their Sins, that their Consciences were not purged from dead works, nor themselves consummate, but only had some outward purifi∣cation of the flesh, it cannot be but they must all eternally perish. But that this was not their condition the Apostle proves from hence, because they were called of God unto an eternal Inheritance, as he had proved at large concerning Abraham, Chap. 6. Hence he infers the necessity of the mediation and death of Christ, as without the vertue whereof, all the called under the first Cove∣nant must perish eternally, there being no other way to come to the In∣heritance. 3. Whereas the Apostle mentions only the Sins under the first Covenant as unto the time passed before the Exhibition of Christ in the flesh, or the death of the Mediator of the New Testament, what is to be thought of them who lived during that season, who belonged not unto the Covenant, but were strangers from it, such as are described, Eph. 4. 12. I answer; The Apostle takes no
notice of them, and that because, taking them generally, Christ dyed not for them. Yea, that he did not so, is sufficiently proved from this place. Those who live and dye strangers from God's Covenant, have no interest in the Me∣diation of Christ. Wherein the Redemption of these Transgressions did consist, shall be decla∣red in its proper place. And we may observe, 1. Such is the malignant Nature of Sin, of all Transgression of the Law, that unless it be removed, unless it be taken out of the way, no Person can enjoy the Promise of the Eternal Inheritance. 2. It was the Work of God alone to contrive, and it was the Effect of infinite Wisdom and Grace to provide a way for the removal of Sin, that it might not be an everlasting Obstacle against the Communication of an Eternal Inheritance unto them that are called. Fifthly, We have declared the design of God here represented unto us, who are the Persons towards whom it was to be accomplished, and what lay in the way as an hindrance of it. That which remains in the words, is the way that God took, and the means that he used, for the removal of that hindrance, and the effectual accomplishment of his design. This in general was first, the making of a New Testament. He had fully pro∣ved . before, that this could not be done by that Covenant against which the Sins were committed, neither by the Priests, nor Sacrifices, nor any other Du∣ties of it. Therefore had he promised the Abolition of it, because of its weakness and insufficiency unto this end, as also the introduction of a new to supply its defects, as we have seen at large in the Exposition of the foregoing Chapter. For it became the Wisdom, Goodness and Grace of God, upon the removal of the other for its insufficiency, to establish another that should be every way effectual unto his purpose, namely, the Communication of an Eternal Inheritance unto them that are called. But then the Enquiry will be, How this Covenant or Testament shall effect this end; what is in it, what belongs unto it that should be so effectual, and by what means it might attain this end. All these are declared in the words. And Sixthly, In general all this arose from hence, that it had a Mediator; and that the Lord Christ, the Son of God, was this Mediator. The dignity of his Person, and thereon both the Excellency and Efficacy of his Priestly Office, whereunto alone respect is had in his being called here a Mediator, he had abundantly before demonstrated. Although the word in general be of a lar∣ger signification, as we have declared on Chap. 8. 6. yet here it is restrained unto his Priestly Office, and his acting therein. For whereas he had treated of that alone in the foregoing Chapter, here declaring the Grounds and Reasons of the necessity of it, he says, for this cause is he the Mediator. And proceed∣ing to shew in what sense he considers him as a Mediator, doth it by his be∣ing a Testator and dying, which belongs to his Priestly Office alone. And the sole end which in this place he assigns unto his Mediatory Office, is his death. That by means of death. Whereas therefore there were Sins committed un∣der the first Covenant, and against it, and would have been so for ever, had it continued, which it was no way able so to take away as that the called might receive the Inheritance, the Lord Christ undertook to be the Mediator of that Covenant, which was provided as a Remedy against these Evils. For herein he undertook to answer for and expiate all those Sins. Whereas therefore Expia∣tion of Sin, is to be made by an Act towards God with whom alone Atone∣ment is to be made, so as that they may be pardoned, the Mediation of Christ here intended, is that whereby suffering death in our stead, in the behalf of all that are called, he made Atonement for Sin.
But moreover God had a further design herein. He would not only free them that are called from that death which they deserved by their Sins against the first Covenant, but give them also a Right and Title unto an Eternal Inheritance, that is, of Grace and Glory. Wherefore the Procure∣ment hereof also depends on the Mediation of Christ. For by his Obe∣dience unto God in the discharge thereof, he purchased for them this Inheritance, and bequeathed it unto them as the Mediator of the New Testament. The Provision of this Mediator of the New Testament is the greatest Effect of the infinite Wisdom, Love and Grace of God. This is the Center of his Eternal Counsels. In the womb of this one Mercy, all others are contained. Herein will he be glorified unto Eternity. (1) The first Covenant of Works was broken and disannulled, because it had no Mediator. (2) The Covenant at Sinai had no such Mediator as could expiate Sin. Hence, (3) Both of them became means of Death and Condemnation. (4) God saw that in the making the New Covenant, it was necessary to put all things into the hand of a Mediator, that it also might not be frustrated. (5) This Mediator was not in the first place to preserve us in the state of the New Covenant, but to deliver us from the guilt of the breach of the former, and the Curse thereon. To make provision for this End, was the Effect of Infinite Wisdom. Seventhly, The especial way and means whereby this Effect was wrought  by this Mediator, was by death. Morte obita, facta, interveniente, in∣tercedente; by means of death, say we. Death was the means, that where∣by the Mediator procured the Effect mentioned. That which in the fore∣going Verse is ascribed unto the Blood of Christ, which he offered as a Priest, is here ascribed unto his death, as a Mediator. For both these really are the same; only in the one, the thing it self is expressed, it was death; in the other, the manner of it, it was by blood; in the one, what he did and suffered, with respect unto the Curse of the first Cove∣nant, it was death; in the other, the ground of his making Expiation for Sin by his death, or how it came so to do, namely, not meerly as it was death or penal, but as it was a voluntary Sacrifice or Obla∣tion. It was therefore necessary unto the End mentioned, that the Media∣tor of the New Testament should dye; not as the High Priests of old dyed, a natural death for themselves; but as the Sacrifice dyed that was slain and offered for others. He was to dye that death which was threatned unto Transgressions against the first Covenant; that is, death under the Curse of the Law. There must therefore be some great Cause and End why this Mediator being the onely begotten of the Father, should thus dye. This was, say the Socinians, that he might confirm the Doctrine that he taught. He dyed as a Martyr, not as a Sacrifice. But, (1) There was no need that he should dye unto that End. For his
Doctrine was sufficiently confirmed by the Scriptures of the Old Testament, the Evidence of the Presence of God in him, and the Miracles which he wrought. (2) Notwithstanding their pretence, they do not assign the Confirmation of his Doctrine unto his Death, but unto his Resurrection from the dead. Neither indeed do they allow any gracious Effect unto his death, either to∣wards God or men, but only make it something necessarily antecedent unto what he did of that kind. Nor do they allow that he acted any thing at all towards God on our behalf. Whereas the Scripture constantly assigns our Redemption, Sanctification and Salvation to the death and blood of Christ. These Persons (1) deny that of it self it hath any influence into them: wherefore (2) they say that Christ by his death confirmed the New Cove∣nant; but hereby they intend nothing but what they do also in the former, or the Confirmation of his Doctrine, with an addition of somewhat worse. For they would have him to confirm the Promises of God as by him declared, and no more, as though he were God's Surety to us, and not a Surety for us unto God. Neither do they assign this unto his Death, but unto his Resurrection from the dead. But suppose all this, and that the death of Christ were in some sense useful and profitable unto these Ends, which is all they plead; yet what use and advantage was it of, with respect unto them, that he should dye an accursed death, under the Curse of the Law, and a sense of God's dis∣pleasure. Hereof the Socinians, and those that follow them, can yield no rea∣son at all. It would become these men so highly pretending unto reason, to give an account upon their own Principles of the death of the onely begot∣ten Son of God, in the highest course and most intense Acts of Obedience, that may be compliant with the wisdom, holiness, and goodness of God, con∣sidering the kind of death that he dyed. But what they cannot do, the Apostle doth in the next words. Eighthly, The death of the Mediator of the New Testament, was for the . Redemption of Transgressions, and for this End it was necessary. Sin lay in the way of the enjoyment of the Inheritance which Grace had prepared. It did so in the Righteousness and Faithfulness of God. Unless it were removed, the Inheritance could not be received. The way whereby this was to be done, was by Redemption. The Redemption of Transgressions, is the deliverance of the Transgressors from all the Evils they were subject unto on their account, by the payment of a satisfactory price. The words used to express it, , will admit of no other significa∣tion. Here it must answer the purging of Conscience by the blood of Christ. And he calls his life a Ransom, or Price of Redemption. And this utterly de∣stroys the foundation of the Socinian Redemption and Expiation for Sin. For they make it only a freedom from Punishment, by an Act of Power. Take off the covering of the words which they use in a sense foreign to the Scripture, and their proper signification, and their sense is expresly contradictory unto the sense and words of the Apostle. He declares Christ to have been the High-Priest and Mediator of the New Testament, in the same Acts and Duties. They teach that he ceased to be a Mediator, when he began to be a Priest. He affirms that the Blood of Christ doth expiate Sins; They, that he doth it by an Act of Power in Heaven, where there is no use of his Blood. He says that his death was necessary unto, and was the means or cause of the Redemption of Transgressions, that is, to be a price of Redemption or just Compensation for them; They contend that no such thing is required thereunto. And whereas the Scriptures do plainly assign the Expiation of Sin, Redemption, Reconcilia∣tion and Peace with God, Sanctification and Salvation unto the Death and Blood-shedding of Christ; They deny them all and every one to be in any sense Effects of it, only they say it was an antecedent sign of the Truth of his Doctrine in his Resurrection, and an antecedent condition of his Exaltation and Power; which is to reject the whole Mystery of the Gospel.
Besides the particular Observations which we have made on the several passages of this Verse, something may yet in general be observed from it. As, 1. A New Testament providing an Eternal Inheritance in Sovereign Grace, the Constitution of a Mediator, such a Mediator for that Testament in infinite Wisdom and Love, the Death of that Testator for the Redemption of Transgressions, to fulfil the Law, and satisfie the Iustice of God, with the communication of that Inheritance by Promise to be received by Faith in all them that are called, are the substance of the Mystery of the Gospel. And all these are with wonderful wisdom comprised by the Apostle in these words. 2. That the Efficacy of the Mediation and Death of Christ extended it self unto all the called under the Old Testament, is an evident Demonstration of his Divine Nature, his Pre-existence unto all these things, and the Eternal Covenant, between the Father and him about them. 3. The first Covenant did only forbid and Condemn Transgressions, Redemption from them is by the New Testament alone. 4. The Glory and Efficacy of the New Covenant, and the Assurance of the Communication of an Eternal Inheritance by vertue of it, depend hereon, that it was made a Testament by the death of the Mediator; which is farther proved in the following Verses.
VER. XVI, XVII. . , Syr.  the death of him is decla∣red, shewed, argued, or proved. Mors intercedat necesse est. Necesse est mor∣tem intercedere. Ar. Necesse est mortem ferri; which is not proper in the Latine Tongue: however there is an emphasis in , more than is ex∣pressed by intercedo. , Syr. , of him that made it; of the Testator. , Syr.  in him that is dead, in mortuis; among them that are dead. , vulg. confirmatum est; and so the Sy∣riac: ratum est, more proper. , Syr.  There is no use, profit or benefit in it. Ar. nunquam valet; quandoquidem nunquam valet; nondum valet; it is not yet of force. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be brought in the death of the Testator. For a Testament is firm (or ratified) after men are dead; otherwise it is of no force whil'st the Testator liveth. There is not much more to be considered in these verses, but only how the Observation contained in them, doth promote and confirm the Argument which the Apostle insists upon. Now this is to prove the necessity and use of the death of Christ, from the Nature, Ends and Use of the Covenant, whereof he was the Mediator. For it being a Testament, it was to be confirmed with the death of the Testator. This is proved in these Verses from the Notion of a Testament, and the only use of it amongst men. For the Apostle in this Epistle doth argue several times, from such usages amongst men, as proceed∣ing from the Principles of Reason and Equity, were generally prevalent among them. So he doth in his discourse concerning the assurance given by the Oath of God, Chap. 6. And here he doth the same from what was commonly agreed upon; and suitable unto the reason of things, about the nature and use of a Testament. The things here mentioned were known to all, approved by all, and were the principal means of the preservation of Peace and Pro∣perty in Humane Societies. For although Testaments as unto their especial Regulation owe their original unto the Roman Civil Law; yet as unto the sub∣stance of them, they were in use amongst all Mankind from the foundation of the world. For a Testament is the just determination of a Man's Will con∣cerning what he will have done with his Goods after his decease. Or, it is the Will of him that is dead. Take this power from men, and you root up the whole foundation of all industry and diligence in the world. For what man will labour to increase his substance, if when he dyes, he may not dis∣pose of it unto those which by Nature, Affinity, or other obligations, he hath most respect unto? Wherefore the foundation of the Apostles arguing from this usage amongst men, is firm and stable. Of the like nature is his observation, that a Testament is of no force whil'st the Testator liveth; the nature of the thing it self expounded by con∣stant practice, will admit no doubt of it. For by what way soever a man disposeth of his Goods, so as that it shall take effect whil'st he is alive, as by Sale, or Gift, it is not a Testament, nor hath any thing of the nature of a Testament in it. For that is only the Will of a man concerning his Goods when he is dead. These things being unquestionable, we are only to consider, whence the
Apostle takes his Argument, to prove the necessity of the death of Christ, as he was the Mediator of the New Testament. Now this is not meerly from the signification of the word , which yet is of consideration also, as hath been declared; but, whereas he treats principally of the two Covenants, it is the Affinity that is between a Solemn Covenant and a Testament, that he hath respect unto. For he speaks not of the death of Christ meerly as it was death, which is all that is required unto a Testament properly so called, without any consideration of what nature it is; but he speaks of it also as it was a Sacrifice by the effusion of his blood, which belongs unto a Covenant, and is no way required unto a Testament. Whereas therefore the word may signifie either a Covenant or a Testament precisely so called, the Apostle hath respect unto both the significations of it. And having in these Verses mentioned his death, as the death of a Testator, which is proper unto a Testament, in the 14th Verse and those that follow, he insists on his blood as a Sacrifice which is proper unto a Covenant. But these things must be more fully explained, whereby the difficulty which appears in the whole Context will be removed. Unto the confirmation or ratification of a Testament, that it may be , . sure, stable, and of force, there must be death, the death of the Testator. But there is no need that this should be by blood, the blood of the Testator, or any other. Unto the consideration of a Covenant, blood was required, the blood of the Sacrifice, and death only consequentially, as that which would ensue there∣on; but there was no need that it should be the blood or death of him that made the Covenant. Wherefore the Apostle declaring the necessity of the death of Christ, both as to the nature of it, that it was really death, and as to the manner of it, that it was by the effusion of his blood, and that from the consideration of the two Covenants, the Old and the New Testament, and what was required unto them, he evinceth it by that which was essential unto them both, in a Covenant as such, and in a Testament precise∣ly so called. That which is most eminent and essential unto a Testament, is, that it is confirmed and made irrevocable by the death of the Testator. And that which is the excellency of a Solemn Covenant, whereby it is made firm and stable, is, that it was confirmed with the blood of Sacrifices, as he proves in the instance of the Covenant made at Sinai, v. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Wherefore whatever is excellent in either of these, was to be found in the Mediator of the New Testament. Take it as a Testament, which, upon the Bequeathment made therein of the Goods of the Testator unto the Heirs of Promise, of Grace and Glory, it hath the nature of, and he dyed as the Testator, whereby the Grant of the Inheritance was made irrevocable unto them. Hereunto no more is required but his death, without the consideration of the nature of it in the way of a Sacrifice. Take it as a Covenant, as upon the consideration of the Promises contained in it, and the Prescription of Obedience, it hath the nature of a Covenant, though not of a Covenant strictly so called; and so it was to be confirmed with the blood of the Sacrifice of himself, which is the Eminency of the Solemn Confirmation of this Covenant. And as his death had an Eminency above the death required unto a Testament, in that it was by blood, and in the Sacrifice of himself, which it is no way necessary that the death of a Testator should be, yet it fully answered the death of a Testator, in that he truly dyed; so had it an Eminency above all the ways of the confir∣mation of the Old Covenant, or any other Solemn Covenant whatever; in that whereas such a Covenant was to be confirmed with the blood of Sacri∣fices, yet was it not required that it should be the blood of him that made the Covenant, as here it was. The consideration hereof solves all the appearing difficulties in the nature and manner of the Apostles Argument. The word  whereunto re∣spect is here had, is, as we have shewed, of a large signification, and various use. And frequently it is taken for a free grant and disposition of things by promise, which hath the nature of a Testament. And in the Old Covenant, there was a free grant and donation of the Inheritance of the Land of Canaan
unto the people, which belongs unto the nature of a Testament also. More∣over both of them, a Covenant and a Testament, do agree in the general na∣ture of their confirmation, the one by blood, the other by death. Hereon the Apostle in the use of the word , doth diversly argue both unto the nature, necessity and use of the death of the Mediator of the New Testament. He was to dye in the confirmation of it as it was a Testament, he being the Testator of it; and he was to offer himself as a Sacrifice in his blood, for the establishment of it, as it had the nature of a Covenant. Wherefore the Apostle doth not argue as some imagine, meerly from the signification of the word, whereby, as they say, that in the original is not exactly rendred. And those who have from hence troubled themselves and others about the Authority of this Epistle, have nothing to thank for it, but their own ignorance of the design of the Apostle, and the nature of his Argument. And it were well if we all were more sensible of our own ignorance, and more apt to acknowledge it, when we meet with difficulties in the Scripture, than for the most part we are. Alas! how short are our Lines, when we come to fathom the depths of it! How inextricable difficulties do appear sometimes in passages of it, which when God is pleased to teach us, are all pleasant and easie! These things being premised, to clear the scope and nature of the Apostles Argument, we proceed unto a brief Exposition of the words.
VER. XVI. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator. THere are two things in the words. (1) A Supposition of a Testament. (2) What is required thereunto. In the first there is, (1) The Note of Inference. (2) The Supposition it self. The first is the Particle, For. This doth not infer a Reason to ensue of . what he had before affirmed, which is the common use of that Illative, but on∣ly the Introduction of an Illustration of it, from what is the usage of Man∣kind in such cases, on supposition that this Covenant is also a Testament. For then there must be the death of the Testator, as it is in all Testaments amongst men. The Supposition it self is in those words, , the Verb Substantive . is wanting, [where a Testament is] so it is by us supplied, it may be, not ne∣cessarily. For the Expression of, where a Testament is, may suppose that the death of the Testator is required unto the making of a Testament; which, as the Apostle sheweth in the next Verse, it is not, but only unto its Execution. In the case of a Testament, namely, that it may be executed, is the meaning of the words, where; that is, wherever. Amongst all sorts of men, living according unto the light of Nature, and the conduct of Reason, the making of Testa∣ments is in use. For without it neither can private Industry be encouraged, nor publick Peace maintained. Wherefore, as was before observed, the Apostle argueth from the common usage of mankind, resolved into the Principles of Reason and Equity. 2. What is required unto the Validity of a Testament, and that is the death of the Testator. And the way of the Introduction of this death unto the . validity of a Testament is, by being brought in;  that it enter; namely, after the ratifying of the Testament to make it of force, or to give it operation. The Testament is made by a living man; but whil'st he lives, it is dead, or of no use. That it may operate and be effectual, death must be brought into the account. This death must be the death of the Testator, , is he who disposeth of things; who hath right so to do, and actually doth it. This in a Testament is the Testator. And  and , have in the Greek the same respect unto one another, as Testamentum and Testator in the Latine. Wherefore if the New Covenant hath the nature of a Testament, it must have a Testator, and that Testator must dye, before it can be of force and effi∣cacy, which is what was to be proved. This is further confirmed, VER. XVII. For a Testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all, whilest the Testator liveth. IT is not of the making and constitution of a Testament, but of the force and execution of it, that he speaks. And in these words he gives a Reason of the necessity of the death of the Testator thereunto. And this is because the validity and efficacy of the Testament depends solely thereon. And this reason he introduceth by the Conjunction , For. . A Testament, , is of force, say we; that is, firm, stable, not to be disannull'd. For if it be but a mans Testament, yet if it be con∣firmed, . no man disannulleth or addeth thereunto, Gal. 3. 15. It is ratified,
made unalterable, so as that it must be executed according unto the mind of the Testator. And it is so , among them that are dead; after men are . dead; that is those who make the Testament. For it is opposed unto , whil'st the Testator liveth. For Testaments are the Wills . of dead men. Living men have no Heirs. And this sense is declared in those words, , quandoquidem, quoniam, seeing that; otherwise, say we; . without this accession unto the making of a Testament. As yet it prevaileth not, it is not of force for the actual distribution of the Inheritance or the Goods of the Testator. Two things must yet farther be declared. (1) What are the Grounds or general Reasons of this Assertion. (2) Where lies the force of the Argu∣ment from it. 1. The force of a Testament depends on the death of the Testator; or the death of the Testator is required to make it effectual for these two Rea∣sons. (1) Because a Testament is no Act or Deed of a man, whereby he pre∣sently and in the making of it, conveys, gives or grants, any part of his pos∣session unto another, or others; so as that it should immediately thereon, cease to be his own, and become the propriety of those others; all such In∣struments of Contract, Bargain, Sale, or Deeds of Gift, are of another na∣ture, they are not Testaments. A Testament is only the signification of the Will of a man, as unto what he will have done with his Goods after his death. Wherefore unto the force and execution of it his death is necessary. (2) A Testament, that is only so, is alterable at the pleasure of him that makes it whil'st he is alive. Wherefore it can be of no force whil'st he is so; for that he may change it or disannul it when he pleaseth. The foundation therefore of the Apostles Argument from this usage amongst men, is firm and stable. 2. Whereas the Apostle argueth from the Proportion and Similitude that is between this New Testament or Covenant, and the Testaments of men, we may consider what are the things wherein that Similitude doth consist, and shew also wherein there is a dissimilitude whereunto his Reasonings are not to be extended. For so it is in all comparisons; the Comparates are not alike in all things, especially where things spiritual and temporal are compared to∣gether. So was it also in all the Types of old. Every person or every thing that was a Type of Christ, were not so in all things, in all that they were. And therefore it requires both wisdom and diligence to distinguish in what they were so, and in what they were not, that no false Inferences or Conclu∣sions be made from them. So is it in all Comparisons; and therefore in the present instance, we must consider, wherein the things compared do agree, and wherein they differ. 1. They agree principally in the death of the Testator. This alone makes a Testament among men, effectual and irrevocable. So is it in this New Testa∣ment. It was confirmed and ratified by the death of the Testator, Jesus Christ, and otherwise could not have been of force. This is the fundamental agree∣ment between them, which therefore alone the Apostle expresly insisteth on, although there are other things which necessarily accompany it, as essential un∣to every Testament; as, 2. In every Testament amongst men, there are Goods disposed and bequeath∣ed, unto Heirs or Legatees, which were the Property of the Testator. Where a man hath nothing to give or bequeath, he can make no Testament. For that is nothing but his Will concerning the disposal of his own Goods after his de∣cease. So is it in this New Testament. All the Goods of Grace and Glory, were the Property, the Inheritance of Christ, firmly instated in him alone. For he was appointed Heir of all things. But in his death, as a Testator, he made a Bequeathment of them all unto the Elect, appointing them to be Heirs of God, Coheirs with himself. And this also is required unto the nature and essence of a Testament. 3. In a Testament there is always an absolute Grant made of the Goods
bequeathed, without condition or limitation. So is it here also; the Goods and Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven are bequeathed absolutely unto all the Elect, so as that no intervenience can defeat them of it. And what there is in the Gospel which is the Instrument of this Testament, that prescribes Conditions unto them, that exacts terms of Obedience from them, it belongs unto it, as it is a Covenant, and not as a Testament. Yet, 4. It is in the Will and Power of the Testator, in and by his Testament, to assign and determine both the time, season and way, whereby those to whom he hath bequeathed his Goods, shall be admitted unto the actual possession of them. So is it in this case also. The Lord Christ, the great Testator, hath determined the way whereby the Elect shall come to be actually possest of their Legacies, namely, by Faith that is in him, Acts 26. 18. So also he hath reserved the time and season of their Conversion in this world, and entrance into future glory in his own hand and power. And these things belong unto the Illustration of the Comparison insisted on, although it be only one thing that the Apostle argues from it, touching the necessity of the death of the Testator. But notwithstanding these instances of agreement, between the New Covenant and the Testaments of men, whereby it appears to have in it in sundry respects the nature of a Testament, yet in many things there is also a disagreement between them, evidencing that it is also a Covenant, and abideth so, notwithstanding what it hath of the nature of a Testament, from the death of the Testator. As, 1. A Testator amongst men ceaseth to have any right in, or use of the Goods bequeathed by him, when once his Testament is of force. And this is by reason of death, which destroys all title and use of them. But our Testator devests himself neither of Right nor Possession, nor of the use of any of his Goods. And this follows on a twofold difference, the one in the Persons, the other in the Goods, or things bequeathed. (1) In the Persons: For a Testator, amongst men, dyeth absolutely; he liveth not again in this world, but lieth down and riseth not, until the Heavens be no more. Hereon all Right unto, and all use of the Goods of this life, ceaseth for ever. Our Testator dyed actually and really to confirm his Testa∣ment; but (1) He dyed not in his whole Person; (2) In that Nature wherein he dyed, he lived again, and is alive for evermore. Hence all his Goods are still in his own power. (2) In the things themselves. For the Goods bequeathed in the Testa∣ments of men, are of that nature, as that the Propriety of them cannot be vested in many, so as that every one should have a right unto and the enjoy∣ment of all, but in one onely. But the spiritual good things of the New Testament are such, as that in all the riches and fulness of them, they may be in the possession of the Testator; and of those also unto whom they are be∣queathed. Christ parts with no Grace from himself, he diminisheth not his own Riches, nor exhausts any thing from his own Fulness, by his communica∣tion of it unto others. Hence also, 2. In the Wills of men, if there be a Bequeathment of Goods made unto many, no one can enjoy the whole Inheritance, but every one is to have his own share and Portion only. But in and by the New Testament, every one is made Heir to the whole Inheritance. All have the same, and every one hath the whole. For God himself thence becomes their Portion, who is All unto All, and All unto every one. 3. In Humane Testaments, the Goods bequeathed are such only as either descended unto the Testators from their Progenitors, or were acquired during their lives by their own industry. By their death they obtained no new Right or Title unto any thing, only what they had before, is now disposed of ac∣cording unto their Wills. But our Testator, according unto an antecedent Contract between God the Father and him, purchased the whole Inheritance by his own blood, obtaining for us eternal Redemption. 4. They differ principally in this, That a Testament amongst men, is no more but meerly so; it is not moreover a Solemn Covenant that needs a confirma∣tion suited thereunto. The bare signification of the Will of the Testator
witnessed unto, is sufficient unto its constitution and confirmation. But in this Mystery the Testament is not meerly so, but a Covenant also. Hence it was not sufficient unto its force and establishment, that the Testator should dye on∣ly; but it was also required that he should offer himself in Sacrifice by the shedding of his blood, unto its confirmation. These things I have observed, because as, we shall see, the Apostle in the progress of his discourse, doth not confine himself unto this Notion of a Testament, but treats of it principally as it had the Nature of a Covenant. And we may here observe, 1. It is a great and gracious Condescension in the Holy Spirit, to give En∣couragement and Confirmation unto our Faith, by a Representation of the Truth and reality of spiritual things, in those which are temporal and agreeing with them in their general nature, whereby they are presented unto the common understandings of Men. This way of proceeding the Apostle calls a speaking, , Gal. 3. 15. After the manner of men. Of the same kind were all the Parables used by our Saviour; For it is all one whether these Representations be ta∣ken from things real, or from those which according unto the same Rule of Reason and Right, are framed on purpose for that end. 2. There is an irrevocable Grant of the whole Inheritance of Grace and Glory, made unto the Elect in the New Covenant. Without this it could not in any sense have the Nature of a Testament, nor that Name given unto it. For a Testament is such a free Grant, and nothing else. And our best Plea for them, for an interest in them, for a participation of them, before God, is from the free Grant and Donation of them, in the Testament of Jesus Christ. 3. As the Grant of these things is free and absolute, so the Enjoyment of them is secured from all interveniences by the death of the Testator.
VER. XVIII, XIX, XX, XXI, XXII. . ; unde; hence, Therefore, Syr. , propter hoc, quia, propter. For this Cause. And hence it is: Arab. , Syr. , was confirm∣ed, dedicatum fuit; was dedicated, consecrated, separated unto sacred use. , Syr. When the whole Command was enjoyned. Vul. Lat. lecto omni mandato legis: The command of the Law being read; taking  and  for the same. Arias exposito secundum legem. Most cum reci∣tasset; having repeated, recited, namely out of the Book. . The Syriack reads only , of an Heifer; as the Arabick omits  also, of Goats, it may be in compliance with the story in Moses, with∣out cause, as we shall see.  is omitted in the Syriack. Whereupon neither the first (Testament) was dedicated without Blood. For when Moses had spoken every Precept to all the People according to the Law, he took the blood of Calves and of Goats with water and Scarlet wool, and Hyssop, and sprinkled both the Book and all the People; Saying, This is the Blood of the Testament which God hath enjoyned unto you. Moreover he sprinkled with Blood, both the Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of the Ministry; And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; and without shed∣ding of blood is no Remission. What we have before observed is fully confirmed in this Discourse; namely, that the Apostle intended not to argue absolutely and precisely from the Name and Nature of a Testament properly so called, and the use of it among men. For he makes use of these things no further, but as unto what such a Testament hath in common with a Solemn Covenant; which is, that they are both confirmed and ra∣tified by death. Wherefore it was necessary that the new Testament, as it was a Testa∣ment, should be confirmed by death; and as it had the Nature of a Covenant, it was to be so by such a Death as was accompanyed by blood-shedding. The former was proved before from the general Nature and Notion of a Testament; the latter is here proved at large from the way and manner, whereby the first Covenant was con∣firmed or dedicated. But the Apostle in this Discourse, doth not intend merely to prove that the first Covenant was dedicated with Blood, which might have been dispatched in a very few words: But he declares moreover in general what was the use of blood in Sa∣crifices on all occasions under the Law; whereby he demonstrates the Use and Efficacy of the blood of Christ, as unto all the Ends of the new Covenant. And the Ends of the use of Blood under the old Testament he declares to have been two; namely Purification and Pardon, both which are comprised in that one of the Expiation of Sin. And these things are all of them applyed unto the blood and Sa∣crifice of Christ in the following verses. In the Exposition of this Context we must do three things, (1) Consider the Difficulties that are in it. (2) Declare the Scope, Design, and force of the Ar∣gument contained in it. (3) Explain the particular passages of the whole. 1. Sundry Difficulties there are in this Context which arise from hence, that the account which the Apostle gives of the Dedication of the first Covenant, and of the Tabernacle, seems to differ in sundry things from that given by Moses, when all things were actually done by him, as it is recorded, Exod. 24. And they are these that follow. 1. That the blood which Moses took, was the blood of Calves and Goats where∣as there is no mention of any Goats or their blood, in the story of Moses.
2. That he took Water, Scarlet-wool, and Hyssop, to sprinkle it withal; where∣as none of them are reported in that story. 3. That he sprinkled the Book in Particular; which Moses doth not affirm. 4. That he sprinkled all the People; that is, the People indefinitely, for all the individuals of them could not be sprinkled. 5. There are some Differences in the words, which Moses spake in the Dedica∣tion of the Covenant, as laid down ver. 20. 6. That he sprinkled the Tabernacle with blood, and all the Vessels of it; when at the Time of the Making, and Solemn Confirmation of the Covenant, the Ta∣bernacle was not Erected, nor the Vessels of its Ministry yet made. For the Removal of these Difficulties some things must be premised in general; and then they shall all of them be considered distinctly. 1. This is taken as fixed, that the Apostle wrote this Epistle by Divine Inspira∣tion. Having evidence here of abundantly satisfactory, it is the vainest thing ima∣ginable, and that which discovers a frame of Mind disposed to Cavil at things Di∣vine, if from the Difficulties of any one Passage, we should reflect on the Autho∣rity of the whole, as some have done on this occasion. But I shall say with some confidence, he never understood any one Chapter of the Epistle, nay, nor any one verse of it aright, who did or doth question its Divine Original. There is no∣thing Humane in it, that savours, I mean, of humane Infirmity, but the whole and every part of it, are animated by the Wisdom and Authority of its Author. And those who have pretended to be otherwise minded on such slight occasions as that before us, have but proclaimed their own want of Experience in things Divine. But; 2. There is nothing in all that is here affirmed by the Apostle, which hath the least appearance of Contradiction unto any thing that is recorded by Moses in the story of these things. Yea, as I shall shew, without the Consideration and Addition of the things here mentioned by the Apostle, we cannot aright apprehend nor understand the account that is given by him. This will be made evident in the Considera∣tion of the particulars, wherein the difference between them is supposed to consist. 3. The Apostle doth not take his Account of the things here put together by him from any one place in Moses, but gathers up what is declared in the Law, in several Places unto various Ends. For as hath been declared, he doth not design only to prove the dedication of the Covenant by Blood, but to shew also the whole use of blood under the Law, as unto Purification and Remission of Sin. And this he doth to declare the Vertue and Efficacy of the blood of Christ under the new Testament, whereunto he makes an Application of all these things in the verses ensuing. Where∣fore he gathers into one head, sundry things wherein the sprinkling of blood was of use under the Law, as they are occasionally expressed in sundry Places. And this one observation removes all the difficulties of the Context; which all arise from this one supposition, that the Apostle gives here an account only of what was done at the Dedication of the first Covenant. So in particular by the Addition of those Parti∣cles , ver. 21. which we well render, moreover, he plainly intimates that what he affirms of the Tabernacle and the vessels of its Ministry, was that which was done afterwards, at another time, and not when the Covenant was first con∣firmed. On these Grounds we shall see that the Account given of these things by the A∣postle is a necessary Exposition of the Record made of them by Moses, and no more. 1. He affirms, that Moses took the blood, , of Calves and Goats. And there is a double difficulty herein; For, (1) The blood that Moses so used was the blood of Oxen, Exod. 24. 5, 6. which seems not to be well rendered by , of Calves. But this hath no weight in it. For , the word there used, signi∣fies all Cattle of the Herd, great and small; every thing that is generis bovini: And there is no necessity from the words, that we should render  there by Oxen, nor  here by Calves; we might have rendered both words by Bullocks. But (2) There is no mention at all of Goats in the story of Moses, and as we observed it is here omitted by the Syriack Translator, but without cause. Ans. 1. There were two sorts of offerings that were made on this occasion; (1) Burnt∣offerings; (2) Peace-offerings, Exod. 24. 5. They offered burnt-offerings and Sa∣crificed
Peace-offerings. The distinct expression of them, proves the offerings to have been destinct , They offered burnt offerings, and they sacrificed, or slew Peace-offerings; and as for the Peace-offerings, it is said that they were of Bullocks or Oxen; but it is not said of what sort the burnt-offer∣ings were. Yea, and it may be that although Bullocks only are mentioned, yet that Goats also were Sacrificed in this Peace-offering. For it is so far from being true, what Ribera observes on the Place, that a Goat was never offered for a Peace-of∣fering, that the contrary unto it, is directly expressed in the Institution of the Peace-offering, Deut. 3. 12. Wherefore the Blood of Goats might be used in the Peace-offering, though it be not mentioned by Moses. But, 2. The Apostle observes that one End of the Sacrifice at the Dedication of the first Covenant was purging and making Attonement, ver. 22, 23. For in all Solemn Sacrifices blood was sprinkled on the Holy Things, to purify them, and make At∣tonement for them, Deut. 16. 14, 19, 20. Now this was not to be done, but by the blood of an expiatory Sacrifice, it was not to be done by the blood of Peace-offer∣ings. Wherefore the Burnt-offerings mentioned by Moses were expiatory Sacri∣fices, to purge and make Attonement. And this Sacrifice was principally of Goats, Deut. 16. 7. wherefore the Text of Moses cannot be well understood without this Exposition of the Apostle. And we may add hereunto also, that although the blood of the Peace-offering was sprinkled on the Altar, Deut. 3. 13. yet was it not Sprinkled on the People, as this blood was; wherefore there was the use of the blood of Goats also as a Sin-offering in this great Sacrifice. 3. In the Dedication of the Priests, these two sorts of offerings were conjoyned; namely, Peace-offerings and Sin-offerings, or burnt offerings for Sin, as here they were. And therein expresly the blood of Goats was used, namely, in the Sin-offer∣ings, as the blood of Bullocks was in the Peace-offering, Lev. 9. 3, 4. Neither is there mention any where of burnt-offerings or Sin-offerings and Peace-offerings to be offered together, but that one of them was of Goats; and therefore was so infalli∣bly at this Time; as the Apostle declares. 2. It is affirmed in the Text, that he took the Blood with Water, Scarlet-wool, and Hyssop and Sprinkled it; But there is mention of none of these things in the story of Moses, but only that he sprinkled the blood. But the Answer hereunto is plain and easie. Blood under the Law was sprinkled either in less or greater quantities. Hereon there were two ways of sprinkling; the one was with the finger, when a small quantity of blood, it may be, some few drops of it were to be sprinkled, it was done with the finger; Levit. 8. 15. Chap. 16. 13. The Quantity being small, though the blood were immixed, and almost congealed, it might be so sprinkled. But there was a Sprinkling whereunto a greater proportion of blood was required; as namely, when an house was to be sprinkled and thereby purifyed; This was done by mixing running water with the blood, and then sprinkling it with Scarlet-wool and Hyssop. Levit. 14. 50, 51, 52. For these things were needful thereunto. The water prevented the blood, from being so congealed, as that it would not be sprin∣kled in any quantity. The Scarlet-wool took up a quantity of it, out of the Vessel wherein it was; and the Bunch of Hyssop was the Sprinkler. Whereupon when Moses Sprinkled the Altar, Book and People, he did it by one of these two ways; for other there was none. The First way he could not do it, namely, with his finger, because it was to be done in a great quantity. For Moses took that half of it that was to be sprinkled on the People and put it into basons, Exod. 24. 6, 8. It was there∣fore infallibly done this Latter way according as our Apostle declares. 3. It is added by the Apostle that he sprinkled the Book which is not expressed in the Story. But the Design of the Apostle is to express at large the whole Solem∣nity of the confirmation of the first Covenant, especially not to omit any thing that blood was applyed unto; because in the application he referrs the Purification and Dedication of all things belonging unto the new Covenant, unto the blood of Christ. And this was the order of the things which concerned the Book. Moses coming down from the Mount, told the People by word of Mouth, all things which God had spoken unto him, or the Sum and Substance of the Covenant which he would make with them, ver. 5. And Moses came and told the People all the words of the Lord; that is, the words spoken on Mount Sinai, the ten Commandments, and all the Judgments of the Lord, that is, all the Laws contained in Chap. 21, 22, 23.
with this Title, , these are the judgments, Chap. 21. 1. Upon the Oral Rehearsal of these words and Judgments the People gave their consent unto the Terms of the Covenant. The People answered with one voice, all the words which the Lord hath said, we will do, ver. 3. Hereon Moses made a Record, or wrote all the words of the Lord in a Book; ver. 4. This being done, the Al∣tar and Pillars were prepared, ver. 4. And it is evident that the Book which he had written was laid on the Altar, though it be not expressed. When this was done, he sprinkled the Blood on the Altar, ver. 6. After which, when the Book had been sprinkled with Blood as it lay on the Altar, it is said, he took the Book, that is, off from the Altar, and read in the audience of the People, ver. 7. The Book being now sprinkled with blood, as the Instrument and Record of the Cove∣nant between God and the People, the very same words which were before spo∣ken unto the People are now recited or read out of the Book. And this could be done for no other Reason, but that the Book it self being now sprinkled with the blood of the Covenant, it was dedicated to be the Sacred Record thereof. 4. In the Text of Moses it is said that he sprinkled the People; in Explanation whereof the Apostle affirms that he sprinkled all the People. And it was necessary that so it should be, and that none of them should be excluded from this Sprinkling. For they were all taken into Covenant with God; Men, Women and Children. But it must be granted, that for the blood to be actually Sprinkled on all individu∣als in such a Numberless Multitude, is next unto what is naturally impossible; wherefore it was done in their Representatives; and what is done towards Repre∣sentatives as such, is done equally towards all whom they do Represent. And the whole People, had two Representatives that day. (1) The twelve Pillars of Stone that were set up to represent their twelve Tribes, and, it may be, to signifie their hard and stony heart under that Covenant, ver. 4. Whereas those Pillars were placed close by the Altar, some suppose that they were Sprinkled as representing the twelve tribes. (2) There was the Heads of their Tribes, the Chief of the house of their Fathers, and the Elders, who drew nigh unto Moses and were Sprin∣kled with blood, in the Name and Place of all the People, who were that day taken into Covenant. 5. The words which Moses spake unto the People upon the Sprinkling of the Blood, are not absolutely the same in the story, and in the Repetition of it by the Apostle. But this is usual with him in all his Quotations out of the old Testament in this Epistle. He expresseth the true sense of them, but doth not curiously and precisely render the sense of every word and syllable in them. 6. The last Difficulty in this context, and that which hath an appearance of the greatest, is in what the Apostle affirmes concerning the Tabernacle and all the Ves∣sels of it; namely, that Moses sprinkled them all with Blood. And the Time which he seems to speak of, is that of the Dedication of the first Covenant. Hence a two∣fold Difficulty doth arise; First, as unto the Time; and Secondly, as unto the Thing it self. For at the Time of the Dedication of the first Covenant, the Ta∣bernacle was not yet made or erected, and so could not then be sprinkled with Blood. And afterwards when the Tabernacle was erected, and all the Vessels brought into it, there is no mention that either it or any of them were sprinkled with Blood, but only anointed with the Holy Oyl, Exod. 40. 9, 10, 11. Wherefore, as unto the first, I say, the Apostle doth plainly distinguish what he affirms of the Taber∣nacle, from the Time of the Dedication of the first Covenant. The manner of his Introduction of it , and moreover the Taberna∣cle, doth plainly intimate a Progress unto another Time and occasion. Wherefore the words of ver 21. concerning the sprinkling of the Tabernacle and its Vessels, do relate unto what follows, ver. 22. and almost all things are by the Law purged with Blood; and not unto those that precede about the Dedication of the first Covenant. For the Argument he hath in hand is not confined unto the use of Blood only in that Dedication, but respects the whole use of the Blood of Sacrifices under the Law; which in these words he proceeds unto, and closeth in the next verse. And this wholly removes the first Difficulty. And as unto the second, Expositors gene∣rally answer, that Aspersion or Sprinkling with Blood, did commonly precede Unction with the Holy Oyl. And as unto the Garments of the Priests, which were the Vessels or Utensils of the Tabernacle, it was appointed that they should be sprin∣kled
with Blood; Exod. 29. 21. and so it may be supposed that the Residue of them were also. But to me this is not satisfactory. And be it spoken without of∣fence, Expositors have generally mistaken the nature of the Argument of the Apo∣stle in these words. For he argues not from the first Dedication of the Tabernacle and its Vessels, which, for ought appears, was by Unction only; But making, as wee observed before, a Progress unto the farther use of the Blood of Sacrifices in purging according to the Law, he giveth an Instance in what was done with respect unto the Tabernacle and all its Vessels, and that constantly and Solemnly every year; and this he doth to prove his general Assertion in the next verse, that under the Law almost all things were purged with Blood. And Moses is here said to do what he appointed should be done. By his Institution, that is, the Institution of the Law, the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of it were sprinkled with Blood. And this was done Solemnly once every year; an account whereof is given, Levit. 16. 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20. On the Solemn Day of Attonement, the High Priest was to sprinkle the Mercy-seat, the Altar, and the whole Tabernacle with Blood, to make an Attonement for them, because of the Uncleannesses of the Children of Israel, the Tabernacle remaining among them in the midst of their Uncleannesses; ver. 16. This he takes notice of, not to prove the Dedication of the first Covenant with what belonged thereunto with Blood, but the use of Blood in general to make At∣tonement, and the impossibility of Expiation and Pardon without it. This is the Design and Sense of the Apostle and no other. Wherefore we may conclude, that the Account here given, concerning the Dedication of the first Covenant, and the use of Blood for Purification under the Law, is so far from containing any thing opposite unto or discrepant from the Records of Moses concerning the same things; that it gives us a full and clear Exposition of them. The second thing to be considered, is the nature of the Argument in this context; and there are three things in it, neither of which must be omitted in the Exposition of the words. He designeth, 1. to prove yet farther the necessuy of the Death of Christ, as he was the Mediator of the New Testament, both as it had the nature of a Testament, and that also of a Solemn Covenant. 2. To declare the necessity of the Kind of his Death, in the way of a Sacrifice by the effusion of Blood; because the Testament as it had the nature of a Solemn Co∣venant was confirmed and ratifyed thereby. 3. To manifest the Necessity of shedding of Blood in the confirmation of the Co∣venant, because of the expiation, purging, and pardon of Sin thereby. How these things are proved, we shall see in the Exposition of the words. There are in the words themselves, 1. A Proposition of the Principal Truth asserted; ver. 18. 2. The Confirmation of that Proposition; which is twofold, (1) From what Mo∣ses did, ver. 19. (2) From what he said, ver. 20. 3. A farther Illustration of the same Truth, by other Instances, ver. 21. 4. A general Inference or Conclusion from the whole, comprizing the Substance of what he intended to demonstrate. In the Proposition there are five things considerable. (1) A note of Introduction; Whereupon. (2) The Quality of the Proposition, it is negative; neither was. (3) The Subject spoken of; The first. (4) What is affirmed of it; it was dedi∣cated. (5) The way and manner thereof; it was not without Blood. 1. The Note of Introduction is in the Particle , which the Apostle frequently . makes use of in this Epistle, as a note of Inference in those Discourses which are Argumentative. We render it by Therefore, and Wherefore; here, Whereupon. For it intimates a confirmation of a general Rule by especially Instances. He had before laid it down as a general Maxime, that a Testament was to be confirmed by Death. For thereupon the first Testament was confirmed with the Blood of Sa∣crifices shed in their Death. Wherefore let not any think strange that the New Testament was confirmed by the Death of the Testator; for this is so necessary, that even in the confirmation of the first there was that which was analogous unto it. And moreover, it was Death in such a way, as was required unto the confirma∣tion of a Solemn Covenant. II. The Proposition hath a double Negative in it, , and , neither . was it without Blood; that is, it was with Blood, and could not otherwise be.
III. The Subject spoken of is , the first, that is, ; Testament, or . Covenant. And herein the Apostle declares what he precisely intended by the first or old Covenant, whereof he discoursed at large, chap. 8. It was the Covenant made with the People at Horeb. For that and no other was dedicated in the way here described. And to take a brief Prospect into this Covenant, the things ensuing may be observed. 1. The matter of it, or the Terms of it materially considered, before it had the formal nature of a Covenant. And these were all the things that were written in the Book, before it was laid on the Altar. Namely, it was that Epitome of the whole Law which is contained in Chap. 20, 21, 22, 23, of Exodus. And other Com∣mands and Institutions that were given afterwards, belonged unto this Cove∣nant reductively. The substance of it was contained in the Book then written. 2. The Manner of the Revelation of these Terms of the Covenant. Being pro∣posed on the Part of God, and the Terms of it being entirely of his choosing and Proposal, he was to reveal, declare, and make them known. And this he did two wayes. (1) As unto the Foundation, and Substance of the whole in the Deca∣logue. He spake it himself on the Mount, in the way and manner declared; Exod. 19. 20. (2) As unto the following Judgments, Statutes, and Rites, directive of their walking before God, according to the former fundamental Rule of the Co∣venant. These he declared by Revelation unto Moses; and they are contained in the 21, 22, and 23 Chapters. 3. The manner of its Proposal; and this also was twofold. (1) Preparatory. For before the Solemn Covenanting between God and the People, Moses declared all the Matter of it unto the People, that they might consider well of it, and whe∣ther they would consent to enter into Covenant with God on those Terms, where∣on they gave their Approbation of them. (2) Solemn, in their actual and absolute Acceptance of it, whereby they became obliged throughout their Generations. This was on the reading of it out of the Book, after it was sprinkled with the Blood of the Covenant on the Altar, ver. 7. 4. The Author of this Covenant was God himself. The Covenant which the Lord hath made with you; ver. 8. And immediately after, he is thereon called the God of Israel; ver. 20. which is the first time he was called so; and it was by vertue of this Covenant. And the Pledge or Token of his Presence, as Covenant∣ing, was the Altar, the Altar of Jehovah; as there was a Representative Pledge of the Presence of the People in the twelve Pillars or Statues. 5. Those with whom this Covenant was made were the People; that is, all the People, as the Apostle speaks, none exempted or excluded. It was made with the Men, Women, and Children; Deut. 31. 22. even all on whom was the Blood of the Covenant, as it was on the Women; or the Token of the Covenant, as it was on the Male Children in Circumcision; or both, as in all the men of Israel. 6. The Manner on the Part of the People of entring into Covenant with God, was in two Acts before mentioned. (1) In a previous Approbation of the matter of it; (2) In a Solemn engagement into it; And this was the Foundation of the Church of Israel. This is that Covenant whereof there is afterwards in the Scripture such frequent mention between God and that People, the Sole foundation of all especial Relation between him and them. For they took the Observation of its Terms on themselves for their Posterity in all Generations until the end should be. On their Obedience hereunto, or Neglect hereof, depended their Life and Death in the Land of Ca∣naan. No farther did the Precepts and Promises of it, in it self extend. But whereas it did not disanull the Promise that was made unto Abraham, and confirm∣ed with the Oath of God, four hundred years before, and had annexed unto it many Institutions and Ordinances, prefigurative and significant of Heavenly things; the People under it, had a Right unto, and Directions for the attaining of an Eternal Inheritance. And something we may hence observe. 1. The Foundation of a Church-state among any People, wherein God is to be honoured in Ordinances of instituted Worship, is laid in a Solemn Covenant between him and them. So it was with this Church of Israel. Before this they served God in their Fami∣lies, by vertue of the Promise made unto Abraham; but now the whole People were gathered into a Church-State, to worship him according to the Terms, In∣stitutions
and Ordinances of the Covenant. Nor doth God oblige any unto insti∣tuted Worship, but by vertue of a Covenant. Unto natural Worship and Obedi∣ence we are all obliged by vertue of the Law of Creation and what belongs there∣unto. And God may by a meer Act of Soveraignty prescribe unto us the Observa∣tion of what Rites and Ordinances in Divine Service he pleaseth. But he will have all our Obedience to be Voluntary, and all our Service to be Reasonable. Where∣fore, although the Prescription of such Rites be an Act of Soveraign Pleasure, yet God will not oblige us unto the Observance of them, but by vertue of a Covenant between him and us, wherein we voluntarily consent unto and accept of the Terms of it, whereby those Ordinances of worship are prescribed unto us. And it will hence follow, (1.) That Men mistake themselves, when they suppose that they are interested in a Church-state by Tradition, Custom, or as it were by Chance, they know not how. There is nothing but Covenanting with God that will enstate us in this Priviledge. And therein we do take upon our selves the observance of all the Terms of the New Co∣venant. And they are of two sorts; (1) Internal and Moral, in Faith, Repentance and Obedience. (2) Such as concern the external worship of the Gospel, in the Ordinan∣ces and Institutions of it. Without such a Covenant formally or virtually made, there can be no Church-state. I speak not at all of any such Covenants as men may make or have made among themselves, and with God, upon a mixture of things Sacred, Civil and Political, with such sanctions as they find out, and agree upon among themselves. For whatever may be the Nature, Use or End of such Covenants, they no way belong unto that concerning which we treat. For no Terms are to be brought hereinto, but such as belong directly unto the Obedience and Ordi∣nances of the New Testament. Nor was there any thing to be added unto or taken from the express Terms of the Old Covenant, whereby the Church-state of Israel was constituted. And this was the entire Rule of Gods dealing with them. The only Question concerning them was, whether they had kept the Terms of the Covenant or no. And when things fell into disorder among them, as they did frequently, as the sum of Gods charge against them was that they had broken his Covenant; so the Reformation of things attempted by their Godly Kings before, and others after the Captivity, was by reducing the People to renew this Covenant without any Addition, Alteration or Mixture of things of another nature. (2.) That so much disorder in the Worship of God under the Gospel, hath entered in∣to many Churches, and that there is so much negligence in all sorts of Persons, about the Observance of Evangelical Institutions, so little conscientious care about them, or Re∣verence in the use of them, or benefit received by them; it is all much from hence, that men understand not aright the Foundation of that Obedience unto God, which is re∣quired in them and by them. This indeed is no other but that solemn Covenant between God and the whole Church, wherein the Church takes upon it self their due observance. This renders our Obedience in them and by them, no less ne∣cessary than any Duties of Moral Obedience whatever. But this being not consi∣dered as it ought, Men have used their supposed Liberty, or rather fallen into great Licentiousness in the use of them, and few have that conscientious regard unto them, which it is their Duty to have. 2. Approbation of the Terms of the Covenant, Consent unto them, and solemn Ac∣ceptance of them, are required on our part unto the establishment of any Covenant between God and us, and our Participation of the Benefits of it. Thus Solemnly did the People here enter into Covenant with God, whereby a peculiar Relation was esta∣blished between him and them. The meer Proposal of the Covenant and the Terms of it unto us, which is done in the Preaching of the Gospel, will not make us Par∣takers of any of the Grace or Benefits of it. Yet this is that which most content themselves withal. It may be they proceed to the performance of some of the Du∣ties which are required therein; but this answers not the Design and way of God in dealing with men. When he hath proposed the Terms of his Covenant unto them, he doth neither compel them to accept of them, nor will be satisfied with such an Obedience. He requires that upon a due consideration of them, we do approve of them, as those which answer his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and such as are of Eternal advantage unto us; that they are all Equal, Holy, Righte∣ous and Good. Hereon he requires that we voluntarily choose and consent unto them, ingaging our selves Solemnly unto the Performance of them all and every
one. This is required of us, if we intend any interest in the Grace or Glory pre∣pared in the New Covenant. 3. It was the way of God from the Beginning, to take Children of Covenanters into the same Covenant with their Parents; So he dealt with this People in the establish∣ment of the first Covenant, and he hath made no Alteration herein in the esta∣blishment of the Second. But we must proceed with the Exposition of the words. IV. Of this Covenant it is affirmed, that it was consecrated with Blood; or was . not dedicated without Blood. , is solemnly to separate any thing unto a sacred use. , is the same in Hebrew. And it is not the Sanction of the Cove∣nant absolutely, that the Apostle intends in this expression, but the use of it. The Covenant had its Sanction, and was confirmed on the Part of God, in offering of the Sacrifices. In the killing of the Beasts, and offering of their Blood, did the Ratification of the Covenant consist. This is included and supposed in what is sig∣nified by the Dedication of it. But this is not an effect of the shedding and offering of Blood, but only of the sprinkling of it on the Book and the People. Thereby had it its , its consecration or dedication unto Sacred use, as the Instru∣ment of the peculiar Church-Relation between God and that People, whereof the Book was the Record. So was every thing consecrated unto its proper use under the Law, as the Apostle declares. This therefore is the mean∣ing of the words; That first Covenant which God made with the People at Mount Sinai, wherein he became their God, the God of Israel, and they became his People, was dedicated unto sacred use by Blood, in that it was sprinkled on the Book and the People, after part of the same Blood had been offered in Sacrifice at the Altar. Hence it follows that this which belongs so essentially unto the solemn confirmation of a Covenant between God and the Church, was necessary also unto the Dedication and Confirmation of the New Covenant, which is that that is to be proved. It is by the Authority of God alone that any thing can be effectually and unchange∣ably dedicated unto sacred use, so as to have force and efficacy given unto it there∣by. But this Dedication may be made by vertue of a general Rule, as well as by an especial Command. V. The Assertion of the Apostle concerning the Dedication of the first Covenant with Blood, is confirmed by an account of the matter of Fact, or what Moses did therein. ver. 19. VER. XIX. For when Moses had spoken every Precept unto all the People according unto the Law; he took the Blood of Calves and of Goats, with Water and Scarlet Wool and Hyssop, and sprinkled both the Book and all the People. There are two things considerable in the words. 1. The Person made use of in the Dedication of the Covenant, which was Moses. 2. What he did therein; which is referred unto two Heads. (1) His speaking or reading the Terms of the Covenant, every Precept out of the Book. (2) His sprinkling of the Book and People with Blood. 1. Moses was the Internuntius between God and the People in this great Trans∣action. . On Gods part he was immediately called unto this Employment. Exod. 3. And on the part of the People he was chosen and desired by them to transact all things between God and them, in the making and confirmation of this Covenant, because they were not able to bear the effects of Gods immediate Presence, Exod. 19. 19. Deut. 5. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. And this choice of a Spokesman on their part, God did approve of, ver. 27. Hence he became in a general sense a , a Me∣diator between God and Men in the giving of the Law: Gal. 3. 19. Whatever therefore was done by Moses in this whole Affair of the Dedication of the Covenant on the Part of God, or of the People, was firm and unalterable, he being a publick Person authorized unto this work. And
1. There can be no Covenant between God and Men, but in the hand or by vertue of a Mediator. The first Covenant in the state of Innocency, was immedi∣ately between God and Man. But since the entrance of sin, it can be so no more. For (1) Man hath neither Meetness nor confidence to treat immediately with God. Nor (2) Any Credit or Reputation with him, so to be admitted as an Undertaker in his own Person. Nor (3) Any Ability to perform the conditions of any Cove∣nant with God. 2. A Mediator may be either only an Internuntius, a Messenger, a Days-man; or also a Surety and an Undertaker. Of the first sort was the Mediator of the old Covenant; of the latter of the New. 3. None can interpose between God and a People in any sacred Office, unless he be called of God and approved of the People, as was Moses. 2dly. That which Moses did in this Affair, was first in way of Preparation; And there are three things in the Account of it. (1) What he did precisely. (2) With respect unto whom. (3) According to what Rule or Order he did it. 1. He spake every Precept, Vul. Lat. lecto omni Mandato; having read every command; which is the sense intended. , is as much in this place as re∣cited. . So it is rendred by most Translators, cum recitasset, that is, when he had read in the Book. For his first speaking unto the People, ver. 3. is not here in∣tended, but his reading in the Audience of the People, ver. 7. He spake what he read, that is, audibly; so it is in the story: he read it in the Audience of the Peo∣ple, so as that they might hear and understand. It is added by the Apostle that he thus read, spake, recited every Precept or Command. He took the Book of the Covenant and read in the Audience of the People, saith the Text; that is, the whole Book, and all that was contained in it, or every Precept. And the whole is reduced by the Apostle unto Precepts. It was , Eph. 2. 15. a Law, a Systeme of Precepts. And it is so called to intimate the nature of that Covenant. It consisted principally in Precepts or Commandments of Obedience, promising no Assistance for the performance of them. The new Covenant is of another nature; It is a Covenant of Promises. And although it hath Precepts also requiring Obedi∣ence, yet is it wholly founded in the Promise, whereby strength and Assistance for the performance of that Obedience are given unto us. And the Apostle doth well observe that Moses read every precept unto the People: For all the Good things they were to receive by vertue of that Covenant, depended on the Observation of every Precept. For a Curse was denounced against every one that continued not in all things written in the Law to do them. Deut. 27. 26. And we may observe; 1. A Covenant that consisted in meer Precepts without an Exhibition of Spiritual strength to enable unto Obedience, could never save sinners. The insufficiency of this Covenant unto that end, is that which the Apostle designs to prove in all this Dis∣course. But thereon a double enquiry may be made. (1) Why God gave this Covenant which was so insufficient unto this great End? This Question is propo∣sed and answered by the Apostle, Gal. 3. 19. (2) How then did any of the Peo∣ple yield Obedience unto God, if the Covenant exhibited no Aid nor Assistance unto it? The Apostle answereth in the same place; that they received it by Faith in the Promise, which was given before, and not disanulled by this Cove∣nant. 2. In all our Dealings with God, respect must be had unto every one of his Precepts. And the Reason hereof is given by the Apostle James, namely, that the Authori∣ty of God is the same in every one of them, and so may be despised in the neglect of the least as well as of the greatest. Jam. 2. 10, 11. 2dly. To whom did Moses thus read every Precept; It was, saith the Apostle, . to All the People. In the story it is said indefinitely, in the Audience of the People; as afterwards, he sprinkled the People. The Apostle adds the note of Universa∣lity in both places; to All the People. For whereas these things were transacted with the Representatives of the People, (for it was naturally impossible that the one half of the individuals of them should hear Moses reading) they were all equal∣ly concerned in what was said and done. Yet I do believe that after Moses first told the People, that is, the Elders of them, all the words of the Law, ver. 3. there was means used by the Elders and Officers, to communicate the things, yea to repeat the words unto all the People, that they might be enabled to give their
rational consent unto them. And we may observe; 1. The first eminent use of the writing of the Book of the Law, that is, of any part of the Scripture, (for this Book was the first that was written,) was that it might be read unto the People. He gave not this Book to be shut up by the Priests; to be concealed from the People, as containing Mysteries unlawful to be divulged, or impossible to be understood. Such conceits befell not the Minds of men, until the Power and Ends of Religion being lost, some got an opportunity to order the con∣cerns of it unto their own worldly Interest and Advantage. 2. This Book was both written and read in the Language which the People under∣stood and commonly spake. And a Rule was herein prescribed unto the Church in all Ages; if so be the Example of the Wisdom and Care of God towards his Church may be a Rule unto us. 3. God never required the Observance of any Rites or Duties of Worship, without a previous warranty from his Word. The People took not on them, they were not obliged unto Obedience with respect unto any positive Institutions, until Moses had read unto them every precept out of the Book. 4. The writing of this Book was an eminent Priviledge, now first granted unto the Church, leading unto a more perfect and stable condition, then formerly it had enjoyed. Hitherto it had lived on Oral Instructions, from Traditions, and by new immedi∣ate Revelations; the evident Defects whereof were now removed, and a standard of Divine Truth and Instruction set up and fixed among them. 3dly. There is the Rule whereby Moses proceeded herein, or the Warranty he . had for what he did: According to the Law. He read every Precept according to the Law. It cannot be the Law in general that the Apostle intends, for the great∣est part of that Doctrine which is so called, was not yet given or written; nor doth it in any place contain any Precept unto this purpose. Wherefore it is a particular Law, Rule or Command, that is intended. According unto the Ordi∣nance or Appointment of God. Such was the Command that God gave unto Mo∣ses for the framing of the Tabernacle; See thou make all things according to the Pat∣tern shewed thee in the Mount. Particularly it seems to be the Agreement between God and the People, that Moses should be the Internuntius, the Interpreter be∣tween them. According unto this Rule, Order or divine Constitution, Moses read all the words from God out of the Book unto the People. Or it may be the Law may here be taken for the whole Design of God in giving of the Law; so as that according unto the Law, is no more but, according unto the Soveraign Wisdom and Pleasure of God in giving of the Law, with all things that belong unto its Order and Use. And it is Good for us to look for Gods especial warranty, for what we un∣dertake to do in his service. The second thing in the words is, what Moses did immediately and Directly to∣wards the Dedication or Consecration of this Covenant. And there are three things . to this purpose mentioned. (1) What he made use of. (2) How he used it. (3) With respect unto what and whom. 1. The first is expressed in these words. He took the Blood of Calves and Goats, with water and Scarlet-wool and Hyssop. He took the Blood of the Beasts that were offered for Burnt-offerings and Peace-offerings; ver. 5, 6. Unto this End, in their slaying he took all their Blood in Basons; and made an equal Division of it. The one half he sprinkled on the Altar; and the other half he sprinkled on the People. That which was sprinkled on the Altar, was Gods Part; and the other was put on the People. Both the Mutual stipulation of God and the Congregation in this Cove∣nant, and the Equality of it, or the Equity of its Terms, were denoted hereby. And herein lies the principal force of the Apostles Argument in these words: Blood was used in the Dedication of the first Covenant. This was the Blood of the Beasts offered in Sacrifice unto God. Wherefore both Death, and Death by blood-shed∣ing, was required unto the Confirmation of a Covenant. So also therefore must the new Covenant be confirmed, but with Blood and a Sacrifice far more precious than they were. This Distribution of Blood, that half of it was on the Altar, and half of it on the People; the one to make Attonement, the other to purifie or Sanctifie; was to teach the two-fold Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, in making Attonement for Sin unto our Justification, and the purifying of our Natures in Sanctification.
2. With this Blood he took the things mentioned with respect unto its Use,  which was Sprinkling. The manner of it was in part declared before. The Blood being put into Basons, and having water mixed with it to keep it fluid and aspersible, He took a bunch or bundle of Hyssop bound up with Scarlet wool, and dipping it into the Basons sprinkled the Blood, until it was all spent in that Service. This Rite or way of Sprinkling was chosen of God as an expressive token or sign of the effectual Communication of the Benefits of the Covenant unto them that were sprinkled. Hence the Communication of the Benefits of the Death of Christ unto Sanctification is called the Sprinkling of his Blood. 1 Pet. 1. 2. And our Apostle comprizeth all the effects of it unto that end, under the name of the blood of Sprinkling, chap. 12. 24. And I fear that those who have used the expression with some contempt, when applyed by themselves unto the sign of the Communication of the Benefits of the Death of Christ in Baptisme, have not observed that Reverence of Holy things, that is required of us. For this Symbol of Sprinkling was that which God himself chose and appointed, as a meet and apt token of the Communication of Covenant-Mercy, that is, of his Grace in Christ Jesus unto our Souls. And, The Blood of the Covenant will not benefit or advantage us without an especial and particular Application of it unto our own Souls and Consciences. If it be not as well Sprinkled upon us, as it was offered unto God, it will not avail us. The Blood of Christ was not divided as was that of these Sacrifices, the one half being on the Altar, the other on the People; but the Efficacy of the whole produced both these effects, yet so, as that the one will not profit us without the other. We shall have no Benefit of the Attonement made at the Altar, unless we have its efficacy on our own Souls unto their Purification. And this we cannot have unless it be sprinkled on us; un∣less particular Application be made of it unto us by the Holy Ghost, in and by an especial Act of Faith in our selves. 3. The Object of this Act of Sprinkling was the Book it self and all the People. The same Blood was on the Book wherein the Covenant was recorded, and the  People that entred into it. But whereas this Sprinkling was for purifying and purging, it may be enquired, Unto what end the Book it self was sprinkled, which was holy and undefiled? I An∣swer; There were two things necessary unto the Dedication of the Covenant with all that belonged unto it. (1) Attonement. (2) Purification; and in both these re∣spects it was necessary that the Book it self should be sprinkled. (1) As we observed before, it was sprinkled as it lay upon the Altar, where Attonement was made; And this was plainly to signifie that Attonement was to be made by blood, for sins committed against that book or the Law contained in it. Without this that book would have been unto the People like that given to Ezekiel, that was written within and without, and there was written therein Lamentations and Mourning and Woe; Chap. 2. 10. Nothing but Curse and Death could they expect from it. But the Sprinkling of it with blood as it lay upon the Altar, was a Testimony and Assur∣ance, that Attonement should be made by blood, for the sins against it, which was the Life of the things. (2) The Book in it self was Pure and Holy; and so are all Gods Institutions; but unto us every thing is unclean that is not sprinkled with the blood of Christ. So afterwards the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of it were pu∣rified every year with blood, because of the Uncleannesses of the People in their Transgressions. Levit. 16. Wherefore on both these accounts, it was necessary that the Book it self should be sprinkled. The blood thus sprinkled was mingled with water. The natural Reason of it was, as we observed, to keep it fluid and aspersible. But there was a Mystery in it also. That the blood of Christ was typified by this blood of the Sacrifices used in the Dedication of the Old Covenant, it is the Apostle's Design to declare. And it is probable that this mixture of it with water might represent that Blood and Water which came out of his side when it was pierced. For the Mystery thereof was very great. Hence that Apostle which saw it and bare Record of it in particular. Joh. 19. 34, 35. affirms likewise that he came by water and blood; and not by blood only, 1 Epist. chap. 5. ver. 6. He came not only to make Attonement for us with his blood, that we might be justifyed; but to sprinkle us with the efficacy of his blood in the communication of the Spirit of Sanctification compared unto water.
For the Sprinkler it self composed of Scarlet wool and Hyssop, I doubt not but that the Humane Nature of Christ, whereby and through which all Grace is communica∣ted unto us, (for of his fulness we receive, and Grace for Grace) was signified by it. But the Analogie and Similitude between them are not so evident, as they are with respect unto some other Types. The Hyssop was an humble Plant, the meanest of them, yet of a sweet savour, 1. Kings 4. 33. So was the Lord Christ amongst men in the days of his flesh, in comparison of the tall Cedars of the Earth. Hence was his complaint; that he was as a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the People; Psal. 22. 6. And the Scarlet wool might represent him as red in the blood of his Sacrifice. But I will not press these things, of whose Interpretation we have not a certain Rule. Secondly; The principal Truth asserted is confirmed by what Moses said, as well as what he did. VER. XX. Saying; This is the Blood of the Testament which God hath enjoyned unto you. The Difference between the words of Moses and the Repetition of them by the Apostle is not material, as unto the sense of them.  Behold, in Moses, is rendred by  This; both demonstrative Notes of the same thing. For in pro∣nouncing of the words Moses shewed the Blood unto the People; And so Behold the Blood, is all one as if he had said, this is the Blood. The making of the Covenant in the words of Moses is expressed by  hath cut, divided, solemnly made. This the Apostle renders by , hath enjoyned or commanded you. And this he doth partly to signify the Foundation of the People's Acceptance of that Covenant, which was the Authority of God, enjoyning them or requiring them so to do; partly to inti∣mate the nature of the Covenant it self which consisted in Precepts and Injunctions principally, and not absolutely in Promises as the New Covenant doth. The last words of Moses, Concerning all these words, the Apostle omits. For he includes the sense of them in that word, which the Lord commanded you. For he hath respect therein both unto the words themselves written in the Book, which were Precepts and Injuncti∣ons, as also the command of God for the Acceptance of the Covenant. That which Moses said, is, This is the blood of the Testament. Hence the Apo∣stle , proves that Death and the shedding of blood therein was necessary unto the con∣secration and establishment of the first Testament. For so Moses expresly affirms in the Dedication of it; This is the blood of the Covenant; without which it could not have been a firm Covenant between God and the People; Not I confess from the nature of a Covenant in general; for a Covenant may be solemnly established with∣out Death or Blood; but from the especial end of that Covenant, which in the confirmation of it, was to prefigure the confirmation of that new Covenant, which could not be established but with the blood of a Sacrifice. And this adds both force and evidence unto the Apostles Argument. For, he proves the Necessity of the Death and Blood-shedding or Sacrifice of Christ in the confirmation of the New Covenant, from hence, that the Old Covenant which in the Dedication of it was prefigurative hereof, was not confirmed without Blood. Wherefore, whereas God had solemnly pro∣mised to make a new Covenant with the Church, and that different from or not ac∣cording unto the Old, which he had proved in the foregoing Chapter, it follows una∣voidably, that it was to be confirmed with the Blood of the Mediator, (for by the blood of Beasts it could not be) which is that Truth wherein he did instruct them; And no∣thing was more cogent to take off the scandal of the Cross and of the sufferings of Christ. For the Enuntiation it self, This is the blood of the Covenant, it is figurative and Sacramental. The Covenant had no blood of its own; but the blood of the Sa∣crifices is called the blood of the Covenant, because the Covenant was dedicated and established by it. Neither was the Covenant really established by it. For it was the Truth of God on the one hand, and the stability of the People in their profes∣sed Obedience on the other, that the establishment of the Covenant depended on. But this blood was a confirmatory sign of it, a Token between God and the Peo∣ple of their mutual engagements in that Covenant. So the Paschal Lamb was cal∣led
Gods Pass-over, because it was a sign and token of Gods passing over the houses of the Israelites when he destroyed the Aegyptians, Exod. 12. 11, 21. With reference it was unto those Sacramental Expressions, which the Church under the Old Te∣stament was accustomed unto, that our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Institution of the Sacrament of the Supper, called the Bread and the Wine, whose use he appointed therein, by the names of his Body and Blood; and any other Interpretation of the words wholly overthrows the Nature of that holy Ordinance. Wherefore this Blood was a confirmatory Sign of the Covenant. And it was so, (1) From Gods Institution, he appointed it so to be, as is express in the words of Moses. (2) From an Implication of the Interest of both Parties in the blood of the Sacrifice; God, unto whom it was offered, and the People on whom it was sprinkled. For it being the blood of Beasts that were slain, in this use of it each Party as it were engaged their lives unto the Observation and Performance of what was re∣spectively undertaken by them. (3) Typically, in that it represented the blood of Christ, and fore-signified the Necessity of it unto the confirmation of the New Covenant; See Zech. 9. 11. Matth. 26. 28. Luk. 22. 20. 1 Cor. 11. 15. So was it the blood of the Covenant, in that it was a sign between God and the Peo∣ple of their mutual consent unto it, and their taking on themselves the Perfor∣mance of the Terms of it, on the one side and the other. The Condescension of God in making a Covenant with men, especially in the ways of the Confirmation of it, is a blessed Object of all holy Admiration. For, (1) The infi∣nite Distance and disproportion that is between him and us, both in Nature and State or Condition; (2) The Ends of this Covenant which are all unto our Eternal Advantage, he standing in no need of us or our Obedience; (3) The Obligation that he takes upon himself unto the Performance of the Terms of it, whereas he might righteously deal with us in a way of meer Soveraignity; (4) The Nature of the Assurance he gives us thereof, by the blood of the Sacrifice, confirmed with his Oath; Do all set forth the ineffable Glory of this Condescension. And this will at length be made manifest in the Eternal Blessedness of them by whom this Cove∣nant is Embraced, and the Eternal Misery of them by whom it is Refused. The Apostle having given this full Confirmation unto his principal Assertion, he adds, for the Illustration of it, the use and efficacy of blood, that is, the blood of Sacrifices, unto Purification and Attonement. VER. XXI, XXII. Moreover he sprinkled with Blood both the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of the Ministry. And almost all things are by the Law purged with Blood; and without shedding of Blood is no Remission. The manner of the Introduction of this Observation, ver. 21. by ; . and in like manner, do manifest that this is not a continuation of the former Instance, in that which belongs thereunto; but that there is a Proceed unto another Argument, to evince the farther use of the sprinkling of blood unto Purification and Attonement under the Old Testament. For the Design of the Apostle is not only to prove the Necessity of the Blood of Christ in Sacrifice, but also the Efficacy of it in the taking away of Sins. Wherefore he shews that as the Covenant it self was dedicated with blood, which proves the Necessity of the blood of Christ unto the confirmation of the New Covenant; so all the ways and means of Solemn Worship were purged and purified by the same means which demonstrates its Efficacy. I will not absolutely oppose the usual Interpretation of these words; namely, that at the Erection of the Tabernacle, and the Dedication of it with all its Vessels and Utensils, there was a Sprinkling with Blood, though not expresly mentioned by Moses, for he only declares the Unction of them with the Holy Oyl, Exod. 40. 9, 10, 11. For as unto the Garments of Aaron and his Sons, which belonged unto the Service of the Tabernacle, and were laid up in the holy places, it is expresly de∣clared that they were sprinkled with Blood, Exod. 29. 21. And of the Altar, that it was Sprinkled when it was Anointed, though it be not said where∣with. And Josephus who was himself a Priest, affirms that all the things be∣longing
unto the Sanctuary were dedicated with the sprinkling of the blood of the Sa∣crifices; which things are usually pleaded for this Interpretation. I shall not as I said, absolutely reject it; yet because it is Evident that the Apo∣stle makes a Progress in these words, from the Necessity of the Dedication of the Covenant with blood, unto the use and efficacy of the Sprinkling of blood in all holy Administrations, that they might be accepted with God, I choose rather to referre the words unto that solemn sprinkling of the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of it by the High Priest with blood of the Expiatory Sacrifice which was made annually on the day of Attonement. This the Introduction of these words by  and  doth declare. As the Covenant was dedicated with the sprinkling of blood, so in like manner afterwards, the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of it were sprinkled with blood unto their sacred use. All the Difficulty in this Interpretation is, that Moses is said to do it. But that which we intend, was done by Aaron and his Successors. But this is no way to be compared with that of applying it unto the Dedication of the Tabernacle, where∣in there was no mention made of blood or its sprinkling, but of anointing only. Wherefore Moses is said to do what he appointed to be done, what the Law required which was given by him. So Moses is frequently used for the Law given by him. Act. 15. 21. For Moses of old time hath in every City them that preach him, be∣ing read in the Synagogues every Sabbath-day; that is, the Law. Moses then sprin∣kled the Tabernacle, in that by an everlasting Ordinance he appointed that it should be done. And the words following, ver. 22. declare that the Apostle speaks not of Dedication but of Expiation and Purification. This Sprinkling therefore of the Tabernacle and its Vessels was that which was done annually on the Day of Attonement, Levit. 16. 14, 16, 18. For therein, as the Apostle speaks, both the Tabernacle and all the Vessels of the Ministry were sprinkled with blood; as the Ark, the Mercy-seat, and the Altar of Incense; And the End of it was to purge them because of the Uncleannesses of the People, which is that the Apostle intends. And that which we are taught herein, is, that I. In all things wherein we have to do with God, whereby we approach unto him, it is the blood of Christ, and the Application of it unto our Consciences, that gives us a gracious Acceptance with him. Without this all is unclean and defiled. II. Even Holy things and Institutions, that are in themselves clean and unpolluted, are relatively defiled, by the unholiness of them that use them; defiled unto them. So was the Tabernacle because of the uncleannesses of the People among whom it was. For unto the unclean all things are unclean. From this whole Discourse the Apostle makes an Inference which he afterwards applies at large unto his present Purpose. VER. XXII. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood; And without shed∣ding of Blood is no Remission. There are two Parts of this Verse; or there is a double Assertion in it. (1) That almost all things are by the Law purged with Blood. (2) That without shedding of Blood is no Remission. In the first of these there is considerable the Assertion it self, and the Limitation of it. 1. The Assertion it self is, that by the Law all things were purged with Blood; , . according unto the Law; the Rule, the Commands, the Institution of it; In that way of worship, Faith and Obedience, which the People were obliged unto by the Law. According unto the Law, there was a Necessity of the Blood of Sa∣crifices for the purging of Sin, and making of Attonement. This he inferres and concludes from what he had said before, concerning the Dedication of the Covenant, and the Purification of the Tabernacle with all the Vessels of its Ministry. And from hence he designs to prove the Necessity of the Death of Christ, and the Efficacy of his Blood for the purging of Sin, whereof those legal things were Types and Re∣presentations. Of these legal Purifications, or purgings by Blood, we have treated already.
2. The Limitation of this Assertion is in the word , almost. Some few Pu∣rifications . there were under the Law that were not by Blood. Such, as some judge, was that by the Ashes of an Heifer mingled with water; whereof we have treated on ver. 13. But I am not certain that this may be esteemed a Purification without Blood. For the Heifer whose Ashes were used in it was first slain, and its blood poured out. Afterwards the blood as well as the flesh was burnt and reduced unto Ashes. Wherefore that way of Purification cannot be said to be without blood. And it was a Type of the Purifying efficacy of the blood of Christ, who offered himself an whole Burnt-offering unto God, through the fire of the Eternal Spirit. But there were two sorts of Purifications under the Law, wherein blood was neither formally nor virtually applyed or used. The one was by Fire in things that would endure it; Numb. 31. 23. And the Apostle speaks of things as well as Persons, as the word  declares. The other was by water, whereof there were many In∣stances. See Exod. 19. 10. Levit. 16. 26, 28. chap. 22. 6, 7. . All other Representations were , in Blood;  for , by the Offering and Sprinkling of Blood. . From the consideration of the Purifications mentioned, the Apostle adds the Li∣mitation of Almost. For the conceit of some of the Antients, that  is as much as ferè, and is to be joyned with purged, were almost purged, that is, they were so only ineffectually, is most improper. For it is contrary to the natural construction of the words, and the direct intention of the Apostle. Only we may observe, that the Purifications which were by fire and water, were of such things as had no immediate Influence into the Worship of God, or in such cases as wherein the Worship of God was not immediately concerned; nor of such things wherewith Conscience was defiled. They were only of external Pollutions, by things in their own nature Indifferent; and had nothing of Sin in them. And the Sacred Institutions which were not concerning the immediate Worship of God, nor things which in themselves did defile the Consciences of Men, were as hedges and fences about those which really did so. They served to warn Men not to come near those things which had a real defilement in themselves. See Matth. 15. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. Thus almost all things, that is, absolutely all, which had any in∣ward real Moral defilement, were purged with Blood, and directed unto the purg∣ing efficacy of the Blood of Christ. And we may observe, that 1. There was a great variety of legal Purifications. For as all of them together could not absolutely purge Sin, but only direct unto what would do so; so none of them by themselves could fully represent that one Sacrifice by blood, whereby all sin was to be purged; therefore were they multiplyed. 2. This variety argues that in our selves we are ready to be Polluted on all oc∣casions. Sin cleaveth unto all that we do, and is ready to defile us even in our best Duties. 3. This variety of Institutions was a great part of the Bondage-state of the Church under the Old Testament; a Yoke that they were not able to bear. For it was al∣most an insuperable Difficulty to attain an Assurance that they had observed them all in a due manner; the Penalties of their Neglect being very severe. Besides, the outward Observation of them was both burdensome and chargeable. It is the Glory of the Gospel that we are directed to make our Address by Faith on all occasi∣ons unto that one Sacrifice by the Blood of Christ, which cleanseth us from all our sins. Howbeit many that are called Christians, being ignorant of the Mystery thereof, do again betake themselves unto other ways for the Purification of Sin, which are multiplied in the Church of Rome. 4. The great Mystery wherein God instructed the Church from the Foundation of the World, especially by and under legal Institutions, was that all purging of Sin was to be by blood. This was that which by all Sacrifices from the Beginning, and all Legal Institutions, he declared unto Mankind. Blood is the only means of Purging and Attonement. This is the Language of the whole Law. All was to manifest, that the washing and purging of the Church from Sin, was to be looked for from the blood of Christ alone. The second Assertion of the Apostle is, that without shedding of blood there is no Remission. Some would have these words to contain an Application of what is spo∣ken before, unto the blood of Christ. But it is manifest that the Apostle yet con∣tinues
in his Account of things under the Law, and enters on the Application of them not before the next verse. Wherefore these words, , according to the Law, or by vertue of its Institutions, are here to be repeated. By the Law without shedding of blood, that is, in Sacrifice, there was no Remission. Yet, though that Season be particularly intended, the Axiom is universally true, and ap∣plicable unto the New Covenant; Even under it, without shedding of blood is no Remission. The Curse of the Law was, that he that sinned should die; But whereas there is no man that liveth and sinneth not, God had provided that there should be a Testifi∣cation of the Remission of Sins, and that the Curse of the Law should not be imme∣diately executed on all that sinned. This he did by allowing the People to make Attonement for their sins by blood, that is, the blood of Sacrifices; Levit. 17. 11. For hereby God signified his Will and Pleasure in two things, (1) That by this blood there should be a Political Remission granted unto sinners, that they should not die under the sentence of the Law, as it was the Rule of the Government of the Nation. And in this sense, for such sins as were not Politically to be spared, no Sacrifice was allowed. (2) That real Spiritual Forgiveness, and gracious Accep∣tance with himself, was to be obtained alone by that which was signified by this blood, which was the Sacrifice of Christ himself. And whereas the sins of the People were of various kinds, there were particular Sacrifices instituted to answer that variety. This variety of Sacrifices with respect unto the various sorts or kinds of sins, for which they were to make Attonement, I have elsewhere discussed and explained. Their Institution and Order is recorded, Levit. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And if any Person neglected that especial Sacrifice which was appointed to make Attonement for his especial Sin, he was left under the sen∣tence of the Law, Politically and Spiritually, there was no Remission. Yea also, there might be, there were sins that could not be reduced directly unto any of those for whose Remission sacrifices were directed in particular. Wherefore God gra∣ciously provided against the Distress or Ruine of the Church on either of these Ac∣counts. For whether the People had fallen under the neglect of any of those especial ways of Attonement, or had contracted the Guilt of such sins, as they knew not how to reduce unto any sort of them that were to be expiated, he had gratiously pre∣pared the great Anniversary Sacrifice, wherein publick Attonement was made for all the Sins, Trangressions and Iniquities of the whole People, of what sort soever they were; Levit. 16. 21. But in the whole of his Ordinances he established the Rule, that without shedding of blood was no Remission. There seems to be an Exception in the case of him who was so poor that he could not provide the meanest offering of blood for a Sin-offering. For he was allowed by the Law to offer the Tenth part of an Ephah of fine flower for his Sin, and it was forgiven him. Levit. 5. 11, 12, 13. Wherefore the word , almost, may be here again repeated, because of this single case. But the Apostle hath respect unto the general Rule of the Law. And this exception was not an ordinary Constitution, but depended on the Impossibility of the thing it self, whereunto it made a gracious Condescension. And this Necessity oft-times of it self without any Constitution sus∣pends a positive Law, and gives a Dispensation unto the infringers of it. So was it in the case of David, when he eat of the Shew-bread in his hunger; and as to works of Mercy on the Sabbath day, which Instances are given by our Savi∣our himself. Wherefore the particular exception on this consideration did ra∣ther strengthen then invalidate the general Rule of the Law. Besides the nearest ap∣proach was made unto it that might be. For fine flower is the best of the bread, whereby Mans Life is sustained; and in the Offering of it, the Offerer testified that by his sin he had forfeited his own Life and all whereby it was sustained, which was the meaning of the Offering of Blood. The Expositors of the Roman Church do here greatly perplex themselves, to secure the Sacrifice of their Mass, from this destroying sentence of the Apostle. For a Sacrifice they would have it to be, and that for the Remission of the sins of the liv∣ing and the dead. Yet they say it is an unbloody Sacrifice. For if there be any blood shed in it, it is the Blood of Christ, and then he is Crucified by them afresh every day; as indeed in some sense he is, though they cannot shed his Blood. If it be unbloody, the Rule of the Apostle is, that it is no way available for the Remission of
sins. Those that are sober have no way to deliver themselves, but by denying the Mass to be a proper Sacrifice for the Remission of Sins, which is done expresly by Estius upon the place. But this is contrary unto the direct assertions contained in the Mass it self, and razeth the very Foundation of it. Now if God gave them so much Light under the Old Testament, as that they should know, believe, and profess, that without shedding of Blood is no Remission, how great is the Darkness of Men under the New Testament, who look, seek, or endeavour any other way after the pardon of sin, but only by the Blood of Christ. 2. This is the great Demonstration of the Demerit of sin, of the Holiness, Righte∣ousness, and Grace of God. For such was the Nature and Demerit of Sin, such was the Righteousness of God with respect unto it, that without shedding of Blood it could not be pardoned. They are strangers unto the one and the other, who please themselves with other imaginations. And what Blood must this be? That the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin, was utterly impossible, as our Apo∣stle declares. It must be the Blood of the Son of God; Rom. 3 24, 25. Act. 20. 28. And herein were glorified both the Love and Grace of God, in that he spared not his only Son, but gave him up to be a bloody Sacrifice in his Death for us all. VER. XXIII. In the following Verses unto the End of the Chapter, the Apostle makes an Ap∣plication of all that he had discoursed concerning the Services and Sacrifices of the Tabernacle, with their use and efficacy on the one hand; and the Sacrifice of Christ, its nature, use and efficacy on the other, unto his present Argument. Now this was to demonstrate the Excellency, Dignity and Vertue of the Priesthood of Christ, and the Sacrifice of himself that he offered thereby, as he was the Media∣tor of the New Covenant. And he doth it in the way of Comparison, as unto what there was of Similitude between them; and of opposition, as unto what was singular in the Person and Priesthood of Christ, wherein they had no share; declaring on both accounts the incomparable Excellency of him and his Sacrifice, above the Priests of the Law and theirs. And hereon he concludes his whole Discourse with an Elegant comparison and opposition between the Law and the Gospel, wherein he comprizeth in few words the substance of them both, as unto their effects on the Souls of men. That wherein in general there was a Similitude in these things, is expressed, Verse 23. . There is no Difference of Importance in the Translation of these words by any Interpreters of Reputation, and singly they have been all of them before spoken unto. Only the Syriack renders  by  Similitudes, not unaptly. VER. XXIII. It was therefore necessary that the Patterns of things in the Heavens should be purified with these; but the Heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifices then these. An Entrance is made in these words into the comparison intended. For as unto both sorts of Sacrifices compared, it is here granted in general, that they purged the things whereunto they were applyed. But there is a Difference also laid down in this verse, namely, as unto the things that were purified by them, and conse∣quently in the nature of their respective Purifications. There is in the words, (1) A note of Inference, or dependance on the former Discourse; Therefore. (2) A Double Proposition of things of divers natures com∣pared
together. (3) The Modification of both those Propositions, It was necessary. (4) In the first Proposition there is (1) The subject Matter spoken of; The Patterns of things in the Heavens. (2) What is affirmed of them as necessary to them; that they should be purified. (3) The Means whereby; with these. (5) The same things are proposed in the second, namely, (1) The things spoken of, or the Heavenly things themselves. (2) What is affirmed of them is traduced from the other Proposition; they also were purified. (3) The means whereby they were so; with better Sacrifices then these. 1. That which first occurrs is the Note of Inference, or Dependance on the for∣mer  Discourse; Therefore. And it hath an equal respect unto both parts of the Assertion. And it is not the Being of the things but their Manifestation that is in∣tended. From what hath been said concerning the legal Purification of all things, and the spiritual Purification that is by the Sacrifice of Christ, these things are evi∣dent and manifest. 2. Of both the things affirmed it is said that it was necessary they should be so; that is, it was so from Gods Institution and Appointment. There was no Neces∣sity  in the nature of the things themselves, that the Patterns of Heavenly things should be purged with these Sacrifices; but on Supposition that God would in and by them represent the Purification of the Heavenly things, it was Necessary that they should be thus purged with Blood. And on the supposition of the same Di∣vine Ordination that the Heavenly things themselves should be purified, it was ne∣cessary that they should be purified with better sacrifices then these, which were altoge∣ther insufficient unto that End. 3. The Subject of the first Proposition is the Patterns of things in the Heavens. The  are the  in the next words. Things in the Heavens are Heavenly things. And they are the same with , in the next verse; figures of the true things. The things intended are those which the Apo∣stle hath discoursed of; The Covenant, the Book, the People, the Tabernacle, with  all the Vessels of its Ministry. These he calls , which we well render Patterns. And Patterns are of two sorts, (1) Such as are , Exemplaria; Those from and according unto which any other thing is framed. That is the Pat∣tern of any thing, according unto which it is contrived, made and fashioned. So a Scheme or Frame drawn and delineated is the Pattern of an Edifice. (2) Such as are exemplata, ; that are framed according unto other things, which they do resemble and represent. These also are . The things mentioned were not Patterns of the Heavenly things in the first sense. The Heavenly things were not framed by them, to answer, resemble and repre∣sent them. But they were so in the latter only. And therefore in the first constitu∣tion of them, those which were durable and to abide, as the Tabernacle with all its Utensils and Vessels, with the positure and disposal of them, were made and erected according unto an original Pattern shewed in the Mount. Or they were framed according unto the Idea of the Heavenly things themselves, whereof he made a Representation unto Moses and communicated a Resemblance of them unto him according unto his own Good Pleasure. This is the Order of these things. The Heavenly things themselves were designed, framed and disposed in the Mind of God, in all their Order, Causes, Beauty, Ef∣ficacy and Tendency unto his own Eternal Glory. This was the whole Mystery of the Wisdom of God for the Redemption and Salvation of the Church by Jesus Christ. This is that which is declared in the Gospel, being before hid in God from the Foundation of the World. Ephes. 3. 8, 9, 10. Of these things did God grant a Typical Resemblance, Similitude, and Pattern in the Tabernacle and its services. That he would make such a kind of Resemblance of those Heavenly things as unto their kind, nature and use, that he would instruct the Church by them, was an Act of his meer Soveraign Will and Pleasure. And this is that effect of his Wisdom, which was manifest under the Old Testament; whereon the Faith and Obedience of the Church was wholly to acquiesce in his Soveraignty. And this their Resem∣blance of Heavenly things, which they had not from their own nature, but meerly from the Pleasure of God, gave them all their Glory and Worth, which the Saints under the Old Testament did in some Measure understand. The present Jews do, as their Forefathers did under the Degeneracy of their Church, conceive
their Glory to consist in the Materials and curious structure of them, things that the wealth and Art of men might exceed. But in themselves they were all earthly, carnal, perishing, and liable unto all sorts of Corruption. Much inferior they were in Nature and Glory, unto the Souls of Men, which were conversant in their highest and most noble Acts about them. But herein alone consisted their honour, worth and use; They were Patterns of Heavenly things. And we may observe, that The Glory and Efficacy of all ordinances of Divine Worship, which consist in outward Observance (as it is with the Sacraments of the Gospel) consist in this, that they re∣present and exhibit Heavenly things unto us. And this Power of Representation they have from divine Institution alone. 2. What they were Patterns of is expressed; namely, of Heavenly things. What these were in particular, must be spoken unto in the Exposition of the next  Proposition, whereof they are the Subject; The Heavenly things themselves. 3. Of these things it is affirmed that they were purified. The Apostle had treat∣ed  before of a double Purification. (1) Of that which consisted in a cleansing from Defilements of its own; Sprinkling the Unclean, and Sanctifying to the Purifying of the Flesh, ver. 13. 22. (2) That which consisted in a Dedication unto Sacred Use. But this also had some respect unto uncleanness. Not unto any that the things so De∣dicated had in themselves; but because of the Uncleanness of them that were to make use of them. This was such as that God would have the intervention of the Sprinkling of Blood between him and them in all their services; as he declares, Levit. 16. 15, 16, 17. And this he would do, that he might teach them the ab∣solute and universal necessity of the purifying Efficacy of the Blood of Christ, in all things between him and sinners. Of this Purification he gives us in this Discourse two Instances. (1) That which was Initial, at the first Solemnization of the Co∣venant; ver. 18, 19, 20. (2) That which was Annual in the Sprinkling of the Tabernacle and its Vessels, because of the Uncleannesses of the People; ver. 22. This latter Purification is that which is intended. 4. The means whereby they were thus to be purifyed, is, with these. In the  next Proposition, the Heavenly things themselves are said to be purified , with Sacrifices. But the Purification of these Patterns was not absolutely confined unto Sacrifices. Water and Scarlet wool and Hyssop, and the Ashes of an Heifer in some cases were required thereunto. With these, that is, with all those things which were appointed by the Law to be used in their Purification or Dedication unto sacred Use. 5. If enquiry be made, Why these Patterns were thus purified, the Apostle affirms  that it was necessary it should be so. This as it respects both Propositions in this verse equally, was spoken unto in general before. The grounds of this Necessity with respect unto these Patterns, were these, 1. The Will and Command of God. This is that which originally or in the first place makes any thing necessary in Divine worship. This is the only spring of rational Obedience in instituted Worship; Whatever is without it, whatever is beyond it, is no part of Sacred Service. God would have them thus purified. Yet also was there herein this manifest Reason of his Will, namely, that thereby he might represent the Purification of Heavenly things. On this Supposition that God would so represent heavenly things by them, it was necessary that they should be purifyed. (2) Seeing he would have them purified there was a Meetness that they should be so with these things. For being themselves carnal and earthly, as were the Tabernacle and all the vessels of it, it was meet they should be purifyed with things carnal also; Such as were the Blood of Beasts, Water, Hyssop, and Scarlet-wool. (3) In particular it was necessary that they should be purified with the Blood of Sacrifices; because they were Types of those things; which were to be purified with the only proper Expiatory Sacrifice. These were the Foundati∣ons of the whole Systeme of Mosaical Rites and Ordinances; and on them they stood, until they were removed by God himself. And that which we should learn from hence, is, a due consideration of that Re∣spect which we ought to have to the Holiness of God in his Worship and Service. He did manifest it unto us, to beget in us a due Reverence of it; He would never admit of any thing therein, but was purifyed according unto his own Institution. All other
things he always rejected as unclean and prophane. Without a due Apprehension hereof, and endeavouring to have both our Persons and our Services purified by the Sprinkling of the Blood of Christ, neither they nor we can be accepted before him The other Proposition in the Text, is, that the Heavenly things themselves were to be purified with better Sacrifices. The first thing in the words is the Subject of the Proposition. The Heavenly . things themselves; that is, the things whereof the other were the Patterns, by which God represented them unto the Church. But what these things are, is not easie to determine. Some say that Heaven it self is intended, the Superetherial Heavens; the Place of the present Residence of Christ, and of the Souls of them that are saved by him. But taking the Heavens absolutely, especially for that which is called the Heaven of Heavens, with respect unto their Fabrick, and as the Place of Gods Glorious Residence, and it is not easie to conceive how they stood in need to be purified by Sacrifice. Some say it is Spiritual things, that is, the Souls and Consciences of men, that are intended. And they are called Heavenly in opposition unto the things of the Law, which were all carnal and Earthly. And it is certain, they are not to be excluded out of this Expression. For unto their Purification, is the vertue of the Sacrifice of Christ directly applyed; ver. 14. Yet the whole context, and the Antithesis in it, between the Types and the things typified, make it evident, that they alone are not intended. To clear the Mind of the Apostle in this expression, sundry things must be ob∣served out of the Context. 1. The Apostle treats of a double Purification, as was immediately before decla∣red In this Application of his Discourse he intends them both. But whereas some things stood in need of the one only, namely, of that of Dedication unto God, and some of the other, namely, purging from Defilements, as the Souls and Consciences of Men; they are distinctly to be applyed unto the things spoken of according to their Capacity. Some were purified by Dedication; some by actual cleansing from real Defilements; both which are included in the Notion of Sacred Purification, or Sanctification. 2. These Heavenly things must be all those and only those whereof the other were Patterns or Resemblances. This is plain in the Context and Antithesis. Wherefore, 3. By Heavenly things, I understand all the effects of the Counsel of God in Christ, in the Redemption, Worship, Salvation, and Eternal Glory of the Church; that is, Christ himself in all his Offices, with all the Spiritual and Eternal Effects of them on the Souls and Consciences of men, with all the worship of God by him ac∣cording unto the Gospel. For of all these things those of the Law were the Pat∣terns. He did in and by them give a Representation of all these things, as we may see in particular. (1.) Christ himself, and the Sacrifice of himself were typed out by these things. To prove this is the principal Purpose of the Apostle. They were the Shadow, he the Body or Substance, as he speaks elsewhere. He was the Lord from Heaven; who is in Heaven, who speaks from Heaven. 1 Cor. 15. 49. Joh. 3. 13. (2) All spiritual and eternal Grace, Mercy, Blessings, whereof the Souls of Men are made Partakers by the Mediation and Sacrifice of Christ, are Heavenly things, and are constantly so called, Heb. 3. 1. Ephes. 1. 3. Joh. 3. 12. Eph. 2. 6. (3) The Church it self and its worship are of the same kind; the things principally to be pu∣rified by these Sacrifices; It is Gods Heavenly Kingdom; Ephes. 5. 25, 26. (4) Heaven it self is comprised herein, not absolutely, but as it is the Mansion of Christ, and the Redeemed in the Presence of God for evermore. Hereon, the Enquiry will be, how these things are said to be purified? For of real Purification from Uncleanness not one of them is capable, but only the Church, that is, the Souls and Consciences of men. I Answer, That we are to have recourse unto that twofold sense of Purification before laid down; namely, of ex∣ternal Dedication, and internal Purging; both which are expressed by the name of Sanctification in the Scripture. Most of the things that were purified by the Blood
of the Sacrifices at the giving of the Law, were so in the first sense and no other∣wise. The Covenant, the Book of the Law, and the Tabernacle with all its Ves∣sels, were purified in their sacred Dedication unto God and his service. Thus were all the Heavenly things themselves purified. Christ himself was Sanctified, Consecrated, Dedicated unto God in his own Blood. He Sanctified himself, Joh. 17. 19. and that by the Blood of the Covenant; Heb. 10. 29. even when he was Consecrated or made perfect through sufferings; chap. 2. 10. So was the Church and the whole worship of it dedicated unto God; made holy unto him; Ephes. 5. 25, 26. And Heaven it self was dedicated to be an habitation for ever unto the Mystical Body of Christ, in perfect Peace with the Angels above, who had never sinned. Eph. 1. 10. Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. But yet there was moreover a real Purification of the most of these things. The Church, or the Souls and Consciences of Men, were really Cleansed, Purified and Sanctified with an internal Spiritual Purification Eph. 5. 25, 26. Tit. 2. 14. It was washed in the blood of Christ, Rev. 1. 5. and is thereby cleansed from Sin. 1 Joh. 1. 7. And Heaven it self was in some sense so Purified, as the Tabernacle was be∣cause of the sins of the People among whom it was. Levit. 16. 16. Sin had en∣tered into Heaven it self in the Apostacy of Angels; whence it was not pure in the sight of God. Job 15. 15. And upon the sin of man, a state of Enmity ensued be∣tween the Angels above and Men below; so that Heaven was no meet Place for an habitation unto them both, until they were reconciled, which was done only in the Sacrifice of Christ, Eph. 1. 10. Hence if the Heavenly things were not defil∣ed in themselves, yet in Relation unto us they were so; which is now taken away. The Summ is; As the Covenant, the Book, the People, the Tabernacle were all purified and dedicated unto their especial ends, by the Blood of Calves and Goats, wherein was laid the Foundation of all gracious entercourse between God and the Church, under the Old Covenant; So all things whatever, that in the Counsel of God belonged unto the New Covenant, the whole Mediation of Christ with all the Spiritual and Eternal Effects of it, were Confirmed, Dedicated unto God, and made effectual unto the ends of the Covenant, by the Blood of the Sacri∣fice of Christ, which is the spring from whence Efficacy is communicated unto them all; and Moreover, the Souls and Consciences of the Elect are Purified and Sancti∣fied from all defilements thereby, which work is gradually carried on in them, by renewed Applications of the same Blood unto them, until they are all presented unto God, Glorious, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing. And we are taught, that The one Sacrifice of Christ with what ensued thereon, was the only means to render effectual all the Counsels of God, concerning the Redemption and Salvation of the Church Eph. 1. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Rom. 3. 24, 25, 26. Of these Heavenly things, it is said, that they were purified with better Sacrifices than these;  is added to encrease the signification : All sober Expositors agree that here is an Enallage of Number, the plural put for the singular. The one Sacrifice of Christ is alone intended. But because it an∣swered all other Sacrifices, exceeded them all in Dignity, was of more Use and Efficacy than they all, it is so expressed. That one Sacrifice which comprized the Vertue, Benefit and Signification of all other. The Gloss of Grotius on these words is intolerable, and justly offensive unto all Pious Souls. , saith he, quia non tantum Christi perpessiones intelligit, sed eorum qui ipsum sectantur, unà cum precibus & operibus Misericordiae. Is it possible that any Christian should not tremble to joyn the Sufferings of Men and their works, with the Sacrifice of Christ, as unto the same kind of Efficacy in purifying of these Heavenly things? Do they make Attonement for Sin? Are they offered unto God for that end? Are they sprinkled on these things for their Purification? 4. The Modification of the former Proposition belongs unto this also. It was necessary these things should be thus purified. (1) As that which the Holiness of God required, and which therefore in his Wisdom and Grace he appointed. (2) As that which in it self was meet and becoming the Righteousness of God; Heb. 2. 10. Nothing but the Sacrifice of Christ, with the everlasting Efficacy of his most pre∣cious
Blood, could thus purifie the Heavenly things, and dedicate the whole new Creation unto God. The last thing we shall observe hereon, is, that it was  that this Dedicati∣on and Purification is ascribed unto. Now  is a slain Sacrifice, a Sacrifice as slain; a Sacrifice by Mactation, Killing or shedding of blood; so is  also. Wherefore it is the Sacrifice of Christ in his Death and Blood-shedding, that is the Cause of these things. Other  of him there was none, he offered none. For the vindication hereof we must examine the Comment of Schlictingius on this Place. His Words are, Licet enim non Sanguinem suum Christus deo obtulerit, sed se ipsum; tamen sine sanguinis effusione offerre se ipsum non potuit ne{que} debuit. Ex eo veró quod diximus sit, ut Autor Divinus Christum cum victimis legalibus conferens, perpetuò fugiat dicere Christi sanguinem fuisse oblatum; et nihilominus ut similitudini serviat, perpetuò Christi sanguinis fusionem insinuet, quae nisi antecessisset, haud quaquam tam plena tam{que} concinna inter Christum & victimas antiquas comparatio institui potuisset. Ex his ergo manifestum est in illa sancta celestia, ad eorum dedicationem emundationem{que} peragendam, victimam pretiosissimam, proinde non sanguinem hircorum & vitulorum, imò ne sanguinem quidem ullum, sed ipsum Dei filium, id{que} omnibus mortalis naturae exuviis depositis, quo nulla pretiosior & sanctior victima cogitari potuit, debuisse inferri. Ans. (1) The Distinction between Christ offering his Blood, and offering himself to God, (the Foundation of this Discourse) is coyned on purpose to pervert the Truth. For neither did Christ offer his Blood unto God, but in the offering of himself; nor did he offer himself unto God, but in and by the shedding and offer∣ing of his Blood. There is no Distinction between Christ offering of himself and offering of his Blood, other then between the Being of any thing, and the Form and manner of its being what it is. (2) That he could not offer himself without the antecedent effusion of his Blood, seems a kind concession, but it hath the same Design with the preceding Distinction. But in the offering of himself he was , a slain Sacrifice, which was in and by the effusion of his Blood; in the very shedding of it, it was offered unto God. (3) It is an useless Observation, that the Apostle in comparing the Sacrifice of Christ with the legal Victims, doth (as it is said) care∣fully avoid the saying that he offered his Blood. For in those legal Sacrifices the Beasts themselves were always said to be offered, although it was the Blood alone, where∣with Attonement was made on the Altar; Levit. 17. 11. And this the Apostle expresly ascribes unto the Blood of Christ, in answer unto the Blood of Bulls and Goats; ver. 13, 14. (4) The Apostle doth not insinuate the mention of the shedding of the Blood of Christ only to make up a full and fit comparison with the legal Victims, as is impudently insinuated; But he directly ascribes the whole effect of Reconciliati∣on, Peace, Attonement, Remission of sins, and Sanctification unto the Blood of Christ, as shed and offered unto God. And this he doth not only in this Epistle where he insists on this comparison; but in other places also where he hath no re∣gard unto it. Rom. 3. 25. Eph. 1. 7. chap. 5. 2, 25, 26. Tit. 2. 14. Rev. 1. 5. (5) Having advanced thus far, in the close of his Exposition he excludes the blood of Christ from any more Interest or efficiency in the Purification of these Heavenly things, then the Blood of Goates and Calves; which is such an open contradiction unto the whole Design and express words of the Apostle, as that the Assertion of it exceeds all the bounds of Sobriety and Modesty. From the Words thus opened, we may Observe unto our own Use. 1. Neither could Heavenly Things have been made meet for us, or our use, nor we have been meet for their enjoyment, had they not been dedicated, and we been purged by the Sacrifice of Christ. There was no suitableness neither in them unto us, nor in us unto them, until it was introduced by the Blood of Christ. Without the Effi∣ciency hereof, Heavenly things would not be Heavenly unto the minds and souls of men; they would neither please them nor satisfie them, nor make them Blessed. Unless they themselves are purged, all things, even Heavenly things themselves would be unclean and defiled unto them. Tit. 1. 15. 2. Every eternal Mercy, every spiritual Priviledge is both purchased for us, and sprinkled unto us, by the Blood of Christ. 3. There is such an Uncleanness in our Natures, our Persons, our Duties and Wor∣ship;
that unless they and we are all sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, neither we nor they can have any Acceptance with God. 4. The Sacrifice of Christ is the one, only, everlasting fountain and spring of all Sanctification and sacred Dedication; whereby the whole new Creation is purified and dedicated unto God. VER. XXIV. The Opposition between the High Priests of the Law, and their Sacrifices, with their Efficacy, and the Lord Christ with his Sacrifice and its Efficacy, is farther carried on in this verse. And this is done in an Instance of a Dissimil tude between them, as it was shewed in general before, in how many things they did agree. And this Dissimilitude consists in the place and manner of the Discharge of their Office, after the great Expiatory Sacrifice, which each of them did offer. The Causal Connexion of the words doth also intimate, that a farther Evidence is given unto what was before laid down; namely, that Heavenly things were pu∣rified by the Blood of Christ. For as an Assurance thereof, upon the Dedi∣cation of the new Covenant, he entered into Heaven it self. Had he purified the Things only on the Earth, we could have entered only into an Earthly Sanctuary, as did the High Priest of Old. But he is entered, as the Apostle now declares, into Heaven it self, which in the gracious Presence of God therein, is the spring and Center of all the things purified by his Sacrifice. . , Syr.  into the House of the Sanctuary. Sancta; Sacrarium; Sanctuarium; Sancta Sanctorum; the most holy Place. , Manufacta; manibus extructa; built with hands. , Syriack,  which is the similitude of that which is true. Vul. Exemplaria verorum. Exemplar respondens veris illis. An example answering unto the true, a Resemblance of the True. ; Syr.  before the face; faciei, vultui, conspectui; in the Presence. VER. XXIV. For Christ is not entered into the Holy Places, (the Sanctuary) made with hands, the figures of the true; But into Heaven it self now to appear in the Presence of God for us. There is in the words a Dissimilitude between the Lord Christ and the Priests of the Law, or an Opposition between what was done by the one and the other. And one Branch of the Antithesis, as unto Affirmation on the one hand, is includ∣ed in the Negation on the other. For in that he says he is not entered into the Holy Places made with hands, it is affirmed that the High Priest did so of Old, and no more. In the words there is, I. The Subject spoken of, that is Christ. II. A Double Proposition concerning Him. 1. Negative; that he is not entered into the Holy Places made with hands. 2. Affirmative; that he is so, into Heaven it self. III. The End of what is so affirmatively ascribed unto him. To appear in the Pre∣sence of God for us. 1. The Subject spoken of is Christ. Jesus, saith the Vulgar Latine. But all Greek Copies with the Syriack, have Christ. From the 15th. verse he had spoken . indefinitely of the Mediator of the New Covenant, what he was to be, and what he had to do, whoever he were. This Mediator and the High Priest of the Church are one and the same. He makes Application of all he had said, unto one singular Person, Christ our High Priest. That which in general is ascribed unto him, or spoken of him both negatively
and affirmatively, is an Entrance; That which was the peculiar Dignity of the  High Priest of Old, wherein the principal Discharge of his Duty did consist, and whereon the Efficacy of his whole Ministration did depend, was, that He, and He alone did enter into the Holy Place, the Typical Representation of the Presence of God. Wherefore such an entrance must our High Priest have after he had offered himself once for all. II. This entrance of our High Priest as unto the place whereinto he entred, is  expressed, first, Negatively; not into the Holy Places made with hands. The place intended is the Sanctuary or most Holy Place in the Tabernacle. It is here expres∣sed in the Plural Number to answer the Hebrew ; for so the LXX render their Reduplications, wherewith they supply their want of superlatives. These Holy Places Christ entered not into. A Double Description is here given of this Place. (1) As unto its Nature; (2) As unto its Use. 1. As unto its Nature, it was made with hands; built by the hands of Men. The  manner of this Building was part of its Glory; for it relates unto the framing and erection of the Tabernacle in the Wilderness. And as this was wholly directed by God himself, so he endowed them in an extraordinary manner with singular Skill and Wisdom by whom the work was wrought. But as unto the thing it self, it is a diminution from its Glory, not absolutely but comparatively; yet was still made by the hands of Men, and so had no Glory in comparison of that which doth excel, namely, Heaven it self. 2. As unto the use of these Holies, they were  is sometimes used for , that which is signified by the Type; and this  we commonly call the Antitype. So is the word used by the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 21. The Substance of what is typified. Sometimes it is used for ; The Type and Resemblance of the thing signified. So is it here used, and well rendered Figures. And what the Apostle calls  in the foregoing verse, he here calls . They are therefore the same; only they express different respect and notions of the same things. As the Delineation and Represen∣tation of Heavenly things in them were obscure and dark, they were  Similitudes, Resemblances of Heavenly things; As that Representation which they had and made of them, was a Transcript from the Original Pattern and Idea in the Mind of God, and shewed unto Moses in the Mount, they were  or express Figures. And they were thus Figures of the True; that is, the true Holies. True in these expressions is opposed unto Shadowing and Typical, not unto that which is false or  abulterate. So Joh. 1. 17, 18. real, substantial, the things originally in all these Institutions. This is a brief Description of the Place whereinto the High Priest under the Law did enter, wherein his great Priviledge did consist, and whereon the Efficacy of all his other Administrations did Depend. And it is described, (1) With respect unto its Institution, it was the most Holy Place, peculiarly dedicated unto the Reception of the especial Pledges of the Presence of God. (2) As unto its Fabrick; it was made with hands; though of an excellent structure, directed by God himself, and framed by his especial command; yet was it in its self no more but the work of Mens hands. (3) As unto its principal end and use; it was a figure and Resemblance of Heavenly things. All Gods Appointments in his service, have their proper sea∣son, Beauty and Glory and Use, which are all given them by his Appointment. Even the things that were made with mens hands, had so, whilst they had the force of a Divine Institution. To enter into the Presence of God represented by the Ty∣pical Pledges of it in this place, was the height of what the High Priest under the Law attained unto. And this he did on the Ground of the Dedication and Purifi∣cation of the Tabernacle by the Blood of the Sacrifices of Goats and Calves. And it may be said, if the Lord Jesus Christ be the High Priest of the Church, hither or into this place he ought to have entered. I Answer, He ought indeed so to have done, if by his Sacrifice he had purified only earthly things. But whereas he had no such Design, nor were the temporal things of the whole Creation worth the Purification with one drop of his Blood, but they were things Spiritual and Heavenly that were purified by his Sacrifice, he was not to enter into the Holy Place made
with hands, the Figures of the same, but into Heaven it self. In opposition unto what is denyed of him, and which is therein ascribed unto the High Priest of the Law; the place whereinto he did enter is called Heaven it self.  The Entrance spoken of was Sacerdotal, not Triumphant and Regal, as I have elsewhere declared. And by this Heaven it self a peculiar place is intended. The Apostle hath in several places affirmed that in his Ascension he passed through the Heavens; and was made higher then the Heavens. Wherefore by this, Heaven it self, some place that is called so by the way of Eminency, is intended. This in the Scripture is sometimes called the Heaven of Heavens, and the third Heaven; The place of the peculiar Residence of the Presence, Majesty and Glory of God, and of his Throne; where all his Blessed Saints enjoy his Presence, and all his Holy Angels minister unto him. A Place above all these aspectable Heavens, the Heavens which we do behold. The Entrance of Christ into Heaven as our High Priest, was into it as the Tem∣ple of God, wherein the Chief thing considerable is the Throne of Grace. For it is that which answers unto and was signified by the entrance of the High Priest into the most Holy Place in the Tabernacle. And there was nothing therein but the Ark and the Mercy-seat, with the Cherubims of Glory overshadowing them, which, as we have declared, was a Representation of a Throne of Grace. He en∣tered likewise into Heaven Triumphantly as it was the Palace of God, the Throne of the Great King, and sat down at the Right hand of the Majesty on high; But this he did with respect unto the Execution of his Kingly Office with Authority and Po∣wer. For as the Offices of Christ are distinct, and their Exercise is so also; so Heaven it self wherein he now dischargeth them all, is proposed unto us, under divers Considerations, distinctly answering unto the work that the Lord Christ hath yet to perform therein. And this serves, 1. Unto the Direction and Encouragement of Faith. When we apply our selves unto Christ to seek for Aid for the subduing and destruction of our spiritual Adver∣saries, by his ruling Power, that mighty Power whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, we consider him on the Throne of Majesty in the full Possession of all Power in Heaven and Earth; Hereby is Faith both encouraged and directed in its Acting or approach unto him. And when we go unto him for relief under our Temptations with a sense of the Guilt of Sin, which requires tenderness and com∣passion, we consider him as in the Temple of God appearing as our High Priest be∣fore the Throne of Grace. Chap. 4. 14, 15, 16. 2. This Representation is the spring of all Spiritual Consolation. God on a Throne of Grace, the Lord Christ before it in the Exercise of his office with Faithfulness, Compassion and Power, is the Spring and Center of all the Comforts of the Church. Schlictingius affirms on this Place, that these things are spoken of Christ, only in a neat and handsom Metaphor under which he is compared unto the Priests of old. And the whole of his Discourse tends unto this, that it is a Comparison framed or coyned by the Apostle for the Illustration of what he intends. But this is not to inter∣pret the meaning of his words, but directly to oppose his whole design. For it is not a fancied framed. Comparison that the Apostle insists on, but a Declaration of the Typical Significancy of legal Institutions; and his Purpose is to manifest the Accom∣plishment of them all in Christ alone. Lastly; The End of this Sacerdotal Entrance of Christ into Heaven is expressed;  Now to appear in the Presence of God for us. A farther Degree of Opposition between our High Priest and those of the Law, is expressed in these words. They entred into the Holy Place to appear for the Peo∣ple, and to present their Supplications unto God. But this was only in an Earth∣ly Tabernacle, and that before a Material Ark and Mercy-Seat. In what is here ascribed unto Christ, there are many differences from what was so done by them. 1. In the Time of what he did or doth; , Now: At this present Season and  always. What those others did was of no continuance. But this NOW is ex∣pressive of the whole Season and Duration of time from the Entrance of Christ into Heaven, unto the Consummation of all things. So he declares it in the next Verse. He never departs out of the Sanctuary to prepare for a new Sacrifice as
they did of old. There is no moment of Time wherein it may not be said, He now appeareth for us. 2. In the End of his Entrance into this Heavenly Sanctuary: , that . is, ; to appear; Absolutely his Entrance into Heaven had other Ends, but this is the only End of his entring into Heaven as Gods Temple, the Seat of the Throne of Grace, as our High Priest. And the whole Discharge of the remaining Duties of his Sacerdotal Office are comprized in this word, as we shall immediately demonstrate. 3. In that he doth thus appear ; Vultui, Conspectui, Faciei . Dei; That is, the immediate Presence of God, in opposition unto the Typical Symbols of it in the Tabernacle, before which the High-Priest presented him∣self. The High Priest appeared before the Ark, the Cherubims and Mercy-seat com∣posed into the Form of a Throne: Christ enters into the real Presence of God, stand∣ing in his sight, before his Face; and this expresseth his full Assurance of his Suc∣cess in his undertaking, and his full discharge from that Charge of the Guilt of Sin which he underwent. Had he not made an end of it, had he not absolutely been freed from it, he could not have thus appeared with Confidence and Bold∣ness in the Presence of God. Lastly; This is said to be done  For us. This referrs only to Appear;  to appear for us; that is, as we shall see, to do all things with God for us, at the Throne of Grace that we may be saved. The words being Opened, the Nature of the thing it self, namely of the present Appearance of Christ in Heaven, must be farther enquired into. And it may be declared in the ensuing Observations. 1. It is an Act of his Sacerdotal Office. Not only He who is our High Priest doth so appear, but he so doth as the High Priest of the Church. For such was the Duty of the High Priest under the Law, whereby it was typified and represented. His Entrance into the Holy Place and Presentation of himself before the Mercy-seat was in the discharge of his office, and he did it by Vertue thereof. And this is one principal Foundation of the Churches Comfort, namely that the present Appear∣ance of Christ in the Presence of God, is a part of his Office, a Duty in the Dis∣charge of it. 2. It is such an Act and Duty of our High Priest as supposeth the Offering of him∣self a Sacrifice for Sin, antecedent thereunto. For it was with the blood of the ex∣piatory Sacrifices offered before on the Altar, that the High Priest entred into the Holy Place. It hath therefore regard unto his antecedent Sacrifice, or his offering himself in his death and blood-shedding unto God. Without a supposition hereof, he could not as our High Priest have entred into the Sanctuary and have appeared in the Presence of God. Wherefore 3. It supposeth the Accomplishment of the Work of the Redemption of the Church. His words in this Appearance before God, are expressed, Joh. 17. 4. I have glo∣rified thee on the Earth, I have finished the work thou gavest me to do; and now I come unto thee. He was sent of God into the World on this great Errand, for this great Work; and he returned not unto him, he appeared not in the Presence of him that sent him, until he had fulfilled it, and was ready in all things to give an Account of it unto the eternal Glory of God. 4. In this his Appearance he presents himself unto God as a Lamb that had been slain. Rev. 5. 6. He is now alive and lives for ever. But there must as unto Effi∣cacy in this Appearance be a Representation of his Sacrifice, his Suffering, his Death, his Blood, of himself as a Lamb slain and offered unto God. And this was to be so in Answer unto the blood of the Expiatory Sacrifice, which the High Priest carried into the Holy Place. For he was himself both the Priest and the Sacrifice, the Offerer and the Lamb. And as that Blood was sprinkled before the Ark and the Mercy-seat, to apply the Attonement made unto all the sacred pledges of Gods Presence and Good Will; so from this Representation of the Offering of Christ, of himself as a Lamb that had been slain, in this his Appearance before God, doth all the Application of its Benefits unto the Church proceed. 5. He thus appears for us. He is therein therefore the great Representative of the Church, or he represents the whole Church of his Redeemed, unto God.
There is more in it then meerly for our Good. It is as it were the Appearance of an Advocate, a Law-Appearance in the behalf of others. So is it declared 1 Joh. 2. 1, 2. He will at the end of all present his whole Church unto God, with the whole work of his Love and Grace accomplished towards them. He first so pre∣sents it unto himself and then to God, Eph. 5. 26, 27. Now he presents them as the Portion given unto him of God out of fallen Mankind to be Redeemed and Saved; saying, behold I and the children which thou gavest me; thine they were and thou gavest them to me. I present them unto thy Love and Care, holy Father, that they may enjoy all the fruits of thine Eternal Love, all the Benefits of my Death and Sacrifice. 6. This is the great Testimony of the Continuation of his Love, Care and Com∣passion towards the Church now he is in the height of his own Glory. Love, Care and Compassion belong unto him in an especial manner as he is an High Priest, which we have declared on many occasions. They are the spring of all his Sacerdotal actings. And they are all witnessed unto in his perpetual Appearance in the presence of God for us. 7. This also comprizeth his being an Advocate. He is hereby in a continual readiness to plead our Cause against all Accusations, which is the especial Nature of his work as an Advocate; which is distinct from his Intercession, whereby he procures supplies of Grace and Mercy for us. 8. This Account of the Appearance of Christ before God on the Throne of Grace, gives direction into a right Apprehension of the way of the Dispensation of all saving Grace and Mercy unto the Church. The Spring and Fountain of it is God himself, not absolutely considered, but as a on Throne of Grace. Goodness, Grace, Love and Mercy are natural unto him; but so also are Righteousness and Judgment. That he should be on a Throne of Grace is an Act of his Soveraign Will and Pleasure, which is the original Spring of the Dispensation of all Grace unto the Church. The procuring Cause of all Grace and Mercy for the Church, as issuing from this Throne of Grace, is the Sacrifice of Christ, whereby Attonement was made for Sin, and all Heavenly things purifyed unto their proper End. Hence he is continually re∣presented before this Throne of God, as a Lamb that had been slain. The Actu∣al Application of all Grace and Mercy unto the Church and every member of it, depends on this his Appearance before God, and the Intercession wherewith it is accompanied. Schlictingius grants on the place, that Christ doth indeed Solicitously take care of the Salvation of the Church; but yet God, saith he, doth grant it of meer Mercy with∣out any regard unto Satisfaction or Merit; which, saith he, we exclude. And the only Reason he gives for their so doing is this; that where there is Satisfaction or Merit, there is no need of Oblation, Appearance or Intercession. But this Fancy (op∣posed unto the Wisdom of God in the Dispensation of himself and his Grace) ari∣seth from their Corrupt Notion of these things. If the Oblation of Christ with his Appearance in Heaven and Intercession were nothing but what they imagine them to be, that is, his Appearance in Heaven with all Power committed unto him, and the Administration of it for our Good, his Satisfaction and Merit could not direct∣ly be thence proved. Yet also on the other hand are they no way disproved there∣by; for they might be antecedently necessary unto the exercise of this Power. But the Argument is firm on the other hand. There is in the Dispensation of Grace and Mercy respect had unto Satisfaction and Merit, because it is by the Blood and Sacrifice of Christ, as it is the design of the Apostle to declare. For whereas He was therein an offering for Sin, was made Sin for us, and bare all our Iniquities, un∣dergoing the Penalty or Curse of the Law due unto them, which we call his Satis∣faction or Suffering in our stead. And whereas all that he did antecedently unto the Oblation of himself for the Salvation of the Church, he did it in a way of Obedience unto God by Vertue of the Compact or Covenant between the Father and Him for our Salvation unto his Glory, which we call his Merit; Unto these there is respect in the dispensation of Grace, or the Lord Christ lived and died in Vain. But to declare their Apprehension of these things, the same Author adds; Porro in Pontifice legali, apparitio distincta erat ab oblatione, licet utra{que} erat conjuncta & simul fieret; nempe quia alius erat Pontifex, alia victima; & apparebat quidem Ponti∣fex, offerebatur autem victima, seu sanguis victimae: At nostri Pontificis & oblatio &
apparitio, quemadmodum & interpellatio, reipsa idem sunt; quia nimirum idem est Pontifex & Victima. Dum enim apparet Christus, seipsum offert; & dum seipsum offert, apparet; dum autem & offert & apparet, interpellat. 1. It is not true that the Oblation or Offering of the Sacrifice, by the High Priest and his Appearance in the Holy Place was at the same time. For he offered his Sacrifice at the Altar without, and afterwards entred with the blood into the Holy Place. 2. He grants that the Blood of the Sacrifice was offered; but will not allow that the Blood of Christ was offered at all, nor that Christ offered him∣self before he had laid aside both flesh and blood having no such thing belonging unto him. 3. That the Sacrifice of Christ, his Oblation, Appearance, and Inter∣cession are all one and the same, and that nothing but his Power and Care in Hea∣ven for the Salvation of the Church is intended by them, is an Imagination expresly contradictory unto the whole Design, and all the Reasonings of the Apostle in the Context. For he carefully distinguisheth those things one from the other, shew∣eth the different and distinct time of them under the Old Testament, declareth their distinct Natures, Acts and Effects, with the different places of their performance. Violence also is offered unto the signification of the Words, and the common Noti∣on of things intended by them, to make way for this Conceit. In common use and force  or  are one thing, and  and  are others. It is true, the Lord Christ is in himself both the Priest and the Sacrifice; but it doth not thence follow, that his offering of himself and his Appearance in the Presence of God for us, are the same; but only that they are the Acts of the same Person. This Continual Appearance of the Lord Christ for us, as our High Priest in the Presence of God, in the way explained, is the Foundation of the Safety of the Church in all Ages; and that whereon all our Consolation doth depend; whence Relief is derived by Faith on all occasions. The Consideration hereof being right∣ly improved will carry us through all difficulties, Temptations and Trials with safety unto the End. VER. XXV. . , Syr. ; and not also; neque, neither; nor yet. , Syr.  his Soul; He made his Soul an offering for Sin. , Syr.  many times. , Syr. ; in or with Blood that was not his own properly, Heb. , with other blood, or the blood of another. Nor yet that he should offer himself often as the High Priest entreth into the Holy-Place every year with the blood of others. In the foregoing verse there is an Opposition in the Comparison between the Lord Christ, and the High Priest of the Law; yet is it such as hath its Foundation in a Similitude that is between them; and therefore respects not so much the things themselves opposed, as the manner of them. For as the Lord Christ entred not into the Holy Place made with hands, but into Heaven it self; So the High Priest had an entrance also, yet not into Heaven, but into that other Holy Place. But in this verse there is an opposition in the Comparison that hath no Foundation in any similitude between them, and that is absolutely denyed of Christ which belonged essentially unto the Discharge of the Office of the High Priest of Old. Many things ensued on the Weakness and Imperfection of the Types, which would not allow that there should be a perfect compleat Resemblance in them of the Substance it self, that all things between them exactly should answer unto One another. Hence they did at best but obscurely represent the good things to come, and in some things it was not possi∣ble but there should be a great discrepancy between them. The Assertion in these Words proceeds on a Supposition of the Duty of the High Priest, which had that Reason for it, as that it was absolutely necessary that our High Priest should not do after the same manner. The High Priest ended not his
work of offering Sacrifices by his entrance into the Holy Place with the Blood of it; but he was to repeat the same Sacrifice again every year. This therefore, in correspondence with this Type, might be expected from Christ also; namely, that whereas he offered himself unto God through the Eternal Spirit, and afterwards entred into the Holy Place or Heaven it self, he should offer himself again, and so have another entrance into the Presence of God. This the Apostle denies him to have done, and in the next verse gives a demonstration, proving it was impossible he should so do. And hereof he gives the Reason both in the remaining verses of this Chapter and the beginning of the next. The Repetition of the annual Sacrifices under the Law was mainly from hence, because they were not able perfectly to effect that which they did signifie; But the One Sacrifice of Christ did at once perfectly accomplish what they did represent. Herein therefore of necessity there was to be a difference, a Dissimilitude, an Opposition between what those High Priests did as unto the Repetition of Sacrifices, and what was done by our High Priest, which is expressed in this verse. The Introduction of the Apostles Assertion is by the disjunctive Negative, , . nor yet; It answers the Negative in the first part of the preceding verse. He entred not into the Holy Place made with hands as the High Priest; nor yet to do what the High Priest did afterwards. In the words themselves there are two things. (1) What is denyed of the Lord Christ. (2) The Limitation of that Denial unto the other part of the Comparison as unto what the High Priest did. 1. It is denied of him that he did thus enter into Heaven that he should offer him∣self often; It doth not follow, saith the Apostle, that because as an High Priest he entred into Heaven, as the High Priests of the Law entred into the Holy Place made with hands, that he should therefore offer himself often, as that High Priest offered e∣very year. It was not required of him, there was no need of it for the Reasons mentioned, it was impossible he should. For this offering of himself was not his Appearance in the Presence of God; but the One Sacrifice of himself by death, as the Apostle declares in the next verse. That he should so offer himself often, more than once, was needless from the Perfection of that one Offering; By one Offering he hath for ever perfected them that were Sanctified; And impossible from the Condition of his Person, he could not dye often. What remains for the Exposi∣tion of these words, will be declared in the removal of those false Glosses and wrestings of them, whereby some endeavour to pervert them. The Socinians plead from hence that the Sacrifice of Christ, or his offering of him∣self is the same with his Appearance in Heaven, and the Presentation of himself in the Presence of God; and they do it out of Hatred unto the Attonement made by his Blood. For, say they, it is here compared unto the entrance of the High Priest in∣to the Holy Place every year; which was only an Appearance in the Presence of God. Answ. 1. There is no such Comparison intended in the words. The Apostle mentioning the entrance of the High Priest with Blood into the Holy Place, intends only to evince the Imperfection of that Service, in that after he had done so, he was again to offer renewed Sacrifices every year, a sufficient Evidence that those Sa∣crifices could never make them perfect who came unto God by them. With Christ it was not so, as the Apostle declares. So that there is not herein a Comparison be∣tween the things themselves, but an Opposition between their Effects. 2. It is granted that the entrance of the High Priest into the Holy Place, belong∣ed unto the Complement or Perfection of his Service in the expiatory Sacrifice But the Sacrifice it self did not consist therein. So likewise did the entrance of Christ into Heaven belong unto the Perfection of the Effects and Efficacy of his Sacrifice, as unto the way of its Application unto the Church. So far there is a Comparison in the words and no further. 3. That the Sacrifice of Christ or his offering himself once for all, once and not often, is the same with his continual Presentation of himself in the Presence of God, is both false in it self, and contrary to the express design of the Apostle. For (1) It is , a slain or bloody Sacrifice, whereof he treats, as he expresly calls it, ver. 25, 26. But there is no shedding of blood in the Appearance of Christ in Heaven; nor, according to these men, any such thing appertaining unto his Nature.
(2) These things are distinguished in the Scripture from their different Natures and Effects. 1 Joh. 2. 1, 2. (3) His Sacrifice or the offering of himself, is so affirmed to be one, as to con∣sist in One individual Act. It is not only said that it was one Offering, but that it was once only offered, ver. 26, 28. This is no way reconcileable unto his continual Ap∣pearance in the presence of God. (4) His Offering is mentioned by the Apostle as that which was then past, and no more to be repeated. He hath by one Offering perfected them that are Sancti∣fied. (5) His Oblation was accompanied with, and inseparable from suffering; So he declares in the next verse; proving that he could not often offer himself, be∣cause he could not often suffer. But his Presentation of himself in Heaven, is not only inconsistent with actual Suffering, but also with any obnoxiousness thereunto. It belongs unto his state of Exaltation and Glory. (6) The time of the offering himself is limited unto the End of the World; now once in the end of the World; in opposition unto the Season that passed before; denoting a certain determinate Season in the dispensation of times; of which afterwards. (7) This Imagination is destructive of the principal design and Argument of the Apostle. For he proves the Imperfection of the Sacrifices of the Law, and their insufficiency to consummate the Church, from their annual Repetition; affirming that if they could have perfected the Worshippers, they would have ceased to have been offered. Yet was that Sacrifice, which he respects, repeated only once a year. But, on this Supposition, the Sacrifice of Christ must be offered always, and never cease to be actually offered, which reflects a greater Imperfection on it, then was on those which were repeated only once a year. But the Apostle expresly affirms that the Sacrifice, which could effect its End, must cease to be offered; Chap. 10. 2. Whereas therefore by One offering he hath for ever perfected them that are Sanctified; he doth not continue to offer himself; though he doth so, to appear in the Pre∣sence of God to make Application of the Vertue of that One offering unto the Church. The Expositors of the Roman Church do raise an Objection on this place, for no other End, but that they may return an Answer unto it, perniciously opposite un∣to and destructive of the Truth here taught by the Apostle; though some of them do acknowledge that it is capable of another answer. But this is that which they principally insist upon as needful unto their present Cause. They say therefore that if Christ cease to offer himself, then it seems that his Sacerdotal Office ceaseth also. For it belongs unto that office to offer Sacrifices continually. But there is no force in this Objection. For it belongs to no Priest to offer any other, or any more Sacri∣fices but what were sufficient and effectual unto the End of them and their office. And such was the One Sacrifice of Christ. Besides though it be not actually repeat∣ed, yet it is vertually applyed always; and this belongs unto the present discharge of his Sacerdotal Office: So doth also his Appearance in Heaven for us, with his Intercession; where he still continues in the actual exercise of his Priesthood, so far as is needful or possible. But they have an Answer of their own, unto their own Objection. They say therefore, that Christ continueth to offer himself every day in the Sacrifice of the Mass, by the hands of the Priests of their Church. And this Sacri∣fice of him, though it be unbloody, yet is a true real Sacrifice of Christ, the same with that which he offered on the Cross. It is better never to raise Objections then thus to answer them. For this is not to expound the words, but to dispute against the Doctrine of the Apostle; As I shall briefly evince. 1. That the Lord Christ hath by the One offering of himself for ever perfected them that are Sanctified, is a Fundamental Article of Faith. Where this is denied, or overthrown, either directly or by just Consequence, the Church is overthrown also. But this is expresly denied in the Doctrine of the frequent Repetition of his Sacrifice, or of the offering of himself. And there is no Instance, wherein the Ro∣manists do more expresly oppose the Fundamental Articles of Religion. 2. The Repetition of Sacrifices arose solely from their Imperfection, as the Apo∣stle declares, Chap. 10. 2. And if it undeniably proved an Imperfection in the Sa∣crifices of the Law, that they were repeated once every year in one place only; how
great must the Imperfection of the Sacrifice of Christ be esteemed, if it be not ef∣fectual to take away Sin, and perfect them that are Sanctified, unless it be repeated every day, and that, it may be, in a thousand Places? 3. To say that Christ offereth himself often, is expresly and in Terms contradicto∣ry to the Assertion of the Apostle. Whatever therefore they may apprehend of the offering of him by their Priests, yet most certain it is, that he doth not every day offer himself. But as the Faith of the Church is concerned in no offering of Christ but that which he offered himself, of himself, by the eternal Spirit once for all; so the pretence to offer him often by the Priests is highly Sacrilegious. 4. The infinite actings of the Divine Nature in Supporting and Influencing of the Humane, the inexpressible Operation of the Holy Ghost in him, unto such a pe∣culiar acting of all Grace, especially of Zeal unto the Glory of God, and compas∣sion for the Souls of men, as are inimitable unto the whole Creation, were requi∣red unto the offering of himself a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savour unto God. And how can a poor sinful Mortal man, such as are the best of their Priests; pretend to offer the same Sacrifice unto God? 5. An unbloody Sacrifice, is, (1) A Contradiction in it self. , which is the only Sacrifice which the Apostle treats of, is victimae mactatio, as well as victi∣mae mactatae oblatio. It is a Sacrifice by death, and that by blood-shedding; other  there never was any. (2) If it might be supposed, yet is it a thing altoge∣ther useless; For without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. The Rule I acknow∣ledge is firstly expressed with respect unto legal Sacrifices and Oblations: Yet is it used by the Apostle by an Argument drawn from the Nature and End of those In∣stitutions, to prove the necessity of blood-shedding in the Sacrifice of Christ himself for the Remission of Sin. An unbloody Sacrifice for the Remission of Sin, overthrows both the Law and the Gospel. (3) It is directly contrary unto the Argument of the A∣postle in the next verse; wherein he proves that Christ could not offer himself often. For he doth it by affirming, that if he did so, then must he often suffer, that is, by the Effusion of his Blood; which was absolutely necessary in and unto his Sacrifice. Wherefore an unbloody Sacrifice, which is without Suffering, whatever it be, is not the Sacrifice of Christ. For if he be often offered, he must often suffer, as the Apostle affirms. Nor is it unto any Purpose to say, that this unbloody Sacrifice of the Mass, receiveth its Vertue and Efficacy from the One Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross, as it is pleaded by the defenders of it; For the Question is not what value it hath, nor whence it hath it; but whether it be the Sacrifice of Christ him∣self or no. To sum up the substance of this whole Controversie; The Sacrifice or Offering of Christ, was (1) By Himself alone through the eternal Spirit. (2) Was of his whole Humane Nature as to the matter of it. He made his Soul an offering for Sin. (3) Was by Death and Bloodshedding, whereon its entire Efficacy as unto Attone∣ment, Reconciliation and the Sanctification of the Church, do depend. (4) Was once only offered, and could be so no more from the Glory of his Person, and the Nature of the Sacrifice it self. (5) Was offered with such glorious internal actings of Grace, as no Mortal creature can comprehend. (6) Was accompanied with his bearing the Curse of the Law, and the Punishment due unto our Sins; which were taken away thereby. And in all this the Humane Nature was supported, sustained and acted by the Divine in the same Person, which gave the whole Duty its Effica∣cy and Merit. That pretended in the Mass, is (1.) Offered by Priests without Him, or those which call themselves so; who therefore rather represent them by whom he was Crucified, then himself who offered himself alone. (2.) Is only of Bread and Wine, which have nothing in them of the Soul of Christ, allowing their Transubstan∣tiation. (3.) Can have no Influence into the Remission of Sins, being confessedly unbloody, whereas without the shedding of Blood there is no Remission (4.) Is often offered, that is, every day, declaring a greater imperfection in it, then was in the great Expiatory Sacrifice of the Law, which was offered only once a year. (5) Re∣quires unto it no Grace in the Offerer, but only an Intention to do his Office. (6) Doth in nothing answer the Curse of the Law, and therefore makes no Attonement. Wherefore these things are so far from being the same Sacrifice, as that they are opposite, inconsistent, and the admission of the One, is the Destruction of the other.
Some Observations we may take from the Text. 1. Such is the absolute Perfection of the One offering of Christ, that it stands in need of, that it will admit of no Repetition in any kind. Hence the Apostle affirms that if it be despised or neglected, there remains no more sacrifice for Sin. There is none of any other kind, nor any Repetition to be made of it self; as there was of the most solemn legal Sacrifices. Neither of them are consistent with its perfection. And this absolute Perfection of the One offering of Christ ariseth, (1) From the Dignity of his Person, Acts 20. 28. There needs no new offering after that, where∣in he who offered and who was offered, was God and Man in one Person. The Repetition of this offering, is inconsistent with the Glory of the Wisdom, Righte∣ousness, Holiness and Grace of God; and would be utterly derogatory to the dig∣nity of his Person. (2) From the Nature of the Sacrifice it self; 1. In the internal gracious actings of his Soul; He offered himself unto God through the eternal Spi∣rit. Grace and Obedience could never be more glorified. 2. In the Punishment he underwent, answering and taking away the whole Curse of the Law; any far∣ther offering for Attonement is highly Blasphemous. 3. From the Love of the Father unto him and delight in him. As in his Person, so in his one offering the Soul of God resteth and is well-pleased. 4. From its Efficacy unto all Ends of a Sacrifice. Nothing was ever designed therein, but was at once accomplished by this One offering of Christ. Wherefore 2. This one offering of Christ is always effectual unto all the Ends of it, even no less then it was in the day and hour when it was actually offered. Therefore it needs no Repetition like those of old, which could affect the Conscience of a sinner only for a season, and until the Incursion of some new sin. This is always fresh in the Ver∣tue of it, and needs nothing but renewed Application by Faith, for the communi∣cation of its Effects and Fruits unto us. Wherefore 3. The great Call and Direction of the Gospel is to guide Faith, and keep it up unto this One offering of Christ, as the spring of all Grace and Mercy. This is the imme∣diate End of all its Ordinances of Worship. In the preaching of the Word, the Lord Christ is set forth as evidently Crucified before our Eyes; and in the Ordi∣nance of the Supper especially, is it represented unto the peculiar Exercise of Faith. But we must proceed to a brief Exposition of the remainder of this Verse. The One offering of Christ is not here proposed absolutely, but in Opposition unto the High Priest of the Law, whose entrance into the Holy Place did not put an end unto his offering of Sacrifices, but his whole Service about them was to be annually repeated. This Sacrifice of the High Priest we have treated of before, and shall therefore now only open these words wherein it is expressed. 1. The Person spoken of is the High Priest; that is, any One, every One that . is so, or that was so in any Age of the Church, from the Institution of that Priest∣hood unto the Expiration of it. As the High Priest; in like manner so he did. 2. It is affirmed of him, that he entreth, in the present Tense. Some think that . respect is had unto the continuance of the Temple-service at that Time. He en∣treth, that is, he continueth so to do. And this the Apostle sometimes admits of, as Chap. 8. 4. But in this Place he intends no more but the Constitution of the Law. According unto the Law He entereth. This is that which the Law requires. And hereby, as in other Instances, the Apostle lays before their Consideration a Scheme of their ancient Worship, as it was at first established, that it might be the better compared with the Dispensation of the New Covenant, and the Ministry of Christ. 3. This Entrance is limited unto the Holy Place. The most Holy Place in the . Tabernacle or Temple, the Holy Place made with hands. 4. There is the Season of their Entrance; yearly. Once in an annual Re∣volution, . or the day fixed by the Law, the tenth day of the Month Tisri or our September. 5. The Manner of his entrance was, with the blood of others; Blood that was not  his own, as the Syriack expresseth it. The Blood of the Sacrifice of Christ was his own. He redeemed the Church, , Acts 20. 28. Hereunto  is opposed , other blood, the Blood of others; that is, the blood
of Bulls and Goats offered in Sacrifice, in for cum, say most Expositors, which is not unusual. See 1 Joh. 5. 6. Gen. 32. 10. Hos. 4. 3. The meaning is, by vertue of the Blood of others, which he carried with him into the Holy Place. That which is denied of Christ the Antitype is the Repetition of this Service, and that because of the Perfection of his Sacrifice, the other being repeated because of their Imperfection. And we may observe, that Whatever had the greatest Glory in the Old Legal Institutions, carried along with it the evidence of its own Imperfection, compared with the thing signified in Christ and his Office. The Entrance of the High Priest into the Holy Place, was the most glori∣ous Solemnity of the Law. Howbeit the annual Repetition of it was a sufficient Evi∣dence of its Imperfection, as the Apostle disputes in the beginning of the next Chapter. VER. XXVI. . is properly Causal; quia, quandoquidem, quoniam. But it is generally rendred in this Place by all Expositors, alioqui; by Concession; if it were so that he would offer, offer himself; for otherwise, ; Syr. ; He would have been a Debter; it would have been due from him. Oportebat, oportuisset; He ought. , Vul. frequenter pati. Others, saepe, saepius passum fuisse; to have suffered often, more often, frequently; that is, once every year. Syriack, ; many times, and not once only. . Vul. ab origine mundi; Others, à condito mundo; from the Foundation of the world; that is, after the entrance of Sin. , Syr. ; in the end of the World. Vul. in consummatione seculorum; sub consummationem secu∣lorum; towards the Consummation of all things. In the fulness of Time. ; ad peccatum abolendum, ad abolitionem peccati. Vul. ad destitutionem pec∣cati; Rhemist. the Destruction of Sin. ; apparuit; patefactus est. He was made manifest. ; The Vulgar renders the words, per hostiam suam apparuit; which the Rhemists translate, he hath appeared by his own Host; most absurdly both as unto words and sense. Syr. At one time he offered his Soul by the Sacrifice or immolation of himself. What  doth relate unto, we must enquire in the Exposition of the Words. VER. XXVI. For then (if otherwise) must he (he ought) often (to) have suffered since (from) the Foundation of the World: But now once in the End of the World (in the Consummation of times) hath he appeared, (been made manifest) to put away (to abolish, or for the Destruction of) Sin, by the Sacrifice of himself. There are sundry Difficulties in these words, both as to the Signification and Con∣struction of them, as also unto their sense and importance, with the Nature of the Argument contained in them, and the things treated of. I shall not repeat the va∣rious Conjectures of Expositors, most of which are alien from the mind of the A∣postle, and easie to be refuted, if that belonged any way unto the edification of the Reader. But I shall only give that Account of the whole, and the several Parts of it, which according unto the best of my understanding doth represent the mind of the Holy Ghost with perspicuity and clearness. There are two Parts of the Words. (1.) A Reason confirming the foregoing Assertion, that Christ was not often to offer himself, as the High Priest did offer Sacrifice every year when he entred into the Holy Place. For then must he &c. (2.) A Confirmation of that Reason from the Nature and End of the Sacrifice of Christ, as stated in matter of Fact according unto the Appointment of God. But now once in the End; &c.
In the first, we may consider (1) The note of Connexion, and of the Introducti∣on of the Reason insisted on. (2) The signification or sense of the Words. (3) The Ground and Nature of the Argument contained in them. 1. The Note of Connexion is , which we render, for then: If it were so; . namely, that Christ should often offer himself. Had it been otherwise, that Christ had so offered himself; so we observed that most translate the Word by alioquin. Either way the intention of the Apostle is expressed, which is to confirm what he had before affirmed by the Introduction of a new Reason of it. 2. From a Supposition of the contrary unto what he had affirmed, the Apostle proves not only the Truth, but the necessity of his Assertion. For then; (1) He must, He ought; he would have been a Debtor, as the Sy∣riack . speaks, it would have been due from him, and indispensibly required of him. It would have been so necessitate medii, which is the greatest in Divine Institutions and Duties. There could have been no such thing, unless that which he now infers from it, be allowed, which was utterly impossible. (2.) That which he ought so to have done is to suffer in the offering of himself. . All the sufferings of Christ in the whole Course of his Humiliation and Obedience, are sometimes expressed by this Word; as Chap. 5. 8. But the suffering here in∣tended is that of his Death, and the shedding of his Blood therein alone. That which accompanied, and was inseparable from his actual Sacrifice, or the immacta∣tion of himself; to have died, to have shed his blood, to have underwent the Pe∣nalty and Curse of the Law. (3) Often; frequently; as the High Priest offered Sacrifice of Old; once every year. . (4.) Since, or rather, from the Foundation of the World. This expression is som∣times . used absolutely for the Original of the World in its Creation; For the abso∣lute Beginning of Time and all things measured by it. Eph. 1. 4. Mat. 25. 34. Joh. 17. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Sometimes from what immediately succeeded on that be∣ginning; Mat. 13. 35. Luk. 11. 5. Heb. 4. 3. Rev. 13. 8. And it is in the latter sense, that it is here used. From the Foundation of the World, that is, from the first entrance of Sin into the World, and the giving of the first Promise, which was im∣mediately after the Creation of it, or its Foundation and Constitution in its Original frame. This is the first thing on record in the Scripture. So God spake by the Mouth of his Holy Prophets, since the World began. Luk. 1. 71. that is, the first Re∣velation of God unto the Church concerning the Messia, with all that succeeded. So Christ is said to be a Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, Rev. 13. 8. be∣cause of the Efficacy of his Sacrifice extending it self unto the first Entrance of Sin and the Promise thereon, immediately on the Foundation of the World. Where∣fore, The Foundation of the World absolutely is in its Creation. Before the Founda∣tion of the World, is an expression of Eternity, and the Counsels of God therein. Eph. 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20. From the Foundation of the World, is mostly the first En∣trance of Sin, and Gods Dispensation of Grace in Christ thereon. 3. The third thing considerable in the Words is the Nature and Force of the Ar∣gument contained in them; and it is taken from the most cogent Topicks. For it is founded on these evident suppositions. 1st. That the Suffering and Offering of Christ are inseparable. For although ab∣stracted from the present Subject Matter, Suffering is one thing, and offering ano∣ther; yet the Lord Christ offered himself unto God in and by his Suffering of Death. And the Reason hereof is, because he himself was both the Priest and the Sacrifice. The High Priest of old offered often, yet now once sufficed therein. For he was not the Sacrifice it self. It was the Lamb that was slain, that suffered. Christ being both, he could not offer without suffering; no more then the High Priest could offer without the suffering of the Beast that was slain. And herein doth the force of the Argument principally consist. For he proves that Christ did not, nor could offer himself often, not absolutely as though the Reite∣ration of any kind of Oblation were impossible, but from the Nature of his especial Offering or Sacrifice, which was with and by suffering, that is, his death and blood∣shedding. And this wholly explodes the Socinian Imagination of the Nature of the Offering of Christ. For if his Offering might be separated from his Suffering, and were nothing but the Presentation of himself in the Presence of God in Heaven, it
might have been reiterated without any Inconvenience, nor would there have been any force in the Arguing of the Apostle. For if his Oblation be only that Presentation of himself, if God had ordered that it should have been done only at certain seasons, as once every year, nothing inconvenient would have ensued. But the Argument of the Apostle against the Repetition of the Sacrifice of Christ, from the necessity of his suffering therein, is full of Light and Evidence; For 1. It was inconsistent with the Wisdom, Goodness, Grace and Love of God, that Christ should often suffer in that way which was necessary unto the offering of himself, namely, by his Death and Bloodshedding. It was not consistent with the Wisdom of God to provide that as the ultimate and only effectual Means of the Expiation of Sin, which was insufficient for it; For so it would have been, if the Repetition of it had been necessary. Nor was it so with his unspeakable love unto his Son, namely, that he should frequently suffer an ignominious and cursed death. It is the Eternal Ob∣ject of the Admiration of Men and Angels, that he should do it once. Had it been done often, who could have understood the Love of the Father unto the Son, and not rather have conceived that he regarded him not in comparison of the Church? Whereas indeed his Love to him, is greater than that unto all others, and the Cause of it. And moreover it would have been highly dishonourable unto the Son of God, giving an Appearance that his Blood was of no more Value or Excellency then the blood of Beasts, the Sacrifice whereof was often repeated. 2. It was impossible from the Dignity of his Person. Such a Repetition of Suffering was not consistent with the Glory of his Person, especially as it was necessary to be demonstrated unto the Salvation of the Church. That he once emptied himself and made himself of no Reputation that he might be obedient unto the Death, the Death of the Cross, proved a stumbling block unto the unbelieving Jews and Gentiles. The Faith of the Church was secured by the Evident Demonstration of his Divine Glo∣ry, which immediately ensued thereon. But as the frequent Repetition hereof would have been utterly inconsistent with the Dignity of his Divine Person, so the most raised Faith could never have attained a prospect of his Glory. 3. It was altogether needless, and would have been useless. For, as the Apostle Demonstrates, by One offering of himself and that once offered, he took away sin, and for ever perfected them that are Sanctified. Wherefore the Argument of the Apostle is firm on this Supposition, that if he were often to offer himself, then was he often to suffer also. But that he should so do, was as inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, and the Dignity of his own Person, as altogether needless as unto the End of his Offering. And As the sufferings of Christ were necessary unto the Expiation of Sin, so he suffered nei∣ther more, nor oftener then was necessary. 2dly. The Argument is also built on another Supposition; namely, that there was a necessity of the Expiation of the Sin of all that were to be saved from the Foundation of the World. For otherwise it might be objected, that there was no need at all that Christ should either offer or suffer before he did so, and that now it may be yet necessary that he should often offer himself, seeing that all Sins before were either punished ab∣solutely, or their sins were expiated and themselves saved some other way. And those by whom this supposition is rejected, as it is by the Socinians, can give no co∣lour of Force unto the Argument of the Apostle, although they invent many Allusi∣ons, whereby they endeavour to give countenance unto it. But whereas he discours∣eth of the only way and means of the Expiation of Sin, to prove that it was done at once, by the One offering of Christ, which needed no Repetition; He supposeth; (1) That sin entred into the World from the Foundation of it, or immediately upon its Foundation, namely, in the Sin and Apostacy of our first Parents. (2) That not∣withstanding this Entrance of it, that many who were sinners, as the Patriarchs from the Beginning, and the whole Israel of God under the Old Testament, had their sins expiated, pardoned, and were eternally saved. (3) That None of the Sacrifices which they offered themselves, none of the Religious Services which they per∣formed, either before or under the Law, could expiate sin, or procure the pardon thereof, or consummate them in Conscience before God. (4) That all this there∣fore was effected by Vertue of the Sacrifice or one offering of Christ. Hence it fol∣lows unavoidably, that if the Vertue of this One offering did not extend unto the taking away of all their sins, that then he must often have suffered and offered from the
Foundation of the World; or they must all have perished, at least all but only those of that Generation wherein he might have once suffered. But this he did not, he did not thus often offer himself, and therefore there was no need that he should so do, though it were necessary that the High Priest under the Law should repeat his every year. For if the Vertue of his one offering did extend it self unto the expiation of the sins of the Church, from the Foundation of the World, before it was offered; much more might and would it extend it self without any Repetition unto the Expiation of the Sins of the whole Church unto the end of the World, now it is actually offered. This is the true Force and Reason of the Ar∣gument in these words, which is cogent and conclusive. And we may hence ob∣serve, That The assured Salvation of the Church of Old from the Foundation of the World by Vertue of the one offering of Christ, is a strong Confirmation of the Faith of the Church, at present to look for and expect everlasting Salvation thereby. To this End we may consider, First, That their Faith had all the Difficulties to conflict withal, that our Faith is to be exercised with; and yet it carried them through them all and was Victorious. This Ar∣gument, for the strengthening of our Faith, the Apostle insists upon in the whole eleventh Chapter throughout. In particular, (1) They had all the Trials, Afflicti∣ons, and Temptations that we have. Some of them unto such a Degree, as the Community of Believers met not withal. Yet was not their Faith by any of them prevailed against. And why should we despond under the same Trials? (2) They had all of them the Guilt of Sin, in the same or the like kind with us. Even Eli∣jah was a man Subject unto the like Passions with others. Yet did not their Sin hinder them from being brought unto the Enjoyment of God; Nor shall ours if we walk in the steps of their Faith (3) They had all the same Enemies to conflict withal that we have. Sin, the World and Satan, made no less opposition unto them, then they do unto us; Yet were they Victorious against them all. And following their Example, we may look for the same Success. Secondly, They wanted many Advantages of Faith and Holiness which we enjoy. For (1) They had not a clear Revelation of the Nature of Gods way of Salvation. This is that which gives Life and Vigour unto Gospel-Faith. Yet did they follow God through the dark Representation of his Mind and Grace unto the eternal Enjoy∣ment of him. We cannot miss our way, unless we wilfully neglect so great Salvation. (2) They had not such plentiful Communications of the Holy Spirit, as are granted under the Gospel. But being Faithful in that little which they received, they mis∣sed not of the Reward. (3) They had not that Light, those Directions for the actings of Faith unto Consolation and Assurance, with many more Advantages un∣to all the Ends of Faith and Obedience which Believers now enjoy. Yet in this State and Condition, by Vertue of the One offering of Christ, they were all par∣doned and Eternally Saved. The Consideration hereof tends greatly to the Con∣firmation of the Faith of them who truely believe. The latter Part of this Verse contains the Confirmation of the Argument proposed in the former. And it consists in a Declaration of the true State, Nature, Efficacy and Circumstances of the One offering of Christ now accomplished according unto the Will of God. There are three things in the Words, (1) An Opposition unto, or a Rejection of the Supposition of Christs offering himself often since the Foundation of the World. (2) An Assertion of the Use, End and Efficacy of that Offering; manifesting the Uselessness of its Repetition. (3) The means of accomplishing that End, or where∣by he came to offer himself. 1. The Opposition unto the rejected Supposition is in these Words; but now once in the End of the World. And every word hath its distinct force in the Oppo∣sition. 1. As unto the Time in general: But now: , now generally is a limitation of time unto the present season; opposed to , then. But sometimes it is only a  Note of Opposition when joyned with . but, as in this place. It may be taken in either sense or include both In the latter, But now, is no more, but it is not so, it is otherwise, and so declared to be; he did not offer himself often since the World began. A Limitation of Time may also be included in it. Now, at this time and
season, it is declared that things are otherwise ordered and disposed. This makes the Opposition more Emphatical. Now it is, and now only, that Christ hath suffered, and not before. 2. He did this once;  which is opposed unto , often. The Apostle . useth this word on this occasion, ver. 28; Chap. 10. 2. So 1 Pet. 3. 18. So he doth , once for all, Chap. 10. 10. He hereby confines our thoughts about the offering of Christ unto that Time and Action wherein he offered himself unto God in his death. He speaks of it as a thing once performed and then past, which cannot be referred unto the continual Presentation of himself in Heaven. Thus it is, saith he, in matter of fact, he hath not often but once only offered himself. 3. He confirms his Opposition unto the reiterated supposition, by an especial De∣notation . of the Time when he once offered himself: He did it in the end of the world, ; In opposition unto . Not then, but now; not often, but once; not from the foundation of the world, but in the end of it. There is no Question as unto the thing it self, or the Time intended in this Ex∣position. It was the Time when our Lord Jesus Christ appeared in the flesh, and offered himself unto God. But why he should express that time, by the End of the world, in the words that our Saviour designeth the End of the world absolutely by, Mat. 28. 20. is not so plain. For there was after this a long continuance and du∣ration of the world to succeed, so far as any knows, not less then what was passed before it. Various are the Conjectures of Learned Men, about this Expression; I shall not detain the Reader with their Repetition. My thoughts are determined by what I have discoursed on Chap. 1. 1. the Exposition of which place the Reader may con∣sult on this occasion, I hope unto his satisfaction. In brief to give a short Account of what more largely I have explained and fully confirmed in the place referred unto;  and  do answer unto the Hebrew  and . And the world, not absolutely with respect unto its Essence or substance, but its duration and the Succession of Ages therein, is signified by them. And the Succession of the Times of the world, is considered unto Gods Distinction and Limitation of things in his dealing with the Church, called ; Eph. 1. 10. And Gods Distincti∣on of Time with respect unto the Dispensation of himself in his Grace to the Church may be referred unto three general heads. First, the Time before the Law: Second∣ly, that which was spent under the Law: Thirdly, that of the Exhibition of Christ in the flesh, with all that doth succeed it unto the end of the world. This last season absolutely considered, is called ; the Fulness of Time, when all that God had designed in the dispensation of his Grace was come unto that head and Consistency, wherein no Alteration should be made unto the End of the world. This is that Season which, with respect unto those that went before, is called , the end of the world, or the last Age of the world, the Consummation of the dispensation of Time, no change being afterwards to be introduced, like things which were made before in the dispensation of God. This season with respect unto the coming of Christ unto the Judaical Church is called , the latter days or the End of the dayes; namely of that Church-state, of the Dispensa∣tion of God in that season. With respect unto the whole Dispensation of God in the  all the allotted Ages of the Church, it was the Last or End of them all; It was that wherein the whole Divine Disposition of things had its Consum∣mation. Wherefore both the Entrance and the End of this season are called by the same name; the Beginning of it here, and the End of it, Mat. 28. 20. For the whole is but one entire Season. And the Preposition  in this construction with a Dative Case, signifies the Entrance of any thing; as , is at the approach of Death. Wherefore whatever hath been, or may be in the Duration of the world afterwards, the Appearance of Christ to offer himself, was , in the end of the world, that is, at the entrance of the last season of Gods dis∣pensation of Grace unto the Church. Thus it was, saith the Apostle, in matter of Fact, then did Christ offer himself and then only. With respect unto this season so stated, three things are affirmed of Christ in the following words; (1.) What he did; He appeared. (2.) Unto what end; to take away sin. (3.) By what means, by the Sacrifice of himself. But there is some Difficulty in the Distinction of these words, and so variety in
their Interpretation, which must be removed. For those words , by the Sacrifice of himself, may be referred either unto , the put∣ting away of sin, that goes before; or unto , was manifest, that follows after. In the first way the sense is, He was manifest to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself; In the latter, he appeared by the Sacrifice of himself to put away sin; which confines his Appearance unto his Sacrifice; which sense is expressed by the Vulgar Translation; per hostiam suam apparuit; he appeared by his own Host, say the Rhemists. But the former Reading of the words, is evidently unto the mind of the Apostle. For his Appearance was what he did in general with respect unto the end mentioned, and the way whereby he did it. 1. There is what he did. He appeared. He was manifested; some say that this . Appearance of Christ is the same with his Appearance in the Presence of God for us, mentioned in the foregoing verse. But it is as another word that is used, so ano∣ther thing that is intended. That Appearance was after his Sacrifice, this is in or∣der unto it. That is in Heaven, this was on Earth. That is still continued, this is that which was already accomplished, at the Time limited by the Apostle. Wherefore this Appearance, this  or manifestation of Christ in the end of the world, is the same with his being manifested in the flesh, 1 Tim. 3. 16; or his com∣ing into the world, or taking on him the seed of Abraham, to this End, that he might suffer and offer himself unto God. For what is affirmed is opposed unto what is spoken immediately before, namely of his suffering often since the Foundation of the world. This he did not do, but appeared, was manifest, that is, in the flesh, in the Ends of the world, to suffer and to expiate sin. Nor is the Word ever used to express the Appearance of Christ before God in Heaven. His , is his coming into the world by his Incarnation unto the Discharge of his Office. His Ap∣pearance before God in Heaven, is his . And his Illustrious Appearance at the last day, is his ; though that word be used also to express his Glorious manifestation by the Gospel, 2 Tim. 1. 10; See 1 Tim. 3. 16. 1 Joh. 3. 8. Tit. 2. 14. This therefore is the meaning of the word: Christ did not come into the world, he was not manifested in the flesh often since the Foundation of the world, that he might often suffer and offer, but he did so, he so appeared, was so manifest in the End of the world. 2. The End of this Appearance of Christ, was to put away sin. And we must . enquire both what is meant by sin, and what by the putting of it away. Wherefore by sin the Apostle intends the whole of its Nature and Effects, in its Root and Fruits, in its Guilt, Power, and Punishment; Sin Absolutely and Universally; Sin as it was an Apostacy from God, as it was the Cause of all Distance between God and us, as it was the work of the Devil; Sin in all that it was, and all that it could effect, or all the Consequents of it; Sin in its whole Empire and Dominion; as it entred by the fall of Adam, invaded our Nature in its Power, oppressed our Per∣sons with its Guilt, filled the whole world with its fruits, gave existence and Right unto Death and hell, with power to Satan to rule in and over mankind; so as it rendred us obnoxious unto the Curse of God and Eternal punishment. In the whole Extent of sin, he appeared to put it away, that is, with respect unto the Church, that is sanctified by his Blood, and dedicated unto God. , which we render putting away, is Abrogatio, Dissolutio, Destructio; An Abrogation, Disanulling, Destroying, Disarming. It is the Name of taking away the Force, Power, and Obligation of a Law. The Power of Sin, as unto all its Effects and Consequents whether sinfull or Penal, is called its Law; the Law of Sin, Rom. 8. 2. And of this Law as of others, there are two Parts or Powers. (1.) Its Obligation unto punishment after the nature of all Penal Laws; Hence it is called the Law of Death, that whereon sinners are bound over unto Eternal Death. This force it borrows from its Relation unto the Law of God and the curse thereof. (2.) Its impelling Ruling Power, subjectively in the mindes of men, leading them Captive into all enmity and disobedience unto God, Rom. 7. 23. Christ appeared to abrogate this Law of sin, to deprive it of its whole power, (1.) That it should not condemn us any more, nor bind us over to punishment. This he did by ma∣king Attonement for it, by the Expiation of it, undergoing in his own suffering the penalty due unto it, which of necessity he was to suffer, as often as he offered himself. Herein consisted the  or abrogation of its Law, principally.
(2.) By the destruction of its subjective Power, purging our Consciences from dead works, in the way that hath been declared. This was the principal end of the Ap∣pearance of Christ in the world, 1 Joh. 3. 8. 3. The way whereby he did this was by the Sacrifice of himself;   for . That Sacrifice wherein he both suffered and offered himself unto God. For that both are included, the opposition made unto his often suffering doth evince. This therefore is the design and meaning of these words, to evidence that Christ did not offer himself unto God often, more then once, as the High-Priest offered every year before his entrance into the Holy place; the Apostle declares the End and Effect of his offering or Sacrifice which render the Repetition of it needless. It was one, once offered, in the end of the world, nor need be offered any more, be∣cause of the Total abolition and destruction of sin at once made thereby. What else concerns the things themselves spoken of will be comprized under the ensuing observations 1. It is the Prerogative of God, and the effect of his wisdom to determine the times and seasons of the dispensation of Himself and his Grace unto the Church. Hereon it depends alone, that Christ appeared in the end of the world, not sooner, nor later, as to the parts of that season. Many things do evidence a condecency unto Divine wisdom, in the determination of that season. As, (1.) He testified his displeasure against Sin, in suffering the generality of mankind to lye so long under the fatal effects of their Apostacy, without relief or Remedy, Act. 14. 16. Chap. 17. 30. Rom. 1. 21, 24, 26. (2.) He did it To exercise the faith of the Church called by ver∣tue of the promise, in the expectation of its accomplishment. And by the various wayes whereby God cherished their faith and hope was he glorified in all Ages, Luk 1. 70. Mat. 13. 16. Luk. 10. 24. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11. Hag. 2. 7. (3.) To pre∣pare the Church for the Reception of him, partly by the glorious representation made of him in the Tabernacle and Temple with their worship, partly by the Burden of Legal Institutions, laid on them until his coming, Gal. 3. 24. (4.) To give the world a full and sufficient trial of what might be attained towards happiness and Blessedness by the excellency of all things here below. Men had time to try what was in Wisdom, Learning, Moral Vertue, Power, Rule, Dominion, Riches, Arts, and whatever else is valuable unto Rational Natures. They were all exalted unto their height, in their possession and exercise before the Appearance of Christ, and all manifested their own insufficiency to give the least real Relief unto Mankind from un∣der the fruits of their Apostacy from God. See 1 Cor. 1. (5.) To give time unto Satan to fix and establish his Kingdom in the world, that the destruction of him and it might be the more conspicuous and glorious. These and sundry other things of a like nature do evince that there was a condecency unto Divine wisdom in the Determination of the season of the Appearance of Christ in the flesh. Howbeit it is ul∣timately to be resolved into his Soveraign will and pleasure. 2. God had a Design of Infinite Wisdom and Grace in his sending of Christ, and his appearance in the world thereon, which could not be frustrate. He appeared to put away sin. The footsteps of Divine wisdome and Grace herein I have enquired into in a peculiar Treatise, and shall not here insist on the same Argument. 3. Sin had erected a Dominion, a Tyranny over all men as by a Law. Unless this Law be abrogated and abolished, we can have neither Deliverance nor Liberty. Men generally think that they serve themselves of sin in the accomplishment of their lusts, and gratification of the flesh; But they are indeed servants of it, and slaves unto it. It hath gotten a power to command their obedience unto it, and a power to bind them over to eternal death for the disobedience unto God therein. As unto what belongs unto this Law and power, See my Discourse of Indwelling Sin. 4. No power of man, of any meer Creature was able to evacuate, disannul or abo∣lish this Law of sin. For 5. The Destruction and dissolution of this Law and power of sin was the great end of the coming of Christ for the discharge of his Priestly Office in the Sacrifice of him∣self. No other way could it be effected. And 6. It is the Glory of Christ, it is the safety of the Church, that by his one offering, by the Sacrifice of himself once for all, he hath abolished sin as unto the Law and condemn∣ing power of it.
VER. XXVII, XXVIII. . , & sicut, & quem admodum. ; Statutum, constitutum est. ; Syr.  to the Sons of men; of Adam, all his Posterity.  Syr. , that at one time; a certain appointed time. , Vul. post hoc autem. Postea verò; and afterward, Syr.  and after their death, the death of them. So also Christ , Syr. , one time; at one time, ; Vul. ad exhaurienda peccata; Rhem. to exhaust the sins of many; without any sense.  may signifie to lift or bear up; not at all to draw out of any deep place, though there may be something in that allusion. Syr. : and in himself he slew or sacrificed the sins of many; in himself, that is, by the Sacrifice of himself he took them away. Bez. ut in seipso attolleret multorum peccata; that he might lift or bear up the sins of many in himself; he took them upon himself as a Burden which he bare upon the Cross, as opposed to , afterwards, not burdened with sin. Others, ad attollendum peccata multorum in semet ipsum; to take up unto himself (that is, upon himself) the sins of many. The Syriack reads the last ause, He shall appear the second time unto the Salvati∣on of them that expect or look for him. All others; he shall appear unto or be seen by them that look for him unto Salvation: unto which difference we shall speak after∣wards. VER. XXVII, XXVIII. And (in like manner) as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this (afterwards) the judgment: So also Christ was once offered to bear (in himself) the sin of many, and unto them that look for him, shall he ap∣pear the second time, without Sin unto Salvation. These verses put a close unto the Heavenly Discourse of the Apostle, concerning the Causes, Nature, Ends and Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, wherewith the new Covenant was dedicated and confirmed. And in the words there is a treble Con∣firmation of that Singularity and Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, which he had pleaded before. 1. In an Elegant instructive Similitude; And as it is appointed, ver. 27. 2. In a declaration of the use and end of the Offering of Christ; he was once offered to bear the Sins of many. 3. In the consequent of it; his second Appearance, unto the Salvation of Belie∣vers; ver. 28. In the comparison, we must first consider the force of it in general, and explain the words. That (as we have observed) which the Apostle designeth to confirm and illu∣strate, is what he had pleaded in the foregoing verses, concerning the Singularity and efficacy of the offering of Christ, whereon also he takes occasion to declare the blessed consequents of it. Hereof he gives an illustration by comparing it unto what is of absolute and unavoidable necessity, so as that it cannot otherwise be, namely, the death of all the individuals of mankind by the decretory sentence of God. As they must dye every one, and every one but once; so Christ was to dye, to suffer, to offer himself, and that but once. The instances of those who died not after the man∣ner of other men, as Enoch and Elias, or those who having died once were raised from the dead and died again as Lazarus, give no difficulty herein. They are in∣stances of exemption from the common Rule by meer acts of Divine Sovereignty. But the Apostle argues from the general Rule and Constitutions, and thereon alone the force of his comparisons doth depend, and they are not weakned by such ex∣emptions. As this is the certain unalterable law of Humane condition, that every
man must dye once, and but once as unto this mortal life, so Christ was once and but once offered. But there is more in the words and design of the Apostle than a bare Similitude and illustration of what he treats of, though Expositors own it not. He doth not only illustrate his former Assertion by a fit comparison, but gives the Reason of the one offering of Christ from what it was necessary for and designed unto. For that he introduceth a Reason of his former Assertion, the Causal connexion  doth demon∣strate: . Especially as it is joyned with , that is, in quantum, inasmuch as; in which sense he constantly useth that expression; chap. 3. 3. chap. 7. 20. chap. 8. 6. And in as much as it was so with mankind, it was necessary that Christ should suffer once for the expiation of Sin, and the Salvation of Sinners. How was it with mankind in this matter? On the account of sin they were all subject unto the Law and the curse thereof. Hereof there were two parts; (1) Temporal Death to be under∣gone penally on the sentence of God. (2) Eternal judgment wherein they were to perish for evermore. In these things consist the effects of sin, and the curse of the Law. And they were due unto all men unavoidably to be inficted on them by the judgment and sentence of God. It is appointed, decreed, determined of God, that men, sinful men shall once die, and after that come to judgment for their Sins. This is the sense, the sentence, the substance of the Law. Under this Sentence they must all perish eternally, if not Divinely relieved. But inasmuch as it was thus with them, the one offering of Christ, once offered is prepared for their Relief and deli∣verance. And the relief is in the infinite Wisdom of God eminently proportionate unto the evil, the remedy unto the disease. For 1. As man was to dye once legally and penally for sin by the sentence of the Law, and no more; So Christ died, suffered, and offered once and no more, to bear Sin, to expiate it, and thereby to take away death so far as it was penal. 2. As after death men must appear again the second time unto judgement, to un∣dergo condemnation thereon; so after his once offering to take away Sin and Death, Christ shall appear the second time to free us from judgement, and to bestow on us eternal Salvation. In this interpretation of the words I do not exclude the use of the comparison, nor the design of the Apostle to illustrate the one offering of Christ once offered by the certainty of the death of men once onely; for these things do illustrate one another as so compared. But withal I judge there is more in them than a meer comparison between things no way related one to another, but onely have some mutual resem∣blance in that they fall out but once. Yea, there seems not to be much light, nor any thing of Argument in a comparison so arbitrarily framed. But consider these things in their mutual Relation and opposition one unto the other, which are the same with that of the Law and the Gospel, and there is much of light and argument in the comparing of them together. For whereas the end of the Death, Suffering and Offer∣ing of Christ was to take away and remove the punishment due unto Sin which con∣sisted in this, that men should once die, and but once, and afterwards come to judg∣ment and condemnation according to the sentence of the Law; And it was conveni∣ent unto Divine Wisdom, that Christ for that end should Dye, Suffer, Offer once only, and afterwards bring them for whom he died unto Salvation. And this is the proper sense of  in quantum, which Interpreters know not what to make of in this place, but endeavour variously to change and alter. Some pretend that some Copies read ; and one, ; which they suppose came from . But the onely Reason why the word is not liked, is because the sense is not understood. Take the mind of the Apostle aright, and his expression is pro∣per unto his purpose. Wherefore there is in these verses an entire opposition and comparison between the Law and the Gospel; the Curse due to Sin, and the Redempti∣on that is by Christ Jesus. And we may observe; That God hath eminently suited our Relief, the means and causes of our spiritual Delive∣rance, unto our Misery, the means and causes of it, as that his own Wisdom and Grace may be exalted and our faith established. That which is here summarily represented by our Apostle in this Elegant Antithesis, he declares at large, Rom. 5. from ver. 12. to the end of the Chapter. But we proceed with the interpretation of the words. In the first part of the Antithesis and comparison, ver. 27. there are three things asserted. (1) The Death
of men, (2) The judgment that ensues, and (3.) The cause of them both. The last is first to be explained. It is Appointed, Determined, Enacted, statutum est. It is so by him who hath a  Sovereign Power and Authority in and over these things, and hath the force of an unalterable Law, which none can transgress. God himself hath thus appointed it; none else can determine and dispose of these things. And the word equally respects both parts of the Assertion, Death and Judgment. They are both equally from the constitution of God, which is the cause of them both. The Socinians do so divide these things, that one of them, namely Death, they would have to be natural; and the other or judgment, from the constitution of God; which is not to interpret, but to contradict the words. Yea, death is that which in the first place and directly is affirmed to be the effect of this Divine Constitution, be∣ing spoken of as it is Penal, by the curse of the Law for sin; and judgment falls under the same constitution, as consequential thereunto. But if death as they plead, be meerly and only natural, they cannot refer it unto the same Divine Constitution with the future judgment, which is natural in no sense at all. Death was so far natural from the beginning, as that the frame and constitution of our nature were in themselves liable and subject thereunto. But that it should actually have invaded our nature unto its dissolution, without the intervention of its meritorious Cause in Sin, is contrary unto the Original state of our Relation unto God, the nature of the Covenant whereby we were obliged unto Obedience, the Reward promised therein, with the threatning of Death in case of disobedience. Wherefore the Law, Statute, or Constitution here related unto, is no other but that of, Gen. 2. 17. In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely dye; with that addition, dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return, Chap. 3. 19. God enacted it as an everlasting Law concerning Adam and all his Posterity, that they should dye; and that once, as they were once taken out of the Dust. But in the words of God before mentioned, there are two things, (1.) A penal Law enacted, Gen. 3. 17. (2.) A judicial sen∣tence denounced, Chap. 2. 19. not onely Death but future judgment also was ap∣pointed thereby. Thus it is appointed to men; that is, to all men, or men indefinitely without excepti∣on; . it is their lot and portion. It is appointed unto men, not meerly as men, but as sinners, as sinful men. For it is of sin and the effects of it, with their removal by Christ, that the Apostle discourseth. It is appointed unto them to dye; that is, penally for sin, as Death was threatned . in that Penal statute, mentioned in the curse of the Law; And death under that consideration alone, is taken away by the death of Christ. The sentence of dying naturally is continued towards all; but the moral nature of dying with the conse∣quents of it are removed from some by Christ; The Law is not absolutely reversed; but what was formally penal in it is taken away. Observe, 1. Death in the first constitution of it was penal. And the entrance of it as a pe∣nalty keeps the fear of it in all living. Yea, it was by the Law Eternally Penal. Nothing was to come after death but Hell. And 2. It is still penal, Eternally penal, unto all unbelievers. But there are false notions of it amongst men as there are of all other things. Some are afraid of it when the penalty is separated from it. Some on the other hand, look on it as a Relief and so either seek it or desire it; unto whom it will prove only an entrance unto judgment. It is the interest of all living to enquire diligently what death will be unto them. 3. The death of all is equally determined and certain in Gods constitution. It hath various wayes of approach unto all individuals. Hence is it generally looked on as an accident befalling this or that man. But the Law concerning it is general and equal. The Second part of the Assertion is; that after this is the judgment. This by the same Divine unalterable constitution is appointed unto all. God hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the world in Righteousness. Death makes an not end of men as some think, others hope, and many would desire it should: Ipsa mors nihil & post mortem nihil: But there is something yet remaining which death is subservient un∣to. Hence it is said to be after this. As surely as men dye, it is sure that some∣what . else follows after death. This is the force of the particle , but; but after it.
Now this after doth not denote the immediate succession of one thing unto another; if one go before, and the other certainly follow after, what ever length of time be interposed between them, the Assertion is true and proper. Many have been long dead, probably the most that shall dye, and yet judgment is not come after. But it shall come in its appointed season; and so as that nothing shall interpose be∣tween death and judgment to make any alteration in the state or condition of the persons concerned in them. The souls of them that are dead are yet alive, but are utterly incapable of any change in their condition between death and judgment. As death leaves men, so shall judgment find them. The second part of this penal constitution is judgment, after death judgment. It . is not a particular judgment on every individual person immediately on his death, although such a judgment there be, For in and by death there is a declaration made concerning the eternal condition of the deceased; But judgment here is opposed unto the second appearance of Christ unto the Salvation of believers, which is the great or general judgment of all at the last day.  used with respect un∣to this day, or taken absolutely, do signifie a condemnatory sentence only;  the resurrection of or unto judgment, is opposed unto  the resurrecti∣on of or unto life, Joh. 5. 29. See ver. 22, 23, 24. So is it here used; Judgment, that is, condemnation for sin follows after death in the righteous constitution of God, by the sentence of the Law. And as Christ by his death doth not take away death ab∣solutely, but only as it was penal; so on his Second appearance, he doth not take away judgment absolutely, but only as it is a condemnatory sentence, with respect unto Believ∣ers. For as we must all dye, so we must all appear before his judgment seat, Rom. 14. 10. But as he hath promised that those that believe in him, shall not see death, for they are passed from death unto life; they shall not undergo it as it is penal; so also he hath, that they shall not come  (the word here used) into judgment, Joh. 5. 24. They shall be freed from the condemnatory sentence of the Law. For the na∣ture and manner of this judgment, see the Exposition on Chap. 6. 5. This then is the sense of the words. Whereas therefore, or in as much as this is the constitution of God, that man, sinful man shall once dye, and afterwards be judged or condemned for sin; Which would have been the event with all, had not a Relief been provided, which in opposition hereunto is declared in the next verse. And no man that dyes in sin, shall ever escape judgment. VER. XXVIII. This verse gives us the Relief provided, in the wisdom and Grace of God for and from this condition. And there is in the words (1.) The Redditive note of comparison and opposition; So (2.) The subject spoken of; the offering of Christ. (3.) The End of it, to bear the sin of many. (4) The consequent of it, which must be spoken to distinctly. 1. The Redditive note is , So, in like manner, in answer unto that state of things . and for the Remedy against it, in a blessed condecency unto Divine wisdom, goodness and Grace. The Subject spoken of is the offering of Christ. But it is here mentioned passive∣ly; . he was offered. Most frequently it is expressed by his offering of himself; the sacrifice he offered of himself. For as the vertue of his offering depends principally on the dignity of his Person, so his humane Soul, his Mind, Will and Affections, with the fulness of the Graces of the Spirit resident and acting in them did concur unto the efficacy of his Offering, and were necessary to render it an Act of Obedi∣ence, a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savour unto God, Ephes. 5. 2. Yea, hereon prin∣cipally depended his own Glory, which arose not meerly from his suffering, but from his obedience therein, Phil. 2. 7, 8. Wherefore he is most frequently said to offer himself, (1.) Because of the virtue communicated unto his offering by the Dignity of his Person. (2.) Because he was the only Priest that did offer. (3.) Because his Obedience therein was so acceptable unto God. (4.) Because this expresseth his love unto the Church; he loved it and gave himself for it. But as himself offered, so his offering was himself. His whole entire humane nature was that which was offered. Hence it is thus passively expressed. Christ was offered, that is, he was not only the Priest who offered, but the Sacrifice that was offered. Both were necessary,
that Christ should offer, and that Christ should be offered. And the Reason why it is here so expressed, is because his offering is spoken of as it was by death and suf∣fering. For having affirmed that if he must often offer he must often suffer, and com∣pared his offering unto the once dying of men penally, it is plain that the offering in∣tended is in and by suffering. Christ was offered, is the same with Christ suffered, Christ dyed. And this expression is utterly irreconcileable unto the Socinian notion of the Oblation of Christ. For they would have it to consist in the presentation of himself in Heaven eternally free from and above all sufferings, which cannot be the sense of this expression, Christ was offered The circumstance of his being thus offered, is that it was once only. This joyn∣ed . as it is here with a word in the preter tense, can signify nothing but an action or passion then past and determin'd. It is not any present continued action such as is the presentation of himself in heaven, that can be signified hereby. 3. The end of Christs being thus once offered and which his one offering did per∣fectly  effect, was, to bear the sins of many. There is an Antithesis between  of many, and  unto men in the verse foregoing. Men, expressed indefinite∣ly in that necessary proposition, intends all men universally. Nor, as we have . shewed, is there any exception against the Rule, by a few instances of Exemption by the interposition of Divine Soveraignty. But the relief which is granted by Christ, though it be unto men indefinitely, yet it extends not to all universally, but to many of them only. That it doth not so extend unto all eventually, is confessed. And this expression is declarative of the intention of God or of Christ himself in his offering. See Ephes. 5. 25, 26. He was thus offered for those many, to bear their sins, as we render the words. It is variously translated as we have seen before, and various senses are sought after by Expositors. Grotius wholly follows the Socinians in their endeavours to pervert the sense of this word. It is not from any difficulty in the word, but from mens ha∣tred unto the Truth, that they put themselves on such endeavours. And this whole attempt lies in finding out one or two places where  signifies to take away; For the various signification of a word used absolutely in any other place is sufficient for these men to confute its necessary signification in any context. But the matter is plain in it self, Christ did bear sin, or take it away, as he was offered; as he was a Sacrifice for it. This is here expresly affirmed; He was offered to bear the sins of many. This he did, as the Sacrifices did of old as unto their Typical use and effi∣cacy. A supposition hereof, is the sole foundation of the whole Discourse of the Apostle. But they bare sin, or took away sin (not to contend about the meer signi∣fication of the word) no otherwise but by the imputation of the sin unto the Beast that was Sacrificed, whereon it was slain that attonement might be made with its blood. This I have before sufficiently proved. So Christ bare the sins of many; and so the signification of this word is determined and limited by the Apostle Peter, by whom alone it is used on the same occasion, 1 Epist. 2. 24. , who himself bare our sins in his own body on the Tree. That place compared with this doth utterly evert the Socinian fiction, of the Oblation of Christ in Heaven. He was offered  to bear the sins of many; When did he do it? How did he do it?  He bare our sin in his own body on the tree. Wherefore then he offered himself for them. And this he did in his suffer∣ing. Moreover, where-ever in the Old Testament  is translated by  in the LXX, as Numb. 14. 33. Isai. 53. 12. or by  with reference unto Sin, it constantly signifies to bear the punishment of it. Yea, it doth so when with respect unto the Event, it is rendred by , as it is Levit. 10. 17. And the proper sig∣nification of the word is to be taken from the declaration of the thing signified by it. He shall bear their iniquities. Isa. 53. 11.  bear it as a burden upon him He was offered once, so as that he suffered therein. As he suffered, he bare our iniqui∣ties, and as he was offered, he made attonement for them. And this is not op∣posed unto the appearance of men before God at the last day, but unto their death, which they were once to undergo. Wherefore The ground of the Expiation of Sin by the offering of Christ is this, that therein he bare the Guilt and Punishment due unto it. Upon this offering of Christ the Apostle supposeth what he had before declared,
namely, that he entred into heaven to appear in the presence of God for us; And hereon he declares, what is the end of all this dispensation of Gods Grace. Unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second time without sin unto Salvation. And he shews, (1) What de facto Christ shall yet do; He shall appear; (2) To whom he shall so appear; Unto them that look for him; (3) In what manner; Without sin. (4) Unto what end; Unto Salvation. (5) In what order; the second time. The last thing mentioned is first expressed; and must first be explained. The se∣cond . time. The Scripture is Express unto a double appearing or coming of Christ. The first was his coming in the flesh, coming into the world, coming unto his own, namely, to discharge the work of his mediation, especially to make attonement for sin in the Sacrifice of himself, unto the accomplishment of all promises made con∣cerning it, and all types instituted for its representation. The Second is in Glory, unto the judgment of all; when he shall finish and compleat the eternal Salvation of the Church. Any other personal appearance or coming of Christ the Scripture knows not; And in this place expresly excludes any imagination of it. His first appear∣ance is past; And appear the second time he will not, until that judgment comes which follows death, and the Salvation of the Church shall be compleated. After∣ward there will be no farther appearance of Christ in the discharge of his office; For God shall be all in all. 2. That which he affirms of him is, He shall appear unto, he shall be seen of.  There shall be a publick vision and sight of him. He was seen on the Earth in the days of his flesh: He is now in Heaven where no mortal eye can see him, within the vail of that Glory which we cannot look into. The Heavens must receive him unto the time of the restitution of all things. He can indeed appear unto whom he pleaseth, by an Extraordinary dispensation. So he was seen of Stephen standing at the right hand of God, Act. 7. So he appeared unto Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 8. But as un∣to the state of the Church in general, and in the discharge of his mediatory Office, he is not seen of any. So the High-priest was not seen of the people, after his en∣trance into the Holy place until he came forth again. Even concerning the Person of Christ we live by faith, and not by sight. And it is the great exercise of faith to live on the invisible actings of Christ, on the behalf of the Church. So also the foun∣dation of it doth consist in our infallible expectation of his Second appearance, of our seeing him again, Act. 1. 11. We know that our Redeemer liveth, and we shall see him with our eyes. Whilest he is thus invisible, the world triumpheth as if he were not. Where is the promise of his coming? The faith of many is weak. They can∣not live upon his invisible actings. But here is the faith and patience of the Church, of all sincere believers: In the midst of all Discouragements, Reproaches, Temp∣tations, Sufferings, they can relieve and comfort their souls with this, that their Re∣deemer liveth, and that he shall appear again the second time, in his appointed season. Hence is their continual prayer as the fruit and expression of their faith; Even so come, Lord Jesus. The present long continued absence of Christ in Heaven is the great tryal of the world. God doth give the world a trial by faith in Christ, as he gave it a trial by obedience in Adam. Faith is tryed by difficulties. When Christ did appear, it was under such circumstances, as turned all unbelievers from him. His state was then a state of Infirmity, Reproach and Suffering. He appeared in the flesh. Now he is in Glory he appeareth not. As many refused him when he appeared, because it was in outward weakness; so many refuse him now he is in Glory, because he appear∣eth not. Faith alone can conflict with, and conquer these difficulties. And it hath sufficient evidences of this Return of Christ, (1) In his faithful word of promise. The promise of his coming recorded in the Scripture, is the ground of our faith here∣in. (2) In the continual supplies of his Spirit which Believers do receive. This is the great pledge of his Mediatory life in Heaven, of the continuance of his love and care towards the Church, and consequently the great assurance of his Second com∣ing. (3) In the daily evidences of his glorious power, put forth in eminent acts of Providence for the Protection, Preservation and Deliverance of the Church, which is an uninterrupted assurance of his future appearance. He hath determined the day and season of it, nor shall all the abuse that is made of his seeming delay in coming, hasten it one moment. And he hath blessed ends of his not appearing before the appointed season, though the time seem long to the Church it self. As, (1) That
the World may fill up the measure of its iniquities, to make way for its eternal De∣struction. (2) That the whole number of the Elect may be gathered in. Though days of trouble are sometimes shortned for their sakes, that they may not faint after they are called, Mat. 24. 22. yet are they also in general continued, that there may be time for the calling of them all. (3) That all the graces of his people may be ex∣ercised and tried unto the utmost. (4) That God may have his full revenue of Glory from the new Creation, which is the first fruits of the whole. (5) That all things may be ready for the glory of the great Day. 3. To whom shall he thus appear? Of whom shall he be thus seen? To them that look for . him. But the Scripture is plain and express in other places, that he shall appear unto all; shall be seen of all, even of his enemies, Rev. 1. 7. And the work that he hath to do at his appearance, requires that so it should be. For he comes to judge the world in general; and in particular to plead with ungodly men about their ungodly deeds and speeches, Jud. 15. So therefore must and shall it be. His second Illustrious Appearance shall fill the whole World with the beams of it: The whole rational creation of God shall see and behold him. But the Apostle treats of his Appearance here with respect unto the Salvation of them unto whom he doth ap∣pear. He shall appear unto Salvation. And this word unto Salvation is capable of . a double Explication. For it may refer unto them that look for him; that look for him unto Salvation; that is, that look to be saved by him. Or it may do so, unto his Appearance; He shall appear unto the Salvation of them that look for him. The sense is good either way. This looking for the coming of Christ, which is a description of Faith by a princi∣pal effect and fruit of it, called also waiting, expecting, longing, earnest expectation, consists in five things. (1) Stedfast Faith of his Coming and Appearance. This is in the Foundation of Christian Religion. And whatever the generality of Hypo∣critical, nominal Christians profess, there are uncontroulable evidences and demon∣strations that they believe it not. (2) Love unto it, as that which is most desirable, which contains in it every thing wherein the Soul takes delight and Satisfaction. That love his appearing, 2 Tim. 4. 5. (3) Longing for it or desires after it. Even so come, Lord Jesus; that is, come quickly; Rev. 22. 20. If the Saints of the Old Testament longed after his Appearance in the flesh, how shall not we do so for his Appearance in Glory. See Tit. 2. 13. Looking for and hasting unto. 2 Pet. 3. 12. (4) Patient waiting for it, in the midst of all discouragements. These the World is filled withal; and it is the great trial of Faith, Jude 20, 21. (5) Preparation for it, that we may be ready and meet for his reception, which is the Substance of what we are taught in the Parable of the Virgins; Mat. 25. Unto those that thus look for him shall the Lord Christ appear unto Salvation. 4. The manner of his Appearance, is, without Sin. This may either respect . himself, or the Church, or both. In his first Appearance in the flesh he was abso∣lutely in himself without Sin; But his great work was about Sin. And in what he had to do for us he was made sin, he bare our iniquities, and was treated both by God and Man as the greatest Sinner. He had all the penal Effects and Consequents of Sin upon him; all dolorous Infirmities of Nature, as Fear, Sorrow, Grief, Pain, all sufferings that Sin deserved, that the Law threatned, were in him and upon him. Nothing as it were appeared with him or upon him but Sin, that is, the effects and Consequents of it, in what he underwent for our Sakes. But now he shall appear perfectly free from all these things, as a perfect conqueror over Sin, in all its causes, effects and consequents. (2) It may respect the Church. He will then have made an utter end of Sin, in the whole Church for ever. There shall not then be the least remainder of it. All its Filth, and Guilt, and Power; and its effects in Darkness, Fear and Danger shall be utterly abolished and done away. The Guilt of Sin being done withal, the whole Church shall then be perfectly purified, without Spot and Wrin∣kle, every way glorious; Sin shall be no more. Respect may be had to both, Him∣self and the Church. 5. The End of his appearance is the Salvation of them that look for him. If this . word relate immediately unto his Appearance; the meaning is, to bestow, to collate Salvation upon them; Eternal Salvation. If it respect them that look for him, it ex∣presseth the qualification of their persons, by the Object of their Faith and Hope; they look for him to be perfectly and compleatly saved by him. Where both senses
are equally true, we need not limit the signification of the words to either of them. But we may observe, 1. Christs Appearance the Second time, his Return from Heaven to compleat the Sal∣vation of the Church, is the great Fundamental Principle of our Faith and Hope, the great Testimony we have to give against all his and our Adversaries. And 2. Faith concerning the second coming of Christ, is sufficient to support the Souls of believers, and to give them satisfactory Consolation in all Difficulties, Trials and Distresses. 3. All true believers do live in a waiting, longing expectation of the coming of Christ. It is one of the most distinguishing Characters of a Sincere Believer so to do. 4. To such alone as so look for him, will the Lord Christ appear unto Salvation. 5. Then will be the great distinction among Mankind, when Christ shall appear unto the Everlasting Confusion of some, and the Eternal Salvation of others; A thing that the World loves not to hear of. 6. At the second Appearance of Christ, there will be an end of all the business about Sin, both on his part and ours. 7. The Communication of actual Salvation unto all Believers, unto the Glory of God, is the final End of the Office of Christ. .
AN EXPOSITION OF THE Tenth CHAPTER of the EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS. THere are two parts of this Chapter. The first concerneth the necessity and efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ; from the beginning unto v. 20. The other is an improvement of the Doctrine of it unto Faith, Obedi∣ence and Perseverance; from v. 20. to the end of the Chapter. Of the first general Proposition of the Subject to be treated of, there are two parts: (1.) A Demonstration of the Insufficiency of Legal Sacrifices for the expia∣tion of sin: v. 1, 2, 3, 4; (2.) A Declaration of the necessity and efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ unto that end; from v. 4. unto v. 19. Of this Declaration there are two parts. (1.) The substitution of the Sacrifice of Christ in the place and room of all Legal Sacrifices, because of its efficacy unto the end which they could not attain and without which the Church could not be saved, v. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. (2.) A final comparison of his Priesthood and Sacrifice with those of the Law, and their absolute preference above them; unto v. 20. In the first particular, of the first general part, there are three things: (1.) An Assertion of the insuffciency of Legal Sacrifices unto the expiation of sin, where∣in a reason of it also is included; v. 1. (2.) A Confirmation of the Truth, of that Assertion from the consideration of the frequency of their Repetition, which manifestly evidenceth that insufficiency; v. 2, 3. (3.) A General Reason taken from the nature of them, or the matter whereof they did consist; v. 4. The first of these is contained in the first verse. . There is no difficulty in the reading, nor much difference about the Transla∣tion of the words. Syr. ; For the Law, a sha∣dow was in it, ; not the Substance it self. ; that shall offer them;  that Translator omits; sup∣posing it the same with . But it hath its own signification: Conti∣nentèr; in assiduum; in perpetuum. ; habens, obtinens, continens. ; ipsam expressam formam; ipsam imaginem. ; Sanctificare, perfectè sanctificare; perfectos facere; Vulg. Lat. make perfect. Perficere, confirmare, to perfect, to confirm.
For the Law having a shadow of good things to come, not the very Image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offer year by year continually, make the comers thereunto (the Worshippers) perfect. There are in these words, (1.) A note of Inference, giving a connexion unto the preceding discourse, For. (2.) The Subject spoken of, The Law. (3.) An Ascription made unto it; It had a shadow of good things to come. (4.) A negation concerning it, derogatory unto its perfection; It had not the very image of the things themselves. (5.) An inference or conclusion from both; can never with those sa∣crifices, &c. 1. The conjunctive particle , For, intimates that what follows or is introduced  thereby, is an inference from what he had before discoursed, or a conclusion made thereon. And this is the necessity of the Sacrifice of Christ. For having de∣clared that he had perfectly expiated sin thereby, and confirmed the New Cove∣nant, he concludes from thence and proves the necessity of it, because the Legal Sacrifices could not effect those ends which they seemed to be appointed for. Wherefore they must be taken away, to give place unto that whereby they were perfectly accomplished. This therefore he now proceeds to prove. God having designed the compleat consummation, or sanctification of the Church, that which only made a representation of it, and of the way whereby it was to be done, but could not effect it, was to be removed. For there was an appointed time wherein he would perfectly fulfil the counsel of his infinite Wisdom and Grace to∣wards the Church herein. And at this time which was now come, a full clear understanding of the insufficiency of all Legal Sacrifices for that end, was to be given unto it. For he requires not faith and obedience in any, beyond the means of light and understanding which he affords unto them. Therefore the full Reve∣lation and demonstration hereof was reserved for this season, wherein he required express faith in the way whereby these things were effected. 2. The Subject spoken of is ; The Law. . That which he im∣mediately  intends is the Sacrifices of the Law, especially those which were offered yearly by a perpetual Statute, as the words immediately following do declare. But he refers what he speaks unto the Law it self; as that whereby these Sacrifices were instituted, and whereon all their vertue and efficacy did depend. They had no more of the one or other, but what they had by and from the Law. And the Law, here, is the Covenant which God made with the people at Sinai, with all the institutions of worship thereunto belonging. It is not the Moral Law which Originally and as absolutely considered, had no Expiatory Sacrifices belonging unto it; nor is it the Ceremonial Law alone, whereby all the Sacrifices of old were ei∣ther appointed or regulated: but it is the first Testament, the first Covenant, as it had all the ordinances of Worship annexed unto it, as it was the Spring and cause of all the priviledges and advantages of the Church of Israel; And where∣unto the Moral Law as given on Mount Sinai, and both the Ceremonial Law and the Judicial also did belong. This he calls the Law, chap. 7. 19; and the Cove∣nant or Testament compleatly, chap. 9. Concerning this Law or Covenant, the Apostle declares two things; (1.) Po∣sitively and by way of concession; It had a shadow of good things to come. (2.) Negatively, that it had not the very Image of the things themselves; which we  must consider together, because they contribute light unto one another. These expressions are Metaphorical, and have therefore given occasion unto various conjectures about the nature of the Allusions in them, and their applicati∣on unto the present subject matter. I shall not trouble the Reader with a Repetiti∣on of them; they may be found in most Commentators. I shall therefore onely fix on that sense of the words, which I conceive to be the mind of the Holy Ghost; giving the Reasons why I conceive it so to be. Both the Expressions used and the things intended in them, a shadow, and the very Image, have respect unto the good things to come. The Relation of the Law unto them is that which is declared. Wherefore the true notion of what these good things to come are, will determine what it is to have a shadow of them, and not the very Image of the things themselves.
The good things intended may be said to be , either with respect  unto the Law, or with respect unto the Gospel; and were so, either when the Law was given, or when this Epistle was written. If they were yet to come with respect unto the Gospel, and were so when he wrote this Epistle, they can be no∣thing, but the good things of Heaven and Eternal Glory. These things were then, are still, and will alwayes be unto the Church Militant on the earth good things to come; and are the Subject of Divine Promises concerning future things. In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lye promised before the world be∣gan, Tit. 1. 2. But this cannot be the sense of the words. For, 1. The Gospel it self hath not the very Image of these things, and so should not herein differ from the Law. For that the very Image of these things are the things themselves shall be immediately declared. 2. The Apostle in this whole discourse designes to prove that the Law with all the Rites of worship annexed unto it, were a Type of the good things that were really and actually exhibited in and by the Gospel, or by the Lord Christ him∣self in the discharge of his Office. Wherefore they are called good things to come with respect unto the time of the administration of the Law; They were so whilest the Law or first Covenant was in force; and whilest the institutions of it were continued. They had indeed their Original in the Church, or were good things to come, from the first promise. They were more declared so to be, and the certainty of their coming more confirmed by the Promise made unto Abraham. After these promises and their various confirmations, the Law was given unto the people. Howbeit the Law did not bring in, exhibit, or make present the good things so promised, that they should no more yet be to come. They were still good things to come whilst the Law was in force. Nor was this absolutely denyed by the Jews, nor is yet so to this day. For though they place more in the Law and Covenant of Sinai than God ever placed in them; yet they acknowledge that there are good things to come, promised and fore-signified in the Law, which as they suppose are not yet enjoyed. Such is the coming of the Messiah; in which sense they must grant, that the Law had a shadow of good things to come. Hence it is evident what are those good things to come; namely, Christ himself, with all the Grace, and mercy, and previledges which the Church receiveth by his actu∣al exhibition and coming in the flesh, upon the discharge of his Office. For he him∣self firstly, principally, and evidently was the Subject of all promises; and what ever else is contained in them, is but that whereof, in his Person, Office, and Grace, he is the Author and cause. Hence he was signally termed ; He who was to come, he that should come. Art thou he who is to come? And after his actual exhibition, the denying of him to be so come, is to overthrow the Go∣spel. 1 Joh. 4. 3. And these things are called , these good things; (1.) Because they are absolutely so without any allay or mixture. All other things in this world, however in some respect, and as unto some peculiar end, they may be said to be good, yet are they not so absolutely. Wherefore, (2.) These things only are good things: Nothing is good either in it self, nor unto us, without them, nor but by vertue of what they receive from them. There is nothing so but what is made so by Christ and his Grace. (3.) They are eminently good things. These good things which were promised unto the Church from the foundation of the world, which the Prophets and wise men of old desired to see; The means of our Deliverance from all the evil things which we had brought upon our selves by our Apostasie from God. These being evidently the good things intended, the Relation of the Law unto them, namely that it had the shadow but not the very Image of them, will also be apparent. The Allusion in my Judgment unto the Art of painting, wherein a shadow is first drawn, and afterwards a picture to the life, or the very Image it self, hath here no place, nor doth our Apostle any where make use of such curious similitudes taken from things artificial, and known to very few; Nor would he use this among the Hebrews, who of all people were least acquainted with the Art of painting. But he declares his intention in another place, where speaking of the
same things, and using some of the same words, their sense is plain and determin∣ed. Col. 2. 17. They are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. They are a shadow of things to come, is the same with this, The Law had a shadow of good things to come: For it is the Law with its ordinances and institutions of worship concerning which the Apostle there discourseth, as he doth in this place. Now the shadow there intended by the Apostle from whence the Allusion is taken, is the shadow of a body in the Light or Sun-shine, as the Antithesis declares: but the body is of Christ. Now such a shadow is, (1.) A Representation of the body. Any one who be∣holds it, knows that it is a thing which hath no subsistence in it self, which hath no use of its own, onely it represents the body, follows it in all its variations, and is inseparable from it. (2.) It is a just representation of the hody, as unto its proportion and dimensions. The shadow of any body represents that certain individual body, and nothing else: It will add nothing unto it, nor take any thing from it; but, without an accidental hinderance, is a just representation of it: much less will it give an appearance of a body of another form and shape, dif∣ferent from that whereof it is the shadow. (3.) It is but an obscure representa∣tion of the body; so as that the principal concernments of it, especially the vigor and spirit of a living body, are not figured nor represented by it. Thus is it with the Law or the Covenant of Sinai and all the ordinances of wor∣ship wherewith it was attended, with respect unto these good things to come. For it must be observed that the opposition which the Apostle makes in this place, is not between the Law and the Gospel, any otherwise but as the Gospel is a full de∣claration of the Person, Offices, and Grace of Christ; but it is between the Sacrifi∣ces of the Law, and the Sacrifice of Christ himself. Want of this observation hath given us mistaken interpretations of the place. This shadow the Law had; ; Having it. It obtained it, it was in it; it was . inlaid in it; it was of the substance and nature of it; it contained it, in all that it prescribed, or appointed; some of it in one part, some in another, the whole in the whole. It had the whole shadow; and the whole of it was this shadow. It was so, 1. Because in the Sanction, dedication, and confirmation of it by the blood of Sacrifices, in the Tabernacle, with all its holy utensils, in its High Priest and all other Sacred Administrations, in its Solemn Sacrifices and Services, it made a Representation of good things to come. This hath been abundantly manifested and proved in the Exposition of the foregoing Chapter. And according unto the first property of such a shadow, without this use it had no bottom, no foundati∣on, no Excellency of its own. Take out the significancy and Representation of Christ, his Offices and Grace out of the Legal Institutions, and you take from them all impressions of Divine Wisdome, and leave them useless things which of themselves will vanish and disappear. And because they are no more now a shadow, they are absolutely dead and useless. 2. They were a just Representation of Christ only, the second property of such a shadow. They did not signify any thing more or less, but Christ himself, and what belongs unto him. He was the Idea in the mind of God, when Moses was charged to make all things according to the pattern shewed him in the Mount. And it is a blessed view of Divine Wisdome, when we do see and understand aright, how every thing in the Law belonged unto that shadow which God gave in it, of the substance of his counsel in and concerning Jesus Christ. 3. They were but an obscure Representation of these things, which is the third property of a shadow. The Glory and efficacy of these good things appeared not visible in them. God by these means designed no further Revelation of them, unto the Church of the Old Testament, but what was in Types and Figures, which gave a shadow of them, and no more. Secondly, this being granted unto the Law, there is added thereunto what is denied of it, wherein the Argument of the Apostle doth consist. It had not the very Image of the things. The  are the same with the  . before mentioned. The negation is of the same whereof the concession was made, the grant being in one sence, and the denial in another. It had not ; . the very Image it self. That is, it had not the things themselves. For that is intended by this Image of them. And the Reasons why I so interpret the words, are these:
1. Take the Image onely for a clear expresse delineation and description of the things themselves, as is generally conceived, and we invalidate the Argument of the Apostle. For he proves that the Law by all its Sacrifices could not take away Sin, nor perfect the Church, because it had not this Image. But suppose the Law to have had this full and clear description and delineation of them, were it never so lively and compleat, yet could it not by its Sacrifices take away sin. Nothing could do it but the very substance of the things themselves, which the Law had not, nor could have. 2. Where the same Truth is declared the same things are expresly called the body, and that of Christ; that is the substance of the things themselves, and that in opposition unto the shadow which the Law had of them, as it is here also. Col. 2. 17. Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. And we are not without cogent Reasons to depart from the explication of the Metaphor there given us. For these expressions are every way the same; They had not the body which is Christ. 3. That is intended which doth compleatly expiate sin, which doth consummate and perfect the Church, which is denyed unto the Law. Now this was not done by an expresse and clear declaration of these things, which we acknowledge to be contained in the Gospel, but it was done by the things themselves, as the Apostle hath proved in the foregoing Chapter, and doth further confirm in this: that is, it was done by Christ alone in the Sacrifice of himself. 4. It is confessed by all that there is an ; a substantial Image; so called, not because it is a representation of what it is not, but because it is that whereof somewhat else is an Image and Representation, as the Law in its institu∣tions and Sacrifices was of these good things. And this the Apostle directs us unto by his Emphatical expression; ; ipsissimam rerum Imaginem; the things themselves; So it is rendred by the Syriac Translation, ipsam rem; or ipsam substantiam; the substance it self. And  is frequently used in the New Testament in this sense. Rom. 1. 23. ; Into the likeness of the Image of a corruptible man; that is, into the likeness of a corruptible man. The Image of the man is not something distinct from him, something to represent him; but the man himself. See Rom. 8. 29. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Col. 1. 15. chap. 3. 10. This therefore is that which the Apostle denyes concerning the Law. It had not the actual accomplishment of the promise of good things; it had not Christ exhi∣bited in the flesh; it had not the true real Sacrifice of perfect expiation: it repre∣sented these things; it had a shadow of them, but enjoyed not, exhibited not the things themselves. Hence was its imperfection and weakness, so that by none of its Sacrifices it could make the Church perfect. Obs. Whatever there may be in any Religious Institutions, and the diligent obser∣vation of them, if they come short of exhibiting Christ himself unto Believers with the Benefits of his Mediation, they cannot make us perfect, nor give us accepta∣tion with God. For, (1.) It was he himself in his own person, that was the prin∣cipal subject of all the promises of old. Hence they who lived not to enjoy his ex∣hibition in the flesh are said to dye in faith, but not to receive the promises, chap. 11. 39. But it is through the promise that all good things are communicated unto us. (2.) Nothing is good or usefull unto the Church, but through its Rela∣tion unto him. So was it with the duties of Religious Worship under the Old Testament. All their use and worth lay in this, that they were shadows of him and his mediation. And that of those in the New Testament is, that they are more efficacious means of his exhibition and communication unto us (3.) He alone could perfectly expiate sin and consummate the state of the Church by the Sacrifice of himself. This being the state of the Law or first covenant, the Apostle makes an Appli∣cation of it unto the Question under debate in the last words of the verse: can never with those Sacrifices, which they offer year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect. We must first speak unto the Reading of the Words, and then unto the sense and meaning. Expositors generally take notice that in the Original there is a Trajection in the words, or that they are placed out of their proper order, which Translators do
rectifie. : every year, or yearly, with the Sacrifices . which they offer; For ; with those Sacrifices which they offer year by year, as we have rendred the words. But the Apostle seems to place  in the entrance of the words, to signalize the annual Sacrifice which he principally intended. But there is a great difficulty in the distinction and pointing of the words that follow; , in perpetuum, continually, or for ever; that is, which they were so to do indispensably by the Law, whilest the Tabernacle or . Temple were standing, or those ordinances of Worship were in force. But neither the signification of the Word, not the use of it in this Epistle will allow it in this place to belong unto the Words and Sentence going before. For it doth not any where signifie a duration or continuance with a limitation. And the Apostle is far from allowing an absolute perpetual duration unto the Law and its Sacrifices, were they of what use soever, especially in this place where he is prov∣ing that they were not perpetual, nor had an efficacy to accomplish any thing perfectly, which is the other signification of the word. And it is used only in this Epistle, chap. 7. 3. In this place, and ver. 12, 14, of this Chapter. But in all these places it is applyed only unto the Office of Christ, and the efficacy of it in his personal Ministry. It is of the same signification with , chap. 7. 25. for ever, to the uttermost, perfectly. Wherefore that which is affirmed of Christ and his Sacrifice, ver. 12, 14, of the chapter, is here denyed of the Law. And the words should be joyned with those that follow. The Law by its Sacrifices could not perfect for ever, or unto the utmost, the comers thereunto. In the words thus read there are three things. 1. The Impotency of the Law; ; It can never. 2. That with respect whereunto this impotency is charged on it; that is, the Sacrifi∣ces which it offered. 3. The effect it self denyed with respect unto that Impotency; which is, to perfect for ever the comers thereunto. 1. The Impotency of the Law as unto the end mentioned is Emphatically expres∣sed, , it can never do it: It can do it by no means, no way, it is impos∣sible . it should. And it is thus expressed to obviate all Thoughts in the minds of the Hebrews, from all expectations of perfection by the Law. For thus they were apt to think and hope, that by one way and means or another they might have accept∣ance with God by the Law. Wherefore it was necessary thus to speak unto them, who had an inveterate perswasion unto the contrary. 2. That with respect whereunto this impotency is ascribed unto the Law is its Sacri∣fices. For from them was the perfect expiation of sin to be expected, or from nothing prescribed by the Law. To deny this power unto them, is to deny it absolutely unto the whole Law, and all its institutions. And these Sacrifices are expressed with respect unto their nature, the time of their offering, and those by whom they were offered. For their nature he says : Iisdem Sacrificiis; iis ipsis hostiis . or Sacrificiis. Our Translation rendereth not the Emphasis of the Expression. Iis hostiis quas quotannis—: with the same Sacrifices, or those Sacrifices which were of the same kind and nature.  is omitted in our Translation. , is with those Sacrifices; the Article being demonstrative. The same; not individu∣ally the same, for they were many, and offered often, or every year, when a Sa∣crifice was offered again materially the same; But they were of the same kind. They could not by the Law offer a Sacrifice of one kind one year, and a Sacrifice of another the next; But the same Sacrifices in the substance and essence, in their matter and manner, were annually repeated without variation or alteration. And this the Apostle urgeth to shew that there was no more in any one of them than in another; and what one could not do, could not be done by its Repetition; for it was still the same. Great things were effected by these Sacrifices; By them was the first Covenant consecrated and confirmed; By them was Attonement and Ex∣piation of sin made; that is, Typically and declaratively; By them were the Priests themselves dedicated unto God; By them were the people made holy. Wherefore this impotency being ascribed unto them, it absolutely concludes unto the whole Law, with all other Priviledges and Duties of it. 2. He describes them from the time and season of their Offering. It was , .
yearly, every year, year by year. It is hence manifest, what Sacrifices he prin∣cipally intends; namely, the Anniversary Sacrifices of Expiation, when the High Priest entred into the most holy place with blood, Levit. 16. And he instan∣ceth therein, not to exclude other Sacrifices from the same censure, but as giving an instance for them all, in that which was most solemn, had the most eminent effects, at once respecting the whole Church, and that which the Jews princi∣pally trusted unto. Had he mentioned Sacrifices in general, it might have been replyed, that although the Sacrifices which were daily offered, or those on especial occasions, might not perfect the Worshippers, at least not the whole con∣gregation; but yet the Church it self might be perfected by that great. Sacrifice which was offered yearly, with the blood whereof the High-Priest entred into the presence of God. Accordingly the Jews have such a Saying among them, that on the day of expiation all Israel was made as righteous, as in the day wherein man was first created. But the Apostle applying his argument unto those Sacrifices and proving their insufficiency unto the end mentioned, leaves no reserve unto any thoughts that it might be attained by other Sacrifices which were of another na∣ture and efficacy. And besides, to give the greater cogency unto his argument, he sixeth on those Sacrifices which had the least of what he proves their imper∣fection by. For these Sacrifices were repeated only once a year. And if this repetition of them once a year proves them weak and imperfect, how much more were those so, which were repeated every Day, or Week, or Month? 3. He refers unto the Offerers of those Sacrifices; which they offer, that is, the . High-Priests, of whom he had treated in the foregoing Chapter. And he speaks of things in the present tense. The Law cannot, which they offer: not the Law could not, and which they offered. The reason hereof hath been before declared. For he sets before the Hebrews a Scheme and representation of all their Worship at its first institution, that they might discern the Original intention of God therein. And therefore he insists only on the Tabernacle, making no mention of the Temple. So he states what was done at the first giving of the Law, and the institution of all its Ordinances of Worship, as if it were now present before their eyes. And if it had not the power mentioned at their first Institution, when the Law was in all its vigor and Glory, no accession could be made unto it by any continuance of time, any otherwise but in the false Imagination of the people. That which remains of the words is an Account of what the Law could not do or effect by its Sacrifices, It could not make the comers thereunto perfect for ever. There is in the words, (1.) The Effect denyed. (2.) The Persons with respect unto whom it is denyed. (3.) The Limitation of that denyal. 1. The Effect denied, what it cannot do, is ; dedicate, consummate, . consecrate, perfect, sanctifie. Of the meaning of the word in this Epistle, I have spoken often before. As also I have shewed at large what that  is, which God designed unto the Church in this world, wherein it did consist, and how the Law could not effect it. See the Exposition on chap. 7. v. 11. Here it is the same with , chap. 9. 9. perfect as appertaining unto the con∣science; which is ascribed unto the Sacrifice of Christ, v. 14. Wherefore the word principally in this place respects the Expiation of sin, or the taking away the guilt of it by Attonement; and so the Apostle expounds it in the following verses, as shall be declared. 2. Those with respect unto whom this power is denyed unto the Law, are ; . say we, the comers thereunto; Accedentes. The expression is every way the same with that of chap. 9. 9. , and , the Worshippers and the comers are the same, as is declared v. 2. 3. those who make use of the Sacrifices of the Law in the worship of God, who approach unto him by Sacrifices. And they are thus expressed by the comers, partly from the Original direction given about the observation, and partly from the nature of the service it self. The first we have, Levit. 1. 2. . The word signifies to draw nigh, to come near with an oblation. These are the comers, those who draw nigh with, and bring their oblations unto the Altar. And such was the nature of the Sacrifice it self. It consisted in com∣ing
with their Sacrifice unto the Altar, with the Priests approaching unto the Sacri∣fice; in all which an accesse was made unto God. Howbeit the Word here is of a larger signification; nor is it to be limited unto them who brought their own Sacrifices, but extends unto all that came to attend unto the Solemnity of them, whereby according to Gods appointment, they had a participation in the benefit of them. For respect is had unto the Anniversary Sacrifice which was not brought by any, but was provided for all. But as the Priests were included in the foregoing words, which they offer; So by these comers, the people are intended, for whose benefit these Sacrifices were offered. For, as was said, respect is had unto the great Anniversary Sacrifice, which was offered in the Name and on the behalf of the whole congregation. And these, if any, might be made perfect by the Sacrifices of the Law, namely those that came unto God by them, or through the use of them, according unto his insti∣tution. 3. That wherein the Law failed as unto the appearance it made of the Expiati∣on of sin, was that it could not effect it  Absolutely, compleatly and for ever. It made an expiation, but it was temporary only, not for ever. It did so both in respect unto the consciences of the worshippers, and the outward effects of its Sacrifices. Their effect on the consciences of the Worshippers was tempo∣rary; for a sense of sin returned on them, which forced them unto a Repetition of the same Sacrifices again, as the Apostle declares in the next verse. And as unto the outward effects of them, they consisted in the removal of temporal punish∣ments and judgments, which God had threatned unto the transgressors of the old Covenant. This they could reach unto, but no further. To expiate sin fully, and that with respect unto eternal punishment, so as to take away the guilt of sin from the consciences, and all punishments from the persons of men, which is to perfect them for ever, which was done by the Sacrifice of Christ; this they could not do, but only represent what was to be done afterwards. If any shall think meet to retain the ordinary distinction of the words, and re∣fer  to what goes before, so taking the word Adverbially, they offered them year by year continually, then the necessity of the Annual Repetition of those Sacrifices is intended in it. This they did, and this they were to do always whilst the Tebernacle was standing, or the Worship of the Law continued. And from the whole verse sundry things may be observed. 1. Whatever hath the least Representation of Christ, or Relation unto him, the obscurest way of teaching the things concerning his Person and Grace whilest it is in force, hath a Glory in it. He alone in himself originally bears the whole Glory of God in the Worship and Salvation of the Church; and he gives Glory unto all institutions of Divine Worship. The Law had but a shadow of Him and his Office; yet was the Ministration of it Glorious. And much more is that of the Gospel and its ordinances so, if we have faith to discern their relation unto him, and experience of his exhibition of himself and the benefits of his mediation unto us by them. Without this they have no Glory, whatever order or pomp may be ap∣plied unto their outward Administration. 2. Christ and his Grace were the only good things, that were absolutely so, from the foundation of the world, or the giving of the first Promise. In and by them there is not only a Deliverance from the curse, which made all things evil; and a Restoration of all the good that was lost by sin, in a sanctified blessed use of the Creatures; but an Encrease and Addition is made unto all that was good in the State of Innocency, above what can be expressed. Those who put such a valuation on the meaner uncertain enjoyment of other things, as to judge them their Good things, their Goods, as they are commonly called; so as not to see that all which is absolutely good is to be found in him alone; much more they who seem to judge almost all things Good besides, and Christ with his Grace Good for nothing, will be filled with the fruit of their own wayes, when it is too late to change their minds. 3. There is a great difference between the shadow of good things to come, and the good things themselves actually exhibited and granted unto the Church. This is the Fundamental difference between the two Testaments, the Law and the Gospel, from whence all others do arise, and whereinto they are resolved. Some when they
hear that there was Justification, Sanctification and Eternal Life to be obtained under the Old Covenant, and its administrations, by vertue of the Promise which they all had respect unto, are ready to think that there was no material difference between the two Covenants. I have spoken at large hereunto in the 8th chapter. I shall now only say, that he who sees not, who finds not a Glory, excellency and satisfaction, producing peace, rest and joy in his soul from the actual exhi∣bition of these good things as declared and tendred in the Gospel, above what might be obtained from an obscure representation of them as future, is a stranger unto Gospel Light and Grace. 4. The principal interest and design of them that come to God, is to have assu∣red Evidence of the perfect Expiation of sin. This of Old they came unto God by the Sacrifices of the Law for; which could only represent the way whereby it was to be done. Until assurance be given hereof, no Sinner can have the least Encouragement to approach unto God. For no guilty person can stand before him. Where this foundation is not laid in the soul and Conscience, all attempts of Access unto God are presumptuous. This therefore is that which the Gospel in the first place proposeth unto the Faith of them that do receive it. 5. What cannot be effected for the Expiation of Sin at once by any Duty or Sacri∣fice, cannot be effected by its reiteration or repetition. Those generally who seek for Attonement and Acceptation with God by their own Duties, do quickly find that no one of them will effect their desire. Wherefore they place all their con∣fidence in the repetition and multiplication of them; what is not done at one time, they hope may be done at another; what one will not do, many shall. But after all they find themselves mistaken. For, 6. The Kepetition of the same Sacrifices, doth of it self demonstrate their insuffi∣ciency unto the end sought after. Wherefore those of the Roman Church who would give countenance unto the Sacrifice of the Masse, by assirming that it is not another Sacrifice, but the very same that Christ himself offered, do prove, if the Argument of the Apostle here insisted on be good and cogent, an insufficiency in the Sacrifice of Christ for the expiation of sin. For so he affirms it is with all Sa∣crifices that are to be repeated, whereof he esteems the repetition it self a sufficient demonstration. 7. God alone Limiteth the ends and efficacy of his own Institutions. It may be said that if these Sacrifices did not make perfect them that came unto God by them, then their so coming unto him was lost labour, and to no purpose. But there were other ends and other uses of this their coming unto God as we have declared; and unto them all they were effectual. There never was, there never shall be any loss in what is done according unto the Command of God. Other things, how∣ever we may esteem them, are but Hay and Stubble, which have no power or efficacy unto any Spiritual ends. VERSE II, III. THe Syriack Translation refers that unto the Persons, which is affirmed of their Offerings;  for if they had been perfect or made perfect; referring unto what went before, that they were not made perfect,  they would have long since ceased or rested from their Oblations or Offerings. They would have offered them no more. And although it doth not at all express  which follows in the Verse; yet it regulates the sense of
the whole by that word, as it more plainly declares in rendring the following words,  Because their conscience would no more have tossed or disquieted them for their sins, who had at one time been purified; which is a good Exposition though not an exact Translation of the Words. And so it renders the next Verse; but in these Sacrifices their Sins are remembred, called to mind every year. , many ancient Copies add the negative, , whereof we shall speak immediately. . Vul. Alioquin; and so others generally; of the word see Chap. 9. 26. For if so, , cessassent (semel) oblata, they would have ceased being once offered. Most render the Participle by the Infinitive Mood; desiissent offerri; they would have ceased to be offered. , cul∣tores, the Worshippers: sacrificantes, the Sacrificers, say some, I think improper∣ly, both as to the proper sense of the Word and the Things intended. The Priests only properly were sacrificantes, but the people are here intended. ; M. S. , mundati, purificati, purgati; cleansed, purified, purged. . Ideo quod nullam habent ultrà conscien∣tiam peccati. Vul. Lat. ideo quòd, for propterea; peccati, for peccatorum. Nullorum peccatorum amplius sibi essent conscii: Bez. They should no more be conscious unto themselves of any sin. The sense is given in the Syriack before mentioned. Arab. They would have made more mention of the Commemoration of Sins, with respect unto the Words following. , Syr. But in these they remembred their Sins. Recommemoratio, repetita mentio. A calling to remembrance by acknowledgment. There is, as was observed, a different reading in the ancient Copies of the First words in the Second Verse. The Syriack and the vulgar Latin take no notice of the Negative Particle ; but read the words positively, then would they have ceased. Those who follow other Copies take , for, ; non, for, nonne; and ren∣der the words Interrogatively, as doth our Translation; for then would they not have ceased? That is, they would have done so: And then  is to be rendred Adversatively, by alioqui, as it is by Most, for otherwise. But it may be rendred Causally by, for then, if an Interrogation be allowed. But the sense is the same in both Readings as we shall see. VERSE 2. For otherwise they would have ceased to be offered; because that the worshippers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins. THe words contain a confirmation by a new argument of what was affirmed in the verse foregoing. And it is taken from the frequent repetitions of those Sacri∣fices. The thing to be proved is the insufficiency of the Law to perfect the Worshippers by its Sacrifices. This he proves in the foregoing verse, from the formal cause of that insufficiency; which is, that in them all it had but a shadow of good things to come, and so could not effect that which was to be done only by the good things them∣selves. Here the same truth is proved ab effectu or à signo, from a demonstrative sign and evidence of it in their Repetition. The present Argument therefore of the Apostle is taken from a sign of the Im∣potency and insufficiency which he had before asserted. There is, as was obser∣ved, a variety in the original copies, some having the negative particle, , others omitting it. If that note of negations be allowed, the words are to be read by way of Interrogation; would they not have ceased to be offered? that is, they would have done so, or God would not have appointed the Repetition of them. If it be omitted, the assertion is positive; They would have then ceased to be offered; there was no Reason for their continuance, nor would God have appointed it. And the notes of the inference, , are applicable unto either reading; For then in that . case, on this supposition that they could perfect the worshippers, would they not? or they would, Have ceased to be offered. There would have been rest given unto them, a stop put to their offering. That is, God would have appointed them to have . been offered once and no more. So the Apostle observes signally of the Sacrifice
of Christ that he once offered himself; that he offered once for all; because by one offer∣ing, and that once offered, he did perfect them that were sanctified or dedicated unto God thereby. That which the Apostle designes to prove, is that they did not by their own force and efficacy for ever perfect the Church or bring it unto that State of Justification, Sanctification and acceptance with God, which was designed unto it, with all the priviledges and spiritual worship belonging unto that State. That this they did not do, he declares in the words following, by a notable instance included in their Re∣petition. For all means of any sort as such do cease when their end is attained. The continuance of their use is an evidence that the end proposed is not effected. In opposition unto this argument in general it may be said that this reiteration or repetition of them was not because they did not perfectly expiate Sins, the Sins of the offerers, all that they had committed and were guilty of before their offering; But because those for whom they were offered did again contract the guilt of Sin, and so stood in need of a renewed expiation hereof. In answer unto this Objection which may be laid against the foundation of the Apostles Argument, I say there are two things in the Expiation of Sin. First, The Effects of the Sacrifice towards God in making attonement; Secondly, The Appli∣cation of those Effects unto our consciences. The Apostle treats not of the later, or the means of the Application of the Effects and Benefits of the Expiation of sin un∣to our Consciences, which may be many and frequently repeated. Of this nature are still all the Ordinances of the Gospel, and so also are our own Faith and Repentance. The principal end in particular of that great Ordinance of the Supper of the Lord, which by his own command is frequently to be repeated, and ever was so in the Church, is to make Application unto us of the vertue and efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ in his death unto our Souls. For a renewed participation of the thing Signified, is the only use of the frequent repetition of the Sign. So renewed Acts of Faith and Repentance are continually necessary upon the incursions of new acts of sin and defilement. But by none of these is there any attonement made for sin or an expi∣ation of it; only the one, the great Sacrifice of Attonement is applyed unto us, not to be repeated by us. But the Apostle treats only of that we mentioned in the first place; the efficacy of Sacrifices to make Reconciliation and Attonement for sin be∣fore God, which the Jews expected from them. And actings towards God need no repetition, to make Application of them unto him. Wherefore God himself being the only object of Sacrifices for the Expiation of sin, what cannot be effected towards him and with him by one and at once, can never be done by Repetition of the same. Supposing therefore the end of Sacrifices to be the making of Attonement with God for sin, and the procurement of all the priviledges wherewith it is accompa∣nied, which was the faith of the Jews concerning them, and the Repetition of them doth invincibly prove that they could not of themselves effect, what they were ap∣plyed unto or used for; especially considering that this repetition of them was en∣joyned to be perpetual, whilst the Law continued in force. If they could at any time have perfected the Worshippers, they would have ceased to be offered; for unto what end should that continuance serve? To abide in a shew or pretence of doing that which is done already, doth no way answer the wisdom of Divine Institutions. And we may see herein both the obstinacy and miserable state thereon of the pre∣sent Jews. The Law doth plainly declare, that without Attonement by blood there is no Remission of sins to be obtained. This they expect by the sacrifices of the Law, and their frequent repetition, not by any thing which was more perfect, and which they did represent. But all these they have been utterly deprived of for many Ge∣nerations, and therefore must all of them on their own principles dye in their sins and under the Curse. The woful superstitious follies whereby they endeavour to sup∣ply the want of those Sacrifices, are nothing but so many Evidences of their obsti∣nate blindness. And it is hence also evident, that the superstition of the Church of Rome, in their Masse, wherein they pretend to offer and every day to repeat a propitiatory Sacri∣fice for the sins of the living and the dead, doth evidently demonstrate, that they disbelieve the efficacy of the one Sacrifice of Christ, as once offered, for the ex∣piation of sin. For if it be so, neither can it be repeated, nor any other used for that end, if we believe the Apostle.
The remaining words of this verse confirm the Argument insisted on; namely, that these Sacrifices would have ceased to be offered, if they could have made the Church perfect; for, saith he, the worshippers being once purged they should have had no more conscience of Sin. And we must enquire (1.) who are intended by the worshippers. (2.) what it is to be purged. (3.) what is the effect of this purging, in having no more conscience of sins. (4.) How the Apostle proves his intention hereby. The Worshippers, , are the same with, , the Comers in the . Verse foregoing: And in neither place the Priests who offered the Sacrifices, but the people for whom they were offered, are intended. They it was who made use of these Sacrifices for the Expiation of Sin. Concerning these persons it is supposed that if the Sacrifices of the Law could . make them perfect, then would they have been purged; wherefore  is the effect of ; to be purged of being made perfect. For the Apostle sup∣poseth the Negation of the latter, from the Negation of the former. If the Law did not make them perfect, then were they not purged. This Sacred  respects either the guilt of Sin, or the filth of it: The one is removed by Justification, the other by Sanctification. The one is the effect of the Sacerdotal actings of Christ towards God in making attonement for Sin, the other of the application of the Virtue and Efficacy of that Sacrifice unto our Souls and Consciences, whereby they are purged, cleansed, renewed and changed. It is the purging of the first sort that is here intended; such a purging of Sin as takes away the Condemning Power of Sin from the Conscience on the account of the guilt of it. If they had been purged (as they would have been, had the Law made the Comers unto its Sacrifices perfect) that is, if there had been a compleat Expiation of Sin made for them. And the supposition denyed hath its qualification and limitation in the word  , once. By this word he expresseth the efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, which being one, at once effected what it was designed unto. And it doth not design only the doing of a thing at one time, but the so doing of it as that it should never more be done. That these Worshippers were not thus purged by any of the Sacrifices which were offered for them, the Apostle proves from hence; because they had not the necessary effect and consequence of such a Purification. For if they had been so . purged, they would have had no more conscience of sins; but that they had so he proves in the next Verse from the Legal Recognition that was made of them every year. And if they had had no more conscience of Sin, there would have been no need of offering Sacrifices for their Expiation any more. (1.) The Introduction of the Assertion is by the Particles , because that,  which directs unto the Argument that is in the words, they would have ceased to be offered, because their end would have been accomplished, and so themselves taken away. (2.) On the Supposition made, there would have been an alteration made in  the state of the Worshippers. When they came unto the Sacrifices, they came with conscience of Sin. This is unavoidable unto a Sinner before Expiation and Attonement be made for it: Afterwards, if they were purged, it should be so no more with them; they should no more have conscience of Sin. They should no more have conscience of Sin; or rather, they should not any more, . or farther, have any conscience of Sins; or they should have no conscience of Sins any more. The meaning of the word is singularly well expressed in the Syriack Translation. They should have no conscience agitating, tossing, disquieting, perplex∣ing for Sins; no conscience judging and condemning their persons for the Guilt of Sin, so depriving them of Solid Peace with God. It is conscience with respect unto the Guilt of Sin, as it binds over the Sinner unto punishment in the judgment of God. Now this is not to be measured by the apprehension of the Sinner, but by the true Causes and Grounds of it: Now these lye herein alone, that Sin was not perfectly expiated; for where this is not, there must be a conscience of Sin, that is, disquieting, judging, condemning for Sin. The Apostle speaks on the one side and the other of them, who were really in∣terested in the Sacrifices whereunto they might trust for the Expiation of Sin.
The way hereof as unto them of old, and the Legal Sacrifices, was the due at∣tendance unto them, and performance of them according unto Gods institution. Hence are the persons so interested called the comers to them, and the worshippers. The way and means of our interest in the Sacrifice of Christ is by Faith only. In this state it often falls out, that true Believers have a conscience, judging and condemning them for Sin, no less than they had under the Law: but this trouble and power of conscience doth not arise from hence, that Sin is not perfectly ex∣piated by the Sacrifice of Christ, but only from an apprehension that they have not a due interest in that Sacrifice, and the benefits of it. Under the Old Testa∣ment they questioned not their due interest in their Sacrifices, which depended on the performance of the Rites and Ordinances of Service belonging unto them: but their consciences charged them with the Guilt of Sin, through an apprehensi∣on that their Sacrifices could not perfectly expiate it. And this they found them∣selves led unto by Gods institution of their Repetition, which had not been done, if they could ever make the Worshippers perfect. It is quite otherwise as unto conscience for Sin remaining in Believers under the New Testament; for they have not the least Sense or Fear concerning any insufficiency or imperfection in the Sacrifice whereby it is expiated. God hath ordered all things concerning it, so as to satisfie the consciences of all Men in the perfect Expiation of Sin by it; only they who are really purged by it, may be in the dark sometimes, as unto their personal interest in it. But it may be objected, that if the Sacrifices neither by their native efficacy, nor by the frequency of repetition could take away Sin, so as that they who came unto God by them, could have peace of conscience, or be freed from the trouble of a continual Condemnatory Sentence in themselves; then was there no true real peace with God under the Old Testament, for other way of attaining it there was none. But this is contrary unto innumerable Testimonies of Scripture, and the promises of God made then unto the Church. In answer hereunto, I say, the Apostle did not, nor doth in these words declare what they did and could, or could not attain unto under the Old Testament; only what they could not attain by the means of their Sacrifices: so he declares it in the next Verse; for in them remembrance is made of Sins. But in the use of them, and by their frequent repe∣tition, they were taught to look continually unto the great Expiatory Sacrifice; whose Virtue was laid up for them in the promise, whereby they had peace with God. Obser. 1. The discharge of conscience from its condemning Right and Power, by vertue of the Sacrifice of Christ, is the foundation of all other priviledges we receive by the Gospel. Where this is not, there is no real participation of any other of them. 2. All peace with God is resolved into a purging Attonement made for sin: Being once purged. 3. It is by a principle of Gospel-light alone, that conscience is directed to condemn all Sin, and yet to acquit all Sinners that are purged: Its own natural Light can give it no guidance herein. VERSE 3. But in those Sacrifices there is a remembrance again made of Sins every year. IT is the latter part of the foregoing assertion; namely, that the Worshippers were not purged or perfected by them, in that they had still remaining a consci∣ence for Sin, which is proposed unto confirmation; for this being a matter of fact, might be denied by the Hebrews. Wherefore the Apostle proves the truth of his Assertion from an inseparable adjunct of the yearly repetition of these Sacrifices according unto Divine Institution. There are Four things to be opened in the words. (1.) The Introduction of the Reason intended, by an adversative conjunction, , but. (2.) The Subject spoken of, those Sacrifices. (3.) What belonged unto them by Divine Institution, which is a renewed remembrance of Sin. (4.) The seasons of it, it was to be made every year.
1. The note of introduction gives us the nature of the Argument insisted on: Had the Worshippers been perfect, they would have had no more conscience for Sins.  But, saith he, it was not so with them; for God appoints nothing in vain: And he had not only appointed the Repetition of these Sacrifices, but also that in eve∣ry Repetition of them there should be a Remembrance made of Sin, as of that which was yet to be expiated. 2. The Subject spoken of is expressed in these words, , in them. But this Relative is remote from the Antecedent which is in the first Verse, by the in∣terposition . of the second, wherein it is repeated: we transfer it hither from the first Verse in our Translation; but in these Sacrifices. And we supply the de∣fect of the Verb Substantive by, there is; for there is no more in the Original than but in them a Remembrance again of Sins. The Sacrifices intended are prin∣cipally those of the Solemn day of Expiation: For he speaks of them that were re∣peated yearly; that is, once every year. Others were repeated every day, or as often as occasion did require; these only were so yearly: And these are peculiar∣ly fixed on, because of the peculiar Solemnity of their Offering, and the interest of the whole people at once in them. By these therefore they looked for the perfect Expiation of Sin. 3. That which is affirmed of these Sacrifices, is, their inseparable adjunct, that in them there was a remembrance of Sin again: That is, there was so by virtue of . Divine Institution, whereon the force of the Argument doth depend. For this remembrance of Sin by Gods own Institution was such as sufficiently evidenced that the Offerers had yet a conscience condemning them for sins. Respect is had unto the command of God unto this purpose, Levit. 16. 21, 22.  is an express remembrance, or a remembrance expressed by Confession or Acknowledgment. See Gen. 40. 9. chap. 42. 21. For where it respects Sin, it is a recalling of it un∣to the Sentence of the Law, and a sense of punishment. See Num. 5. 15. 1 King. 17, 18. And hereby the Apostle proves effectually that these Sacrifices did not make the worshippers perfect. For notwithstanding their Offering of them, a sense of Sin still returned upon their Consciences, and God himself had appointed that every year they should make such an acknowledgment and confession of Sin, as should manifest that they stood in need of a farther Expiation than could be at∣tained by them. But a difficulty doth here arise of no small Importance. For what the Apostle denys unto these Offerings of the Law, that he ascribes unto the One only Sacrifice of Christ. Yet notwithstanding this Sacrifice and its Efficacy, it is certain that Be∣lievers ought not only once a year, but every day to call sins to remembrance, and to make Confession thereof. Yea, our Lord Jesus Christ himself hath taught us to pray every day for the pardon of our sins, wherein there is a calling of them unto Remembrance. It doth not therefore appear wherein the difference lyes between the Efficacy of their Sacrifices, and that of Christ, seeing after both of them there is equally a Remembrance of Sin again to be made. An. The difference is evident between these things. Their Confession of Sin was in order unto, and preparatory for, a new Attonement and Expiation of it. This sufficiently proves the insufficiency of those that were offered before. For they were to come unto the new Offerings, as if there had never been any before them: Our remembrance of Sin, and confession of it, respects only the Applica∣tion of the Virtue and Efficacy of the Attonement once made, without the least de∣sire or expectation of a new propitiation. In their remembrance of Sin respect was had unto the curse of the Law which was to be answered, and the wrath of God which was to be appeased; it belonged unto the Sacrifice it self, whose Object was God: Ours respects only the application of the benefits of the Sacrifice of Christ unto our own Consciences, whereby we may have assured peace with God. The Sentence or Curse of the Law was on them, until a new Attonement was made; for the Soul that did not joyn in this Sacrifice, was to be cut off: But the Sentence and Curse of the Law was at once taken away, Eph. 2. 14, 15, 16. And we may observe. 1. An Obligation unto such Ordinances of Worship as could not expiate sin, nor testifie that it was perfectly expiated, was part of the Bondage of the Church under the Old Testament.
2. It belongs unto the Light and Wisdom of Faith, so to remember Sin, and make Confession of it, as not therein, or thereby to seek after a new Attonement for it, which is made once for all. Confession of Sin is no less necessary under the New Testament, than it was under the Old; but not for the same end. And it is an emi∣nent difference between the spirit of Bondage, and that of Liberty by Christ. The one so confesseth Sin as to make that very Confession a part of Attonement for it; the other is encouraged unto Confession, because of the Attonement al∣ready made, as a means of coming unto a participation of the benefits of it. Wherefore the causes and reasons of the Confession of Sin under the New Testa∣ment, are, (1.) To affect our own Minds and Consciences with a sense of the Guilt of Sin in it self; so as to keep us humble and filled with self-abasement. He who hath no sense of Sin but only what consists in dread of future judgment, knows little of the mystery of our Walk before God, and Obedience unto him, according unto the Gospel. (2.) To engage our Souls unto watchfulness for the future against the sins we do confess; for in confession we make an abrenuntiati∣on of them. (3.) To give unto God the glory of his Righteousness, Holiness and Aversation from Sin. This is included in every Confession we make of Sin; for the reason why we acknowledge the Evil of it, why we detest and abhor it, is its contrariety unto the Nature, holy Properties, and Will of God. (4.) To give unto him the glory of his infinite Grace and Mercy in the pardon of it. (5.) We use it as an instituted means to let in a sense of the pardon of Sin into our own Souls and Consciences, through a fresh Application of the Sacrifice of Christ, and the benefits thereof, whereunto Confession of Sin is required. (6.) To exalt Jesus Christ in our Hearts, by the application of our selves unto him, as the only procurer and purchaser of Mercy and Pardon; without which, Confession of Sins is neither acceptable unto God, nor useful unto our own Souls. But we do not make Confession of Sin, as a part of a Compensation for the Guilt of it; nor as a means to give some present pacification unto Conscience, that we may go on in Sin, as the manner of some is. VERSE IV. . THere is no difficulty in the Words, and very little difference in the Transla∣tions of them. The vulgar renders  by the Passive: Impossibile est enim sanguine taurorum & hircorum auferri peccata: It is impossible that Sins should be taken away by the blood of Bulls and Goats. The Syriack renders  by  which is to purge or cleanse unto the same purpose. For it is impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin. This is the last determinate resolution of the Apostle concerning the insufficiency of the Law, and its Sacrifices for the Expiation of Sin, and the perfecting them who come unto God, as unto their Consciences. And there is in the Argument used unto this end, an inference from what was spoken before, and a new enforcement from the Nature or subject matter of these Sacrifices. Something must be observed concerning this Assertion in general, and an Ob∣jection that it is liable unto. For by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, he intends all the Sacrifices of the Law: Now if it be impossible that they should take away Sin, for what end then were they appointed? Especially, considering that in the Institution of them, God told the Church that he had given the Blood to make Attonement on the Altar, Levit. 17. 11. It may therefore be said as the Apostle doth in another place, with respect unto the Law it self; if it could not by the works of it justifie us before God, to what end then served the Law? To what end serve these Sacrifices, if they could not take away Sin? The Answer which the Apostle gives with respect unto the Law in general, may be applyed unto the Sacrifices of it, with a small Addition from a respect unto their special Nature. For as unto the Law, he answers two things: (1.) That
it was added because of Transgressions, Gal. 3. 19. (2.) That it was a School∣master to guide and direct us unto Christ, because of the severities wherewith it was accompanied like those of a School-master; not in the Spirit of a tender Fa∣ther. And thus it was as unto the end of these Sacrifices. 1. They were added unto the promise because of Transgressions. For God in them, and by them did continually represent unto Sinners the Curse and Sentence of the Law; namely, that the Soul that sinneth must dye; or that Death was the Wages of Sin. For although there was allowed in them a Commutation, that the Sinner himself should not dye, but the Beast that was Sacrificed in his stead, which be∣longed unto their Second end of leading unto Christ; yet they all testified unto that Sacred Truth, that it is the Judgment of God that they who commit Sin are worthy of Death. And this was, as the whole Law, an Ordinance of God to deterr Men from Sin, and so put bounds unto Transgressions. For when God pas∣sed by Sin with a kind of Connivance, winking at the Ignorance of Men in their iniquities, not giving them continual warnings of their Guilt and the consequents thereof in Death, the World was filled and covered with a Deluge of Impieties. Men saw not Judgment speedily executed, nor any Tokens or Indications that so it would be, therefore was their Heart wholly set in them to do Evil. But God dealt not thus with the Church. He let no Sin pass without a Representation of his displeasure against it, though mixed with Mercy in a direction unto the Re∣lief against it, in the Blood of the Sacrifice. And therefore he did not only ap∣point these Sacrifices on all the especial occasions of such Sins and Uncleanness, as the Consciences of particular Sinners were pressed with a sense of; but also once a year there was gathered up a Remembrance of all the Sins, Iniquities and Transgressions of the whole Congregation, Levit. 16. 2. They were added as the Teaching of a School-master to lead unto Christ. By them was the Church taught and directed to look continually unto, and after that Sacrifice which alone could really purge and take away all Iniquity. For God appointed no Sacrifices until after the Promise of sending the Seed of the Woman to break the Head of the Serpent. In his so doing was his own Heel to be bruised, in the suffering of his Humane Nature, which he offered in Sacrifice unto God; which these Sacrifices did represent. Wherefore the Church know∣ing that these Sacrifices did call Sin to remembrance, representing the displeasure of God against Sin, which was their First end; and that although there was an Intimation of Grace and Mercy in them by the commutation and substitution which they allowed; yet that they could not of themselves take away Sin, it made them the more earnestly, and with longing desires look after him and his Sacrifice, who should perfectly take away Sin and make peace with God, wherein the prin∣cipal exercise of Grace under the Old Testament did consist. 3. As unto their especial nature, they were added as the great instruction in the way and manner whereby Sin was to be taken away. For although this arose originally from Gods meer Grace and Mercy; yet was it not to be ex∣ecuted, and accomplished by Soveraign Grace and Power alone. Such a taking away of Sin would have been inconsistent with his Truth, Holiness, and Righteous Government of Mankind, as I have elsewhere at large demonstrated. It must be done by the Interposition of a Ransome and Attonement by the substitution of one who was no Sinner in the room of Sinners, to make satisfaction unto the Law, and Justice of God for Sin. Hereby they became the principal direction of the Faith of the Saints under the Old Testament, and the means whereby they acted it, on the original promise of their Recovery from Apostasie. These things do evidently express the Wisdom of God in their Institution, al∣though of themselves they could not take away Sin. And those by whom these ends of them are denyed, as they are by the Jews and Socinians, can give no account of any end of them, which should answer the Wisdom, Grace and Holi∣ness of God. This Objection being removed, I shall proceed unto the Exposition of the words in particular. And there are Four things in them as a Negative Proposi∣tion. (1.) The Illative Conjunction declaring its respects unto what went before. (2.) The subject matter spoken of: The Blood of Bulls and Goats. (3.) What
is denyed concerning it; it could not take away Sin. (4.) The Modification of this Negative Proposition, it was impossible they should do so. 1. The Illative Conjunction, For, declares what is spoken to be introduced in  the Proof and Confirmation of what was before affirmed. And it is the closing Argument against the Imperfection and Impotency of the Old Covenant, the Law, Priesthood and Sacrifices of it, which the Apostle maketh use of. And indeed it is comprehensive of all that he had before insisted on; yea, it is the Foundation of all his other Reasonings unto this purpose. For if in the Nature of the thing it self it was impossible that the Sacrifices consisting of the Blood of Rulls and Goats should take away Sin, then however, whensoever, and by whomsoever they were offered, this effect could not be produced by them. Wherefore in these words the Apostle puts a Close unto his Argument, and reassumes it no more in this Epistle, but only Once or Twice makes mention of it in the way of an Il∣lustration to set forth the excellency of the Sacrifice of Christ; as, v. 11. of this Chapter, and Chap. 13. 10, 11, 12. 2. The subject spoken of is the Blood of Bulls and Goats. The reason why the . Apostle expresseth them by Bulls and Goats, which were Calves and Kids of the Goats, hath been declared on Chap. 9. ver. 11, 12. And some things must be ob∣served conceruing this Description of the Old Sacrifices. 1. That he makes mention of the Blood of the Sacrifices only; whereas in many of them the whole Bodies were offered, and the Fat of them all was burn∣ed on the Altar. And thus he doth for the ensuing Reasons; (1.) Because it was the Blood alone whereby Attonement was made for Sin and Sinners. The Fat was burned with Incense only, to shew that it was accepted as a sweet sa∣vour with God. (2.) Because he had respect principally unto the Anniversary Sacrifice, unto the Consummation whereof, and Attonement thereby, the carry∣ing the Blood into the Holy Place, did belong. (3.) Because Life Natural is in an especial manner in the Blood, which signified that Attonement was to be made by Death, and that by the effusion of Blood, as it was in the Sacrifice of Christ. See Levit. 17. 11, 12. And in the shedding of it there was an Indication of the Desert of Sin in the Offerer. 2. He recalls them by this Expression of their Sacrifices, the Blood of Bulls and Goats, unto a due consideration of what effect might be produced by them. They were Accompanied with great Solemnity and Pomp of Ceremony in their Celebration. Hence arose a great Esteem and Veneration of them in the Minds of the People. But when all was done, that which was Offered was but the Blood of Bulls and Goats. And there is a Tacit Opposition unto the matter of that Sacrifice, whereby Sin was really to be Expiated, which was the precious Blood of Christ, as Chap. 9. 13, 14. 3. That which is denyed of these Sacrifices, is, , the taking a∣way of sins. The thing intended is variously expressed by the Apostle, as by  , Chap. 2. 17. , Chap. 1. 3. , Chap. 9. 14. , Chap. 9. 26. , ver. 28. To make Reconciliation, to purge sin, to purge the Conscience, to abolish sin, to bear it. And that which he intendeth, in all these expressions, which he denies of the Law and its Sacrifices, and ascribes unto that of Christ, is the whole en∣tire effect thereof, so far as it immediately respected God and the Law. For all these Expressions respect the Guilt of Sin, and its removal, or the pardon of it, with righteousness before God, acceptance and peace with him. To take away sin, is to make Attonement for it, to Expiate it before God by a satisfacti∣on given, or price paid, with the procurement of the Pardon of it according unto the Terms of the New Covenant. The Interpretation of these words by the Socinians, is contrary unto the signi∣fication of the words themselves, and the whole design of the Context. Im∣possibile est (saith Schlictingius) ut sanguis taurorum & hircorum peccata tollat; hoc est, efficiat ut homines in postcrum à peccatis abstinerent, & sic nullam amplius habeant peccatorum conscientiam, sive ullas corum poenas metuant; quam cnim quaeso vim ad haec praestandum sanguis animalium habere potest? Itaque hoc dicit, taurorum & hircorum sanguinem eam vim nequaquam habere, & ut habeat, impossi∣bile esse, ut homines à peccatis avocet, & ne in posterum peccent, efficiat. And Gro∣tius
after him speaks to the same purpose, , quod suprà , est extinguere peccata, quod sanguis Christi facit, cum quia fidem in nobis parit, tum quia Christo jus dat nobis auxilia necessaria impetrandi; pecudum san∣guis nihil efficit tale. 1. Nothing can be more Alien from the Design of the Apostle, and Scope of the Context. They are both of them to prove, that the Sacrifices of the Law could not Expiate Sins, could not make Attonement for them, could not make Reconciliation with God, could not produce the effect which the Sacrifice of Christ alone was appointed and ordained unto. They were only Signs and Figures of it. They could not effect that which the Hebrews looked for from them, and by them. And that which they expected by them was, that by them they should make Attonement with God for their sins. Wherefore the Apostle denies that it was possible they should effect what they looked for from them, and nothing else. It was not that they should be Arguments to turn them from Sin unto newness of life, so as that they should sin no more. By what way, and on what consideration they were means to deter Men from Sin, I have newly declared. But they can produce no one place in the whole Law, to give coun∣tenance unto such an Apprehension that this was their end; so that the Apostle had no need to declare their Insufficiency with respect thereunto. Especially, the great Anniversary Sacrifice on the day of Expiation was appointed so ex∣presly to make Attonement for Sin, to procure its Pardon, to take away its Guilt in the sight of God, and from the Conscience of the Sinner, that he should not be punished according unto the Sentence of the Law; as that it cannot be denyed. This is that which the Apostle declares, that of themselves they could not effect or perform, but only Typically, and by way of Represen∣tation. 2. He declares directly and positively what he intends by this taking away of Sin, and the ceasing of Legal Sacrifices thereon, ver. 17, 18. Their Sins and their Iniquities will I remember no more; now where Remission of these is, there is no more Offering for Sin. The cessation of Offerings for Sin, follows directly on the Remission of Sin, which is the effect of Expiation and Attonement; and not upon the turning away of Men from Sin for the future. It is therefore our Justification, and not our Sanctification that the Apostle discourseth of. 3. The words themselves will not bear this sense. For the Object of , that which it is exercised about, is . It is an Act upon Sin it self, and not immediately upon the Sinner. Nor can it signifie any thing but to take a∣way the Guilt of Sin, that it should not bind over the Sinner unto punishment; whereon Conscience for sin is taken away. But to return. 4. The manner of the Negation is, that, it was impossible that it should be other∣wise.  And it was so, 1. From Divine Institution. Whatever the Jews apprehended, they were ne∣ver designed of God unto that end, and therefore had no Virtue or Efficacy for it Communicated unto them. And all the Virtue of Ordinances of Worship depends on their Designation unto their end. The Blood of Bulls and Goats as offered in Sacrifice, and carried into the most Holy Place, was designed of God to represent the way of taking away sin, but not by it self to effect it; and it was therefore impossible that so it should do. 2. It was impossible from the Nature of the things themselves, in as much as there was not a Condecency unto the Holy perfections of the Divine Nature, that Sin should be Expiated, and the Church perfected by the Blood of Bulls and Goats. For, (1.) There would not have been so unto his Infinite Wisdom. For God having declared his severity against Sin, with the necessity of its punish∣ment unto the Glory of his Righteousness and Soveraign Rule over his Crea∣tures, what Condecency could there have been herein unto infinite Wisdom? What Consistency between the severity of that Declaration, and the taking away of Sin by such an Inferiour Beggarly means, as that of the Blood of Bulls and Goats? A great appearance was made of infinite displeasure against sin, in the giving of the Fiery Law, in the Curse of it, in the threatnings of Eternal Death; should all have ended in an outward shew, there would have been no manner of proportion to be discerned between the Demerit of Sin, and the
means of its Expiation. So that (2.) It had no Condecency unto Divine Justice. For, (1.) As I have elsewhere proved at large, Sin could not be taken away without a Price, a Ransome, a Compensation and satisfaction made unto Justice for the Injuries it received by Sin. In satisfaction unto Justice by way of Com∣pensation for Injuries or Crimes, there must be a proportion between the Injury and the Reparation of it, that Justice may be as much Exalted and Glorified in the one, as it was depressed and debased in the other. But there could be no such thing between the Demerit of Sin, and the Affront put on the Righteous∣ness of God, on the one hand; and a Reparation by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, on the other. No Man living can apprehend wherein any such proportion should lye or consist: Nor was it possible that the Conscience of any Man could be freed from a Sense of the Guilt of Sin, who had nothing to trust unto but this Blood to make Compensation or Attonement for it. (2.) The apprehension of it, (namely, a suitableness unto Divine Justice, in the Expiation of Sins by the Blood of Bulls and Goats,) must needs be a great Incentive unto prophane persons, unto the Com∣mission of Sin. For if there be no more in Sin and the Guilt of it, but what may be Expiated and taken away at so low a price, but what may have Attonement made for it by the Blood of Beasts, why should they not give satisfaction unto their Lusts by living in Sin? (3.) It would have had no consistency with the Sen∣tence and Sanction of the Law of Nature; In the day thou eatest, thou shalt dye. For although God reserved unto himself the Liberty and Right of substituting a Surety in the room of a Sinner, to dye for him; namely, such an one as should by his Suffering and Dying, bring more Glory unto the Righteousness, Holi∣ness and Law of God, than either was derogated from them by the Sin of Man, or could be restored unto them by his Eternal Ruin; yet was it not consistent with the veracity of God in that Sanction of the Law, that this substitution should be of a Nature no way Cognate, but ineffably inferiour unto the Na∣ture of him that was to be delivered. For these and other Reasons of the same kind, which I have handled at large elsewhere, it was impossible, as the Apostle assures us, that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin. And we may observe, 1. It is possible that things may usefully represent, what it is impossible, that in, and by themselves they should effect. This is the Fundamental Rule of all Instituti∣ons of the Old Testament. Wherefore, 2. There may be great and eminent uses of Divine Ordinances and Institutions, although it be impossible that by themselves in their most exact and diligent use, they should work out our Acceptance with God. And it belongs unto the Wisdom of Faith, to use them unto their proper end, not to trust unto them, as unto what they cannot of themselves effect. 3. It was utterly impossible that Sin should be taken away before God, and from the Conscience of the Sinner, but by the Blood of Christ. Other ways Men are apt to betake themselves unto for this end, but in vain. It is the Blood of Jesus Christ alone that cleanseth us from all our Sins; for he alone was the Propitiation for them. 4. The Declaration of the Insufficiency of all other ways for the Expiation of Sin, is an evidence of the Holiness, Righteousnes, and Severity of God against Sin, with the unavoidable Ruin of all Unbelievers. 5. Herein also consists the great Demonstration of the Love, Grace and Mer∣cy of God, with an encouragement unto Faith; in that when the Old Sacrifices neither would, nor could perfectly Expiate Sin, he would not suffer the work it self to fail, but provided a way that should be infallibly effective of it; as is declared in the following Verses.
VERSE V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X. THe Provision that God made to supply the Defect and Insufficiency of Legal Sacrifices, as unto the Expiation of Sin, peace of Conscience with himself, and the Sanctification of the Souls of the Worshippers, is declared in this Con∣text. For the words contain the blessed undertaking of our Lord Jesus Christ, to do, fulfil, perform and suffer all things required in the Will, and by the Wis∣dom, Holiness, Righteousness and Authority of God, unto the compleat Salva∣tion of the Church, with the Reasons of the Efficacy of what he so did, and suffered unto that end. And we must consider both the words themselves, so far especially as they consist in a Quotation out of the Old Testament, with the Validity of his Inferences from the Testimony which he chuseth to insist on unto this purpose. . Some few differences may be observed in the Antient and best Translations. . Vulg. Lat. ideo quapropter. Syr. : for this, for this cause. : Hostiam & oblationem, Sacrificium, victimam. The Syriack renders the words in the Plural Number, Sacrifices and Offerings. , Aptâsti, adaptâsti mihi; praeparâsti, perfecisti. A Body hast thou prepàred, i. e. fitted for me, wherein I may do thy Will. Syr.  But thou hast Cloathed me with a Body; very significantly, as unto the thing in∣tended, which is the Incarnation of the Son of God. The Aethiop. renders this Verse somewhat strangely: And when he entred into the World, he saith, Sacri∣fices and Offerings I would not; thy Body he hath purified unto me. Making them, as I suppose, the words of the Father. : Vulg. non tibi placuerant; reading the preceding words in the Nominative Case, altering the Person and Number of the Verb. Syr. ; Thou didst not require; non approbâsti: that is, they were not well pleasing, nor accepted with God, as unto the end of the Expiation of Sin. . Ecce adsum, venio. : The Syriack omitteth the last word, which yet is Em∣phatical in the discourse. : Vul. tunc dixi, then I said; that is, ; for he said; for the Apostle doth not speak these words, but repeats the words of the Psalmist. The reading of the words out of the Hebrew by the Apostle, shall be consi∣dered in our passage. VERSE 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 5. Wherefore when he cometh into the World, he saith, Sacrifice and Offer∣ing thou wouldst not; but a Body hast thou prepared [fitted for] me. 6. In Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou hast had no pleasure. 7. Then said I, Lo, I come, (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy Will O God; that I should do thy Will. 8. Above when he said, Sacrifice and Offering, and Burnt Offerings, and Offerings for Sin, thou wouldst not, neither hadst pleasure therein, which are Offered by the Law:
9. Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy Will (O God.) He taketh away the First, that he may establish the Second. 10. By the which Will we are Sanctified, through the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. A Blessed and Divine Context this is, Summarily representing unto us the Love, Grace and Wisdom of the Father; the Love, Obedience and Suf∣fering of the Son; the Federal Agreement between the Father and the Son, as unto the work of the Redemption and Salvation of the Church, with the Blessed Harmony between the Old and New Testament, in the Declaration of these things. The Divine Authority and Wisdom that Evidence themselves herein, are ineffable, and do cast contempt on all those by whom this Epistle hath been called in question; as sundry other passages in it do in a peculiar manner. And it is our Duty to enquire with diligence into the Mind of the Holy Spirit herein. As unto the general Nature of the arguing of the Apostle, it consists in Two Parts. (1.) The Introduction of a pregnant Testimony out of the Old Testament unto his purpose, v. 5, 6, 7, 8, and part of the 9th. (2.) Inferences from that Testimony, Asserting and Confirming all that he had pleaded for. In the Testimony he produceth, we may consider, (1.) The manner of its In∣troduction, respecting the reason of what is asserted; Wherefore. (2.) Who it was by whom the words insisted on were spoken; He saith. (3.) When he spake them; When he came into the World. (4.) The things spoken by him in general; which consist in a double Antithesis. (1.) Between the Legal Sacrifices, and the Obedience of Christ in his Body, ver. 5. (2.) Between Gods acceptance of the one and the other, with their Efficacy unto the end treated of, which must be par∣ticularly spoken unto. 1. The Introduction of this Testimony is by the word, wherefore, for which  cause, for which end. It doth not give an account why the words following were spoken, but why the things themselves were so ordered and disposed: And we are directed in this word, unto the due consideration of what is designed to be proved: And this is, that there was such an Insufficiency in all Legal Sa∣crifices, as unto the Expiation of Sin, that God would remove them, and take them out of the way to Introduce that which was better, to do that which the Law could not do. Wherefore, saith the Apostle, because it was so with the Law, things are thus disposed of in the Wisdom and Counsel of God, as is de∣clared in this Testimony. 2. Who spake the words contained in the Testimony: He saith. The words . may have a Threefold respect. (1.) As they were given out by Inspiration, and are Recorded in the Scripture. So they were the words of the Holy Ghost, as the Apostle expresly affirms of the like words, ver. 15, 16. of this Chapter. (2.) As they were used by the Penman of the Psalm, who speaks by Inspiration. So they were the words of David, by whom the Psalm was Composed. But although David spoke or wrote these words, yet is not he himself the person spoken of, nor can any passage in the whole Context be applyed unto him, as we shall see in particular afterwards. Or if they may be said to be spoken of him, it was only as he bare the person of another, or was a Type of Christ. For although God himself doth frequently prefer Moral Obedience before the Sa∣crifices of the Law, when they were Hypocritically performed, and trusted unto as a Righteousness, unto the neglect of Diligence in Moral Duties; yet David did not, would not, ought not in his own Name and Person re∣ject the Worship of God, and present himself with his Obedience in the room thereof, especially as unto the end of Sacrifices in the Expiation of Sin. Wherefore, (3.) The words are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ; when he cometh into the World, he saith. And it is a vain Enquiry, when in particular he spake these words; unto whom or where any mention is made of them in the story of him. It is no way needful that they should be Literally or Verbally pronounced by him. But the Holy Ghost useth these words in his Name as his, because they
declare, express and represent his mind, design and resolution in his coming into the World, which is the sole end and use of Words. On the consideration of the Insufficiency of Legal Sacrifices (the only appearing means unto that pur∣pose) for the Expiation of Sin, and the making of Reconciliation with God, that all Mankind might not Eternally perish under the Guilt of Sin, the Lord Christ represents his readiness and willingness to undertake that work, with the Frame of his Heart and Mind therein. The Ascription of these words unto the Lord Christ on the reason mentioned, gives us a prospect into, (1.) The Love of his undertaking for us, when all other ways of our Recovery failed, and were disallowed as Insufficient: (2.) Into the Foundation of his undertaking for us, which was the Declaration of the Will of God concerning the Insufficiency of these Sacrifices: (3.) Into his readiness to undertake the work of Redemption, notwithstanding the difficulties that lay in the way of it, and what he was to undergo in the stead of the Legal Sa∣crifices. We have the Solemn word of Christ in the Declaration he made of his readi∣ness Observ. and willingness to undertake the work of the Expiation of Sin, proposed unto our Faith, and Engaged as a sure Anchor of our Souls. 3. The Season of his speaking these words in the manner declared, was, on . his coming into the World; wherefore coming (or when he cometh) into the World, he saith, , veniens or venturus; when he was to enter into the World, when the design of his future coming into the World was declared. So , is, he that is to come, Mat. 11. 3. and , Joh. 4. 45. That therefore may be the sense of the words; upon the First prediction of the fu∣ture coming of the Son of God into the World, the Design, Mind and Will, wherewith he came, was declared. Refer the words unto some actual coming of the person spoken of into the World, and various interpretations are given of them. When he came in Sa∣crifices Typically, say some: But this seems not to be a word accompanying the First Institution of Sacrifices; namely, Sacrifices thou wouldst not have. His coming into the World was his appearance, and publick shewing of himself unto the World, in the beginning of his Ministery, as David came out of the Wilderness and Caves to shew himself unto the people, as King of Israel, saith Grotius. But the respect unto David herein is frivolous; nor are those words used with respect unto the Kingly Office of Christ, but meerly as unto the Offer∣ing himself in Sacrifice to God. The Socinians contend earnestly, that this his coming into the World, is his entrance into Heaven after his Resurrection. And they embrace this uncouth Interpretation of the words, to give countenance unto their pernicious Errour, that Christ offered not himself in Sacrifice to God, in his Death, or whilest he was in this World. For his Sacrifice they suppose to be Metaphorically only so called, consisting in the representation of himself unto God in Heaven, after his Obedience and Suffering. Wherefore they say that by the World which he came into, the World to come mentioned, Chap. 2. 5. is intended. But there is nothing sound, nothing probable or specious in this wresting of the words and sense of the Scripture. For, (1.) the words in the places compared are not the same. This is  only; those are , and are not absolutely to be taken in the same sense, though the same things may be intended in vari∣ous respects. (2.)  is the Habitable part of the Earth, and can on no pretence be applyed unto Heaven. (3.) I have fully proved on that place, that the Apostle in that expression intendeth only the Days and Times of the Messia, or of the Gospel, commonly called among the Jews,  the World to come, that new Heaven and Earth, wherein Righteousness should dwell. But they add that  it self is used for Heaven, Rom. 4. 13. , that he should be the Heir of the World; that is, of Heaven, the World above. But this Imagination is vain also. For Abrahams being Heir of the World, is no more but his being the Father of many Nations: Nor was there ever any other promise which the Apostle should refer unto, of his being Heir of the World, but only that of his being the Father of many Nations, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also; as the Apostle explains it,
Rom. 15. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Respect also may be had unto the promised Seed pro∣ceeding from him, who was to be the Heir of all things. That which they intend by his coming into the World, is what himself con∣stantly calleth his leaving of the World, and going out of it. See Joh. 17. 11, 12. 18. Chap. 13. 1. I leave the World, I am no more in the World; they are in the World. This therefore cannot be his coming into the World. And this Ima∣gination is contrary as unto the express words, so to the open design of the Apostle; For as he declares his coming into the World, to be the season where∣in a Body was fitted for him, so that which he had to do herein, was what he had to do in this World, before his departure out of it, v. 12. Wherefore this Figment is contrary unto common sense, the meaning of the words, the de∣sign of the place, and other express Testimonies of Scripture, and is of no Use, but to be an instance how Men of corrupt Minds can Wrest the Scripture for their ends unto their own destruction. The General Sense of the best Expositors, antient and modern, is, that by the coming of Christ into the World, his Incarnation is intended: See Joh. 9. 10. Chap. 3. 16, 17. 19. Chap. 6. 14. Chap. 9. 5, 39. Chap. 11. 27. Chap. 12. 46. Chap. 16. 28. The same with his coming in the Flesh, his being made Flesh, his being manifest in the Flesh; for therein and thereby he came into the World. Neither is there any weight in the Objection of the Socinians, unto this Ex∣position of the words; namely, that the Lord Christ at his First coming in the Flesh, and in his Infancy, could not do the will of God, nor could these words be used of him. For, (1.) His coming into the World in the Act of the Assumption of our Nature, was in Obedience unto, and for the fulfilling of the Word of God. For God sent him into the World, Joh. 3. 17. And he came not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. (2.) His doing the will of God, is not confined unto any one single Act or Duty, but extends it self unto all the Degrees, and whole progress of what he did and suffered in compliance with the Will of God, the Foundation of the whole being laid in his Incar∣nation. But as these words were not verbally and litterally spoken by him, being only a real Declaration of his Design and Intention; so this expression of his coming into the World, is not to be confined unto any one single Act or Duty, so as to exclude all others from being concerned therein. It hath respect unto all the Solemn Acts of the Susception and Discharge of his Mediatory Office for the Salvation of the Church. But if any shall rather Judge that in this expressi∣on some single season and act of Christ is intended, it can be no other but his Incarnation, and his coming into the World thereby. For this was the Foundati∣on of all that he did afterwards, and that whereby he was fitted for his whole work of Mediation, as is immediately declared. And we may observe, (1.) The Lord Christ had an Infinite prospect of all that he was to do and suffer Observ. in the World, in the discharge of his Office and Undertaking. He declared from the beginning his willingness unto the whole of it. And an Eternal evidence it is of his Love, as also of the Justice of God, in laying all our Sins on him, seeing it was done by his own Will and Consent. 4. The Fourth thing in the words is, what he said. The substance of it is laid down, ver. 5. Unto which the farther Explication is added, ver. 6, 7. And the Application of it unto the Intention of the Apostle, in those that follow. The Words are recorded, Psal. 40. v. 6, 7, 8. being Indited by the Holy Ghost in the Name of Christ, as declarative of his Will. Of the First thing proposed, there are Two Parts. (1.) What concerned the Sacrifices of the Law. (2.) What concerneth himself. As unto what concerneth the Sacrifices, there is, (1.) the expression of the Subject spoken of; that is, , which the Apostle renders by , Sacrifice and Offer∣ing. In the next Verse, the one of them, namely , is distributed into . , which the Apostle renders by , Burnt Offerings, or whole Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices for Sin. It is evident that the Holy Ghost in this variety of Expressions, comprizeth all the Sacrifices of the Law, that had respect unto the Expiation of Sin. And as unto all of them,
their Order, especial Nature and Use, I have Treated at large in my Exercitations before the First Volume of this Exposition. Exercit. 24. whither the Reader is referred. Of these Sacrifices it is affirmed, that God would them not, ver. 5. and that . he had no pleasure in them, ver. 6. The First in the Original is ; which the Apostle renders by, , thou wouldst not. We render it in the Psalm, thou didst not desire.  is, to will, but always with desire, compla∣cency and delight, Psal. 51. 6. Behold , thou desirest, thou wilt, or art de∣lighted with Truth in the hidden part, ver. 16. , thou wouldst not, thou desirest not Sacrifice, Gen. 34. 11. He had delight in Jacobs Daughter, Psal. 147. 10. So  the Noun is, delight, Psal. 1. 2. The LXX. render it generally by , and , to will, as also the Noun by . And they are of the same signification, to will freely, voluntarily and with delight. But this Sense the Apostle doth transfer unto the other word, which he renders by , ver. 6. In the Psalm it is  thou hast not required. , is to . rest in, to approve, to delight in, to be pleased with: So is it always used in the New Testament, whether spoken of God or Men. See Matt. 3. 17. Chap. 12. 18. Chap. 17. 5. Luk. 3. 22. Chap. 12. 32. Rom. 15. 26, 27. 1 Cor. 1. 21. Chap. 10. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 8. Col. 1. 19. &c. Wherefore if we shall grant that the words used by the Apostle be not exact Versions of those used in the Psalmist, as they are applyed the one unto the other, yet it is evident that in both of them the full and exact meaning of both these used by the Psalmist is declared, which is sufficient unto his purpose. All the difficulty in the words may be reduced unto these two Enquiries. (1.) In what sense it is affirmed that God would not have these Sacrifices, that he had no pleasure in them, that he rested not in them. (2.) How was this made known, so as that it might be declared, as it is in this place. As unto the First of these, we may observe, 1. That this is not spoken of the Will of God, as unto the Institution and Appoint∣ment of these Sacrifices; for the Apostle affirms, that they were Offered accord∣ing unto the Law, ver. 8. Namely, which God gave unto the people. God saies indeed by the Prophet unto the people, that he spake not unto their Fathers, nor commanded them in the day that he brought them out of the Land of Egypt, concerning Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, Jer. 7. 22. But he spake not abso∣lutely, as unto the things themselves, but unto their manner of the observance of them. 2. It is not with respect unto the Obedience of the people in their attendance unto them, during the Oeconomy of the Law. For God both required it strictly of them, and approved of it in them, when duly performed: The whole Law and Prophets bare Testimony hereunto. And it was the great Injunction which he left with the people, when he ceased to grant any more immediate Re∣velations of his Will unto the Church, Mal. 4. 4. And the Lord Christ himself under the Judaical Church, did observe them. 3. God doth frequently reject or disallow them in the people, as they were at∣tended unto and performed by them. But this he did only in the case of their gross Hypocrisie, and the two great evils wherewith it was accompanyed. The First was, that they did not only prefer the outward Observation of them be∣fore Internal Moral Obedience, but trusted unto them, unto the total neglect of that Obedience. See Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And the other was, that they put their trust in them for Righteousness and Acceptance with God; about which he deals, Jer. 7. Yet neither was this the Case under consideration in the Psalm. For there is no respect had unto any miscarriages of the people about these Sacrifices, but unto the Sacrifices themselves. Wherefore some say that the words are Prophetical; and declare what the Will of God would be after the coming of Christ in the Flesh, and the Offer∣ing of his Sacrifice once for all. Then God would no more require them nor accept them. But yet neither is this suited unto the Mind of the Holy Ghost. For, (1.) The Apostle doth not prove by this Testimony that they were to cease, but that they could not take away Sin whilst they were in force. (2.) The rea∣son
given by the Lord Christ of his undertaking, is their insufficiency during their continuance according to the Law. (3.) This Revelation of the Will of God, made unto the Church, was actually true when it was made and given, or it was suited to lead them into a great mistake. The Mind of the Holy Ghost is plain enough, both in the Testimony it self, and in the Improvement of it by the Apostle. For the Legal Sacrifices are spoken of only with respect unto that end which the Lord Christ undertook to accomplish by his Mediation. And this was the perfect real Expiation of Sin, with the Justification, Sanctification and Eternal Salvation of the Church; with that perfect State of Spiritual Worship which was ordained for it in this World. All these things these Sacrifices were appointed to prefigure and represent. But the Nature and Design of this Prefiguration being Dark and Obscure, and the things signified being utterly hid from them, as unto their especial Nature and the manner of their Efficacy, many in all Ages of the Church expected them from these Sacrifices, and they had a great appearance of being Divinely Ordained un∣to that end and purpose. Wherefore this is that, and that alone, with respect whereunto they are here rejected. God never appointed them unto this end, he never took pleasure in them with reference thereunto; they were insufficient in the Wisdom, Holiness and Righteousness of God unto any such purpose. Wherefore the Sense of God concerning them as unto this end, is, that they were not appointed, not approved, not accepted for it. 2. It may be enquired, how this Mind and Will of God, concerning the refusal of these Sacrifices unto this end, might be known, so as that it should be here spoken of, as of a Truth unquestionable in the Church. For the Words, thou wouldst not, thou tookst no Pleasure, do not express a meer internal act of the Divine Will, but a Declaration also of what is, and what is not well-pleasing unto God. How then was this Declaration made, how came it to be known? I answer, 1. The Words are the words of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, consi∣dered as to be Incarnate, for the Redemption of the Church. As such, he was always in the Bosome of the Father, participant of his Counsels; especially of those which concerned the Church, the Children of Men, Prov. 8. 22, 23, 24. &c. He was therefore always acquainted with all the thoughts and coun∣sels of God, concerning the ways and means of the Expiation of Sin, and so de∣clared what he knew. 2. As unto the Penman of the Psalm, the words were dictated unto him by immediate Revelation, which if nothing had been spoken of it, or inti∣mated before, had been sufficient for the Declaration of the Will of God there∣in; for all Revelations of that Nature, have a beginning when they were first made. But, 3. In, by and together with the Institution of all these Legal Sacrifices, God had from the beginning intimated unto the Church, that they were not the absolute, ultimate way for the Expiation of Sin, that he designed or would approve of. And this he did partly in the Nature of the Sacrifices them∣selves, which were no way competent or suited in themselves unto this end, it being impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin; partly in giving various intimations first, and then express Declaration of his Will, that they were only prescribed for a season, and that a time would come when their Observance should utterly cease, which the Apostle proves, Chap. 7. and 8. and partly by evidencing that they were all but Types and Figures of good things to come, as we have at large declared. By these, and sundry other ways of the like kind, God had in the Institution and Command of these Sacrifices themselves sufficiently manifested, that he did neither design them, nor require them, nor approve of them, as unto this end of the Expiation of Sin. Wherefore there is in the words no new Revelation absolutely, but only a meer express Declaration of that Will and Counsel of God, which he had by various ways given intimation of before. And we may observe, 1. No Sacrifices of the Law, not all of them together, were a means for the Expiation of Sin, suited unto the Glory of God, or necessities of the Souls of Men. From the First appointment of Sacrifices immediately after the entrance of Sin,
and the giving of the promise, the observation of them in one kind or ano∣ther, spread it self over the whole Earth. The Gentiles retained them by Tra∣dition, helped on by some Conviction on a Guilty Conscience, that by some way or other Attonement must be made for Sin. On the Jews they were im∣posed by Law. There are no Footsteps of Light or Testimony, that those of the former sort, namely the Gentiles, did ever retain any sense of the true Reason and end of their Original Institution, and the practice of Mankind there∣on, which was only the Confirmation of the First promise by a prefiguration of the means and way of its accomplishment. The Church of Israel being Carnal also, had very much lost the Understanding and Knowledge hereof. Hence both sorts looked for the real Expiation of Sin, the pardon of it, and the taking away of its punishment by the Offering of those Sacrifices. As for the Gentiles, God suffered them to walk in their own ways, and winked at the time of their Ignorance. But as unto the Jews, he had before variously intimated his Mind concerning them, and at length by the Mouth of David in the person of Christ, absolutely declares their Insufficiency, with his disapprobation of them as unto the end which they in their Minds applied them unto. 2. Our utmost diligence, with the most Sedulous improvement of the Light and Wisdom of Faith is necessary in our search into, and enquiry after the Mind and Will of God, in the Kevelation he makes of them. The Apostle in this Epistle proves by all sorts of Arguments taken from the Scriptures of the Old Testa∣ment, from many other things that God had done and spoken, and from the Nature of these Institutions themselves, as here also by the express words of the Holy Ghost, that these Sacrifices of the Law, which were of Gods own ap∣pointment, were never designed nor approved by him as the way and means of the Eternal Expiation of Sin. And he doth not deal herein with these He∣brews on his Apostolical Authority, and by new Evangelical Revelation, as he did with the Church of the Gentiles; but pleads the undeniable Truth of what he asserts from these direct Records and Testimonies which themselves owned and embraced. Howbeit although the Books of Moses, the Psalms, and the Pro∣phets were read unto them, and among them continually, as they are unto this day, they neither understood, nor do yet understand the things that are so plainly revealed in them. And as the great Reason hereof is the Veil of blindness and darkness that is on their Minds, 2 Cor. 3. 13, 14. So in all their search into the Scripture, they are indeed Supinely slothful and negligent. For they cleave alone unto the outward Husk or Shell of the Letter, utterly despising the Mysteries of Truth contained therein. And so it is at present with the most of Men, whose search into the Mind of God, especially as unto what concerns his Worship, keeps them in the Ignorance and Contempt of it all their days. 3. The constant use of Sacrifices to signifie these things, which they could not effect or really exhibit unto the Worshippers, was a great part of the Bondage that the Church was kept in under the Old Testament. And hereon, as those who were Carnal, bowed down their Backs unto the Burthen, and their Necks unto the Yoke; so those who had received the Spirit of Adoption, did continually Pant and Groan after the coming of him, in and by whom all was to be fulfilled. So was the Law their Schoolmaster unto Christ. 4. God may in his Wisdom appoint and accept of Ordinances and Duties unto one end, which he will refuse and reject, when they are applyed unto another. So he doth plainly in these Words, those Sacrifices which in other places he most strictly enjoyns. How express, how multiplyed are his Commands for good works, and our abounding in them? Yet when they are made the matter of our Righteousness before him, they are as unto that end, namely, of our Justification, rejected and disapproved. The First Part of ver. 5. declares the Will of God concerning the Sacrifices of the Law. The latter contains the supply that God in his Wisdom and Grace, made of the defect, and insufficiency of these Sacrifices. And this is not any thing
that should help, assist or make them effectual, but somewhat brought in, in opposition unto them, and for their Removal. This he expresseth in the last clause of this Verse. But a Body hast thou pre∣pared me. The Adversative, , but, declares that the way designed of God  for this end was of another Nature, than those Sacrifices were. But yet this way must be such, as should not render those Sacrifices utterly useless from their First Institution, which would reflect on the Wisdom of God by whom they were appointed. For if God did never approve of them, never delight in them; unto what end were they Ordained? Wherefore although the real way of the Expiation of Sin, be in it self of another Nature than those Sa∣crifices were; yet was it such as those Sacrifices were meet to prefigure and represent unto the Faith of the Church. The Church was taught by them that without a Sacrifice there could be no Attonement made for Sin; where∣fore the way of our Deliverance must be by a Sacrifice. It is so, saith the Lord Christ, and therefore the First thing God did in the preparation of this new way, was the Preparation of a Body for me, which was to be Offered in Sacrifice. And in the Antithesis intimated in this Adversative Conjunction, respect is had unto the Will of God. As Sacrifices were that which he would not un∣to this end, so this preparation of the Body of Christ was that, which he would, which he delighted in, and was well pleased withal. So the whole of the work of Christ and the effects of it, is expresly referred unto this Will of God, ver. 9, 10. And we must, First, speak unto the Apostles rendring these words out of the Psalmist. They are in the Original, , my Ears hast thou digged, bored, prepared. All sorts of Critical Writers and Expositors have so laboured in the resolution of this difficulty, that there is little to be added unto the Industry of some, and it were endless to confute the Mistakes of others. I shall there∣fore only speak briefly unto it, so as to manifest the oneness of the sense in both places. And some things must be premised thereunto. 1. That the Reading of the words in the Psalm is incorrupt, and they are the precise words of the Holy Ghost. Though of late years sundry persons have used an unwarrantable boldness in feigning various Lections in the Hebrew Text, yet none of any judgment have attempted to conjecture at any word that might be thought to be used in the room of any one of them. And as for those which some have thought the LXX. might possibly mistake, that signifie a Body, as , which sometimes signifies a Body in the Chaldee Dialect, or, , there is in neither of them any the least Analogy unto ; that they are ridiculously suggested. 2. It doth not seem probable unto me, that the LXX. did ever Translate these Words, as they are now Extant in all the Copies of that Translation, . For, (1.) It is not a Translation of the Original words, but an Interpretation, and Exposition of the sense and meaning of them, which was no part of their design. (2.) If they made this Exposition, they did so either by chance, as it were, or from a right understanding of the Mystery contained in them. That they should be cast upon it by a meer conjecture, is altogether improbable. And that they understood the mystery couched in that Metaphori∣cal expression (without which no account can be given of the Version of the words) will not be granted by them who know any thing of those Translators or their Translation. (3.) There was of old a different Reading in that Transla∣tion. For instead of , a Body, some Copies have it , the Ears, which the Vulgar Latin follows; an evidence that a change had been made in that Tran∣slation, to comply with the words used by the Apostle. 3. The words therefore in this place were the words whereby the Apostle expressed the sense and meaning of the Holy Ghost in those used in the Psal∣mist, or that which was intended in them. He did not take them from the Translation of the LXX; but used them himself, to express the sense of the Hebrew Text. For although we should not adhere precisely unto the Opinion, that all the Quotations out of the Old Testament in the New, which agree in words with the present Translation of the LXX. were by the Scribes of that
Translation, transferred out of the New Testament into it, which yet is far more probable than the contrary Opinion, that the words of the Translation are made use of in the New Testament, even when they differ from the Origi∣nal; yet sundry things herein are certain and acknowledged. As, (1.) That the Penmen of the New Testament do not oblige themselves unto that Translation, but in many places do precisely render the words of the Original Text, where that Translation differs from it. (2.) That they do oftentimes express the sense of the Testimony which they Quote, in words of their own, neither agreeing with that Translation, nor exactly answering the Original Hebrew. (3.) That sundry passages have been unquestionably taken out of the New Testament, and inserted into that Translation, which I have elsewhere proved by undeni∣able instances. And I no way doubt but it hath so fallen out in this place, where no account can be given of the Translation of the LXX. as the words now are in it. Wherefore, 4. This is certain that the sense intended by the Psalmist, and that expressed by the Apostle, are the same or unto the same purpose. And their Agreement is both plain and evident. That which is spoken, is, an act of God the Father towards the Son. The end of it, is, that the Son might be fit and meet to do the Will of God in the way of Obedience. So it is expressed in the Text, mine Ears hast thou bored, or a Body hast thou prepared me; Then said I, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God. This is the sole end why God so acted towards him: What this was, is so expressed in the Psalmist, my Ears hast thou bored, with a double Figure: (1.) A Metaphor from the Ear, wherewith we hear the com∣mands we are to obey; Obedience being our compliance with the outward commands of God, and the Ear being the only means of our receiving those commands, there is nothing more frequent in the Scripture, than to express O∣bedience by hearing and hearkening, as is known. Wherefore the ascription of Ears unto the Lord Christ by an act of God, is the preparation of such a State and Nature for him, as wherein he should be meet to yield Obedience unto him. (2.) By a Synecdoche; wherein the part is put for the whole. In his Divine Nature alone it was impossible that the Lord Christ should come to do the Will of God, in the way whereby he was to do it. Wherefore God prepared ano∣ther Nature for him, which is expressed Synecdochically by the Ears for the whole Body; and that significantly, because as it is impossible that any one should have Ears of any use, but by Vertue of his having a Body; so the Ears are that part of the Body, by which alone Instruction unto Obedience, the thing aimed at, is received. This is that which is directly expressed of him, Isa. 59. 4, 5. He wakeneth, Morning by Morning, he wakeneth my Ear to hear as the Learned. The Lord God hath opened my Ear, and I was not rebellious; or, I was obedient. And so it is all one in what sense you take the word , whether in the more common and usual, to dig or bore, or in that whereunto it is sometimes applyed, to fit and perfect. For I do not judge there is any allusion in the ex∣pression, unto the Law of boring the Ear of the Servant that refused to make use of his Liberty at the year of release. Nor is the word, used in that case,  but , Exod. 21. 6. But it respects the framing of the Organ of hearing which is as it were bored; and the internal sense in readiness unto Obedience, is ex∣pressed by the framing of the outward Instrument of Hearing, that we may learn to obey thereby. Wherefore this is, and no other can be the sense of the words in the Psalmist; namely, that God the Father did order things towards Jesus Christ, that he should have a Nature wherein he might be free, and able to yield Obedience unto the Will of God, with an intimation of the quality of it, in having Ears to hear, which belong only unto a Body. This Sense the Apostle expresseth in more plain terms now after the accom∣plishment of what before was only declared in Prophesie, and thereby the Veil which was upon Divine Revelations under the Old Testament, is taken away. There is therefore nothing remaining but that we give an Exposition of these words of the Apostle, as they contain the sense of the Holy Ghost in the Psalm;
And two things we must enquire into, (1.) What is meant by this body; (2.) How God prepared it. 1. A Body is here a Synecdochical expression of the Humane nature of Christ. . So is the flesh taken, where he is said to be made flesh, and the Flesh and Blood whereof he was partaker. For the general end of his having this Body, was, that he might therein and thereby yield Obedience, or do the Will of God. And the especial end of it, was, that he might have what to offer in Sa∣crifice unto God. But neither of these can be confined unto his Body alone. For it is the Soul, the other essential part of Humane Nature, that is the prin∣ciple of Obedience. Nor was the Body of Christ alone, Offered in Sacrifice unto God. He made his Soul an Offering for Sin, Isa. 53. 10. which was Typi∣fied by the Life that was in the Blood of the Sacrifice. Wherefore it is said, that he offered himself unto God, Chap. 9. 14. Ephes. 5. 2. That is, his whole entire Humane Nature, Soul and Body, in their Substance, in all their Faculties and Powers; But the Apostle both here and ver. 10. mentions only the Body it self, for the reasons ensuing. (1.) To manifest that this Offering of Christ was to be by Death, as was that of the Sacrifices of Old; and this the Body alone was subject unto. (2.) Because as the Covenant was to be confirmed by this Offering, it was to be by Blood which is contained in the Body alone, and the separation of it from the Body carries the Life along with it. (3.) To testifie that his Sacrifice was visible and substantial, not an outward appearance of things, as some have fancied; but such as truly answered the real Bloody Sacrifices of the Law. (4.) To shew the Alliance and Cognation between him that Sancti∣fieth by his Offering, and them that are Sanctified thereby: Or that because the Children were partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also took part of the same, that he might tast of Death for them. For these and the like reasons doth the Apostle mention the Humane Nature of Christ under the name of a Body only, as also to comply with the Figurative Expression of it in the Psalm. And they do what lies in them to overthrow the principal Foundation of the Faith of the Church, who would wrest these words unto a new Aetherial Body given him after his Ascen∣sion, as do the Socinians. 2. Concerning this Body, it is affirmed that God prepared it for him. Thou  hast prepared for me; that is, God hath done it, even God the Father; For un∣to him are those words spoken; I come to do thy will O God, a Body hast thou prepared me. The coming of Christ the Son of God into the World, his com∣ing in the Flesh by the assuming of our Nature, was the effect of the mutual Counsel of the Father and the Son. The Father proposeth to him what was his Will, what was his design, what he would have done. This proposal is here repeated, as unto what was Negative in it, which includes the Opposite Positive; Sacrifice and Burnt Offerings thou wouldst not have, but that which he would, was the Obedience of the Son unto his Will. This Proposal the Son closeth with∣al; Lo, saith he, I come. But all things being Originally in the Hand of the Father, the Provision of things necessary unto the fulfilling of the Will of God, is left unto him. Among those the principal was, that the Son should have a Body prepared for him, that so he might have somewhat of his own to offer. Wherefore the preparation of it is in a peculiar manner assigned unto the Father; a Body hast thou prepared me. And we may observe; that 1. The Supream contrivance of the Salvation of the Church, is in a peculiar manner ascribed unto the person of the Father. His Will, his Grace, his Wis∣dom, his good Pleasure, the purpose that he purposed in himself, his Love, his sending of his Son, are every where proposed as the eternal springs of all Acts of Power, Grace and Goodness, tending unto the Salvation of the Church. And therefore doth the Lord Christ on all occasions declare that he came to do his Will, to seek his Glory, to make known his Name, that the praise of his Grace might be exalted. And we through Christ do believe in God even the Father, when we assign unto him the Glory of all the Holy Properties of his Nature, as acting Originally in the contrivance, and for the effecting of our Salvation.
2. The Furniture of the Lord Christ (though he were the Son, and in his Divine person the Lord of all,) unto the discharge of his work of Mediation, was the pe∣culiar Act of the Father. He prepared him a Body; he anointed him with the Spirit; it pleased him that all fulness should dwell in him. From him he received all Grace, Power, Consolation: Although the Humane Nature was the Nature of the Son of God, not of the Father, (a Body prepared for him, not for the Father;) yet was it the Father, who prepared that Nature, who filled it with Grace, who strengthened, acted and supported it in its whole course of Obedience. 3. Whatever God designes, appoints and calls any unto, he will provide for them all that is needful unto the Duties of Obedience, whereunto they are so ap∣pointed and called. As he prepared a Body for Christ; so he will provide Gifts, Abilities and Faculties suitable unto their work, for those whom he calleth unto it. Others must provide as well as they can for themselves. But we must yet enquire more particularly into the nature of this preparation of the Body of Christ, here ascribed unto the Father. And it may be considered two ways. 1. In the Designation and Contrivance of it. So preparation is sometimes used for Predestination, or the Resolution for the effecting any thing that is future in its proper season. Isa. 30. 33. Matt. 20. 23. Rom. 9. 23. 1 Cor. 2. 9. In this sense of the word, God had prepared a Body for Christ, he had in the Eternal Counsel of his Will determined that he should have it in the appointed time. So he was Forc-ordained before the Foundation of the World, but was manifest in these last times for us; 1 Pet. 1. 20. 2. In the actual effecting, ordering and creating of it; that it might be fitted and suited unto the work that it was ordained unto. In the former sense the Body it self is alone the Object of this preparation. A Body hast thou prepared me, that is, designed for me. This latter sense comprizeth the use of the Body also; it is fitted for its work. This latter sense it is, that is proper unto this place. Only it is spoken of by the Psalmist in a Prophetical Style, wherein things certainly future, are expressed as already performed. For the word signifies such a preparation, as whereby it is made actually fit and meet for the end it is designed unto. And therefore it is variously rendred, to fit, to adapt, to per∣fect, to adorn, to make meet, with respect unto some especial end. Thou hast adapted a Body unto my work, fitted and suited an Humane Nature unto that I have to perform in it and by it. A Body it must be; yet not every body, nay not any Body brought forth by Carnal Generation according to the course of Nature, could effect, or was fit for the work designed unto it. But God pre∣pared, provided such a Body for Christ, as was fitted and adapted unto all that he had to do in it. And this especial manner of its preparation, was an act of Infinite Wisdom and Grace. Some Instances thereof may be mentioned. As, 1. He prepared him such a Body, such an Humane Nature, as might be of the same Nature with ours, for whom he was to accomplish his work therein. For it was necessary that it should be Cognate and Allied unto ours, that he might be meet to act on our behalf, and to suffer in our stead. He did not form him a Body out of the Dust of the Earth, as he did that of Adam whereby he could not have been of the same Race of Mankind with us; nor meerly out of nothing as he created the Angels, whom he was not to save. See, Chap. 2. ver. 14, 15, 16. and the Exposition thereon. He took our Flesh and Blood proceeding from the Loyns of Abraham. 2. He so prepared it, as that it should be no way subject unto that depravation and pollution, that came on our whole Nature by Sin. This could not have been done, had his Body been prepared by Carnal Generation, the way and means of conveying the taint of Original Sin, which befel our Nature, unto all indivi∣dual persons. For this would have rendered him every way unmeet for his whole work of Mediation. See, Luke 1. 35. Heb. 7. 26.
3. He prepared him a Body consisting of Flesh and Blood, which might be Offered as a real substantial Sacrifice, and wherein he might Suffer for Sin, in his Offering to make Attonement for it. Nor could the Sacrifices of Old which were Real, Bloody and Substantial, prefigure that which should be only Metaphorical and in appearance. The whole evidence of the Wisdom of God in the Institution of the Sacrifices of the Law, depends on this, that Christ was to have a Body consisting of Flesh and Blood, wherein he might answer all that was prefigu∣red by them. 4. It was such a Body as was Animated with a Living Rational Soul. Had it been only a Body, it Might have Suffered as did the Beasts under the Law, from which no Act of Obedience was required, only they were to suffer what was done unto them. But in the Sacrifice of the Body of Christ, that which was principally respected, and whereon the whole Efficacy of it did depend, was his Obedience unto God. For he was not to be Offered by others, but he was to Offer himself in Obedience unto the Will of God, Chap. 9. 14. Ephes. 5. 2. And the principles of all Obedience lye alone in the Powers and Fa∣culties of the Rational Soul. 5. This Body and Soul were obnoxious unto all the Sorrows and Sufferings which our Nature is liable unto, and we had deserved as they were poenal, tending unto Death. Hence was he meet to Suffer in our stead, the same things which we should have done. Had they been exempted by special priviledge from what our Nature is liable unto, the whole work of our Redemption by his Blood had been frustrate. 6. This Body or Humane Nature thus prepared for Christ, was exposed unto all sorts of Temptations from outward Causes. But yet it was so Sanctified by the perfection of Grace, and fortified by the fulness of the Spirit dwelling therein, as that it was not possible it should be touched with the least Taint or Guilt of Sin. And this also was absolutely necessary unto the work whereunto it was designed, 1 Pet. 2. 22. Heb. 7. 26. 7. This Body was liable unto Death, which being the Sentence and Sanction of the Law, with respect unto the First and all following Sins (all and every one of them) was to be undergone actually by him, who was to be our De∣liverer, Heb. 2. 14, 15. Had it not died, Death would have borne Rule over all unto Eternity. But in the death thereof, it was swallowed up in Victory, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. 8. As it was subject unto Death and died actually, so it was meet to be raised again from Death. And herein consisted the great pledge and evidence that our dead Bodies may be and shall be raised again unto a Blessed Immortality. So it became the Foundation of all our Faith, as unto things Eternal, 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 9. This Body and Soul being capable of a real separation, and being actually sepa∣rated by Death, though not for any long continuance, yet no less truly and really than them who have been dead a Thousand years, a Demonstration was given therein of an active Subsistence of the Soul, in a State of Separation from the Body. As it was with the Soul of Christ when he was dead, so is it with our Souls in the same State. He was alive with God and unto God, when his Body was in the Grave; and so shall our Souls be. 10. This Body was visibly taken up into Heaven and there resides; which, considering the ends thereof, is the great encouragement of Faith, and the Life of our Hope. These are but some of the many instances that may be given of the Divine Wisdom in so preparing a Body for Christ, as that it might be fitted and adapted unto the work which he had to do therein. And we may Observe, that
Not only the Love and Grace of God in sending his Son, are continually to be ad∣mired and Glorified, but the acting of this Infinite Wisdom, in fitting and preparing his humane Nature, so as to render it every way meet unto the work which it was designed for, ought to be the especial Object of our Holy Contemplation. But having treated hereof distinctly in a peculiar discourse unto that purpose, I shall not here again insist upon it. The last thing Observable in this Verse, is, that this preparation of the Body of Christ, is ascribed unto God even the Father, unto whom he speaks these words; a Body hast thou prepared me. As unto the Operation in the production of the Substance of it, and the forming its Structure, it was the peculiar and im∣mediate work of the Holy Ghost, Luk. 1. 35. This work I have at large else∣where declared. Wherefore it is an Article of Faith, that the Formation of the Humane Nature of Christ in the Womb of the Virgin, was the peculiar Act of the Holy Ghost. The Holy taking of this Nature unto himself, the Assumption of it to be his own Nature by a Subsistence in his Person, the Divine Nature assuming the Humane in the Person of the Son, was his own Act alone. Yet was the preparation of this Body, the work of the Father in a peculiar manner; it was so in the Infinitely Wise, Authoritative contrivance and ordering of it, his Counsel and Will therein being acted by the immediate Power of the Holy Ghost. The Father prepared it in the Authoritative Disposition of all things; the Holy Ghost actually wrought it; and he himself assumed it. There was no distinction of time in these distinct actings of the Holy Persons of the Trinity in this matter, but only a disposition of Order in their Operation. For in the same instant of time, this Body was prepared by the Father, wrought by the Holy Ghost, and assumed by himself to be his own. And the actings of the distinct Persons, being all the actings of the same Divine Nature, Understanding, Love, and Power, they differ not fundamentally and radically; but only ter∣minatively with respect unto the work wrought and effected. And we may Observe, that The Ineffable, but yet distinct Operation of the Father, Son and Spirit, in, about and towards the Humane Nature assumed by the Son, are, as an uncontroulable evi∣dence of their distinct Subsistence in the same Individual Divine Essence; so a Guidance unto Faith, as unto all their distinct actings towards us in the Application of the work of Redemption unto our Souls. For their actings towards the Mem∣bers, is in all things conform unto their acting towards the Head. And our Faith is to be directed towards them, according as they act their Love and Grace distinctly towards us. VERSE 6, 7. In Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices for Sin thou hast had no pleasure; Then said I, Lo, I come (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy Will, O God. TWo things are asserted in the Foregoing Verse in general. (1.) The Rejection of Sacrifices for the end of the compleat Expiation of Sin. (2.) The Provision of a new way or means for the accomplishment of that end. Both these things are spoken unto apart, and more distinctly in these two ver∣ses: The former ver. 6. the latter ver. 7. Which we must also open, that they may not appear a needless repetition of what was before spoken. Ver. 6. He reassumes and farther declares what was in general before affirm∣ed, ver. 5. Sacrifice and Offering thou wouldst not. Hereof we have yet a far∣ther Confirmation and Explication, which it stood in need of. For notwithstand∣ing that General assertion, two things may yet be enquired about. (1.) What were those Sacrifices and Offerings which God would not. For they being of various sorts, some of them only may be intended, seeing they are only mentioned in
general. (2.) What is meant by that Expression, that God would them not; seeing it is certain that they were appointed and commanded by him. Wherefore our Lord Jesus Christ whose words in the Psalm these are, doth not only reassert what was spoken before in general, but also gives a more par∣ticular account of what Sacrifices they were which he intended. And two things he declares concerning them. 1. That they were not such Sacrifices as Men had found out and appointed. Such the World was filled withal, which were offered unto Devils, and which the people of Israel themselves were addicted unto. Such were their Sacrifices un∣to Baal and Moloch, which God so often complaineth against and detesteth. But they were such Sacrifices as were appointed and commanded by the Law. Hence he expresseth them by their Legal Names, as the Apostle immediately takes notice, they were Offered by the Law, ver. 8. 2. He shews what were those Sacrifices appointed by the Law, which in an espe∣cial manner he intended; and they were those which were appointed for the Le∣gal and Typical Expiation of Sin. The general names of them in the Original, are, . The First was the general name of all Victims or Sacrifices by Blood; the other of all Offerings of the Fruits of the Earth, as Flower, Oyl, Wine, and the like. For herein respect is had unto the general design of the Context, which is the removal of all Legal Sacrifices and Offerings of what sort soever, by the Coming and Office of Christ. In compliance therewith they are expres∣sed under these two general names, which comprehend them all. But as unto the especial Argument in hand, it concerns only the Bloody Sacrifices Offered for the Attonement of Sin, which were of the First sort only, or . And this kind of Sacrifices, whose incompetency to Expiate Sin he declares, are referred unto Two Heads. 1. Burnt Offerings. In the Hebrew it is  in the Singular Number, which is usually rendred by , in the Plural, and Sacrifices of this kind were . called , or Ascensions, from their Adjunct, the rising up, or ascending of the Smoak of the Sacrifices in their Burning on the Altar; a Pledge of that sweet savour which should arise unto God above, from the Sacrifice of Christ here below. And sometimes they are called  or firings, from the way and means of their Consumption on the Altar, which was by fire. And this re∣spects both the  or the continual Sacrifice, Morning and Evening, for the whole Congregation, which was a Burnt Offering; and all those which on especial occasions were offered with respect unto the Expiation of Sin. 2. The other Sort is expressed by , which the Greek renders by , for or concerning Sin. For  the Verb in Kal signifieth to Sin, and . in Piel, to expiate Sin. Hence the Substantive  is used in both those Sen∣ses, and where it is to be taken in either of them, the circumstances of the Text do openly declare. Where it is taken in the latter Sense, the Greek renders it by , a Sacrifice for Sin; which expression is retained by the Apostle, Rom. 5. 3. and in this place. And the Sacrifices of this kind were of two sorts; or this kind of Sacrifices had a double use. For, (1.) The great Anniversary Sa∣crifice of Expiation for the Sins of the whole Congregation, Levit. 26. was a  or , a Sin Offering. (2.) The same kind of Offering was also appointed unto, and for particular persons, who had contracted the Guilt of particular Sins, Levit. 4. This Sacrifice therefore was appointed both for the Sins of the whole Congregation, namely, all their Sins of what sort soever, Levit. 16. 21. and the especial Sins of particular persons. The one Offering of Christ was really to effect what by all of them was represented. Concerning all these Sacrifices it is added, , thou hadst no pleasure. . In opposition hereunto, God gives Testimony from Heaven concerning the Lord Christ and his undertaking; This is my Beloved Son, , In whom I am well pleased, Matt. 3. 17. Chap. 17. 5. See, Isa. 42. 1. Ephes. 1. 6. This is the great Antithesis between the Law and the Gospel; Sacrifices and Offerings for sin, ; This is my Beloved Son, . The word signifies to approve of with delight, to rest in with satisfaction, the exercise of , the Divine good Will, The Original word in the Psalm is, , which signifies to ask, to seek, to enquire, to require. Wherefore, as we observed before, although
the Apostle doth directly express the Mind and Sense of the Holy Ghost in the whole Testimony, yet he doth not exactly render the words in their precise sig∣nification, word for word. Thus he renders  by , and  by , when an exact Translation would have required the contrary applicati∣on of the words. But the meaning is the same, and the two words used by the Psalmist are exactly represented in these used by the Apostle. There are two Reasons of this seeming Repetition, thou wouldst not, thou hadst no pleasure. (1.) A Repetition of the same words, almost of the same significa∣tion, about the same subject, signifies the determinate certainty of the Removal of these Sacrifices, with the disappointment and ruin of them, who should con∣tinue to put their trust in them. (2.) Whereas there were two things preten∣ded unto in the behalf of these Sacrifices and Offerings, First, their Institution by God himself, and Secondly, his acceptance of them, or being well pleased with them; one of these words is peculiarly applyed unto the former; the other unto the latter; God did neither Institute them, nor ever accepted of them un∣to this end of the Expiation of Sin, and the Salvation of the Church thereby. And we may observe, 1. It is the Will of God that the Church should take especial notice of this sacred truth, that nothing can expiate or take away Sin, but the Blood of Christ alone. Hence is the vehemency of the rejection of all other means in the Repetition of these words. And it is necessary for us so to apprehend his Mind, conside∣ring how prone we are to look after other ways of the Expiation of Sin, and Justification before God. See Rom. 10. 3. 4. 2. Whatever may be the Use or Efficacy of any Ordinances of Worship, yet if they are employed or trusted unto for such ends as God hath not designed them unto, he accepts not of our persons in them, nor approves of the things themselves. Thus he declares himself concerning the most Solemn Institutions of the Old Testament. And those under the New have been no less abused in this way, than those of Old. VERSE 7. Then said I, Lo, I come (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do thy Will, O God. THis is the Close of the Testimony used by the Apostle out of the Psalmist, which in the next Verses he interprets, and makes Application of unto his purpose. And it contains the second branch of the Antithesis, that he insists on. The Lord Christ having declared the Will of God, and what God said un∣to him concerning Legal Sacrifices, and their Insufficiency unto the Expiation of Sin, and the Salvation of the Church, he expresseth his own Mind, Will and Design unto God the Father thereon. For it was the Will and Grace of God that this great work should be wrought, however he disapproved of Legal Sacrifices as the means thereof. For there is herein represented un∣to us as it were a Consultation between the Father and the Son, with re∣spect unto the way and means of the Expiation of Sin, and the Salvation of the Church. In the words we may consider, (1.) How the Son expressed his Mind in this matter; he said; I said. (2.) When or on what consideration he so expressed him∣self; It was Then: then I said. (3.) A remark put upon what he said, in the word Behold. (4.) What he undertakes, or tenders himself to do in what he said; it was to do the Will of God, I come to do thy Will, as unto that work and end, with respect whereunto Sacrifices were rejected. (5.) The warranty that he had for this undertaking; it was no more than what the Holy Ghost had before left on Record in the Scripture: In the Volume of the Book it is written of me. For these words do represent the Mind and Will of Christ upon his actual under∣taking
of his work, or his coming into the World, when many Prophesies and Divine Predictions had gone before concerning it. 1. The expression of his Mind is in that word , I said. There is no ne∣cessity, as was before observed, that these very words should at any one season , be spoken by our Lord Jesus Christ. The meaning is, this is my Resolution, this is the Frame of my Mind and Will. The representation of our Mind, Will and Desires unto God, is our speaking to him: He needs not our words unto that end; nor absolutely do we so our selves upon the account of his Omnisci∣ence. However this is the work that the Lord Christ ingaged his Truth and Faithfulness to undertake. And in these words, I said, he engageth himself in the work now proposed unto him. Hereon whatever difficulties afterwards arose, what∣ever he was to do or suffer; there was nothing in it but what he had before solemnly engaged unto God. And we ought in like manner, to be faithful in all the Engagements that we make to him and for him. Surely, faith he, they are my people, Children that will not Lie. 2. There is the season, wherein he thus said, , then, or thereon. For it may respect either the Order of the Time, or the stating of the Case in hand. . First, it may respect an Order of Time; He said, Sacrifice and Burnt Offerings thou wouldst not have; Then said I. But it is, as I judge, better extended unto the whole Case in hand. When things were come to this pass, when all the Church of Gods Elect were under the Guilt of Sin, and the Curse of the Law thereon; when there was no hope for them in themselves, nor in or by any Divine Institution; when all things were at a loss, as unto our Recovery and Sal∣vation; then did Jesus Christ the Son of God in Infinite Wisdom, Love and Grace, interpose himself in our behalf, in our stead, to do, answer and perform all that God in Infinite Wisdom, Holiness and Righteousness required unto that end. And we may observe, that There is a Signal Glory put upon the undertaking of Christ, to make Reconciliation for the Church by the Sacrifice of himself. 3. This undertaking of Christ is Signalized by the Remark that is put on the Declaration of it, , Behold. A Glorious Spectacle it was to God, to Angels and to Men: To God, as it was filled with the highest Effects of Infinite good∣ness, Wisdom and Grace, which all shone forth in their greatest Elevation, and were glorified therein. It was so unto Angels, as that whereon their Confirmation and Establishment in Glory did depend, Eph. 1. 10. which therefore they en∣deavoured with Fear and Reverence to look into, 1 Pet. 1. 12, 13. And as unto Men, that is, the Church of the Elect, nothing could be so Glorious in their Sight, nothing so desirable. By this call of Christ, behold I come, the Eys of all Creatures in Heaven and Earth ought to be fixed on him, to behold the glori∣ous work he had undertaken, and the accomplishment of it. 4. There is what he thus proposed himself for, saying Behold me. This in ge∣neral is expressed by himself; I come. This coming of Christ, what it was, and wherein it did consist, was declared before. It was by assuming the Body that was prepared for him. This was the Foundation of the whole work he had to do, wherein he came forth like the Rising Sun, with Light in his Wings, or as a Giant rejoycing to run his Race. The Faith of the Old Testament, was, that he was thus to come: And this is the Life of the New, that he is come. They by whom this is denyed; do overthrow the Faith of the Gospel. This is the Spirit of Antichrist, 1 Joh. 3. 1, 2, 3. And this may be done two ways. (1.) Directly and Expresly. (2.) By just conse∣quence. Directly, it is done by them who deny the Reality of his humane Nature, as many did of old, affirming that he had only an Aetherial, Aerial or Phan∣tastical Body; For if he came not in the Flesh, he is not come at all. So also it is by them who deny the Divine Person of Christ, and his preexistence therein, before the assumption of the Humane Nature. For they deny that these are the words of him when resolved, and spoken before this coming. He that did not exist before in the Divine Nature, could not promise to come in the Humane. And Indirectly it is denied by all those, who either in Doctrines
or practices deny the ends of his coming, who are many, which I shall not now mention. It may be Objected against this fundamental Truth, that if the Son of God would undertake this work of Reconciliation between God and Man, why did he not do the Will of God by his mighty Power and Grace, and not by this way of coming in the Flesh, which was attended with all Dishonour, Reproaches, Sufferings and Death it self? But besides what I have at large elsewhere dis∣coursed concerning the necessity and suitableness of this way of his coming unto the manifestation of all the Glorious properties of the Nature of God, I shall only say, that God, and he alone knew what was necessary unto the accomplish∣ment of his Will; and if it might have been otherwise effected, he would have spared his only Son, and not have given him up unto death. (2.) The End for which he thus promiseth to come, is to do the Will of God; Lo, I , come to do thy Will, O God. The Will of God is taken two ways. (1.) For his Eternal purpose and design, called the Counsel of his Will, Eph. 1. 11. and most commonly his Will it self; The Will of God as unto what he will do, or cause to be done. (2.) For the Declaration of his Will and Pleasure, as unto what he will have us to do in a way of Duty and Obedience; that is, the Rule of our Obedience. It was the Will of God in the former sense that is here intended; as is evi∣dent from the next Verse, when it is said, that by this Will of God we are San∣ctified, that is, our Sins were Expiated according to the Will of God. But neither is the other sense absolutely excluded, for the Lord Christ came so to fulfil the Will of Gods purpose, as that we may be enabled to fulfil the Will of his Command. Yea, and he himself had a Command from God to lay down his Life for the accomplishment of this Work. Wherefore this Will of God, which Christ came to fulfil, is that which else∣where is expressed by , Ephes. 1. 5, 11. &c. His good pleasure, his purpose, the Counsel of his Will; his good pleasure which he purposed in himself, that is, freely without any Cause or Reason taken from us, to call, justifie, sanctifie and save to the uttermost, or to bring them unto Eter∣nal Glory. This he had purposed from Eternity, to the praise of the Glory of his Grace. How this might be effected and accomplished, God had hid in his own Bosome from the beginning of the World, Ephes. 3. 8, 9. So as that it was beyond the Wisdom and Indagation of all Angels and Men to make a Discove∣ry of. Howbeit, even from the beginning, he declared that such a work he had graciously designed, and gave in the First promise, and otherwise some ob∣scure Intimations of the Nature of it for a Foundation of the Faith in them that were called. Afterwards God was pleased in his Soveraign Authority over the Church for their good, and unto his own Glory, to make a representation of this whole work in the Institutions of the Law, especially of the Sacrifices there∣of. But hereon the Church began to think (at least many of them did so) that those Sacrifices themselves were to be the only means of accomplishing this Will of God, in the Expiation of Sin, with the Salvation of the Church. But God had now by various ways and means witnessed unto the Church, that in∣deed he never appointed them unto any such end, nor would rest in them; and the Church it self found by experience, that they would never pacify Conscience, and that the strict performance of them was a Yoke and Burden. In this state of things when the fulness of time was come, the glorious Counsels of God, namely of the Father, Son and Spirit brake forth with Light, like the Sun in its strength from under a Cloud, in the tender made of himself by Jesus Christ un∣to the Father, Lo, I come to do thy Will O God. This, this is the way, the only way whereby the Will of God might be accomplished. Herein were all the Riches of Divine Wisdom displayed, all the Treasures of Grace laid open, all Shades and Clouds dispelled, and the open door of Salvation evidenced unto all. (3.) This Will of God Christ came to do, , to effect, to establish and per∣fectly  to fulfil it. How he did so the Apostle fully declareth in this Epistle. He did it in the whole work of his Mediation, from the susception of our Nature in the Womb, unto what he doth in his supream Agency in Heaven at the Right
Hand of God. He did all things to accomplish this eternal purpose of the Will of God. This seems to me the First Sense of the place. Howbeit, I would not as I said before, exclude the former mentioned also. For our Lord in all that he did was the Servant of the Father, and received especial commands for all that he did. This Commandment, saith he, have I received of my Father. Hence in this sense also he came to do the Will of God. He fulfilled the Will of his purpose, by Obedience unto the Will of his Commands. Hence it is added in the Psalm, that he delighted to do the Will of God, and that his Law was in the midst of his Bowels. His delight in the Will of God, as unto the laying down of his Life at the Command of God, was necessary unto this doing of his Will. And we may observe, 1. The Foundation of the whole glorious work of the Salvation of the Church, was laid in the Soveraign Will, Pleasure and Grace of God, even the Father. Christ came only to do his Will. 2. The coming of Christ in the Flesh, was in the Wisdom, Righteousness and Holiness of God, necessary for to fulfil his Will, that we might be saved unto his Glory. 3. The fundamental motive unto the Lord Christ in his undertaking the work of Mediation, was the Will and Glory of God; Lo, I come to do thy Will. 5ly. The last thing in this Context is the Ground and Rule of this undertaking of the Lord Christ; and this is the Glory of the Truth of God in his promises . recorded in the word; In the Volume of the Book it is written of me, that I should fulfil thy Will O God. There is a difficulty in these words, both as to the Translation of the Original Text, and as unto the Application of them. And therefore Critical Observations have been multiplied about them, which it is not my way or work to repeat. Those that are Learned, know where to find them, and those that are not so, will not be edified by them. What is the true meaning and intention of the Holy Spirit in them, is what we are to enquire into. The Socinian Expositors have a peculiar conceit on this place. They sup∣pose the Apostle useth this expression, , to denote some especial Chap∣ter or place in the Law. This they conjecture to be that of Deut. 17. v. 18, 19. And it shall be, that when He (the King to be chosen) shall sit on the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests, the Levites: And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein, all the days of his Life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all the words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them. David they say spoke those words in the Psalm; and it is no where said that he should come to do the Will of God, but in this place of Deuteronomy, as he was to be the King of that people. But there can be nothing more fond than this empty conjecture. For, 1. David is not at all intended in these words of the Psalmist, any other∣wise but as he was the Penman of the Holy Ghost, and a Type of Christ, on which account he speaks in his name. They are the words of Christ, which David was inspired by the Holy Ghost to declare and utter, neither would David speak these words concerning himself; because he that speaks, doth ab∣solutely prefer his own Obedience as unto Worth and Efficacy, before all Gods Holy Institutions. He presents it unto God, as that which is more useful un∣to the Church, than all the Sacrifices which God had Ordained. This David could not do justly. 2. There is nothing spoken in this place of Deuteronomy concerning the Sa∣cerdotal Office, but only of the Regal. And in this place of the Psalmist, there is no respect unto the Kingly Office, but only unto the Priesthood. For Compari∣son is made with the Sacrifices of the Law. But the Offering of these Sacrifices was expresly forbidden unto the Kings; as is manifest in the instance of King Uzziah, 2 Chron. 26. ver. 18, 19, 20. Besides, there is in that place of Deute∣ronomy, no more respect had unto David than unto Saul, or Jeroboam, or any
other, that was to be King of that people. There is nothing in them that belongs unto David in a peculiar manner. 3. The words there recorded contain a meer prescription of Duty, no predi∣ction of the event, which for the most part was contrary unto what is required. But the words of the Psalmist are a Prophesie, a Divine Prediction and Promise which must be actually accomplished. Nor doth our Lord Christ in them, declare what was prescribed unto him, but what he did undertake to do, and the record that was made of that undertaking of his. 4. There is not one word in that place of Moses concerning the removal of Sacrifices and Burnt Offerings, which, as the Apostle declares, is the principal thing intended in those of the Psalmist. Yea, the contrary as unto the season intended, is expresly asserted. For the King was to read in the Book of the Law continually, that he might observe and do all that is written therein, a great part whereof consists in the Institution and Observation of Sacrifices. 5. This Interpretation of the words utterly overthrows what they dispute for immediately before. This is, that the entrance mentioned of Christ into the World, was not indeed his coming into this World, but his going out of it, and entring into Heaven. For it cannot be denied but that the Obedience of reading the Law continually, and doing of it, is to be attended unto in this World, and not in Heaven; and this they seem to acknowledge, so as to recal their own Exposition. Other absurdities which are very many in this place, I shall not insist upon. , We with many others render, in answer unto the Hebrew, in the Volume or Roll. Ribera contends that this Translation of the word, the Volume or Roll of the Book, is absurd; Because, saith he, the Book it self was a Volume or a Roll; and so it is, as if he had said, in the Roll of the Roll. But , which we Translate a Book, doth not signifie a Book as written in a Roll, but only an Enuntiation or Declaration of any thing. We now call any Book of great∣er quantity a Volume; but  is properly a Roll, and the words used by the Psalmist do signifie that the Declaration of the Will of God made in this matter, was written in a Roll. The Roll which contains all the Revelations of his Mind. And the word used by the Apostle, is not remote from this signification, as may be seen in sundry Classick Authors, , volumen; because a Roll is made round after the Fashion of the Head of a Man. As the Book it self was one Roll, so the Head of it the beginning of it, amongst the first things written in it, is this recorded concerning the coming of Christ to do the Will of God. This includeth both senses of the word; in the Head, in the Beginning of the Roll, namely of that part of the Scripture, which was written when David Penned this Psalm. Now this can be no other but the first promise, which was recorded, Gen. 3. 15. Then it was first declared, then it was first written and Enrolled, that the Lord Christ the Son of God should be made of the Seed of the Woman, and in our Nature come to do the Will of God, and to de∣liver the Church from that woful estate whereinto it was brought by the Craft of Satan. In this promise, and the writing of it in the Head of the Volume, lies the verification of the Psalmists assertion, in the Volume of the Book it is written. Howbeit, the following Declarations of the Will of God herein, are not ex∣cluded, nor ought so to be. Hence are we herein directed unto the whole Vo∣lume of the Law. For indeed it is nothing but a prediction of the coming of Christ, and a presignification of what he had to do. That Book which God had given to the Church, as the only guide of its Faith: The Bible: That is the Book, all other Books being of no consideration in comparison of it; That Book wherein all Divine Precepts and Promises are Enrolled or Recorded: In this Book, in the Volume of it, this is its principal subject, especially in the Head of the Roll, or the Beginning of it, namely in the first promise, it is so written of me. God commanded this great Truth of the coming of Christ to be so Enrolled for the Encouragement of the Faith of them that should believe. And we may observe, that 1. Gods Records in the Roll of his Book are the Foundation and Warranty of the Faith of the Church, in the Head and Members.
2. The Lord Christ in all that he did and suffered, had continual respect unto what was written of him. See Matt. 26. 24. 3. In the Record of these words, (1.) God was Glorified in his Truth and Faithfulness. (2.) Christ was secured in his work, and the undertaking of it. (3.) A Testimony was given unto his Person and Office. (4.) Direction is given unto the Church in all, wherein they have to do with God, what they should attend unto; namely, what is written. (5.) The things which concern Christ the Medi∣tor, are the Head of what is contained in the same Records. VERSE VIII. IX. X. . THe Use and Signification of most of the words of these Verses, have already in our passage been spoken unto. Above when he says, &c. There are two things in these three Verses. (1.) The Application of the Te∣stimony, taken out of the Psalmist, unto the present Argument of the Apostle, ver. 8, 9. (2.) An inference from the whole unto the proof of the only cause and means of the Sanctification of the Church, the Argument he was now en∣gaged in. 1. As to the first of these, or the Application of the Testimony of the Psalmist, and his Reassuming it, we may consider, 1. What he designed to prove thereby, and this was, that by the Introduction and establishment of the Sacrifice of Christ in the Church, there was an end put to all Legal Sacrifices; And he adds thereunto, that the ground and reason of this great alteration of things in the Church by the Will of God, was the utter in∣sufficiency of these Legal Sacrifices in themselves, for the Expiation of Sin, and Sanctification of the Church. In ver. 9. He gives us this sum of his design, He takes away the first, that he may establish the second. 2. The Apostle doth not here directly argue from the matter or substance of the Testimony it self, but from the Order of the words, and the regard they have in their Order unto one another. For there is in them a two fold Proposi∣tion; one concerning the Rejection of Legal Sacrifices; and the other an Intro∣duction and tender of Christ and his Mediation. And he Declares from the Order of the Words in the Psalmist, that these things are inseparable; namely, the taking away of Legal Sacrifices, and the establishment of that of Christ. 3. This Order in the words of the Apostle is declared in that distribution of  & , above, and then; , above, that is, in the first place; these . his words, or sayings recorded in the first place. 4. There is in the words themselves these three things. 1. There is a Distribution made of the Legal Sacrifices into their general heads, with respect unto the Will of God concerning them all; Sacrifices and Offering, and whole Burnt Offerings, and Sacrifice for Sin. And in that Distri∣bution he adds another property of them, namely, they were required according to the Law. (1.) He had respect not only unto the removal of the Sacrifices, but also of the Law it self, whereby they were retained; so he enters on his present disputati∣on with the Imperfection of the Law it self, ver. 4. (2.) Allowing these Sacrifices and Offerings, all that they could pretend unto, namely, that they were established by the Law; yet notwithstanding this, God re∣jects them as unto the Expiation of Sin, and the Salvation of the Church. For he excludes the consideration of all other things which were not appointed by the Law, as those which God abhorr'd in themselves, and so could have no place in this matter. And we may Observe, that
1. Whereas the Apostle doth plainly distinguish and distribute all Sacrifices and Offerings, into those on the one side, which were offered by the Law, and that one Offering of the Body of Christ on the other side; the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass is utterly rejected from any place in the Worship of God. 2. God as the Soveraign Law-giver, had always Power and Authority to make what Alteration he pleased, in the Orders and Institutions of his Worship. 3. That Soveraign Authority is that alone which our Faith and Obedience respects in all Ordinances of Worship. After this was stated and delivered, when the Mind of God was expresly de∣clared, as unto his rejection of Legal Sacrifices and Offerings, , then he said; . After that, in Order thereon, upon the grounds before mentioned, he said, Sa∣crifice, &c. In the former words he declared the Mind of God, and in the latter his own Intention and Resolution to comply with his Will, in Order unto another way of Attonement for Sin; Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God; which words have been opened before. In the last place he declares what was intimated and signified in this Order of those things being thus spoken unto; Sacrifices on the one hand, which was the First, and the coming of Christ, which was the Second in this Order and Oppo∣sition. It is evident, 1. That these words, , he taketh away the First, do intend . Sacrifices and Offerings. But he did not so do it immediately, at the speaking of these words, for they continued for the space of some Hundreds of years after∣wards; but he did so declaratively, as unto the Indication of the time; namely, when the Second should be introduced. 2. The end of this removal of the First, was the establishment of the Second. This Second, say some, is the Will of God; but the Opposition made before, is not between the Will of God and the Legal Sacrifices; but between those Sacrifices and the coming of Christ to do the Will of God. Wherefore it is the way of the Expiation of Sin, and of the compleat Sanctification of the Church by the Coming, and Mediation, and Sacrifice of Christ, that is this Second, the thing spoken of in the Second place; this God would establish, approve, confirm, and render unchangeable. As all things from the beginning made way for the coming of Christ in the minds of them that did believe, so every thing was to be removed out of the way, that would hinder his coming, and the discharge of the work he had undertaken; Law, Temple, Sacrifices, must all be removed to give way unto his coming; So is it testified by his fore-runner, Luke 3. 4. As it is written in the Book of the words of Isaiah the Prophet, saying, the Voice of one crying in the Wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his Paths straight, and the rough Ways shall be made smooth, and all flesh shall see the Salvation of God. So it must be in our own Hearts, all things must give way unto him, or he will not come and take his Habitation in them. VERSE 10. By the which Will we are Sanctified through the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. From the whole Context, the Apostle makes an Inference, which is compre∣hensive of the Substance of the Gospel, and the description of the Grace of God which is established thereby. Having affirmed in Christs own words, that he came to do the Will of God, he shews what was that Will of God which he came to do, what was the design of God in it, and the effect of it, and by what means it was accomplished; which things are to be enquired into. As, (1.) What is the Will of God which he in∣tends; By which Will. (2.) What was the design of it, what God aimed at in this act of his Will, and what is accomplished thereby; We are sanctified. (3.) The way and means whereby this effect proceedeth from the Will of God; namely, through the Offering of the Body of Jesus Christ, in opposition to Legal Sacrifices. (4.) The
manner of it, in opposition unto their Repetition; it was once for all. But the sense of the whole will be more clear, if we consider the end aimed at in the first place, namely, the Sanctification of the Church. And sundry things must be observed concerning it. 1. That the Apostle changeth his Phrase of Speech into the first person, we are Sanctified, that is, all those Believers whereof the Gospel Church-State was constituted, in opposition unto the Church-State of the Hebrews and those that did adhere unto it; so he speaks before, as also Chap. 4. 3. We who have believed do enter into Rest. For it might be asked of him, you that thus overthrow the Efficacy of Legal Sacrifices, what have you your selves attained in your relin∣quishment of them? We have, saith he, that Sanctification, that Dedication un∣to God, that Peace with him, and that Expiation of Sin, that all those Sacrifices could not effect. And observe, 1. Truth is never so effectually declared, as when it is confirmed by the experience of its Power in them that believe it, and make profession of it. This was that which gives them the confidence which the Apostle exhorts them to hold fast, and firm unto the end. 2. It is an Holy Glorying in God, and no unlawful boasting, for Men openly to profess what they are made partakers of by the Grace of God, and Blood of Christ. Yea, it is a necessary duty for Men so to do, when any thing is set up in competi∣tion with them, or opposition unto them. 3. It is the best security in differences, in and about Religion (such as these wherein the Apostle is ingaged, the greatest and highest that ever were) when Men have an Internal Experience of the Truth which they do profess. 2. The words he useth are in the Preterperfect tense, , and relate . not only unto the things, but the time of the Offering of the Body of Christ. For although all that is intended herein, did not immediately follow on the Death of Christ, yet were they all in it, as the Effects in their proper cause, to be produced by virtue of it, in their times and seasons; and the principal effect intended was the immediate consequent thereof. 3. This end of God through the Offering of the Body of Christ, was the Sanctification of the Church; we are Sanctified. The principal Notion of Sancti∣fication in the New Testament, is the effecting of real Internal Holiness in the persons of them that do believe, by the change of their Hearts and Lives. But the word is not here so to be restrained, nor is it used in that sence by our Apostle in this Epistle, or very rarely. It is here plainly comprehensive of all that he hath denied unto the Law, Priest-hood, and Sacrifices of the Old Testament, with the whole Church-State of the Hebrews under it, and the effects of their Ordinances and Services. As, (1.) A compleat Dedication unto God, in Opposition unto the Typical one, which the people were partakers of by the sprinkling of the Blood of Calves and Goats upon them, Exod. 24. (2.) A compleat Church-state for the Celebration of the Spiritual Worship of God, by the Administration of the Spirit, wherein the Law could make nothing perfect. (3.) Peace with God upon a full and perfect Expiation of Sin, which he denies unto the Sacrifices of the Law, ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. (4.) Real, Internal purification or sanctification of our Natures and Persons, from all inward Filth, and Defilement of them; which he proves at large that the Carnal Ordinances of the Law could not effect of themselves, reaching no farther than the Puri∣fication of the Flesh. (5.) Hereunto also belong the priviledges of the Gospel, in Liberty, Boldness, immediate Access unto God, the means of that Access by Christ our High-Priest, and confidence therein, in Opposition unto that fear, bon∣dage, distance, and exclusion from the Holy Place of the presence of God, which they of old were kept under. All these things are comprized in this Ex∣pression of the Apostle, we are Sanctified. The designation of such a State for the Church, and the present Introduction of it by the preaching of the Gospel, is that whose Confirmation the Apostle principally designs in this whole Discourse; the sum whereof he gives us, Chap. 11. 40. God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect.
1. The whole Fountain and principal cause of this State, this Grace, is the Will of God, even that Will which our Saviour tendred to accomplish; by which Will we are Sanctified. In the Original it is in which Will; in, for by; which is usual. Wherefore we say properly, by which Will, for it is the supream efficient cause of our Sanctification that is intended. And in that expression of our Saviour, Lo, I come to do thy Will O God, it is evident, (1.) That it was the Will, that is, the Counsel, the Purpose, the Decree of God, that the Church should be Sanctified. (2.) That our Lord Christ knew that this was the Will of God, the Will of the Father in whose bosom he was. And, (3.) That God had de∣termined, which he also knew and declared, that Legal Sacrifices could not ac∣complish and make effectual this his Will, so as the Church might be Sanctified thereon. Wherefore the Will of God here intended (as was intimated before) is nothing but the Eternal, Gracious, Free act, or purpose of his Will, where∣by he determined or purposed in himself, to recover a Church out of lost Mankind, to Sanctifie them unto himself, and to bring them unto the enjoyment of himself hereafter. See Eph. 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. And this Act of the Will of God was, (1.) Free and Soveraign, without any meritorious cause, or any thing that should dispose him thereunto without him∣self; he purposed in himself. There are every where blessed effects ascribed to it, but no cause any where. All that is designed unto us in it, as unto the Commu∣nication of it in its effects, were its effects, not its cause: See Eph. 1. 4. and this place. The whole mediation of Christ, especially his Death and Suffering was the means of its accomplishment; and not the procuring cause of it. (2.) It was accompanied with infinite Wisdom, whereby Provision was made for his own Glory, and the means and way of the accomplishment of his Will. He would not admit the Legal Sacrifices, as the means and way of its accomplishment, be∣cause they could not provide for those ends, for it is impossible that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away Sin. (3.) It was immutable and irrevocable, it depended not upon any condition in any thing or persons without himself; He purposed in himself; nor was it capable of any change or alterations from opposi∣tions or interveniencies. (4.) It follows hereon that it must be infallibly effe∣ctual, in the actual accomplishment of what was designed in it, every thing in its order and season; it cannot in any thing be frustrate or disappointed. The whole Church in every Age shall be Sanctified by it. This Will of God, some would have not to be any Internal Act of his Will, but only the things Willed by him, namely, the Sacrifice of Christ; and that for this reason, because it is opposed to Legal Sacrifices, which the Act of Gods Will cannot be. But the mistake is evident, for the Will of God here intended is not at all opposed unto the Legal Sacrifices, but only as to the means of the accomplishment of it, which they were not, nor could be. The Soveraign Will and Pleasure of God, acting it self in infinite Wisdom Observ. and Grace, is the sole, supream, original cause of the Salvation of the Church, Rom. 9, 10, 11. 3. The means of accomplishment, and making effectual of this Will of God, is the Offering of the Body of Christ Jesus. Some Copies after , read , and then the sence must be supplied by the repetition of , in the close of that Verse, who by the Offering of the Body of Christ were once Sanctified. But there is no colour for this supply, for the word, once, doth di∣rectly respect the Offering of Christ, as the following Verses, wherein it is ex∣plained, and the dignity of this Sacrifice thence demonstrated, do prove. Where∣fore this Article belongs not unto the Text, for it is not in the best Copies, nor is taken notice of in our Translation. Why, and in what sense the Sacrifice of Christ is called the Offering of his Body, was before declared. And by which, , refers not to the cause of our Sanctification which is the Will of God, but unto the effect it self. Our Sanctification is wrought, effected, accomplish∣ed by the Offering of the Body of Christ. (1.) In that the Expiation of our Sin, and Reconciliation with God were perfectly wrought hereby. (2.) In that the whole Church of the Elect was Dedicated unto God, which priviledge they are called into the actual participation of, through Faith in the Blood of Christ. (3.) In that there∣by
all the Old Legal Sacrifices, and all that Yoke, and Burden, and Bondage wherewith they were accompanied, are taken out of the way, Eph. 2. 15, 16. (4.) In that he redeemed us thereby from the whole curse of the Law, as given Originally in the Law of Nature, and also renewed in the Covenant of Sinai. (5.) In that thereby he ratified and confirmed the new Covenant and all the promises of it, and all the Grace contained in them to be effectually Com∣municated unto us. (6.) In that he procured for us, and received into his own disposition, in the behalf of the Church, effectually to Communicate all Grace and Mercy unto our Souls and Consciences. In brief, whatever was prepared in the Will of God for the good of the Church, it is all Communicated unto us through the Offering of the Body of Christ, in such a way as tendeth unto the Glory of God, and the assured Salvation of the Church. This Offering of the Body of Christ, is the glorious Center of all the Counsels of the Wisdom of God, of all the purposes of his Will for the Sanctification of the Church. For, (1.) No other way or means could effect it. (2.) This will do it infallibly; for Christ Crucified is the Wisdom of God, and the Power of God unto this end. This is the Anchor of our Faith, whereon alone it rests. 4. The last thing in the words gives us the manner of the Offering of the Body of Christ. It was done, , once for all, say we, once only, it was never . before that one time, nor shall ever be afterwards, there remains no more Offer∣ing for Sin. And this demonstrates both the Dignity and Efficacy of his Sacri∣fice. Of such Worth and Dignity it was, that God absolutely acquiesced there∣in, and smelt a savour of Eternal rest in it: And of such Efficacy, that the San∣ctification of the Church was perfected by it, so that it needed no Repetition. It also made way for the following state of Christ himself, which was to be a state of Glory, absolute and perfect, inconsistent with the Repetition of the same Sacrifice of himself. For as the Apostle shews, ver. 12, 13. After this Sacrifice offered he had no more to do but to enter into Glory. So absurd is that Imagination of the Socinians, that he offered his Expiatory Sacrifice in Heaven; that he did not, he could not enter into Glory, until he had compleatly Offer∣ed his Sacrifice, the Memorial whereof he carried into the Holy Place. And the Apostle lays great weight on this consideration, as that which is the Foun∣dation of the Faith of the Church. He mentions it often, and argues from it as the principal Argument to prove its excellency above the Sacrifices of the Law. And this very Foundation is destroyed by those who fancy unto them∣selves, a renewed Offering of the Body of Christ every day in the Mass. No∣thing can be more directly contrary unto this Assertion of the Apostle, what∣ever colour they may put upon their practice, or whatever pretence they may give unto it. Wherefore the Apostle in the next Verses argues from the Dignity and Ef∣ficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, by its difference from, and Opposition unto the Legal Sacrifices which were often repeated.
VERSE XI, XII, XIII, XIV. . VERSE 11, 12, 13, 14. And every Priest standeth daily Ministring, and Offering oftentimes the same Sacrifices, which can never take away Sins. But this Man after he had Offered one Sacrifice for Sins, for ever sat down on the Right Hand of God. From henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool. For by one Offering he hath perfected for ever them that are Sanctified. THese words are an entrance into the close of that long blessed Discourse of the Apostle, concerning the Priest-hood and Sacrifice of Christ, their Dignity and Efficacy, which he shuts up and sinisheth in the following Verses, confirming the whole with the Testimony of the Holy Ghost before produced by him. Four things doth he here instruct us in, by way of Recapitulation of what he had declared and proved before. (1.) The state of the Legal Priests and Sacri∣fices, as unto the repetition of them, by which he had proved before their utter insufficiency to take away Sin, ver. 11. (2.) In that one Offering of Christ, and that once Offered, in opposition thereunto, ver. 12. (3.) The consequence there∣of on the part of Christ; whereof there are two parts. 1. His State and Con∣dition immediately ensuing thereon, ver. 12. manifesting the Dignity, Efficacy and absolute perfection of his Offering. 2. As unto the continuance of his State and Condition afterwards, ver. 13. (4.) The absolute effect of his Sacrifice, which was the Sanctification of the Church, ver. 14. In the First of these we have, (1.) The Note of its Introduction, , and. (2.) The Subject of the Proposition in it, every Priest. (3.) What is ascribed unto  them in the discharge of their Office; which is exprest, 1. Generally, they stood Ministring day by day. 2. Particularly, as unto that part of their Office, which is now under consideration; they often, that is, every day offered the same Sa∣crifices. (4.) The inefficacy of those Sacrifices though often Offered; they could not take away Sin. Besides this work of Daily Offering the same Sacrifices, which could not take away Sin, there was nothing ensued on them, of Glory and Dignity unto themselves, or Benefit unto the Church. This the Apostle in∣sinuates, although it be left out in the Comparison, insisting especially on the contrary in the opposite Sacrifice of Christ, both as unto his own Glory, and the Eternal Salvation of the Church. 1. The Introduction is by , mostly a Copulative, sometimes Redditive, as it is here taken by us and rendred. In this latter way it gives a further reason of . what was before declared, of the Efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, by a com∣parison of it with those of the Priests, which were often repeated. In the other sense it denotes a progress in the same Argument, by a repetition of the conside∣ration of the Old Sacrifices, and a new comparison of them with that of Christ. Both come to the same, and either may be allowed. 2. The subject spoken of, that is, , every Priest, that is, say some, every High-Priest, and so they interpret the words, standeth daily, by a certain day . once a year, referring the whole unto the Anniversary Sacrifice on the day of Expiation. And it is not denied, but that the Apostle hath a special regard
thereunto, and mentioneth it expresly, as we have shewed on Ch. 9. 7, 25. But it cannot be here so restrained, for he makes Application herein, of what he had spoken before of all the Sacrifices of the Law; and therein he reckons up all sorts of them, as we have seen, some of which, as the whole Burnt Offer∣ings, and all Offerings in distinction from Bloody Sacrifices, were not Offered by the High-Priest on that day, but by other Priests on all occasions. And the following expression of, , Standing, Ministring every day, declares the constant discharge of the Priestly Office in every daily  Ministration. This was the work that all the Priests were designed unto in their courses. Wherefore the words as they do not exclude the Annual Sacri∣fice of the High-Priest, so they include the daily and occasional Sacrifices of all the other Priests; for these Offerings of Blood were also Types of the Sacrifice and Offering of Christ. For all Sacrifices by Blood were to make Attonement for Sin, Lev. 17. 11. And they were of no use but by virtue of the Typical Representation of the Sacrifice of Christ. Therefore all the Priests, and their whole Office, as unto all that belonged unto the Offering of Sacrifices, are comprized in this Assertion. And it was necessary to extend the Comparison unto them all, that there might be no exception unto the Argument from it. And the following words which give a Description of the general way of their Ministration, do inforce this Interpretation, which is the third thing in them. 3. Standeth daily Ministring, , standeth, or rather stood; they did so while their Office was in force, which was their Duty by the Law so to do. For the  Apostle respecteth not what was their present acting as to matter of Fact, but speaks of the whole service of the Priests indistinctly, as past or present, with regard unto what was to be done, by virtue of the first institution of them, and the service which the Tabernacle was erected for. Stood, or standeth ready for, and employed in the Work of their Office, , Ministring; a general name of imployment about all sacred Duties, . Services, and Offices whatever, and therefore it comprizeth all the Service of the Priests about the Tabernacle and Altar, wherein they Ministred unto God according to his appointment. And this extends unto all that were partakers of the Priest-hood, and was not confined unto the High-Priest. See Chap. 9. 1. This they did, , that is, day by day, as occasion did require, according . to the appointment of the Law. Not only the daily Sacrifice Morning and Evening is intended, nor yet the doubling of them on the Sabbath, and other Festivals, but all the occasional Offerings for the people, as their necessi∣ties did require. For any Man might bring his Sin-Offering, and Trespass-Offering, his Peace-Offering, his Vow, or Free-Will-Offering unto the Priest at any time to be Offered on the Altar. For this cause they came to be always in a readiness to stand Ministring daily; and hereunto was their Office confined. There was no end of their work, after which they should enter into an other and better State, as the Apostle shews it of the Lord Christ in the next Verse. And this is an high Argument of the im∣perfection of their Sacrifices, they were never brought unto that State by them as the High-Priest might cease from Ministring, and enter into a condition of rest. 4. Their general Ministry is described by the especial duty which is under present consideration; they Offered oftentimes the same Sacrifices; they were the same Sacrifices that were Offered, of the same general Nature and Kind. They were indeed distributed into several sorts, according unto their occasions and institutions; as, whole Burnt-Offerings, Sin-Offerings, Trespass-Offerings, and the like; but their general Nature was one and the same, falling all under the same cen∣sure, that they could not take away sin. They had not any one peculiar Service that could effect this end: And they Offered them often, daily, monthly, occa∣sionally, annually, according unto Divine Institution. In this defect as unto the efficacy and frequency in the repetition, is the Sacrifice of Christ directly opposed unto them. Hence, In the last place the Apostle passeth that Sentence concerning them all, whose Truth he had before sufficiently confirmed, they cannot, they never could take
away sin. They could not , take them out of the way, that is, absolute∣ly, perfectly, as the word denotes. They could not do it before God the Judge, . by making a sufficient Attonement for them, ver. 4. They could not do it as un∣to the Conscience of the Sinner, giving him assured peace with God thereon. It may be they could not do it at any one time, but in the constant continuance in the Use and Observation of them, they might do it; if they were multiplied, if they were costly, if they were observed in an extraordinary manner, they might effect this end? No, saith the Apostle, they could not do it, , the defect was in their own Nature and Power, they cannot do it. They could not . do it by any means, nor at any time: The word is a vehement Negation, re∣specting all the Powers of those Sacrifices, and all the times wherein they were used. And therefore as unto those things which might seem to give them their efficacy, as their multiplication, their constancy, their cost, extraordinary care about them, God doth reject them in a peculiar manner, when trusted unto for the taking away of sin, Isa. 1. 11. Mich. 6. 6, 7. If all those Divine Institutions in the diligent Observation of them could not take away Sin, how much less can any thing do so, that we can betake our selves Observ. unto for that end? There are innumerable things invented in the Papacy to take away Sin, and its Guilt, especially of those Sins which they are pleased to call venial. And all Men on the conviction of sin, are apt to entertain thoughts that by some en∣deavours of their own, they may so take them away. To comply with this presumption are all the Papal inventions of Confession, Absolution, Indulgences, Masses, Penances, Purgatory, and the like, accommodated. Others trust solely unto their own Repentance and following Duties, as do the Socinians, and all Men in their unrenewed estate. But certainly if the Apostle proveth this Assertion beyond contradiction, that none of them can ever take away any sin, their Legal Institutions of Divine Worship, and their Observations could not do it; how much less can the Inventions of Men effect that great end? This account he gives us of the Inefficacy of the Sacrifices of the Priests, notwith∣standing their diligent attendance on their Offerings, ver. 11. VERSE 12, 13, 14. In these Verses the Apostle opposeth that one Sacrifice of Christ unto the Le∣gal Offerings that the Priests attended unto; and that in three things. (1.) In the Nature of it, and its perfection, ver. 12. (2.) The Consequence on the part of Christ, by whom it was offered, ver. 12, 13. (3.) In the effect of it towards the Church, ver. 14. VERSE. 12. 1. There is a note of opposition, answering the , and, in the Verse foregoing; , but, it is not Exceptive, but Alternative. 2. The Person spoken of, , He; that is, he of whom we speak, he whose Body was Offered once for all, Jesus Christ the High-Priest of the New Testa∣ment; . but this Man, say we. 3. What is ascribed unto him in those words, . After he had Offered one Sacrifice for sin. He Offered as the Priests did; he . Offered for sin as they did also; so far there was an agreement. But (1.) he Offe∣red only one Sacrifice, not many; And what is included therein, that this Sacrifice was of himself, and not the Blood of Bulls and Goats. (2.) It was but once Offer∣ed; and it is principally called one Sacrifice, because it was but once Offered, and the time when he Offered this Sacrifice, is also proposed, not absolutely, but with respect unto what ensued. It was before he sate down on the Right Hand of God, that is, before his entrance into Glory, after he had Offered one Sa∣crifice for sin. And the way of mentioning these things doth manifest, that the principal intention of the Apostle, is to speak unto the different consequences of
this Offering of the Priests of Old, and of Christ. And this Observa∣tion of his Offering one Sacrifice only for sin, is mentioned in opposition unto the frequent repetition of their Sacrifices; but he mentioneth it only transiently, to make a way for the great ensuing differences in the consequents of them. Ho wbeit in these words thus transiently mentioned, he judgeth and condemu∣eth the two grand oppositions that at this day are made against that one Sacri∣fice of Christ, and Efficacy of it. The First is that of the Papists, who in the Mass pretend to multiply the Sacrifices of him every day, whereas he Offered but once; so as that the repetition of it, is destructive unto it. The other is that of the Socinians, who would have the Offering and Sacrifice of Christ, to be only his appearance before God to receive power to keep us from the punish∣ment of sin, upon his doing of the Will of God in the World. But the words are express as unto the Order of these things; namely, that he Offered his Sa∣crifice for sins before his Exaltation in Glory, or his sitting on the Right Hand of God. And herein doth the Apostle give Glory unto that Offering of Christ for sins, in that it perfectly accomplished what all Legal Sacrifices could not ef∣fect. This therefore is the only repose of troubled Souls. 3. The consequent hereof on the part of Christ is two fold: (1.) What immediately ensued on this Offering of his Body, ver. 12. (2.) What continueth to be his state with respect thereunto; both of them evidencing Gods high approba∣tion and acceptance of his person, and what he had done; as also the Glory and Efficacy of his Office and Sacrifice above those of the Law, wherein no such Priviledge nor Testimony was given unto them upon the discharge of their Office. 1. The immediate consequent of his Offering was, , that he sat down on the Right Hand of God. This Glorious Exaltation of Christ hath been . spoken unto, and opened before, on Ch. 7. 3. Ch. 8. 1. Here it includes a double opposition unto, and preference above the State of the Legal Priests upon their Oblations. For although the High-Priest in his Anniversary Sacrifice for the Expiation of sin, did enter into the most Holy Place, where were the visible pledges of the presence of God; yet he stood in a posture of humble Ministra∣tion, he sate not down with any appearance of Dignity or Honour. Again, his abode in the Typical Holy Place was for a short season only; but Christ sate down at the Right Hand of God for ever, , in perpetuum; in an un∣alterable state and condition. He sate down, never to Offer Sacrifice any more. And this is the highest pledge, the highest assurance of those two things, which are the Pillars and principal Foundations of the Faith of the Church. (1.) That God was absolutely pleased, satisfied and highly glorified in and by the Offering of Christ. For had it not been so, the Humane Nature of Christ had not been im∣mediately exalted into the highest Glory that it was capable of. See Eph. 5. 1, 2. Phil. 2. 7, 8, 9. (2.) That he had by his Offering perfectly Expiated the Sin of the World, so as that there was no need for ever of any other Offer∣ing or Sacrifice unto the end. 1. Faith in Christ doth joyntly respect both his Oblation of himself by Death, and the Glorious Exaltation that ensued thereon. He so Offered one Sacrifice for Observ. sin, as that thereon he sate down on the Right Hand of God for ever. Nei∣ther of these separately is a full Object for Faith to find rest in; both in conjunction are a Rock to fix it on. And, 2. Christ in this Order of things is the great exemplar of the Church. He suffered and then entred into Glory. If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him, ver. 13. From henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Foot∣stool. So that, 2. The state and condition of Christ, after his sitting down at the Right Hand of God, not absolutely, but with respect unto his Enemies, is declared in these words. The whole Testimony is taken from Psal. 110. 1. and here explained in these Verses. It is produced in the Confirmation of what the Apostle asserts, concerning the impossibility, as well as the needlesness of the Repetition of his Sa∣crifice. For as it was no way necessary, as in the Verses following he declares; so it is impossible in his present state and condition which was Ordained for
him from the beginning; This was, that he should sit at the Right Hand of God, expecting his Enemies to be made his Footstool, that is, a state of Majesty and Glory. But Offer himself he could not, without suffering and dying, whereof in this state he is no way capable. And besides, as was before Observed, it is an evidence both of the dignity and eternal efficacy of his own Sacrifice, where∣on at once his Exaltation did ensue. I acknowledge my thoughts are inclined unto a peculiar Interpretation of this place, though I will not oppose absolutely that which is commonly received; though in my judgment I prefer this other before it. The Assertion is introdu∣ced by , henceforth, say we: as unto what remains, that is, of the dispen∣sation of the personal Ministry of Christ. He was here below, he came unto . his own, he dwelt amongst them, that is, in the Church of the Hebrews; some very few believed on him, but the generality of the people, the Rulers, Priests, Guides of the Church engaged against him, persecuted him, falsly accused him, killed him, hanged him on a Tree. Under the Veil of their Rage and Cruelty he carried on his work, of making his Soul an Offering for sin, or taking away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. Having fulfilled this Work, and thereby wrought out the Eternal Salvation of the Church, he sits down on the Right Hand of God. In the mean time those stubborn Enemies of his who hated, rejected, and slew him, continued raging in the fierceness of their implacable tumults against him, and them that believed in him. They hated his Person, his Office, his Work, his Gospel; many of them expresly sinning against the Holy Ghost. Yet did they Triumph that they had prevailed against him, and destroyed him, as some of their accursed posterity do to this day. It was the Judgment of God, that those his obstinate Enemies should by his power be utterly destroyed in this World, as a pledge of the Eternal Destruction of those who will not believe the Gospel. That this was the end whereunto they were designed, himself declares; Matt. 22. 7. Luke 19. 24. Those mine Enemies that would not have me reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before my face. After our Lord Christ left this World, there was a mighty Contest between the dying Apostate Church of the Jews, and the rising Gospel Church of Believers. The Jews boasted on their success, in that by fraud and cruelty they had destroyed him as a Malefactor; The Apostles and the Church with them gave Testimony unto his Resurrection and Glory in Heaven. Great expectation there was, what would be the end of these things, which way the Scale would turn. After a while, a visible and glorious determination was made of this controversie; God sent forth his Armies and destroyed these Murderers, burning up their City. Those Enemies of the King which would not have him to Reign over them, were brought forth and slain before his face, so were all his Enemies made his Footstool. I do judge that these are the Enemies of Christ, and the making of them his Footstool, which are pecu∣liarly here intended; namely, the destruction of the hardned unbelieving Jews, who had obstinately rejected his Ministry, and opposed it unto the end. Then were those his Enemies who so refused him, slain and destroyed thereon. For, 1. This Description of his Enemies as his Enemies, peculiarly directs us unto this sense, the Enemies of his Person, Doctrine and Glory, with whom he had so many contests, whose Blasphemies and Contradictions he underwent; They were his Enemies in a peculiar manner. 2. This the word, , expecting, better answers unto, than unto the other sense. For the glorious visible propagation of the Gospel and Kingdom . of Christ thereon, began and was carried on gloriously upon and after the de∣struction of Jerusalem, and the Church of the Jews his Enemies. With reference hereunto, Expectation may be no less distinctly ascribed unto him, than if we extend the word unto the whole time, unto the end of the World. 3. The Act of Vengeance on these his Enemies, is not said to be his own, but peculiarly assigned unto God the Father, and those imployed by him. In the Original promise, the words of God the Father to him are, I will make thine Enemies thy Footstool; I take it upon me, Vengeance is mine, to revenge the injuries done unto thee, and the obstinacy of those Unbelievers. Here in this place respect is had unto the means that God used in the work of their destru∣ction, which was the Roman Army, by whom they were, as the Footstool
of Christ, absolutely trodden under his feet, with respect unto this special Act of God the Father; who in the Execution of it, proclaims, that Vengeance is his. For in the following words the Lord Christ is said only to expect it, as that wherein his own cause was vindicated, and revenged, as it were, by another Hand, while he pleaded it himself in the World, by that mild and gentle means of sending his spirit to convince them of Sin, Righteousness and Judg∣ment. 4. This is that which the Apostle constantly threatens the obstinate He∣brews, and Apostate Professors of the Gospel withal, throughout this Epistle, the time of their destruction being now at hand. So he doth, Chap. 6. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. In this Chapter, ver. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. Where it must be spoken to. 5. This was that, , or what remained, as unto the personal Ministry of Christ in this World. The horrible Destruction of the stubborn Obstinate Enemies of the Person and Office of Christ, which befell the Nation of the Jews, is a standing security of the Observ. endless destruction of all who remain his Obstinate adversaries. 6. I leave this Interpretation of the Words unto the thoughts of them that are Judicious, and shall open the Mind of the Holy Ghost in them according unto the generally received Opinion of their sense. And to this end, 1. The Subject spoken of is the Enemies of Christ, , his Enemies. He hath had many Enemies ever since his Exaltation, and so shall have unto the  Consummation of all things; when they shall all of them be Triumphed over. For his Enemies are of two sorts. (1.) Such as are so immediately and direct∣ly unto his Person. (2.) Such as are so to his Office, and Work, with the bene∣fits of the Salvation of the Church. Those of the first sort are either Devils or Men. All the Devils are in a Combination as sworn Enemies unto the Person of Christ and his Kingdom. And for Men, the whole World of Unbelieving Jews, Mahumetans, and Pagans, are all his Enemies, and do put forth all their Power in Opposition unto him. The Enemies unto his Office, Grace, and Work and the benefits of it, are either persons or things. (1.) The Head of this Opposition and Enmity unto his Person, is Antichrist, with all his Adherents; and in a special manner, all Worldly Power, Authority and Rule, acting themselves in subserviency unto the Antichristian Interest. (2.) All Pernicious Heresies against his Person and Grace. (3.) All others which make Profession of the Gospel, and live not as becomes the Gospel, they are all Enemies of Christ and his Office. The things which rise up in Enmity and Opposition to him, and the work of his Grace, are, Sin, Death, the Grave, and Hell; All these endeavour to obstruct and frustrate all the ends of Christs Mediation, and are therein his Enemies. 2. There is the Disposal of this Subject, of these Enemies of Christ. They shall be made his Footstool, , until they be put, and placed in this con∣dition; it is a State which they would not be in, but they shall be made, put . and placed in it, whether they will or no, as the word signifies. . A Footstool is used in a Threefold sence in the Scripture. 1. For the visible pledge of Gods Presence and his Worship. Gods Throne, as we have shewed, was represented by the Ark, Mercy-Seat, and Cherubims, in the most Holy Place; whereon the Sanctuary it self was his Footstool. 1 Chron. 28. 2. Psal. 99. 5. Psal. 132. 7. So it is applyed unto God, and his pre∣sence in the Church; as the Ark was his Throne, so the Sanctuary was his Foot∣stool. 2. It is applyed unto God and his presence in the World: so Heaven above is called his Throne, and this lower part of the Creation is his Footstool, Isa. 66. 1. In neither of these senses are the Enemies of Christ to be his Footstool; Therefore it is taken, 3. For a Despised, Conquered Condition; a State of a mean subjected people, deprived of all power and benefit, and brought into absolute subjection. In no other sense can it be applyed unto the Enemies of Christ, as here it is. Yet
doth it not signifie the same condition absolutely, as unto all persons and things that are his Enemies; For they are not of one Nature, and their subjection to him is such as their Natures are capable of. But these things are intended in it: (1.) The Deprivation of all Power, Authority, and Glory. They fate on Thrones, but now are under the Seat of him, who is the only Potentate. (2.) An utter defeat of their Design, in opposing either his Person, or the work of his Grace in the Eternal Salvation of his Church. They shall not hurt or destroy no more in the Mountain of the Lord. (3.) Their Eternal Disposal by the Will of Christ, according as his Glory shall be manifested therein. Sin, Death, the Grave, and Hell, as unto their Opposition to the Church, shall be utterly destroyed, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. and there shall be no more Death. Sathan and Antichrist shall be destroyed two ways. (1.) Initially and Gradually. (2.) Absolutely and Compleatly. The First they are in all Ages of the Church, from the time of Christs Glorious Ascension into Heaven. They were then immediately put in subjection to him, all of them, because that they should not defeat any one end of his Mediation. And he maketh continual instances, as he pleases, of his Power over them in the visible Destruction of some of his most principal and implacable Enemies. And Secondly, it will be compleat at the last day, when all these Enemies shall be utterly destroyed. 4. The word, , until, here hath respect unto both these, the Gradual and . Final destruction of all the Enemies of Christ. 5. This, Christ is said to expect; henceforth expecting. Expectation and Wait∣ing are improperly ascribed to Christ, as they are in the Scripture unto God himself, so far as they include hope or incertainty of the event, or a desire of any thing, either as to matter, manner, or time, otherwise than as they are fore∣known and determined. But it is the rest and complacency of Christ, in the faithfulness of Gods promises, and his infinite Wisdom, as unto the season of their accomplishment, that is intended. He doth not so expect these things, as though there were any thing wanting to his own blessed Glory, Power, or Authority, until it be actually and compleatly finished; but, saith the Apostle, as to what remains to the Lord Christ in the discharge of his Office, he hence∣forth is no more to Offer, to Suffer, no more to Dye, no more to do any thing for the Expiation of Sin, or by way of Sacrifice, all this being absolutely and compleatly perfected, he is for ever in the enjoyment of the Glory that was set before him; satisfied in the Promises, the Power, and Wisdom of God, for the compleat effecting of his Mediatory Office, in the Eternal Salvation of the Church, and by the conquest and destruction of all his and their Enemies in their proper times, and seasons for it. And from this Interpretation of the words, we may take these Observations. 1. It was the entrance of Sin, which raised up all our Enemies against us. From thence took they their Rise and Beginning; as, Death, the Grave, and Hell: Observ. some that were friendly before, became our Enemies thereon; as the Law: and some that had a Radical Enmity, got power thereby to Execute it, as the Devil. The state in which we were created, was a state of Universal peace; all the strife and contention rose from Sin. 2. The Lord Christ in his ineffable Love and Grace put himself between us, and all our Enemies; and took into his breast all their Swords, wherewith they were armed against us, so they are his Enemies. 3. The Lord Christ by the Offering of himself, making peace with God, ruined all the Enmity against the Church, and all the Enemies of it. For all their power arose from the just displeasure of God, and the Curse of his Law. 4. It is the Foundation of all consolation to the Church, that the Lord Christ, even now in Heaven, takes all our Enemies to be his; in whose destruction he is infinitely more concerned than we are. 5. Let us never esteem any thing, or any person, to be our Enemy, but only so far, and in what they are the Enemies of Christ. 6. It is our Duty to conform our selves to the Lord Christ, in a quiet expectancy of the ruin of all our spiritual Adversaries.
7. Envy not the Condition of the most Proud and Cruel Adversaries of the Church; for they are absolutely in his power, and shall be cast under his Foot∣stool at the appointed season. VERSE 14. For by one Offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The Apostle, 1. Gives the great Reason of this State of things with reference unto the Lord Christ in the discharge of his Office; namely, that he did not repeat his Offering, as the Priests under the Law did theirs, every year, and every day; that he is sate down at the Right Hand of God, expecting his Enemies to be made his Footstool; wherein they had no share after their Oblations: And this is, be∣cause by one Offering he hath for ever perfected them that are Sanctified. This being done, there is no need of any daily Sacrifice, nothing that should detain the Lord Jesus out of the possession of his Glory. So the Particle, , for, inferrs a Reason in these words, of all that was assigned before unto him, . in opposition unto what was done by the Priests of the Law; it was by one Offering. 2. What he did so effect, which rendered all future Offerings and Sacrifices impossible. He hath perfected for ever them that are Sanctified. For the First, what he did, of the Nature of the thing spoken of, was , by one Offering; as what the Priests of old did, was also by Offer∣ings . and Sacrifices. The Eminency of this Offering the Apostle had before de∣clared, which here he referrs unto; it was not of Bulls, or Goats, but of him∣self, he Offered himself to God; of his Body; that is, his whole Humane Nature. And this Offering as he had observed before, was only once Offered; in the men∣tion whereof, the Apostle includes all the opposition he had made before, be∣tween the Offering of Christ, and those of the Priests, as to its Worth and Dignity. 3. That which is effected hereby, is, that he perfected for ever them that are Sanctified; those on whom his work is effected, are thereby Sanctified. They . that are Dedicated unto God, those who are Sanctified, or Purged, by virtue of this Sacrifice; unto them all the other effects are confined. First to Sanctifie them, then to perfect them, was the design of Christ in Offering of himself, which he purposed not for all Men Universally. So in the Foundation of the Church of Israel, they were first Sanctified, and Dedicated unto God in, and by the Sacrifices wherewith the Covenant was Confirmed, Exod. 24. and after∣wards were perfected, so far as their condition was capable thereof, in the pre∣scription of Laws and Ordinances for their Church-State and Worship. The word here, , was used before. He hath brought them into the most perfect and consummate Church-state, and Relation unto God, as unto all his . Worship, that the Church is capable of in this World. It is not an absolute, subjective, virtual, internal perfection of Grace, that is intended; the word signi∣fies not such a perfection, made perfect, nor is ever used to that purpose; nor is it the perfection of Glory, for he treats of the present Church-state of the Gospel in this World. But it is a state and condition of that Grace, and those priviledges which the Law, Priests, and Sacrifices could never bring them unto. He hath by his one Offering wrought and procured for them the compleat par∣don of Sin, and peace before God thereon, that they should have no more need of the Repetition of Sacrifices; he hath freed them from the Yoke of Carnal Ordinances, and the Bondage which they were kept in by them, pre∣scribing unto them an Holy Worship to be performed with boldness in the presence of God, by an entrance into the Holy Place; He hath brought them into the last and best Church-state, the highest and nearest Relation unto God that the Church is capable of in this World, or the Glory of his Wisdom and Grace hath Assigned unto it. And this he hath done, , for ever, so as that there shall never be any Alteration in that Estate whereunto he hath brought them, nor any Addition of Priviledge or Advantage be ever made unto it.
(1.) There was a Glorious Efficacy in the One Offering of Christ. Observ. (2.) The end of it must be effectually accomplished towards all, for whom it was Offered; or else it is inferiour unto the Legal Sacrifices, for they attained their proper end. (3.) The Sanctification, and Perfection of the Church, being that end designed in the Death and Sacrifice of Christ, all things necessary unto that end must be in∣cluded therein, that it be not frustrate. VERSE XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII. . VERSE 15, 16, 17, 18. Whereof the Holy Ghost also is a witness to us: For after that he had said before. This is the Covenant that I will make with them, after those days, saith the Lord: I will put my Laws into their Hearts, and in their Minds will I write them. And their Sins and Iniquities will I remember no more. Now where remission of these is, there is no more Offering for Sin. THe Foundation of the whole preceeding Discourse of the Apostle, concern∣ing the Glory of the Priest-hood of Christ, and the Efficacy of his Sacri∣fice, was laid in the Description of the New Covenant, whereof he was the Me∣diator, which was Confirmed and Ratified by his Sacrifice, as the Old Covenant was by the Blood of Bulls and Goats, Chap 8. 10, 11, 12, 13. Having now abun∣dantly proved and demonstrated, what he designed concerning them both, his Priest-hood and his Sacrifice, he gives us a Confirmation of the whole, from the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, in the description of that Covenant which he had given before. And because the Crisis which he had brought his Argument and Disputation unto, was, that the Lord Christ by reason of the dignity of his Person and Office, with the everlasting Efficacy of his Sacrifice, was to Offer himself but once, which virtually includes all that he had before taught and de∣clared, including in it an immediate Demonstration of the insufficiency of all those Sacrifices which were often repeated, and consequently their removal out of the Church; he returns unto those words of the Holy Ghost, for the proof of this particular also. And he doth it from the Order of the words used by the Holy Ghost, as he had Argued before from the Order of the words in the Psalmist, ver. 8, 9. Wherefore there is an Ellipsis in the words, which must have a supplement to render the sense perfect. For unto that proposition, after he had said before, ver. 11. with what follows, ver. 16. There must be added in the beginning of the 17. Verse; He said; after he had said or spoken of the Internal Grace of the Covenant, he said this also, that their Sins and Iniquities he would remem∣ber no more. For from these words doth he make his Conclusive inference, ver. 18. which is the sum of all that he designed to prove. There is in the words, 1. The Introduction of the Testimony insisted on, The Holy Ghost also is a witness unto us. The Hebrews might Object unto him, as they were ready enough to do it; that all those things were but his own Con∣clusions
and Arguings, which they would not acquiesce in, unless they were Confirmed by Testimonies of the Scripture. And therefore I did observe in my First Dis∣courses on this Epistle, that the Apostle dealt not with these Hebrews as with the Churches of the Gentiles, namely, by his Apostolical Authority; For which cause he prefixed not his Name and Title unto it; But upon their own acknow∣ledged Principles and Testimonies of the Old Testament; so manifesting, that there was nothing now proposed unto them in the Gospel, but that which was foretold, promised, and represented in the Old Testament, and was therefore the Object of the Faith of their Fore-fathers. The same way doth he here proceed in, and call in the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, bearing witness unto the things that he had taught and delivered. And there is in the words, (1.) The Author of this Testimony, that is, the Holy Ghost; and it is ascribed unto him, as all that is written in the Scripture is . so, not only because Holy Men of Old wrote as they were acted by him, and so he was the Author of the whole Scripture; but because also of his Presence and Authority in it, and with it continually. Hence whatever is spoken in the Scripture is, and ought to be unto us as the immediate Word of the Holy Ghost: he continues therein to speak unto us, and this gives the reason of (2.) The manner of his speaking in this Testimony; , he bears witness to . us, he doth it actually and constantly in the Scriptures by his Authority therein. And he doth so unto us, that is, not unto us only who Preach and Teach those things, not unto the Apostles and other Christian Teachers of the Gospel; but unto all of us of the Church of Israel, who acknowledge the Truth of the Scri∣ptures, and own them as the Rule of our Faith and Obedience. So doth he often joyn himself unto them to whom he wrote and spake of, by reason of the com∣mon alliance between them as Hebrews; see Chap. 2. 3. and the Exposition of that place. This is that which the Holy Ghost in the Scripture testifies unto us all, which should put an end unto all controversies about those things. Nothing else is taught you, but what is testified before hand by God himself. 1. It is the authority of the Holy Ghost, alone speaking unto us in the Scripture, Observ. whereinto all our Faith is to be resolved. 2. We are to propose nothing in the Preaching and Worship of the Gospel, but what is testified unto by the Holy Ghost: not traditions, not our own reasons and inventions. 3. When an important Truth consonant unto the Scripture is declared, it is use∣ful and expedient to confirm it with some express Testimony of Scripture. Lastly, the manner of the Expression is Emphatical, , even  also the Holy Spirit himself. For herein we are directed unto his Holy Divine person, and not an External Operation of Divine Power, as the Socinians dream. It is that Holy Spirit himself that continueth to speak to us in the Scripture. Thats the First thing in the Introduction of the Testimony. 2. There are two things in this Testimony of the Holy Ghost; The (1.) is the matter or substance of it. (2.) The Order of the things contained in it, or spoken by him. The Introduction of the former is in the words we have spoken unto; that of the latter, in the close of the Verse; In these words, for after he had spoken before. Of the Testimony it self, which is declarative of the Nature of the New Cove∣nant made in Christ, and Confirmed in him, there are two general parts. (1.) That which concerns the Sanctification of the Elect, by the Communication of effectual Grace unto them for their Conversion and Obedience. The (2.) is concerning the compleat pardon of their sins, and the casting them into everlasting Oblivion. The First of these the Holy Ghost witnesseth in the First place, but he stays not there; afterwards he adds the Latter, concerning the pardon of Sin and Iniquities, this being that alone wherein at present the Apostle is concerned, and from thence he confirms his present Argument; he distinguisheth it from the other, as that which was of particular use in it self. And therefore, ver. 17. is to be supplied by, and thence or thereon also, their Sins and Iniquities I will pardon.
The words themselves have in both parts of them, been explained at large on chap. 8. where they are first produced as the great foundation of the en∣suing discourses of the Apostle, so that they are not here again to be opened. We are only to consider the Argument of the Apostle from the latter part of them; And this is, that the Covenant being Confirmed and Established, that is, in the Blood, and by the one Sacrifice of Christ, there can be no more Offering for Sin. For God will never appoint nor accept of any thing that is needless, and useless in his Service, least of all in things of so great importance as is the Offer∣ing for Sin. Yea, the Continuation of such Sacrifices would overthrow the Faith of the Church, and all the Grace of the New Covenant. For, saith the Apostle, in the New Covenant, and by it, the Holy Ghost testifieth, that as it was Con∣firmed by the one Sacrifice of Christ, perfect pardon and forgiveness of Sin is prepared for and tendered unto the whole Church, and every one that be∣lieves. To what purpose then should there be any more Offerings for Sin? Yea, they who look for, and trust unto any other, they fall into that Sin, for which there is no remission provided in this Covenant, nor shall any other Of∣fering be accepted for them for ever. For they despise both the Wisdom and Grace of God, the Blood of Christ, and the Witness of the Holy Ghost, whereof there is no remission; so he disputes, ver. 28, 29. of this Chapter. And here we are come unto a full end of the Dogmatical part of this Epistle, A Portion of Scripture filled with Heavenly and Glorious Mysteries, the Light of the Church of the Gentiles, the Glory of the People Israel, the Foundation and Bulwark of Faith Evangelical. I do therefore here with all humility, and sense of my own weakness and utter disability for so great a work, thankfully own the Guidance and Assi∣stance which hath been given me in the interpretation of it, so far as it is, or may be of use unto the Church, as a mere effect of Soveraign and Undeser∣ved Grace. From that alone it is, that having many and many a time been at an utter loss as to the mind of the Holy Ghost, and finding no relief in the worthy Labours of others, he hath graciously answered my poor weak supplicati∣ons, in supplies of the light and evidence of Truth. VERSE XIX, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIII. VERSE 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, By a new and living way which he hath Consecrated for us, through the Vail, that is to say, his Flesh; And having an High Priest over the House of God: Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure water: Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering: (for he is faithful that promised.) IN these Words the Apostle enters on the last part of the Epistle, which is wholly Paraenetical, or Hortatory. For though there be some occasional intermixtures of Doctrines consonant unto them before insisted on, yet the pro∣fessed
design of the whole remainder of the Epistle, is to propose unto, and press on the Hebrews such duties of various sorts, as the Truth he had insisted upon, do direct unto, and make necessary unto all that believe. And in all his Ex∣hortations, there is a mixture of the ground of the duties exhorted unto, of their necessity, and of the priviledge which we have in being admitted un∣to them, and accepted with them; all taken from the Priest-hood and Sa∣crifice of Christ, with the effects of them, and the benefits which we receive thereby. In these words there are Three things. 1. The Ground and Reason of the Duty exhorted unto, with the foundation of it, as the special priviledge of the Gospel, ver. 19, 20, 21. 2. The way and manner of our using this priviledge unto that end, ver. 22. 3. The special Duty exhorted unto, which is, Perseverance, and constancy in be∣lieving, ver. 23. In the First, we have, (1.) A note of Inference, or deduction of the following Exhortation from what was before discoursed; , Therefore. (2.) A friendly compellation of them to whom he spake, used formerly, but now restrained after a long interruption; , Brethren. (3.) The priviledge it self, which is the foundation of the Exhortation, , having bold∣ness to enter into the holiest. (4.) The means whereby we attain the priviledge, which fits us for this duty; , 'tis by the Blood of Jesus. (5.) The means of using and exercising it as a priviledge in a way of duty, ver. 20. the way is Consecrated for us. (6.) A further encouragement unto it, from the considera∣tion of our High Priest; having a High Priest, ver. 21. 1. The Apostle repeats his obliging compellation, Brethren. And herein he hath a peculiar respect unto those among the Hebrews, who had received the  Gospel in sincerity. For although there was a Natural Brotherhood between him and the whole People of Israel, and they were always wonted to call them∣selves Brethren in general, on the account of their Original stock and separation from the rest of the World, as Acts 28. 27. yet this Word and Name is used by the Apostle on the account of that spiritual Relation which was between them; Which believe in God through Jesus Christ. See Chap. 3. ver. 1. and the exposition of it. And the Apostle by the use of it here, testifies unto two things. (1.) That although they had not as yet a full understanding of the Nature and Use of all Legal Institutions and Sacrifices, nor of their abolishing by the coming of Christ, and the discharge of his Office; yet this had not forfeited their interest in the Heavenly calling, on account whereof he dealt with them as with Brethren. (2.) That this difference, so far as it had yet continued, had no way alienated his Mind and Affections from them, though he knew how great their mistake was, and what danger, even of eternal ruin, it exposed them unto. Hereby were the Minds of those Hebrews secured from prejudice against his Person and his Doctrin, and inclined unto a compliance with his Exhortation. Had he called them Hereticks and Schismaticks, and I know not what other Names of reproach, which are the terms of use upon the like occasions amongst us, he had, in all probability, turned that which was lame quite out of the way. But he had another Spirit, was under another conduct of Wisdom and Grace, than most Men are now acquainted withal. It is not every Mistake, every Errour, though it be in things of great impor∣tance while it overthrows not the Foundation, that can divest Men of a fraternal Observ. interest with others in the Heavenly calling. 2. There is a Note of Inference from the preceding discourse, declaring it the ground of the present Exhortation, , Therefore; seeing that these things are now . made manifest unto you, seeing it is so evidently testified unto, that the Old Covenant, Sacrifices and Worship, could not make us perfect, nor give us an Access unto God, whereon they are removed and taken away, which the Scripture fully testifies unto; and seeing all this is effected or accomplished in the Office and by the Sacrifice of Christ, which they could not effect; and priviledges are there∣on granted unto Believers, which they were not before made partakers of;
Let us make use of them unto the Glory of God, and our own Salvation, in the duties which they necessarily require. And we may observe, that the A∣postle applies this Inference from his discourse, unto the use and improvement of the Liberty and Priviledges granted unto us in Christ, with the Holy Wor∣ship belonging thereunto, as we shall see in opening of the words. How∣beit, there is another conclusion implied in the words, though not expressed by him; and this is, that they should cease and give over their attendance unto the Legal Worship and Sacrifices, as those which now were altogether useless, being indeed abolished. This is the principal design of the Apostle in the whole Epistle; namely, to call off the believing Hebrews from all adherence unto, and conjunction in Mosaical Institutions. For he knew the danger, both Spiritual and Temporal, which would accompany and arise from such an ad∣herence. For, (1.) It would insensibly weaken their Faith in Christ, and give them a disregard of Evangelical Worship, which did indeed prove unto many of them a cause of that Apostacy, and final Destruction, which he so frequently warns them against. (2.) Whereas God had determined now speedily to put an utter end unto the City, Temple, and all its Worship by an Universal desolation, for the sins of the people, if they did obstinately adhere unto the observance of that Wor∣ship, it was justly to be feared, that they would perish in that destruction that was approaching, which probably many of them did. To instruct them in that light and knowledge of the truth, that might deliver them from these evils, was the first design of the Apostle in the Doctrinal part of this Epistle: Yet doth he not plainly and in terms express it any where in this Epistle; not in this place, where it was most properly and naturally to be introduced; yet he doth that which evidently includes it, namely, exhort them unto those duties, which, on the principles he hath declared, are utterly inconsistent with Mosaical Worship; and this is our free entrance into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus. For an en∣trance, in any sence, with our worship into the most holy place, is inconsistent with, and destructive of all Mosaical Institutions. And this was an effect of the sin∣gular Wisdom wherewith the Apostle was furnished, to write this Epistle. For had he directly and in terms opposed their Observation, no small tumult, and out-cry would have been made against it, and great provocations had been given unto the Unbelieving Jews. But he doth the same thing no less effectually in these words, wherein notwithstanding there is scarce a word which that ap∣plication of his discourse doth not follow upon. And his Wisdom herein ought to be an instructive example unto all those that are called unto the instruction of others in the dispensation of the Gospel, especially such as through any mistakes do oppose themselves unto the truth. Such things as will give exasperation unto the Spirits, or advantages unto the temptations of Men, ought to be avoid∣ed, or treated on with that Wisdom, Gentleness, and Meekness, as may be no prejudice unto them. This way of Procedure doth the same Apostle ex∣presly prescribe unto all Ministers of the Gospel, 2 Tim. 2. 23, 24, 25, 26. 3. There is in the words the Priviledge which is the foundation of the duty . exhorted unto; having therefore boldness to enter into the holiest, for a regular en∣trance into or of the most holy. The priviledge intended is directly opposed un∣to the state of things under the Law; and from the consideration of it, is the nature of it to be learned. For the entrance into the holiest, in the Tabernacle, belonged unto the Worship of the Church; it was the principal part thereof; but it had many imperfection attending it. (1.) It was not into the special presence of God, but only unto a place made with hands, filled with some re∣presentations of things that could not be seen. (2.) None might ever enter into it, but the High-Priest alone, and that only once a year. (3.) The Body of the people, the whole Congregation were therefore joyntly and severally ut∣terly excluded from any entrance into it. (4.) The prohibition of this entrance into this Holy place belonged unto that Bondage wherein they were kept un∣der the Law, which hath been before declared. The priviledge here mentioned being opposed to this state of things among them which respected their present Worship; It is certain that it doth concern the present Worship of God by Christ
under the Gospel. And they are therefore utterly mistaken who suppose the entrance into the most holy, to be an entrance into Heaven after this Life for all Believers. For the Apostle doth not here oppose the glorious state of Heaven unto the Church of the Hebrews, and their Legal Services; but the priviledges of the Gospel-state and worship only: Nor would it have been to his purpose so to have done. For the Hebrews might have said, that although the Glory of Hea∣ven after this life do exceed the Glories of the Services of the Tabernacle, which none ever questioned; yet the benefit, use, and efficacy of their present Ordi∣nances and Worship, might be more excellent than any thing that they could obtain by the Gospel. Neither were believers then also excluded from Hea∣ven after death, any more than now. Therefore the priviledge mentioned, is that which belongs unto the Gospel Church in its perfect state in this World. And the exercise and use of it doth consist in our drawing nigh un∣to God in Holy Services and Worship through Christ, as the Apostle declares, ver. 22, 23. There is then a two-fold opposition in these words unto the state of the people under the Law: (1.) As unto the Spirit, and frame of mind in the Wor∣shippers. Or, (2.) As unto the place of the Worship, from whence they were ex∣cluded, and whereunto we are admitted. 1. The First is in the word, , boldness. There were two things with re∣spect unto those Worshippers in this matter: (1.) A Legal Prohibition from en∣tring . into the holy place, whereon they had no liberty or freedom so to do; be∣cause they were forbidden on several penalties. (2.) Dread and fear, which deprived them of all boldness or holy confidence in their approaches unto God; therefore the Apostle expresseth the contrary frame of believers under the New Testament by a word that signifieth both Liberty, or Freedom from any Prohi∣bition, and boldness with confidence in the exercise of that liberty. I have spoken before of the various use and signification of this word , which the Apostle both in this and other Epistles, useth frequently to express both their right, and liberty, and confidence unto, and in their access unto God, of believers under the New Testament, in opposition to the state of them under the Old. We have a right unto it, we have liberty without restraint by any Prohibition, we have confidence and assurance without dread or fear. 2. This liberty we have, , aditus, introitus; , that is, the true Sanctuary, the holy place not made with hands: See Chap. 9. 11, 12. . The immediate gracious presence of God himself in Christ Jesus. Whatever was Typically represented in the most holy place of Old, we have access unto, that is, unto God himself we have an access in one spirit by Christ. 1. This is the great fundamental priviledge of the Gospel, that believers in all their holy Worship, have liberty, boldness, and confidence, to enter with it and by Observ. it into the gracious presence of God. They are not hindred by any prohibition. God set bounds unto Mount Sinai, that none should pass or break through into his presence in the giving of the Law. He hath set none to Mount Sion, but all believers have Right, Title, and Liberty to approach unto him, even unto this Throne. There is no such Order now, that he who draws nigh shall be cut off, but on the contrary, that he that doth not so do, shall be destroyed. 2. Hence there is no dread, fear, or terror in their Minds, Hearts, or Con∣sciences when they make those approaches unto God. This was a consequent of the same Interdict of the Law, which is now taken away. They have not re∣ceived the Spirit of Bondage unto fear, but the Spirit of the Son, whereby with holy boldness they cry, Abba Father; for where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Li∣berty; they have freedom unto, and confidence in their duties, and therein consists the greatest evidence of our interest in the Gospel and Priviledges thereof. 3. The nature of Gospel Worship consists in this, that it is an entrance with bold∣ness into the presence of God. However Men may multiply duties, of what sort or nature soever they be, if they design not in and by them, to enter into the presence of God, if they have not some experience that so they do, if they are taken up with other thoughts, and rest in the outward performance of them,
they belong not unto Evangelical Worship. The only exercise of Faith in them, is in an entrance into the presence of God. 4. Our approach unto God in Gospel Worship, is unto him, as evidencing himself in a way of Grace and Mercy. Hence it is said to be an entrance into the holiest, for in the holy place were all the pledges and tokens of Gods grace and fa∣vour, as we have manifested upon the foregoing Chapter. And as the taking off of the old prohibition gives us liberty, and the institution of the Worship of the Gospel gives us Title unto this priviledge; so the consideration of the na∣ture of that presence of God whereunto we approach, gives us boldness there∣unto. 5. The procuring cause of this priviledge is in the next place exprest, we have it , by the Blood of Jesus, say we. It is the procuring cause of . this priviledge that is intended, which is often so proposed. The Blood of Jesus Christ is the same with his Sacrifice, the Offering of himself, or the Offering of his Body once only. For he Offered himself in and by the effusion of his Blood, whereby he made attonement for Sin, which could not be otherwise effected. And it is here opposed, as also in the whole preceding discourse, unto the Blood of the Legal Sacrifices. They could not procure, they did not effect any such li∣berty of access unto God in the holy place. This was done by the Blood of Je∣sus only, whereby he accomplished what the Sacrifices of the Law could not do. And it is a cause of this priviledge on a twofold account. (1.) In its respect unto God, in its Oblation. (2.) In respect unto the Consciences of Believers, in its Application. 1. By its Oblation, it removed and took away all causes of distance between God and Believers. It made attonement for them, answered the Law, removed the Curse, broke down the partition-wall, or the Law of Commandments con∣tained in Ordinances, wherein were all the prohibitions of approaching unto God with boldness. Hereby also he rent the Veil which interposed and hid the gracious presence of God from us. And these things being removed out of the way by the Blood of the Oblation, or Offering of Christ, peace being there∣by made with God, he procured him to be reconciled unto us, inviting us to accept and make use of that reconciliation, by receiving the attonement. Hence believers have boldness to appear before him, and approach unto his presence. See Rom. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20, 21. Eph. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Hereon was it the procuring, the purchasing cause of this pri∣viledge. 2. It is the cause of it with respect unto the Consciences of Believers in the Application of it unto their Souls. There are not only all the hindrances men∣tioned, on the part of God, lying in the way of our access unto him, but also the Consciences of Men from a sense of the guilt of Sin, were filled with fear and dread of God, and durst not so much as desire an immediate access unto him. The efficacy of the Blood of Christ being through believing communicated un∣to them, takes away all this dread and fear. And this is done principally by his bestowing on them the holy Spirit, which is a Spirit of Liberty, as our Apostle shews at large, 2 Cor. 3. Wherefore we have boldness to enter into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus, on these three accounts: (1.) In that Attonement is made thereby for sin, and peace with God, so as that he is reconciled unto us; All that anger being turned away, that did deterr us from any such approach. (2.) Fear, dread, and bondage are taken away, so as the acting of Faith on God through the Blood of Jesus, doth expel them, and remove them out of our Mind. (3.) We receive the Holy Spirit therewithal; who is a Spirit of Liberty, pow∣er, holy boldness, enabling us to cry Abba Father. 1. Nothing but the Blood of Jesus could have given this boldness, nothing that Observ. stood in the way of it, could otherwise have been removed, nothing else could have set our Souls at liberty from that bondage that was come upon them by sin.
2. Rightly esteem, and duly improve the blessed priviledge which was purchased for us at so dear a rate. What shall we render unto him? How unspeakable are our Obligations unto Faith and Love? 3. Confidence in an access unto God not built on, not resolved into the Blood of Christ, is but a daring presumption which God abhors. VERSE 20. Having told us that we have , an entrance into the holiest; he now declares what the way is whereby we may do so. The way into the holiest under the Tabernacle was a passage with Blood through the Sanctuary, and then a turn∣ing aside of the Veil, as we have declared before. But the whole Church was forbidden the use of this way, and it was appointed for no other end but to signifie, that in due time there should be a way opened unto Believers unto the pre∣sence of God, which was not yet prepared. And this the Apostle describes, (1.) From the preparation of it; which he hath Consecrated. (2.) From the properties of it; it was a new and living way. (3.) From the tendency of it; which he expresseth, (1.) Typically, or with respect unto the old way under the Tabernacle, it was through the Veil. (2.) In an exposition of that Type; that is, his flesh. In the whole, there is a Description of the Exercise of Faith in our access unto God by Christ Jesus. Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he hath Consecrated for us, through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh. 1. The preparation of this way is by an , by a Dedication. The word hath a double signification, one in things natural, the other in things sacred; . which yet are of no affinity unto one another. In things natural, it is to make new, so as to be ready for use: In things sacred, it is to Dedicate or Consecrate any thing at the first erection or making of it unto sacred services. The latter sence of the word, which we receive in our translation, is here to be imbraced, yet so as it includes the former also. For it is spoken in opposition unto the De∣dication of the Tabernacle, and way into the most holy place, by the Blood of Sacrifices, whereof we have treated in the Ninth Chapter. So was this way into the holy place Consecrated, Dedicated, and set apart sacredly for the use of Believers, so as that there never is, nor ever can be any other way but by the Blood of Jesus. Or there is this also in it, that the way it self was new prepared and made, not being extant before. The way of our entrance into the holiest, is solemnly Dedicated and Consecrated Observ. for us, so as that with boldness we may make use of it. He hath done it for us, for our use, our benefit, and advantage. 2. The properties of this way are two. 1. That it is, , New. (1.) Because it was but newly made and pre∣pared. (2.) Because it belongs unto the new Covenant. (3.) Because it admits  of no decays, but is always new, as unto its efficacy and use as in the day of its first preparation. Whereas that of the Tabernacle waxed old, and so was pre∣pared for a removal; this way shall never be altered nor changed, never decay, it is always new. 2. , it is Living. This Epithet is placed by apposition, without any note . of distinction or conjunction. And it is said to be Living, (1.) In opposition un∣to the way into the holiest under the Tabernacle which was, 1. By Death. No∣thing could be done in it without the Blood of the Sacrifices. 2. It was the cause of death unto any one that should make use of it, the High Priest only excepted, and he but once a year. (2.) It is Living as unto its efficacy, it is not a dead thing; it is that which hath a Spiritual vital efficacy in our access unto God. (3.) It is living from its effects: it leads to Life, and effectually brings us thereunto, and is the only way of entring into everlasting Life. All the priviledges we have by Christ are great, glorious, and efficacious, all tend∣ing and leading unto life. Observ.
This new and living way of our approach unto God, is nothing but the exer∣cise of Faith, for acceptance with God by the Sacrifice of Christ, according un∣to the Revelation made in the Gospel. 3. He shews which way it thus leads to the holiest, or what is the tendency . of it, it is through the Veil. The Apostle shews here expresly what he alludeth unto in the Declaration he makes of our entrance into the holiest. The Veil here intended by him, was that between the Sanctuary and the most holy place, whose Description we have given on chap. 9. For there was no possible entrance thereinto, but through that Veil, which was turned aside, when the High-Priest entred. What this Veil was unto the High Priest in his entrance into that holy place, that is the Flesh of Christ unto us in ours, as in the last place is described in exposition of this Type, that is, his Flesh. . For the opening of these words, and the vindication of the Apostles application of this Type, we may observe, 1. The Flesh of Christ, the Body of Christ, the Blood of Christ, Christ him∣self, are all mentioned distinctly, as the matter of his Sacrifice. See chap. 9. 14, 25, 28. 2. This is done on various respects, to express either the dignity, or the efficacy of the Nature, and manner of his Offering. 3. In the Sacrifice of Christ, the Flesh was that which suffered peculiarly, as the great token and evidence of his real sufferings. 4. The whole efficacy of his Sacrifice is ascribed unto every essential part of the Humane Nature of Christ, in that which is either acted, or suffered there∣in. To his Soul, Isa. 53. his Blood, chap. 9. 14. his Body, ver. 10. his Flesh, as in this place. For these things were not distinctly operative, one in one ef∣fect, another in another, but all of them concurr'd in his Nature and Person, which he Offered once wholly to God. So that where any of them is mention∣ed, the whole Humane Nature of Christ as unto the efficacy of it in his Sacri∣fice, is intended. 5. Yet were these things distinctly typified and fore-signified in the Sacrifices and Service of old. So was the Flesh of Christ by the Veil, as his whole Nature by the Tabernacle, his Soul by the Scape-goat, his Body and Blood by the Sin∣offering on the day of Expiation, when the Sacrifice was burnt without the Camp. 6. Herein in an especial manner was the whole a Type of the Flesh of Christ, in that there was no entrance to be laid open into the Holy place, but by the rending of the Veil. The time when the High Priest entered into it, it was in∣deed by turning it aside, whereon it immediately closed again, and forbad an entrance, and a prospect unto others. Wherefore there could be no entrance into that holy place abiding, unless the Veil was rent and torn in pieces; so that it could close no more. For it came to pass on the death of the Lord Jesus, that the Veil of the Temple was rent from the top to the bottom. And that which is signified hereby, is only this, that by virtue of the Sacrifice of Christ, wherein his Flesh was torn and rent, we have a full entrance into the holy place, such as would have been of old, upon the rending of the Veil. This therefore is the ge∣nuine interpretation of this place, we enter with boldness unto the most holy place through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh; We do so by vertue of the Sacrifice of himself wherein his Flesh was rent, and all hindrances thereby taken away from us. Of all which hindrances the Veil was an Embleme, and principal Instance, until it was rent and removed. The sufficiency of the Sacrifice of Christ unto all the ends of the perfection of the Church, in all duties and priviledges, is that which the Apostle instructs us unto herein. And there is great instruction given us in this Comparison of the Type, and Anti-type, into the way and nature of our access unto God, in all our solemn Worship. It is God as he was represented in the holy place, to whom we address our selves peculiarly, that is, God the Father as on a Throne ef Grace; the man∣ner of our Access is with holy confidence grounded solely on the efficacy of the Blood, or Sacrifice of Christ.
The way is by Faith, as to the removal of the Obstacles, and the view of God as reconciled. This is given us by the suffering of Christ in the Flesh, which laid open the entrance into the Holy place. Wherefore the Apostle saies not, that the Veil was the flesh of Christ, as some pretend who have hence cavill'd at the Authority of this Epistle on no other ground but because they could not appre∣hend the spiritual Light and Wisdom that is therein; Only he says, we have Our entrance into the Holy place by vertue of the flesh of Christ, which was rent in his Sacrifice, as through the rending of the Veil a way was laid open into the Ho∣liest. This is the first encouragement unto the Duty Exhorted unto from the bene∣fit and priviledge we have by the Blood of Christ. Another to the same purpose follows. VERSE 21. And having a great high Priest over the House of God. Having, is understood from v. 19. The word whereby the Apostle expresseth . our relation unto Christ, ch. 4. 15. He is our Priest, he exerciseth that Office on our behalf, and our Duty 'tis in all things to be such as becometh this great High Priest to own in the discharge of his Office. What became him that he might be our High Priest, as it is expressed, ch. 7. 26. shews what we ought to be in our measure that belong unto his care, and say with boldness, we have an High Priest; which is another encouragement unto the diligent attendance to the duties we are here exhorted unto. For it may be said, that notwithstanding the provision of a new way into the Holiest, and boldness given us to enter thereinto; yet in our selves we know not how to do it, unless we are under the conduct of a Priest, as the Church of old was in their Worship. All those Priests being removed, how shall we do now to draw nigh unto God, without such a conduct, such a countenance? The Apostle removes this from them, and gives encouragement for what he had proved to be a Duty before, namely, that we have a great High Priest. Three things are in the words: (1.) That we have a Priest. (2.) That he is a great Priest: (3.) That part of his Office wherein in this duty we are concern∣ed, which is, that he is over the House of God. The first hath been spoken unto on many occasions: Onely the Apostle calls him not here, Our High Priest, which he doth most frequently, but a Priest, with the addition of Great, A Great Priest, which answers directly to the He∣brew Expression, , as the High Priest was called; yet the Apostle hath a respect unto his Eminency above all other Priests whatsoever. He is great in his Person, God and Man, as he had described him, ch. 1. 2, 3. Great in his glori∣ous Exaltation, ch. 8. 1, 2. Great in his Power and the efficacy of his Office, ch. 7. 25. Great in Honour, Dignity and Authority; the consideration where∣of leads both unto the confirmation of our Faith, and the ingenerating of a due reverence in our hearts towards him. For as he is so great as that he can save us unto the uttermost, or give us acceptance before God, as unto our Persons and our Duties; So he is so glorious that we ought to apply our selves to him with re∣verence and godly fear. That which unto the particular end designed in this place, we ought to consider in his Office is, that he is over the House of God. The Apostle doth not therein consider the Sacrifice of himself, which he proposed as the foundation of the pri∣viledge whence the ensuing Duty is inferr'd; but what he is and doth after his Sa∣crifice, now he is exalted in Heaven; For this was the second part of the Office of the High Priest. The First was to Offer Sacrifice for the people, the other was, to take the oversight of the House of God; For so it is particularly exprest with re∣spect unto Joshua, who was an eminent Type of Christ, Zech. 3. 6, 7. The whole care of ordering all things in the House of God was committed to the High Priest, so is it now in the hand of Christ, he is over the House of God, to order all things unto the Glory of God, and the Salvation of the Church. The House of God, . that is, the whole House of God, the Family of Heaven and Earth, that part of the Church above, and that here below, which make up but one House of God. The
Church here below is comprized in the first place; for unto them it is that this en∣couragement is given, unto whom this Motive of drawing nigh, is proposed, namely, as they have an High Priest. And it is in the Heavenly Sanctuary where∣in he administreth, or in the House of God above, into which also we do enter by our Prayers and sacred worship; so is he for ever over his own house. The Lord Christ doth peculiarly preside over all the persons, Duties, and worship Observ. of Believers in the Church of God; (1.) In that all their worship is of his appoint∣ment, and what is not so, belongs not to the house of God. (2.) In that he assists the worshippers by his Spirit, for the performance of this duty. (3.) That he makes their services accepted with God. (4.) In rendring their worship glorious by the administration of his Spirit, and effectual through the addition of the Incense of his Intercession. For other things that may be hence edu∣ced, see our Exposition of chap. 4. v. 14, 15, 16. VERSE 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure water. The Duty is here exprest whereunto these encouragements and priviledges do direct and lead. And this Duty is described, (1.) By the nature of it, Let us draw near. (2.) The Qualification of the persons by whom it is to be performed, With a true Heart. (3.) The manner of its performance, in full assurance of Faith. (4.) The preparation for it; which is twofold, (1.) That our hearts are sprinkled from an evil conscience. (2.) That our bodies are washt with pure Water. I. The Duty it self is expressed by , the word whereby the whole performance of all Divine, solemn worship was constantly expressed. For God . having fixed the residence of the signs of his presence unto a certain place, name∣ly, that of the Tabernacle and Altar, none could worship him but it was by an approach, an access, a drawing nigh unto that place, the means of their Wor∣ship, and the pledges of Gods presence therein. So were they to bring their Gifts, their Offerings, their Sacrifices; every thing wherewith they worshipped, in it was an approximation unto God. Now all thele things, Tabernacle, Temple, Altar, as we have shewed, were Types of Christ and the gracious presence of God in him, and they were appointed only unto this end to teach the Church to look for an access to God in and by him alone. Wherefore the Apostle tells the Hebrews, that as they had under the old Testament an approach unto God, and were then , those that came and drew nigh unto him, yet it was de∣fective in three things. (1.) That it was by carnal means, the Blood of Bulls and Goats. (2.) That it was not unto God himself, but only some outward pledges of his presence. (3.) That in this access they were alwayes excluded from an en∣trance into the Holiest. This way being now removed, there is that appointed in the room thereof, which is lyable to none of these Defects. For, (1.) It is not by things carnal, but in a Holy Spiritual way and Manner, as the enfuing de∣scription of it doth manifest. (2.) It is not unto any outward pledges of the divine presence, but immediately unto God himself even the Father (3.) It is into the most holy place it self, the special residence of God, and of our High Priest Christ Jesus. Wherefore this drawing near containeth all the holy worship of the Church, both publique and private, all the ways of our access unto God by Christ. And the charge given for this Duty, is the first inference the Apostle maketh from the consideration of the Benefits we receive by the Priesthood and Sacrifice of Christ. II. The principall qualification of the Persons exhorted unto this duty, is a true heart. God in an especiall manner requireth truth in the inward parts . in all that come unto him, Ps. 51. 6. Especially he doth so in his worship Joh. 4. 24. Now Truth respects either the mind, and is opposed unto falsehood; or respects the Heart and Affections, and is opposed to Hypocrisie. In the first may all false Worship is rejected, all means of the worship of God not of his own institution. But the Truth of the Heart here intended, is the sincerity of heart,
which is opposed unto all hypocrisie. Two things are therefore comprized in this qualification: 1. That the Heart is that which God principally respects in our Access un∣to him. The Hebrews in their degenerate condition rested in the outward Observ. performance of Duties, so as that they made their access outwardly ac∣cording to the Institutions and Directions of the Law; they were regardless of themselves and of the inner man, and of the frame thereof. But it is the heart that God requires, and accordingly that it be under the conduct of Doctri∣nal Truth in the Light of the Mind, and not only that it be true, and free from Hypocrisie in the acts of Worship that it goes about, but also that in its habi∣tual Frame it be holy, and throughout leavened with sincerity. Thence it is denominated a true heart. If men be sincere in the Acts of Worship, but fail of it in point of walking in Conversation, they will not be accepted in it. 2. Universal, internal Sincerity of heart is required of all those that draw nigh Observ. unto God in his holy Worship. It is so, (1.) From the Nature of God. (2.) From the nature of the Wor∣ship it self. (3.) From the Conscience of the Worshippers, which can have neither boldness nor confidence without it. What is required unto that sincerity or true heart, without which we cannot fully draw nigh unto God in any duty of his Worship, I cannot now declare. III. There is the way and manner, together with the Principle to be acted in all . our accesses unto God, , in the full assurance of faith. [1.] With∣out Faith it is impossible to please God. Wherefore faith is required in this ac∣cess on a twofold account: (1.) Of the qualification of the Person, he must be a true Believer who hath this Access, all others are utterly excluded from it: (2.) Of its actual exercise in every Particular duty of access. Abel by faith offered his sacrifice. And there is no duty acceptable unto God which is not quickned and enlivened by Faith. [2.] As unto this Access unto God by Christ, the Apostle requires that there be a full assurance of faith. Many have disputed wherein this assurance of faith doth consist, what it is that belongs thereunto. We must consider the design of the Apostle, and scope of the place, and what they do require. The word is used only in this place, though the Verb, , be elsewhere, Rom. 4. 21. chap. 14. 15. to signifie a full satisfaction of mind, in what we are perswaded of. Here two things seem to be included in it. 1. That which in other places the Apostle expresseth by , which is the word constantly used to declare the frame of mind which is or ought to be in Gospel Worshippers, in opposition unto that of the Law. And it hath two things in it: (1.) An open view of the spiritual Glories, of the way and End of our Approach unto God, which they had not. (2.) Liberty and confidence; Liberty of speech, and confidence of being accepted, which in their Bondage con∣dition they had not. Therefore the Apostle thus expresseth the way and man∣ner of our approaching to God by Christ, in opposition unto that under the Law, and affirms it to be in the full assurance, and spiritual boldness of Faith. This is the Plerophorie of it; which frame of Mind is plainly directed unto. 2. A firm and unmoveable Perswasion concerning the Priesthood of Christ, where∣by we have this Access unto God, with the glory and efficacy of it; Faith with∣out wavering. For many of the Hebrews who had received in general the Faith of the Gospel, yet wavered up and down in their minds about this Office of Christ, and the glorious things related of it by the Apostle; supposing that there might some place be yet left for the Administration of the Legal High Priest. This frame the Apostle confutes; and shews that under it men could have no access to God, nor acceptance with him. Wherefore the full assurance of faith here, respects not the assurance that any have of their own salvation, nor any degree of such an assurance; it is only the full satisfaction of our souls and Consciences in the reality and efficacy of the Priesthood of Christ to give us ac∣ceptance with God, in opposition unto all other ways and means thereof, that
is intended. But withall this perswasion, is accompanied with an assured trust of our own acceptance with God in and by him, with an acquiescence of our Souls therein. 1. The actual exercise of Faith is required in all our approaches unto God, in Observ. every particular duty of his Worship. Without this no outward Solemnity of Worship, no exercise of it will avail us. 2. It is Faith in Christ alone that gives us boldness of access unto God. 3. The Person and Office of Christ are to be rested in with full assurance in all our Accesses to the Throne of Grace. IV. There is a two-fold preparation prescribed unto us for the right discharge of this Duty. (1.) That our Hearts be sprinkled from an evil Conscience. (2.) That our Bodies are washed with pure Water. It is plain that the Apostle in these ex∣pressions alludeth unto the necessary preparations for Divine Service under the Law. For whereas there were various ways, whereby Men were Legally de∣filed, so there were means appointed for their Legal purification, which we have declared on Chap. 9. Without the Use and Application of those Purificati∣ons, if any of them that were so defiled, did draw nigh unto the Worship of God, he was to dye, or be cut off. These Institutions the Apostle doth not only allude unto, and make Application of things outward and Carnal, unto things in∣ward and Spiritual; but withal declares what was their Nature and Typical Ad∣ministration. They were not appointed for their own sakes, but to typifie and represent the Spiritual Grace, and its Efficacy, which we receive by the Sacri∣fice of Christ. The Subject spoken of is two-fold: (1.) The Heart. (2.) The Body: That is, the inward and outward Man. As unto the First, it is required that with respect unto it, it be separated from an evil Conscience; There is no doubt but in this place, as in many others, the Heart is taken for all the Faculties of our Souls, with our Affections. For it is that wherein Conscience is seated, wherein it acts its power, which it doth especially in the practical understanding, as the Affections are ruled and guided thereby. This Conscience is affirmed to be evil, antecedently unto the means propo∣sed for the taking it away. Conscience, as Conscience, is not to be separated from the heart, but as it is evil, it must be so. Conscience may be said to be evil on two accounts. (1.) As it disquieteth, . perplexeth, judgeth, and condemneth for Sin. In this sence the Apostle speaks of Conscience, ver. 2. A Conscience condemning us for sin, which the Sacrifices of the Law could not take away; so an Heart with an evil Conscience, is a Heart terrified and condemning for Sin. (2.) On account of a vitiated principle in the Conscience not performing its duty, but secure when 'tis filled with all un∣clean vitious habits. And hereon it signifies also all those secret latent sins in the Heart, which are known only to a Mans own Conscience, opposed unto the Body, or external known Sins, which he speaks of afterwards. I take it here in the latter sence; (1.) Because it is said to be evil, which it cannot be, with respect unto its former Acts and Power, for it doth therein but perform its duty, and is evil not in it self, but unto them in whom it is. And (2.) The way of its removal is by sprinkling, and not by an oblation or offering; now sprinkling is the efficacious application of the Blood of Attonement unto Sanctifi∣cation or internal Purification. And this is the last thing in particular, namely, the Way or Means of the . removal of this evil Conscience, which is by sprinkling of our Hearts. The ex∣pression is taken from the sprinkling of Blood upon the Offering of the Sacri∣fices, Exod. 29. 16, 21. Lev. 4. 17. Chap. 14. 7. The Spiritual Interpretation and Application whereof is given us, Ezek. 36. 25. And whereas this sprinkling from Sin, and cleansing thereby, is in Ezekiel ascribed unto pure water, where∣as it was in the Type, the Blood of the Sacrifice that was sprinkled, it gives us the sence of the whole. For as the Blood of the Sacrifice was a Type of the Blood and Sacrifice of Christ as Offered unto God; so it is the Holy Spirit, and
his efficacious work that is denoted by pure water, as is frequently produced. Wherefore this sprinkling of our hearts, is an Act of the Sanctifying power of the Holy Ghost, by virtue of the Blood and Sacrifice of Christ, in making of that Ap∣plication of them unto our Souls, wherein the Blood of Christ the Son of God clean∣seth us from all our sins. Hereby are our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience. (1.) Originally, in the Communication of regenerating Sanctifying Grace. (2.) Continually, in fresh Applications of the virtue of the Blood of Christ, for the taking away of the defilement by internal actual Sin. 1. Although that Worship whereby we draw nigh unto God be wrought with Observ. respect to Institution and Rule, yet without internal Sanctification of heart we are not accepted in it. 2. Due Preparations by fresh Applications of our Souls unto the efficacy of the Blood of Christ, for the Purification of our hearts, that we may be meet to draw nigh to God, is required of us. This the Apostle hath especial respect unto, and the want of it, is the Bane of publick Worship. Where this is not, there is no due reverence of God, no Sanctification of his name, not any benefit to be expected unto our own Souls. 3. In all wherein we have to do with God, we are principally to regard those internal Sins we are conscious of unto our selves, but are hidden from all others. The last thing required of us in order to the duty exhorted unto, is, that . our Bodies be washed with pure water. This at first view would seem to refer unto the outward Administration of the Ordinance of Baptism required of all, antecedently unto their orderly Conjunction unto a Church-state in the causes of it; and so it is carried by many Expositors. But, (1.) The Apostle Peter tells us that saving Baptism doth not consist in the Washing away of the filth of the Body, 1 Pet. 3. 21. therefore the expression here must be figurative, and not proper. (2.) Although the sprinkling and washing spoken of, do principally respect our habitual internal qualification, by regenerating Sanctifying Grace; yet they include also the actual, gracious, renewed preparations of our Hearts and Minds, with respect unto all our solemn approaches unto God; but Baptism cannot be repeated. (3.) Whereas the sprinkling of the Heart from an evil Conscience, respects the Internal, and unknown Sins of the Mind; so this of wash∣ing the Body doth the Sins that are outwardly acted and perpetrated. And the Body is said to be washed from them, (1.) Because they are outward, in oppo∣sition unto those that are only inherent in the Mind. (2.) Because the Body is the Instrument of the perpetration of them; hence are they called Deeds of the Body; the Members of the Body; our Earthly Members, Rom. 3. 13, 14, 15, 16. chap. 8. 13. and 12. 19. Col. 3. 3, 4, 5. (3.) Because the Body is defiled by them, some of them in an especial manner, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Pure Water wherewith the Body is to be washed, is that which is promised, Ezek. 36. 25, 26. the assistance of the sanctifying Spirit, by virtue of the Sa∣crifice of Christ. Hereby all those sins which cleave unto our outward Conver∣sation are removed and washt away. For we are Sanctified thereby in our whole Spirits, Souls, and Bodies. And that Scripture respects the Deeds of Sin, as unto a continuation of their Commission, he shall keep and preserve us. We are so by the Grace of Christ, and thereby we keep and preserve our selves from all outward and actual Sins, that nothing may appear upon us, as the Bo∣dies of them who having wallowed in the Mire are now washed with pure Wa∣ter; for the Body is placed as the Instrument of the Defilement of the Soul in such Sins. 1. Universal Sanctification upon our whole persons, and the Mortification in an Observ. especial manner of outward Sins, are required of us in our drawing nigh unto God. 2. These are the Ornaments wherewith we are to prepare our Souls for it, and not the Gaiety of outward apparel. 3. It is a great work to draw nigh unto God, so as to Worship him in Spirit and in Truth.
VERSE 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, for he is faith∣ful who hath promised. This is the second Exhortation which the Apostle educeth by way of inference from the Principles of Truth which he had before declared and confirmed. And it is the substance or end of the whole parenetical or hortatory part of the Epistle; that, for the obtaining whereof, the whole Doctrinal part of it was written, which gives Life and Efficacy unto it. Wherefore he spends the whole remainder of the Epistle, in the Pressing and Confirming of this Exhortation, on a compliance wherewith the Eternal condition of our Souls doth depend. And this he doth, partly by declaring the means whereby we may be helped in the discharge of this Duty; partly by denouncing the eternal ruine and sure destruction that will follow the neglect of it; and partly by encouragements from their own former Experiences, and the strength of our Faith; and partly by evidencing unto us in a multitude of Examples, how we may overcome the difficulty that would occur un∣to us in this way, with other various Cogent reasonings; as we shall see, if God pleaseth, in our progress. In these words, there is a Duty prescribed, and an encouragement added un∣to it. As unto the Duty it self, we must enquire: (1.) What is meant by the Pro∣fession of our Faith? (2.) What is meant by holding it fast? (3.) What to hold it fast without wavering? 1. Some Copies read, , the profession of our hope, which . the Vulgar follows, the profession of the hope that is in us; and so it may have a respect unto the Exhortation used by the Apostle, Chap. 3. 6. And it will come unto the same with our reading of it; for on our Faith our Hope is built, and is an eminent fruit thereof. Wherefore holding fast our Hope, includes in it the holding fast of our Faith, as the Cause is in the Effect, and the Building in the Foundation. But I preferr the other Reading, as that which is more suited unto the design of the Apostle, and his following Discourse; and which his fol∣lowing Confirmations of this Exhortation do directly require, and which is the proper Subject of our , or profession. See Chap. 3. 1. Faith is here taken in both the principal acceptations of it, namely, that faith whereby we believe, and the Faith or Doctrine which we do believe. Of both which we make the same profession; of one as the inward Principle, of the other as the outward Rule. Of the meaning of the word it self, , or joynt pro∣fession, . I have treated largely, Chap. 3. 1. This solemn profession of our Faith, is two-fold. (1.) Initial. (2.) By the way of continuation, in all the Acts and Duties required thereunto. The First, is a solemn giving up of our selves unto Christ, in a professed subjection unto the Gospel, and the Ordinances of Divine Worship therein contained. This of old was done by all Men, at their First accession unto God in the Assemblies of the Church. The Apostle calls it, the beginning of our confidence, or subsistence in Christ and the Church, Chap. 3. 6. And it was ordinarily in the primitive times, accompanied with excellent Graces and Priviledges. For, (1.) God usually gave them hereon great Joy and Exultation with peace in their own Minds, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Hath translated us out of darkness into his marvellous light. The glorious marvellous light, whereunto they were new∣ly translated out of darkness, the evidence which they had of the truth and re∣ality of the things that they believed and professed, the value they had for the Grace of God in this high and Heavenly calling, the greatness and excellency of the things made known unto them, and believed by them, are the means whereby they were filled with joy unspeakable and full of Glory. And respect is had unto this frame of Heart in this Exhortation. For it is apt on many accounts to decay and be lost: but when it is so, we lose much of the Glory of our pro∣fession.
(2.) They had hereon, some such Communication of the Spirit in Gifts, or Graces, that was a Seal unto them of the promised inheritance, Eph. 1. 13. And although what was extraordinary herein is ceased and not to be looked after, yet if Christians in their initial dedication of themselves unto Christ and the Gospel, did attend unto their duty in a due manner, or were affected with their priviledges as they ought, they would have experience of this Grace, and ad∣vantage in ways suitable unto their own state and condition. Secondly, The continuation of their Profession first solemnly made, avowing the Faith on all just occasions, in attendance on all Duties of Worship requi∣red in the Gospel, in professing their faith in the Promises of God by Christ, and thereon chearfully undergoing afflictions, troubles and persecutions on the account thereof, is this profession of our Faith that is exhorted unto. II. What is it to hold fast this profession? The words we so render, are , and sometimes , singly, as 1 Thes. 5. 23.  and , are indefinitely used to this end ch. 3. 6. ch. 4. 14. Rev. 2. 25. ch. 3. 11. So that which is here , is , chap. 4. 14. And there is included in the sence of either of these words, 1. A supposition of great difficulty with danger, and opposition against this holding the Profession of our Faith. 2. The putting forth of the utmost of our strength and endeavours in the defence of it. 3. A constant perseverance in it, denoted in the word keep; possess it with constancy. III. This is to be done without wavering, that is, the profession must be im∣movable and constant. The frame of mind which this is opposed unto, is expressed James 1. 6. , one that is alwayes disputing, and tost up and down with various thoughts in his mind, not coming to a fixed resolution or determination. He is like a Wave of the Sea, which sometimes subsides and is quiet, and sometimes is tossed one way or another, as it receives impressions from the Wind. There were many in those days who did hesitate in the profession of the Doctrine of the Gospel; sometimes they inclined unto it and embraced it, sometimes they re∣turned again unto Judaisme; and sometimes they would reconcile and compound the two Covenants, the two Religions, the two Churches together, with which sort of men our Apostle had great contention. As mens minds waver in these things, so their profession wavers; which the Apostle here condemneth or opposeth unto that full assurance of Faith which he required in us.  is, not to be bent one  way or another, by impressions made from any things or causes; but to abide firm, fixed, stable, in opposition to them. And it is opposed unto, 1. An halting between two opinions, God or Baal, Judaism or Christianity, Truth or Error. This is to waver Doctrinally. 2. Unto a Weakness, or Irresolution of mind as unto a continuance in the pro∣fession of faith against difficulties and oppositions. 3. To an yielding in the way of complyance, in any point of Doctrine or Worship contrary unto or inconsistent with the Faith we have professed. In which sense the Apostle would not give place, no not for an hour unto them that taught Cir∣cumcision. 4. To final Apostacy from the truth, which this wavering up and down, as the Apostle intimates in his following discourse, brings unto. Wherefore it includes Positively, (1.) A firm perswasion of mind, as to the truth of the Faith whereof we have made profession. (2.) A constant resolution to abide therein, and adhere thereunto against all oppositions. (3.) Constancy and diligence in the perform∣ance of all the Duties which are required unto the continuation of this profession. This is the summ and substance of that duty which the Apostle with all sorts of Arguments presseth on the Hebrews in this Epistle, as that which was indis∣pensibly necessary unto their Salvation. 1. There is an Internal Principle of saving Faith required unto our profession Observ of the Doctrine of the Gospel, without which it will not avail. 2. All that believe, ought solemnly to give themselves up unto Christ and his
Rule, in an express profession of the faith that is in them, and required of them. 3. There will great difficulties arise in, and opposition be made unto, a sincere profession of the Faith. 4. Firmness and constancy of mind with our utmost diligent endeavours, are required unto an acceptable continuance in the profession of the Faith. 5. Uncertainty and wavering of mind, as to the Truth and Doctrine we pro∣fess, or neglect of the duties wherein it doth consist, or compliance with errors for fear of persecution and sufferings, do overthrow our profession, and render it useless. 6. As we ought not on any account to decline our Profession, so to abate of the degrees of fervency of spirit therein, is dangerous unto our souls. Upon the Proposal of this Duty, the Apostle in his passage interposeth an encouragement unto it, taken from the assured benefit and advantage that should be obtained thereby; for, saith he, He is faithfull that hath promised. And . we may observe in the opening of these words the nature of the encouragement given us in them. 1. It is God alone who Promiseth. He alone is the Author of all Gospel Pro∣mises; by him are they given unto us, 2 Pet. 1. 4. Titus 1. 1. Hence in the sense of the Gospel, this is a just Periphrasis of God, He who hath Promised. 2. The Promises of God are of that nature in themselves, as are suited unto the encouragement of all Believers unto constancy, and final perseverance in the Profession of the Faith. They are so, whether we respect them as they contain and exhi∣bit present Grace, Mercy and consolation; or as those which propose unto us things Eternal in the future glorious reward. 3. The Efficacy of the Promises unto this end, depends upon the faithfulness of God who gives them. With him is neither variableness, nor shadow of turning. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent. Gods faithfulness is the unchange∣ableness of his Purpose and the Counsels of his Will, proceeding from the Immu∣tability of his Nature, as accompanied with almighty Power for their accom∣plishment, as declared in the Word. See chap. 6. 18. Titus 1. 2. This there∣fore is the sense of the Apostles Reason unto the end he aims at. Consider, saith he, the promises of the Gospel, their incomparable Greatness and Glory, in their enjoyment consists our eternal Blessedness; and they will all of them be in all things accomplished towards those who hold fast their profession, seeing he who hath promised them, is absolutely Faithful and Unchangeable. The Faithfulness of God in his Promises, is the great encouragement and support∣ment, under our continual Profession of our Faith against all oppositions. VERSE XXIV. . VERSE 24. And let us consider one another to provoke unto love and good works. LOve and good works are the fruits, effects, and Evidences of the sincere profession of saving faith; Wherefore a diligent attendance unto them, is an effectu∣al means of our constancy in our profession. This therefore the Apostle in the next place Exhorts unto, and thence declares the manner whereby we may be excited and enabled unto them. And there is in the words, (1.) A profession of a Duty, as a means unto another end. (2.) The declaration of that end, name∣ly, by and upon that consideration, to provoke one another to Love and good Works. 1. : The word hath been opened on chap. 3. 1. A diligent in∣spection into, an heedfull consideration of mind, intent upon it, in opposition unto com∣mon, . careless, transient thoughts about it, is intended. The Object of it here, is not things, but Persons; one another. And herein the Apostle supposeth,
1. That those unto whom he wrote, had a deep concernment in one another, their present temporal and future Eternal state. Without this the meer considerati∣on of one another, would only be a fruitless effect of curiosity, and tend unto many evils. 2. That they had also communion together about those things without which this Duty could not be rightly discharged. For it was not then in the world as it is now; but all Christians who were joyned in Church Societies, did meet together for mutual Communion in those things wherein their Edification was concerned, as is declared in the next Verse. 3. That they judged themselves obliged to watch over one another as unto sted∣fastness in profession, and fruitfulness in Love and good Works. Hence they knew it their Duty to admonish, to exhort, to provoke, to encourage one ano∣ther. Without this the meer consideration of one another is of no use. On these suppositions this consideration respects the Gifts, the Graces, the Tem∣ptations, the Dangers, the Seasons and Opportunities for Duty, the manner of the walking of one another in the Church, and in the World. For this consideration is the Foundation of all these mutual Duties of Warning, or Admonition and Exhorting, which tend to the encouragement and strengthening of one another. But those Duties are now generally lost amongst us, and with them is the glory of the Christian Religion departed. II. The special kind of this Duty as here pressed by the Apostle is, that it is . used : Unto the Provocation of Love and good works, that is, as we have rendred the words, to provoke (that is, one another) unto Love and good Works. Provocation is commonly used in an ill sense, namely, for the imbittering of the spirit of another, moving anger, sorrow, and disquiet∣ment, and impatience of mind; So 1 Sam. 1. 6, 7. to provoke one, is to imbitter his Spirit, and to stir him up unto anger. And when any provocation is high, we render it strife or contention, such as whereby the Spirits of men are im∣bittered one towards another, Acts 15. 39. Howbeit, it is used sometimes for an earnest and diligent excitation of the Minds or Spirits of men unto that which is good. See Rom. 11. 14. So it is here used. And there is more in it than a bare mutual Exhortation; An excitation of Spirit by Exhortation, Example, Rebukes, until it be warmed unto a duty. This is the great end of the Communion that is among Christians in the mutual consideration of one another; considering the circumstances, conditions, walkings, abilities for usefulness, of one another, they do excite one another unto love and good works, which is called the provocation of them, or the stirring up of the minds of men unto them. This was the way and practice of the Christians of old, but is now generally lost, with most of the principles of practical Obedience, especially those which concern our mutual edification, as if they had never been prescribed in the Gospel. The Duties themselves which they are thus mutually to provoke one another unto, are, Love and good works; And they are placed by the Apostle in their proper or∣der; For Love is the spring and fountain of all acceptable good works. Of mutual love among believers, which is that here intended, as unto the nature and causes of it, and motives unto it, I have treated at large Chap. 6. The good works intend∣ed are called here , usually they are . Those which are most com∣mendable, and praise-worthy are intended, such as are most usefull unto others, such as whereby the Gospel is most exalted; works proceeding from the shining Light of Truth, whereon God is glorified. 1. The mutual watch of Christians in the particular Societies whereof they Observ. are members, is a duty necessary unto the preservation if the profession of the Faith. 2. A due consideration of the circumstances, abilities, temptations and oppor∣tunities for duties, in one another, is required hereunto. 3. Diligence, or mutual Exhortation unto Gospel duties, that men on all grounds of Reason and Example may be provoked unto them, is required of us, and is a most Excellent Duty, which in an especial manner we ought to attend unto.
VERSE XXV. . VERSE 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our selves together, as the manner of some is, but Exhorting one another; and so much the more as ye see the day ap∣proaching. THe Words contain an enforcement of the preceding Exhortation, in a cau∣tion against what is contrary thereunto, or the neglect of the general Duty which is the Principal means to further us in all the things that we are exhorted unto, and without which some of them cannot at all be performed. And there is in the Words (1.) The neglect and evil which they are cautioned against, that is, Forsaking the assembling of our selves: (2.) This is exempli∣fied, (1.) In an instance of some that were guilty of it; as is the manner of some. (2.) By the contrary Duty; but exhorting one another. (3.) The degree of this Duty; so much the more. (4.) The Motive unto that degree; as ye see the day approaching. In the First, there is the thing spoken of, , well rendred by us, the assembling of our selves together; for it is not the Church-State absolutely, . but the actual assemblies of Believers, walking together in that State, which the Apostle intends. For as the Church it self is Originally the Seat and Subject of all Divine Worship, so the actual Assemblies of it, are the only way and means for the Exercise and performance of it. These Assemblies were of two sorts. (1.) Stated on the Lords Day, or first Day of the Week, 1. Cor. 16. 2. Acts 20. 7. (2.) Occasional, as the Duties or Occasions of the Church did require, 1 Cor. 5. 4. The End of these Assemblies were twofold. (1.) The due performance of all solemn Stated, orderly, Evangelical Worship, in Prayer, Preaching of the Word, Singing of Psalms, and the Administration of the Sacraments. (2.) The exercise of Discipline, or the watch of the Church over its Members, with respect unto their Walking and Conversation, that in all things it be such as becomes the Gospel, and giving no Offence. So to Admonish, Exhort, and Provake one another to Love and Good Works; Comfort, Establish, and Encou∣rage them that were Afflicted or Persecuted; to relieve the Poor, &c. Such Assemblies were constantly observed in the first Churches; How they come to be lost is not unknown, though how they may and ought to be revived is difficult. Two things are evident herein. 1. That those Assemblies, those comìngs together in one place, was the only way whereby the Church, as a Church made its Profession of Subjection unto the Authority of Christ in the Performance of all those Duties of Sacred Worship, where∣by God was to be Glorified under the Gospel. Wherefore a Voluntary neglect and relinquishment of those Assemblies, destroys any Church State, if it be persisted in. 2. That those Assemblies were the Life, the Food, the Nourishment of their Souls; Without which they could neither attend unto the Discipline of Christ, nor yield Obedience unto his Commands, nor make Profession of his Name as they ought, nor enjoy the Benefit of Evangelical Institutions: Whereas in a due Observance of them consisted the Tryal of their Faith in the sight of God and Man. For as unto God, whatever Reserves men may have in their minds, that they would still continue to believe in Christ though they attended not unto his Discipline in these Assemblies, he regards it not; because there∣in
men do openly preferr their own temporal Safety before his Glory. And as unto men, it is not so much Faith it self, as the Profession of it in those assem∣blies, that they hate, oppose, and persecute. Wherefore Believers in all Ages have constantly ventured their lives in the Observance of them through a thousand difficulties and dangers, esteeming them always aliens from their communion by whom they were neglected. Wherefore, secondly, The Apostles charge concerning those Assemblies, is, that we should not forsake them. There is a twofold forsaking of these Assemblies. (1.) That which is Total, which is the fruit and evidence of absolute Apostacy. (2.) That which is so Partially only, in want of Diligence and conscientious care in a constant attendance unto them according as the Rule and their Institution do require. It is the latter that the Apostle here intends, as the word in part sig∣nifies, and of the former he speaks in the following verses. And this is usually done on some of these accounts: 1. From fear of suffering. These Assemblies were those which exposed them unto Sufferings, as those whereby they made their Profession visible, and evi∣denced their Subjection unto the Authority of Christ; whereby the unbelieving World is enraged. This in all Ages hath prevailed on many, in the times of Tryal and Persecution, to withdraw themselves from those Assemblies; and those who have done so, are those Fearful and Unbelieving ones, who in the first place are excluded from the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 8. In such a season, all the arguings of Flesh and Blood, will arise in the minds of Men, and be pro∣moted with many spècious pretences: Life, Liberty, Enjoyments in this World, will all put in to be heard; Reserves concerning their State in this frame, with Resolutions to return unto their Duty when the Storm is over; Pleas and Arguments that these Assemblies are not so necessary, but that God will be mer∣cifull unto them in this thing. All which and the like false reasonings do carry them away to ruine. For notwithstanding all these vain pleas, the Rule is per∣emptory against these persons. Those who for their Houses, Lands, Possessi∣ons, Relations, Liberty, Life, preferr them before Christ, and the Duties which we owe to him, and his Glory, have no interest in Gospel Promises. Whatever men pretend that they believe, if they confess him not before men, He will deny them before his Father which is in Heaven. 2. Spiritual sloth, with the occasions of this life, are the cause in many of this sinful neglect. Other things will offer themselves in competition with the diligent attendance unto these Assemblies. If men stir not up themselves, and shake off the weight that lyes upon them, they will fall under a wofull neg∣lect as unto this and all other important Duties. Such Persons as are influen∣ced by them, will make use of many specious pleas, taken for the most part from their occasions and necessities. These things they will plead with men, and there is no contending with them; But let them go to Christ and plead them immediately unto himself, and then ask of themselves, how they suppose they are accepted? He requires that we should attend unto these Assemblies diligently, as the principal way and means of doing that, and observing that which he com∣mands us, the certain indispensible Rule of our Obedience unto him. Will it be accepted with him, if in a neglect of that, we should say unto him, we would have done so indeed, but that one thing or other, this business, this diversion, this or that attendance in our callings would not suffer us so to do? This may indeed fall out sometimes where the Heart is sincere, but then it will be troubled at it, and watch for the future against the like occasions. But where this is frequent, and every trivial diversion is embraced unto a neglect of this Duty, the Heart is not up∣right before God, the Man draws back in the way unto perdition. 3. Unbelief working gradually towards the forsaking of all profession. This is the first way for the most part, whereby an evil Heart of Unbelief in de∣parting from the living God, doth evidence it self; which the Apostle on this consideration warns the Hebrews of, chap. 3. I say, hereby usually it first evi∣denceth it self. It hath unquestionably put forth its power before, within and in a neglect of private Duties, but hereby it first evidenceth it self unto others. And if this course, from this principle, be persisted in, total Apostacy lyes at the door; whereof we have multiplyed instances.
1. Great Diligence is required of us in a due attendance unto the Assemblies of the Church for the ends of them, as they are instituted and appointed by Jesus Observ. Christ. The benefit we recieve by them, the danger of their neglect, sense of the Authority of Christ, concernment of his glory in them, with the vanity of the pretences for their Neglect, call aloud for this Diligence. 2. The neglect of the Authority and Love of Christ in the appointment of the means of our Edification, will alwayes tend to great and ruinous evils. Thirdly, The Apostle Exemplifies their sin, which he warms them against in an instance of those who are guilty of it, as the manner of some is. The Church of  the Hebrews, especially that at Jerusalem, had been exposed to great Tryals and Persecutions, as the Apostle declares v. 32, 33. during this State, some of the Members of them, even in those early dayes, began so far to decline their profession, as not to frequent the Assemblies of the Church. They were afraid to be taken at a Meeting, or that their known persecuting Neighbours should take notice of them as they went unto, or came from their Assemblies. And it should seem, they were not a few who were fallen into this sinfull neglect; for the Apostle speaks of it as a thing which was well known among themselves. Again, There were among the Hebrews at that time great disputes about the continuance of the Temple-worship, with the Rites and Ceremonies of it, which many were entangled withall; and as that error prevailed in their minds, so did they begin gradually to neglect and forsake the Worship and Duties of the Gospel, which ended with many in fatal Apostacy. To prevent the effects of these two evils, was the principal design of the Apostle in writ∣ing this Epistle, which is fill'd with Cogent Arguments against them. This was the later cause of their Declension before intimated, namely, Unbelief secret∣ly inclining unto a departure from the living God. And this is marked here as the Ordinary Beginning of an entrance into final Apostacy; namely, that men do for sake the Assemblies of the Saints. Only observe, that it is not an occcasio∣nal Dereliction of them, but that which they accustomed themselves unto; it was , their manner, it was an ordinary way, and manner of walking which they accustomed themselves unto. 1. No Church-Order, no outward profession can secure men from Apostacy. Per∣sons Observ. were guilty of this Crime in the first, the best, the Purest Churches. 2. Perfection, freedom from Offence, Scandal, and ruinous Evils, is not to be expected in any Church in this World. 3. Men that begin to decline their Duty in Church Relations, ought to be marked, and their wayes avoided. 4. Forsaking of Church Assemblies is usually an entrance into Apostacy. Fourthly, The Apostle illustrates this great evilby the contrary Duty, . . All the Duties of these Assemblies, especially those which are usefull and needfull to prevent Backsliding, and preserve from Apostacy, are proposed under this one, which is the head and chief of them all. The Nature of this mutual Exhortation among Christian Believers in Church Societies, hath been discoursed on chap. 3. Here it is opposed unto the evil dehorted from, Forsake not, but exhort one another; Wherefore it is comprehen∣sive of the general nature of all the Duties of Believers in Church Societies, and it hath a special respect unto Constancy and Perseverance in the profession of the Faith, and diligent attendance unto the Duties of Gospel-worship; as is evi∣dent from the whole Context. This is the Duty of all Professors of the Gospel, namely, to perswade, to encourage, to exhort one another unto constancy in Pro∣fession, with resolution and fortitude of mind against difficulties, dangers, and oppositions. A duty which a State of Persecution will teach them, who intend not to leave any thing of Christ. And 'tis never the more inconsiderable, be∣cause the practice of it is almost lost out of the World, as we said before. The Motive unto these Duties is, the approach of the Day. Wherein we have, (1.) A Degree added unto the Performance of these Duties, from this Mo∣tive
, so much the more. (2.) The motive it self, which is the ap∣proach of the day. (3.) The evidence they had of it, you see. There is from this Motive, an especial degree to be added unto the performance of the duties before mentioned; they are such as ought alwaies to be attended unto. How∣beit, this is a season wherein it is our duty to double our diligence about them. For this, so much the rather, referrs distinctly unto all the duties before menti∣oned being to be repeated . Wherefore although the Word of Christ in his Institutions and commands, do make duties constantly in their perfor∣mance necessary unto us; yet there are warnings and works of Christ whose consideration ought to excite us unto a peculiar diligence and attendance unto them. And, 1. Such warnings of Christ there are unto his Church, both by his Word, and by his Providence. For although he speak not now immediately unto them by Revelations, yet he speaks unto them mediately in his Word. All the warnings he hath left on record in the Scripture, given unto his Churches in the various conditions wherein they were, as for instance, Those in the second and third of the Revelations, are given likewise unto all the Churches now, that are in the same State or condition wherein they were. And he doth it by his Providence, in threatnings, Essicacious tryals, and persecutions, 1 Cor. 11. 30, 31, 32. 2. The principal End of these warnings is to stir us up unto more diligence in attendance unto the duties of his worship in the Assemblies of the Church; as is manifest in all his dealings with the seven Churches, as Types of all others. For (1.) Our neglect therein, is the cause of that displeasure which he in his warn∣ings and tryals calls us unto. For this Cause many are sick and weak, many are fallen a sleep. Because thou art luke-warm, I will do so and so. (2.) Because without a diligent care, we cannot pass through trials of any nature, in persecu∣tion, in publick calamities, unto his glory, and our own safety. For by a neglect of these duties, all graces will decay, carnal fears will prevail, coun∣sel and help will be wanting, and the soul be betrayed into innumerable dangers and perplexities. (3.) Without it, it will not be to the glory of Christ to evi∣dence his presence amongst them in their tryals, or give deliverance to them. Wherefore we may consider what belongs unto this, and so much the rather, what additions unto our performance of those duties is required from this mo∣tive. 1. A Recovery of our selves from outward neglects in attendance upon Church-Assemblies; such there have been amongst us on various pretences, which if on renewed warnings we recover not our selves from, we are in danger of eter∣nal ruine, for so the case is stated in this place. 2. A diligent enquirie into all the duties which belong to the Assemblies of Be∣lievers, is comprised here by the Apostle under the general head of mutual consideration, provocation, and Exhortation, that we be not found defective through our Ignorance, and unacquaintedness with what he doth require. 3. Spiritual Diligence in stirring up our hearts and minds unto sincerity, zeal, and delight in the performance of them; in all labouring after a recovery from our decays and backslidings, which is the design of most of the Epistles of Christ unto the Seven Churches. Wherefore, When especial Warnings do not excite us unto renewed Diligence in known duties, our condition is dangerous as unto the continuance of the presence of Christ Observ. amongst us. 3. The motive it self is, the approach of the day; concerning which we must enquire, (1.) What day it is, that is intended? (2.) How it did ap∣proach? . And then, How it did evidence it self so to be, as they saw it? 1. The day, ; an eminent day; The Rule whereby we may determine what day is intended, is this; it was such a day as was a peculiar motive unto . the Hebrews in their present circumstances, to attend diligently unto the due performance of Gospel Duties. It is not such a day, such a Motive, as is al∣waies common to all, but only unto those who are in some measure in the same circumstances with them. Wherefore it is neither the day of death personally
unto them, nor the day of the future Judgment absolutely that is intended; For those are common unto all equally, and at all times, and are a powerful motive in General unto the performance of Gospel Duties; but not an especial peculiar Motive at some time unto peculiar diligence. Wherefore, this day was no other but that fearful and tremendous day, a season for the destruction of Jerusalem, the Temple, City, and Nation of the Jews, which our Saviour had forewarned his Disciples of, and which they had in continual expectation. But it may be said, How should the Approach of this day, wherein all things seem to be dissolved, the Church to be scattered, the whole Nation to be con∣sumed with blood and fire, be a motive unto redoubled diligence in attendance unto the duties of Christian Assemblies? It should now seem rather to have been a time for every one to shift for himself, and his Family, than to leave all at uncertainties, and unto ruine, whilest they looked after these Assem∣blies. Answ. 1. Whatever Desolations and Destructions may be approaching, our best and wisest frame will be to trust unto God, in the discharge of our duty. All other contrivances will prove not only vain, and foolish, but destructive unto our Souls. The day here intended was coming on the people and Nation for their neglect and contempt of the Gospel, it was the Revenge of their Murder, unbelief, and Obstinacy against Christ. Wherefore if any that made Profes∣sion of the Gospel were now negligent and careless in the known duties of it, they could have no evidence or satisfaction in their own minds, that they should not fall in the fire of that day. They who will in any degree partake of mens sins, must in some degree or other partake of their plagues. 2. It is impossible that men should go or be carryed through a day of publique Ca∣lamity, a destructive day, comfortably and chearfully, without a diligent atten∣dance unto those known duties of the Gospel. For, (1.) The Guilt of this neglect will seize upon them when their tryal shall come: and they will wish, when it is too late, that they had kept at a distance from it. (2.) Let men pretend what they will, this decay in those duties argues and evidenceth a decay in all graces, which they will find weak, and unfit to carry them through their tryals, which will bring them unto an unspeakable loss in their own minds. (3.) The Lord Christ requireth this from us in a way of testimony unto him, that we are found faithful in our adherence unto his Institutions upon the approach of such a day. For hereby do we evidence both the subjection of our soules unto him, as also that we value and esteem the priviledg of the Gospel above all other things. (4.) Because the duties prescribed, in a right discharge of them, are the great meanes for the strengthning and supporting of our soules in that part of the tryal which we are to undergo. For such a day as that intended, hath fire in it, to try every mans work of what sort it is, and every mans grace both as to its Sincerity and Power. Therefore all ways and means whereby our works may be tryed, and our graces exercised, are required of us in such a season. Wherefore, Approaching Judgments ought to influence unto especial diligence in all Evan∣gelical Observ. Duties. 2. How did this day approach? It was approaching, coming, drawing nigh, it was in procinctu, gradually coming upon them; Warnings of it, dispositions towards it, intimations of its coming were given them every day. This I have before given an account of, and how the drawings nigh of this day were upon them when this Epistle was written, and how in a short time it brake forth upon them in all its severity. And these things were so evident, as that in the last place, the Apostle takes it for granted, that they themselves did see openly and evidently the approaching day; And it did so in these five things: (1.) In the accomplishment of the signs of its coming, foretold by our Saviour; compare Mat. 24. 9. &c. with the 32, 33, 34, verses of this Chapter. And besides, all the other signs mentioned by our Saviour, were entring on their accom∣plishment. (2.) In that things were at a great stand as unto the Progress of the Gospel among the Hebrews. At the first Preaching of it multitudes were con∣verted unto Christ, and the Word continued in efficacy towards them for some
season afterwards; but now as our Apostle plainly declares in this Epistle the case was changed among them, the Elect obtained, the rest were hardened, Re. 11. The number of the Elect among that people were now gathered in; few ad∣ditions were made unto the Church; not daily nor in multitudes as formerly. And Believers knew full well that when their work was all accomplished, God would not leave the people in their obstinacy, but that wrath should come upon them unto the uttermost. (3.) They saw it approaching in all the Causes of it. For the Body of the people having now refused the Gospel, were given up un∣to all wickedness, and hatred unto Christ; An account whereof is given at large by the Historian of their own Nation. (4.) The Time and season did manifest it self unto them. For whereas the body of that people were to be cut off, and cast off, as the Apostle expresly declares, Rom. 9. 10, 11. This could not be done untill a sufficient tender of the Gospel and of Grace by Christ Jesus were first made unto them. Notwithstanding all their other wickednesses, God would not surprize them with an overturning destruction. He had before as Types of his dealing with them, warned the old world by Noah, and Sodom by Lot, be∣fore the one was destroyed by water, and the other by fire. He would also give them their day, and make them a sufficient tender of mercy, which he had now done towards forty years. In this space, through the Ministry of the Apostles, and other faithfull dispensers of the Word, the Gospel had been pro∣posed unto all persons of that Nation throughout the world, Rom. 10. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. This being now accomplished, they might evidently see that the day was approaching. (5.) In the Preparations for it. For at this time all things began to be fill'd with Confusions, Disorders, Tumults, Seditions, and Slaughters in the whole Nation, being all of them entrances of that woful day, whose coming was declared in them and by them. 1. If men will shut their eyes against evident signs and tokens of approaching Observ. Judgments, they will never stir up themselves, nor engage into the due performance of present duties. 2. In the approach of great and final Judgments, God by his Word and Providence gives such intimations of their coming, as that wise men may discern them. Whoso is wise he will consider these things, and they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. The Prudent foreseeth the evil and hideth himself. How is it that you discern not the Signs of the times? 3. To see evidently such a day approaching, and not to be sedulous and diligent in the duties of divine Worship, is a token of a backsliding frame tending unto final Apostacy. VERSE XXVI, XXVII. . VERSE 26, 27. For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remaineth no more Sacrifice for sins: But a certain fearfull looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. IN these Verses the Apostle gives a vehement enforcement of his preceding Exhortation, from the dreadful Consequences of a total neglect of it, or un∣compliance with it. And this he doth, (1.) By expressing the nature of the sin which lyes therein. (2.) By an impossibility of deliverance from the Guilt of it. (3.) The Punishment, that would unavoidably follow upon it.
Interpreters have greatly perplexed themselves and others in the interpretati∣on and exposition of these verses, and those that follow. Their conjectures in great variety have proceeded principally from a want of a due attendance unto the scope of the Apostle, the argument he had in hand, the circumstances of the people unto whom he wrote, and the present State of Gods Providence towards them. I shall not trouble the Reader with their various conjectures and censures of them; but I shall give such an evident sence of the words, as themselves and the Con∣text do evince to be the mind of the Holy Ghost in them. 1. As unto the words, wherein the Sin and State of such men is expressed, If we sin wilfully. He puts himself among them, as is his manner in Comminations; both to shew that there is no respect of persons in this matter, but those who have equally sinned, shall be equally punished: And to take off all appearance of severity towards them, seeing he speaks nothing of this nature, but on such suppositions as wherein if he himself were concerned, he pronounceth it against himself also. We sinning, or if we sin , wilfully, say we; our former translations, willingly, which we have now avoyded, lest we should give Coun∣tenance . unto a supposition, that there is no Recovery after any voluntary sin. If we sin wilfully, that is, Obstinately, Maliciously, and with despight which is the nature of the sin it self, as is declared v. 28. But the word doth not require, nor will scarce bear any such sence. Willingly is of choice, without surprizal, com∣pulsion, or fear; and this is all that the word will bear. The Season and circumstance which states the sin intended is, after we have received the knowledge of the truth. There is no Question but that by the Truth the Apostle intends the Doctrine of the Gospel; and the receiving of it is upon the conviction of it's being truth, to take on us the outward profession of it. Only there is an Emphasis in that word ; the word is not used any where to express the meer conceptions or notions of the mind about truth, but such an ac∣knowledgment of it as ariseth from some sense of it's power and excellency. This therefore is the description of the persons concerning whom this sin is sup∣posed. They are such as unto whom the Gospel had been preached; who upon conviction of its truth, and sense of its power, have taken upon them the publick profession of it: and this is all that is required to the constitution of this state. And what is so required may be reduced to one of these two heads. (1.) The solemn Dedication of themselves unto Christ in and by their Baptism. (2.) Their solemn joyning themselves unto the Church, and continuance in the duties of its worship, Acts. 2. 41, 42. On this opening of the words, it is evident what sin it is that is intended, against which this heavy doom is denounced; And that on these two conside∣rations. (1.) That the head of the precedent Exhortation is, that we would hold fast the profession of our Faith without wavering, v. 22. And the meanes of continuing in that profession, v. 24, 25. Wherefore the sin against this Exhor∣tation, is the relinquishment and renouncing of the profession of the Faith, with all acts and duties thereunto belonging. (2.) The state opposite unto this sin, that which is contrary unto it, is receiving the knowledg of the Truth, which what is required thereunto, we have now declared. Wherefore the sin here, intended is plainly a relinquishment and renunciation of the truth of the Gospel and the promises thereof, with all duties thereunto belonging, after we have been convinced of its truth, and avowed its power and Excellency. There is no more required but that this be done , Willingly, as (1.) Not . upon a suddain surprizal and temptation, as Peter denied Christ. (2.) Not on those compulsions and fears which may work a present dissimulation, with∣out an internal rejection of the Gospel. (3.) Not through darkness, Ignorance making an impression for a season on the minds and reasonings of men; which things, though exceedingly evil and dangerous, may befal them who yet con∣tract not the guilt of this crime. But it is required thereunto that men who thus sin, do it, (1.) By choice, and of their own accord, from the internal pravity of their own minds, and an evil heart of unbelief to depart from the living God. (2.) That they do it by, and with the preference of another way of Religion, and a resting there∣in before or above the Gospel. (3.) That whereas there were two things
which were the foundation of the profession of the Gospel. (1.) The Blood of the Convenant, or the blood of the Sacrifice of Christ with the attonement made thereby; And (2.) The dispensation of the Spirit of Grace; These they did openly renounce, and declare that there was nothing of God in them, as we shall see on, v. 29. Such were they who fell off from the Gospel unto Judaism in those daies. Such are they whom the Apostle here describeth, as is evident in the context. I will say no more unto the sin at present, because I must treat of it under its aggravations on, v. 29. 1. If a voluntary relinquishment of the profession of the Gospel and the duties Observ. of it be the highest sin, and be attended with the height of wrath and punish∣ment; we ought earnestly to watch against every thing that inclineth or disposeth us thereunto. 2. Every declension in or from the profession of the Gospel, hath a proportion of the guilt of this great sin, according unto the proportion that it bears unto the sin it self. Hereof there may be various degrees. 3. There are sins and times wherein God doth absolutely refuse to hear any more from men in order unto their Salvation. 2. The first thing which the Apostle chargeth as an aggravation of this sin, is, that it cannot be expiated, There remains no more Sacrifice for sin. Words not unlike those of God concerning the house of Eli. 1 Sam. 3. 14. I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the Iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with Sacrifice nor offering for ever. An Allusion is had herein unto the Sacri∣fices of the Law. As there were certain sins which from their nature, as Mar∣der, Adultery, Blasphemy; or from the manner of their Commission with Ob∣stinacy and an high hand, that had no Sacrifice allowed for them, but those that were so guilty were to be cut off from the people of God, and to dye without mercy, as the Apostle declares his own mind, vers. 28. So is it with them that thus sin willingly, there is no relief appointed for them, no means for the expiation of their sin. But yet there is an especial Reason of this Severity under the Gospel, which the Apostle hath principal respect unto. And this is that there is now no multiplication, or repetition of Sacrifices for sin. That of Christ our High Priest was offered once for all, henceforth he dyeth no more, he is offered no more, nor can there be any other Sacrifice offered for ever. This the words express, , there remains not, there is not in the . Counsel, purpose, or institution of God any other Sacrifice yet left, to be offered in this or any other Case. To suppose there is yet any such left, it must be on one of these two accounts. (1.) That God would change the whole dispensati∣on of himself, and his Grace by Christ, because of its weakness and insufficien∣cy. But it may be said, whereas God did thus deal with the Mosaical Law, and all its Sacrifices to bring in that of Christ; Why may not therefore there be ano∣ther way of Expiation of sin yet remaining whereby they may be purged and pu∣rified who are guilty of Apostacy from the Gospel? (2.) Although men have justly forfeited all their interest and benefit by the one Offering of Christ; why may he not appoint another for them, or cause himself to be offered again for their recovery? But both these suppositions are not only false, but highly Blasphe∣mous; for it is certain there remains no more Sacrifice for sin. , compriseth all sorts of Offerings and Sacrifices, whereby . sin might be expiated. Wherefore the Apostle plainly expresseth that as persons by a voluntary relinquishment of the Gospel, did forfeit all their interest in the Sacrifice of Christ as he further declares, v. 29. so there was no way appointed for the relief of them by the expiation of their sin for ever. Further, to clear the mind of the Holy Ghost herein, I should Answer some enquiries that may arise on this interpretation of the words, but in this place I shall only propose them. 1. Whether this Commination may be extended to all Ages, Times, and Seasons? or whether it were confined unto the present state of the Hebrews, with the circumstances they were in? The Reasons of the Enquiry are, (1.) Because
their circumstances were eminently peculiar, and such as cannot befall others in any season. (2.) Because there was a temporal Destruction then impendent over them, ready to devour Apostates, which cannot be applied unto them who fall into the same sins at other seasons. 2. Whether the sin intended may include great actual sins after the profession of the Gospel, answering such as under the Law were said to be committed with an high hand? 3. Whether there may be hopes for the persons here intended though no express provision be made in the Covenant for the expiation of this sin. 4. Whether there be any defect in the Priesthood of Christ that it hath but one Sacrifice for sins, which if it be neglected and despised, can never be repeated, nor can any other Sacrifice be added unto it? 5. Whether a person who hath voluntarily forsaken and renounced the Gospel with a great appearance of all the circumstances that concur unto the state of the sin here mentioned, should make profession of repentance, what may be con∣ceived concerning his Eternal condition? what is the duty of the Church concer∣ning such an one? These things shall be spoken unto elsewhere. The loss of an interest in the Sacrifice of Christ on what account, or by what means soever it fall out, is absolutely ruinous unto the souls of men. Observ. VERSE 27. But a certain fearfull looking for of Judgment and fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries. When a man under the Law had contracted the guilt of any such sin, as was indispensibly capital in its punishment, for the legal expiation whereof no Sacrifice was appointed or allowed, such as Murder, Adultery, Blasphemy, he had nothing remaining but a fearful expectation of the Execution of the sentence of the Law against him. And it is evident that in this Context, the Apostle argues from the less unto the greater; If it was so, that this was the case of him who so sinned against Moses Law, how much more must it be so with them, that sin against the Gospel, whose sin is incomparably greater, and the punishment more severe? The Connexion of the words with those foregoing, by the Adversative  for , includes or brings along with it the Verb , there remains; No Sacrifice for sin is left or remains; But there doth remain or abide for such persons a fearful expectation of Judgment. There are two things in these words. 1. The punishment due unto the sins of Apostates which is three waies ex∣pressed. (1.) By the general nature of it, It is Judgment. (2.) By the special nature of that Judgment, it is fiery indignation. (3.) By the efficacy of it unto its end, it devours the adversaries. 2. The certain approach of this Judgment, there remains a fearful expecta∣tion. This last lies first in the words. And, 1. That which we render certain, is in the Original only : It doth not denote an assured expectation, nor the certainty of the punishment; but only . a certain kind of expectation, a kind of fearful expectation. Nor is this spo∣ken in the way of diminution, but to intimate something that is inexpressible, such as no heart can conceive, or tongue express; 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. What shall be the end of them who obey not the Gospel? Where shall the sinners and ungod∣ly appear. 2. , an expectation, is the frame of mind with respect unto any thing . that is future, good or bad, wherein we are concerned, that we are to look for what ever it be, which we have reason and grounds to think it will come unto us or befal us. 3. This Expectation is said to be , fearful, tremendous, which men can neither conflict withall, nor avoid, as we shall see further, ver. 31. That . which fills the mind with dread and horror, depriving it of all Comfort, and relief. An expectation of this dreadful and terrible nature, may be taken two
wayes: (1.) For the certain Relation that is between the sin, and punishment spoken of; the punishment is unavoidable, as any thing is which upon the most certain grounds is looked for. So they are said only metaphorically to look for that which will certainly ensue. (2.) As it expresseth the frame of the minds of them concerning it. And though the Assertion may be used in the former sence, yet I doubt not but this latter also is included in it; and that also on two accounts: (1.) Because if they did set themselves unto the consi∣deration of the event of their Apostacy, nothing else could befal their minds, nothing will present it self unto them for their relief; their minds will not admit of other thoughts but what belongs to this dreadful expectation. (2.) On the account of that dread and terror that God sends at times into the minds and Consciences of such persons. They may bear it high, and with an Osten∣tation of Satisfaction on what they have done, yea, commonly proclaim a self-Justification, and prove desperate persecutors of them who sacredly adhere unto the Truth. But as he said of old of Tyrants, that if their Breasts were opened, it would appear what tortures they have within: I am perswaded, it is probable, that God very seldom lets them pass without tormenting fear and dread of approaching Judgments, in this world, which is a broad en∣trance into Hell. I. There is an inseparable concatenation between Apostacy and Eternal ruin. Observ. II. God often times visits the minds of cursed Apostates with dreadful expecta∣tions of approaching wrath. III. When men have hardned themselves in sin, no fear of punishment either will rouze or stirr them up to seek after relief. IV. A dreadful expectation of future wrath without hope of relief, is an open entrance into Hell it self. 2. This dreadful punishment is described by the general nature of it, it is , . Judgment; it is not a thing that is dubious, that may fall out or may not do so. It is not an unaccountable severity that they are threatned withall, but it is a just and righteous sentence denouncing punishment proportionate unto their sin and crime. Judgment is taken sometimes for punishment it self, Ps. 9. 16. James 2. 13. 1 Pet. 4. 17. 2 Pet. 2. 3. But most commonly it is used for the sentence of judicial condemnation and tryal, determining the offender unto pu∣nishment; And so 'tis most commonly used to express the general Judgment that shall pass on all mankind at the last day, Mat. 10. 15. & 5. 11, 22, 24. chap. 12. 36. Mark 6. 2. 2 Pet. 2. 9. 2 Pet. 3. 1. John 4. 17. I doubt not but that in the word as here used both these are included, name∣ly, the righteous sentence of God judging and determining on the guilt of this sin, and punishment it self which ensues thereon, as it is immediately described. And although respect be had herein principally to the Judgment of the great day; yet is it not exclusive of any previous Judgments that are preparatory unto it, and pledges of it; such was that dreadful Judgment which was then coming on the Apostate Church of the Hebrews. The Expectation of future Judgment in guilty persons, is and will be at one Observ. time or another dreadful and tremendous. The punishment and destruction of those sinners is described by its parti∣cular nature, it is a fiery indignation, . For these words do not re∣late . unto , as  doth, nor are regulated by it; It is not, the ex∣pectation of fiery indignation: but refer immediately unto . As there remains an expectation of Judgment, so there is a fiery indignation that remains. And so (which shall) afterwards  referrs to fire, , and not to indig∣nation, . The indignation, the vehemency, the power of fire. What is this fire? and what is this indignation of it? 1. God himself is in the Scripture said to be a consuming fire; Deut. 4. 24. Ch. 9. 3. Isa. 33. 14. Heb. 10. 29. What is intended thereby is declared in a word, Deut. 4. 24. ; as here . The essential holiness and
righteousness of God, whereby he cannot bear with the Iniquities and provoca∣tions of men who betake not themselves unto the only Attonement, and that he will by no means acquit the Guilty, is intended in this Metaphorical expression. The Judgment of God concerning the Punishment of sin as an Effect of his will, in a way consonant unto the holiness of his nature, and the Exigence of his Righteousness, is called fire 1 Cor. 3. 13. But that is not the fire that is here intended. It is Devouring, Consuming, Destroying, such as answereth the se∣verity of Gods Justice unto the utmost, as Isa. 9. 5. chap. 30. 33. chap. 66. 15. Amos 7. 4. Math. 18. 8. 2 Thes. 1. 8. Ps. 11. 7. Deut. 32. 22. Therefore this indignation or fervor of fire, hath respect unto three things. (1.) The Holiness of the nature of God; from whence Originally this Judgment doth proceed, as that which is most suitable thereunto. (2.) The righteous act of the Will of God; sometimes called his wrath and anger from the effects of it, be∣ing sutable unto the holiness of his nature. (3.) The dreadful severity of the Judg∣ment in self, in its nature and effects, as it is declared in the next words. I doubt not but respect is had unto the final Judgment, at the last day, and the Eternal destruction of Apostates. But yet also it evidently includeth that sore and fiery Judgment which God was bringing on the Obstinate Apostate Jews, in the total destruction of them and their Church-State by Fire and Sword. For as such Judgments are compared to, and called fire in the Scripture; so this was so sin∣gular, so unparallel'd in any people of the World, as that it might well be called fiery indignation, or fervor of fire. Besides, it was an eminent pledge and token of the future Judgment, and the severity of God therein. Wherefore 'tis foretold in expressions that are applicable unto the last Judgment. See Math. 24. 29, 30, 31. 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11, 12. This Indignation to be executed by fire is described in the last place by its effica∣cy and effects: It is the fire that shall devour, or eat up the adversaries. The ex∣pression is taken from Isa. 26. 11. For the fire of thine Enemies, is there, not that which the Enemies burn with, but wherewith they shall be burned. Concerning the Efficacy and effect of this fire we may consider, (1.) The Sea∣sons of its application unto this effect, . (2.) The Object of it, the adversa∣ries. (3.) The way of its operation, it shall devour them. (1.) It shall do so, it is not yet come to the effect, it is future. Hence  many of them despised it, as that which would never be; 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6. But there are three things intimated in this word. (1.) That it was in procinctu, in readiness, not yet come but ready to come; so is the word used to express that which is future, but ready to make its entrance. (2.) That it is certain, it shall and will be, whatever appearances there are of its turning aside, and mens avoid∣ing of it, it will come in its proper season; so speaks the Prophet in a like case; Hab. 2. 3. (3.) The foundation of the Certainty of the coming of this fiery Indignation, is the irreversible Decree of God, accompanied with righte∣ousness, and the measures which infinite Wisdom gave unto his Patience. This was the unavoidable season that was approaching, when the adversaries had fill'd up the measure of their sin, and Gods Providence had saved the Elect from this day to come. I. There is a determinate time for the accomplishment of all Divine threat∣nings, Observ. and the inflicton of the severest Judgments, which no men can abide or avoid. He hath appointed a day wherein he will judge the World. So at present there is a sort of men whose damnation sleepeth not, concerning whom he hath sworn that Time shall be no more, which is the present State of the Antichristian World. II. The certain determination of Divine Vengeance on the Enemies of the Gospel, is a Motive unto holiness, a supportment under sufferings, in them that believe. Lift up your heads, know your Salvation is nigh at hand; what manner of persons ought we to be? See, 2 Thes. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. 2. There is a description of those on whom this fiery indignation shall have its effects, and 'tis the Adversaries, . He doth not say, those that be∣lieve not, and obey not the Gospel, as he doth elsewhere, when he treats abso∣lute∣ly .
of the day of Judgment; as in that place 2 Thes. 1. 8, 9. now mentioned; but it confines them unto those that are Adversaries, who from a contrary principle set themselves against the Lord Christ and the Gospel. This is the peculiar descrip∣tion of the unbelieving Jews at that time: they did not only refuse the Gospel through unbelief, but were acted by a principle of opposition thereunto; not only as unto themselves, but as unto others, even the whole world: so is their State described, 1 Thes. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary unto all men, forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sin always, for the wrath is come upon them unto the uttermost. They laid the foun∣dation of this Enmity in Killing the Lord Jesus; but they rested not therein, they continued in their unbelief, adhering to their old Judaism, and their sins therein. Nor did they rest there, but persecuted the Apostles, drove them out from amongst them, and all that preached the Gospel; and this not only with respect unto themselves alone, and those of their own Nation; but they set them∣selves with fury all the World over against the Preaching of the Gospel unto the Gentiles, and that of cursed malice that they might not be saved. See in∣stances of this Rage, Acts 13. 45. Chap. 22. 22, 23. They were properly the Adversaries whom the Apostle intends, and therefore the Judgment which was peculiar unto them and their sins in that fearful temporal destruction which did then approach, is intended herein, as well as the Equity of the sentence is extended to the general Destruction of all Unbelievers at the last day. I. The highest aggravations for the greatest sins, is, when men out of a con∣trary principle of Superstition and Error, do set themselves maliciously to oppose Observ. the Doctrine and Truth of the Gospel, with respect unto themselves and others. II. There is a time when God will make demonstrations of his Wrath and dis∣pleasure against all such Adversaries of the Gospel, as shall be pledges of his Eter∣nal Indignation. He will one day deal so with the Antichristian persecuting World. 3. What is the Effect of this fiery indignation against those adversaries? It shall eat them up, or devour them. The expression is Metaphorical, taken from . the nature and efficacious operation of fire; it eats, devours, swallows up and con∣sumes all combustible matter that it is applyed unto, or is put into it. That intend∣ed is destruction, inevitable, unavoidable, and terrible in the manner of it. See Mal. 4. 1. whence those expressions are taken. Only the similitude is not to be extended beyond the proper intention of it; For fire doth so consume and devour what is put into it, as that it destroys the substance and being thereof, that it shall be no more: It is not so with the fiery indignation that shall consume or devour the Adversaries at the last day; It shall devour them as to all happiness, all blessedness, all hopes, comforts and relief at once; but it shall not at once utterly consume their Being. This is that which this fire shall Eternally prey upon, and never utterly consume. But if we make the application of it unto the temporal destruction that came upon them, the similitude holds throughout, for it utterly consumed them, and devoured them, and all that belonged unto them in this World, they were devoured by it. The dread and terror of Gods final Judgments against the Enemies of the Gospel, is in it self inconceivable, and only shadowed out by things of the greatest dread and Observ. terror in the World. Whence it is so, I shall now declare.
VERSE XXVIII, XXIX. ; VERSE 28, 29. He that despised Moses Law dyed without mercy under two or three Witnesses. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was Sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done de∣spight unto the Spirit of Grace? THe Apostle confirms what he had spoken of the fore and certain destruction of Apostates from the Gospel, by an Argument à comparatis, and à mi∣nori ad majus; that is, by the consideration of the two states of the Church, which he had all along compared and expressed. Wherefore to convince the Hebrews not only of the certainty, and severity of the Judgment declared, but also of the Equity and Righteousness of it, he proposeth unto them the con∣sideration of Gods constitution of punishment under the Old Testament with re∣spect unto the Law of Moses, which they could not deny to be Just and Equal. Ver. 28. he lays down the matter of fact as it was Stated under the Law; Wherein there are three things. (1.) The sin whereunto that of Apostasie from the Gospel is compared, He that despised Moses Law. (2.) The Punishment of that sin according to the Law, he that was guilty of it dyed without Mercy. (3.) The way whereby according unto the Law his sin was to be charged on him, it was under two or three Witnesses. Unto the first, two things did concur. 1. It was such a sin as by the Law was capital; as, Murder, Adultery, Incest, Idolatry, Blasphemy, and some others. Concerning them it was provided in the Law, that those who were guilty of them should be put to Death. God alone by vertue of his Soveraignty, could dispense with the Execution of this sentence of the Law, as he did in the case of Lavid, 2 Sam. 12. 13. but as unto the peo∣ple, they were prohibited on any account to dispense with it, or forbear the Execution of it. Numb. 35. 31. 2. It was required that he did it presumptuously, or with an high hand. Ex. 21. 14. Numb. 15. 30, 31. Deut. 17. 12. He that was thus guilty of sin, in sinning is said to despise Moses Law; , . to abolish it, to render it useless, that is, in himself, by contempt of the Autho∣rity of it, or the Authority of God in it. And it is called a contempt, and abolish∣ing of the Law, as the word signifies, 1. Because of Gods indulgence unto them therein. For although the general sen∣tence of the Law was a Curse, wherein death was contained against every Trans∣gression thereof, Deut. 29. yet God had ordained and appointed that for all their sins of Ignorance, Infirmity, or surprisals by Temptations, an Attonement should be made by Sacrifice, whereon the guilty were freed as unto the terms of the Covenant, and restored to a right unto all the Promises of it. Wherein they would not abide in those Terms and Conditions of the Covenant but transgress the bounds annext to them, it was a contempt of the whole Law, with the wisdom, goodness, and authority of God therein. 2. They rejected all the Promises of it which were given exclusively unto such sins, nor was there any way appointed of God for their recovery unto an interest in them. Hereby they made themselves Lawless Persons, contemning the Threat∣nings, and despising the Promises of the Law, which God would not bear in any of them, Deut. 29. 18, 19, 20, 21.
It is the contempt of God and his Authority in his Law that is the Gall and Observ. Poyson of sin. This may be said in some measure of all voluntary sins, and the more there is of it in any sin, the greater is their guilt, and the higher is their aggravation who have contracted it. But there is a degree hereof which God will not bear with; namely, when this presumptuous contempt hath such an influence into any sin, as that no ignorance, no infirmity, no special temptation can be pleaded, unto the extenuation of it. I obtained mercy be∣cause I did it ignorantly in unbelief. And sundry things are required here∣unto. (1.) That it be known unto the sinner both in point of right and fact to be such a sin as whereunto the penalty of death without dispensation was annexed. (2.) That therefore the sence of God in the Law be suggested unto the soul in and by the ordinary means of it. (3.) That the Resoluti∣on of continuing in it, and the perpetration of it, doth prevail against all convictions and fear of punishment. (4.) That Motives unto the contrary, with reluctancies of Conscience be stifled or overcome. These things ren∣dered a sinner presumptuous, or caused him to sin with an high hand under the Law; Whereunto the Apostle adds in the next verse the peculiar aggrava∣tions of sin against the Gospel. This it is to despise the Law of Moses, as it is explained, Numb. 15. 30, 31. 2. The Punishment of this sin, or of him that was guilty of it, was, that he died without mercy. He died, that is, he was put to death, not alvaies, it  may be, de facto; but such was the constitution of the Law, he was to be put to death without mercy. There were several waies of inflicting Capital pu∣nishments appointed by the Law, as hanging on a Tree, burning, and stoning. Of all which, and the application of them unto particular Cases, I have given a description in the Exercitations unto the first Volume of these Commenta∣ries. And it is said, that he dyed without mercy, not only because there was no allowance for any such mercy as should save and deliver him, but : God had expresly forbidden that either mercy or compassion should be shew∣ed in such cases, Deut. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. Deut. 19. This is expresly added unto the highest instance of despising the Law, namely, the decalogue in the foundation of it, whereon all other precepts of the Law were built; and that which comprised a total Apostacy from the whole Law. Wherefore I doubt not but the Apostle had an especial respect unto that sin in its punishment, which had a compleat parallel with that whose hainousness he would represent. However, When the God of mercies will have men shew no mercy, as in the Temporal pu∣nishment; he can and will upon repentance shew mercy as to Eternal punishment. Observ: For we dare not condemn all unto Hell, which the Law condemned as unto temporal punishment. 3. The way of Execution of this Judgment, it was not to be done under two or three witnesses, that is, that were so of the fact and crime. The Law is . express in this case, Deut. 17. 6. Chap. 19. 13. Numb. 35. 30. Although God was very severe in the prescription of these Judgments, yet he would give no advantage thereby unto wicked and malicious persons, to take away the lives of innocent men. He rather chose that those who were guilty should through our weakness go free for want of evidence against them, than that innocence should be exposed unto the malice of one single testimony or witness. And such abhorrency God had of false witnesses in criminal Causes, as that which is most contrary unto his Righteousness in the Government of the world, as that he established a Lex talionis in this case alone; that a false witness should suffer the utmost of what he thought and contrived to bring on another. The Equity of which Law is still continued in force, as suita∣ble to the Law of Nature, and ought to be more observed than it is; Deut. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. On this Proposition of the State of things under the Law by Gods ap∣pointment as to Sin and Punishment, the Apostle makes his Inference
unto the certainty and equity of the punishment he had declared with re∣spect unto sins against the Gospel, v. 29. Of how sorer punishment, &c. And there is in these words three things, (1.) The nature of the sin unto which , &c. the punishment is annexed. (2.) The punishment it self expressed compara∣tively with and unto that of the transgression of Moses Law. (3.) The evi∣dence of the inference which he makes; for this is such as he referrs it unto themselves to judge upon, suppose ye-shall be thought worthy? The Sin it self is described by a threefold Aggravation of it, each instance having its especial Aggravation: (1.) From the Object sinned against. (2.) From the Act of the minds of men in sinning against it. 1. The first aggravation of the sin intended is from the Object of it, the Person of Christ the Son of God; and that included in it, is the Act of their minds to∣wards him, they trod, or trampled upon him. 2. The second against the Office of Christ, especially his Sacerdotal Office, and the Sacrifice of his blood which he offered therein; the blood of the covenant wherewith he was Sanctified; And the aggravation included therein from the act of their minds towards it, that they accounted it an unholy thing. 3. A third aggravation as unto the Object, is the Spirit of Christ, or the Spirit of grace; and the aggravation included therein is, that they do despight unto him. In general, the Nature and Aggravation of the sin intended may be reduced unto these heads. (1.) The Object of it, which is the summ and substance, a divine constellation of all the blessed effects of infinite Wisdom, Goodness, and Grace, yea the whole di∣vine Wisdom, Goodness, and Grace of God in the most glorious manifestation of them. All these things are comprized in the Person, Office, and Glory of the Son of God, as the Saviour and Redeemer of the Church. (2.) The Actings of the minds of men towards this Object, which is in and by all the vilest affections that humane nature is capable of. Contempt, Scorn, and Malice are ascribed unto such sins; they trample on, they despise, and do . despight. Wherefore, if it be possible, that any thing, any sins of men, can provoke the heat of divine indignation; if any can contract such a guilt, as that the holiness, righteousness, truth, and faithfulness of God shall be enga∣ged unto its eternal punishment, the sin here intended must do it. We shall therefore consider it in its Nature, and distinct Aggravations. The sin in General is, that which we have spoken to before, namely, sinning wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the truth, and in an absolute total relinquishment and rejection of the Gospel. In the description of the spe∣cial Object of this sin, that which is first exprest is the Person of Christ, the Son of God. I have on sundry occasions before shewed, how the Apostle doth vary in his expression of Christ, here he calls him the Son of God, and he maketh use of . this name to give a sence of the glorious greatness of the person with whom they had to do, against whom this sin was committed. For although he were a man also, who had Blood to shed, and did shed it in the Sacrifice of him∣self; and notwithstanding what cursed Blasphemous thoughts they might have of him, yet indeed he is, and will appear to be the Eternal Son of the Living God. But how comes this Son of God to be concerned herein? What injury is done him by Apostates from the Gospel? I answer, that as the Lord Christ in his own Person was the special Author of the Gospel; as his Authority is the special Object of our Faith in it; as his Office with all the fruits of it is the Subject, Summ, and Substance of the Gospel; So there is no reception of it in a due manner unto Salvation, no rejection of it unto final condemnation, but what is all of it Originally, fundamentally, and vertually contained in the reception, or rejection of the per∣son of Christ. This is the Life, the Soul, and Foundation of all Gospel truth; without which it is of no power, or efficacy unto the Souls of men. But I have treated at large of these things elsewhere. I cannot but Observe, that, as whosoever rejects, refuses, forsakes the Gospel, re∣jecteth and forsaketh the Person of Christ, so on what account soever men take up the Profession of it, and perform the Duties of it, if the foundation be not laid in a re∣ception of Christ himself, of the Person of Christ, all their profession will be in vain.
This is the first aggravation of this sin, it is committed immediately against the Person of the Son of God, and therein his Authority, Goodness, and Love. But it may be thought, if the Person of Christ be concerned herein, yet it is in∣directly or consequentially only, and in some small degree: No, saith the Apostle, but he that is guilty of this sin, doth trample on the Son of God, or tread him under foot. The word is rendred with great variety, but that of our Translation is . proper, and 'tis the highest expression of scorn, contempt and malice amongst men. To tread under foot is to despise, and insult over, as is plain in the Meta∣phor. And this contempt respects both the Person of Christ and his Authority. He is proposed in the Gospel, was professed by this sort of sinners for a while to be the Son of God, the true Messiah, the Saviour of the World. Hereon Faith in him, and all holy reverence unto him are required of us, as on him whom God had exalted above principalities and powers, and whom therefore we ought to ex∣alt, and adore in our Souls. But now by this sort of Persons he was esteemed an Evil doer, a Seducer, one not at all sent of God, but one that justly suffered for his crimes. Herein they trod under foot the Son of God with all contempt and scorn. Again, it respects his Authority. This the Gospel declared, and those who had come unto any profession of it, as those had done whereof he speaks in this place, as all must have done who contract the guilt of this sin, did avow, and submit themselves unto. The profession they made was to Observe and do all that he had commanded them, because all Power was given unto him in Heaven and Earth; This they now utterly rejected and despised, as unto the outward obser∣vance of his Commands, Ordinances, and Institutions of Divine Worship; they openly rejected them, betaking themselves unto other Modes, and Rites of Di∣vine Service, in opposition and contradiction unto them, even those of the Law. Neither did they retain any regard in their minds unto his Authority. I. Though there may be sometimes an appearance of great severity in Gods Judg∣ments Observ. against sinners, yet when the nature of their sins, and the aggravation of them shall be discovered, they will be manifest to have been righteous, and within due measure. II. Take we heed of every neglect of the Person of Christ or of his Authority, lest we enter into some degree or other of the guilt of this great offence. III. The sins of men can really reach neither the Person nor Authority of Christ, they only do that in desire, which in effect they cannot accomplish. This doth not take off, or extenuate their sin, the guilt of it is no less than if they did actually trample upon the Son of God. The Second Aggravation of the sin spoken of, is its Opposition to the Office of . Christ, especially his Priestly Office, and the Sacrifice that he Offered thereby, called here, the Blood of the Covenant. And that included in it, is the frame of their minds in that opposition, they counted it an unholy thing; both which have . a third Aggravation from the use and efficacy of that Blood, it is that wherein he was Sanctified. For the First, In what sence the Blood of Christ was the Blood of the Cove∣nant, . hath been fully declared on chap. 9. That whereby the new Covenant was ratified, confirmed, and made effectual as unto all the Grace of it unto them that do believe; And it was the foundation of all the following actings of God to∣wards him in his exaltation, and of his Intercession. See chap. 13. 20. The Blood of the Covenant was the great expression of the Grace of God, and of the Love of Christ himself, as well as the Cause of all good unto us; the center of divine wis∣dom in all the mediatory actings of Christ, the Life and Soul of the Gospel. Of this Blood of the Covenant it is said, that they who are guilty of the sin intended, accounted it an unholy thing, they judged it so, and dealt with it accordingly. Both the judgment of the mind, and practice thereupon are intended. is common, and opposed unto any thing that is dedicated, and conse∣crated unto God, and made sacred. Hence it is used for prophane and un∣holy, that which no way belongs unto divine worship. They did no longer esteem it as that blood wherewith the New Covenant was sealed, confirmed,
established, but as the blood of an ordinary man shed for his crimes, which is common and unholy, not sacred; not of so much use unto the glory of God as the blood of Bulls and Beasts in legal Sacrifices; which is the height of impiety. And there are many degrees of this sin, some Doctrinal, some Pra∣ctical; which though they arise not unto the degree here intended, yet are they perilous unto the Souls of men. Those by whom the efficacy of his blood unto the expiation of sin by making satisfaction and attonement, is denyed, as 'tis by the Socinians, will never be able to free themselves, from making this blood in some sence a common thing. Yea, the contempt which hath been cast on the blood of Christ by that sort of men, will not be expiated with any other Sacrifices for ever. Others do manifest what slight thoughts they have of it, in that they place the whole of their Religion within themselves, and value their own Light as unto Spiritual advantages above the blood of Christ. And Practically there are but few who trust unto it for their Justifi∣cation, for pardon, righteousness and acceptance with God; which is in a great measure to account it a Common thing; not absolutely, but in comparison of that Life, Excellency, and Efficacy that is in it indeed. But as Christ is pre∣tious unto them that believe, 1 Pet. 1. 7. so is his Blood also wherewith they are redeemed, 1 Pet. 1. 19. Every thing that takes off from an high and glorious esteem of the blood of Christ as the blood of the Covenant, is a dangerous entrance into Apostacy: Such is the Observ. pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, with all things of the like nature. The last aggravation of this sin with respect unto the blood of Christ, is the Nature, Use and Efficacy of it, it is that wherewith he was sanctified. It is not . real, or internal sanctification that is here intended, but it is a separation, and dedication unto God; in which sence the word is often used. And all the disputes concerning the total and final Apostacy from the Faith, of them who have been really, and internally sanctified, from this place, are altogether vain; Though that may be said of a man in aggravation of his sin, which he professeth concern∣ing himself. But the difficulty of this Text is, concerning whom these words are spoken; for they may be referred unto the person that is guilty of the sin in∣sisted on; he counts the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he himself was sancti∣fied, an unholy thing. For as at the giving of the Law, or the establishing of the Covenant at Sinai, the people being sprinkled with the blood of the Beasts that were offered in Sacrifice, were sanctified, or dedicated unto God in a peculiar manner: So those who by Baptism, and confession of Faith in the Church of Christ were separated from all others, were peculiarly dedicated to God there∣by. And therefore in this case Apostates are said to deny the Lord that bought them, or vindicated them from their slavery unto the Law by his Word and Truth for a season, 2 Pet. 2. 1. But the design of the Apostle in the Context leads plainly to another application of these words. It is Christ himself that is spoken of, who was sanctified and dedicated unto God, to be an Eternal high Priest, by the blood of the Covenant which he offered unto God, as I have shewed before. The Priests of old were dedicated and sanctified unto their Office by another, and the Sacrifices which he offered for them, they could not sanctifie themselves; so were Aaron and his Sons sanctified by Moses, antece∣dently unto their offering any Sacrifice themselves. But no outward Act of men or Angels could unto this purpose pass on the Son of God. He was to be the Priest himself, the Sacrificer himself, to dedicate, consecrate, and sanctifie him∣self by his own Sacrifice, in concurrence with the actings of God the Father in his suffering. See John 17. 19. Heb. 2. 10. chap. 5. 7, 9. chap. 9. 11, 12. That precious blood of Christ, wherein, or whereby he was sanctified, and dedicated unto God as the Eternal High-Priest of the Church, this they esteemed an un∣holy thing; that is, such as would have no such effect as to consecrate him unto God and his Office. However men may esteem of any of the Mediatory actings of Christ, yet are they Observ. in themselves glorious and Excellent. So was the Sacrifice of his own Blood, even
that whereby not only the Church was sanctified, but himself also was dedica∣ted as our High Priest for ever. 3. The Third aggravation of this Sin is taken from its opposition unto the Spirit of Christ, he hath done despight unto the Spirit of Grace. And as in the . former instances, so it is here, there are two parts of this aggravation. The first taken from the Object of their sin, the Spirit of Grace. The second taken from the manner of their opposition unto him, they do him despight. The holy Spirit of God promised and communicated under the Gospel by Jesus Christ from the Father, as the Author and cause, actually communicating and ap∣plying of all Grace unto the souls of them that believe, is this Spirit of Grace. And this carries in it innumerable aggravations of this Sin. This Person, the holy Spirit of God, God himself, his Communication of grace and mercy, in the accomplishment of the most glorious Promises of the Old Testament, was he whom these Apostates renounced. But there is a peculiar notion or con∣sideration of the Spirit, with respect whereunto he is sinned against, and that is this, That he was peculiarly sent, given, and bestowed to bear witness unto the Person, Doctrine, Death and Sacrifice of Christ, with the glory that en∣sued thereon. John 16. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 12. And this he did various wayes. For by him the souls of multitudes were converted unto God, their eyes enlight∣ned, their minds sanctified, their lives changed. By him did those who be∣lieved, come to understand the Scriptures, which before were as a sealed book unto them; were directed, encouraged, supported, and comforted in all that they had to do and suffer for the name of Christ. By him were all those mighty works, wonders, signs and miracles wrought which accompanied the Apostles, and other preachers of the Gospel at the beginning. Now all these things, and the like effects of his Grace and Power on all who made profes∣sion of the Gospel, were owned, believed, and avowed to be the works of the holy Spirit as promised in the dayes of the Messiah; and they pleaded the evidence of them unto the confusion of all their adversaries. This therefore was done also by these Apostates before their Apostasie. But now being fully fallen off from Christ and the Gospel, they openly declared that there was no testimony in them unto the truth, but all these things were either diabolical delusions, or phanatical misapprehensions; that indeed there was nothing of truth, reality, or power in them, and therefore no argument to be taken from them, unto the confirmation of the truth of Christ in the Gospel. Now this proceeding from them, who had once themselves made the same profes∣sion with others, of their truth and reality, gave the deepest wound that could be given unto the Gospel. For all the adversaries of it who were silenced with this publick testimony of the holy Spirit, and knew not what to say, consider∣ing the many miracles that were wrought, did now strengthen themselves by the confession of these Apostates, that there was nothing in it but pre∣tence; and who should better know than those who had been of that Society? There are no such cursed pernicious Enemies unto Religion as Apostates. Observ. Hence are they said to do despite unto the Spirit of Grace, . They . do injure him so far as they are able. The word includes wrong with contempt. And this they did upon a twofold account. For, (1.) The works, many of them which he then wrought, were eminent and evident effects of divine Power; and to ascribe such works unto another cause, is to do despite unto him. (2.) They did so principally, in that by all his works, and in the whole dispensation of him, he gave testimony unto Christ in the Gospel. And what greater despite and wrong could be done unto him, then to question his truth and the veracity of his testimony? No greater despite can be done unto a man of any reputation, than to question his truth, and credit, in that where∣in he engageth himself as a witness. And if lying unto the Holy Ghost is so great a sin, what is it to make the Holy Ghost a Liar? Herein did such per∣sons do him despite. For notwithstanding the publick testimony he gave in, with, and by the preaching of the Gospel, they rejected it as a fable, in despising his Person and Authority.
All these great and terrible Aggravations are inseparable from this sin of Apostasie from the Gospel, above those of any sin against the Law of Moses whatever. They were none of them in the vilest sin prohibited by the Law under capital punishment. Hence therefore the Apostle, 2. Proposeth it unto the Judgment of the He∣brews, of how much sorer punishment, They suppose a sinner guilty of this sin shall . be Judged worthy, above what was inflicted on the wilful transgressors of the Law? And there is included herein, (1.) That such a sinner shall be punished.  Apostates may flatter themselves with impunity, but in due time punishment will overtake them. How shall they escape who neglect so great Salvation? Much less shall they not do so, by whom it is thus despised in all the causes of it. (2.) That this shall be a sore, a great and an evil punishment, which is included in the note of comparison, far greater punishment, such as men shall be able neither to abide, nor to avoid. (3.) Comparatively, it shall be a sorer Punishment then that which was appointed for wilfull Transgressions of the Law, which was Death with∣out Mercy. (4.) That the degree of its exceeding that punishment is inexpressible: Of how much sorer? None can declare it, as the Holy Ghost expresseth himself when he would intimate unto our minds that which we cannot absolutely conceive and apprehend, 1 Pet. 4. 17, 18. But whereas that punishment was Death with∣out Mercy, wherein could this exceed it? I answer; Because that was a temporal death only. For though such sinners under the Law might and did many of them perish Eternally, yet they did not so by vertue of the constitution of the Law of Moses, which reached only unto temporal punishments: But this punishment is Eter∣nal, that's constantly proposed in the first place unto all impenitent Unbelievers, and despisers of the Gospel. See 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, 8. Mark 16. 16, &c. Yet so as not to exclude any other temporal Judgments in Spirituals, or Naturals that may precede it. Such was that whereunto the temporal destruction, that was ready to come on these despiers, did belong. 3. The way whereby they are made Obnoxious unto it is, that they are counted Worthy of it, , they shall receive neither more nor less, but their due. , The Judge in this case is God himself, as the Apostle declares in the next verse. He alone knows, he alone can justly determine what such Apostates are worthy of. But in general, that this shall unspeakably exceed that annexed unto the trans∣gression of the Law, is left unto themselves to judge, suppose ye. Ye know and . take it for granted, that the punishments under the Law to be inflicted on its transgressors by the Constitution and Sanction of it, were all of them righteous, for God was the Judge of this in them all. Consider now what aggravations this sin is accompanied withall above all sins whatever against the Law, and be your selves Judges of what will follow hereon. What do you think in your own hearts will be the Judgment of God concerning these sinners? This argument the Apostle doth frequently insist upon, as chap. 2. 2, 3, 4. chap. 12. 25. and it had a peculiar cogency towards the Hebrews, who had lived under the terror of those legal punishments all their dayes. I. The inevitable certainty of the Eternal punishment of Gospel-despisers, depends Observ. on the Essential holiness and righteousness of God, as the Ruler and Judge of all. It is nothing but what he in his just Judgment which is according unto truth, ac∣counteth them worthy of, Rom. 1. 32. II. It is a righteous thing with God thus to deal with men. Wherefore all hopes of Mercy, or the least relaxation of Punishment unto all Eternity are vain and false unto Apostates, they shall have Judgment without Mercy. III. God hath allotted different degrees of Punishment unto the different degrees and aggravations of sin. The wages indeed of every sin is Death, but there is unto such persons as these a Savour of death unto death, and there shall be different de∣grees of Eternal Punishment. IV. The Apostacy from the Gospel, here described, being the absolute height of all sin and impiety that the nature of man is capable of, it renders them unto Eternity obnoxious unto all punishment that the same nature is capable of. The greatest sin must have the greatest Judgment. V. It is our Duty diligently to enquire into the nature of sin, lest we be over∣taken
in the great Offence. Such Persons as they in the Text, it may be little thought what it was that they should principally be charged withal, namely, for their Apostasie; and how dreadful was it, when it came upon them in an evident conviction? VI. Sinning against the Testimony given by the Holy Ghost unto the truth and pow∣er of the Gospel, whereof men have had experience, is the most dangerous Sym∣tom of a perishing Condition. VII. Threatnings of future Eternal Judgments unto Gospel-despisers belong unto the preaching and declaration of the Gospel. VIII. The Equity and Righteousness of the most severe Judgments of God in eter∣nal Punishments against Gospel-Despisers, is so evident, that it may be referred to the Judgment of men not obstinate in their Blindness. IX. 'Tis our Duty to justifie and bear witness unto God in the Righteousness of his Judgments against Gospel-Despisers. VERSE XXX, XXXI. . VERSE 30, 31. For we know him that hath said, Vengeance belongeth unto me, I will recompence, saith the Lord. And again, the Lord shall Judge his People. It is a fearfull thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. THere is in these Verses the confirmation of all that was spoken before, by the consideration of what God is in himself, with whom alone we have to do in this matter, and what he assumeth unto himself in this and the like Cases. As if the Apostle had said, In the severe sentence which we have denounced against Apostates, we have spoken nothing but what is suitable unto the holiness of God and what indeed in such cases he hath declared that he will do. The conjunction  denotes the introduction of a Reason of what was spoken before; but this is not all which he had discoursed on, on this Subject; but more particularly the . reference he had made unto their own Judgments, of what sore punishment was due unto Apostates. Thus it will be with them, thus you must needs determine concerning them in your own minds, for we know him with whom we have to do in these things. Wherefore the Apostle confirms the truth of his discourse, or rather illustrates the evidence of it, by a double consideration, (1.) Of the per∣son of him who is, and is to be the sole Judge in this case, who is God alone, For we know him. And (2.) What he hath assumed unto himself, and affirmed . concerning himself in the like-cases, which he expresseth in a double Testimony of Scripture. And then lastly, there is the way whereby our minds are influenced from this Person and what he hath said, which is, that we know him. The first consideration confirming the Evidence and certainty of the truth as∣serted, is the person of him who is the only Judge in this case. I confess the Pro∣noun herein is not exprest in the Original, but as 'tis included in the Participle and Article prefixed, , he that saith, who expresseth himself in the words . ensuing. But it is evident that the Apostle directeth unto a special consideration of God himself, both in the manner of the expression, and in the addition of those words, , to the Testimony which he writes immediately. If you will be convinced of a righteousness, and certainty of this dreadful destructi∣on of Apostates, consider in the first place the Author of this Judgment the only Judge in the case; We know him that hath said. I. There can be no right Judgment made of the nature and demerit of sin, with∣out Observ.
a due consideration of the Nature and Holiness of God, against whom it is committed. Fools make a mock of sin, they have no sense of its guilt, nor dread of its punishment. Others have slight thoughts of it, measuring it only either by out∣ward effects, or by presumptions which they have been accustomed unto. Some have general notions of its guilt, as 'tis prohibited by the Divine Law, but never search into the nature of that Law with respect unto its Author. Such false mea∣sures of sin ruin the souls of men. Nothing, therefore, will state our thoughts aright concerning the guilt and demerit of sin, but a deep consideration of the infinite greatness, holiness, righteousness, and power of God against whom it is committed. And hereunto this also is to be added, That God acts not in the effect of any of these Properties of his nature, but on a preceding contempt of his Goodness, Bounty, Grace and Mercy; As it is impossible that sin should come into the world but by the contempt of these things. Antecedently unto all possibility of sinning, God communicates the effects of his goodness and bounty unto the Creation; And in those sins which are against the Gospel, he doth so also of his Grace and Mercy. This is that which will give us a due measure of the guilt and demerit of sin: Look upon it as a contempt of infinite Goodness, Bounty, Grace, and Mercy, and to rise up against infinite greatness, holiness, righteousness, and power, and we shall have a view of it as it is in it self. II. Under apprehensions of great severities of Divine Judgments, the considera∣tion Observ. of God the Author of them, will both relieve our Faith, and quiet our hearts. Such instances are given of the Eternal casting off Multitudes of Angels, on their guilt in one sin; the woful sin of Adam, and the ruine of his Posterity, even of those who had not sinned after the similitude of his Transgression; the destruction of the old world by an Universal Flood; as in the Fire and Brimstone that God rained from Heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah; in the final rejection of the Jews; the dreadful overthrow of the City and Temple by fire; in the Eternity of the torments of impenitent sinners. In all these things and others that seem to have any thing of the same kind with them, we shall need nothing to give the most full satisfaction unto our Souls, if we know him who hath said, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it. This consideration is confirmed by a double Testimony, wherein God as∣sumeth unto himself that which will give assurance of the Punishment of A∣postates. And we may consider concerning these Testimonies, (1.) The Apostles application of them unto his purpose, (2.) The force that is in them unto that end. 1. They are both of them taken from Deut. 32. 35, 36. But in that place they seem absolutely to intend vengeance and Judgment on the Adversaries of his people to make a way for their deliverance. But here they are applyed unto the final de∣struction of that same people, namely the Jews, without hopes of deliverance. I answer, 1. That it is usual with the Apostle in this Epistle, and all other writers of the New Testament to make use of Testimonies out of the old, without respect unto the particular cases and designs which they are originally applyed unto; but with regard unto the Truth and Equity contained in them; Whereon they are equally applicable unto all cases of a like nature. Thus, saith he, God declares himself with respect unto his Stubborn Enemies, whence a Rule is established, that he will deal so with all that are so, who are in the same circumstances with them of whom we speak. 2. What God speaks concerning his Enemies, and the Enemies of his people in Covenant with him, is applicable unto that people it self, when they absolute∣ly break and reject the Covenant; so was it done by these Apostates, who there∣on came into the room and place of the most cursed Enemies of God and his people. And therefore God will be unto them what he was unto the worst of those his ad∣versaries.
3. That which God properly in that place assumeth this title unto himself upon, is the Cruelty and Rage of those adversaries in the persecution and de∣struction of his people: And shall he not act in like manner towards them who murdered the Lord Jesus, and persecuted all his followers? Wherefore whatever frame of mind in God is represented in the Scripture, as unto his indignation against the worst of sinners and his adversaries, is fully applica∣ble unto these degenerate Apostates. The First testimony in the Original is, , to me vengeance and recompence, which the Apostle renders by , to the same purpose. Recompence is the actual exercise of Vengeance. , Vengeance, is the , actual execution of Judgment on sinners according unto their desert without mitigation of mercy. 'Tis an act of Judgment, and wherever mention is made of it, God is still proposed as a Judge, it being a just retribution, on the con∣sideration of the demerit of sin as sin. 1. This Vengeance God appropriateth the right of unto himself in a peculiar manner, as that which no Creature in it's full latitude hath any interest in. See Psal. 94. 1, 2. For it respects only sin in its own formal nature, as sin against God. (1.) Though men may inflict punishments on it, yet they do it princi∣pally on other accounts. Whatever is of vengeance in punishment is meerly an emanation from divine constitution. (2.) No creature can have the just measures of the desert of sin, so as to give it a just and due recompence. (3.) The power of the Creature cannot extend to the just execution of Vengeance, sins de∣serving eternal punishment. (4.) Pure vengeance as vengeance, is not to be intrusted with our nature, nor would any man be able to manage it, but would fall into one excess or other, unto the ruine of his own soul. Wherefore God hath reserved and included all vengeance unto himself, and all just, final retribu∣tion for and unto sin. Although he hath allowed infliction of punishment on offenders in order unto the Government and peace of the world in Magistrates and publick persons; yet as unto vengeance, as it denotes giving satisfaction to our selves in the punishment of others, it is forbidden unto all persons both pri∣vate and publick. God in executing vengeance gives satisfaction unto his own in∣finite holiness, and righteousness, which makes it holy and just. Men cannot give satisfaction unto themselves in punishment but it is unto their evil affections, which makes it useless and unjust. Hence David blessed God that he had kept him from avenging himself on Nabal. For there is no vengeance but what is exerted by a mans self, in his own case and cause: The Judgment unto punishment is for others. Wherefore the formal Reason of the appropriation of all venge∣ance unto God is, that God alone can Judge and Punish in his own case, and unto his own satisfaction. He hath made all things for himself, and the wicked for the day of evil. 2. In this appropriation of vengeance unto God, there is supposed and inclu∣ded, that indeed there is vengeance with God, which in due time he will exe∣cute; I will repay saith God. He doth oftentimes exercise great Patience and forbearance, even then when vengeance might justly be expected and is call∣ed , for; How long doest thou not avenge our blood? This commonly adds unto the security of wicked men, and they learn to despise the threatnings of all the Judgments of God which they have deserved, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Ec∣cles. 8. 11. They are ready to conclude that either vengeance doth not belong unto God, or that it shall be executed when and where they are not concern∣ed. But in all these cases God hath fixed a determinate time and season for the execution of deserved vengeance. Hence he calls it the year of ven∣geance, and the day of recompence; so here, I will repay it saith the Lord: This being so, God having said that vengeance belongeth unto him, and that it is due unto provoking sins and sinners; that it is in his power, and his . alone to inflict it when and how he pleaseth, and that he will certainly do so; in the assurance whereof the Apostle adds that word, saith the Lord, he will repay it; It evidently follows, that in his appointed season, the day and year of vengeance, such horrible provoking sinners as were those treated of, must fall under the most severe punishment and that for evermore. The Second testimony taken from the same place, is of the same impor∣tance
with this, The Lord shall judge his people. In Deuteronomy it is applyed  unto such a Judgment of them as tends unto their deliverance. But the ge∣neral truth of the words is, that God is the Supream Judge, he is Judge him∣self. Psal. 50. 6. This the Apostle makes use of, concluding, that the righteousness of God, as the Supream Judge of all, obligeth him unto this severe destruction of Apostates: For shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Shall not he who is Judg in a peculiar manner of those that profess them∣selves to be his people, punish them for their iniquities, especially such as break off all Covenant-relation between him and them? I. A due consideration of the nature of God, his office, that he is the Judge of all, especially of his people, and that enclosure he hath made of vengeance unto him∣self Observ. under an irrevocable purpose for it's execution, gives indubitable assurance of the certain unavoyable destruction of all wilful Apostates. All their securi∣ty, all their presumptions, all their hopes will vanish before this considera∣tion, as darkness before the light of the Sun. II. Although those who are the peculiar people of God do stand in many rela∣tions unto him that are full of refreshment and comfort; yet is it their duty constant∣ly to remember that he is the holy and righteous Judge even towards his own people. Lastly, the Ground of the application of these testimonies unto the present case, is that knowledge of God which they had unto whom he spoke, (for . we know him,) You have the same sence of God, his holiness and truth as I have, and therefore it cannot be strange unto you, that he will deal thus se∣verely with Apostates; you know who he is, how infinite in holiness, righ∣teousness and power; you know what he hath said in cases like unto this, namely, that vengeance is his, and he will repay it; wherefore it must be evident unto you that these things will be as they are now declared. The knowledge of God in some good measure both what he is in himself, and what Observ. he hath taken on himself to do, is necessary to render either his promises or threat∣nings effectual unto the minds of men. VERSE 31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the Living God. The Apostle in these words winds up his whole argument against the wilful despisers of the Gospel, taken from the nature and aggravations of that sin, with the severity of the punishment that would certainly befall them that are guilty thereof. And these words are, as an inference from them that go immediately before, so they are a recapitulation of all that he had spoken to this purpose. Let men look to it, look to themselves, consider what they do, for it is a fearful thing, &c. There are three things in the words. (1.) The description given of God with respect unto the present case, he is the living God. (2.) The event of their sin with respect unto him, it is a falling into his hands. (3.) The nature hereof in general, it is a fearful thing. 1. In what sence God is called the Living God, and with respect unto what ends, hath been declared on chap. 3. 12. chap. 9. 14. In brief, this title is ascribed  unto God principally on two accounts. (1.) By way of opposition unto all dead and dumb Idols, those whom the Heathen worshipped; and which are graphically described by the Psalmist, Ps. 115. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. as also by the Prophet, Isa. 44. 9, 10, 11, &c. And this is to impress upon our minds a due sence of his Glory, and Eternal Power, according as we are called to trust in him or to fear him. Life is the foundation of Power. He who hath life in himself, who is the cause of all Life in all other things that are partakers of it, must be the only spring of infinite Power. But God is here called the Living God with respect unto his Eternal Power, whereby he is able to avenge the sins of men. Indeed it calls to mind all
the other holy properties of his nature, which are suited to impress dread or ter∣ror on the minds of presumptuous sinners, whose punishment is thence demon∣strated to be unavoidable. He sees, and knows all the Evil and Malice that is in their sin and the circumstances of it. He is the God that liveth and seeth, Gen. 16. 14. And as he seeth, so he judgeth, because he is the Living God, which also is the ground of holy trust in him; 1 Tim 4. 10. This Name of the Living God is full of Terror or Comfort unto the Souls of men. 2. The Event of the sin spoken against as unto its demerit, with respect unto God, is called falling into his hands. The Assertion is general, but particularly applied unto this case by the Apostle. To fall into the hands, is a common ex∣pression . with reference unto any one falling into, and under the power of his Enemies. None can be said to fall into the hands of God, as though they were not before in his Power. But to fall into the hands of God absolutely, as it is here intended, is to be obnoxious to the Power and Judgment of God, when and where there is nothing in God himself, nothing in his Word, Promises, Laws, Institutions that should oblige him to Mercy or a mitigation of Punishment. So when a man falls into the hands of his Enemies, between whom and him there is no Law, no Love, he can expect nothing but Death. Such is this falling into the hands of the Living God; there is nothing in the Law, nothing in the Gospel, that can be pleaded for the least abatement of punish∣ment. There is no property of God that can be implored; It is the Destruction of the sinner alone whereby they will all be glorified. There is a falling into the hands of God that respects temporal things only, and that's spoken of comparatively. When David knew that an affliction or tempo∣ral punishment was unavoidable, he chose rather to fall into the hands of God as unto the immediate infliction of it, than to have the Wrath of men used as the instruments thereof, 2 Sam. 24. 17. But this appertains not unto our present purpose. 3. Hereof the Apostle affirms in general, that it is , a fearful, dreadful . thing, that which no heart can conceive, nor tongue express. Men are apt to put off thoughts of it, to have slight thoughts about it; but it is and will be dreadful, terrible, and eternally destructive of every thing that is good, and inflictive of every thing that is evil, or that our nature is capable of. I. There is an apprehension of the terror of the Lord in the final Judgment, which Observ. is of great use unto the Souls of men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. It is so to them who are not yet irrecoverably ingaged into the effects of it. II. When there is nothing left of Judgment, nothing remains but the Expectation of it, its foreapprehension will be fill'd with dread and terror. III. The dread of the final Judgment where there shall be no mixture of ease, is altogether inexpressible. IV. That man is lost for ever who hath nothing in God that he can appeal unto; nothing in the Law or Gospel which he can plead for himself; which is the State of all wilful Apostates. V. Those properties of God which are the Principal delight of Believers, the chief object of their Faith, Hope, and Trust, are an eternal spring of dread and terror unto all impenitent sinners; the Living God. VI. The Glory and Honour of the future state of Blessedness and Misery, are in∣conceivable either to Believers or Sinners. VII. The fear and dread of God in the description of his Wrath, ought continually to be on the Hearts of all who profess the Gospel. Herein by this general assertion, the Apostle summs up, and closeth his blessed dis∣course concerning the greatest sin that men can make themselves guilty of, and the greatest punishment that the Righteousness of God will inflict on any sinners. Nor is there any reaching of either part of this Divine discourse unto the utmost. When he treats of this sin and its aggravations, no mind is able to search into, no Heart is able truly to apprehend the evil and guilt which he chargeth it withal. No one can express or declare the least part of the evil which is comprised in every
aggravation which he gives us of this sin. And in like manner concerning the punishment of it he plainly intimates, it shall be accompanyed with an incom∣prehensible severity, dread, and terror. This therefore is a passage of holy Writ which is much to be considered, especially in these days wherein we live, where∣in men are apt to grow cold and careless in their Profession, and to decline gra∣dually from what they had attained unto. To be useful in such a season it was first written; and belongs unto us no less than unto them unto whom it was first Originally sent. And we live in dayes wherein the security and contempt of God, the despite of the Lord Christ and his Spirit, are come to the full, so as to justi∣fie the truth that we have insisted on. VERSE XXXII, XXXIII, XXXIV. . VERSE 32, 33, 34. But call to remembrance the former days, in which after ye were illumina∣ted, ye endured a great fight of afflictions: Partly whilest ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilest ye became companions of them that were so used. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoyling of your goods, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better, and an enduring Substance. THE words in their Coherence intimated in the Adversative , but, have respect unto the Exhortation laid down v. 25. All the Verses interposed contain a dehortation from the evil which they are warned of. Hence the Apostle returns unto his former Exhortation unto the duties recommended un∣to them, and perseverance therein, against all the difficulties which they might meet withal, wherewith others were turned into destruction. And the present argument which he makes use of unto this purpose is this now mentioned. And there are in the words, 1. A Direction unto a means useful unto the end of his Exhortation, call to mind the former dayes. 2. A description of those days which he would have them to call to mind: (1.) From the Season of them, and their state therein, after they were enlight∣ned. (2.) From what they suffered in them, A great fight of afflictions, which are enumerated in sundry instances, v. 33. (3.) From what they did in them, v. 34. with respect unto themselves and others. (4.) From the ground and reason whereon they were carried chearfully through what they suffered and did, knowing in your selves. 1. There is the Prescription of the Means of this Duty, , which we have well rendred, call to mind. It is not a bare remembrance he intends, . for it is impossible men should absolutely forget such a season. Men are apt enough to remember the times of their sufferings, especially such as are here mentioned, accompanied with all sorts of injurious treatments from men. But the Apostle would have them so call to mind, as to consider withal what sup∣portment they had under their sufferings, what satisfaction in them, what de∣liverance from them, that they might not despond upon the approach of the like evils and trials on the same account. If we remember our sufferings only as un∣to what is evil and afflictive in them, what we lose, what we endure and under∣goe; such a remembrance will weaken and dispirit us, as unto our future trials.
Hereon many cast about to deliver themselves for the future by undue means and sinful compliances, in a desertion of their profession, the thing the Apostle was jealous of concerning these Hebrews. But if withal we call to mind what was the case for which we suffered, the honour that is in such sufferings out-bal∣lancing all the contempt and reproaches of the world, the presence of God en∣joyed in them, and the reward proposed unto us; the calling them to mind will greatly strengthen us against future trials; provided we retain the same love unto, and valuation of the things for which we suffered, as we had in those for∣mer days. And these various events we find exemplified every day. Some who have endured trials, and came off from them, do grow immediately more wary as they suppose, and more cold really as unto the causes of their sufferings. The remembrance of what was afflictive in their trials, fills them with fear of the like exercise again. Hence they grow timerous and cautious as to all duties of Reli∣gion, and the Worship of God, which may expose them unto new sufferings; and then some of them by degrees fall absolutely off from attendance unto them; as it was with some of these Hebrews. Such as these call to mind only that which is evil and afflictive in their sufferings; and taking the measure thereof in the counsel or representation made of it by flesh and blood, it proves unto their dammage, and oft-times unto their eternal ruine. Others who call to mind with their sufferings, the causes of them, and the presence of God with them therein, are encouraged, emboldened and strengthned unto Duty with zeal and con∣stancy. A wise management of former Experiences is a great Direction and Encourage∣ment Observ. unto future Obedience. 2. As to the Object of this Duty, the Apostle so expresseth it, call to mind . the former days. It is uncertain what times or Seasons the Apostle doth pecu∣liarly intend. Besides those continual hazards they were in from their Adver∣saries, and the occasional sufferings that they were exposed unto; they seem to have had some special seasons of persecution before the writing of this Epistle. The first was in the stoning of Stephen, when great Persecution rose against all the Church, and extended it self unto all the Churches of Christ in that Nation, wherein our holy Apostle himself was highly concerned, Acts 8. 1. Chap. 9. 1. ch. 22. 19. ch. 26. 10, 11. And the other was on the occasion of this Apostle himself; for upon his last coming to Jerusalem, after his great successes in preaching the Gospel among the Gentiles, the whole Body of the people was fill'd with rage and madness against him and all the other Disciples. It is no doubt, although express mention be not made of it, but that at that time the Rage and Cruelty of the Priests and the multitude, did put forth themselves unto a general Persecution of the Church. And this season he seems to reflect upon in particular, because he mentions his own bonds at that time, and their com∣passion with him. However, certain it is, that all the Churches of Judea had suffered those things here mentioned from their Countrey-men, as the Apostle himself declares, 1 Thess. 2. 14. At this present time they seemed to have had some outward peace. The occasion whereof were the Tumults and Disorders which were then growing in their whole Nation. Their own intestine discords, and the fear of outward Enemies, by which they were shortly utterly destroy∣ed, diverted them from prosecuting their rage for a season against the Church. And it may be some began to grow careless and secure hereon; as we are gene∣rally apt to do, supposing that all will be serene when one or another storm is over. These therefore the Apostle doth press unto such a remembrance of for∣mer trials as might prepare for those that we are to expect; for as he tells them, they had still need of Patience, v. 36. 2. There is a Description of these former days from their State and Condi∣tion in them, the days in which they were inlightned, or rather, in which having . been inlightned. The mention of this their illumination, being in a tense of the time past, manifests that their inlightning did precede those days of their suffer∣ings. But yet the Expression is such as argues a nearer conjunction or concurrence between those two things, their illumination, and these dayes of affliction; the
one followed as it were immediately on the other. This inlightning was that work of Gods grace mentioned, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Their translation out of dark∣ness into his marvellous light. They were naturally blind, as were all men, and peculiarly blinded with prejudices against the truth of the Gospel. There∣fore when God by his effectual call delivered them out of that State of dark∣ness, by the Renovation of their understandings, and the removal of their prejudices; the light of the knowledge of God shining into their hearts, is this Illumination, the saving Sanctifying Light which they received at their first effectual call, and Conversion to God. This Spiritual change was pre∣sently followed with days of affliction, trouble, and persecution. In it self it is, for the most part, accompanied with joy, delight, zeal, and vigorous acting of Faith and Love; 1 Pet. 1. 8. For, (1.) God did usually grant unto Believers some secret Pledge and Sealing of his Spirit which fill'd them with joy and zeal; Eph. 1. 13. (2.) Their own hearts are exceedingly affected with the Excellency, glory, and beauty of the things revealed unto them, of what they now see perfectly, whereunto they were before in darkness, that is, the Love and Grace of Christ Jesus in the Revelation of himself unto them. (3.) All Graces are new and fresh, not yet burdened, clogged, or wea∣ried by temptations, but are active in their several places; Hence frequent mention is made of and commendation given unto the first Love of persons and Churches. This was the State and condition of those Hebrews, when the days of tryal and affliction came upon them, it was immediately after their first conversion unto God. And 'tis usual with God thus to deal with his people in all ages. He no sooner calls persons to himself, but he leads them into the Wilderness. He no sooner plants them, but he shakes them with storms, that they may be more firmly rooted. He doth it, (1.) Utterly to take off their expectations from this world, or any thing therein. They shall find that they are so far from bettering their outward Estate in this world by cleaving unto Christ and the Church, as that the whole rage of it would be stirr'd up against them upon that account, and all the things enjoyed in it be exposed unto ruine. This the Lord Christ every where warned his disciples of, affirming that those who are not wil∣ling to renounce the world, and to take up the Cross, did not belong unto him. (2.) For the tryal of their faith. 1 Pet. 5. 6, 7. (3.) For the glory and pro∣pagation of the Gospel. (4.) For the exercise of all graces. (5.) To breed us up into the military discipline of Christ, as he is the Captain of our Salvation. They who pass through their first trials, are Christs Veterans on new attempts. I. All men by nature are darkness and in darkness. Observ. II. Saving illumination is the first fruit of effectual vocation. III. Spiritual Light in its first Communication puts the soul on the diligent exer∣cise of all Graces. IV. 'Tis suited unto the wisdom and goodness of God, to suffer persons on their first Conversion to fall into manifold trials and temptations. This was the State of the Hebrews in those days which the Apostle would have them call to mind. But the words have respect unto what follows immediate∣ly, which you endured. The description of this State and condition, namely,  that they were inlightned, is interposed for the ends we have spoken unto. Wherefore the season he would have them call to remembrance, is described by what they suffered therein. This as was observed he expresseth two ways. (1.) In general, (2.) In particular instances. The First in these words, ye endured a great fight of afflictions. (1.) That which he would have them to mind is affliction. (2.) The aggravation of it, it was a great fight of afflicti∣ons. (3.) Their deportment under it, in that they endured them. 1. We render this word by Afflictions, although by the particulars mentioned . afterwards, it appeared it was Persecutions from men, that the Apostle only in∣tended. And if we take afflictions in the ordinary sence of the word, for chastise∣ments, corrections and trials from God, it is true, that mens persecutions are also
Gods afflictions, with the special end of them in our trials; we are chastned of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world. God used them as his furnace, and fining pot for the trial of their faith which is more pretious then gold. And under all persecutions we are to have a special re∣gard unto the immediate hand of God in such afflictive trials. This will keep us humble, and in a constant subjection of our souls unto God, as the Apo∣stle declares, chap. 12. But the word in the Original is , which is properly sufferings. The same word that the Apostle useth to express the suf∣ferings of Christ, Chap. 2. 10. Chap. 5. 8. It's a general name for every thing that is hard and afflictive unto our nature, from what cause or occasion soever it doth arise. Even what wicked men undergo justly for their crimes is what they suffer, as well as what Believers undergo for the truth and pro∣fession of the Gospel. Materially they are the same, 1 Pet. 4. 14, 15, 16. It is therefore the general name of all the evils, troubles, hardships, distresses, that may befall men upon the account of their profession of the truth of the Gospel. This is that which we are called unto, which we are not to think strange of. Our Lord Jesus requires of all his disciples, that they take up their Cross, to be in a continual readiness to bear it, and actually so to do as they are called. And there is no kind of suffering but is included in the Cross. He calls us indeed unto his Eternal glory, but we must suffer with him, if we desire to reign also with him. 2. Of these Trials, Afflictions, Persecutions they had . That . labour and contention of Spirit, which they had in their profession, with sin and Sufferings, is expressed by these words; which set forth the greatest, most earnest, vehement actings and endeavours of Spirit that our nature can arise unto. It is expressed by  in this place, and by , 2 Tim. 4. 7. . See 2 Tim. 2. 5. 1 Cor. 9. 25. The Allusion is taken from their striving, wrestling, fighting, who contended publickly for a Prize, Victo∣ry and Reward, with the Glory and Honour attending it. The custom of the Nations as then observed, is frequently alluded unto in the New Testa∣ment. Now there was never any way of life wherein men voluntarily or of their own accord engaged themselves into such hardships, difficulties and dan∣gers, as that, when they contended in their Games and strivings for mastery; Their preparation for it was an universal temperance, as the Apostle declares, 1 Cor. 9. 25. And an abstinence from all Sensual pleasures; wherein they offered no small violence unto their natural Inclinations and Lusts. In the con∣flicts themselves, in wrestling, and fighting, with the like dangerous ex∣ercises in skill and strength, they endured all pains, sometimes death it self. And if they failed or gave over through weariness, they lost the whole re∣ward that lay before them. And with words, which signify all this contest, doth the holy Ghost express the fight or contention which Believers have with sufferings. There is a reward proposed unto all such persons in the pro∣mises of the Gospel, infinitely above all the Crowns, Honours and Rewards proposed unto them in the Olympick Games. No man is compelled to enter into the way or course of obtaining it, but they must make it an act of their own wills and choice, but unto the obtaining of it they must undergo a great strife, contention, and dangerous conflict. In order hereunto three things are required. (1.) That they prepare themselves for it, 1. Cor. 9. 25. self-denial, and readiness for the Cross, contempt of the world, and the en∣joyments of it, are this preparation; without this we shall never be able to go through with this conflict. (2.) A vigorous acting of all graces in the conflict it self, in opposition unto and destruction of our Spiritual and world∣ly adversaries; Eph. 6. 10, 11, 12. Heb. 12. 5. He could never prevail nor overcome in the publick contests of old, who did not strive mightily, put∣ting forth his strength and skill, both to preserve himself, and oppose his Enemy. Nor is it possible that we should go successfully through with our conflict, unless we stir up all graces, as faith, hope, trust, unto their most vigorous exercise. (3.) That we endure the hardship, and the evils of the conflict with Patience and Perseverance, which is that the Apostle here speci∣ally intends.
This is that which he commends in the Hebrews with respect unto their first trials and sufferings, , you endured, and bare patiently, so as not to faint . or despond, or to turn away from your profession. They came off conquerers, having failed in no point of their conflict. This is that which they were called unto, that which God by his Grace enabled them to, and through which they had that success which the Apostle would have them to call to remembrance, that they might be strengthened and encouraged unto what yet remains of the same kind. This hath been the lot and portion of sincere Professors of the Gospel in most ages. And we are not to think it a strange thing, if it come to be ours in a high∣er degree than what as yet we have had experience of. How many ways God is glorified in the sufferings of his people, what advantages they receive there∣by, the prevailing Testimony that is given thereof unto the truth and honour of the Gospel, are commonly spoken to, and therefore shall not be insisted on. VERSE 33. Partly whilest ye were made a gazing-stock, both by reproaches and afflictions, and partly whilest ye became companions of them that were so used. Having mentioned their sufferings, and their deportment under them in gene∣ral, he distributes them into two heads in this verse: The First is what imme∣diately concerned their own persons; and the Second, their concernment in the sufferings of others, and their participations of them. This distribution is ex∣prest by , and , on this hand and that. The whole of their suffer∣ings was made up of various parts, many things concurred thereunto; they did not consist in any one trouble or affliction, but a confluence of many, of various sorts did meet in them. And this indeed is for the most part the greatest diffi∣culty in sufferings: Many of them come at once upon us, so that we shall have no rest from their assaults. For it is the design of Satan and the world on these occasions to destroy both Soul and Body, and unto that end he will assault us inwardly by temptations and fears, outwardly in our Names and Reputations, and all that we are or have. But he that knows how to account all such things but Loss and Dung, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, is prepared for them all. What referrs unto the first part is their suffering in their own persons; And herein he declares both what they suffered, and the manner how. That which they suffered was reproaches and afflictions, and for the manner of it, they were made a gazing stock unto other men. The first thing wherein they suffered was Reproaches, , a great aggra∣vation . of sufferings unto ingenuous minds. The Psalmist in the person of the Lord Christ himself complains that reproaches had broken his Heart, Psal. 69. 20. And elsewhere, frequently he complaineth of it as one of the greatest evils he had to conflict withal. It is that kind of reproach which proceeds from malicious hatred, and is accompanied with contempt and scorn, and vents it self in all manner of obloquies, or hard speeches, such as those mentioned, Jude v. 15. And the na∣ture of it is fully declared by the Prophet, Jer. 10. 8, 9, 10. And there are two Branches of reproaches: (1.) False accusations, or charging of men with things vile and contemptible, such as will expose them unto publick scorn and rage; They shall speak all manner of evil of you falsly; wherein you are evil spoken of as evil doers. So they reproached the Person of Jesus Christ himself, they said he was a Malefactor, an evil doer, a seditious person, a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Seducer, one that had a Devil, and thereby stirred up the rage, hatred, and contempt of the people against him. So they reproached the primitive Christians among the Pagans, namely, that they were Atheists, confederating themselves for Adulte∣ries, Incest, Murder, and Sedition, under which notion they slaughtered them as Beasts of the Field. And the like reproaches have been cast on the Professors of the Gospel in all ages. (2.) Those reproaches consist in the contempt that is cast upon what is true, and what in it self is Holy, Just, Good, and Praise-worthy. They reproached them with their Faith in Christ, with their Worship of him, in owning his Authority. This in it self was their Honour and their Crown. But as it
was managed with hatred and Blasphemy, as it was confirmed by the common consent of all, as it received Strength and Countenance from their sufferings, wherein they esteemed them punished for their sins and impieties, it added unto their distress. For men thus to be traduced, aspersed, and charged, partly with things infamous, base, vile, partly by contempt and scorn cast on what they do own and profess, by their Friends, Neighbours, Relations, and the Mul∣titude of the people, in order to their further hurt and ruin, that they may be looked on and Judged as persons meet to be destroyed, not suffered to live on the face of the Earth, it is a great suffering, and difficulty to be endured and undergone. Therefore all those that make Profession of the Name of Christ and the Gospel ought to look and provide for such things. 1. Take heed of so much softness and tenderness of nature, that may give too deep a sense of reproach, scorn, and shame; which may give too deep an Entrance unto these things into your minds, being such as will weaken them in their duties. This Ordina∣rily is a frame and disposition of mind that lies at the next door to Vertue, to Mo∣desty, to Humility, and the like; but in this case it lies at the next door to diffidence, despondency, and carnal fears. We are in this case to harden our Countenances, and to set our faces as a Flint and Adamant, so as to despise all Reproaches and Scorns on the account of our profession. 2. It is required, that we do not put too much value on our Names and Reputations in the world. A good name is a Precious Oyntment, it yields a good savour, but it is so only with these two limitations. (1.) That it is obtained by things that are really Good and Praise-worthy; for some have made their Names famous and acceptable to the multitude by ways and actions that have really nothing praise-worthy in them. And, (2.) that they be good men who esteem their name to be good. Laudari volo, said one, sed à viro Laudato. To have a good re∣port amongst an evil Multitude, is of no advantage. Yet are some men very tender herein, they would be praised, and spoken well of by the many; at least they would not be spoken evilly or contemptuously of. But if we have not an under-valuation of our names and reputations universally in respect unto Christ and the Gospel, if we are not contented to be made as the Filth and ∣scouring of all things, it will greatly disadvantage us in the time of sufferings. And therefore in the Providence of God frequently it falls out, that if there be any thing that is unto us as the Apple of our eye, that of all we should be tender of our Names and reputations in, this shall be peculiarly attempted and reproached. 3. That they do not think that any new thing befalls them when they are re∣proached. No, not when the reproaches are new, and such as never were cast on any that went before them. For the stores of reproach, and false accusations in the treasury of Satan, and hearts of wicked men, will never be exhausted. 4. Know that where reproach goes before, persecution will follow after, in the course of the world. It thunders in Reproaches, and fails in a Storm of persecu∣tion. These sufferings consisted in afflictions; these Afflictions did partly sue upon, and partly accompany these reproaches. For those who endeavour to bring men under contempt by reproaches, will not fail to reproach them under their Sufferings. Therefore do we render the Particle  by both, referring both the reproaches and afflictions unto their being made a gazing-stock. And the word is of a large signification, denoting every thing that is evil and grievous to us in any kind. But as it is distinguished from reproaches, it denotes suffering in their persons or enjoyments; an instance whereof he gives in the next verse, in the spoyling of their goods. 3. The manner of their Suffering of these things, it is said they were made a ga∣zing-stock, . 'Tis properly spoken of them who were brought on the  publick Stage or Theater in any City, and there exposed unto all sorts of evils and punishments. And it was the way of the highest and most capital punishment. For when guilty persons were cast unto Beasts to be devoured, it was in the Theater, where they were made a spectacle unto the people, or a gazing-stock, But the Apostle limits the suffering of the Hebrews unto reproaches and afflictions; they had not yet resisted unto blood. So at Ephesus they drew Gaius and Ari∣starchus into the Theater, with an intention to destroy them; Acts 19. 29.
But yet neither doth it necessarily follow, that those spoken of were actually or solemnly carried into any Theater, there to be reproached, then destroyed. But because the Theater was the place where persons were publickly exposed to be looked upon with scorn and contempt; The word  is used to sig∣nifie mens being so exposed, and made a Spectacle, in any place, on any occa∣sion. And this is the meaning of the phrase used by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 9. No more is required hereunto, but that they were publickly, and in the sight of all that had occasion or opportunity to behold them, exposed unto these things. So was it with them, when they halled men and women out of their Meetings, who being dragged, or driven in the Streets, were committed some of them into Prisons, Acts 8. 3. then were they loaden with all manner of reproaches, and made a gazing-stock to all that were about them. This way and manner of their suffering was a great addition to it, and an aggravation of it. It requireth Ex∣cellent actings of Faith, and spiritual courage, to carry ingenuous persons above this publick contest. But their Cause and their Example were sufficient to sup∣port them, and enable them unto this Duty. I. All temporary Sufferings in all their aggravating Circumstances, in their most dreadful preparation, dress, and appearance, are but light things in comparison of Observ. the Gospel and the Promises thereof. II. There is not any thing in the whole nature of temporary Sufferings, or any circumstance of them, that we can claim an exemption from, after we have under∣taken the Profession of the Gospel. This was the first part of the contention with sufferings, which those Hebrews had undergone. The other part of their sufferings was, that they became the Companions of them that were so used. They not only suffered in themselves, on what they gave occasion unto, by their own profession of the Gospel, and practice of its Worship; but also came into a Fellowship of Sufferings with them that were so used as they were. And we may consider, (1.) Who those are that were so used. (2.) How they became their Companions in that condition. (1.) : the word signifies the way, manner, and course of our . Conversation in the World. And in that sence the sufferings of these persons is included as the Effect in the Cause. They so walked in the World as to be ex∣posed to sufferings. We take the word in a passive sence, and render it so used, used after the same manner which you were. It is also used for to be tossed, overturned, oppressed; which is the sence of it in this place. But the Apostle writing unto the whole Church of the Hebrews, we may enquire who they were who were used in this manner with them, for they seem to be distinguished from them unto whom he wrote. And, (1.) It is not impossible but the Apostle might have respect unto those that were sober and moderate amongst the Jews themselves. For things were now come unto that confusion in Jerusalem and in all Judea, that all such persons were continually exposed unto the violence and rage of Robbers, Oppressors, and seditious Villains. The Christians, being of the same conversation with them, were not known by the multitude, nor di∣stinguisht from them. It is not therefore unlikely that they might suffer with them in those publick violences, which being not immediately for the professi∣on of the Gospel, they are said in what they so underwent, to be made the com∣panions of others. Or, (2.) respect may be had unto the sufferings of Christi∣ans in other places up and down the world, which they heard of, and were in no small measure affected with. But this was not peculiar unto the Church of the Hebrews; and so not likely to be peculiarly ascribed unto them. Or (3.) It may be respect is had unto some that had suffered amongst themselves at Je∣rusalem, or in other places of Judea, who were their Countrey-men, yet be∣longed not unto the stated Church of Christ in the place unto which he wrote at present. And this hath Countenance given it from the next Verse; where it seems to be given as an instance of their being made companions of them that suf∣fered, in that they had compassion of the Apostle himself in his bonds, and such was the condition of others.
But I am rather inclined unto a double distribution of things and persons in the Text, both included in the , and the . That of Things is actual suffering, and a participation of the suffering of others. That of Persons is this, that all those unto whom he wrote, did not actually in their own persons suffer the things which he speaks of, but some of them did so suffer, and the rest of them were companions with them that did so suffer. And for the most part it so falls out in the fiercest persecution of the Gospel. All individual persons are not called forth unto the same actual sufferings; some in the Providence of God, and through the rage of men are singled out for trials; some are hid, or do escape, at least for a season, and it may be are reserved for the same trials at another time. So it may be said of the whole Church, that they endured a great fight of afflictions, while some of them were a gazing-stock, &c. and others of them were Companions of them who were so used. It is reserved unto the soveraign Pleasure of God to measure out unto all Pro∣fessors Observ. of the Gospel their especial Lot and portion as unto trials and sufferings, so as that none ought to complain, none to envy one another. Hence it appears in what sence those who suffered not in their own persons, were made Companions of them who did so, whereby the whole Church partook of the same troubles. . (1.) They were made so by their common Interest in the  same cause for which they suffered. (2.) By their apprehension that the same sufferings would reach unto themselves, seeing there was the same Cause in them as in others. (3.) By their sorrow, trouble, and compassion for the suffer∣ing of the Members of the same Head and Body with them. (4.) By all du∣ties of Love and Affections which they discharged in owning and visiting of them. (5.) By the Communication of their Goods, and outward enjoyments unto them, who had suffered the loss of their own, so were they made their companions. VERSE 34. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoyling of your Goods, knowing in your selves that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring Substance. Having distributed the  of Believers into two heads: (1) What they underwent some of them, at least in their own persons; and (2.) What befell them with respect unto others, suffering in the same Cause with themselves. In this Verse the Apostle gives an especial instance of each kind, only he inverts the Order, wherein he had before layd them down. For whereas he first mention∣ed what they suffered in themselves, and then what they accompanied others in; here he insisteth of the latter of them in the first place, they had compassion of him in his bonds; and of the former in the latter place, and took joyfully the spoyling of their goods. But he adds unto both the frame of their minds in what they did and suffered. As unto others, they were their companions in sympathy and compassion, and as unto their own losses, they them took joyfully. Of the First, the Apostle gives an instance in himself, Ye had compassion of me in my bonds. And this he affirms as a proof and confirmation of what he had spoken before concerning their being made Companions of them that suffered. This is exprest in the introductive particles , for even you had, as for Example sake. I have proved before the Apostle Paul was the Author of this Epistle, and this very passage is sufficient to confirm it. For who else could there be, whose bonds for the Gospel were so known, so famous among the Believers of the Jews as his own. For the other persons, who some would needs fancy to be Writers of this Epistle, as Luke, Barnabas, and Clemens, there's nothing in the Scripture or Ecclesiastical story of any of their Bonds in Judea, where∣of it is plain that he here speaketh. But the sufferings of our Apostle in this kind of bonds and imprisonment were peculiar above any other Apostles whatsoever. Hence he stiles himself in particular Philem. 1. the bond-man
for Christ, and gloried in his bonds as his peculiar honour, Acts 26. 29. an Am∣bassador in bonds, Eph. 6. 20. So Phil. 1. 7. and 12. 13, 14, 16. Col. 4. 3. which he desired the Church to remember him in, Col. 4. 18. 2 Tim. 2. 9. Wherefore his bonds being singularly and above all others so known, so famous, so useful, such a subject of the Churches Prayers, and of their Faith, having been begun and long continued among those Hebrews, and being spoken of by him as a matter known unto them all, 'tis unreasonable to suppose that any other is intended. Of what sort or kind the sufferings of any that God employs in the Ministry of the Gospel shall be, is in his soveraign disposal alone. And in this Apostle unto whom as being the Apostle of the Gentiles, God had designed more work and travelling up and down the world, than unto any of the other, it may be unto them all; yet God was pleased that much of his time should be spent in bonds and imprisonments. But although the principal reason hereof must be left hid in the wisdom and soveraign good pleasure of God; yet we may see that two inestimable Advantages did redound unto the Church thereby. For, (1.) His bonds being first at Jerusalem, and afterwards at Rome, as Acts 23. 11. the two capital Cities and seats of the Jews and Gentiles; and he being called out to plead the Cause of the Gospel openly and publickly, the report of it was carried all the world over, and occasion given unto all sorts of men to inquire what it was, that a man remote from the suspicion of any crime, did suffer such things for. I no way doubt but that multitudes by this means were brought to make inquiry after, and into the Doctrine of the Gospel, which otherwise would have taken no notice of it. See Eph. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And, (2.) During his confinement under those bonds, the Holy Ghost was pleased to make use of him in writing sundry of those blessed Epistles which have been the Light and Glory of the Gospel in all Ages. Wherefore let every one of us be content and re∣joyce in what may soever God shall be pleased to call us to suffer for the truth of the Gospel. For although it may seem outwardly to be of the greatest advantage thereunto, which is the only thing we would desire, that we might enjoy our Li∣berty; yet God can and will make them subservient unto his own glory, wherein we ought to acquiesce. Secondly, He expresseth the concernment of these Hebrews in those bonds of his, , they suffered together with him therein. They were not un∣concerned in his sufferings, as being satisfied with their own freedom, as  is the manner of some. Now compassion consists in these things. (1.) A real condolency, grief, and trouble of mind for the bonds of others, as if we our selves were bound. (2.) Continual Prayers for their relief, supportment, and deliverance; as it was with the Church in the Case of Peter in his bonds, Acts 12. (3.) A ministration unto them, as unto the things that may be outwardly wanting, as many did to Paul, Acts 24. 23. (4.) The owning and avowing of them, as not being ashamed of their chains, bonds, or suffer∣ings, 2 Tim. 1. 16, 17. (5.) A readine to undergo hazards, difficulties and dangers, for them who are called thereunto, Rom. 16. 4. It is not a heartless, fruitless, ineffectual pity that the Apostle intends; but such a frame of mind that hath a real concernment in the sufferings of others, and is operative in these and the like duties towards their good. These things are required in us towards all those who suffer for the Gospel, according as we have oportu∣nity for their exercise. Where this is wanting we can have no solid Evidence of our being one with them in the same mystical Body. The remembrance of this frame, and the discharge of all those duties towards them who have suffered, is of singular use to prepare our minds for, and to confirm our hearts in our own sufferings when they do approach. 2. He minds them of their deportment under their own sufferings, they took joyfully. That which they suffered in was their , their outward sub∣stance, and present enjoyments: It is extended unto Houses, Lands, Posses∣sions,  whatever rightfully belongs unto men and is enjoyed by them. But it is especially applied unto things of present use, as the goods of a mans House, his Money, Corn, or Cattel, which are more subject to present rapine and spoil, than other real Possessions, Lands or Inheritances. These are the
things of mens present supportment without which ordinarily they cannot live nor subsist. And therefore in persecutions, the enemies of the Gospel do usually fall on these in the first place, as supposing that the loss of them will reduce their owners unto all sorts of extremity, especially when they have no pretence or warranty as yet to destroy their persons. They will take, from them the bread that they should eat, the clothes that they should wear, the beds whereon they should lye, whatever is of use unto them and their families. And this must needs be a sore trial unto men, when not only themselves, but their Relations also, their Wives and Children, some perhaps in their Infant age, are reduced unto all extremities. The way whereby they were deprived of their goods was , it was by rapine and spoil. What pretence of Law, or constitution of the Rulers  they who did it, had for what they did, I know not; But the way of Exe∣cution was with savage rapine and spoil, as the word signifies. They violent∣ly tare away from them what they did enjoy; not aiming to take all the spoil meerly unto their own advantage, wherewith yet the minds of some cursed Enemies are influenced, but at the satisfaction of their rage and malice, in the ruine of the Saints of Christ. This it seems had been the state of things with these Hebrews, which was now passed over for that season, but in all probability would quickly again return, as the warning here given them by the Apostle did plainly intimate. And it is the way of the world in such persecutions, after they have vented their rage and malice for a while, and satisfied themselves with their own cruelty, to give over until some new cause, pretence, or new instigation of the Devil sets them a work again. 3. The frame of mind in the Hebrews as unto this part of their suffering is, that they took their losses and spoiles with joy. Nothing doth usually more affect the minds of men than the suddain spoiling of their goods, what they have laboured  for, what they have use for, what they have provided for themselves and their families. We see in ordinary Cases what Wailings and Lamentatious do accom∣pany such occasions. But these Hebrews received and accepted of this rapine of their goods, not only patiently and chearfully; but with a certain peculiar joy. The ground whereof the Apostle declares in the close of this verse, knowing in your selves, that ye have in Heaven a better and an enduring substance. Some Copies of the Original, and some antient translations, as the vulgar Latin, read the words ; And I suppose the difference arose from the  Order of the words in the Text, or the placing of  not immediately after , but interposing  between them. Hence the words may be rendred as we do, knowing in your selves that you have a better substance, or as they lye in the Original knowing that ye have a better substance in your selves. In this latter way it is evident that there is no place for that addition in Heaven, which is necessary in the former. For it is not proper to say, knowing that you have in your selves in Heaven, though it be most proper to say, knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven. I confess I should absolutely imbrace the latter reading, knowing that you have in your selves, and so leave out that, in Heaven, for evident reasons, did not the authority of the most antient Copies and Tran∣slations of the best note require the retaining of it. However, I shall open the words according to both readings. 1. Knowing that we have in our selves. The things which they had lost, were their goods, or their substance, as they are called, Luke 15. 13. Unto these he op∣poseth the substance, which of what nature it is, he declares in comparison with those other goods. Those other goods were so theirs, as that they were without them, things lyable unto rapine and spoyl, such as they might be, such as they were deprived of; men could and men did take them away. But this substance is in themselves, which none could take away from them, none could spoil them of. Such is the peace and joy that our Lord Jesus Christ gives unto his Church here be∣low, John 16. 22. chap. 14. 27. And if the substance, here intended, be that which was in themselves, in opposition unto those external goods, which they might be, and were deprived of, then it is that subsistence in the soul and unto the experience of Believers, which Faith gives unto the Grace and Love of God
in Christ Jesus, with all the consequents of it here and for evermore. This is that which comforts Believers under all their troubles, this fills them with joy un∣speakable and full of Glory, even in their Sufferings. This will make them to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, when they lay it in the Ballance against them. In this sence  expresseth an assurance arising from experience, as the word is often used. They knew they had it in themselves, from the Powerful Ex∣perience which Faith gave them of it. So the whole of it is intended, and at large explained by the Apostle, Rom. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Faith gives us Justification before God, access unto him, and acceptance with him, and therewithal gives joy and rejoycing unto the Soul; and this it doth in an especial manner under Tribulations and Sufferings, enabling men to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, for it stirreth up all Graces in such a Condition unto their due Exercise issuing in a blessed experience of the Exellency of the Love of God, and of his Glory in Christ with a firm and stable hope of future Glory. Yea and by these things doth the Holy Ghost shed abroad the Love of God in our Hearts, which will give joy in any Condition. And this Substance hath both the Qualifi∣cations here assigned unto it. (1.) It is , better, more excellent, incom∣parably so, than the outward goods that are subject to rapine and spoil. And it . is (2.) , abiding, that which will not leave them in whom it is, can never be taken from them. My joy shall no man take from you. . Faith giving an experience of the Excellency of the Love of God in Christ and of the Grace received thereby, with its incomparable preference above all outward Observ. perishing things, will give joy and satisfaction in the loss of them all, upon the account of an interest in these better things. If we follow the Ordinary reading and retain those words, in heaven, the whole must be somewhat otherwise expounded. For it is not the Grace of faith but hope that is expressed. And, (1.) That expression of knowing in your selves, declares the evidence they had of the grounds whereon they re∣joyced in the spoiling of their goods. It was manifest and evident unto them∣selves. The world looked on them under another notion, they took them, and declar'd them to be persons who deserved all manner of evil in this world, and such as would perish for ever in that which is to come. So they did to Christ himself, when they reproached him with his trust in God when he was on the Cross. In this case the Apostle doth not direct them unto any outward defence of themselves, but only unto the uncontrollable evi∣dence, which they had in themselves, of future glory. And this they had, (1.) From the Promises of Christ: (2.) From the Testimony and witness of the holy Ghost. (3.) From the Experience which they had of the beginnings and first-fruits of this glory in themselves. Faith in and by these means will give an infallible evidence of Heavenly things, secure against all opposition; and in all these things it works by hope, because it respects things that are fu∣ture. 2. This substance is said to be in Heaven, it is there prepared, there laid up, there to be enjoyed. Wherefore it compriseth the whole of the future . state of blessedness; and 'tis well called Substance, as 'tis also riches, and an inheritance, or a weight of glory; for in comparison of it, all other things temporary have no substance in them. 3. They are said , to have this Substance, not in present possession, but in right, title, and evidence. They know in themselves that they had . an undeniable Title unto it, which none could deprive them of, but that they should certainly enjoy it in the appointed season. Wherefore they are said to have it, (1.) Because it is prepared for them in the will, pleasure and Grace of God. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom. (2.) Because 'tis purchased for them by the blood of Christ; he hath purchased, or obtained eternal redemption. (3.) 'Tis promised unto them in the Gospel. (4.) It is secured for them in the Intercession of Christ. (5.) Granted unto them in the First-fruits. (6.) All this is confirmed unto them by the Oath of God. The First-fruits they had in possession and use, the whole in right
and title: And continual application of it was made unto their souls by the hope which will not make ashamed. 4. How this substance is better then outward enjoyments, and abiding, needs not to be explained, they are things in themselves so plain and evident. This two-fold interpretation of the words is so far coincident and agreeing in the same sence in general, that we may draw our Observations from both or either of them. As, I. It is the glory of the Gospel, that it will on a just account, from a sense of and interest in it, give satisfaction and joy unto the souls of men in the worst of suf∣ferings Observ. for it. II. It is our duty to take care that we be not surprized with outward sufferings, when we are in the dark as unto our interest in these things. This may often fall out through our carelesness, negligence, and want of keeping our garments about us in our walk before God: They rejoyced as knowing they had in them∣selves, which otherwise they could not have done. III. Internal Evidences of the beginnings of Glory in Grace, a sense of Gods love, and assured pledges of our Adoption, will give insuperable joy unto the minds of men under the greatest outward sufferings. IV. It is our Interest in this world, as well as with respect unto Eternity, to preserve our Evidences for heaven clear and unstain'd, so that we may know in our selves; which is the ground of this great Duty. V. There is a substance in spiritual and Eternal things, whereunto Faith gives a subsistence in the souls of believers. See chap. 11. 1. VI. There is no Rule of proportion between Eternal and temporal things. Hence the enjoyment of the one will give joy in the loss of the other. VERSE XXXV, XXXVI. . VERSE 35, 36. Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which hath great recompence of re∣ward. For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye might receive the Promise. IN these two verses there is an Inference from his former argument, and a Con∣firmation of it from the necessity of what is required thereunto. The first in ver. 35. wherein the Apostle gives us the peculiar design, use, and force of the preceding Exhortation unto the consideration of what they had suffered in and for the profession of the Gospel. And there is in the words, (1.) A note of inference from the foregoing discourse, , wherefore. (2.) A grace and duty which in this Inference he exhorts them to retain, and that is . (3.) The manner of their retaining it, cast not away. (4.) The Reason of the Exhortation not to cast it away, because it hath great recompence of reward. 1. The inference is plain: seeing you have suffered so many things in your Per∣sons and Goods, seeing God by the power of his grace hath carried you through . with satisfaction and joy, do not now despond and faint upon the approach of the same difficulties, or those of a like nature. The especial force of the infe∣rence the words themselves do declare. 2. That which he exhorts them thus unto by this argument is the preserva∣tion and continuance of their confidence. This  whatever it be, was . that which engaged them in and carryed them through their sufferings, which alone was praise-worthy in them. For meerly to suffer is , and may
be good or evil, as it's causes and occasions, and circumstances are. Now this was absolutely neither their Faith nor Profession. But as we have had occasion to mention several times, it is a fruit and effect of faith, whereby the minds of Believers are made prompt, ready, free, unto all duties of profession, against all difficulties and discouragements. It is a boldness of mind with freedom from bondage and fear in the duties of Religion towards God and man, from a prevailing perswasion of our acceptance with God therein. In this frame of Spirit, by this fruit and effect of faith these Hebrews were carried chearfully through all their sufferings for the Gospel. And indeed without it, it is impos∣sible that we should undergo any great sufferings unto the glory of God, or our own advantage. For if we are made diffident of our cause by unbelief; if the helps and succours tendered in the Gospel and promises thereof be betrayed by fear; if the shame of outward sufferings and scorns do enfeeble the mind; if we have not an evidence of better things to lay in the Ballance against pre∣sent evils, it is impossible to endure any great fight of afflictions in a due manner. Unto all these evil habits of the mind is this confidence opposed. This was that Grace, that exercise of Faith, which was once admir'd in Peter and John, Acts 4. 13. And there can be no better account given of it, then what is evident in the behaviour of those two Apostles in that season. Being in bonds, under the power of their enraged enemies for preaching the Gospel, yet with∣out fear, tergiversation, or hesitation, without all questioning what will be the issue, and how they would deal with them whom they charged to have murdered the Lord Jesus; with all boldness and plainness of speech, they gave an account of their Faith, and testified unto the Truth. Wherefore these things that I have mentioned are plainly included in this confidence, as to invincible constancy of mind, and boldness in the profession of the Gospel, in the face of all difficulties, through a trust in God, and a valuation of the Eternal reward, which are the Foundation of it. This frame of Spirit they ought to labour to confirm in themselves, who are or may be called unto sufferings for the Gospel. If they are unprepared, they will be shaken and cast down from their stability. 3. This confidence which hath been of such use unto them, the Apostle Exhorts . them now not to cast it away; . He doth not say, leave it not, forgo it not; but cast it not away. For where any Graces have been stirred up unto their due exercise, and have had success, they will not fail, nor be lost without some positive act of the mind in rejecting of them, and the refusal of the succours which they tender unto us. And this rejection may be only as unto it's actual exercise, not as unto it's radical in-being in the soul. For as I look on this confidence as a Grace, so it is not the root, but a branch of it: Faith is the root, and confi∣dence is a branch springing out of it. Wherefore it may, at least for a season, be cast away, while faith abides firm. Sometimes failing in Faith makes this Con∣fidence to fail, and sometimes failing in this Confidence weakens and impairs Faith. When faith on any occasion is impaired and insnared, this confidence will not abide. And so soon as we begin to fail in our confidence, it will reflect weakness on faith it self. Now unto the casting away of this Confidence these things do con∣cur. (1.) That it do as it were offer it self unto us for our assistance as in for∣mer times. This it doth in the reasonings and arguings of faith for boldness and constancy in profession, which are great and many, and will arise in the minds of them that are Spiritually enlightned. (2.) Arguments against the use of it, espe∣cially at the present season when it is called forth, are required in this case; and they are of two sorts. (1.) Such as are suggested by carnal wisdom, urging men unto this or that course whereby they may spare themselves, save their lives, and keep their Goods, by rejecting this confidence, although they continued firm in the Faith. (2.) From carnal fears, representing the greatness, difficulties and dangers that lye in the way of an open profession with boldness and confidence. (3.) A resolution to forgoe this confidence upon the urgency of these arguings. (4.) An application unto other ways and means inconsistent with the exercise of this Grace, in the discharge of this duty. And hence it appears how great is the evil here dehorted from, and what a certain entrance it will prove into the Apostacy it self so judged as before, if
not timely prevented. And 'tis that which we ought continually to watch against. For he that was constant in this Grace, yet did once make a forseiture of it unto his unutterable sorrow, namely, the Apostle Peter. And it is not lost but upon the Corrupt reasonings which we have now mentioned that aggravate its guilt. He that casts away his Confidence as unto his present profession, and the duties thereof, doth what lies in him cast away his interest in future salva∣tion. Men in such cases have a thousand pretences to relieve themselves. But the present Duty is as indispensibly required, as future happiness is faith∣fully promised. Wherefore the Apostle adds the Reason why they should be careful in the preservation of this confidence, which is, that it hath a great recompence of reward. That which the Apostle as unto the matter of it calls here a recompence of . reward, in the end of the next verse, from the formal cause of it, he calls the promise, and that promise which we receive after we have done the will of God. Wherefore the reward of recompence here intended is the glory of Hea∣ven, proposed as a crown, a reward in way of recompence unto them that over∣come in their sufferings for the Gospel. And the future glory, which as unto it's Original cause is the fruit of the good pleasure and soveraign grace of God, whose pleasure it is to give us the Kingdom; and as unto it's Procuring cause is the sole purchase of the blood of Christ, who obtained for us Eternal redemp∣tion; and on both accounts a free gift of God; for the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God through Christ is Life Eternal, so as it can be no way merited nor procured by our selves, by vertue of any proportion by the rules of Justice between what we do or suffer and what is promised; is yet constantly promi∣sed unto suffering Believers under the name of a recompence and reward. For it doth not become the Greatness and Goodness of God to call his own people unto sufferings for his Name, and unto his Glory, and therein the loss of their Lives many times, with all Enjoyments here below; and not propose unto them, nor provide for them, that which shall be infinitely better than all that they so undergo. See Heb. 6. 11. and the Exposition of that place, Rev. 2. 3. Wherefore it is added, 3. That this Confidence hath this recompence of reward, (that is) it gives a right and title unto the future reward of glory; it hath it in the promise and consti∣tution of God; whoever abides in it's Exercise shall be no loser in the issue. They are as sure in divine Promises as in our own possession. And although they are yet future, Faith gives them a present subsistence in the soul, as unto their power and efficacy. In the times of suffering, and in the approaches of them it is the duty of Believers to look on the Glory of Heaven, under the notion of a refreshing, alsufficient Re∣ward. Observ. VERSE 36. For ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might receive the Promise. The Apostle in these words confirms the necessity of the Exhortation he had insisted on. He had pressed them unto nothing but what was needful for them. For whereas there were two things proposed unto them; one in the way of Duty, namely, that they should do the will of God; the other in the way of Reward, or what they should receive upon their so doing; things were so ordered in the soveraign pleasure and will of God, that they could believe neither of them, not only without the Duty which he exhorted them unto, but without a continuance therein. And indeed, this Exhortation, not to cast away their confidence, that is, to abide in it, and to improve it against all difficulties and dangers, doth include in it that patience which he affirms that they stand in need of. Wherefore there are three things in the words. (1.) The con∣firmation of the preceding Exhortation by this reason, that they had need of Pa∣tience. (2.) The time and season wherein that Patience was so needful as unto
them, and that was whilest they were doing the will of God. (3.) The end whereunto it was necessary, which is the receiving of the Promise. (1.) The rational Enforcement is introduced by the Redditive , For. This is . that which you must apply your minds unto, or you cannot attain your end. (2.) That which he asserts in this reason is, that they had need of Patience. He doth not charge them with want of Patience, but declares the necessity of it as unto its continual Exercise. , is a bearing of evils with quietness, and . complacency of mind, without raging, fretting, despondency, or inclination unto complyance with undue ways of deliverance. In Patience possess your Souls. , or confidence will ingage men into troubles and difficulties in a way of duty. But if patience take not up the work, and carry it on, confidence will flagg and fail. See chap. 6. 11, 12. and our Exposition thereon. Patience is the perfecting grace of suffering Christians, James 1. 4, 5. And that which all tribulations do excite in the first place unto it's proper actings, whereon the ex∣ercise of other graces doth depend, Rom. 5. 4, 5. This saith the Apostle you have need of. He speaks not absolutely of the Grace it self, as though they had it not, but of its continual exercise in the condition wherein they were, or whereinto they were entring. Men for the most part desire such a state wherein they may have as little need and use of this grace as possi∣ble. For it supposeth things hard and difficult, about which alone it is conver∣sant. But this is seldom the estate of the professors of the Gospel. For besides the troubles and afflictions which are common unto, and almost inseparable from this life, they are for the most part continually exposed unto all sorts of troubles and miseries, on the account of their profession. He that will be the disci∣ple of Christ, must take up his Cross. The necessity here intimated of Patience, is grounded on these two suppositions. (1.) That those who profess the Gospel in sincerity shall ordinarily meet with trials, tribulations, and sufferings upon the account of that profession. This the Scripture, and the experience of all ages doth abundantly testifie; And in particular, it was the condition of these Hebrews, as it was of all the primitive Churches. (2.) That without the con∣stant exercise of Patience, none can pass through these tribulations unto the glo∣ry of God, and their own advantage, as unto the great end of the obtaining the promise of Eternal Life. For without it men will either faint and give way to temptations, that shall turn them aside from their profession; or will misbehave themselves under their sufferings, unto the dishonour of God, and the ruine of their own souls. Patience is not a meer endurance of trouble, but it is indeed the due exercise of all graces under sufferings; nor can any grace be acted in that con∣dition where Patience is wanting. The Exercise of Faith, Love, and delight in God, the resignation of our selves to his soveraign will and pleasure, the valuation of things Eternal above all things of this present life, whereby the soul is kept quiet and composed, free from distractions, fortified against temp∣tations, resolved for perseverance to the end; this is Patience. It is therefore indispensibly necessary unto this condition. He that would abide faithful in difficult seasons, must fortifie his soul with an unconquerable Patience. (1.) Then pray for it. (2.) Give it it's due exercise in the approaches of troubles, that it be not pressed and overwhelmed by thoughts contrary unto it. (3.) Take care to keep Faith vigorous and active: it will grow on no other root but that of Faith. (4.) Especially exercise Faith unto a view of Eternal things, which will ingage the aid of Hope, and administer the food that Patience lives upon. Wherefore in this case, (5.) Remember, 1. That the want of it layes the soul open unto the power and efficacy of all sorts of temptations, for this is the only Armour of proof against the assaults of Satan and the World in a suffering season. 2. 'Tis that alone which will asswage the pain of sufferings, ease the burden of them, rebate their edge, and make them easy to be born. All other things will fall before the sharpness of them, or give relief that shall end in ruine. 3. It is this alone whereby God is glo∣rified in our sufferings, and honour given to Jesus Christ in the Gospel. . The next thing in the words is the season of the necessity of the continuance of the exercise of this Grace and Obedience, untill we have done the will of God.
There is no dismission from the discharge of this duty untill we have done the whole will of God. The Will of God is twofold; (1.) The Will of his Purpose and good pleasure, the Eternal act of his Counsel, which is accompanied with infinite wisdom concerning all things that shall come to pass. (2.) The Will of his Command presenting unto us our Duty, or what it is that he requireth of us. Respect may be, and I judge is had unto the will of God in both these sences in this place; For (1.) A respect is had unto the will of God dispo∣sing the state of the Church and all Believers therein into Troubles, Sufferings, and Temptations; 1 Pet. 3. 17. He could, if it had seemed good unto him have placed the Church in such a condition in the world, as that it should have been freed from all outward troubles and distresses. But it is his will that it should be otherwise, and 'tis for the ends of his own glory, as also the good of the Church in that state wherein they are to continue in this world. This therefore is that which we are to acquiesce in as unto all the sufferings we may de exposed unto in this world. It is the will of God, that it should be so. And he seldom leaves us destitute without a prospect into those holy Reasons and ends of it, for which it is necessary that it should be so. But whereas this principally respects sufferings, it will be said, How can we do this will of God, when nothing is required of us but outwardly to endure what we do undergo? I answer, (1.) Though sufferings be principally intended in this place, yet they are not so only. The whole state and condition of our lives in this world de∣pends on this will of God, the time of our doing and suffering, of living and dying, with all our circumstances, are resolved into his will concerning them. And it is weariness of the effects of this will of God, that is in the most the cause of their departure from their profession. Wherefore this sence is not to be exclu∣ded. See Acts 13. 26. But, (2.) The will of God is that whereby our whole duty is presented unto us as unto our Faith, Obedience, and Worship. As our Lord Christ came to do the will of him that sent him, according to the Command∣ment he received of him. The whole of our duty is resolved into the will of God, (that is) the will of his Command; and so to do the will of God in this sence is to abide constant in all the duties of Faith and Obedience, Worship and Profession, which he requireth of us. And there is no release in this matter whilest we are in this world. Wherefore, sayes the Apostle, you have need of patience, during the whole course of obedience presented unto you, as that without which you cannot pass through it, so as thereon to inherit the promises. What is meant here by the promise is evident from the Context. All the . promises of Grace and mercy in the Covenant which they had already received. God had not only given them the promises of all these things, but he had given them the good things themselves that were promised, as to the degrees and measures of their enjoyment in this world. And as unto the promise of Eternal life and glory, they had received that also, and did mix it with Faith. But the thing promised it self they had not received. This different notion of the pro∣mises the Apostle declares Chap. 11. as we shall see, God willing. I. The glory of Heaven is an abundant recompence for all we shall undergo in our Observ. way towards it. II. Believers ought to sustain themselves in their sufferings with the promise of future glory. III. The future Blessedness is given unto us by the promise, and is therefore free and undeserved. IV. The consideration of Eternal Life as the free effect of the grace of God and Christ, and as proposed in a gracious promise, is a thousand times more full of Spi∣ritual refreshment unto a believer, than if he should conceive of it or look upon it meerly as a reward proposed unto our own doings or merits.
VERSE XXXVII, XXXVIII, XXXIX. . VERSE 37, 38, 39. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now the Just shall live by Faith: but if any man draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition: but of them that be∣lieve to the saving of the Soul. THe substance of the Apostolical exhortation, as hath been often observed, is the Constancy of the Hebrews in their profession against persecutions and temp∣tations. Unto this end he commends unto them the necessary use of confidence and Patience, as those which would carry them through their difficulties, and support them under it. But those Graces are not the root whereon constancy and perseverance do grow, they are all branches of it. They do not give strength unto the soul to do and suffer according to the mind of God, but they are the way whereby it doth exercise its strength which it hath from another grace. It is faith from whence alone all these things do spring. This the Apo∣stle knowing, he reserves the declaration of its nature, efficacy, and power unto the close of this argument. And such an ennarration of the nature and effi∣cacy of it he intends, as will certainly effect the great work of carrying them through their difficulties, even all that they may be called unto, because it hath done the same in all true Believers from the foundation of the world. Wherefore, as is usual with him, in these Verses, he makes a transition unto the consideration of Faith it self, whereinto he resolves the whole Exhortation unto constancy in profession. And there are three things in these three verses. (1.) A Proposal of the Object of faith, which is the coming of Christ with the circumstances of it, v. 37. (2.) The necessity and efficacy of Faith on that proposal, with the certain ruine of them that are strangers unto it, confirmed by prophetical testimony, v. 38. (3.) The Judgment of the Apostle concerning these Hebrews, as unto their Faith, and the sincerity of it; from whence he proceeds to declare it's nature, and confirm its efficacy, v. 39. VERSE 37. For yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. It might arise in the minds of these Hebrews, weakning and discouraging them from a complyance with this Exhortation of the Apostle, that it was a long time that they were to be exposed unto, and exercised with these troubles, so as that they might justly fear that they should be worn out by them. And indeed there is nothing doth more press upon, and try the minds of men in their sufferings, than that they can see no issue out of them. For we are all naturally inclined to desire some rest and peace, if it may stand with the will of God, whilest we are in this world. To encourage them against the influ∣ence of this temptation, the Apostle accommodates a testimony out of the Pro∣phet Habakkuk, which leads him directly unto the consideration of the power and efficacy of Faith, which he had designed. Hab. 2. 3, 4. For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not lie: though it tar∣ry, wait for it, for it will surely come, it will not tarry. Behold, his soul which
is lifted up, is not upright in him; but the just shall live by his faith. He speaks of a Vision, that is, a prophetical vision of good things which God would effect in due time. And there is the same Reason in general of all the promises of God. Wherefore what is spoken of one, namely, of the deliverance of the people, may be accommodated unto another, namely, the coming of Christ whereby that deliverance is to be wrought. There is in the Prophet a suppo∣sition that it seems to be delayed, and the accomplishment of it to be retard∣ed; though it tarry, saith he; that is, seem to you so to do. For believers are apt to think long under their sufferings of the seeming delaies of the accom∣plishment of Gods promises, and long for the time of it; as wicked men and Scoffers harden themselves in their sins and impieties on the same account with re∣spect to Gods Threatnings; 2 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4. But saith he, it will not tarry; that is, although it seem to you so to do, and you are dejected thereon about it; yet there is an appointed time for it, and that in it self no long time, beyond which it shall not be deferr'd one moment, Isa. 60. 22. 2 Pet. 3. This whole sence the Apostle compriseth in this verse, though he do not peculiarly render the words of the Prophet. 1. He respects in this Verse the season of the accomplishment of what he now proposeth unto them. And there are three things therein. (1.) An Acknowledgment that it is not immediately to be looked for. For it is a thing yet to be waited for, yet there remains some time for its accomplish∣ment; and this is that which renders their confidence and Patience in Sufferings . so necessary, as he had before observed. The delay of the Accomplishment of Promises is a great exercise of Faith and Patience. Whence are all the Exhortations not to faint in our minds, nor to be Observ. weary. (2.) There is a limitation of the time for the accomplishment of what seems so to be delayed, it is , a little space. Though it seem to tarry, wait for it, it . will come, and that ere long, or after a short space of time. (3.) A farther declaration of the Nature of this Season in these words , . quantum quantum, or quantillum quantillum; the reduplication of the word may yield a double sence. (1.) A Limitation of the time, a very little, a short space not to be fear'd or reckon'd on. (2.) On the other side, a supposition of some Duration how long soever it be, yet it is but a little while. According unto either sence the design of the Apostle is the same, which is to satisfie the Hebrews that there shall be no such delay in what they looked after and expected, as should be a just cause of despondencies or weariness in them. As if he had said, My Brethren, faint not, be not weary nor discouraged, keep up Confidence and Patience, you know what you wait for and expect, which will be an abundant recompence unto you for all your Sufferings; And whatever appearances there may be of its tarrying or delay, whatever it may seem to you, yet if you have but a prospect into Eternity, be it what it will, it is but a very little while, and so is to be esteem∣ed by you. 2. That which is proposed unto them under this Limitation is this, that he who shall come will come, and will not tarry. What the Prophet spake of the Vision he saw, the Apostle applies unto the Person of Christ, for the reasons before mentioned: , He that shall come, is a Periphrasis of Christ, . frequently used and applied unto him. Once it is used to express his Eter∣nity, Rev. 1. 8. but generally it hath respect unto the Promise of him. The Foundation of the Church was laid in the Promise that he should come, and he came in his Spirit unto them from the foundation of the World; 1 Pet. 1. 11. ch. 3. 18, 19, 20. yet this was he that should come, as is expressed John 1. this was his coming in the Flesh. After his Incarnation and Ministry, he was now with respect unto them, he that was come. Yea, to deny him to be come in answer unto that promise, is Antichristian, 1 John 4. 3. Yet after this, he was to come again, on a double account. 1. In the Power of his Spirit, and the exercise of his Royal Authority, for the setting up and settling his Church in the world; whereof there are two parts:
(1.) The Assistance of his Spirit, with his miraculous Operations unto the Ministers of the Gospel, which were the powers of the world to come, John 16. 7, 8. This was an illustrious Advent of Christ, not in his own person, but in that of his Vicar and Substitute, whom he promised to send in his stead. Hereby he was acquitted from all that dishonour, contempt andreproach, that was cast on him in the world. (2.) He was to come for the punishment and destruction of his stubborn and inveterate Adversaries. And these also were of three sorts. (1.) Those that were so directly unto his own Person, and by consequence unto his Gospel. (2.) Such as were directly Enemies unto his Gospel, and by consequence unto his Person. (3.) Such as were declared Enemies to them both. (1.) Of the First sort were the Jews who slew him, who murdered him, and cast him out of the Vineyard, and thereon continued their hatred against the Gospel, and all that made profession thereof. He was to come to destroy those murderers, and to burn their City, which fell out not long after the writing of this Epistle, and is properly intended in this place. See Matth. 24. 3, 27, 30. 2 Pet. 3. 4. Jude 14. Rev. 1. 7. Mark 16. 28. James 5. 7, 8. For hereon en∣sued the deliverance of the Church from the Rage and persecution of the Jews, with the illustrious propagation of the Gospel throughout the world. (2.) The Pagan Roman Empire was the Second sort of his Adversaries who were immediate Enemies unto his Gospel, and consequently to his Person. These after the destruction of the former sort, raged with all Blood and Cru∣elty against the Church for sundry Ages. These therefore he promised he would come and destroy; and the Faith of the Church concerning this his Coming was, that he that should come, would come, and would not tarry. The de∣scription of this coming of Christ is given us; Rev. 6. 7, 8, 9, 10. (3.) After this arose a third sort of Enemies, who in words owning his person and Gospel opposed all his Offices, and persecuted all that would yield Obedience unto him in the Exercise of them, and were thereby consequentially Enemies both to his Person and Gospel. This was the Apostate Christian Church of Rome, or the New Testament Babylon. And in respect of these Enemies of his, Christ is still he that is to come, and as such is believed in, and his coming prayed for by all the Saints. For he is to destroy the Man of Sin, the Head of that Apostasie, by the Brightness of his coming. For as the oppositi∣on made unto him did not arise suddenly, and at once, as those foremen∣tioned did, especially that of the Jews, whose destruction was therefore speedy and at once, but in a long tract of time grew up gradually unto its height; so he will destroy it in like manner. And therefore although he hath set his hand unto that work, and begun the Execution of his Judgments on the An∣tichristian State in some degree, yet as to the utter destruction of it by those Plagues which shall befall it in one day, he is still , he that is looked for, he that is to come. 2. Christ is , with respect unto his coming at the last day unto Judgment. This is known and confessed, and the business of his coming therein is the Prayer of the whole Church, Rev. 22. 20. And it is an Article of Faith, whose nature we have described on Chap. 6. 5. It may be now inquired, with respect unto whether of these comings, it is said here he shall come, that he is . It is generally referr'd by Interpreters unto his last Advent at the day of Judgment. I doubt not but that also is included, but I dare not exclude the other Comings mentioned, as things which were principally suited unto the relief of the Church under it's distress. For unto every state of the Church there is a coming of Christ suited and accommodated unto their condition, whereby their Faith is kept in continual exercise of desires after it. This was the life of faith under the Old Testament as to his coming in the flesh, until it was accomplished. This faith after his Resurrection they lived on, though but for a short season, un∣till he came in the power of his Spirit, and his miraculous Operations, so to convince the World of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment. Nor do I under∣stand how the Just can live by faith, without a continual expectation of the coming of Christ in a way suited to the Sufferings and Deliverance of his
Church in that season. For instance, the state was such now with those He∣brews, that if an end were not put unto it, or the dayes were not shortned, no flesh among them could have been saved, as our Saviour speaks, Matth. 24. 22. In this state the Church looked for such a coming of Christ, as should work out their Deliverance, and he came accordingly, as we have shewed. Afterwards, the Earth was filled with the Blood of Saints and Mar∣tyrs, by the Power of the Roman Empire. In this state those that were slain, and those that were alive, appointed unto death, cryed, How long, Lord, ho∣ly and just, doest thou not avenge our blood on them that live on the Earth? They exercised Faith also in this word, that it was but a little while, and he that shall come, will come; which he did accordingly. And the case is the same with those that suffer under the Antichristian Apostasie, they live, pray, and believe in the expectation of the Appearance of the Brightness of that coming of Christ, wherewith the Man of Sin shall be consumed, and al∣though it seem to tarry, they wait for it: This is the faith and patience of the Saints. Wherefore, the End for which this coming of Christ is proposed unto the Church, being the supportment and encouragement of their Souls unto Faith and Patience, a respect must be had unto such a coming as is suited to their relief in their present state and condition. And this unto these Hebrews was then , in a literal sence. So it is to be accommodated unto all other states of the Church. And therein, the consideration of the coming of Christ at the last day unto the final and eternal Judgment, ought not to be omitted. This is that Anchor and great Reserve of Believers in all their di∣stresses and sufferings, when all appearance of deliverance in the World ab∣solutely ceaseth, to betake themselves unto this, that there is a day approach∣ing, wherein God will judge the World in righteousness, by the Man whom he hath ordained. That the Lord Christ shall assuredly come unto that Judg∣ment, is that which they principally resolve their Satisfaction into. See 2 Thess. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. I. It is essential unto Faith to be acted on the promised Coming of Christ to Observ. all that look for his appearance. II. There is a Promise of the Coming of Christ suited unto the state and con∣dition of the Church in all ages. III. The appearing delay of the accomplishment of any of these Promises re∣quires an exercise of the faith and patience of the Saints. IV. Every such coming of Christ hath its appointed season beyond which it shall not tarry. V. This divine disposition of things gives a necessity unto the continual exer∣cise of Faith, Prayer and Patience, about the coming of Christ. VI. Although we may not know the especial Dispensations and moments of time that are passing over us, yet all Believers may know the state in general of the Church under which they are, and what coming of Christ they are to look for and expect. So is it with us who live under the Antichristian state, which Christ in his appointed time will come and destroy. VII. Faith in any Church satisfies the souls of men with what is the Good and deliverance of that state; Although a man do know or is perswaded that perso∣nally he shall not see it himself, nor enjoy it. The Faith of this kind is for the Church, and not for mens individual persons. VIII. Under despondencies as to peculiar appearances or comings of Christ, it is the duty of Believers to fix and exercise their Faith on his illustrious Ap∣pearance at the last day.
IX. Every particular coming of Christ in a way suited unto the present de∣liverance of the Church, is an infallible pledge of his coming at the last unto Judgment. X. Every promised coming of Christ is certain, and shall not be delayed beyond its appointed season, when no difficulties shall be able to stand before it. VERSE 38, 39. Now the just shall live by Faith: but if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition: but of them that believe to the saving of the Soul. The Apostle proceedeth in the Allegation of the Testimony taken out of the Prophet, and the application of it unto his present purpose. And he ob∣serveth not herein the order of the words, but keeps unto the sence and meaning of them. And two things he designeth in these two Verses. (1.) To declare the Event of the Proposal made unto them of the coming of Christ, whereby he confirmed his Exhortation unto Faith and Patience in their suffer∣ing condition, v. 38. (2.) An Application of the different Events mention∣ed by the Prophet unto these Hebrews, v. 39. In the First there are two different events expressed of the Proposal and Exhortation before given and made, with the means of them; the one is, that the just shall live by his Faith; and the other which is built on the Supposition, if any man draw back, that is, then my soul shall have no pleasure in him. In the First, there are to be considered, (1.) The note of Connexion in the Adversative particle : (2.) There is the Qualification of the Person spoken of, he is the just. (3.) The means of his being so, or of his obtaining the event mentioned, which is by Faith. (4.) What is the event it self, he shall live. Three times doth the Apostle in his Epistles make use of this Prophetical testimony, Rom. 1. 17. Gal. 3. 11. and in this place. The Note of Inference in the Exceptive Particle , we render Now, as . afterwards we render , But. The first proper sence might as well have been retained; But in the first place, and And afterwards. But the difference is of no importance,  is here taken for  in the Prophet, which is oft times exceptive, . And in the Prophet the expression is plain, because it fol∣loweth the description of the contrary frame unto what is here asserted; He whose heart is lifted up: But  in the transposition of the Words used by the Apostle, (for he first repeats the last clause of the words, and then the former afterwards, which was more accommodate unto his purpose,) doth not seem to have the force of an exceptive: nor hath it so indeed, in respect unto what was affirmed in the foregoing Verse; but it hath so unto the diffi∣culty supposed in the case under consideration, which are the Sufferings and Temptations which Professors of the Gospel should in common meet with∣all, and in the appearance of a delay as unto their deliverance out of them. But, saith the Apostle, however, notwithstanding these things, the just shall live by Faith. 2. The Person spoken of is , a just person, a man really made just, . or justified by faith, every one that is really and truly so. I doubt not but this is included in the word, and the state of Justification is intended in it. To which purpose the words are elsewhere cited by the Apostle. But yet that which is here principally intended, is that qualification of a Righteous man which is opposed to Pride, and haste of Spirit through Unbelief, whereon men draw back from God in the Profession of the Gopel. The just man, he
who is humble, meek, sincere, subdued unto the will of God, waiting for his pleasure, as all Justified persons are in their several degrees, he shall live; for he is free from that principle of Pride and Unbelief which ruines the souls of men in times of trial. There are especial Qualifications of Grace required unto stedfastness in Pro∣fession Observ. in times of Persecution, and long continued tryals. Shall live by Faith, so we:  may be joyned with , and so . express the Instrumental cause, way and means whereby a man comes to be , just; that is, , justified, which is by faith. For it is by faith both that a man is justified, and also those gracious Qualifications are wrought in him which enable him to persevere in his Profession. It puri∣fieth the heart of that Leaven of Pride which destroyeth all who are infected with it. Or it may denote the way and means whereby a Just man doth abide and persevere in his Profession unto life. And this sence I embrace, because it is the entrance of the Apostle into his demonstration of the mighty things which faith will doe, and which have been done and suffered through Faith by Believers, which he declares here in general, namely, whatever diffi∣culties and oppositions a just man meets withall in the way to things Eternal, faith will carry him through them with safety and success. He shall live: Life in both the principal sences of it is here intended. (1.) He . shall not die in and from his Profession; he shall not perish as trees plucked up from the roots, twice dead; he shall maintain a spiritual life, the life of God, as the Psalmist speaks, I shall not die but live, and declare the loving kindness of the Lord. (2.) He shall live, or attain the Promise of Eternal Life, so is the word expounded in the close of the next Verse, Believe unto the saving of the Soul. I. Many things are required to secure the success of our Profession in times of Observ. difficulties and trials: As, (1.) That our Persons are righteous or justified by Grace. (2.) That we be furnished with those Graces that are appointed unto that end. (3.) That faith be kept unto a diligent exercise. II. The continuance of the spiritual Life, and Eternal salvation of true Be∣lievers are secured from all oppositions whatever. As 'tis confest there is in these words a prescription of the way and means whereby they may be so, so there is a faithfull promise of God that so they shall be. In the latter part of the Verse there is a description of others, on a Supposition of a contrary state, frame and event. In the former, the person is righteous, the way of his acting in the present case is by faith, and the event is Life, he shall live. On the other hand there is a supposition made of a person not so qualified, not so acting, not so living, not having the same success, but con∣trary in all these things. Wherefore they do greatly deceive themselves and others who suppose it the same person who is thus spoken of, and counte∣nance themselves by the defect of the Pronoun , which is naturally and ne∣cessarily supplyed in our Translation. For this Reading and sence of the words, The just shall live by Faith, and if any draw back, &c. is contrary to the or∣der of the words both in the Prophet and the Apostle, and the express decla∣ration of the mind of the Apostle in the next verse. For as the words lie in the Prophet, this of the Just living by Faith is a direct exception unto and re∣moval of them whose souls are lifted up, so as to depart from God. But saith he, the Just, it shall not be so with him; that is, the Just he shall live by his Faith, which is a direct opposition unto the other sort of persons. And although the order of the words be changed by the Apostle, yet the opposi∣tion between the two sorts of persons is evidently continued. Wherefore in the next Verse the Apostle makes an express distinction of these unto whom he spake, or concerning whom he speaks in the two states, the one , the other . Of the latter he had spoken in the first words, and of the
former in these that are now to be spoken unto. I shall therefore retain the supplement in our Translation, if any man, or any one draw back, if there be in any an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God. There is an appearance of a great change in the words of the Prophet, . For his Soul, which in the Prophet is referr'd unto the persons offending, is in the Apostle referr'd unto God who is offended. For indeed the word  may be so referred in the Original if we suppose a change of speech, and that the Prophet having spoken before in the Name of God, doth here speak of God, and the respect he had unto proud Unbelievers. But the word  is scarce reconcileable unto this Interpretation. Wherefore it is enough that the Apostle gives us the plain general sence and meaning of the words, with an Exposition of them, as he hath done, since he seldom keeps unto the proper words of the testimonies he quotes, but alwayes gives the mind of the Holy Ghost in them. There are two things in the words: (1.) A Crime supposed with reference unto the case under consideration, which is perseverance under trials and tem∣ptations. (2.) A Sentence pronounced upon that Crime. The first is expressed by . The word in the Prophet denotes the cause of the sin intended. . therein, it's Nature and Effect. The Original of all defection from the Go∣spel is in the sinful elation of heart, not submitting unto, not acquiescing in the Will of God, not satisfied with the condition of Temporal sufferings on the account of the Eternal Reward. When men are under the power of this evil frame of heart, they will draw back, subduct themselves out of that state and condition wherein they are exposed to these inconveniences. , if any man who hath made, doth make profession of Faith in Christ and of the Gospel, upon the invasion and long continuance of trials, temptations, and sufferings for them, do through want of submission unto, and acquiescence in the Will of God, withdraw himself from that Profession, and Communion therein with them who persist faithfull in it, my heart shall not, &c. This is the evil which the great design of the whole Epistle is to obviate and prevent, which the Apostle applies himself unto with all manner of Arguments, Motives, Ex∣hortations and Threatnings, to make effectual. For this was that sin which by reason of their sufferings and persecutions Professors were exposed unto, and which was absolutely ruinous unto the souls of them that fell under the power of it. I. No persons whatever, ought to be on any consideration secure against those Observ. sins which present circumstances give an efficacy unto. II. It is an Effect of spiritual Wisdom to discern what is the dangerous and prevailing Temptation of any Season, and vigorously to set our selves in oppo∣sition unto it. III. It is much to be feared that in great Trials, some will draw back from that Profession of the Gospel wherein they are engaged. IV. This defection is commonly durable, continued by various pretences. This is included in the word ; gradually and covertly to subduct himself. 2. The Sentence denounced against this sin is . The Soul of God is God himself: But he so speaks of himself, to affect us with . a due apprehension of his concernment in what he so speaks, as we are with that which our Souls, that is, our minds, with all our affections are ingaged in. So God promises to the Church, That he will rejoyce over them with his whole heart, and with his whole Soul. So is it here. What God thus affirms of himself, that he hath no delight in such a Person, he is not pleased with him, he shall not live before him. There is a , in the words, he shall have no delight in him, that is, he will abhorr him, despise him, and in the end utterly destroy him. But I suppose it may be thus expressed also to ob∣viate a pretence of the Hebrews against the Apostle at that season, namely,
that by deserting the Truth of the Gospel, and returning unto their Judaism, they did that which was pleasing unto God, and wherein they should find acceptance with him. For as they supposed, they returned again unto those In∣stitutions of Worship which he had been pleased withall, and which were of his own appointment. So all Apostates have some pretence for what they do, wherewith they justifie themselves untill their iniquity be found out to be hate∣full. Wherefore to deprive them of this pretence, the Apostle declares that the soul of God takes no pleasure in them. And in this Negation all positive evils are included. When God will not, doth not delight in any persons, the consequent is, that he will utterly destroy them. See Jer. 15. 1. I. It is our great Duty to look diligently that we are of that holy frame of mind, Observ. that due exercise of Faith, as that the Soul of God may take pleasure in us. II. Though there appear as yet no outward tokens or evidences of the anger and displeasure of God against our ways; yet if we are in that state wherein God hath no pleasure in us, we are entring into certain Ruine. III. Backsliders from the Gospel are in a peculiar manner the Abhorrency of the Soul of God. IV. When the Soul of God is not delighted in any, nothing can preserve them from utter destruction. VERSE 39. But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition: but of them that believe, to the saving of the Soul. An Application is made in these words unto the State and Condition of these Hebrews at present, at lest unto them whom the Apostle designs in an especial manner. As also a transition is made unto that which now lay in his Eye, namely, the full demonstration of the power and efficacy of faith to make us accepted with God, and to carry us through in the course of our greatest trials and temptations with success and victory. The Application he makes unto the believing Hebrews, is of the same nature and kind with that which on the same occasion he had made unto them before, chap. 6. 9. In both places having treated of the danger of Apostacy and the woful state of Apostates, he relieves the minds of Believers by letting them know, that although for their awakening and instruction, as for other ends, he declared the dreadful Judgments of God against unprofitable professors and Apostates, yet was it not as though he apprehended that that were their condition, or that they were cast out of the favour of God, or cursed by the Law, but he was perswaded better things of them. Such ministerial encouragements are needful in like cases, that persons be not exasperated through an apprehension that undue surmises are entertained against them, nor too much dejected with fears that their condition makes them obnoxious unto the threatning. Both which are diligently to be avoided. The Apostle's reckoning himself, in his ministerial dealing with them, in their state and condition as here, we are not, hath been spoken unto elswhere, with the reasons of it. And whereas he sayes we are not, it is frivolous to interpret it by we ought not to be, as 'tis done by some; For so the words have nothing of comfort or supportment in them, which yet is the total de∣sign of them. Nor is it an absolute infallible declaration of the state and con∣dition of all individuals concerning whom he speaks; but he gives the inter∣pretation of that perswasion on what grounds it was built, and what it was resolved into, which was spoken of in the other place, whether the Reader is referred. In the words there is a double supposition of a twofold opposite state and a
twofold opposite event, whose foundation is laid in the verse foregoing. The States are , on the one hand, and  on the other. The Events are perdition on the one hand, and saving the Soul on the other. The first of these is denyed, the latter affirmed concerning these Hebrews. 1. We are not . Even among them that were called in those days this twofold state was found. No small number there were who were . then falling into Apostacy, but they were a certain determined number which that Plague should prevail against, 2 Tim. 2. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. They were appointed to stumble at the Word, being of old ordained unto this con∣demnation. Those of Israel unto whom the Lord Christ was a Stone of stum∣bling, and a rock of offence, the Reprobates among them, which were called but not to be saved. This whole band of Rovers though in profession they were harnessed like the Children of Ephraim, yet turned their backs in the day of battail. The Event of this defection was destruction. Gradual decays and declensions there may be among true Believers from which they may be recovered: But those here intended are such as fall into Eternal ruine. For although some respect may be had unto that woful fiery destruction that was coming upon them in the desolation of the City, Land and Temple; yet it is Eternal ruine and destruction that is principally intended, as is ma∣nifest in the Antithesis, wherein it is opposed unto the saving of the Soul. I. The Scripture every where testifieth, that in the visible Church there is a certain number of false Hypocrites, whose end and lot it is to be destroyed. Observ. II. 'Tis our duty to evidence unto our own Consciences, and give evidence unto others, that we are not of this sort or number. III. Nothing can free Apostates from Eternal ruine. That which is asserted of these believing Hebrews is, that they belonged unto another state that had another event. (1.) This state is, that they were of the Faith, so our Apostle useth this expression, Gal. 3. 7, 8. That is true believers, and heirs of the Promises. He there declares, not only such as make profession of the Faith, but such as truly and really believe. A State of them unto whom all the promises as unto present preservation and Eternal salvation were made in the word. We that are of that faith which is effectual unto the saving of the soul. Both here and in the former clause not only the Event but the actual influence of Apostacy on the one hand unto destruction, and of faith on the other to the saving of the soul, is intended; so the Preposition  doth denote. Faith that is effectual unto the acquisition of life, that is, to the obtaining of it as by a due means for the saving of our souls from Eternal ruine, and the obtaining of Eternal Life, Acts 26. 18. For sincere faith will carry men through all difficulties, hazards, and troubles, unto the certain enjoyment of Eternal Blessedness. FINIS.
