R1272 13029492 96726
PREACHING OF CHRIST. Opened in a SERMON Preached at St. Peters Church in the City of Norwich at an Ordination, Septemb, 22. 1661. By EDWARD REYNOLDS D. D. and Bishop of NORWICH. Augustin. Epist. 203. Non Cogito in Ecclesiasticis Honoribus Tempora ventosa transigere, sed cogito me principi pastorum omnium ra∣tionem de Commissis Ovibus redditurum. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for George Thomason at the sign of the Rose and Crown in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 1662.
To the Reverend my dearly be∣loved Brethren the Dean, Prebenda∣ries, and the rest of the Clergy of the Cathedral Church and City of NORWICH. REverend and beloved Bretheren. Ever since the preaching of this plain Sermon, I have been impor∣tuned Quotidiano convicio (if I may use the Orators expression) to make it publick.Quintilion. I have at last suffered my self to be overcome by the perswasions of my friends. My chief end therein hath been, That I might provoke my younger brethren to make it the main design of their Ministry to render the Lord Jesus, His divine Person, His sacred Offices, His heavenly Doctrine, His blessed Example, His spiritual Graces, the fellow∣ship of his sufferings, the power of his re∣surrection,Phil. 3. 8, 10. the excellency of his know∣ledge,Eph. 3. 8, 18, 19 the unsearchable riches of his love, & al the mysteries of his Kingdom, amiable in
the eyes of their hearers, As it was foretold of him,Hag. 2. 7. That he should be the desire of all Nations,Cant. 5. 10, 16. the chiefest of ten thousand, and altogether lovely. That in preaching the Law, they may lead men to Christ for mercy to pardon the Transgressions, and for Grace to obey the commands of it. That in preach∣ing the Gospel, they may direct men unto Christ for Faith, to believe the promises of the Covenant, for he is the Author of our Faith:Heb. 12. 2. Col. 1. 27. For Hope, to wait for the fulfilling of them, for he is unto us the Hope of Glory; and for Love, to in flame that purity and holinesse which they are intended to kindle in us, for the Love of Christ constraineth us.2 Cor. 5. 14. That by the awe and dread of the Name of Christ,2 Cor. 5. 20. in whose stead they speak,1 Pet. 5. 4. and un∣to whom,Heb. 13. 17. as the chief Shepherd of the sheep, they must give an account, they may be deterred from all those ways of passion, o∣stentation and vanity, whereby men are some∣times transported to preach themselves ra∣ther then Christ,Jer. 23. 16, 22, 26. and the conceptions of their own heart rather then his counsel,1 Sam. 2. 17. and thereby provoke the people to abhor the offering of
the Lord. I have taken the liberty of dedi∣cating it unto you, that I might thereby te∣stifie the Love and Honour I owe your per∣sons, the value I set upon your learned and pious Labours, and the real thanks which I return unto you, for the great Love which you have expressed towards my person, and assistance which you have afforded me in mine attendance on the service of that Dio∣cess. And I hope it will not be grievous unto you, or offensive unto any, if after the Example of the Antient Bishops in the primitive and purer ages of the Church, who were wont to sit with their Clergy and pre∣side in an Ecclesiastical Senate,Ignat. I shall in matters of weight and difficulty intreat the advice and assistance of you who are Pres∣byteri urbis, in order to the more safe,Origen. judi∣cious,Consessus Cleri. Cyprian. regular,Senatus Eccle∣siae. Hieron. vid. Cyprian: passim. Epist. 6. 18, 19, 24, 28, 31, 32, 33, 35, 40, 46, 58, 66, 71, 72. and inoffensive determining of them. And so I commend you to the Grace of God, and remain Your most loving Brother and fellow Labourer in the service of Christ and his Church, Ed. Norwich.
PREACHING OF CHRIST. 2 Cor. 4. 5. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Je∣sus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. A Great part of this Epistle is Apologetical, wherein the Apostle laboureth to as∣sert and vindicate his Apo∣stolical office and dignity from the prejudices which either the sufferings which attended him in the dis∣pensation
thereof, or the suggestions of false Apostles, and deceitful workers might have raised up against him. With these men he putteth himself in the balance, and as in many other respects he prefer∣reth himself before them, so particular∣ly in the point of fidelity and sincerity in the work of the Ministry: which ha∣ving mentioned, chap. 1. 12. and 2. 17. 3. 6. and thereupon having set forth the excellency and glory of the Evangelical Ministry, cap. 3. 7,—18. He further de∣monstrateth his uncorrupt and sincere ad∣ministration thereof in this present chap∣ter, and in divers consequent parts of this Epistle: professing his diligence therein, as in the discharge of a service where∣unto he was in special mercy called, ver. 1. his Endeavour in godly simplicity as in the sight of God to manifest the truth thereof unto the consciences of men, verse 2. for it was not his prevarication, but mens own blindness, and Satanical delusion which hid the Gospel from those who received it not, v. 3, 4. And
this his fidelity he further proveth by the substance and tenor of the Doctrine which he taught, which was to set forth not himself, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and by the excellency of the divine power concur∣ring with his Ministry to give unto men, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ, Ver. 5, 6, 7. The words contain The mention of a duty, , we preach, and the sub∣ject or matter of that duty, set forth, 1. Negatively, not our selves. 2. Positive∣ly, Christ as the Lord of the Church, whereof the Apostle was but a servant in order to their good, and his Masters glory, of which particulars we shall speak with all brevity and perspicuity. And 1. Of the Duty, , we preach, implying an allusion to those and Caduceatores, who were wont with an open and loud voice to pro∣mulge and publish the Edicts of Magi∣strates, of whom we read so often in Ho∣mer and others. In which respect the Prophet is commanded to lift up his
voice like a Trumpet, Isa. 58. 1. allu∣ding unto those Trumpets which the Priests were commanded to sound in the calling of solemne assemblies, Numb. 10. 1. I shall not here insist on the dignity and excellency of this office, which not onely the holy Prophets and Apostles did attend upon, Isa. 6. 8. Mat. 3. 1. Mat. 10. 7. but the Blessed Angels, , Luk. . 10. yea, He who is the Lord of men and Angels, was solemnly anointed unto this function, to preach the Gospel to the poor, to preach deliverance to the Cap∣tives, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, Luke 4. 18, 19, 43, 44. and though he were the Lord of life and glory, unto whom every knee must bow, Phil. 2. 10. whom all the Angels are commanded to worship, Heb. 1. 6. yet he did not disdain to be a Minister, Rom. 15. 8. and to go about preaching of the Gospel of the Kingdom, Mat. 4. 23. And therefore how mean and ignoble soever this function may be esteemed by
men, who value not their own souls, and and therefore are not to be so much won∣dred at, as pitied, if they undervalue the means of making them happy; yet we learn from hence with the Apostle to magnifie our office, Rom. 11. 13. and to e∣steem it a singular gift of divine grace be∣stowed upon us, that we should preach the unsearchable riches of Christ, Eph. 3. 7, 8. and accordingly to adorn our Ministry by such lives and learning as becomes it, and not to dishonour by sordid, earthly, sensual, or brutish conversations, so sa∣cred and divine an office. Neither shall I at all mention the dif∣ficulty of it, which made the Prophet cry out, I am a child, Jer. 1. 6. and the Apo∣stle, who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2. 16. thereby teaching us by unwearied diligence in our Studies, and assiduity in our prayers, to wait upon God for sup∣plies of his Spirit and grace, who alone maketh able Ministers of the New Testa∣ment, 2 Cor. 3. 6. But I shall speak a very little of the
necessity of this weighty work, to awa∣ken and provoke those who are call'd unto it, with the more fear and trem∣bling, with the more fidelity and assidui∣ty to attend upon it. A thing is necessary two ways, either necessitate praecepti, because it is com∣manded, or necessitate medii, because it is instituted as a special means unto some great and weighty end which is to be thereby attained. The preaching of the Gospel is necessary both these wayes. 1. Necessitate praecepti, as in special man∣ner appointed by Christ, who is the King and Lawgiver in his Church, as his Fa∣ther sent him, and gave him a Commission and a command to discharge the service which was intrusted in his hand, which he with all willingness and obedience set a∣bout, though it were not only to preach∣ing but to dying, that so the pleasure of the Lord might prosper in his hand: Even so did he send forth his Disciples, John 20. 21. with a strict commission and command (as having all power in heaven and earth
given to him) to preach the Gospel, Mat. 28. 18, 19, 20. And in order to the perpetual discharge of that service, he appointed not onely Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists, which were temporary officers, but Pastors and Teachers to at∣tend the same to the worlds end, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the building up of the body of Christ, Eph. 4. 8—13. And ac∣cordingly the Apostles took special care to commit the same service unto faithful men, who might be able to teach others, and appointed Elders to be ordained in every City for carrying on this necessary work, Acts 14. 23. 2 Tim. 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. And as our Saviour by the argument drawn from his power over them, and their love to him, presseth the exercise of this du∣ty upon his Disciples, Matth. 28. 18, 19. Iohn 21. 15—17. so do the Apostles af∣terward, by the Author of their super∣intendency, the holy Spirit, by the pro∣perty of God in his Church, by the blood whereby it was purchased, Act. 20. 28.
by the presence of God, by the judgement to come, 2 Tim. 4. 1. by the Crown of Glory which they shall receive from the chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. presse diligence and fidelity in the same upon those whom they ordained thereunto. 2. It is necessary, necessitate medii, un∣to the great Ends of conversion and sal∣vation, for where there is no vision the people perish, Prov. 29. 18. when they were without a teaching Priest, they were without the true God, 2 Chron. 15. 3. no salvation without calling upon God, no calling without faith, no faith with∣out hearing, no hearing without a Preacher. It is the Apostles gradation, Rom. 10. 13—15. for albeit it be not me∣dium naturale, which doth by an intrin∣secal and constant vertue perpetually produce the effect intended, (for many more are called than chosen) inso∣much that the Prophet complains, who hath believed our report? Isa. 53. 1. All the day long have I stretched out mine hand unto a rebellious people, Isa. 65. 2. yet it
is medium institutum, appointed by God to be the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 18. and the word of Grace, Acts 20. 32. whereby ordinarily men are called to salvation, repentance and remission of sinne, being thereby preached in the Name of Christ, Luke 24. 47. the Lord working together therewith by the ex∣cellency of his power, as it pleaseth him, and dividing unto every man as he will, 1 Cor. 3. 5—7. 12. 11. In one word, It is necessary, 1. In regard of Christ, whose Authority insti∣tuteth it, and whose Glory is greatly concerned in it, as being his effectual In∣strument to demolish the Kingdom of Sa∣tan, and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of him, 2 Cor. 10. 5. 2. In regard of the Church of Christ, the Collection, Edification, Perfection and Salvation whereof doth so greatly de∣pend upon it, as the mighty power of God unto that purpose, Rom. 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1. 21. hereby men are gathered to∣gether,
and turned from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, John 11. 52. Acts 26. 18. hereby they are built up towards the at∣tainment of their inheritance, Act. 20. 32. hereby they are carried on in the unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man, Eph. 4. 13. Hereby they save themselves and those that hear them, 1 Tim 4. 16. Acts 11. 14. 3. In regard of our selves, It is neces∣sary, 1. Ad impletionem muneris, for of all Stewards, the Stewards of the My∣steries of God must be found faithfull, 1 Cor. 4. 2. 2. Ad Acquisitionem Merce∣dis, for they that turn many to righ∣teousnesse shall shine as Starres for ever and ever, Dan 12. 3. 3. Ad evitationem periculi, for woe be unto us if we preach not the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 16. So every one of these wayes a necessity is laid up∣on us. Therefore great diligence, fidelity and wisdome is to be used in this so
weighty a service. It is no small work whereby strong holds must be pulled down, and every high thing that exalt∣eth it self against the Kingdom of God be demolished, whereby sinne and Satan must be dispossessed, and the whole man subdued to the obedience of Christ, whereby the very natural propensions of men must be changed, and they effe∣ctually perswaded to hate what they lo∣ved, to love what they hated, to deny themselves, their reason, their will, their appetites, their interests, their lands, their relations, their lives, their All, (for this they must sometimes do quoad ex∣ercitium, ever quoad praeparationem animi) to please an invisible God, and to obtain an invisible inheritance. This is not the work of an illiterate Reader, but of one who hath the tongue of the learned, a workman that need not to be ashamed. This is not the work of a carless loite∣rer, that shears the fleece, and starves the flock, but of one who gives himself wholly to it. So did those Renowned
Bishops in the primitive times, we read every where in Saint Chrystome of his intimating that he was a daily preacher; and of Saint Ain∣brose his Omni Die Dominico, as Saint Austin tells us, Confess. 6. c. 3. prayer and preaching are two excellent and wor∣thy parts of the Ministery of Reconcili∣ation, appointed as mutual helps and furtherances each to other, and there∣fore they on either hand do very ill, who justle out and disparage the one by the other, as if performing the one were a sufficient discharge of the Mini∣sterial Function, and means of the peo∣ples edification and salvation without the other. Certainly our Saviours Commission extends to the worlds end, Matth. 28. 20. as long as there are strong holds to be demolished, sin to be reproved, a Church to be edified, Saints to be perfected, enemies to be resisted, there will be a necessity of every Ordi∣nance of Christ, by which these great works may be effected.
And unto the more sure effecting of them, this weighty work of preaching is to be managed and discharged with that spi∣ritual skill that we may approve our selves unto God, as workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Tim. . 15. that is to say, 1. With Evidence and demonstratin, so as to affect the conscience, and make powerful and awakening discoveries and impressions upon the practical judgement, which may not by any sophisms or subterfuges be e∣vaded, or gain-said; this the Apostle calleth demonstrative or convincing preach∣ing; My speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of mans wisdom, with ostentation of wit or humane Elocution, with Rhetoricating sophismes, or plau∣sible insinuating deceptions, as Cicero somewhere boasteth that he had dazled the eyes of the Judges, and as Saint Hie∣rome complains of many in his time, id habent curae non quomodo Scripturarum medullas ebibant, sed quomodo aures populi Declamatorum flosculis mulceant: But
saith the Apostle, my preaching was . In a spiritual, powerful and invincible demonstration, which admits not of any possibility of being gain-said or disproved; for such is that syllogisme which the Philosopher calls a Demonstration, wherein a con∣clusion is most evidently deduced ex principiis primis necessariis & per se veris, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 4. and elsewere, speaking of an unbeliever, who heareth Evangelical preaching, he saith, , he is so convinced, that he is judged; the secrets of his heart are so discovered, that he falls on his face as a cast and convicted prisoner, worshippeth God, and acknowledgeth God to be in such preaching, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. so the Prophet is said to judge men when he maketh them know the abomination of their fathers. Ezek 20. 4. and once more, we have not, saith the Apostle, walked craftily, nor handled the Word of God deceitfully, , by manifestation, or evident discovering
of the truth, we commend our selves to every mans conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 2. and thus it is said of Ste∣phen, That his adversaries were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spake, Act. 6. 10. 2. With wisdom and seasonablenesse, as men are able to heare and bear, so Christ spake the word, Mark 4. 33. John 16. 12. we must have milk for the weak, and meat for the strong, so ma∣nage our Ministry as to prevent and re∣move all occasions of prejudice and of∣fence from any which watch for matter of advantage and exception against us. 3. With sincerity and faithfulnesse, not dissembling any necessary doctrine, nor dawbing with untempered morter, nor corrupting the Word of Truth, but delivering the whole counsel of God, pleasing men in all things for their pro∣fit and edification, and to all other purposes, not pleasing men but God which trieth the heart, 1 Cor. 10. 33. 1 Thes. 2. 4. speaking his words whether men will
hear or forbear, Ezek. 2. 7. and telling them the Truth, though we be judged enemies for so doing, Gal. 4. 16. 4. With spiritual power and Autho∣rity, as Christ did, Matth. 7. 29. to declare unto men their transgression in such a manner as to judge them for it, Mic. 3. 8. Ezek. 20. 4. that their hearts may be pricked, Acts 2. 37. and they made to fall on their face and give glory to God, 1 Cor. 14. 25. to shew unto a man his up∣rightnesse in such a manner as that he may find God gracious to him, and may see his face with joy, Job 33. 23.—26. so to preach the word as to binde and loose, to remit and retain, to heal and settle the con∣sciences of our hearers, that they may finde the Gospel come unto them, not in word only, but in power, 1 Thes. 1. 5. 5. With meeknesse and all winning insinuations, that there may appear no∣thing but love and gentlenesse in every thing which we deliver; as the Apostle professeth to the Thessalonians, that he
was gentle among them, as a nurse che∣risheth her children, 1 Thes. 2. 7. and exhorteth Timothy and other spiritual persons with meeknesse to instruct oppo∣sers, and to restore such as are overtaken with any fault, 2 Tim. 2. 24, 25. Gal. 6. 1. It is an excellent Character which Saint Austin giveth of a preacher, that he should so manage his Office, ut doceat, ut delectet, ut flectat, ut intelligenter, ut libenter, ut obedienter audiatur. So to teach as withal to delight and perswade, and by a constraint of love to gain willing and chearful obedience to the doctrine which he teacheth. 6. With courage and boldnesse, not to fear the faces of any presumptuous sin∣ners, who dare to affront the Law, and not to fear the face of God. Shall any man be so bold as to do what God for∣bids? and shall a Minister be so timo∣rous as not to speak what God com∣mands? Shall I be afraid to offend him by doing my duty who is not afraid to offend God by neglecting his? Shall I
be afraid to save him who is not afraid to destroy himself? or shall I be dismaid at the face and frown of a man, and neg∣lect the wrath of God who can tear me in pieces? be not dismayed at their face, saith the Lord, least I confound thee be∣fore them, Jer. 1. 17. yet this boldnesse must be in a way of conviction and per∣swasion, without indiscretion and exaspera∣tion, that when we shew our zeal a∣gainst mens sins, we may withal manifest our love to their persons, and that honor and reverend esteem which we owe to their dignities and conditions. Lastly, our Lives and Examples must teach the people as well as our doctrine, we must be like the Star which did not onely lighten the wise men, but lead them unto Christ, Matth. 2. 9. He who by his wicked life buildeth againe those things, which by his holy doctrine he de∣stroyed, maketh himself a transgressor, Gal. 2. 18. verbis tantum philosophari non doctoris est sed historionis. It is rather pa∣geantry than serious piety, for men to
preach Angelical Sermons, and to live diabolical conversations, ut dicta factis deficientibus erubescant, as Tertullian speaks. We cannot expect that other men should follow our doctrine, when we our selves forsake it, the greatest part of men being like sheep, which go non qua eundum sed qua itur, rather as they are led then as they are taught. And so much of the duty here supposed, the excel∣lency, necessity, and manner of preach∣ing. We proceed to the object or matter of preaching, expressed, 1. Negatively, not our selves. Men may be said to preach themselves these four ways. 1. When they make themselves Lords over the flock, and exercise dominion over the consciences of those that hear them, as if a Ministry were a Soveraignty, or as if the sheep were their own, to be or∣dered and disposed as they please; this is the character which the Apostle gi∣veth of the man of sinne, that he sitteth as God in the Temple of God, usurping a
divine authority over the souls of men, 2 Thes. 2. 4. and exercising a bloody ty∣ranny over their bodies. And therefore both our Saviour and his Apostles to prevent the danger of so tempting an ambition have left strict and severe pro∣vision against it. Be not you called Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, Matth. 23. 8.—12. We have not dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy, 2 Cor. 1. 24. Not as being Lords over Gods he∣ritage, but ensamples to the flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3. 2. When they make themseves the Authors of their own Ministry, underta∣king so weighty an employment of their own heads, and running before they are sent, as many did in the Prophet Jeremies time, Jer. 23. 21. And many more in in the late licentious days amongst us, of whom we may say as the Historian said of an obscure person, that he was Homo ex se Natus, they were Concionatores ex semetipsis Nati, self created preachers, as Agathocles, a Prince of a Potter, a
Preacher of a Trooper, men who made it the principal business of their usurped preaching to disgrace, and pull down le∣gitimate preachers, and beget an under∣valuing of those serious principles, which they knew sober and fixed Divines would never desert, and contrary unto which they were resolved to act. 3. When they make themselves the Matter of their preaching, prophesying lies and the deceits of their own hearts, Jer. 23. 16, 26. teaching for doctrines the traditions or commandments of men, Mat. 15. 9. making sad the righteous, and strengthning the hands of the wicked by their lies, following their own spirits, Ezek. 13. 3, 22. venting in the place and name of Christ their own passions, and animosities, their own interests and jea∣lousies, their own private opinions and paradoxes, somenting distempers, inge∣nerating discontents and divisions in the hearts of the people, corrupting the minds, perverting the judgements, en∣snaring and intangling the consciences
of those that hear them; turning aside to vain jangling, departing from the faith, giving heed to seducing▪ spirits, speaking lies in hypocrisie, teaching things which they ought not, leading captive and deceiving the hearts of the simple, sowing tares in the Lords field, being the snare of a fow∣ler in all their wayes, walking in the Spi∣rit and in falshood, prophesying of wine and strong drink, causing the people to erre through their lies and their lightnesse. That you may keep your selves from this crimson and bloody sin, often recount that dreadful intermination, Deut. 18. 20: The Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the Name of other Gods, even that Pro∣phet shall die. See also Jer. 14. 14, 15. Jer. 23. 11, 12, 15, 30, 31, 32, 39, 40. Eze. 13. Eze. 34. Hos. 4. 6, 9. 5. 1. 9. 7. Mic. 3. 5, 6, 7. Mal. 2. 1, 2, 3. 8. 9. Mat. 23. 13.—29. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14, 15. Gal. 1. 8, 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3. 4. When they make themselves the
End of their preaching, making so holy an Ordinance subservient to their vain glory, or ambitious pursuits, or filthy lucre, or plausible compliance, or pri∣vate interests, as the Pharisees, who for a pretence made long prayers, that they might devoure widows Houses, supposing gain to be godlinesse, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Tim. 6. 5. when they pursue crooked and indirect aimes of their own, often∣tation of learning, inticing words of mens wisdom, commending themselves, plea∣sing others, 1 Co. 2. 4. 2 Cor. 10. 12. Gal. 1. 10. quite contrary to the practise of the holy Apostle, who in his Function and Ministry walked not in craftiness, handled not the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4. 2. did not exhort out of unclean∣ness, or in guile, used not flattering words, nor a cloak of Covetousnesse, pleased not men, nor sought glory of any, 1 Thes. 2. .—6. but made it his onely end to please God, and by all means to save souls, to manage his Masters interest and not his own, that Christ alone might be glorified in
the hearts of men; for how much so ever we attribute to our selves, so much we detract from Christ. Whom the Apostle makes the sole matter of his preaching. Which leads to the positive part of our preaching, Christ Jesus the Lord, whereby is intimated that the Lord Jesus is both the Author, the Ob∣ject, and the End of all our preach∣ing. 1. The Lord Jesus is the Authour and Instituter of this service in his Church; how high a presumption it is for men to intrude into a Ministry without a call and warrant from God, the sad examples of Corah, Dathan, Abiram, Vzziah, the vagabond Exorcists, Acts 19. 13▪—16. and others do abundantly testifie. And therefore as Aaron was solemnly sepa∣rated to minister to the Lord, 1 Chron. 23. 13. and in like manner Christ was called of God an high Priest after the Or∣der of Melchizedec, Heb. 5. 5, 6, 7, 10. Even so were his Apostles sent by him,
Mat. 28. 19. and by authority from him did they ordain others unto the same ser∣vice, Act. 14. 23. and direct the same course to be observed afterwards, 2 Tim. 2. 2. Tit. 1. 5. from him then, and those whom he hath appointed must we receive both our mission and our message, our whole Ministry we must receive in the Lord, as it is said of Archippus, Col. 4. 17. It must be given and committed to us, be∣fore we presume to take unto our selves the stiles of Ambassadors for Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. Joh. 3. 27. 1. From him we must have our Mission, for how shall they preach except they be sent, saith the Apostle, Rom. 10. 14. an Honor must not be undertaken without a Call, No man taketh this honour unto himself, but he that is called of God, Heb. 5. 4. the Mi∣nisterial Function is an honour, as the A∣postle sheweth, 1 Tim. 5. 17. A Trust must not be undertaken without a Call, the Ministry is a Trust and AEconomy, 1 Cor. 9. 17. Great would be the disorder and confusion, great the mischief and danger,
if hereticks and seducers might of their own heads sow their tares & subvert the souls of men; if ignorant and self con∣ceited men may heap up to themselves Hearers; if giddy and unstable people may run after novelties, and be carried about with divers and strange doctrines; if so honorable an Office should be ex∣posed to contempt, and be destitute of divine blessing and assistance by the inva∣sion of unqualified and worthless Intru∣ders. A call then is necessary. And this call, though mediate and by the Ministry of men, is from Christ. Pastors and Teachers, who have onely a mediate call, are set up by him as well as Apostles and Prophets, Eph. 4. 11. the Elders of Ephesus, though appointed by an ordinary call, are said to be made Overseers by the holy Ghost, Act. 20. 28. This Call is twofold, Internal and Ex∣ternal. 1. Internal, standing, 1. In an E∣vidence of fit qualifications for so weighty a work, viz. 1. Sanctity of life, which may
fit and dispose for the faithful and consci∣onable discharge of the Office, to make a manActs 17. 16. zealous for the glory of God, sensi∣ble of the interest of souls,1 Tim. 4. 11, 12 exemplary to the flock,1 Thes. 2. 10. able toEph. 3. 4. speak experimentally of the ways of God,2 Cor. 2. 11. the devices of Satan, theEph. 4. 12. deception of lust,1 Cor. 10. 13. the issues of tem∣ptation,Rom. 1. 11, 12▪ the consolations of the holy Spirit, and other the deep mysteries of salvation. 2. Soundness of Doctrine, and such able parts of substantial learning, as that he may be1 Tim. 3. 2. apt to teach, toIsa, 50. 4. speak a word in season, toJob 33. 23. shew a man his up∣rightnesse, toTit. 1. 11. convince gain sayers, toTit. 2. 8. use sound speech which cannot be condemn∣ed. It is not a little measure of learning which will serve to open the Scriptures, to confute errours, to state questions, to decide controversies, to resolve cases, to speak with demonstration and authority to the consciences of sinners. The Lord hath been pleased to intersperse some∣thing of almost all kinde of other learn∣ing, besides divine, in the Scriptures. Physick, in what is reported of beasts,
birds, plants, meteors, precious stones, &c. Ethicks and Politicks in Solomons Proverbs and Ecclesiastes. Logick and Rhetorick in the strong reasonings, and powerful Elegancies of Prophets and A∣postles. Mathematicks and Architecture in the structure of Noahs Ark, and of Solo∣mons and Ezekiels Temple. Languages, the Old Testament being written in Hebrew and Chalde, the New in Greek. Allusions to Exotick and profane History and Anti∣quity, Mythology, Parables, Poetry, quo∣tations out of prophane writers. And all this to instruct us what abundance of learning is requisite unto him who will rightly understand and divide the word of Truth. 3. Aptnesse to teach, spiritual skill and wisdom to shew himself a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 15 32. , as the Apo∣stles expressions are, 1 Tim. 3. 2. 2 Tim. 2. 2. 2. This Internal call standeth in a sincere desire, by the secret work of God on the heart, to serve him and his Church in the work of the Ministry,
and that not out of ambition, covetous∣nesse, or carnal affections, but out of an intire regard to the glory of God, and sal∣vation of souls. The Apostle calleth it , 1 Tim. 3. 1. a willingnesse unto it, 1 Cor. 9. 17. an addicting ones self unto it, 1 Cor. 16. 15. an offering a mans self to be sent by God, Isa. 6. 8. 2. The External call instituted by Christ in his Apostles, is managed by their successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. 1. In Examination of the fitnesse of those who judge themselves thus inwardly called, by the preceding qualifications, that the office may not be invaded by ignorant or unworthy per∣sons, 1 Tim. 3. 10. 2. In Approbation, when upon trial men are found able, willing, apt, faithful, the Church by her Officers declareth them such, and gi∣veth testimony unto them, as the Apo∣stle doth unto Epaphras and Tychicus, Col. 1. 7. 4. 7. 3. In separation and solemn consecrati∣on unto the function by fasting and pray∣er,
commending the persons so approved unto the grace of God, Act. 13. 2. 14. 23. And this done in the Church Assembly, praesente plebe, whose assent and testimo∣ny was anciently required, of which we read in Saint Cyprian, Ep. 68. Concil. Carthag. 4. can. 2. and in Leo. Ep. 89. Hereby the Church are witnesses, and (not declaring their dissent and dissatisfacti∣on) Approvers of what is done. And it was done with the Rite and Ceremony of Imposition of hands, 1 Tim. 5. 23. as importing, 1. A dedication and devo∣ting the person to the Office, Numb. 27. 18. 2. A deriving authority to admini∣ster the Office. 3. An imploring the gifts, blessing, protection, custody of the holy Spirit upon them, and commending them to the Grace of God, Act. 14. 26. Thus from Christ and according to his Institution Ministers of the Gospel have their Mission. 2. From him they must receive their Message. He is King in the Church, and they his Ambassadors, who must from him
only receive their instructions, 2 Cor. 5. 20. they must speak His Words, Ezek. 2. 7. that the Church may have a proof of Christ speaking in them, 2 Cor. 13. 3. and of the Counsel of God delivered by them, Acts 20. 27. teaching the people the things which he hath commanded, Mat. 28. 20. His command is our commission. We must deliver nothing but what we have Received. I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. That which I have heard, saith the Prophet, of the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto you, Isa. 21. 2. Speak unto all the Cities of Judah which come to worship in the Lords House All the words which I command thee to speak unto them, diminish not a word, Jer. 26. 2. What thing soever I command you observe to do it, thou shalt not add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deut. 12. 32. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God, 1 Pet. 4. 11. The Lord hath committed unto us the Word and Ministry of Reconciliation, what we do in attendance on that Mini∣stry
we do in Christs stead, and therefore ought seriously to consider with our selves, whether the words which we speak unto the people, be, for the truth, gravity, and sanctity of them, such, as may without indignity done to Christ, have his name and authority prefixed on them. He will not own the dictates and inventions of men for the Oracles of God. Though it belong to the duty, authority, and wisdom of the Church to direct meer circumstantials in the service of God, so as may most conduce unto that order and decency which God requi∣reth, so as may best become the serious∣nesse, simplicity, and sanctity of so hea∣venly and spiritual worship: Yet she may not impose as doctrines her command∣ments, Mat. 15. 9. She may not adde any thing to the alsufficiency and plenitude of the holy Scriptures, Deut. 4. 2. Prov. 30. 6. when we speak of the means of salvation, of the rules, principles, and grounds of faith and worship, of the a∣dequate subject of Evangelical preaching,
we must keep to the law and testimonies, if we speak not according unto them, it is because there is no light in us, Isa. 8. 20. no doctrine is necessary or sufficient to carry us unto Heaven, but that which first came down from heaven. Thus we preach Christ Jesus the Lord, as the Author both of our Mission and of our Message. II. We preach Christ Jesus the Lord, as the Matter and substance of our preaching; there is not any matter of preaching, which doth not either expli∣cite or reductive comprise Christ in it. We preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 23. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. All materials of Religion are contain∣ed under four heads, Agenda, Credenda, Petenda, Participanda, duties to be done, mysteries to be believed, mercies to be implored, seals to be imparted. 1. Of the Agenda, the Law is the Rule, and this is a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Consider it as Cove∣nant
of Life,, and so it sends us unto Christ, by whose onely obedience the Righteousnesse thereof hath been fulfilled for us, I am not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it, Mat. 5. 17. by whose onely sufferings and satisfaction the curse there∣of hath been removed from us, Gal 3. 13. Christ is the end of the Law, Rom. 10. 4. Consider it as a Rule of living, and so also it sends us unto Christ. 1. His spi∣ritual Doctrine openeth the sense and wideness thereof unto us, for his com∣mandment is exceeding broad, this was one great end of his Sermon in the Mount to vindicate the Law from the narrow glosses which had been cast upon it. 2. His most holy example leads us in the way of it, that we may walk as he walked, 1 Pet. 2. 21. 1 John 2. 6. 3. His holy Spirit and Grace, and his love shed abroad in our hearts, enable and constrain us to the obedience of it, I am able, saith the Apostle, to do all things through Christ who strengthened me, Phil. 4. 13. We must
never preach the Law without Christ. As it was delivered, so it must be preach∣ed, In the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3. 19. when we discover the disease we must shew the Physician. So God to Adam, 1. Conviction, where art thou? then consolation, the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head, Gen. 3. 9, 15. So John Baptist, to the multitude, first generation of Vipers, then, bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance, Luke 3. 7, 8. So Christ to Laodicea, first, thou▪ art poore, and blinde, and naked: then, I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried, Rev. 3. 17, 18. Thus Omnia Agenda lead to Christ. 2. Omnia Credenda contained in the Gospel are comprized in Christ. 1. All the Doctrines of the Gospel, as is evident by every Article of the Creed. I believe in the Father as the Father of Christ; By whom he made the world, Col. 1. 16. and in whom he is our Father, John 20. 17. I believe in the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of Christ, Rom. 8. 9. Gal. 4. 6. Vicarius Christi, who brings him and
his comforts to the soul. I believe the holy Catholick Church, the Spouse of Christ, the Body of Christ, the fulness of him that filleth all in all, Eph. 1. 23. caput & corpus unus est Christus. I believe the communion of Saints, & our communion is with the Father & the son as K. of Saints, 1 Joh. 1. 3. and with holy Angels and men, as subjects to that King. The Remission of sins, and this is from him, It must be preached in his Name, Luke 24. 47. The resurrection of the body, and this also is from him; The Son quickeneth whom he will John 5. 21, 25. John 11. 25. The life everlasting, and this from him. Christ in us the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. 2. All the Promises of the Gospel have their foundation and stability in Christ; they are in him yea, and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. He the purchaser of them by his propitiation: He the procurer of them by his Impetration: He the fulfil∣ler of them by his Princely Admini∣stration. 3. All the Comminations of the Gospel
lead us to consider Christ as the Sanctu∣ary and Refuge, through whom they are by believers to be avoided, as the Prince and Judge by whom they are upon unbe∣lievers to be inflicted, Acts 10. 42, 43. 13. 39. 4. The whole Covenant of Grace leads us unto him. For as the Covenant of Works was made with the first Adam in behalf of his posterity, so the Cove∣nant of Grace is made with the second Adam in behalf of his posterity. He be∣ing both God and man is equally concern∣ed in the Interests of both; and accord∣ingly he preserves Gods interest by his satisfaction and righteousnesse, and mans interest by reconciliation and blessed∣ness. He is the Surety of the Covenant, for the satisfaction of God, Heb. 7. 22. and he is the Mediator of the Covenant for the reconciliation of man, Heb. 8. 6. Thus omnia credenda lead unto him. 3. Omnia Petenda, All things to be prayed for do necessarily carry us unto Christ. His Father the answerer of our
prayers. I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Eph. 3. 14. His Spirit the Author of our prayers. The Spirit of the son in our heart crieth Ab∣ba Father, Gal. 4. 6. His Name the ar∣gument of our prayers. Whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you, John 16. 23, 24. His Intercession the efficacy of our prayers; this the Incense offered with the prayers of all Saints on the golden Altar, Rev. 8. 3. 4. Omnia Participanda lead unto him. Baptisme simulacrum mortis & Resurre∣ctionis Christi, the image of the death and resurrection of Christ, wherein we are planted and regenerated to his life and likenesse. The Lords Supper, the Memorial of the death of Christ, wherein we feed and feast upon him as our Pas∣sover which was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5. 7, 8. In one word, we preach him, 1. In his Office, as the Christ anointed of his Father. 2. In the great Ends of those Offices, which are to be our Jesus to
save us, and our Lord to Rule us; to be a Prince and a Saviour to give Repen∣tance and Remission of sinnes, Acts 5. 31. III. We preach Christ Jesus the Lord as the great End of all our preaching, that thereby we may advance his interest, and promote his designs, that he may see of the travel of his soul and be satisfied. That his people may be gathered, his body e∣dified, his Saints perfected, his enemies subdued, his Gospel propagated, his name glorified, and he finally admired in all them that believe, 2 Thes. 1. 10. These are in se finis operis, Eph. 4. 12. and they ought to be in us finis ope∣rantis. And now having secured Christs ho∣nour and interest, the Apostle returns again to himself, and sheweth in what capacity he looketh on himself in the Church of Christ, not as a Lord, but as a servant. Our selves your servants, far from the temper of those whom you suffer to bring you into bondage, to
smite, to devoure you, to exalt them∣selves, 2 Cor. 11. 20. Whatever titles of honour or dignity the pastors of the Church are adorned withal, (as the A∣postle assureth us of an Honor due unto it, 1 Tim. 5. 17. and an Authority en∣trusted with it, 2 Cor. 10. 8.) yet this very honour consists in a service which they owe to the Church of Christ. Christ onely hath domination and preheminen∣cy, all others, even Apostles themselves, nothing but service and Ministry. As the Priests and Levites are commanded by Josiah, to serve the Lord and his people Israel, 2 Chron. 35. 3. The highest Officers and noblest abilities are all the Churches, and for their edification, 1 Cor. 3. 22. The Names in Scripture given to Pastors, as Stewards, Ministers, Watchmen, La∣bourers, all import a service, excluding domination, which our Saviour ex∣presly forbids, Mat. 20. 25. 28. Inclu∣ding humility, industry, fidelity, love, helpfulnesse, all endeavours to attend the service of the Churches faith, as the Apostle calls it, Phil. 2. 17.
Yet withal they are such servants and stewards as are also Rulers, so they are cal∣led, Luke 12. 42. 1 Tim. 5. 17. serviunt u∣tilitati non potestati, servants they are to the souls of the people, but not to their power, whom the people have no despoti∣cal authority over, but are to submit unto as unto those that watch for their souls, 1 Cor. 16. 15, 16. Heb. 3. 17. And therefore the Apostle addeth, That they are the peoples servants for Jesus sake, in order to the promoting of his Honour and interest in the Church. The Church is his Spouse, his Flock, his Body, is to him the purchase of his own Blood. We are his Officers, and must give an account of you to him. Our Love, our Loyalty, our Fide∣lity, our Fear of him constrain us to spend and to be spent in the service of your souls. He is our Jesus and your Jesus, as we ex∣pect our own salvation from him, or value and desire yours, we must serve your faith and shew our selves his servants by being yours. I shall conclude all with a word of Ex∣hortation
to my reverent Brethren in this sacred Function, and you that are candi∣dates thereof, 1. Preach the Gospel, be instant in season and out of season reprove,2 Tim. 4. 2. rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine; think not much to further the salvation of those by your labours, whom Christ purchased with his blood, Magnifie your Office,Rom. 11. 13. not by pomp and state, by scorn or superciliousnesse; these things debase it; but by humble and painful attendance upon the Ministry which you have received of the Lord.Col. 4. 17. Esteem not that a needless Office, which the Apo∣stle hath made necessary; nor a bootlesse service unto the performance whereof so great a Reward, unto the omission whereof so great a woe is annexed, 1 Cor. 9. 16, 17. If you be not moved by the souls of others, preach for your own sakes, that you may save your selves. If you value not your own salvation, preach for the sake of o∣thers, that you may save those that hear you, 1 Tim. 4. 16. If there be yet ignorance in the people, let them not continue in darknesse
for want of your teaching. If there be yet sins amongst them, let them not perish un∣der them, for want of your Reproving. If they be yet imperfect, let them not be still children, for want of your instructing; if they be yet exposed to Temptation, let not Satan swallow them up, for want of your Resisting him. If Satan destroy men by his suggestions, he shall not answer for them as an officer (he had not inspection over them) but as a Murtherer onely. If you destroy them by your negligence, if the Shepherds do not feed, nor the Physicians heal, nor the Watchmen keep, nor the Ste∣wards provide for the flock, you have be∣trayed a trust, abused a Lord, exposed a de∣positum, you shall give an account, not onely for souls murthered, but for an office neglected, for a talent hidden, for a Ste∣wardship unfaithfully and injuriously ad∣ministred. O therefore studiously and con∣scientiously apply your selves to this hea∣venly skill of spiritual preaching. Preach in good earnest, as those who seriously in∣tend their own and their hearers salvation.
Preach not as a Rhetorician at a Desk, only to tickle ears, and to play a prize; but as an Advocate at a Bar to preserve a Client,Joh. 16. 8, 9. to save a soul. So convince of sinne, the guilt, the stain, the dominion, the pollution of it, the curse and malediction whereunto the soul is exposed by it, that your hearers may be awakened, and humbled, and effe∣ctually forewarned to flee from the wrath to come.Luke 3. 7. So convince of the alsufficient righteousnesse, andJoh. 16. 10. and unsearchable riches of Christ,Eph. 3. 8. the Excellency of his knowledge,Phil. 3. 8. the unmeasurablenesse of his love,Eph. 3. 18, 19. the precious∣nesse of his Promises,2 Pet. 1. 4. the fellowship of his suf∣ferings,Phil. 3. 10. the power of his Resurrection, the beauties of his holinesse,Psal. 110. 3. the easinesse of his yoke,Mat. 11. 30. the Sweetnesse of his peace,Joh. 14. 27. the joy of his salvation,Psal. 51. 12. the hope of his Glory,Col. 1. 27. that the hearts of your hearers may burn with∣in them,Luk. 24. 32. and they may flie like Doves unto their windows for shelter and Sanctuary into the arms of such a Redeemer,Isa. 60. 8. who is able and willing to save to the uttermost those that come unto God by him,Heb. 7. 25. that they may with all ready obedience, and by
the constraining power of the love of Christ,2 Cor. 5. 14. yield up themselves to the Government of this Prince of Peace, by whom the Prince of this world is judged and cast out,John 12. 31. 16. 11. his works destroyed,1 Joh. 3. 5, 8. and we for this end bought with a price,1 Cor. 6. 19, 20. that we should not be our▪ own, but his that bought us, nor live any longer unto our selves,2 Cor. 5. 15. but unto him that loved us and died for us, and rose again. 2 Preach not your selves, your own ima∣ginations, the devices of your own hearts, set not up your reason against Gods Word, nor your will against his grace, nor your interest against his glory, nor your fleshly wisdom against the simplicity of his holy Gospel. Preach not out of ostentation meer∣ly to the fancies and wits of men to please or to tickle them, but out of manifestation of truth to the conscience to please God. Preach not your own passions and animo∣sities, things tending to widen breaches, to foment jealousies and discontents, to kindle fedition, to cherish faction, to beget turbulency & disquiet, to shake the piety which the people owe to God, or the loy∣alty
they owe to their Prince, or the tran∣quility which they ought to promote in Church and State; but as servants of a Prince of Peace, preach those things which make for peace, and which may heal the divisions & compose the distempers which yet remain in the midst of us. 3. Preach Christ Jesus the Lord, deter∣mine to know nothing among your peo∣ple but Christ crucified, let his name and grace, his spirit and love triumph in the midst of all your Sermons. Let your great end be to glorifie him in the hearts, to render him amiable and precious in the eyes of his people; to lead them to him as a Sanctuary to protect them, a propitiati∣on to reconcile them, a treasure to enrich them, a Physician to heal them, an Advo∣cate to present them and their services un∣to God: as wisdom to counsel, as righteous∣nesse to justifie, as sanctification to renue, as redemption to save, as an inexhausted fountain of pardon, grace, comfort, victo∣ry, glory. Let Christ be the Diamond to shine in the bosom of all your Sermons.
4. Serve the souls, not the wills or lusts of men. Consider the worth of souls, their excellency, their immortality, the price that bought them, the sin which defiles them, the curse which destroys them, the grace which renues them, the glory which blesseth them. Consider the vigilancy of Satan who goeth about to devour them. His malice and industry, his power and policy, his sophisms and devices, his artifi∣ces and temptations, the indefatigable di∣ligence, and various methods he useth to destroy them, against whose engines and machinations our Ministry is appointed. Is it a small sin to gratifie Satan by negle∣cting to save those precious souls which he seeketh to ruine? Is it a small sin by our carelesnesse to betray such souls as those, and our own with them, to the peril of e∣ternal perdition? Shall we be able to en∣dure the hideous outcry of destroyed souls wherewith we had been entrusted, howl∣ing out that doleful accusation against us, Parentes sensimus parricidas, our Guids have misled us, our Watchmen have betrayed us,
our Pastors have starved us, our Stewards have defrauded us, our fathers have been our parricides? For Jesus sake, if you love Jesus; It is the argument which himself useth, Joh. 21. 15, 16, 17. (and if any man love not the Lord Iesus, let him be Anathema Maranatha.) If you would have Jesus love you, if you ten∣der his sheep, if you regard his command, if you fear his wrath, if you value his salva∣tion, study the price of souls, snatch souls out of the fire, forewarn souls of the wrath to come, be humble, be faithful, be painful, be pitiful towards the souls of men. Com∣mend your fidelity, set forth Christs excel∣lency unto the souls of your hearers, that you may be able to say to him at his co∣ming, as he to his Father, Behold me and the children whom thou hast given me. Thus doing, you shall both save your selves and them that hear you. FINIS.
