R1631 31355741 110642
Robin Hood and the Tanner. Or, Robin Hood met with his Match: A merry and pleasant Sng. Relating the gallant and fierce Combate between Arthur Bland, a Tanner of Nottingham, and Robin Hood the greeaest Ar∣cher in England. Tune is, Robin Hood and the Stranger. IN Nottingham there lives a jolly Tanner, with a hey down down a down down, his name is Arthur a Bland, There is ne're a Squire in Nottingham-shire, dare bid bold Arthur to stand. With a long Pike-staff upon his shoulder, with a hey, &c. so well he can clear his way, By two and by thrée he makes them to flée, for he hath no list to stay. As he went forth on a Summers morning, with a hey, &c. in the Forrest of merry Sherwood, To view the red Déer that range here and there, there met he with bold Robin Hood. As soon as bold Robin he did him espy, with a hey, &c he thought some sport he would make, Therefore out of hand he bid him to stand, and thus to him he did speak. Why, what art thou, thou bold fellow, with a hey, &c. that ranges so boldly here, Insooth to be brief, thou look'st like a Thief, that comes to steal the Kings Deer. If thou béest a Kéeper in this Forrest, with a hey, &c. the King puts me in trust, To look to his Déer that range here and there, therefore stay thee I must, If thou béest a kéeper in this Forrest, with a hey, &c. and hast such a great command, Then thou must have more partakers in store, before thou mak'st me to stand. Nay, I have no more partakers in store, with a hey, &c. nor any that I do need. But I have a Staff of another Oak-graff, I know it will do the deed: For thy sword & thy bow I care not a straw, with a hey, &c. nor all thy Arrows to boot, If thou get a knock upon the bare scop, thou canst as well shite as shoot, Speak cleanly, speak cleanly, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. and give better terms to me. Else I'le thee correct for thy neglect, and make thee more mannerly. Marry gip with a winnion, qd. Arthur a Bland, with a hey, &c. art thou such a goodly man? I care not a fig for thy looking so big, mend thou thy self where thou can. Then Robin Hood he unbuckled his belt, with a hey, &c. and threw it upon the ground, Says, I have a staff of another Oak graff, that is both strong and sound But let me measure, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. since thou wilt not yield to mine. For I have a staff of another Oak-graff, not half a foot longer than thine. But let me measure, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. before we begin our fray, For I'le not have mine no longer than thine, for  will be counted foul play.
I pass not for length, bold Arthur reply'd, with a hey, &c. my staff is of Oak so free, Eight foot and a half, it will knock down a Calf, and I hope it will knock down thee. Then Robin Hood could no longer forbear, with a hey, &c. he gave him such a knock, Quickly and soon, the blood came down, before it was ten a Clock. Then Arthur soon recover'd himself, with a hey, &c. and gave him such a knock on the crown, That from every hair of bold Robins head the blood came trickling down. Then Robin Hood raved like a wild Boar, with a hey, &c. as soon as he saw his own blood, Then Bland was in hast, he laid on so fast as though he had been stacking of wood. And about, and about, and about they went, with a hey, &c. like two wild Boars in a chase, Striving to aim each other to maim, Leg, arm, or any place. And knock for knock they lustily dealt, with a hey, &c. which held two hours and more, That all the wood rang at every bang, they ply'd their work so sore. Hold thy hand, hold thy hand, said Robin Hood, with a hey, &c. and let our Quarrel fall, For here we may thrash our bones to mash, and get no Coyn at all: And in the Forrest of merry Sherwood, with a hey, &c. hereafter thou shalt be free, Gra-mercy for nought, my freedom I've bought, I may thank my good staff, and not thee. What tradesman art thou, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. good fellow I prithee me show, And also me tell, in what place thou dost dwell, for both these fain would I know. I am a Tanner, bold Arthur reply'd, with a hey, &c. in Nottingham long have I wrought, And if thou come there, I vow & do swear, I will tann thy hide for nought: God-a-mercy good fellow, said jolly Robin, with a hey, &c. since thou art so kind to me, And if thou wilt tann my Hide for nought, I will do as much for thee. But if thou wilt forsake thy Tanners Trade, with a hey, &c. & live in the green woods with me, My name is Robin Hood, I swear by the wood, I will give thee both gold and fee: If thou be Robin Hood, bold Arthur reply'd, with a hey, &c. as I think well thou art, Then here's my hand, my name's Arthur Bland we two will never part. But tell me, O tell me, where is little John? with a hey, &c. of him fain would I hear, For we are Ally'd by the Mothers side, and he is my Kinsman near. Then Robin Hood blew on his bugle horn, with a hey, &c. he blew both loud and shrill, And quickly anon, appear'd little John, come tripping over the Hill. O what is the matter, then said little John, with a hey, &c. Master I pray you me tell, Why do you stand with your staff in your hand, I fear all is not well, O man I do stand, and he makes me to stand, with a hey, &c. the Tanner that stands thee beside, He is a bonny blade, and master of his trade, for soundly he hath tann'd my hide, He is to be commended, then said little John, with a hey, &c. if such a feat he can do. If he be so stout, we will have a bout, and he shall tan my hide too. Hold thy hand, hold thy hand, said Robin Hood with a hey, &c. for as I do understand, He is a Yeoman good, and of thy own blood, for his name is Arthur a Bland. Then little John threw his staff away, with a hey, &c. and as far as he could it sling, And ran out of hand to Arthur a Bland, and about his neck did cling. With loving respect there was no neglect, with a hey, &c. they was neither nice nor coy, Each other did face with a lovely grace, & both did weep for joy. Then Robin Hood took them both by the hand, with a hey, &c. & Danc't about the Oak-tree, For three merry men, and three merry men, and three merry men we be. And ever hereafter as long as we live, with a hey, &c. we three will be all as one, The wood shall ring, and the old wife sing, of Robin Hood, Arthur and John. FINIS. Printed for A. M. and W. D.
