R1948 12686687 65783
A CENTURIE OF Divine Meditations UPON PREDESTINATION, and its Adjuncts: Wherein are shewed the comfortable uses of this Doctrine. To which are annexed sixteen Meditations upon Gods Ju∣stice and Mercy. By ALEXANDER ROSS. LONDON, Printed by Iames Young, 1646.
TO The Right Honourable and Vertuous Lady, FRANCES Countess of Rutland, wife to the Right Honorable JOHN Earle of Rut∣land. Noble Lady, AS you have been plea∣sed to make me happy, by permitting me to gaze with admiration upon the rare structure and goodly fa∣brick of that beautifull temple
of your Vertues; so give me leave to passe through this, into your temple of Honor, and there, at the shrine of your perfections, to lay this Centurie of Divine Meditations; a sacrifice, I know, more acceptable to you then whole Hecatombes of fat beasts, or the smoake of Sabean incense. Your noble Progenitors have devolved upon you many naturall endowments, whereby you out-strip most of your own sex: but grace hath gifted you with cleernesse and perspicuitie of judgement in the mysteries of
speculative Divinitie, even be∣yond many who think themselves learned Clerks of our sex. Ma∣dam, though you are every way honourable, yet nothing doth so much enoble you, as your zeale to Religion, and love to learned men: When your beautie, wealth, outward honours and pleasures shall determine in death, even then Religion and Learning will beautifie and inrich your soul, and immortalize your name. The highest pitch of my ambition in this, and the former Dedication, is only to shew my gratitude to
your honourable Husband, and your Self, though in small mites, compared to your noble favours; and withall, to set forth the lustre of your own knowledge in these points which still perplex the mindes of many Christians. The Father of Mercies crowne you both, and your hopefull Issue, with the blessings of both hands here, and of Eternitie hereafter. This is, and still shall be, the prayer of Your Honours devo∣ted Servant, Alexander Ross.
I Have perused these divine and lear∣ned Meditations on Gods Prede∣stination, Iustice and Mercie; and, judging them to be pious and profita∣ble, I allow them to be printed and pub∣lished. JOHN DOWNAME. January the 7. 1645.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON PREDESTINATION, and its Adjuncts. I. I Finde that God by his absolute power can do that, which in justice he may not; He can torment the good Angels that sinned not, but he will not: if he could not doe so, he were not omni∣potent; if he should, he were not just. I will therefore reve∣rence
that power which can doe what he wills, but will not doe all that he can. II. God may justly annihilate the good Angels, though justly he cannot punish them: He could not be unjust in taking that nature from them which he freely bestowed; and he could not be just in inflicting a punishment which they had not deserved. But I, that am a sinfull man, must acknowledge it goodnesse in him to annihi∣late me. I must reverence his Iustice if he punish me, but will admire, and extoll his mercy, if he save me.
III. God is a most free Agent, being subject neither to a com∣manding law, nor to a con∣straining power; yet hath he necessitated some of his exter∣nall actions, partly by his good∣nesse, partly by his Promise: He must do what he promiseth, because he is true; he must doe what is just, because he is good. I will claime Heaven as my due, not because I merit it, but because he promised it; his own goodnesse hath tied him to give it, though my sinnes may deterre me from begging it. IIII. If my Adoption be the end of Predestination, by which
Grace and Glorie are prepared for me; then shall the end be first in my intention, but the meanes shall be first in executi∣on. I will strive and beg for faith in Gods naturall Son, that in him I may become Gods adopted sonne. V. The good Angels were made happie by the grace of Confir∣mation, Adam by the grace of Restauration: the Angels fell not, therefore needed not this grace; Adam stood not, there∣fore wanted that grace. He that is confirmed falls not, he that falls, is not confirmed: God shewed his love to the Angels in confirming them, but his
mercy to Adam in restoring him. Lord shew thy mercy to me when I fall, in restoring me; shew thy love to me when I am raised, in confirming me: make me happy with Adam in the one, happy with Angels in the other. VI. Gods Prescience is of a lar∣ger extent then his Predestina∣tion; for he foreknew or fore∣saw both good and evil, but he predestinated good only: he foresaw good and evill, because he is omniscient; he predestina∣ted only good, because in him there is none, and from him there comes none evill. O that we could be like him, to foresee
evil, and hate it; to resolve only upon good, and doe it. VII. Gods decrees are in our power, and our power is in his decrees; they are in us as causes in their effect, we are in him as effects in their cause: It's by his decree that we have power, 'tis not by our power that he decrees: 'Its in our power to performe his decrees, but this power we have by his decree. Lord, if thou hast decreed my obedience, give me power of performance, and so thy decree shall be in my power: not that thou didst decree, because thou knewest I would obey; but I will obey, because I know thou hast decreed.
VIII. God hath decreed to give us faith, and he hath decreed to justifie us by that faith; by the former decree he makes us his sonnes, by the other he acquits us of our sinnes. Lord, if thou hast decreed to make me thy son, bestow faith on me; if thou hast decreed to blot away my sin, by that same faith justifie me. IX. God first loved us, and then he decreed to bestow Grace and Glory on us; his love to us is the cause of our happinesse, so our love to him must be the cause of our obedience. Lord make me to love thee, and then I know I shall obey thee.
X. Faith and Holinesse are gra∣ces by which we attain to hap∣pinesse; but Gods love is that grace by which we obtaine faith and holinesse. As the acti∣on followes the qualitie, so Gods decree followes this first grace, but other graces come after his decree: it was by his decree that we have any grace, it was by his grace that he was pleased to decree. Lord, as the grace of thy love made thee to de∣cree my happinesse; so make the love of thy grace in me increase, that I may enjoy this happinesse. XI. God doth so determine the actions of the Will, that some∣time
he bends it to what he pleaseth; and so it works neces∣sarily, not freely, if we consider the act or use of working: sometime he determines it so, that he leaves it to its own in∣clination; and then it workes freely: Gods Providence doth not thwart his Creation, if he sometimes suspends, hinders, determines the properties and motions of his creatures; in the creation he gave them, that in his providence he might use them. Lord, if thou shouldest leave my Will to it self in this corrupted estate I now am in, what fruit can it produce but sowre grapes, and wilde olives? for the fruit cannot be better then the tree, and men ga∣ther
not grapes of thistles, nor figs of thornes. I had rather have a necessitie laid on me to doe good, then be left at libertie to doe evil; I had rather my Will should be a servant to thy commands, then be master over its own actions. XII. If Adam had not sinned, he had been saved; and being a sinner, yet he is saved: grace had saved him then, and grace saves him now; the grace of Gods love had saved him then, the grace of Gods mercy saves him now; Gods love then had been grounded upon the first Adams perseverance, it is now grounded on the second Adams death and obedience. I had been
happie in Adam, had he not been a sinner; but I am now much more happie in Christ by being my Sa∣viour. I lost Paradise by the first Adam, I have gained Heaven by the second: the first Adam, being man, would needs be God, and so made us equall to the beasts; the second Adam, being God, would needs be man, and so hath made us equall to the Angels. XIII. SomeSupralap∣sarians. say, that God in predestinating man, looked on him as he was to be created; others,Sublap∣sarians., that he considered him as al∣ready created and lapsed, be∣cause we are predestinated in Christ: but Christ is a Savi∣our,
and a Saviour presupposeth a sinner. I will not dispute the question, but this I know, that my miserie occasioned his mercy; and, had I not been a sinner, he had not been a Saviour. XIIII. I am elected in Christ, who is my Mediator, not only by his merit of impetration of par∣don for me, but also by the ef∣ficacie of application of that pardon to me. Not only by his bloud hath he made a purchase of Heaven for sinners, but also by that same bloud he hath delivered the possession of Heaven to sinners. XV. There is a Promise of Hea∣ven made to us, and there is a
law of obedience and faith im∣posed on us: Heaven is pro∣mised upon condition of faith and obedience, and these are promised upon condition of divine assistance. Lord, if thou assist, I will obey; if I obey, thou wilt reward: but here are the odds, that my obedience is the effect and fruit of thy grace and assistance, but not the cause of thy remunera∣tion and benevolence. XVI. God, being the supreme cause, can have no superiour cause of his actions; yet some say, he may produce an effect which may occasion him to work further: thus the fore∣sight of mans sin gave him oc∣casion
to precondemne him. This well is too deep, and I have no bucket to draw with: I will not soare with the waxen wings of humane reason too nigh this inaccessible light, nor will I prie into the sacred Arke of Gods secret decrees; only this I can say, that whatever his de∣crees were before time, I am sure, his proceeding to judgement is just in time. He is so just, that he never condemned any man but for sin; and he is so mercifull, that he will not condemne every man that doth sin. XVII. Justice and Mercy were still in God actually from all eter∣nitie, in respect of the first act,
to wit, of existence; though they were not alwayes in re∣spect of the second act, to wit, of operation: God could not alwayes exercise Justice and Mercy on sinners, because there have not been alwayes sinners; as soone as man sinned, these attributes in God appeared, which were eternally existent in him, but not eternally exer∣cised by him. Lord, thou hast exercised the eternitie of thy Iu∣stice in punishing for me thy natu∣rall Son, exercise, I pray, the eter∣nitie of thy Mercie for him, in sa∣ving the soule of me thy adopted sonne. XVIII. God by his antecedent will
decreed to bestow Faith and Grace on us, which by his con∣sequent will he resolved to de∣ny us; his former will was mo∣ved by his own goodnesse, but his latter will was provoked by our wickednesse: if we have unjustly rejected the grace which by his former will he resolved to give us, may not he justly by his latter will deny that grace, which was rejected so perversly by us. Lord, if thou art resolved by thy first will to be∣stow grace on me, let me not by my disobedience provoke thy second will to deny that grace unto me. XIX. Our wickednesse is the cause that moveth God to exercise
his acts of Justice; but his own bountie is the cause, and our miserie the occasion, why he exerciseth his acts of Mercy. When I am punished, I will ac∣cuse my own wickednesse, which provoked against me divine Iu∣stice; and when I am saved, I will extoll and reverence that bountie, which took occasion by my mise∣rie, to make me an object of his Mercy. XX. I finde a two-fold decree, the one of Providence, the other of Predestination: by that, God resolved to give us as much grace as might suffice to save us; by this, he appoin∣ted to give us effectuall grace,
that we might be powerfully saved: by the former we may beleeve if we will, by this we doe actually beleeve. They are inexcusable that have sufficient grace, though it be not effectu∣all; for God hath dealt graci∣ously with us in affording suffi∣cient helps of our salvation, and we have dealt wickedly with our selves in hindring the efficacie of these helps. No man then hath cause to complaine of Gods crueltie, seeing he hath be∣stowed on all men sufficient grace of Providence, whereby they may be saved; but many men have cause to admire Gods mercie, who hath be∣stowed on some the effectuall grace of Predestination, whereby they shall be saved.
XXI. God will have all men to be saved, and he will have wicked men to be damned: that, is his antecedent will; this, his conse∣quent: that, is sometimes fru∣strated of its end, this never; and its fitting that seeing his will cannot be fulfilled by us, it should be fulfilled upon us. They that will not satisfie his will by their obedience, shall satisfie his will in suffering just vengeance. XXII. God loves himself, and so he doth man: the one love is internall, the other externall; the one is eternall, the other temporarie; the one necessarie, the other voluntarie; for Gods
internall actions, if the object be internall naturally, are absolutely necessarie; as when he loves himself, the agent, the object, the action are all inter∣nall, and all necessarie in respect of existence: but if the object be internall voluntarily, as when God decreeth and un∣derstandeth externall objects, which he makes internall, by uniting them to his under∣standing, then all these actions are voluntarie and free, even his very decrees which proceed from his free will. It was in his choice whether he would de∣cree any thing concerning man or not; whether he would be∣stow grace and glorie on him:
The eternall generation indeed of his own Son is an action of necessitie, but the regeneration of his adopted sonnes is a work altogether voluntarie. So much the more then will I admire and praise that goodnesse which elected and saved me, by how much the more I see it was free and volunta∣rie, but no wayes, in respect of his perfection, necessarie. XXIII. There is in man a two-fold judgement, to wit, an antece∣dent, which is that of the af∣fections and senses; and a consequent, which is that of reason: so there is a two-fold volition; the one followes the judgement of sense, and it is ra∣ther
an imperfect desire, then a perfect volition; the other fol∣lowes the judgement of reason: both these volitions were in Christ more eminently then in us, because in him were two Wils, and these, by reason of his two natures, were distinct in him, though his person was but one; therefore he desired the cup might passe from him, but willed it not; or, he willed it by his antecedent, not by his con∣sequent will. O thou that madest in thy selfe, the judgement of af∣fection stoope to the judgement of reason, and madest thy desire subser∣vient to thy will, and causedst thy antecedent will to give place to thy consequent; produce in me the
same effect, that these sinfull de∣lights which my affections so ear∣nestly run after, and thy gentle corrections, which they so earnest∣ly run from, may be so ordered, that the one by me may be courageously subdued, the other patiently indu∣red; that my affections may submit to my will, my will to reason, and reason to thy Spirit. XXIIII. God worketh not immedi∣ately by his decree, but by his power: his decree is but a re∣mote cause, his power immedi∣ate; his decree is an internall action, the actions of his power are externall; the actions of his decrees depend on his wise∣dome, the actions of his power
are subservient to his decrees. Lord, if in thy wisedome thou thoughtest it good that my soul should be saved, and if thou hast decreed it, then let thy power be seen in effecting it. XXV. The necessitie and contin∣gencie of things is not to be at∣tributed to Gods decree, but to the working of his power; con∣tingencie, is when he useth his resistible power, if he works ir∣resistibly then followes necessi∣tie: what is contingent to the second cause, is infallible to Gods prescience, but necessarie to the work of his omnipoten∣cie: his decree is a remote cause, which without his power
worketh not. Christs death was contingent to the Jewes, that crucified him; infallible to Gods prescience, who fore∣saw that the Jewes would kill him; but necessarie in regard of his decree, working by his power in presenting that bitter cup unto him. Why then shall afflictions dismay mee, which though they be contingent in re∣spect of the second agent, yet they are infallible to that all-seeing eye of Heaven that foresaw them; and necessarie, if we regard that power∣full hand which inflicted them? XXVI. God ordereth sin, though he ordained it not: he ordereth it, that it may be subservient to
his glory; he ordained it not, because he sinneth not: He could not ordain it, seeing he hates it, forbids it, and punishes it. Lord, I ascribe to thy glorie both my salvation, and my sin: my salvation thou hast ordained, my sin thou hast ordered; that by the one I may love thy mercie, and by the other, I may feare thy Iustice. Who but Goodnesse it selfe would ordaine the salvation of a sinner, and who but Wisdome it self would order the prevarications of a sin∣ner? What is more offensive to thy nature then sin? What is more destructive of thy feature in me then sin? yet out of sin thou hast drawn the meanes to manifest the goodnesse of thy nature in my sal∣vation,
and out of the same sin thou hast drawn a meanes to repaire in me thy decayed feature by my re∣pentance and conversion. XXVII. God gave to Adam sufficient grace to stand, but not to per∣sist; he permitted him to fall, who by the grace he received might have stood; he gave him sufficiencie of grace, not permanencie in grace: by the one God is cleared from iniqui∣tie, and by the other he mani∣fests his justice and mercie: if man had not been a sinner, God had not been a Saviour; we had not known Emanuel, God with us, if Adam by sin had not separated God from us; we
had known him as Jehova, but not as Jesus. O my God, if thou give me sufficiencie of grace, I may fall; but if thou give me permanen∣cie in grace, I shall not fall: give me Adams happinesse in Para∣dise, that I may sufficiently love and know thee; give me the An∣gels happinesse in Heaven, that I may constantly love and know, and eternally abide in thee. XXVIII. God delivered his Son to death, so did Satan by Iudas: God had power to doe so, Sa∣tan had none; God did this in love to the sonnes of men, Sa∣tan did it in malice to the Son of God: by an affirmative act God was willing to permit Sa∣tan
to exercise his malice, by a negative act he hindered him not: in all this God sinned not, if we consider the authoritie of the agent, the forme of the acti∣on, and the justice and good∣nesse of his intention. Though God acts not sin, nor is willing it should be acted by man, yet he is willing to permit it. Not sin, but permission is the object of his will; he could not will sin, because he is not sinfull; he permits it, because he can draw good out of it. XXIX. God permits not punishment, but inflicts it; he permits not good, but commands it; he wills not sin, but permits it; not as it is good, but as out of it he
drawes good. O thou that drew∣est light out of darknesse, and meat out of the eater; draw good out of my evils, and comforts out of my afflictions: Thou canst draw ho∣ney out of the rock, and turne water into wine, and make bitter Meribah potable; we pray thee, turn the bitter waters of our Meribah, our strife and contention, into the pure and sweet streames of Peace and Union. XXX. What God cannot doe, he cannot will; what he cannot will, he cannot decree: and al∣though affirmatively his power be of a larger extent then his will, for he can doe that which he will not doe; yet negative∣ly
he cannot will what he can∣not doe, nor doe what he can∣not will: he cannot doe evil, therefore he cannot will it; he cannot will it, therefore he can neither doe it by an externall, nor decree it by any internall act. O that my will and actions, Lord, were conformable to thine: for oftentimes I doe the evil which I will not, and I will the good, which I doe not. Lord, make my will conformable to thine, that my actions may be conformable to my will. XXXI. Gods grace reacheth further then his mercy; his grace is ex∣tended to all, his mercy only to those that are in miserie: by
grace the Angels were confir∣med, by grace the world is pre∣served, but by mercie man is redeemed; he is gracious then to all, but mercifull onely to some: yet though his grace be more universall and communi∣cable, his mercy is more won∣derfull and amiable. Lord, the noblest of all thy Attributes is thy goodnesse to thy creatures▪ but the excellencie of thy goodnesse is, in shewing mercy to sinners: Thy goodnesse made me a man, but thy mercy a happy man: by the one, thou deliverest me from nothing; by the other, from worse then no∣thing: thy goodnesse gave me be∣ing, and thy mercy well being.
XXXII. In every sin the act and the obliquitie, in every vertue the act and the circumstances are distinguishable. In sin the act is alwayes good metaphysical∣ly, but evill morally; either be∣cause it is prohibited, as the act of eating the fruit to Adam; or because it is repugnant to ju∣stice and sanctitie, though they were not prohibited, as theft and murther: In every vertue the act is alwayes good both morally and metaphysically, but the circumstances may be evill; as to give almes is good, but to give out of pride is evill. I will not forbeare to doe good, be∣cause the circumstances may be
evil; nor will I venture to doe evil, because the circumstances may be good. If God command that which may seeme to be evil, I will doe it; for his command makes it good: if he forbids that which may seeme to be good, I will not doe it, because his prohibition makes it evil. Adam sinned in eating of the fruit (though seemingly good) because God prohibited it; and the Hebrewes sinned not, in spoiling the Egyptians (though seemingly evil) because God commanded it. XXXIII. God did no wayes necessi∣tate Adam to sin, neither by inward perswasion, nor by out∣ward coaction: besides, he gave him a law easie to be kept, and
power sufficient to keep it: He did then neither will nor decree his fall, nor perswade nor force it, only he gave way that he might fall, who had power to stand; that, being by Christ rai∣sed from his fall, he might more firmely stand. Lord, as thou didst permit my fall, so be now pleased to remit it; I fell willing∣ly from thee, make me to returne as willingly to thee: Thou gavest me a will to stand or fall, give me a will to rise, and so to stand, that I may never fall again. XXXIIII. There is a two-fold necessi∣tie; the one isConse∣quentiae. Syllo∣gisticall, the other is Conse∣quentis.reall: there was a
Syllogisticall necessitie of mans fall, in respect of Gods fore∣knowledge, but not reall: Gods prescience was an antecedent not a cause; and mans fall was the consequent, not the effect of that prescience: but there is a reall necessitie of that which God decreeth. Lord, I did not sin, because thou didst foresee it; but because I was to sin, therefore thou didst foresee it: my fall was a ne∣cessarie sequell of thy precognition, so let my rising be a necessary effect of thy Predestination. XXXV. Sin properly is not the pu∣nishment of sin, because we sin willingly, we suffer punishment unwillingly; in sinning we are
agents, in punishments we are patients: yet sin may be the cause of sin; not that one sin can procreate another, but be∣cause one sin can deserve and prepare the way for commit∣ting of another. Lord, free me from the guilt and stain of Adams sin, which hath been both the pre∣paratorie and meritorious cause of all my actuall sins. XXXVI. God worketh on the will either by a physicall motion, or by morall perswasion; and he perswades either powerfully by his Spirit, or sufficiently by his Word: so he hindereth sin, ei∣ther by his law prohibiting it,
or by his power inhibiting it: let no man sin presumptuously, because he is not stopped in the full careere of his sin powerful∣ly; though there is not alwayes an inhibition by his Power, yet there is still a prohibition by his Law, to make us inexcu∣sable. Lord, work on my depra∣ved will physically, work morally, work sufficiently, and work power∣fully, by the Word, by thy Spirit, by thy Law, by thy Sword: circum∣cise my heart and eares; the one by the Sword of the Spirit, the other by the Sword of the Word: if I can∣not be restrained by thy Law, to forbeare the forbidden fruit with Adam; let me be constrained by the glittering of thy sword, to stop
in the wayes of wickednesse with Balaam. XXXVII. Though nothing is contin∣gent to God, yet his know∣ledge may consider contingen∣cies, as they are contingent: for what by man is done contin∣gently, by him it is foreseen certainly; in which regard Gods judgements are founded upon sin, which may more fitly be called the object and occa∣sion of his judgements, then the cause. Lord, the cause of thy judgements is thy justice, and my sin the occasion: thy justice is eter∣nall, thy judgements are just, my sins are contingent: if it were not for thy judgements, I should not ac∣knowledge
my sinnes; if it were not for my sinnes, thou couldst not exercise thy judgements; and if it were not for thy justice, there would be no proportion between thy judge∣ments and my sinnes: the exercise of thy judgements will cease, if thou put an end to my sins; but thy ju∣stice shall not cease, though thou in mercy pardon my sins. XXXVIII. Nature is before grace, and the works of creation before the effects of Predestination: Man was first made a living soul, by the outward breath of Gods mouth; and then was made a quickning spirit, by the inward breath of the holy Ghost: so he decreed first to
give man naturall abilitie by the work of Creation, and then to bestow on him supernaturall graces, the effects of Predesti∣nation. Lord, thou hast gifted me with naturall faculties, whereby I exceed the beasts; and thou hast endowed me with supernaturall graces, whereby I am equall to the Angels: I praise thee for the work of thy Creation, much more for that of Predestination; by the one thou madest me a man, by the other a happy man: make me to exceed the beasts as much in mo∣rall vertues, as I excell them in na∣turall abilities; so make me to equall the Angels as much in love and obedience, as I come neer them in supernaturall happinesse.
XXXIX. God did first foresee that Adam would sin, before he predestinated Christ to die for sin; he foresaw the disease, then prepared the remedie; he fore∣saw the leprosie, then ordained the bloud of his Son to wash it: for as the sinner only is capable of the grace of Regeneration; so this grace was preordained to the sinner in Gods Predesti∣nation. O my God, if thou wast so provident as to prepare physick for my sinfull soule before I had sinned; I am confident thy goodnesse is not now lessened, but that thou wilt ap∣ply that same physick to my soule having sinned.
XL. Gods Image in man consi∣sted in nature and naturall pro∣perties, in morall vertues, and supernaturall graces; the first were totally retained in Adams fall, the third totally lost, the second lost in part. Again, the essentiall part of Gods Image remained, to wit, the soul; but the accidentall part was lost, to wit, justice and holinesse; the subject continued, though this forme perished: therefore for the soul, renovation is suffici∣ent; but for those graces in the soul, a new creation is required. Lord, by thy Image I excell the beasts, by it I match the Angels, by it I resemble thy self; but the
subject of this image is by sin decay∣ed, and by sin the forme is quite abolished. O thou that in my Crea∣tion didst grace me with the breath of life, now in my Regeneration breathe in me the life of grace: the temple of God is decayed in me, and the God of this temple is banished from me; repaire this temple, that thy image again may stand in it, and renew thy image that this temple may be sanctified by it. XLI. Adams sin was committed after Predestination, if we con∣sider Adams actuall existence; but it was before Predestinati∣on, in respect of Gods presci∣ence. What madnesse is it to think, that God sees not our sinnes
which we commit secretly; whereas he did foresee our sins before they were committed, and that from all eternitie? XLII. In Predestination, the pre∣terition of some men, was the punishment of those men; and the deniall of felicitie, was their miserie: but punishment pre∣supposeth sin, and preterition as a punishment must come after the prevision of sinne. If this doctrine be true, that the prevision of sin was the cause of preterition; sure it is most true, that the com∣mission of sin is the cause of con∣demnation. XLIII. Passive excaecation, or the
wilfull ignorance and spirituall blindnesse in man, is both a sin, and the cause of sin: active ex∣caecation, as it is from man, it is a sin; as from God, it is the pu∣nishment of sin. It stands with thy justice, O God, to punish them with blindnesse, who have with delight blinded themselves; and to deprive those of light, who love to walke in darknesse. Why shouldest thou hold out the lamp of thy Word to those that despise it; and cause thy sun to shine on them, who wil∣fully shut their eyes against it? Lord, deale with me as thou didst with Saul: I am blinded spiritu∣ally, make me blinde corporally;
that by losing the sight of my bo∣dy, I may regain the sight of my soul. I will gladly lose the light of the sun, moon, and other planets; so I may behold the light of the Son of righteousnesse. XLIIII. Some say, that the hearts in∣duration is not the cause of Gods indignation; but that God is first angry, then hard∣neth: I am sure God hath just cause to be angry with those who will be hardned, and therefore in his just anger hard∣neth them. I confesse, Lord, that I have hardned my own heart, therefore thou mayest justly be an∣gry with me; and because my vo∣luntary hardnesse hath provoked
thy anger, therefore may thy anger effect in me, and that most justly, a further degree of hardnesse. XLV. God who by his irresistible will decreeth the hardning of a sinner, yet actually by his re∣sistible will useth to harden that sinner. Though none can resist the will of his decrees, yet he permits us sometimes to op∣pose the actions of his will: in the one he shewes himself the God of power, in the other he shewes his mercy, in suffring man to resist the power of God. O thou that diddest wrestle with Jacob, and gavest him strength both to resist and conquer thee; when thou wrestlest with me by
tentations, give me so much strength as by mortification to subdue my self, and then give me leave by faith and teares to van∣quish thee. XLVI. There is in God a two-fold negative act; the one of Pro∣vidence, the other of Preteriti∣on: by the former, God de∣nyed to Adam the gift of Perse∣verance, and so suffered him to fall; by the other, he denyeth to some men the gift of Faith and Repentance, and so suffers them to remain in their fall. God was not bound to give Adam perseverance, seeing otherwise he furnished him with grace sufficiently; nor is he
bound to give to those faith, and repentance, who fell from their former grace willingly, and oppose his Word and Spi∣rit obstinately. Lord, I confesse, that as thou wast not in Adams debt for perseverance, so neither art thou in mine for any grace: but if thou wilt be pleased to bestow on me so much grace, as to attaine true happinesse; I will impute it not to my deserts, but to thy favour and goodnesse. XLVII. Some say, that those whom God hath decreed for Salvati∣on may be damned, but that they shall not be damned; that his decree hindreth the act, but not the possibilitie. I leave this
nicetie for the Schooles: But this use I will make of it, that if I may be damned, I will work out my salvation with fear and trembling; if I shall not be damned, I will not fear, though I walk through the valley of death: if I may be dam∣ned, I acknowledge, Lord, it is through my own wickednesse; if I shall not be damned, it is out of thy unspeakable goodnesse. XLVIII. It is the doctrine of many in these dayes, that as God by his revealed will saves none, but such as beleeve in him; so he decreed by his secret will to save none, but such as he fore∣saw would beleeve in him. I am confident, God could foresee no∣thing
thing in me, but what he was plea∣sed to bestow upon me: if he fore∣saw my faith, he foresaw the fruit of his preventing grace; if he foresaw my perseverance, he fore∣saw the effect of his subsequent grace. XLIX. Election (say some) is Gods decree to justifie the faithfull; others say, 'tis Gods decree to save man, as he is man, and to that end to make him faithfull: In the one opinion, I finde faith the meanes of Justification; in the other, of Salvation: meanes, I say, but not the cause. Lord, the cause of my happinesse is in thee, the meanes in me; but the efficacie of this meanes, both in my
justification and salvation, is only from thee. L. If the decree of preterition went before the act of sin, but not before the prevision of that sin; I am confident, the act of preterition cannot, much lesse can the act of condemnation, precede the act of sin. Therefore how injurious are some to the God of mercy, in daring to accuse him of crueltie, who is so far from con∣demning any man, but for sin com∣mitted, that he would not decree mans condemnation, but for sin foreseen? LI. There was injoyned to Adam the law of abstinence from the
forbidden fruit, and the law of obedience: the former was particular to Adam, the other was common to him and his posteritie: it was not for the breach of the former, which was personall; but for the breach of the other, which was universall, that we are condem∣ned: not Adams act of eating, but his disobedience was our bane; for we sinned in him: sin is a transgression of the law; but the law could not have been transgressed by us, had it not been in him given to us. Lord, we have great cause to ad∣mire and respect thy mercy, in sa∣ving us for the second Adams obedience; but we have no cause to
suspect thee of crueltie, in condem∣ning us for the first Adams dis∣obedience. LII. Punishment was prepared in Gods decree as well for the sin of Iacob as of Esau, both ha∣ving sinned alike in Adam; but it was pardonable in the one, unpardonable in the other: which difference proceeded from grace, not from nature. Lord, I confesse, thou couldst see no more originall sin in Judas, then in me; yet thou wast pleased to punish him, and to spare me: if thou hadst condemned us both, thou hadst done justly; but in sparing the one, thou hast magnified thy mer∣cie.
LIII. There is a two-fold grace, the one of Creation, the other of Election; the one was the gift of God without Christ, the other was the gift of God in Chirst; the one was the image of God, the other was the re∣novation of that image; the one was lost in Paradise, the other shall never be lost in Heaven. Lord, thou hadst no other inducement, but thine own goodness to create me to thy image; but now thou hast another induce∣ment, to wit, thy Sons merits, to renew in me that decayed image: the one thou mightst not have done, the other thou canst not but doe; for, though thou wast not
bound in the creation to bestow thy image on me, yet now thou art bound by thy Sonnes satisfaction to repaire this image in me. LIIII. Adam could have abstained from the externall act of touch∣ing, by naturall grace only; but in him could not be the inward and permanent affection of obeying, without supernaturall grace also. Lord, if Adam could not yeeld constant obedience to thee in his estate of integritie, how shall I be able to persevere in obedience, without thy speciall grace, being now in the estate of iniquitie? LV. Though the habit of justice, as it is the essence of God, be
necessarily in him; yet the acti∣ons of justice, which are not his essence, are not necessarily per∣formed by him: He is necessa∣rily just, but a voluntarie agent: He doth necessarily hate inju∣stice, but freely and voluntari∣ly he punisheth it, and decreed punishment for it. Lord, what should become of me, and of all the other wretched sonnes of Adam, if it were as necessarie for thee to punish, as it is to be just? But my comfort is, that, as justice is so ne∣cessarie in thee, that thou canst not be unjust; so thy actions are so free and voluntarie, that thou canst pardon my sin, and yet notwith∣standing thou canst not be but just.
LVI. There was no necessitie why God should manifest his justice in punishing sinners, seeing he had power to manifest that, in punishing his own Son for sin∣ners. In the one, he shewes himself to be a God of mercy, not of re∣venge, in sparing his enemies; in the other, he shewes himself a God of justice, in punishing his beloved Son, who became suretie for his enemies. LVII. There is a two-fold cause of predemnation; the one is sin, the other is Gods decree; the one is necessarie, the other volunta∣rie: sin is the cause why God may condemne all, Gods de∣cree
is the cause why he will condemne but some: he looks on sin as it is pardonable in some, unpardonable in others; the one eye by which he lookes is justice, the other is mercie. Lord, thou didst look upon my sin with justice and severitie, when thou punishedst it in thine own na∣turall Son; therefore look on it as it is in me, with meeknesse and mer∣cy, and pardon it in me that am thy adopted son. LVIII. Every man is not a reprobate that falls into sin, but he that fi∣nally perseveres in sin: for all men fell into sin, by the permis∣sion of providence; but wicked men only continue to the end
in sin, by the permission of pre∣terition. Lord, that sin which was voluntary in Adam, is neces∣sary in me; but although in thy just judgements, there is a neces∣sitie that I should be tainted with originall contagion, yet there is no necessitie why I should lye still and persevere in actuall transgression: without thy providence I could not fall, without thy assistance I cannot rise: as by thy providence thou hinderest not my falling, because the glory of thy justice was thereby manifested; so, I pray thee, further, by thy assistance, my rising again, that the glory of thy goodnesse may be thereby magnified. LIX. In Gods externall actions
there is neither naturall nor co∣active necessitie; for both na∣ture, and coaction exclude li∣bertie: the fire burnes natural∣ly, the bullet flyes upward vio∣lently, therefore both necessari∣ly; but Gods internall actions on himself are naturall, there∣fore necessarie: the Father be∣got his eternall Son, neither willingly nor unwillingly, but naturally and necessarily; so because Gods attributes are na∣turall, and essentiall to him, they are necessarily in him: he is necessarily not voluntarily good, because he cannot be but good; he doth voluntarily, not necessarily make man good, be∣cause he can forbeare, if he
would, to make him good. Lord, I confesse, that the more free Agent thou wast in the work of my conversion, the lesse free am I, but the more necessitated to praise thy goodnesse and wisdome; for, how can I choose but honour and obey thee, who couldst have chosen whe∣ther thou wouldst have redeemed and saved me? LX. Faith is both an habit, and an action: if it justifie, as it is an habit, I will not dispute; this I know, that it justifieth, as it is an action: for Abraham beleeved, and so was justified. The life then of Religion consisteth in action; not onely of the out∣ward works of the hand, but al∣so
of the inward work of the heart; for this is the work of God, that we beleeve in him. O Lord, faith is thy work, and it is mine too; it is thy work to infuse it, it is my work to apprehend Christ by it: let thy work be first performed in me, and then I know my work, if thou assist, shall be per∣formed by me. LXI. Though we are not actually free from sin in this life, yet there is a possibilitie that we may be free; if either we con∣sider the power of God, who can mightily effect it; or the will of a regenerate man, who doth so earnestly affect it. Lord, in that I may be free from sin, it
argues thy omnipotencie; but in that I am not free from sin, I must blame my own impotencie: There is in me a desire to be freed from this body of death, and in thee there is power to free me, who art the Lord of life. LXII. There was in Adam a di∣rective light of the minde while he was falling, to let him see his danger; but there was not in him that perswasive light which might powerfully re∣strain him from danger: that light had kept him from fal∣ling, had he followed it; and this light had kept him from falling, had he received it. Lord, though thou didst not give Adam
this light, thou art unblameable; seeing thou didst give him so much of that light, as made him in∣excusable. LXIII. In what facultie of the soul the cockatrice of Adams sin was first hatched, I will not now dispute; whether it was in the understanding, being first blin∣ded; or in the will, being first perverted: this I know, that the will is apt to be seduced by a blinde understanding, and the understanding as apt to be clouded by a perverse will: The understandingQuoad speciem actus. moves the will by proposing the object, which the will cannot affect, except the
understanding knowes it; the willQuoad exercitium actus. moves the under∣standing to judge and consider the object, which the understanding can∣not consider, except the will command it. Lord, illuminate my understanding, that it may di∣rect my will to affect the things that thou commandest; and rectifie my will, that it may command the understanding to exercise its act in meditating on the things which thou commandest. LXIIII. If Christs obedience had been necessarie or naturall, and not voluntarie, he had not been like to us in all things except sin; neither had he been sub∣ject
to the tentation of disobe∣dience, nor had his obedience been meritorious, nor had it been more excellent then the obedience of Angels: but in this was his obedience more noble then theirs, in that he yeelded that obedience willing∣ly, which they doe necessarily. I will strive whilst I am here to obey willingly, that hereafter I may obey necessarily: for, though volun∣tary obedience be the nobler, yet ne∣cessarie obedience is the surer; for I may disobey in the one, I cannot but obey in the other. LXV. Though the sufficiencie of Christs death be extended to all, yet the efficacie thereof is not
applied to all; nor did he pray and make intercession for all: By his death he procured par∣don for us, and by his interces∣sion he applies that pardon to us. Lord, in thy birth, thou ac∣ceptedst my nature; in thy death, thou representedst my person: by thy intercession put away my sins, and pardon my offences, that the mediation which thou begannest in thy birth, and didst accomplish in thy sacrifice and passion, may be ful∣ly made effectuall to me, by thy prayers and intercession. LXVI. Action followes the affecti∣on; therefore we love and hate actually, because these affecti∣ons are in us radically: Though
hatred be no affection in God, yet we conceive it as an affecti∣on: God therefore rejected Esau, because he hated him; but he did not hate him, because he rejected him. Lord, I know thou maist justly reject me, because in me there is that pravitie, for which thou maist justly hate me: repaire therefore in me the lost image of thy Son, and so I shall escape thy just wrath and indigna∣tion. LXVII. The acts of Christs righte∣ousnesse are ours, not as they are performed by him, but as they are imputed to us.; impu∣ted, I say, by his merit and goodnesse, and apprehended by
our faith, though in much weaknesse. Then I see, Lord, that without faith thy righteousnesse will not availe me, and without thy merit and goodnesse my faith cannot prevaile with thee: give me then the hand of faith, that with the Hemorroisse, I may touch thee; and by thy merit strengthen that hand, that, with Jacob, I may hold thee. LXVIII. Christ first suffered, before we could be redeemed; and we are redeemed, before it is ap∣plyed, or can receive benefit by it: then are we fully redeemed, when we are from Satan and sin delivered. Though Christ in suf∣fering hath sufficiently paid the
ransome, yet whilst we are here subject to sin and Satan, we are not fully partakers of redemption; Hea∣ven, not earth, is the place where that shall be perfected. I will therefore lift up my head with joy, because by death the day of my re∣demption draweth nigh. LXIX. A double benefit we have by Christ: one, that he hath purchased Redemption for us by his bloud; the other, that he hath applyed that Redemp∣tion to us by his Spirit: if he had not died, I could not have beleeved; if I had not beleeved, he had not applyed his death and merits to me: Redempti∣on is the cause of Faith, and
Faith the cause of Application. Lord, produce Faith in me by the vertue of thy passion, that by Faith I may injoy thee in a true and spi∣rituall Application. LXX. That the Church injoyes life eternall, she is bound to Gods dilection; but that she injoyes that life alone, she is bound to his election: because he loved her, he hath bestowed this hap∣pinesse upon her; because he chose her, he hath appropriated this happinesse unto her. Lord, I will praise thy love, by which I was elected; and I will praise that election, by which I am separated from the reprobate.
LXXI. Gods will is the cause of preterition, his justice is the cause of predemnation: he was not bound to give grace to all, therefore he passed by some without prejudice to his good∣nesse; he was bound to punish sin in all, therefore he preor∣daines the death of his own Son; and eternall paines for reprobates, that he might not suffer prejudice in his justice. Lord, if thou hadst passed by me, I could not have blamed thy good∣nesse: if thou shouldst punish me eternally, I cannot blame thy ju∣stice; for, if thou givest grace to all, where is thy libertie? if thou
forgivest all, where is thy justice and equitie? LXXII. God is a most free Agent, be∣cause he can doe what he plea∣seth, not because he can doe every thing: his will is the su∣preme cause of all externall things, but not of his justice, which is internall: as he cannot doe that which is evil, so he cannot will that which is un∣just; as goodnesse is the object of his actions, so justice is the rule of his will. Lord, make my actions subordinate to thy will, as thy wil is subordinate to thy justice: that, as thou canst not will that which in justice thou maist not; so
I may not doe that, which in wise∣dome thou wilst not. LXXIII. Though God foresaw sin in all, yet he rejected not all: sin was the occasion why he reje∣cted some, his will was the cause why he rejected but some; his will was the cause of discri∣mination, but sin of reprobati∣on. Lord, I confesse, it was not for want of sin in me, that thou didst not reject me; but because there was no want of goodnesse in thee, therefore thou didst elect me: my sin was the cause why I might have been rejected, but thy mercie is the cause, why I was not re∣jected.
LXXIIII. God hindred Adams sin mo∣rally, by his law; not physically, by his power: he gave a law to guide him, threatnings to af∣fright him, promises to induce him, sufficient grace to strength∣en him; but used no violence or force to restraine him: he would not thwart or destroy, by any violent restriction, that libertie which he gave him by Creation. Thus we see his pru∣dence, in not restraining sin physi∣cally; and withall his goodnesse, in curbing it morally. LXXV. God willeth the death of a sinner, because he foresaw the impenitencie of the sinner: this
is his consequent, not his ante∣cedent will; in this, his will de∣pends not on the creatures acti∣ons, but on his own prescience: his will may be Posterior to the foreseen sin of the creature, but no wayes depending on the will of the creature. In willing the death of sinners, he shewes his ju∣stice; in willing the death but of some sinners, he shewes his good∣nesse. LXXVI. All men may beleeve, only some men will beleeve; in all there is a possibilitie, in some only a velleitie: the possibili∣tie to beleeve, is the gift of na∣ture; but the will to beleeve, is the gift of grace: the one we
have by Creation, the other by Regeneration. Lord, what is possibilitie without will, and nature without grace? As in Generation thou gavest me a reasonable soul, that had a capabilitie to beleeve in thee; so, in my Regeneration, give me a sanctified will, that I may actually and constantly beleeve in thee. LXXVII. He that bestoweth Faith up∣on sinners, bestoweth also Sal∣vation upon repentant sinners; by faith we are brought to re∣pentance, by repentance we are prepared for salvation. Lord, if thou hadst not bestowed faith upon Peter, to beleeve in thee, he had not repented for denying thee; and
if he had not repented, he had not been saved: lead me then, by the hand of faith, to the Iordan of re∣pentance; that, being washed there from my spots, I may see Heaven opened with Christ, and with him injoy thy Spirit, and light of thy Countenance. LXXVIII. There is in Gods will both a necessitie, and a libertie; he wills necessarily what concerns himself, he wills freely what concerns other things besides himself: he did necessarily will his own glorie, he did freely will and decree my felicitie. Lord, thou couldst not but will thine own honour and goodnesse; thou couldst not have willed my
happinesse: the more free thou wast from necessitie in willing my felicitie, the more am I bound to praise the glorie of thy mercie. LXXIX. Gods will hath a two-fold consideration, one as it is con∣cealed, another as it is revealed; the former hath relation to his own actions, the other to ours; what he will doe himselfe is concealed, what he will have us doe is revealed: this will is not alwayes forcible, the other is powerfull and irresistible. Lord, let me follow the directions of thy revealed will, and not meddle with the hid secrets of thy concealed will. I will not be too forward to know what thou hast not revealed,
nor will I be too backward to doe what thou hast commanded. LXXX. God hath decreed to bestow on man first grace, then glory: to the decree of giving grace, preterition is opposite; to the decree of giving glory, repro∣bation: no man is debarred from glory, but he that was first deprived of grace; preteri∣tion then is the antecedent to reprobation, and the want of grace to the want of glory. Thus they whom God doth here ho∣nour with the spirituall crown of grace, shall be hereafter graced with the eternall crown of honour. LXXXI. That is a just law which is
given by him that hath right to impose it, and imposed on him who hath power to performe it: such was the law that God gave to Adam; the one had power to give, the other power to keep it. Lord, thy law is just which thou hast given to me, be∣cause thou hast power to impose it; this law will not be the lesse just, if thou wilt assist me, and give me power to obey it. LXXXII. As Gods will hath relation to his own actions, it is accom∣panied with omnipotencie; as it hath relation to our actions, it is regulated by justice: for, when he will doe what he hath determined, he cannot be resi∣sted;
so, when he will have us doe what he hath commanded, he cannot be unjust: what he himself will doe, is best known to him; what he will have us do, is not unknown to us. Lord, as it is thy will, that I doe that which thou commandest, wherein thou shewest thy justice; so let it be thy will to command that, which by thy help I can doe, and therein shew thy goodnesse. LXXXIII. He that opposeth Gods re∣vealed will, which can be resi∣sted; deserveth to be hardned by Gods concealed will, which cannot be resisted: for that will of God which is not done by him, shall be done on him.
Lord, assist me to follow the dire∣ction of that will which is reveal∣ed, that I may avoid the destructi∣on which by that other will is de∣creed: for although, by the secret will of thyVolun∣tas pla∣citi. pleasure, thou hast determined death for obstinate sinners; yet, by the pleasureVolun∣tas signi. of thy re∣vealed will, thou hast proposed life to penitent sinners. LXXXIIII. God in his goodnesse made man a vessell of mercy, Satan in malice made him a vessell of miserie; therefore God in his justice hath made him a vessell of his wrath and furie: God made the vessell, which, whilst it staid in his hand, remained
sound; falling from thence, it hath received a crack, therfore, by this crack being made un∣serviceable, it is rejected. Lord, the substance of the vessell is thine, the crack is mine; I have made my self unfit to serve thee, therefore justly maist thou refuse to honour me. LXXXV. God hated Pharaoh, not be∣cause he hardned him, but be∣cause he obstinately resisted God, therefore he hated him, and consequently hardned him; and that not by the force of his omnipotencie, but by his pa∣tience and longanimitie. Lord, if I by thy goodnesse should take oc∣casion to become obstinate in wic∣kednesse,
why maist not thou take occasion by my perversenesse, to ob∣durate me in my sins, and to de∣barre me from grace and happi∣nesse? Therefore, I pray thee, keep me from obstinacie, that thy pati∣ence, by my sins, may not be turned into fury. LXXXVI. There be two sorts of carnall men; some are carnall in know∣ledge, some in affections: the former sort are children, who are fed with milk, and not yet, with spirituall men, able to judge of all things; the other sort are wicked men, who walk after the flesh, not after the spi∣rit, and have not mortified the
deeds of the flesh: now God is a Spirit, and will be worship∣ped in spirit. Lord, remove from me all fleshly understanding, that I may conceive thee spiritually; and remove from me all carnall affecti∣ons, that I may love thee spiritual∣ly. Give me the love of know∣ledge, that I may attain to the knowledge of thy love: Make me by the spirit of understanding, to come to the understanding of thy Spirit. LXXXVII. Goodnesse hath a two-fold residence; one in the minde, the other in the flesh: when 'tis there, I will good; when 'tis here, I doe good: 'tis good to have the knowledge of good,
and that is in the minde; 'tis good to subdue and mortifie sinfull lusts, and that is in the flesh: the former goodnesse is sometimes in wicked men, the other is onely in good men. Lord, place in my minde the good∣nesse of knowledge, whereby I may see and understand thee; and place in my flesh the goodnesse of holi∣ness, whereby I may love and in∣joy thee: for what is knowledge without goodnesse, and sight with∣out injoyment? It is by knowledge I see, it is by love I enjoy. LXXXVIII. 1. There is in us an inward man, so there is an outward. 2. There is a new man, so there
is an old man. 3. There is a law of the minde, so there is a law of the members, and there is a law also of the spirit of life. 4. There is a voluntarie domi∣nion in sin, and there is an invo∣luntarie. 5. There is an univer∣sall tyrannie of sin, and there is a particular. 6. There is a rege∣neration in the minde and will, and there is a regeneration in the members and affections. 7. There is a complete will, or volition; and there is an incom∣plete will, or velleitie. 8. There is a generall, or confused judge∣ment; and there is a more par∣ticular, or distinct judgement. 1. The inward man is the minde, the outward man is the
body. 2. The new man is grace, the old man is sinne. 3. The law of the minde is knowledge and conscience, the law of the members is sin, the law of the Spirit of life is sa∣ving grace. 4. The wicked are under the voluntarie, the godly under the involuntarie domini∣on of sin. 5. Originall sin is an universall tyrant, actuall sins are particular tyrants. 6. Re∣generation in the minde and will, is knowledge and desire; Regeneration in the members, is action, or working the will of God. 7. Volition followes the last judgement of reason, vel∣leitie followes the antecedent, or confused judgement. 8. By
a generall and confused judge∣ment, my will affects the good which is commanded by Gods law; by a particular and di∣stinct judgement, my will affects the evil which is condemned by Gods Law. Lord,1 as I praise thee for the inward and the out∣ward man,2 so will I much more praise thee, if thou wilt strengthen in me the new man of grace, and weaken the old man of sin;3 if thou wilt give me the law of the spirit of life, to illuminate the law of the minde, and to debilitate the law of the members:4 Make my service of sin involuntarie;5 and though I cannot be free from that catholike tyrant of originall sin, yet in thy mercy deliver me from the inso∣lencie
of these particular tyrants, my actuall sinnes:6 And let not my Regeneration be only intellectu∣all, but also operative and effectu∣all. 7 Rectifie and cleere my judge∣ment, that it may direct my will: 8 And make my will to affect the good which thou cmmandest, and to dis-affect the evil which thou condemnest. LXXXIX. Though Predestination, as it is an act or work of God, can nothing be furthered or hinde∣red by our good or wicked lives; yet salvation, which is the effect of Predestination, may be furthered by prayers and holinesse, hindered by our infidelitie and wickednesse: for
God who preordained Salvati∣on, preordained also the means which may help forward our Salvation. Lord, let not the con∣ceit of my Election dull me with se∣curitie, or puffe me up with pre∣sumption: but assist me, that by good works I may make my Electi∣on sure, and in feare and trem∣bling I may work out my Salva∣tion. XC. There are three books of life; the one is Gods Register book, the other is Gods book of Sta∣tutes, the third is his book of Records. In the first, as in a Register, are set down all the names of the predestinate; in the second, which is the Scripture,
are set out all the duties that are to be performed by the prede∣stinate; in the third are set down all the good actions and sufferings of the predestinate: Out of the first we cannot be blotted, for our names are writ∣ten in Heaven; and though an earthly mother may forget the fruit of her womb, yet our hea∣venly Father cannot forget the fruit of his Spirit. Out of the third book we may be blotted, because our sinnes may occasi∣on him to forget our good works, and to slight our suf∣frings. Lord, I confesse that I have slighted thy sacred Book of divine Statutes, therefore thou maist justly blot me out of the book
of thy remembrance: but in that thou hast not blotted my name out of thy first book, I ascribe it to thy immutabilitie; and if thou wilt not blot out my patience and suf∣frings out of thy other book, I will admire and praise thy mercy. XCI. Though God loves all men, yet he saves not all men: he loves them, because he made them; he saves them not, be∣cause he willed it not: he could not in justice will all mens Sal∣vation, seeing man by his vo∣luntary unjustice deprived him∣self of Salvation; he loves his own image, but hates that which defaced his image; he loves the man, but hates the sin;
and if it were not for sin, he would not punish man. Lord, thy love to man is unspeakable, in that thou savest some; and thy ju∣stice is unsearchable, in that thou savest not all. I cannot blame thy justice, but my sins, that caused my miserie; I cannot brag of my me∣rits, but of thy goodnesse, that mo∣ved thee to mercie. XCII. God hates the sins of man, because he loves his own ju∣stice with the love of Amor benevolen∣tiae.complacencie; he hates the miseries of man, be∣cause he loves mans welfare with the love ofAmor amicitiae. ami∣tie; but by accident he loves the death of wicked men,
because he hates the works of iniquite. Thus it is as naturall for God to hate evil, as it is to love himself; and as impossible for him to love evil, as it is to hate him∣self. XCIII. Christ loved us when we were his enemies, and he loves us being his friends: when we were his foes, he suffered death for us; being his friends, he hath purchased life to us: that love was greater then this, if we consider the object; this love is greater then that, if we consi∣der the benefit. O my God, how am I bound to thee, who when I was thine enemie, didst weare the crown of thornes for me; and being now
thy friend hast bestowed a Crown of glory on me: Let not the ser∣vant repine to beare the reproaches of so gracious a master, who was content to beare the sins and shame of so ungracious a servant. XCIIII. God did first will his own glory. 2. Mans existence. 3. His righteousnesse. 4. His own Promises. 5. The exe∣cution or accomplishment of them concerning mans happi∣nesse. Gods glory is the great wheele of this clock, which moves all the rest; the finall cause, which moves all other causes. Had it not been for his glory, I had neither had being, nor well-being; he gave me
existence, he made me to his image, he promised me happi∣nesse, and he hath performed it, to the end I might glorifie him. Shall I then dishonour thee, O God, by whom I am what I am, when I look on my creation; and am by grace what I am not by nature, when I look on my regeneration? Therefore I will praise the glory of thy power, for my existence; the glory of thy goodnesse, for my righteousnesse; the glory of thy mercy in promising, and the glory of thy truth in performing what thou hast promised, though thus I have not deserved. XCV. All the afflictions of Gods people are either punishments,
chastisements, or probations; punishments for sins past, cha∣stisements to prevent sinnes to come, probations to make triall of our Christian vertues: and, though Christ was punished for our sinnes, to free us from eter∣nall torments; yet we are not thereby exempted from tem∣porarie punishments: he died to save us from death eternall, not from death temporall: he both suffered and satisfied; we suffer, though we cannot satis∣fie: our sufferings are to shew our conformitie with Christ, but not to shew any insufficien∣cie in the death of Christ. Thou, O Lord, hast paid a plenarie ran∣some for sin; and thou that knew∣est
no sin, becamest sinne, and didst suffer death as a punishment for us, that we who are born in sin might be free from sin, that death might not be a punishment, but a chastisement to us. XCVI. As by one simple act God knowes his own Essence, so by one simple act he wils his own goodnesse; which will, whe∣ther we take it for an act or for an habit, is eternally in God, and differs but in some re∣spects from his essence, and therefore is immutable, infi∣nite, and holy as his Essence: and though many things are willed by him, yet there is but one will in him; which can∣not
be moved by any efficient end, or object different from himself. Lord, though my will cannot attain that simplicitie, infi∣nitenesse, and immutabilitie that is in thee: yet let it obtain some measure of holinesse, that in desi∣ring of that only which is good, it may in some measure resemble thine. XCVII. All have not had the happi∣nesse to heare of Christ, and yet there is no happinesse with∣out Christ: in this God is not unjust, for they who either in themselves, or in their parents have rejected him, are not wor∣thy of him; besides, God hath not left himself without a wit∣nesse,
for he hath left a law written in all mens hearts, and so much light of his goodnesse and justice as may make all men excuselesse. If therefore they shall be rejected that had not that light of knowledge which we have: how can we think we are elected, who have even spurned at the knowledge of that light which they have not? XCVIII. Regeneration, which is the killing of the old man, and quickning of the new, hath for her ushers Sorrow and Contri∣tion; for her Attendants Faith and Hope; for her followers the works of Charitie: if any of these be defective, Genera∣tion
will be little effective: nei∣ther is this the work of nature, but of grace; for nature by generation can give us a mor∣tall essence, but grace by rege∣neration gives us an immortall existence: in our first birth we had a new nature from our cor∣porall parents, in our second birth, nature is renewed by our spirituall parents: So easie is the work of physicall generati∣on, that it's performed in the instant of our conception; so difficult is the work of hyper∣physicall regeneration, that we cannot be consummately refor∣med, till the instant of our dis∣solution. Lord, the great world was with greater facilitie by thee
created, then the little world of man could by thee be re-created; that was done only by uttering thy externall word, this could not be done, but by the suffering of thy internall Word: therefore, as I am bound to thee for the tempor all life, which in my generation by thy spi∣rit thou breathedst in me; much more am I bound for that eternall life, which, in my regeneration, by thy Sonnes death, thou hast purcha∣sed for me. XCIX. In thy sight, O Lord, no flesh can be justified, if we consider the puritie of thy nature, the ri∣gour of thy justice, the infirmi∣ties of our flesh, and the imper∣fections
of our righteousnesse: For the first, the Angels are not pure in thy sight, much lesse we who dwell in houses of clay: For the second, if thou shouldst marke, Lord, what is done amisse, who could abide it? For the third, there is no man that doth good, no not one, we are all gone out of the way: For the fourth, the justest man falleth seven times a day, and our righteousness is like a men∣struous cloath. Therefore we ac∣knowledge, Lord, there is no righ∣teousnesse inherent in us, by which we can be saved, but that righte∣ousnesse which is inherent in thee, and imputed to us, and by that we are justified; and there is in thee
exuberance of mercies, by which we may be pardoned. C. We are justified by grace formally, by faith instrumen∣tally, by the word ministerial∣ly, by good works demonstra∣tively, by sorrow and repen∣tance preparatively, by Christs death and obedience meritori∣ously, and by God himself principally: if then God be the efficient cause, if Christs active and passive obedience be the materiall, if grace be the for∣mall, if Gods glory be the fi∣nall cause of our justification; how can we claime any share in it? We are only subjects and
patients, no wayes agents; our good works are but fruits and effects, no wayes causes; our sorrow and repentance are ef∣fects of preventing grace, not of free-will; our faith is from above, not from our selves. Therefore, O Lord, I disclaime all merit of congruitie and condigni∣tie, all efficacie of Sacraments, all suffrages of Saints, all power of Ro∣mane Prelates, all absolution of Priests, all observation of humane tradition, and all will-worship, from my justification. I acknowledge no other merits but thy mercies; by thy grace thou preventedst my merits; my merits are thy suf∣frings, my holinesse is thy good∣nesse; my righteousnesse is but a
sparkle of thy brightnesse, a drop of that Ocean, a grain of that heap, a stone of that immense mountain of thy incomprehensible goodnesse; for which I am indebted to thee, not thou to me: Therefore, not un∣to us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name we glve the glory.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON Gods Justice. I. GOD will not pardon any sin, except we re∣pent of every sin; for as he that breaks one com∣mand, is guiltie of the breach of all; so he that faileth in re∣penting of one sin, repenteth of never a sin. God loves not to doe things by halves, he will pardon all, or none; and he will have us repent of all, or
none: for, as it stands not with his goodnesse and perfection to give an imperfect pardon; so it consisteth not with the sinceri∣tie of repentance, to conceale any sin not repented: as he ejected seven divels out of one, and a legion out of another, without leaving any behinde in the possessed; so he will have us cast out all our sinnes, with∣out hiding of any unrepented. What availes it to be freed from Satans power in casting us into the water of drunken∣nesse, if he can, when he plea∣seth, fling us into the fire of concupiscence? O thou that art the great Physician of my soul, to thee I open all my wounds, and
disclose all my maladies: make me, by the vomit of confession, to cast up all my sinfull humours before thee; that, by the cordiall of a gene∣rall pardon, my soule may be cured, and totally saved by thee. II. So severe is the great Judge of the quick and the dead, that when he shall come to judge the world in righteousnesse, at his presence the powers of Heaven shall shake, the ele∣ments shall melt, the starres shall fall, the sun shall be dark∣ned, the sea shall roare, and the moone shall give no light; yea, the heavens shall be rolled up like a scrole, and shall passe away with a noise. Lord, if the
righteous shall scarcely be saved, where shall sinners appeare? If there be no puritie in the Angels, nor stabilitie in the heavens, nor holinesse in thy Saints, what shall become of me, who am sold under sin, and drinks in iniquitie as wa∣ter? But my comfort is, that thou hast committed all judgement to thy Son, who died for sinners. Shall I feare to be judged by a bro∣ther; or appear before a Saviour? He that left Heaven to suffer death for me, will he after death shut Heaven against me? I will not feare from that mouth the sentence of condemnation, which by prayer hath been the meanes of mediation between God and me. Surely, he that came to seek that which was
lost, will not loose that, which he came to seek. III. Such is the severitie of Gods Justice, that he will not exempt his own children from tempo∣rarie punishments, though he died for them: 1. Because, like gold, they must shine in the furnace of affliction. 2. That they may not be damned with the world. 3. That they may be the better fitted for Heaven; for they must be baptized in this red sea, before they can ob∣tain that heavenly Canaan; and through the temple of Vertue must passe into the temple of Honour. 4. That the wicked may have lesse cause to com∣plain
when they see Gods own Sonnes not spared. 5. That by chastisements sin may be sup∣pressed, as Pauls pride by an Angel of Satan was buffetted. 6. That the Patience, Faith, and Obedience of the Saints might be manifested and exercised; that the metall of their vertues may not, for want of exercise, be rusted. 7. That in some sort they might be made conforma∣ble to Christ their Master; for, if he suffered for sin, that knew not sin, shall we escape punish∣ment, that are born, live, and die in sin? Shall the head be wounded with thornes, and the members sleep in beds of Roses? 8. That others by their
example may be animated to run with patience the race which is set before them. 9. That Gods love to them may be testified; for he passeth by bastards, and corrects those whom he loves. Lord, with all reverence I kisse thy rod; by it I am bettered; thy flail doth not break me, but separates the chaffe from me; thy fire purifieth, but consumeth me not; in thy morter, the more that the spices of my ver∣tues are bruised, the more they are made fragrant: My spirituall Camomell by thy treading is not spoiled, but made more redolent: in thy Presse, though, like grapes, I am squeezed, yet the pretious liquor of my vertues are not lost,
but increased; the more that the stormes of afflictions beat upon me, so much the more, like a strong Ce∣dar, let my roots be fastned in thee; the darker the night is, I will, like a star fastned in thy firmament, shine the cleerer; and the more burthen thou layest upon me, with the Palme, I will rise the higher. I acknowledge, Lord, thy goodnesse, in that thou hast not drowned the Ark of my soul in the flood of af∣flictions, but hast raised it higher then the highest mountaines: Thy rod hath sweetned my bitter wa∣ters; and thy salt hath preserved me from rottennesse. IIII. Such is the severitie of Gods Justice, that some mens tempo∣rarie
sinnes are punished with eternall paines; because the person offended is eternall, the happinesse which they lost is eternall, their desire to sinne is eternall, the malice of Satan in tormenting men is eternall; the Justice of God is immutable, the fire of hell is inextinguish∣able, the repentance of wicked men in hell is impossible, the wrath of God without Christ is implacable. Lord, make me seriously to meditate upon these infernall paines, which for acerbi∣tie are unspeakable, for varietie in∣numerable, for permanencie inter∣minable; that I may not run the hazzard of suffring endlesse tor∣ments, for the injoyment of a few,
short, and fruitlesse vanities: make me to prevent thy wrath by timely repentance, that I may, before I goe hence, obtain thy favour and in∣dulgence. V. As God in his Justice suffers his Children to lye under the rod of correction, and adversi∣tie; so doth he permit wicked men to flourish with all out∣ward prosperitie. Lazarus starves, whilst the rich Glutton surfets: whilst Ioseph is a pri∣soner, his brethren are at liber∣tie; and whilst Belshazzar is feasting, Gods people are in captivitie. This God is pleased to suffer: 1. That his goodness may appeare, which causeth
his sun to shine upon the good and bad. 2. To make the wic∣ked inexcusable, who have not wanted the bait of outward blessings to bring them to goodnesse. 3. That we may know worldly prosperities to be none of Gods choicest bles∣sings, seeing bad men injoy them; and outward adversi∣ties to be none of his chiefest judgements, seeing good men are annoyed by them. 4. That the wicked may not complain for wanting the reward of their good actions; verily they have received their reward here: let them be content with their temporarie blessings, that is all the reward they shall have; let
them take then that which is their own, and goe their way. 5. The more outward prospe∣ritie is heaped on them, the greater judgements are prepa∣red for them. 6. It stands with Gods Justice, that these tempo∣rall vanities which they pre∣ferre to life eternall, should be the occasion of their stumbling and downfall. 7. Here is the comfort of Gods Children, that he who heapes so many outward and earthly benefits on his Enemies, will not forget to bestow inward and heaven∣ly blessings on his Friends: if the few good actions of wicked men are here so plentifully re∣warded, surely the many suffe∣rings
of good men cannot be forgot and obliterated. O my God, as thy outward blessings, which are but temporall, content not my desires, which are immor∣tall; neither am I assured by them that thou lovest me, seeing thou bestowest them on such as hate thee: therefore, Lord, conferre on whom thou wilt wealth and ho∣nour; that which I desire of thee, is thy love and favour. VI. It stands with Gods Justice to suffer us to fall into divers doubts and tentations, when we are puffed up with pride and conceit of our own excellen∣cies; he will by such meanes humble us, that we may see our
own infirmities; he will suffer us, with Peter, to sink in these waters, that with him we may flie to our Master Jesus: the Angel of Satan is permitted to buffet us, that we may, with Paul, pray to him whose grace is sufficient for us: God himself in these tentations wrestles with us, as the Angel did with Iacob; but we must not despaire though we halt: he that strives with us all the night, will give us a blessing in the morning; and he that commanded Abra∣ham to sacrifice his only son, will send an Angel to Abraham to rescue his son; though Sa∣tan seek to winnow us, yet we have a supporter of our faith, a
Saviour who prayes to his Fa∣ther for us. Feare not drown∣ing, though these billowes of tentations shake our ship, so long as we have Christ with us in the ship, though our tentati∣ons are unpleasing, (for a wounded spirit who can bear?) though all the waves and stormes of the Almightie goe over our head, though from our youth up we suffer his ter∣rours with a troubled minde, though he give us vinegar and gall to drink, and feed us with the bread of teares: in a word, though he would slay us, yet, with Iob, let us trust in him; he will lay no more on us then we can beare; he can make the
same rod that beats us, support and comfort us; and though the vinegar which he powres into our wounds be sharp, yet he will temper it with oile: he can sweeten our corrupted potage with meale, as well as our corrupted waters with salt. What though the gall of tenta∣tions be bitter; what though the spitle and clay of afflictions be unpleasant, so long as he can by them recover our spirituall eye-sight, which we by pride have lost? Give the Physician leave to lance and scarifie, so long as by such meanes he can cure thee of thy maladie. O great Physician of my soul, I will not refuse to swallow the bitter
Aloes of afflictions, if by them thou canst purge out the rank hu∣mours of my sickly affections. If I cannot obtain the Crown, but by fighting in this bloudie field; if I cannot attain the haven of Heaven, but by sailing through this stormie sea; be thou my Pilot to conduct me, my Captain to lead me, and my King to reward me, or rather thy own worke in me. O my God, if these waters of tentation doe at any time over-flow their banks, like Iordan, let the presence of the true Ark of the Covenant drive back these waters, that I may passe safely through them to the land of eternitie: let the rod of thy passi∣ons divide this red sea of tribulati∣ons, and let the long robe of thy
righteousnesse, which farre exceeds Elijah's mantle in vertue and largenesse, make me a way through this Iordan, to the Kingdome of true happinesse. VII. 1. God in his severe Justice doth often punish a multitude for the sinnes of one man; one Achan offends, and all the host of Israel suffers. 2. Oftentimes he punisheth the children for the parents, to the third and fourth generation. 3. Some∣times he punisheth the good for the sinnes of the bad; Mor∣decai, Daniel, and the three Children are punished with captivitie, for the Jewes rebel∣lion and iniquitie. 4. Often∣times
for mans transgressions, he destroyes the dumb crea∣tures; Man sinned, and the earth with the beasts are de∣stroyed. In this God is not un∣just, though his judgements be occult: for, if the Chirurgi∣on can strike the arme for the infirmitie of the head, why may not God punish one for the offence of another, if by punishing the one, he can cure the other? 1. It was no injustice in God to punish a multitude for the sin of Achan, because the multitude was guiltie of other sinnes, though not of the sinne of Achan. 2. It is no in∣justice in God to punish chil∣dren for the sin of their parents,
because they are parts of their parents. 3. Neither is it inju∣stice in God to punish the good, for the offences of the wicked, because no man is so good, that can say, he is no wayes wicked. 4. It is no in∣justice in God to punish the creatures for mans transgressi∣on, seeing it was Gods good∣nesse to make the creatures for mans use and recreation: thus, as God can justly punish a whole nation for the sinnes of a wicked Prince, so as justly can God punish a good Prince for the sinnes of a wicked nation. O Lord, if harmelesse Infants, who have not sinned but in their pa∣rets, are not exempted from thy
justice; how shall I, who to the stock of my parents sinnes have added such an increase of actuall trans∣gressions, think to escape? And if the dumb creatures, which know not sin, are punished for mine ini∣quitie; doe not I deserve to be pu∣nished both for mine own sins, and for subjecting the creature unto vanity? VIII. Gods Justice appeares in pu∣nishing the wicked, in releeving the oppressed, in rejecting the bribes of rich men, in refusing to accept the persons of any men, in pronouncing just judge∣ment, and putting the same in execution towards all men; and in tempering his justice with
mercy towards the most wicked men: He drowned the first world for their abominations: he relieved the Israelites from their oppressions: he spared not kings and rich men for their wealth and greatnesse; and yet in sparing some, when he drowned the world, he shewed his mercy and goodnesse. O thou righteous Iudge of the world, look with the eye of Iustice upon the op∣pressions of thy Church, and re∣move them; and with that same eye of Iustice look on her oppressors, and destroy them: but yet with the other eye of mercy look upon such of her persecutors as thou wilt save, and in time reclaime them.
DIVINE MEDITATIONS UPON Gods Mercie. I. AS there is in God no passion, so con∣sequently no com∣passion; yet he is truly the God of Mercie, be∣cause there is in him a prompti∣tude to help those that are in miserie: This mercy he extends not only to the good that love him, but also to the bad that hate him: 1. That they who
are bad by their own perverse∣nesse, may be made good by his love and kindnesse. 2. As no man is so bad, in whom there is not some goodnesse; and no man so good, in whom there is not some wickednesse: so God is not so unjust, as to suffer the one to goe unpunished; nor is he so mercilesse, as to suffer the other to goe unrewarded. 3. As he sheweth mercie to the bad, and to those by whom he is hated; he will teach us, by his example, how to carrie our selves to those by whom we are persecuted. He healed the eare of him that came to appre∣hend him; he forgave Peter that denyed him; he made
Paul a vessell of mercy, though he persecuted him; he prayed for those that crucified him; and he died for those sheep that went astray from him: he causeth his sun to shine upon the good and bad; his rain to fall upon the just and unjust. O my God, I acknowledge thy goodnesse and mercie towards me a wretched sinner, who am sold under sin, and laden with iniqui∣tie: O let this thy goodnesse be a forcible meanes to reclaime me from the course of sinne; that I may henceforth walk before thee in truth, in righteousnesse, and in sin∣ceritie.
II. A great argument of Gods goodnesse and mercie is his forbearance and longanimitie: he stretcheth out his hands all day long to a rebellious gene∣ration. Why will you die, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner. Many mira∣cles did he work to turn Phara∣ohs heart: sixscore yeares did he spend to bring the first world to repentance: many Prophets did he send, before he would destroy the Jewes; he would have healed Babylon, but she would not be healed; he would have gathered Jeru∣salem,
as the hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but she would not be gathered: How loath was he to cut down the fig-tree, though fruitlesse? how loath was he to destroy his Vineyard, though grape∣lesse? how loath to overthrow the Jewes, though gracelesse? O Lord, I confesse, that thy for∣bearance in punishing me so great a sinner, proceeds not from any liking thou takest in my sinning, for thou art most good: nor for any neglect in correcting, for thou art most just: nor for any ignorance that can be in thee, for thou art omniscient: nor for any impotencie that can befall thee, for thou art omnipotent; but onely
out of thy goodnesse and mercie towards me, who delightest not in any mans destruction, but patiently waitest for the sinners conversion. Lord, I am more bound to thee for thy long forbearance, then the An∣gels, who sinned in Heaven, and Adam in Paradise: they had no sooner offended thee, but they were rejected by thee; I have often∣times sinned, and yet I am spared. O let me not abuse thy long animi∣tie by presumption, but let it work in me a true and speedie con∣version. III. God sheweth his great mer∣cie towards us, in using so many meanes to call us: when we
are wearie, he bids us come to him, and he will ease us; when we are thirstie, he bids us come and drink, that with these wa∣ters of life he may refresh us; when we are hungrie, he bids us come and eat, for with his own body he will feed us; when we have fought, and got the victorie, he will bid us come to receive the Crown of glorie, which he hath laid up for us. He calls us by his Spirit inwardly, and by his Word outwardly: Every good moti∣on is a call, and an inward knocking: every Preacher is a Messenger, every Sermon is a Summons, every Scripture is a Love-letter, by which he in∣vites
and calls us. Besides, eve∣ry benefit that we receive from him, is a Messenger to invite us to him: every morning the sun riseth, not onely to give us light, but to invite us unto him who is the fountain of light: every night the moon or stars appeare, not only to lessen the darknesse of the aire, but also to drive away the darknesse of the minde; to call us both out of corporall and spirituall obscu∣ritie; Every drop of rain, eve∣ry flower in the field, every eare of corne, every grape in thy Vineyard, every increase of thy flock, every addition to thy stock, are so many trumpetters of Gods mercie, to stirre up
and call thee. Again, every crosse and affliction he layes upon us, whether sicknesse, po∣vertie, banishment, imprison∣ment, or infamie, are so many Heraulds sent to summon and call us. Besides all these, the horrour of hell-darkness, which shall never be illightened; of that fire, which shall never be extinguished; of that thirst, which shall never be quenched; of that worm, that shall never be consumed; of that weeping and gnashing of teeth, which shall never be ended; are pro∣posed to us as so many sad Ap∣paritors to summon us: But, lastly, if none of these will pre∣vaile with us, then the joyes
of Heaven are painted out unto us; the light that knowes no darknesse, the joy that knowes no sorrow, the life that knowes no death, the comfort of Gods countenance, the beautie of the new Jerusalem, the societie of holy Angels, the companie of Christ, and of all the blessed Soules; the rivers of delight, fulnesse of joy, and pleasures for evermore. O God, how won∣derfull is thy goodnesse, which thou hast shewed to me, in profering so many baites to catch and draw me out of the turbulent sea of this world, unto the shore of eternall happinesse! But I have not obeyed thy outward invitations, nor in∣ward motions: I have not taken
notice of thy benefits, nor of thy chastisements; not of thy threat∣nings, nor of thy promises. Lord, I am so backward, thou must not only call me, but compell me; thou must not only warne me, but thou must draw me, and then I will cheerfully run after thee. IIII. The mercy of God appeares also in this, that, after our re∣lapses, he is ready to receive us: his mercies are those sweet oyntments, which make the Virgins follow him. He came to call sinners to repentance, to save that which was lost: he rejected not that sinfull Mary Magdalene, nor Matthew, though
a Publican; nor the Canaanitish woman, though a dog; nor the Thief upon the Crosse, nor Pe∣ter that denied him, nor the Jewes that crucified him, nor Paul that persecuted him: that loving Father in the Gospel did not receive his prodigall Son when he returned, nor the shepherd that sheep which went astray, nor the woman her groat which she had lost, with so much joy and glad∣nesse, as he will us, if we return to him by repentance. O Lord, I have gone astray, like a lost sheep, from thee; I have, like a Prodi∣gall, spent that patrimonie of grace which thou gavest me; I have gone a whoring after this
vain world, and have forsaken thee: O thou that art a carefull Shepherd, a pitifull Father, a lo∣ving Husband, reject not thy lost sheep, thy prodigall sonne, thy dis∣loyall wife. Shall I dispaire to come unto thee, whose armes are stretched out on the crosse to em∣brace me, whose head bendeth downward to kisse me, whose heart is opened to receive and entertain me? V. Gods mercie is to be consi∣dered, either as it is in him, or as it is from him: as it is in him, it is his act or habit; as it is from him, it is his effect: as it is in him, it is immutable; as it is from him, it is changeable:
as it is in him, it is necessarie; as it is from him, it is voluntarie (for he will have mercie on whom he will:) as it is in him, it is his. power; as it is from him, it is his .operation: as it is in God, it is God; for nothing is eternall except God, but his mercy is eternall, from genera∣tion to generation, saith David: it is not lawfull to trust in any, but in God; yet David trusteth in Gods mercy; doubtlesse then his mercy is himself: and, being it is so, his mercy and ju∣stice are all one, though the ef∣fects of his justice and mercy are different. Lord, as thy justice is seen in punishing sinners; so is thy
mercy manifested in sparing them; as thy justice was unspeakeable in punishing thy Son for my sin, so is thy mercy incomprehensible in par∣doning my sin by the punishing of thy Son. VI. As Christs active and passive obedience is the meritorious cause, so is Gods free mercy and grace the impulsive cause of our Justification and Salvati∣on: And although God was bound in justice to pardon our transgressions, having received full satisfaction by his Sonnes death and mediation, yet was he not bound in justice to send his Son into the world, or to make him an attonement for
our prevarications: to send a Mediatour, who, by his obedi∣ence, might make satisfaction, and consequently save us, was an act of his free grace and mercie, to which he was not tied; but having sent a Media∣tour, who, by his obedience, hath made satisfaction, it is an act of justice now to save us, and to this he is necessarily tied. O my God, how much am I bound to love and honour thee, who hast bound thy selfe to justifie and save me? I pray thee, as thou hast di∣vested thy self of thine own li∣bertie in condemning me, and hast freely subjected thy self to necessity, that thou mightest save me; so de∣barre me from all libertie in offen∣ding
thee, and impose on me this necessitie, that all my dayes I may love and serve thee. VII. To shew mercy, and to par∣don sin, are not of equall extent; for God shewes mercy to all that are in miserie, but he only pardons their sinnes whom he meanes to glorifie: he is mer∣cifull to the wicked, in causing his sun to shine, and his rain to fall, and in bestowing of many outward blessings on them; but he pardoneth only the sins of them, who by repentance turn from sinne to him, and by faith lay hold on Christ that died for them. And, although God be
mercy it self, or mercifull in the highest degree; yet, without sa∣tisfaction, he will not pardon iniquitie; because pardoning is an act rather of his free will, then of his mercy: neither is it essentiall to his mercy to par∣don, for so he should pardon all to whom he is mercifull; which is not true: and though he is mercifull to all those whom he pardoneth, yet the act of pardoning is not mercy, but the effect of mercy: for his mercie is essentiall, immutable, necessarie; but to pardon is a free and mutable act: therefore, as Gods justice is not prejudi∣ced by punishing one for the sinnes of another, seeing that
other undertook voluntarily to suffer punishment; so neither is Gods mercy wronged by par∣doning that sin for which sa∣tisfaction is made, because the satisfaction was not made by the party that offended: it was justice then in God to punish Christ for our sinnes, because voluntarily he took upon him our sinnes; so it was mercy in God to pardon that sinne, for which Christ had fully satis∣fied. It was justice in God the Son, having become our surety, to satisfie for us; so it was mercy in God the Father to apply and impute his Sonnes satisfaction to us. I confesse, Lord, that though thou art bound
in justice to pardon my sinne, for which thou art fully satisfied; yet thou art not bound in justice to im∣pute that satisfaction, or to account it mine; seeing by my personall righteousnesse thou hast not been satisfied. I will admire thy justice in punishing thy Sonne for the sins which by him were not committed, and I will magnifie thy mercie in forgiving my sinnes, for which I have no wayes satisfied. VIII. The highest degree of Gods mercy was in sending of his only begotten Sonne into the world, to be our Jesus, to pro∣cure Salvation for us; which he did, not by shewing us the
way of Salvation onely, or by declaring his Fathers will unto us, or by shewing us the exam∣ple of his life and death; but by paying the price of our Redem∣ption: for we are reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Rom. 5. 10. we are redeemed by the precious bloud of that im∣maculate Lamb, 1 Pet. 1. 18. his bloud was given for the remis∣sion of sins, Matth. 26. 28. we are justified by his bloud, Rom. 5. 8. he was made a curse, to free us from the curse of the law, Gal. 3. 13. by his death he hath abo∣lished death, &c. Heb. 2. 14. the Son of man came to give his life for the Redemption of ma∣ny, Mat. 20. 28. his bloud cleans∣eth
us from all sin, 1 Ioh. 1. 7. by his stripes we are healed, Isai. 53. 5. he made himselfe a sacri∣fice for sin, Isai. 53. 10. therefore it is by his bloud, by his sacri∣fice, by his death, by his stripes, that we are saved, expiated, ju∣stified, redeemed, cleansed, hea∣led: and it was for our sinnes that he suffered, Rom. 4. 25. for our iniquities that he was brui∣sed, Isai. 53. 5. our transgressions he bore in his body on the tree; and upon him was laid the ini∣quitie of us all, Isai. 53. 7. nei∣ther did he undertake this wretched condition for us for∣cedly, but freely; nor was the death temporall, but eternall in the intention, and greatnesse of
the torments; neither was Christs death a bare manifesta∣tion, but a just price of our Re∣demption: for in him we have Redemption by his bloud, re∣mission of sins, &c. Eph. 1. 5. we are redeemed by the precious bloud of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, 1 Pet. 1. 18. which was represented by the Leviticall sacrifices, save onely that the Leviticall Priest offe∣red for his own sinnes, and for the sinnes of the people; but Christ had no sins of his own for which he should offer: And as the Priests office was to of∣fer sacrifice, and to make inter∣cession, Christ performed the one upon the Crosse, when by
his death he made satisfaction, and blotted out the hand-wri∣ting of Ordinances; but the other, Christ performes in Hea∣ven, interceding for us, and ap∣plying his death unto us; for we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righte∣ous, 1▪ Ioh. 2. 1. whose Intercessi∣on must not be confounded with his oblation, because this was once performed, and can∣not be iterated, for he cannot die often, Heb. 9. 25. and with one oblation he hath consecra∣ted for ever those that are san∣ctified, Heb. 10. 14. but his Inter∣cession is performed daily, for he is entered into Heaven, that he might appeare in the sight of
God for us, Heb. 9. 24. by vertue of whose propitiatorie sacrifice we are not taught the way to offer and reconcile our selves to God, but by him we are re∣conciled, redeemed, justified, sa∣ved. O my God, who is able to com∣prehend the height, depth, breadth, and length of thy unspeakable mer∣cy? In height it reacheth to the heavens, in confirming the Angels; in depth it reacheth to hell, for thou deliveredst David from the ne∣thermost hell; in breadth it ex∣tends from East to West, over all the world, even over all thy works; and the length thereof is from ge∣neration to generation: Therefore there is none of thy Attributes so gracious and admirable as thy
mercy: for, as there is nothing greater in thee, then that thou canst; so there is nothing bet∣ter, then that thou wilt have mercy on those that are in misery. FINIS.
