T623 13546999 100154
A TRUE RELATION OF AN Apparition, Expressions and Actings, OF A SPIRIT, Which Infested the House of Andrew Mac∣kie in Ring-Croft of Stocking, in the Pa¦roch of Rerrick, in the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, in Scotland. By Mr. Alexander Telfair, Minister of that Paroch: and Attested by many other Persons, who were also Eye and Ear-Witnesses. Eph. 6.11. Put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. Vers. 12. For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against Principalities, and Powers, &c, James 4.7. — Resist the Devil and he will flee from you. EDINBVRGH, Printed by GEORGE MOSMAN, And are to be sold at his Shop in the Parliament Closs, 1696.
TO THE READER. I Assure you It is contrare to my Genius, (all Circum∣stances being considered) to appear in Print to the View of the World, yet these Motives have prevailed with me▪ to publish the following Relation (beside the satisfy∣ing of some reverend Brethren in the Ministry, and several worthy Christians) As 1. The Conviction and Confutation of that prevailing Spirit of Atheism▪ and Infidelity in our time, denying both in Opinion and Practice the Existence of Spirits, ei∣ther of God or Devils; and consequently a Heaven and Hell: And imputing the Voices, Apparitions and Actings of Good, or Evil Spirits, to the Melancholick Disturbance or Distemper of the Brains and Fancies of those, who pretend to hear▪ see, or feel them: 2. To give occasion, to all who read this, To bless the Lord, who hath sent a stronger (even Christ Iesus) than the
strong Man, to bind him, and spoil him of his Goods, and to destroy the Works of the Devil, and even by these things whereby Satan thinks to propagate his Kingdom of Darkness, to discover, weaken ad bring it down▪ 3▪ To induce all Persons, particularly Masters of Families, to private and Family-Prayer; lest the neglect of it provke the Lord, nor only to pour out his Wrah upon them otherwise: But to let Satan loose to haunt their Persons and Fami∣lies with audible Voices, Appaition, and hurt to their persos and Goods▪ 4▪ That Ministrs and Congregations, whee the Gospl is in any measure in purity and power, may be upon their guard, to wrestle according to the Word of God, against these Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses, who still seek to mar the Success and Fruit of the Gospel, sometimes b force, and sometimes by fraud, sometimes secretly▪ and sometimes openly▪ (Tunc tua res agitur, paries cum proximus ardet) And for thse Ends learn to know his Wiles, and put on the whole Armour of God, that they may be able to debate wih him And 5▪ That all who ae by the goodness of God re from these audible Voices, Apparitions or Hurts from Satan, may learn o ascribe Praise and Glory to God, who leads them not into Temptation, but deli∣vers them from Evil: And that this true and attested Account of Satan's Mthods in this Place, may carry th foresad Ends, i the earnst Prayer of An weak Labourer in the Work of the Gospel in that Place, and Your Servant for Christ's sake ALEXANDER TELFAIR. Edinburgh, Decem. 2, 1695.
A true Relation of an Apparition, Expressions and Actings, of a Spi∣rit, which Infested the House of Andrew Mackie in Ring-Croft of Stocking▪ in the Paroch of Rerrick, in the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright, in Scotland. WHereas many are desirous to know the Truth of the Matter, as to the Evil Spirit and its Actings, that troubleth the Family of Andrew Mackie in Ring-Crot of Stocking, &c. and are lyable to be mis-in∣formed, as I do find by the reports that come to my own Ears of that matter. Therefore that satis∣faction may be given, and such mistakes may be cured or prevented: I the Minister of the ad Paroc (who was present several times, and was Witness to many of its Actings, and have heard an Account of the whole of its Methods and Actings from the persns present, towards whom▪ and before whom it did act) have given the ensuing, and short Account of the
whole Matter: which I can attest to be the very Truth as to that Affair and before I come to the Relation it self, I premise these things with re∣spect to what might have been the occasion and rise of that Spirits ap∣pearing and acting. 1. The said Andrew Mackie being a Measn to his Employment, 'tis given out, that when he took the Meason-word, he devouted his first Child to the Devil: But I am certainly informed, he never took the same, and knows not what that Word is. He is outwardly Moral, there is no∣thing known to his Life and Conversation, but honest, civil, and harmless▪ beyond many of his Neighbours, doth delight in the Company of the best; and when he was under the Trouble of that evil Spirit, did pray to the great satisfaction of many. As for his Wife and Children, none have im∣puted any thing to them as the rie of it, nor is there any ground, for ought I know▪ for any to do so. 2. Whereas its given out that a Woman sub malâ fam, did leave some Cloaths in that house▪ in the Custody of the said Andrew Mackie, and died before they were given up to her; and he or his Wife should have keeped some of them back from her friends: I did seriously pose both him and his Wife upon the Matter, they declared they knew not what things were left, being bound up in a Sack▪ but did deliver entirely to her Freinds all they received from the Woman▪ which I am apt to believe. 3 Whereas one Macknaught, who sometimes before possessed that House, did not thrive in his own Person, or Goods: It seems he had sent his Son to a Witch-wife, who lived then at the Routing-bridge, in the Paroch of Iron-gray, to enquire what might be the cause of the decay of his Person and Goods: the Youth meeting with some Forreign Soul∣dirs, went abroad to Flanders, and did not return with an Answer. Some years after there was one Iohn Redick in this Paroch, who having had occasi∣on to go abroad, met with the said young Macknaught in Flanders, and they knowing other, Macknaught enquired after his Father and other Friends; and finding the said Iohn Redick was to go home, desired him to go to his Father, or who ever dwelt in the Ring-croft, and desire them to raise the door-thre∣shold, and search, till they found a Tooth, and burn it▪ for none who dwelt in that house would thrive till that was done. The said Iohn Redick coming home, and finding the old man Macknaught dead, and his Wife out of that place, did never mention the matter, nor further mind it, till this trouble was in Andrew Mackie's Family; then he spoke of it, and told the mat∣ter
to my self Betwixt Macknight's death, and Andrew Mackie's Possession of this House, there was one Thomas Telfair, who possest it some years; what way he heard the Report of what the Witch wife had said to Mackight's Son, I cannot tell; but he searched the door-threshold, and found something like a Tooth, did compare it with the Tooth of Man, Horse▪ Nolt and Sheep (as he said to me) but could not say which it did resemble, only it did resemble a Tooth: he did cast it in the fire, where it burnt like a Candle, or so much Tallow; yet he never knew any trouble about that house by night or by day, before or after, during his Possession. Thee things premised, being suspected to have been the occasion of the Trou∣ble; and there being no more known as to them, than what is now de∣clared, I do think the matter still unknown, what may have given an arise thereto. But leaving this I subjoin the matter as ollows. In the Moneth o Febuary, the said Andrew Mckie had some young Beasts, which in the night time were still loosed, and their Bindings brok∣en: he taking it to be the unrulyness of the Beasts, did make stronger and stronger Bindings of Withes and other things, but still all were brok∣en: at last he uspected it to be some other thing, whereupon he remo∣ved them out of that place, and the first night thereafter, one of them was bound with a Hair-tedder to the balk of the houe, so strait that th feet of the Beast only touched the ground, but could not move no way else, yet it sustained no hurt. An other night, when the Family were all sleeping, there was the full of an back-creel of Pees, set together in midst of the ouse floor, and fire put in them, the smoak wakened the Family, otherwise the house had been burnt; yet nothing all the while was either seen or heard. Upon the 7th. of March there were stones thrown in the House, in all the places of it, but it could not be discovered from whence they came, what, or who threw them: After this mannr it continued till the Sab∣bath, now and then throwing both in the night and day, but was busiest throwing in the night time. Upon Saturndy, the Family being all without, the Children coming in, saw something, which they thought to be a body itting by the ire-side with a Blanket (or Cloath) about it, whereat they were afraid: The youngest▪ being a boy about 9 or 0 years of age, did chide the rest, say∣ing, why are you fear'd? let us aine (or bless) our selves, and then there is no ground to fear't: he perceived the blanket to be his, and ain∣ing
(or blessing) himself, ran and pulled the blanket from it, saying, be what it will, it hath nothing to do with my blnket; and then they found it to be a four footed Stool set upon the end▪ and the blanket cast over it. Upon the Sabbath, being the 1h. of March the Crook and Pot-clips were taken away, and were a wanting four days, and were found at last on a oft▪ where they had been soght everal times before. This is at∣teted by Chales Mackelae of Colline, and John Cairns in Hadhills. It was observe that the Stones which hi any person, had not half their natural weight, and the throwig wa more frequent on the Sabbath, than at o∣ther ties: and especilly in time of Prayer▪ above all other times, it was busist▪ then throwing most at the person praying. The said Andrew Mac∣kie told the matter to me upon Sbbath after Sermon; upon the Tuesday thereafter I went to the house, did stay a considerable ime with them, and prayed twice, and there was no trouble: Then I came out with a resolution to leave the house, and as I was standing, speaking to some men at the barn end, I saw two little stones drop down on the Croft at a lit∣tle distance from me; and then immediatly some came crying ot of the house, that it was become as ill as ever within: whereupon I wnt into the house again, and as I was at Prayer, it threw several stones at me, but they did no urt▪ being very small; and after there was no more trou∣ble till the 18 day of March: and then it began as before, and threw more frequently, greater stones, whose strkes were sorer where they hit: and thus it continued to the 21. Then  went to the houe and stayed a great part of the night, but was greatly troubled; stones, and several ther things were thrown at me; I was struck several times on the sides, and houlders, very sharply with a great staff, so that those who were present heard the noise of the strokes: that night it threw off the bed-side, and rapped up∣on the Christs and Boards, as one calling for access: This is attested by Charles Macklelane of Colline▪ William Mackminn, and Iohn Tait in Torr. That night, as I was once at Prayer, leaning on a bed-side, I felt something prssing up my arme, I casting my eyes thither, perceived a little white Hand and Arm from the elbow down, but presently it evanished. It is to be observed, that notwithstanding of all that was felt and heard, from the first to the last of this matter, there was never any thing seen, except that hand I saw, and a Friend of the said Andew Mackie's said he aw as it were a young Man, red faced, with yellow hair, looking in at the Win∣dow;
and other two orthree Persons, with the said Andrw his Children, saw at several times, as it were a young Boy about the age of 14 years with gray Cloths, and a bonnet on his head, but preently disappeared; as also what the three Children saw sitting by the ire-side. Upon the 22 the Trouble still increased, boh against the Family, and against the Neighbours who came to visite them, by throwing stones, and beating them with staves; so that some were forced to leave the house be∣fore their inclination: This is attested by Charles Macklelane of Colline, and Andrew Tait in Torr. Some it would have met as they came to the house, and stoned with stones about the yards, and n like manner stoned as they went from the house; of whom Thomas Telfair in Stocking was one. It made a little Wound on th said Arew Mackie's brow▪ did thrust seve∣ral times at his shoulder, he not regarding, at last it gripped him so by the hair, that he thought something like nails of fingers scratched his skin. I dragged severals up and down he house by the Cloaths: This is at∣teted by Andrew Tait. It gripped one John Kege Miller in Achncairn so, by the side, that he intreated his Neighbours to help, and cryed, it would rive the side from him. That night it lifted te Cloaths off the Children, as they were sleeping in bed, and beat them on the hipps, as if it had been with ones hand, so that all who were in the house heard it. The door-barr, and other things, would go thorrow the house as if a person had been carrying them in their hand, yet nothing seen doing it: This is attested by John Telfair in Achinlek, and others. It rattled on the Chests and Bed sides with a staff▪ and made a great noise; and thus it continued by throwing stones, stricking with staves, and rattling in th house, till the 2d. of Apr, at night it cryed Wisht, Wisht, at every Sentence in the close of Prayer; and it Whied so distinctly, that the Dog barked, and ran to the door, as if one had been calling to houd him. pl 3. It whisled several times, and cryed wisht, wisht, this is at∣tested by Adrew Ta. Upon the 4th▪ of Aprl, Charles Mcklelne of Collin Land-lord, with the said Andrew Makie, went to a certain Number of Minster met at Buttle, and gave them an Account of the matter; where upon these Ministers made publick Prayers for the Family, and two of their Number. viz. Mr. Andrew Aevat Minister of Kells, and Mr. Iohn Murdo Minster of Crsmichel came to the House and spent that Night in fasting and praying: But it was very cruel against them, especially by throwing rat Stones some of them about half an stone weight: It wounded Mr▪
Andrew Aewart twice in the Head▪ to the effusion of his Blood, it pulled off his Wigg in time of Prayer, and when he was holding out his Nap∣kin betwixt his hands, it cast a Stone in the Npkin, and therewith threw it from him: It gave Mr. Iohn Murdo several sore strokes; Yet the wounds and Bruises received did soon cure: There were none in the House that Night escaped from some of its fury and cruelty: That Night it threw a firie peet amongs the People; But did no hurt, it only disturbed them in time of prayer: And also i the dawning, as they rose from Prayer▪ the Stones poured down on all who were in the House to their hurt▪ this is attested by Mr. Andrew Aevart Mr. Iohn Murdo, Charles Macklelane, and John Tait. Upon the 5th. of Aprile: It set some Thatch-straw in fire which was in the Barne yeard: At night the House being very throng with Neigh∣bours, the Stones were still thrown down among them; As the said Andrew Mackie his Wife went to bring in some peets, for the fire when she came to the door, she found a broad Stone to shake under her foot, which she never knew to be loose before: She resolved with her self to see what was beneath it in the morning there after. Upon the 6th. of Aprile, when the House was quiet, she went to the stone, and there found Seven small bones, with Blood, and some Flesh, all closed in a peice of Old suddled Paper, the Blood was fresh and bright: The sight whereof troubled her, and being affraid, laid all down again; And ran to Colline his House, being an quarter of an Mile distant: But in that time, it was worse then ever it was before; by throwing Stones, and fire-Balls, in and about the House, but the fire as it lighted did Evanish: In that time it threw an Hot-stone into the bed betwixt the Children, which burnt through the bed cloaths; And after it was taken out by the Mans Eldest Son, and had lyen on the floor more nor an Hour, and an half; the said Charles Macccelan of Colln could not hold it in his hand for het: this is attested be Charles Macklelan▪ It thrust an Staff thorrow the Wall of the house above the Children in the bed, shook it over them, and Groaned. When Colline came to the house, he went to Prayer before he Offered to lift the Bones; all the while he was at Prayer it was most cruel; But as soon as he took up the Bones the trouble ceased. (this is attested be Charles Macklelane) he sent them presently to me; upon sight whereof I went immediatly to the house: while I was at Prayer, it threw great Stones which Hitt me: But they did not hurt: Then there was no more trouble that Night.
The 7h. Aprile, being the Sabbath it began agai and threw Stones, and wounded Wilam Macminn a Black-smith on the Head, it cast a Plough-sock at him, and alo an Trough-one upwards of three stone Weight, which did fall upon his Bck, yet he was not hurt thereby. Attested by William Macminn, it set the house twice in fire, yet there was no hurt done in respect some neighboures were in the house, who helped to quench it, at Nht in the twi-light as Jon Mackie the said Andrew Makie his Eldest Son was coming home, near to the house, there was an Extraordinary light fell about him, and went before him to the house, with a swift Motion. That night it containued after its wonted manner. Aprile 8th. In the morning as Andrew Mackie, went down the Closs he found a Letter both writen and ealed with Blood; it was directed on the back thus. 3 years tho shall have to repent a net it well And within was writen: Wo be to the Cotlland Repent and tak warning for the door of haven ar all Redy bart against the I am sent for a warning to the to fllee to god yet troublt shallt this man be for tuenty days a 3 rpent repnent opent sctland or els tow shall. In the midle of the day, the Persons alive who lived in that house since it was Built, being about 28 Years: were conveined by appointment of the Civil Magistrate, before Colline my self and others and did all touch the Bones, in respect there was some Suspicion of ecret Murder committed in the place: But nothing was found to discover the same. Upon the 9th. of Apile, te Letter and Bones were sent to the Mini∣sters who were all Occasionally met at Kirkbrugh, they appointed five of their numbe viz▪ Mr. John Murdo, Mr. Iames Monteth, Mr. Iohn Mackmilan, Mr. Samuel Spalding, and Mr. William Falconer with me to to go to the House, and spend so much tie in Fasting and Praying as we were able. Upon the 10 of Aprile We went to the house, and no sooner did I be∣gin to open my Mouth; but it hrew stones at me, and all within te House, but still worst at him who was at Duty: It came often with such force upon the house that it made all the house Shake, it brake an hole thor∣row the Timber and Thach of the House, and poured in great Stones▪ one whereof more then an Quarter weight fell upon Mr. James Moteith his back, yet he was not hurt, it threw an other with great force at him when he was praying bigger ten a Mans ist which hitt him on the Breast yet h was neither hurt nor moved thereby; t was hought it that one of
our number, with an other person▪ should go by turnes; and stand under the hole in the outside: o there was no more trouble from that place▪ But the Barne being joyned to the end of the House▪ it brake down the Barne Door and Mid-wall and thrw stones up the House; But did no great hurt: t Gripped, and Handled the Legs of ome, as with a Mans hand; t Hoised up the feet of others while standing on the ground, thus it did to William Lenx of Mill-house, my Self and others, in this maner it continued till Ten a Clock at night; But after that there was no more trou∣ble while we were about the house this is Attested by Mrs. Iames Monteith, John Murdo▪ Samuel Spalding, Mr. Falconer William Lennox, and John Tait, The 11.12.13. t was worse then ever it was before; for not any who came into the House did escape heavy stroks; There was one Andrew Tait in Torr, as he was coming to stay with the Familie all night, by the way his Dog Catched a Thumard, when he cme in he cast it by in the house, thereafter there wre other three young Men who came in also: And when they were all at Prayer the Evil Spirit beat them with the dead Thulmard, and threw it before them; The three who knew it not to be in the house were greatly affrighted, especially one Samuel Thomson a Chap-man, whom it also gripped by the Side and Back, and thrust as if it had been an hand beneath hi Cloaths, and into his Pockets, he was so affright∣ed that he took Sickness immediatly, this is Attested by Andrew Tat. The 14th. being the Sabbat, it set some straw in fire that was in the Barn-yeard, and threw stones while Ten a Clock at night, it threw an Dike-spade at the said Andrew Mackie with the Mouth toward him; But he received no hurt, while an Meal-ive was tosed up and down the house the said Andrew Mackie takes hold of it, and as it were with difficulty gets the grip keeped; At last all within the Rim is torn out, thereafter it threw an handul, of the Sive Rolled together at Thomas Robertson i Airds, who was Witness to this, yet in all thir Actings there was never any thing seen but what I mentiond▪ before. Upon the 15th Aprile William Anderson a Drover ad James Paterson his Son in Law, came to the house with Colline in the Evening, Colline going Home a while within night, the said Arew Mackie sent his Sones to convy him: As they returned, they were Cruelly stoned, and the stones Rolled amongst their Legs like to break them: Shortly after they came in, it wounded William Aderson on the Head to the great Effusion of his Blood, in time of Prayer it Whsld, Gred, and Cryed Whisht, Whisht, this is Attested by John Caires.
The 16. It continued Whiing▪ Groaning, Whisling, and throwing stones in time of Prayer, it cryed b, b, and Kick, Cuck, and shoke men back and foreward, and Hoised them up as if it would lift them off their knees, this is Attested by Andrew Tait▪ The whole Family went from the house, and left five Honest neigh∣bours to wait on the same all night but there was no hurt done to them nor the Family where they were, nor to those neighbours who stayed in the said Addrew Mackie his house, only the Cattle were cast over other to the hazard of killing them as they were bound to the Stakes; and some of them were loosed, this is Attested by John Cairnes▪ Upon the 18. They returned to their House again▪ and there was no hurt done to them nor their Cattle that night except in a little House where there were some Sheep, it coupled them together in paires by the Neck, with Straw Ropes, made of an Bottle of straw, which it took off an Loft in the Stable, and carryed to the Sheep-house, which is three or four pair of Butts distant, and it made mo Ropes than it needed for binding the Sheep which it left beside the straw in the Sheep-house, this is Attested by Andrew Tait▪ Upon the 19. it fired the straw in the Barn, but Andrew Mackie put it out (being there Threshing) without doing any hurt: it shut Staves thorrow the Wall at him but did no hurt. The 20. it continued throwing stones, Whisling and Whising with all its former words, when it hit any Person, and said, take you that till you get more, that person was sure immediatly of an other, but when it said take you that, the person got no more for a while, this is Attested by John Tait. The 21.22.23. It containued casting Stones, beating with Staves and throwing Peet-mud in the fces of all in the House, especially in time of Prayer with all its former Tricks. The 24▪ Being a day of Humiliation appointed to be kept in the Parish for that cause; all that day from Morning to Night▪ it containued in a most fearfull maner without intermission, throwing Stones with such cruelty and force that all in the House feared lest they should be killed. The 25th. it threw stones all night▪ but did no great hurt. The 26th. it threw stones in the evening, and knocked on a Chit se∣vel times, as one to have access; and began to speak, and call those who were sitting in the house Witches, and kes, and said it would take them
to Hell. The People then in the house said among themselves, if it had anyto speak to it, now it would speak. In the mean time Andrew Mac∣kie was sleeping, they wakened him, and then he hearing it say, Thou shalt be troubled till Tuesday, asked, Who gave the a Commission? To whom it answered, God gave me a Commission; and I m sent to warn the Land to repent; for a Iudgement is to come if the Land do not quickly repent, and com∣mnded him to reval it upon his perrl; and if the Land did not repent, it aid it would go to its Father, and gt a Commission to return with an hunded worse than it self, and would trouble every particular Family in the Land: An∣drew Mackie said to those who were with him, if I should tell this, I would not be believed. Then it said, Fetch betters, fetch the Minister of the Paroch, and two honst men upon Tuesdays night, and I shall declare before them what I have to say. Then it said, Praise me, and I will whiste to you, Worship me, and I will trouble you no more. Then Andrew Mackie said, The Lord, who delivered the three Children out of the fiery Furnace, deliver me▪ and mine this night, from the Temptations of Satan: Then it replyed, You miht as well have said, Shadrah, Meshah, and Abed-nego▪ In te mean time while Andrew Mackie was speaking, there was one James Tefair in Buttle, who was adding a word▪ to whom it said, You are basely bred, meddling in other mens Discourse, wherein you are not concerned. It likewise said, Remove your Goods, for I will burn the house▪ He anwered, the Lord stop Satan's Fu∣ry, and hinder him of his Designs. Then it said, I will o it, or you sall gide well: All this is attested by John Tait in Torr, and several others who cannot subscribe. Upon the 27 it set the house seven times in fire. The 28, being the Sabbath, from Sun rising to Sun setting, it still set the house in fire, as it was quenched in one part, instantly it was fired in an other: and in the evening, when it could not gt its Designs fulfilled in burning the house it pulled down the end of the house, all the stone-work thereof, so that they could not abide in it any longer, but went and kindled their fire in the stable. Upon the Sabbath night▪ it pulled oe of the Children out of the bed▪ gripping him as he thought, by the craig and shoulders, and took up the block of a tree, as great as a plough-head, and held it above the Chil∣dren, saying, if I had a Commission I would brain them: thus it ex∣pressed it self, in the hearing of all who were in the house: attested y William Mackminn, and John Corsby.
The 29▪ being Munday, it continued Setting fire in the house, the said Andrew Macki finding the House so frequently set in fire, and being weary quenching it, he went and put out all the Fire that was about the House, and poured water upon the Hearth; yet after, it Fired the House several times, when there was no Fire within an quarter of an Mile of the house: this is Attested by Charles Maclelane and John Cairnes. In the midest of the day, as Andrew Mackie was threshing in the Barne, it whis∣pered in the wall and then cryed Andrew, Andrew, but he gave no Answer to it: Then with an Auster▪ Angry Voice as it were, it said Speak: Yet he gave no Answer; Then it said, be not troubled, you shall have no more trouble, except some casting of Stones upon the Twesday to Fulfill the promise, and said take away your Straw, I went to the house about Eleven a Clock it Fired the house once after I went there, I stayed all Night till be∣twixt Three and Four in the Twesdays morning, dureing which time there was no trouble about the House, except two little stones droped down at the Fire-side as we were siting down at our first entry; a little after I went away, it began to throw stones as formerly, this is Attested by Charles Mackleland and John Tait. Upon Tuesdays night, being the 30 of April, Charles Macklelane of Colline, with several Neighbours, were in the barne, as he was at prayer he observed a Black thing in the corner of the barne, and it did increase, as if it would fill the whole house, he could not discern it to have any Form; but as if it had been a black Cloud, it was affrighting to them all; and then it threw Bear-chaff, and other mud upon their faces, and after did grip severals who were in the house by the middle of the Body, by the Arms and other parts of their Bodies so strait, that some said, for five days thereafter they thought they felt these gripps: after an hour or two of the night was thus past, there was no more Trouble. This is attested by Charles Mack∣lelane, Thomas Mackminn, Andrew Paline, John Cairns, and John Tait. Upon Wednesdays night, being the 1 of May, it fired a little Sheep-house the Sheep were got out safe, but the Sheep-house was wholly burnt. Since there hath not been any trouble about the House by night nor by day. Now all things aforesaid being of undoubted Verity, Therefore I conclude with that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adver∣sary the Devil, as a roaring lyon walketh about seeking whom he may devour: Whom resist stedfast i the Faith:
This Relation is attested, as to what they particularly saw, heard, and felt, by▪ Mr. Andrew Aewart Minister at Kells▪ Mr. James Moneith Minister at Borg. Mr. John Murdo Minister at Corsmichael. Mr. Samuel Spalding Minister at Partan. M. William Falconer Minister at Kltoun▪ Charls Macklelane of Colline▪ William Lennox of Millhoue. Andrew Tait in Torr. John Tait in Torr▪ Joh Cairns in Hardhills▪ William Mackminn. John Corsby. Thomas Mackminn. Andrew Paline, &c.
