W1558 13523927 99962
Wise Nature humane Judgments to direct Plac't th' Index of our Minds in the aspect As here appeares; For this Physiognomie Speaks Valour, Witt, and perfect Gallantrie Learning and loue of Arts; So who this Looke Contemplates well, will Read and like the Booke.
Select and choice POEMS Collected out of the LABOURS OF CAPTAIN George Wharton. LONDON: Printed for Joseph Blaiklock, at the signe of the Turks Head in Ivy-Lane. 1661.
The continued Loyalty of (that eminent Sufferer for the Good Old Cause of his Majesty) Captain GEORGE WHARTON. FRom the year 1642, untill the surrender of Ox∣ford, this Loyal-minded Person was actually in the Service of his late Royal Majesty of glo∣rious Memory: being sometimes Comptroller of his Majesties Train of Artillery, and Captain of a Troop of Horse, which he raised at his own costs and charges. And then, there being nothing more to be done (the unhappy Wars now brought to a period) he came to London upon the benefit of the Oxford-Articles; where long he had not been, but he was necessitated to drink deep of the Cup of sorrow, pro∣vidence had provided for the Royal Party; being (as himself in Hemer. 1651. saith) constantly at the pleasure of the then power, subject to be turn'd out of Town, to graze upon the Common, clap't up in Prisons to study the generation of Nits and Lice; or necessitated to such a Hellish kind of living, as nothing but Bats and Owls and Cavaliers could possibly endure. And he (as ha∣ving more enemies, and those more mischievons then many other Persons of that Party) was more narrowly
searcht after; and at the last, viz. in 1648. (by ill for∣tune) discovered; and when once in hold, the famous Jayls of Newgate, the Gatehouse, and Windsour-Castle, began to be as commonly known to him, as if a Prison had been all the Portion he (in this world) could pro∣bably expect. However, once it was his good hap to escape; and being at liberty, he writ his Bellum Hiber∣nicale, Merlini Anglici Errata, &c. wherein he round∣ly and fearlesly corrected the errors of some that were the Parliaments hirelings to abuse the King and his Party, under pretence of Astrology: But Liberty be∣ing a thing too precious for him long to enjoy, in those cloudy and Tyrannical times, he was at length retaken: and for ten or twelve yeers together, was seldom half a year from being under restraint, until this time of the happy Restoration of his glorious Majesty King CHARLS the Second, unto his three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland. But notwithstanding his constant sufferings, and their frequent imprisoning of his body, his more noble part was always free: and, as he had opportunity, he did signifie to the world his Loyal affections to His Sacred Majesty and his Cause, in several Books of his, which (that the world may see, there have been some men like sturdy Oaks, that could never be shaken or brib'd to perjury) I shall (with other curious pieces of his wit) present unto the Reader. That the lively Copy of a truly Loyal subject may not be buryed in Oblivion, but be brought to light afresh, for the en∣couragement of others to persevere according to Al∣legiance, in Loyalty, Duty and Obedience.
IN his Loyal Almanack for 1650. being the next op∣portunity of the Press he had, after the Bloody Murther of His sacred Majesty of blessed memory, Charles the First; he hath these several signal sparks of Loyalty following. 1. He begins—with—Liber Lectori. Touch me not, Traytor! For I have a Sting For all, but such as love and serve the King. I am no Temporist: Nor can I brooke The Pocket of a BradshawBradshaw the bold Villaine that sentenced His late sacred Ma∣jesty to Death Steel, one appointed to draw up the Charge against him, but by reason of sickness was absent. Cooke, the Villaine that sollicited the whole Villainy, and prayd the pretended Court to murther his Soveraign., Steel, or Cooke; Or any Regicide that liveth: I Disdain all Harbours of Disloyalty. VRANIA is Divine! and (to be clear) I serve no Mortal, but the CAVALIER. If then thou be'st not one, pray let me lie, Until thou canst affect, as well as buy. 2. Vnder the Table of Kings, &c. having placed therein K. Charles the Second, he writes— Let such as Booker cringe unto a State, And leave a Blank where I have rank'd a King: 'Tis far below my Quill to calculate The spurious birth of that prodigious thing. For maugre all its Acts, and damned Art, Still Charles the Second's Monarch of my Heart.
3. Vnder the Table of Terms, &c. Thus should the Terms begin and end, if we Were not controll'd by Traytors Tyranny: But since they may adjourn, or vote them down, My Rule's not certain, whilst they rule the Town. 4. In January (having put the Decollation of His Royal Majesty, and the Arch-Bishop of Can∣terbury: in Red Letters, that the Cruelty of those Actions might more eminently appear) he writes— Behold those Crimson Veins! England, lament! Nay, curse the Authors of thy Dismal Fate: But doat no longer on a Parliament, Nor be ambitious to be hight a State: Since in this Month those Tyrants hewed down, In Laud, the Mitre; in blest Charles, the Crown. 5. In February. Lo here again two Martyrs on a tree [Burleigh andThose two worthy persons were murthered in the month Februa∣ry, though in different years, viz. 1. 1647. the 2. 1648. Beaumont] basely put to death; That, for attemping's Soveraign to free: This, that he would not (Saintlike) break his faith: Look to it Wild, and Lambert! there's a season Heav'n will revenge this blood, reward your treason.
6. In March. Yet, yet, the thirsty Saints howle out for blood; BraveThose 3 worthies were for their Loyalty murthered, March 9. 1648. Capel! Cambridge, Holland, all must die; The first, 'cause he for's King and Country stood; They, 'cause they would, and yet would not comply. —! They found thy mercy and fair-quarter Flat cruelty—But Capel is the Martyr. 7. In April. The lofty Saints, their prowess now to show, And make their fame float with the spreading main; Vouchsafe this month, to let great London know, They durst encounter boyes as well as men. For lyon-likeApril 9. 1648. there were several Apprentices, &c. kill'd in the streets. th'apprentices they slay, But what cannot resist, is Asses prey. 8. In May. Now wise and nobleThe E. of Strafford was beheaded, May 12. 1641. Strafford,Mr. Yeomans and Mr. Bowcher put to death May 30. at Bristol 1643. Yeomans, Bow∣cher, AndSir Nich. Kemish put to death at Chepstow, May 25. 1648. Kemish (in cold blood) resign to fate: The Surrey suppliants too, they basely Butcher, As trivial objects of their rage and hate. Their blood cries still aloud: may it do so, Till Hea'vn avenge it on his barb'rous fo.
9. In June. The LoyalJune 3. 1648. The Kentishmen murdered for presuming so much as to petition for a KING. Kentishmen are Murdred next, They would petition for, and have a KING: What disobedient things were they, that vext, And so distub'd the States new-modelling? Petitioning's the birth-right of the Saints; They must be heard, but will hear no complaints. 10. In July. So Tompkins,Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Challoner put to death at London, July 4. 1643. Challoner, and that brave soul! [Francis LordFrancis Lord Villiers slain at Kingston, July the 7. 1648. Villiers] in this month expir'd. The cause the Kings: A crime most deadly foul, 'Gainst those pure creatures, wich the Crown aspir'd; Nor do those Saints distinguish cruelty: 'Tis Justice (right or wrong) how e'er we dy. 11. In August. Who loves true worth, and grutcheth it to pay, A tear for valiant Lucas, and stout Lisle? Or why behoves it not, that—pray Their blood may not submerge this sinful Isle? His Mercy's murder; honour, breach of trust: Good God reward him as he's base, thou Just!168. August. 8. Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death at Colchester, after quarter given.
12. In September. The last of Treaties in this month begun, And promis'd fair, untill the men of War, Dreading a peace, surpriz'd our Rising-Sun, And dragg'd him to th'illegal new-found Bar Of bondage. The next treaty they shall see Will be through halters at the Gallow-tree.August 18. 1648. The treaty in th' Isle of Wight began. 13. In October. What blood was shed at Basing, after they Had spent their sury, with their pois'nous breath: And wanted strength unto their wills to slay, But promis'd quarter! let the harmless earth It fell on, witness! may it ne'er forsake That tincture, untill Heav'n enquiry make.Basing house taken by storm, and after quarter was promised many wer murdered, October. 14 1645. 14. In November. Next, Kniveton's life their rage must satisfie, For meer obedience to his Soveraigns will: Who sent him messenger; yet like a Spie, They take, adjudge him, and his blood they spill. Did ever Turks, or Pagans violate The Law of Nations, like this lawless State?Mr. Dan. Kniveton put to death for his loyalty, on Nov. 27. 1643. at London.
15. In December. StoutMajor Pitcher shot to death in St. Pauls Church-yard for be∣ing loyal, Decem. 29. 1648. Sir Alex. Carew beheaded Decem. 23. 1644. for the same crime. Pitcher's murder'd. Carew, who did praise A servants treachery unto his King: Lo! for reward his servant him betrays Unto the block, a bloody-offering. What grief it was, that when he did return, It could not be, but by a shameful urne! And for a Conclusion to this Heroick Piece of Loyal∣ty, he writ the following Epistle by way of Post-script. To the High and Mighty, the Tyrants Triumphant at Westminster. Gentlemen I Cannot call you, since you drench'd your Hands in His Blood, who was the Fountain of all our earthly Honour, and Happiness, the Life and Light of the Land. (Hoc scelus Abyssus, & ex Abyssu natum.) Nor Country men, who have (so Nero-like) inhumanely ripp'd up the Bowels of your Natural Mother, and ex∣posed her Nakedness to the view of the pitiless-world. (Si hi Sancti, qui Scythae? Si hi Christiani, qui Canni∣bales?) For certainly none of you are of the right Eng∣lish race, in that all of you degenerate so far from the true English Nature.
Facta haec Anglia olim, nec Sancta, nec Ethnica novit. Or if you be; the most prodigious Monsters that ever the Earth groaned under: in whose proditorious breasts, the Spirits of all expired Traytors, by a kind of Pytha∣gorical Transmigration, are enclosed.—Let after-ages impose a name suitable to your merits, for surely this cannot. In the interim, it shall suffice me: you know whom I speak to; and that I speak what I know. From year to year I have fore-warned you of judge∣ments threatned and impending, for your horrible im∣pieties. And thogh I had been silent, yet methinks the general fate of all Rebellions (especially such as this is) that sums up all Items, in this Total [The Bar∣barous Murder of Gods Anoynted!] had been enough to inform what you might trust to; but that 'tis too apparent we are wheel'd about to those times, wherein Sacriledge is counted Reformation; Rebellion, Devo∣tion; Murther, Justice: and Traytors consecrated Saints and Martyrs. —Vis proditoria nomine vocatur Novo, Angligina Virtus. I have cordially wish'd, and seriously begg'd, you would have returned to your pristine Obedience: as the surest step, to make your selves, your children, and all of us happy. But I found your consciences were sear'd, your soules flatter'd with ambitions dreams; and charms of heightned pride had mounted you, Icarus-like, too near the Sun: which ever goeth before destruction. And indeed, you have not bin more Turk-like tempted with success in your Actions (from which you still con∣cluded,
though very weakly, that GOD owned your Cause) then Heaven hath been merciful (I may say) in tempting you with so large a time of Repentance. But sithence you have despised the Mercy, and neg∣lected the Opportunity; it is to be feared, the Mercy, and time of the Mercy, are both forfeited. For, I will not search into the secret Will of God: so far as 'tis manifested either in his Word, or Works, shall satisfie me: and by their Rules (if I understand either) your Commonwealth, together with your selves, are (even now) falling to nothing. This I write in Charity to you, to the end, that (although you have no hopes to escape a Temporal, yet) your endeavours may be to avoid the Eternal punishment due to your wick∣edness: And that's as much as can be desired, or pray'd for, by, SIRS, The Admirer of your Treason and Tyranny, George Wharton. For the writing of this Almanack he suffered excee∣dingly; and was, by imprisonment, made incapable of e∣very thing that might probably assist him through his earthly Pilgrimage: and was now so closely looked after, that he durst not write again; neither could he be permit∣ted
that Liberty, until it pleased God to put it into the mindes of his Adversaries, to release him upon promise to live quietly. And then in his Almanack 1651. for his Peaceable living, he most ingenuously Apologizeth thus: To you sowre Criticks, that By-standers are, Viewing the Gamesters, (playing foul or fair) And by the stroaks of you defining Will, Save whom you fancy; those you do not, kill: To you, grave Chair-men (whose attentive ear Hears all you can, believes all true you hear, And think the Roy'llists cannot real be, Until a Rope conclude their Destinie) Send I these Lines: To let you understand, I live as well b' Example, as Command: And that, whate'er you judge herein amiss, Conformable to your own Practice is. The Prelates quit their Sleeves of Lawn, and all The Hierarchy their Coats Canonical, And live disguis'd, as if they were none such, That e'er laid claim to Tythes, or Christian-Church. Why may not I as well disguised be, As they, or rather their Divinity? The high-born House of LordsSome Lords, after their House was voted useless, very contentedly turn Commoners. themselves, submit Their Persons, Honours, Magazines of Wit: Sure I (who am but dust and ashes) then, May do as much as those Almighty-Men. The new-conforming Garter-Knight, that erst Hung's Watchet Ribbon o'er his amorous brest,
Thinks it far better (now the King is dead) To lay't aside, then lay aside his head. Why may not I some crimson Lines leave out, To save my ankles from the Prison-gout? The subtile Lawyer holds it not amiss He paraphrase on Ambiguities; And (though he scarce the Latine understand) To write CUSTODES in a texted-hand. Why might not I (though not for dirty gain) Write as he writes? Will such Ink ever stain? —, when he found the Presbyters decay, Streight leaves his scribling-humour, to obey. What if from scribling (too) I deign to cease? Do I ought more then all that live in Peace? Nay, Lilburn (that prodigious Combatant) Held it not safe perpetually to rant: For he (once quitted from the dreadful Rope) Waves Magna Charta, falls a boyling soap. I've scap't the Halter twice, as well as he: What if I now resolve to live as free? Compounders (some) not onely Pay, but Swear; Might I not Promise that I would forbear? The brave secluded Member, that needs must Revile the Army, doom the State to dust, Observe him but, (now he is all to bits) How penitent, how patiently he sits! The parboyl'd-Citizen, who ne'er would do Scarce what an Ord'nance did enjoyn him to; See how obsequiously he trots about, To finde both Old and New-Malignants out! The Wary-High-Shooe, who so idoliz'd The Covenant, that equally be priz'd It with his Bible; Lo, but how he bows Before th' Engagement, to secure his Cows!
Now (Zoilus) tell me, whether 'tis more fit I sacrifice my folly, or submit? These times afford few Martyrs, and those few Scant would be Martyrs, if they could eschew. The Clergy heretofore ate all the Cake, They still usurp'd the glory of the Stake; And should (methinks) if all be true they say, Lead us as well to suffer, as to pray. But now (alas!) their Zeal's congeal'd to Ice, Obedience they prefer to Sacrifice; And want not Scripture-texts more then enough, Which warrant them to thrash as well as plough, Had FOX but writ his Volumes in this Age, His Book of Martyrs had not fill'd a Page: England (I fear) would scarce have spar'd him one Old Latimer, to make a Martyr on. Indeed they tell's what New Jerusalem's, And how 'tis pav'd with Pearls, and precious Gems; Blaming us much, we freely leave not this Course Clay, for a Coelestial Paradise. Yet when a doughty Priests unhallow'd Gums Sustain one rotten Tooths-ach, how he fumes And froths! and if a Feaver do but strike him, What Peasant powts, and pants, or pineth like him! O for a Doctor then! Bridle the Horse, And haste the Clerk away—He's worse and worse! Alas! the Doctor comes not! O, quoth he, Would God restore me but, then he should see— But what? Be sure no minde he has to Death, The Parson's heart's fast chained to the Earth: He blesses Heav'n for's last nights Requiem, But has no thoughts of New Jerusalem. Mistake me not: For I include not here, The Reverend Doctors of the Holy-Chair;
Nor yet the meanest of that Sacred-Quire, Whose Service at the Altar is entire: To them I bow, and willingly make their's, The tyche (at least) of all my dayly Pray'rs. No, I intend the thred-bare Motley-Coat, Which makes the Pulpit, but a Juglers-throat, And can from thence (t'enfatuate Mankinde) Disgorge both fire and water at a winde; Yet (were it to preserve the World) not dye Ought but his Stockings, prate he ne'er so high. I say, 'tis him I mean; for he I look Will be the loose-Surveyor of my Book. "Deal gently (good Sir-John) and do not quack, "Live else the Subject of mine Almanack. In Hemerose. 1652. this Learned and Loyal Person wrote these several witty Verses following. 1. Under the Table of Kings. When Romes perverse and giddy Multitude Dissolv'd (in Tarquin) their Great Monarchy; To doom the Act UNNATURAL and RUDE, ('Tis said) A Serpent Barked: But when We Dissolved Ours, (so were they overcome With Pannique fear!) both Men and Beasts were dumb. 2. Vnder his Moveable-Feasts. Those Feasts were once held sacred amongst Men: Old Folks may live to see them so agen.
3. Vnder the Table of Terms. The Law is good, and needs no Reformation; It takes no Bribes, nor sleeps a long Vacation: Delays no Suits, disdains not to imbrace A John-an-Oaks, or John-a-Styles his Case: Yet, since the Pilots's deadMeaning King CHARLES THE First, our late Dread Soveraign., and storms do threat, (Rocks being near) the Wreck must needs be great. 4. In February. Mars throws his Knapsack by, and stoutly draws His trusty Bilbo, to prescribe us Laws. Jove, claims his Priviledge; and Mars, his Pow'r: Both wrangleMars this Month, being in Aries, cast a Quartile to Jupiter in Ca∣pricorn. hard, and each on other lowre. At length Jove yeilds, and Mars assumes the Chair, Votes his own Person Noble; Doings, Fair. 5. In May. A Zealous Month (or so it doth appear) Composed all of love, and Bottle-beer: But whilst theMeaning our now Gracious and Dread Soveraign Lord, King Charles the Second. Shepherd's absent, or asleep, The ravenous Wolves devoure the silly sheep: London! beware of Fire, and Beasts of prey, And something else; But what, I will not say.
6. In October. Swords now grow dull, and Heads are gravely tost, To balance what is gain'd with what is lost: To find out how and where the danger lies, To estimate old stores, with new supplies: W'are now at leisure to attend the knocks Of Sir John Levite, in his Jugling-Box. 7. In November. What loud Dissention's this we softly hear And dread, 'twixt Saturn and his Councellor? Who's that gives back? What Jovial Fools are they Must needs command, before they can obey? "Divide and rule, is Machiavils: Take heed! "For though he dy'd long since, here's yet his seed.This moneth there was a Trine of the Planets Saturn and Mercu∣ry, from Cancer and Scorpio. 8. In December. The first EclipseMeaning the Eclipse of the Moon, that happened in Libra on March the fifteenth day, this year., next moneth doth take effect, And JoveJove and Mars this moneth were in Quartile Aspect. and Mars move now in dire Aspect: Whence the malicious Changling-Brotherhood Of sniveling Mock-Priests, that cry'd out for Blood, Shall surely feel (though yet they will not see) The full-grown-fruits of their Apostacy.
In Hemerosc. 1653. this worthy Artist wrote these several Verses following. 1. Of the Vulgar Accounts, Notes and Festivals. The Christians of the East and Greek Church, do number From the Creation unto this present year 7161 Years. The Jews, Hebrews, and latter Rabbines. 5413 Years. Ergo, they differ in their Computation 1748 Years. Heavens direct us! what a Difference here's, [Full seventeen hundred forty twice four years:] Whose Reck'ning shall we trust? or shall we wait, Till some New-Prophet rise, and calculate The year? [That year which Saints in Heav'n not scan, Yet needs must be confin'd by prying-Man!] But if nor Jews, nor Christians can it find, If Plato saw not, surely they are blind. The Christian Abyssines and Egyptians, from the Dioclesian Aera,1369 or that of Martyrs, Thus rots that Tyrant: And may all the same, Who act like Cruelty, yet hate the Name. The Saracens and Turks from Hegira, or the flight of their Prophet Mahomet.1063 The Turks are very holy in their way; They preach, give Alms, and most devoutly pray;
And live in hope: Our Zelots do no more, Unless to over-do, and ne'er give o'er. Had we been born in Turkie, we should set As great a rate on Rascal Mahomet, As Turks themselves: If they in England, then We had been all alike [Good Christian-Men.] "'Tis Birth and Education, which doth make "Religion: that which seals it, is, the stake. The Astronomers from Nabonassarus (of Egyptian years,2401. consisting each of 365 days) They (of all others) can account the best, Yet are accounted of, but like the rest: The snarling Priest (who Numbers never knew, More then to tythe his Pigs, or whence they grew; But like the Alewife, chalks behinde the door, And sets even Christ and Moses on the score) Gains more belief in striving how to bribe Our Reason, then do all that learned Tribe. But know (fond Men) the Bible was not writ For you to draw Chronologies from it: To prop up faction, warrant Breach of Laws, Absolve from Oaths, and chain us to your Cause; To teach Men Trades, or Sciences, or Arts: 'Twas made to rectifie and steer our Hearts. "Wretched those souls, who thus (by you) are fed "With Tares and Husks, instead of heav'nly Bread. From the Death of Alexander the Great,1976 He who conquered all the spacious earth, Was conquered himself for want of breath:
He that (whilst living) could endure no bound, Rests now contented with six foot of ground. "His Birth, his Valour, his Exploits and Glory, "All tumbled in a heap of Doubtful Story. Even so at length (GreatThis was purely Prophetical, and is now most happily verified. Conqu'rours) shall you be O'er-come, confin'd, as close, as low as he. Ten thousand Armies strength will not defend: Your Conquests, and your selves must have An End, Nor can they yeild you comfort when you die, Be'ng nothing but a splendid Robbery. Since the Julian Institution,1698 Since the Gregorian Emendation,71 Our State have been reforming twelve long years, The Church, Court, Country, City, (Hair and Ears:) Should they the English Kalendar omit, 'Twill be forgot when they begun to sit: Ages to come, who thirst to celebrate Their famous Deeds, shall find them without date; And know no more when CHARLES or Strafford dy'd, Then some, When Christ was born, or crucifi'd. Perhaps mistake the Persons with the Times, Finding so like, their Suff'rings, and their Crimes. 2. Vnder the Feasts and Fasts. VVhat Changlings were the Presbyterian-Crew, VVho pull'd old Crosses down, to set up new! And burnt Christs Picture, whilst they did embrace Those Antique Draughts of Calamy and Case:
That durst adventure on such dangerous shelves, As to un-Saint th'Evangelists themselves: And leave us not a Festival, beside VVhat they so called, and had sanctifi'd. But Heav'n is just: For, lo! they're forc'd to bow; The Synod's down, and stinking-Elders too: "Onely they bark at Moon-shine, now and then, "To witness they are Dogs more like, then Men. 3. Under the Kings, &c. I've said y' are Gods: Who dare you Tyrants call, Since (Good or Bad) y' are his Vice-gerents all? But you shall die like Men: This, I allow; For Men must die: so did our Saviour too. "VVhen once the Rulers, Priests, and People cry, "Away with him, Pilate must crucifie. 4. Under the Table of Terms. Lawyers prefer the sharpest Laws, as best To keep a Commonwealth in Peace and Rest: If so, why should those Gown-men Frown and Puff, To see the Courts of Justice lin'd with Buff? "No Plea ere moved as a Sword can do; "For that o'er-ruleth Judge and Jury too. 5. In January. VVelcome, ye pregnant times! whilst you shall be As cross to some, as they were curs'd to me:
VVelcome, prodigious Births! wherein appear No fewer Monsters, then are days i' th' year: Thrice welcome are ye! For y' are none of mine: A Poets issue, is, A Princely Line. 6. In February. Disturbed Heav'ns produce disturbed Pates; Confused Councils, more confused States. A Quarter-witted Clergy half undone, Their Grand Impostures, clear, as is the Sun: Whence GiddyWe have had Preachers of all sorts and sizes in this age of Liberty and Licentiousness. Zealots take the Craft in hand, And breath a holy-madness through the Land. 7. In the moneth May. VVhither an Army now? VVell! I could say VVho 'tis will get, or who shall loose the day: Thrasillus-like inform you, who shall prove Victorious in's Ambition, who in's Love: But I am silent; Nay, I must be dumb; Tis TREASON now to pray, Thy Kingdom come. 8. In November. The Nation mourns because of monstrous Oaths: Her scarlet sins, cause want of Bread and Cloathes: Diseases rage, and strongly multiply; Our New-Republick's sick, and like to die.
London bewailes, beshrews her lewd pretence, Of begging for a Posture of Defence. 9. Where speaking of the Mutations of Empires, Kingdoms and Commonwealths, he pithily con∣cludes.— Thus Changes come, thus Changes will ensue, (Till these corrupted bodies change for new, And put on incorruption) Men and Things, VVhole Countries, Cities, Beggars, Princes, Kings: He who but lately wore a Crown of Gold, Crown'd now with thorns, exil'd, or basely sold: He clad in rags, and fed with scraps before; Now, thron'd in's stead, and surfeiting with store: A glorious Church and Kingdom, but to day; To morrow, both the VVolf and Foxes Prey. The Learned Lawyer, Orthodox Divine, Once high esteem'd, now rank'd with filthy swine: The Hospitable Lord erst fed the Poor, And cloath'd the naked, nak'd turn'd out of door: His sorrowing VVife, and helpless Children gone To try their Friends, perhaps be frowned on; And he in's hoary-age Petition, bare, Those that his Grooms (at best) but lately were: The Fool in's Coat, the VVise-man in his Chair. Th' Indulgent Father, and the Hopeful Heir: The griping Landlord, and the greedy Clown, The glittering Tissue, and the gray-friz'd Cown; The Rosy-Cheeke, and the unfurrowed Brow, The Freckled VVainscot-Face, that milks the Cow; The Flowry Bride (girt with chaste thoughts about) VVill all once changed be; their Lamps must out:
Nay, Heav'n it self grows old, and will away: It had a Birth, and shall a dying day. All, all to change and dissolution tend; Poor Almanacks, ev'n they, must have an end. In Hemeros. 1654. this ingenious Person wrote these following Heroick Verses. 1. Of the Feasts, &c. Go ring the Bells, let Priests and People pray; I know no Treason in a Holy-Day. 2. Over the Table of Kings, &c. Here stands the Regal Table, till it be Convict and Banish'd for Malignancy. Under the Kings. Call me no more Malignant, since the Tearm Hath Hydra's Head; I Hercules his Arm: And (though no God, nor worshipped at Tyre) Remember yet great Jupiter's my Sire. Let States and Kingdoms whirle; mine shall not fall, Except (when time is done) this Globe and all. So Wolf and Lamb salute! the first for blood, The second to be offer'd for our good.
3. Over the Terms. Thus may the Terms begin, thus may they end: As yet we know not what we do intend. Under the Terms. Friends! send your Sons no more to th' Inns of Court, But breed them Souldiers, Men of loud Report: So need they fear no rude Return of words Or Writs, nor yet Exception 'gainst their Swords: So shall their Terms be never out of Date, Nor liable to change, but with the State: So may they chuse the trade most profit brings, Set up or Lawyers, Priests, or Petit Kings. 4. In January. Now CHARLES is dead, the Senate in a ditty, Sung in Wild Airs about the holy City; The ill-got Lords made worse then Indian slaves, And Priests (like Churches) hovering o'er their Graves. Whose turn is next? speak you as may be free! I dare not meddle with SUPREMACY. 5. In February. Fetch Me a Ladder and a Broom, that I May sweep the Cobwebbs from the azur'd skie;
Dispatch the fumes that cloud the subtile Air, And make the Heav'ns look Maiden-smooth and fair: Else is that Roof too mean for those that vie With Gods themselves for Crowns and Majesty. 6. In March. Justice now flows, and Righteousness doth stream Throughout the streets; the Conduits run with Cream. Our Virgins Lamps be full of holy Oyl, Themselves o'er-charg'd and ready to recoil: Old men dream dreams, and young men visions see: Their cloven tongues are tip't with Prophesie. 7. In April. Well fare Gay knacks, and men to change inclin'd; They raise the dust, and cloud the work design'd: In gilded Roofs, who doubteth of deceit? In troubled waters, who can see the Bait? He that would closely bring great things about, Must mud, as well as fish the Rabble-rout. 8. In June. W'are all reform'd, and free as we were born, Almost as naked too, much more forlorn: The times are tyrannous, not men, for they Have brought to pass, what men b'asham'd to say. But (if one truth may slip my harmless Pen) Times would be better, had we better men.
9. In July. Sweet are the Sippets of a Diadem! Shall Foraigners invade us, or we them? Victors but once grown bouzy with success, Dream of nought else, but Gold and Gloriousness: But we are lowly minded, and despise All earthly substance, being heavenly-wise. 10. In September. What fine new-nothing's this, that I espy, A Sect, a Schisme, or a Heresie? Or shall I Nick-nam't a Religion? Say! No,'t relishes the sober water-way: Yet wants no fire to make the spirit beat, Nor bucksome creatures to allay the heat. 11. In October. Must Treasurers account? 'tis fit they do: (They shall in time make satisfaction too) But those (and other pious cheats we have) Can quote us Scripture why they play the knave: Religion is a cloak for all deceit, And shrowds designs that be of greatest weight.
12. In November. Ho Presbyterians! Prick up your Ears, Advance your Troops of jealousies and fears: Summon your Elders in their several Classes, The Covenanters, Directory-Asses: And tell me (now, your bloud & breath's nigh spent) Where's one dares Fight for King and Parliament? 13. In December. A blessing on the Commonwealth Affairs: (May that green Lady never know gray Hairs) Let's on with courage, and resolve to do Whate'er necessity compels us to. So long as God's with us, what need we fear Whose turn it is to reign another year? In his Ephemeris 1655. I find these several ex∣cellent Poems following. 1. Over the Feasts. Lo, here the sacred (Saint-offending) days, Religion's outward worth and splendent rays: Old truth's strong evidence, motives to zeal, Rich badges of a Christian Commonweal:
Fair Hieroglyphicks of what we profess, 'Live shadows of eternal happiness; Lasting Records on earth, wherein even they That w'ont be drawn to hearken what we say, May by observing, only, what we do, Read our Belief; and reading, do so too! 2. Over the Table of Kings. Here's yet the Regal Table; who can tell But 't may (by thus long prostitution) swell? Under the Table of Kings. How! Tyrants all? what glory is 't to be Accounted Gods, if Gods of Tyranny? 'Tis strange your conquests were not claim enough, Yet ours (of one another) Gospel-proof: Either your Titles to the Crown were good, Or ours (so mystical) not understood. 3. Over the Table of Terms. Away to Westminster, and do not fear: We will indulge ye yet another year. Under the Table of Terms. Go to, brave Hero's! and Abridge the Law, [Teach (in Epitome) to Hang and Draw:]
Make Magna Charta speak us Lilburn-free, That Treason which is writ without a T. Correct old Littleton, and Print him New. The Sword's one tenure, more, he never knew. 4. In January. Rythm you whose measures charm you better luck; I must be mute; my Muse is Planet-struck; Her fancie's fetter'd, and her Ink is froze; Complaint is made, her Pen's too broad at Nose: I'll to the VVoods, and find some Satyr out; There's now no fellow to the Cloven-foot. 5. In May. The Pole's perplexed, and the German dreads, The horned Moon should pierce the Eagle's heads: Goths, Huns, and Vandals once had greatest power; The Tartars and the Turks have now much more. If then success be it which best depaints A glorious Cause, Turks are the only Saints. 6. In September. From th' honour of our ill-begotten Peers, From the sowre batch of jealousies and fears, From flouds of Orphans and poor VVidows tears, From twice-six other over-rediousO. Cromwel the pretended Protector, and his pretended Parlia∣ment, had agreed together for Triennial Parliaments. years, Good Lord deliver us. The Number Three Hath always in it some high mystery.
7. In December. Now Falcifer, Gradivus dothThere was then an opposition of Saturn and Mars, from Virgo, and Pisces. oppose, Then through the Virgin (Hobling backward) goes: Hence th' waters are corrupted, Fishes die, The earth is barren; a mortality Afflicts the Land; MarsThe pretended Protectors Tyranny began now to be most notorious. rageth up and down, Not quiet with, nor yet without a Crown. In Hemerose. 1656. are to be read these incom∣parable Pieces of Learning and Ingenuity. 1. I shall present you with his Chronologie, it being the last in Verse, and the most compleat of all his others. SInce all things were of God created good Since Noah ascended th'Ark t'avoid the flood Since God the Promise made to Abraham Since th' Israelites from Egypts bondage came Since Solomon the Temple finished Since King Zedekias a Captive led
Since JESUS of the blessed Virgin born Since for Mans sins he suffered death and scorn Since Caesar's force the Britains overthrew Since hence the Rav'nous Roman Eagle flew Since first the Saxons stept on English ground Since here the Danes the like advantage found Since Norman William Britain over-powr'd Since Maud the English-Saxon Blood restor'd Since second Henry Ireland first assayl'd Since our first Edward hence the Jews expell'd Since Tyler's Highness would the Throne ascended Since he his life (with his Rebellion) ended Since Guns (those mortal engines) first were found Since Printing made the world with books abound Since Protestants (by Luther) first so nam'd Since Loiola the Jesuites Order fram'd Since Ket and's followers seduc'd the Nation Since hang'd (upon the Tree of Reformation) Since Kentish Wiat rose against Queen Mary Since with Spain's Philip she did intermarry Since London streets by Coaches first molested Since Scotland with Geneva-trash infested Since lightning last consumed Paul's high spire Since all the Heav'ns appeared on a fire Since Piercy and great Nevil's Insurrection Since Gresham Colledge, and th'Exchange erection Since Drake surrounded this our Globe of strife Since pious Gresham did exchange this life Since Saint Domingo ransack'd was by Drake Since then the Spaniards did (not fight, but) quake Since Zutphen-siege our famous Sydney slew Since Scotch Queen Mary bid the world adieu Since boasting Spain's Armado overthrown Since th'Indian Weed was first in England known
Since daring Drake and noble Hawkins di'd Since Cheapside-Cross most richly beautifi'd Since Cales was from the Spaniards stoutly torn Since CHARLES the first, to grief & sorrow born Since Learned JAMES the English Crown possest Since he th' Allegiance Oath upon us prest Since Fate reveal'd the Puny Powder-Plot Since first rejoyc'd for (now regarded not) Since Fred'rick Count arriv'd on English earth Since we bewail'd Heroick HENRY's death Since here (last) Christianus (Denmarks King) Since Middleton's River brought from Amwel-spring Since we Bermudas first inhabited Since Learned Rawleigh's noble Blood was shed Since last a Comet in the Scorpion seen Since that brought death to Ann (our James's Queen) Since Charles with cares as well as gold was crown'd Since his fair Queen first trod on English ground Since Londons last great Plague from Heaven sent Since then at Oxford sate the Parliament Since Buckinghams great Duke so basely slain Since England did conclude a Peace with Spain Since living Charles first breath'd this loathsome air Since Rev'rend LAVD began St. Pauls repair Since the Late King advanc'd against the SCOT Since Peace concluded (but intended not) Since Wolves and Foxes first were idoliz'd Since Learned Straffords Blood was sacrific'd Since Sects and Tumults set the Land on fire Since the dead King was forced to retire Since Hotham shut Hull-gates against the King Since ruined for thoughts to let him in Since we with Essex vow'd to live and die Since we cashier'd him (of his Excellency)
Since Charles his Royal Standard streaming stood Since Keinton-field deep dy'd with English blood Since Cheapside-Cross (for Conscience sake) did fall Since Moses Tables forc'd to give the wall Since the Scotch Army marched to our aid Since they return'd from Hereford, well paid Since Vxbridge Overture's initiation Since Love belcht firebrands that consum'd the nation Since first we felt the vertue of a Tax Since glorious Laud triumphed o'er the Ax Since Common-Prayers ceas'd (abjured rather) Since the wise Synod voted God the Father Since Naseby-field first own'd that fatal blow Since even poor women felt the overthrow Since pensive Charles left Oxford (in disguise) Since he to treacherous Scots became a prize Since Henderson receiv'd his Mortal Wounds Since Scotch-men sold their Prince for English pounds Since Holmby-house restrain'd his further flight Since Joyce surpriz'd him in the dead of night Since he had terms propos'd, and promis'd right Since fairly juggl'd into th' Isle of Wight Since there the sinful Treaty did commence Since (broken off) he forthwith hurry'd thence Since the old Commons took a purging dose Since CHARLES made truly great and glorious Since they the House of Lords did useless doom Since Kingship dangerous and burthensome Since the Supremacy was Eastward bound Since our Allegiance bury'd under ground Since CHARLES's Crown exposed to a rate Since England hight the Title of Free-State Since Scotland tasted of Heav'ns ireful Cup Since English Hogs ate our dear Brethren up
Since Mars unroosted those had twelve years rul'd Since Madmen on their Ruines 'gan to build Since that illiterate Conclave's Dissolution Since this (blest) Governments first Institution This is added out of his Ephemer. 1655. Since Time was pregnant of a Lord Protector Since she brought forth a (more then Trojan) Hector Since London feasted him at Grocers Hall Since Viner the first Knight (amongst us all) Since peace concluded with the High-born Dutch Since the shrill Trumpet nois'd it to be such Since Knights and Burgesses their free Election Since winnowed, and made of one complexion Since they conven'd and sate (with blest intent) Since they presum'd to tune the Instrument Since found flat-guilty of that High-Ambition Since taught the meaning of a Recognition Since some (like Rats) forsook the falling House Since others (big with Mountains) dropt a Mouse Since the Protector set their sins before them Since he dissolved (never to restore) them Since Noble James (the Duke of Lenox) dy'd Since perjur'd Falc'ner wisely stept aside Since Wiltshire's Insurrection broach'd new fears Since the grand seisure of the Cavaliers For the continuing this Ingenuous Chronologie to any time, you need but adde the elapsed years between your proposed year, and the year 1656. and 'tis done. Examples are needless.
2. Over the Festivals. Why raile we not at superstitious days, Pull Crosses down, and burn the harmless Bays? Why do we not inhibit Common-Pray'rs, And threaten Bridewel to the Cock-pit Players? How can our tender Consciences digest Organs and Altars, (stand they East or West?) Plum-broth and Pies (made of Malignant-Paste) Which erst the Godly would not dare to taste? And plead Allegiance, now that Fatal Stroke Hath cut the Chain, and cleft in two the Yoke? The change is great, and may be well defended: But 'tis enough to say, The work is ended. 2. Over the Table of Kings. Yet, yet the Regal Table courts the Nation: Kings are not out of date, though out of fashion. 3. Under the Table of Kings. Two Williams, twice four Henries, Stephens but one; Three Richards, twice three Edwards, and a John: One Mary, one Elizabeth, a James, And Charles, [five times five Soveraigns, with ten names] Who numbers more, transgresses (out of Reason:) God save my Cow! and that (I hope)'s no Treason.
4. Over the Table of Terms. The Chancery's reform'd, and so are we: All things enjoy their pristine Purity. Under the Table of Terms. Lawyers ('tis true) like new-set Milstones grinde Their Rough-shod-Clients: yet are they the wind That drive the sayles. Who's most blame-worthy then, The Ginding Lawyers, or Litigious Men? Sate I as Judge, the Lawyers should go free, Such Clowns on Calthrops, till they could agree. 5. In January. Where our third Edward (that Puissant King!) VVas born to conquer France, I rudely sing: VVhereThe Author was Prisoner in Windsor-Castle, when he wrote his this years Ephemeris. Kings have Captives been; that stately wall Confines my Muse: (for sin Original.) Help you that can, or have my verse excus'd; That Shepherd poorly Pipes, whose Reed is bruis'd.
6. In March. ChronusSaturn and Mars this moneth were in Trine Aspect, from Virgo and Taurus., the Virgin; Mars, the Bull ascends; And (by their Trine) assure us they are friends. VVhen boist'rous Knaves meet and salute each other, Their common phrase is, How Devil dost thou Brother? The Graver sort abhor that hellish note; Yet (in the fear of God) they'll cut your throat. 7. In July. 'Tis false to say Dog-days (but now) begin, Since thrice five years have nought but Dog-days bin: Or that in EnglandSirius is the great Dog-star which in July toward the latter and thereof, ariseth cosmically with the Sun, inflaming the air; whence (from that time, toward the end of August, are termed) Dog-days. Sirius biteth not, Whilst we have such deep wounds, and days so hot: But Sirius quickly sets (elsewhere to burn) Then shall our Dog-days into HALCYON turn.
8. In September. Two haughty Rebels, (yet of heav'nly race) Invade the Virgins Confines: face to face Dispute their Title there; but finding none, (As trespassers) they hasten to be gone: Concluding Hermes for the onely man That's Heir at Law. But get it how he can.These Lines deserve a Comment. 9. In December. Thus Windsor's my Parnassus, and the Jayl- Supporting-Cole-hole, (cramm'd with Mills's Ale) My Well of Helicon. How should my Quill Want quickning, or my Muse inspired-skill? Thanks, honest Luke: May all thy Ale and Beer Turn Nectar; run untilted all the year!Luke Mills was the Tapster in Windsor-Castle, at what time our Author was Prisoner there. 10. His Conclusion. The time's at hand, Titan's indulg'd by Jove, Crowned with Honours, dress'd in Robes of Love: Away, ye Miscreant Subjects of Despaire, That dream on Fogs, and think 'twill ne'er be fair! Shake off your pensive Mantles, wash down sorrow; Phoebus appears, and bids the world Good Morrow!
The Clouds do scattter, and anon you'll see (What shall I say?) An ENGLISH JUBILEE! In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1657. we shall find these several curious Pieces of Wit and Loy∣alty. 1. Under his moveable Feasts. These are the Festivals, which every year Change their position in the Kalendar: The rest are fixed, till the higher Pow'rs Vouchsafe t' unfix, and vote them out adoors: But that's to do: let's therefore yet obey Our holy Mother, and keep Holy-day. 2. Under the Table of Kings. So have I seen 'mongst the Coelestial train Bright stars arise, and quickly set again: Other (whose Circles greater Arches trace) Though short in lustre, run a longer race: Some wondrous swift, some slower then the rest; Yet (one and all) still tending to the West. Impartial Death doth no compassion take; Cedars and Shrubs promiscuous Ashes make.
3. Under the Table of Terms. The Terms commence, conclude; and yet the strife Ends not: Contention hath a tedious life: And (which is worse) whoere the Conquest get, Gains but a lump of drowzie after-wit. But O revenge! (he'll that, although he begs) 'Tis sweeter far, then Muscadine and Eggs. 4. In January. Bi-fronted Janus (th' old Italian King) Beholds the year transact, and entering: Wisdom and Prov'dence, are firm props of State; They support Princes, and make Nations great: Their suffrages shall now restrain my Pen, And make me one of the prudential men. 5. In February. Now did the ancient Romans sacrifice To Pluto, and th' infernal Deities For their dead Fathers souls: Furies were then The direful Objects of Idol'trous Men: And 'tis a weakness yet (in every head) To cringe to and indulge the thing we dread.
6. In March. Rome-building Romulus, gave this the name, In honour of God Mars, from whom he came By Ilia, thus to perpetuate The Martial Prowess of the Roman-State: This vanity (if so I may it call) Those Heroes had; and so indeed have all. 7. In April. April's so call'd, 'cause the Terrestrial Pores Are open'd now to drink the pleasant show'rs: Fruits, Herbs & Plants, sprout forth their fragrant Buds, And cloath all green, the Fertile Fields and Woods. Flora presents variety of Graces, Makes Ladies hide (for shame) their painted Faces. 8. In May. May, à Majoribus: and what were they? Great Jove was one, who else I cannot say: The Pleiades and Hyades arise, And drench the earth with chaste Humidities: May, then à Madeo; (it soundeth well) So Friday-street, from butter'd Mackerel.
8. In June. June à Junioribus, (if so you'll ha't) That is to say, Chuck-farthing and his Mate: Or à unone, ('save us all!) for she Was wife to Jove, and just so let it be. Some Etymon, are like the Knight, or worse; Who draws his honour from his Fathers purse. 9. In July. But, Julius à Julio Caesare, Romes Proto-Monarch, Pompey's enemy: Th' ingrateful Senate robb'd him not of all, His name survives their cruelty, his fall. Pharsalia's fresh in mind, whilst Caesar here Triumpheth thus, not once, but every year. 10. In August. This Moneth Augustus Caesar did begin His Consulship, and thrice triumph'd therein: Marc-Antony, by force of Arms subdu'd, Brought Egypt to the Roman servitude. Therefore the Senate thought it was but just T' exchange Sextilis Mensis for August.
11. In December. The Moon's obscur'd four parts (of twelve) and more, And seen (if th' air be clear) all England o'er: But Cynthia's Labour is, with little pain; Her throws are easie; she's soon light again. Were men-eclipsed but restored thus, We'd trouble no Jayls, nor should Jayls trouble us. 12. A Conclusion of this years Book. But hold! the Press hath overtook my Pen, The Term's at hand, and I shall wander then: My Steed is ready [the grave Pedlars Back,] My Harbinger [his Dog,] my Inn [the Pack:] Old Erra Pater (that hoof-beaten Jew) The Shepherds Kalendar, (with all the Crew Of merry Rascals) my Companions are: They deign to stile me Fellow-Traveller. Then Fairs and Markets I must duly keep, And (on the stall) make up the dirty heap Of Penny Ware: where the disdainful eye Pores on me two long hours, before he buy: Whilst Nobler Judgements purchase at first sight, And swear (implicitely) I'm thorough Right. Yet some (although they on me seem to doat) Will not vouchsafe me ev'ry year a Coat; Whose duller Brats I wish no less forlorn And naked, twelve months after they are born. Another, his Mundungus (with me) lights, All, save three Pages, where he wisely writes
When's Mare took Horse; his Cows th' impatient Bull; Or, when himself, some foul lascivious Trull. Yet this, forbids no entries; onely I Would not be Pander to such Drudgery. Nor do I grudge the hungry flames a whit; For, they consume not, they refine my Wit. Others behinde them (in Fools Ordure) throw My injur'd Leaves: they'll serve the Bible so. But O th'Exchange! there, I endure the Rack, Such Din is made, with Wharton's Almanack! I can't but Blush for shame, when I do meet My Name (like Small-Coal) cry'd in ev'ry Street. Howbe't, I thereon set the bolder face, Because, like Fortune have, ev'n Acts of Grace. And yet, some trifling shops provoke me most: For, here and there, they nail me to a Post: O cruel hands! but that my patience bears, It well presaging what attends their Ears. Thus pleased, or displeased, I appear, Servant or Slave, t'all interests, once a year. So let me pass: and when this Journey's over, I'll try if better luck I can discover. In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1658. We finde these learned and weighty Verses following. 1. Under the Table of Kings. Here, and not here, implies a Contradiction, Reality (you'll say) oppos'd to Fiction.
I grant it so: and he that asks me, Why? Must know, I cannot skill of things too nigh. He a large Picture, that will judge aright, Sets it not near him, but aloof his sight.Here O. Cromwels Usurpation and Tyranny, together with his pray∣ing Pretences to Justice and Honesty, are Curiously, though Anigma∣tically taxed. He would be a King in Re, but not in Nomine. 2. Under the Table of Terms. Peace makes a pleasant sound, well understood; But Discord better, whilst the Peace not good: I am not of his Humour, did prefer Th' Vnjustest Peace, before the Justest War. Admit one rifled, robb'd of all relief: Must he needs patch a Peace up with the Thief? 3. In January. If, wanting wings, one may ascend the Skies, And Phoebus view, without an Eagles eyes, Then rouze up (Muse) from thy Lethargique strains, And (having first invok'd the God of Brains) Let the Grand subject of thy Measures be, No soul to England like aMonarchia, à Monos Archon, the Rule of one Prince. Monarchy.
4. In February. It is the Image of that Domination, By which Jehovah rules the whole Creation: Angels nor Saints, do in his Kingdom share; God is sole Monarch; they but subjects are. Whose Laws are such, as when they did rebel, Sequestred not, but sent 'em straight to hell. 5. In March. As Old as that Paternal Soveraignty, God plac'd in Adam, rul'd his people by; Disown'd of none, but them whose minds aspire, And envy One should have what all desire: For be't a few or many we live under, Such shall repine, still, whilst not of the number. 6. In April. The Antients did a Monarchy prefer, Made all their Gods submit to Jupiter: And (when Affairs and Nations first began) Princes Decrees were th' onely Laws of Man: Experience will avow it, where there's any, One honest man is sooner found then many.
7. In May. The rational soul performs a Princes part, She Rules the body by Monarchick Art: Poor Cranes and silly Bees (with shivering wings) Observe their Leaders, and obey their Kings. Nature her self disdains a crowded Throne; The Body's monstrous, hath more Heads then one. 8. In June. A Monarchy's that Politick simple State, Consists in unity (inseparate, Pure and entire;) A Government that stands When others fall, touch'd but with Levelling hands: So natural, and with such skill endu'd, It makes one body of a multitude. 9. In July. In order (wherein latter things depend On former, that's most perfect doth attend On unity: but this can never be The Pop'lar State) nor Aristocracy: For, where or all or many bear the sway, Such order to confusion leads the way.
10. In August. A Monarchy more quickly doth attain The End propos'd: for, 'tis the single Brain That ripens Counsel, and concealeth best Princely Designs, till Deeds proclaim 'em blest. Whilst numerous Heads are rarely of one Mind; Slow in their Motion; louder then the Wind. 11. In September. Treason, nor Force, so suddainly divides Th' United strength that in a Crown resides: Sedition prospers not; it seldom here Results an Object of the Prince's fear. Than when an Empire, Rome was ne'er more strong, Nor triumph'd under other Rule so long. 12. In October. A Monarchy abates those fev'rish fits Of Emulation, a Free-State begets: A Prince cannot his Reins so quickly slack, Or throw his Burthen on another's Back. But where so many Rulers have command, The work's transfer'd, and toss'd from hand to hand.
13. In November. The People or the Nobles, to debate The deep Concernments of a troubled-State, Set times and places have assign'd them: they First meet, and then adjourn from day to day. Whereas a Monarch, who by Nature's One, Deliberates always, never's off his Throne. 14. In December. But hold! Methinks I see the three Estates Conven'd, thrown open prison-doors and grates, Extinct our paltry Jealousies and Fears, Grace offered to all but Cavaliers And Papists: yet with patience they abound, In hope for better, now, the wheel goes round. 15. The Conclusion. Thus trace we Time, and (in our several Spheres) Slightly pass over ne'er-returning years: Thus States and Kingdoms to a Period draw; Their Politicks must yeild to Natures Law. Thus Kings and Beggars are Companions made, Shake hands, and knock the Scepter 'gainst the Spade: Thus Courts and Cottages become one Roof, And Carts and Chariots meet without reproof:
Thus all the Greatness Mortals do contend And Damne their Souls for, slideth to An End. In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum, 1659. these following Pithy and Prophetique Verses are to be found. 1. On the Moons Eclipse in April. Now have amongst ye, you that stand On slippery ground, or build on sand. Seditious Spirits play their pranks, Inundations break the Banks: Rumours of Wars about us fly, (Thrice happy Man, dares bravely die) Intestine Tumults, taken Towns, Besieged Cities, Princes frowns Astonish Us. But I'll to plough, And never minde what Mad-men do. Mavors and Hermes bear the sway: May He, deserves it, have the day.In the Month April 1659. the Rump appear, and put a Period to the Raign of Richard Cromwel, and indeed extirpate that Family, whose Honour was onely built upon a sandy Foundation.
2. On the Moons Eclipse in October. Quick work and crafty! (He that sways In this Defect, brooks no Delays:) Beware of Pyrates, High-way Thieves, Dull Heresies, and Hanging-Sleeves: Of scarcity and dearth of Grain, VVith uncouth Griefs 'mongst Cattle reign: Tempestuous VVinds, Quotidian Fevers, Ptisicks, and Priests that cock their Bevers: Debates, that into question call The Peoples Laws; ev'n God's and all. For Stilbon, onely, hath command, And him alone I understand.On October 6. Parliament, Council of State, and Officers of the Ar∣my, were feasted at Grocers-hall by the City. The 12 the Parliament vote Lambert and other Officers Commissions from them. 13. They turn the Parliament out of doors for it. 26. The (pretended) Committee of Safety erected. Quere, Was not this quick work and crafty? &c. 3. On the Suns Eclipse in November. VVhat noise is this? methinks I hear Some dread Heroe, drawing near. A busie Clergie belching fire; Some Prince depos'd, and in the mire. I see (by th' light of one fair Star) VVhole Nations going out to war: Risings, Arraignments, sudden death And Ruine, rushing on the earth: The Rivers lessen'd, Fountains dry; VVaters corrupt, good Subjects die: For Mars is rampant; and what hand Can turn the Edge of Burlybrand?Lord General Monck, beholding the Confusions of England, marches hither to put a stop to them. The King of Sweden shortly after died; which this Learned Artist must needs mean, by this Eclipse of the Sun.
4. Under the Regal Table. Sacred's the name of King, and full of splendour, Famous the Title of the Faiths Defender: Yet (when on such the Rabble fix'd their spleen) Who had regard to Faith, to King or Queen? But now, (such Comments on the Text they make) All Mortals must submit for Conscience sake. 5. Under the Table of Terms. Thanks, busie-Term-time! thou bring'st work to do For Judge, for Council, and Attorney too: But should'st thou end, and never more Commence, Lawyers would lose their most voluptuous sence: The knotty Laws (which now so dear we buy) Be rated like Bishops Divinity. 6. Under the Tide-Table. The Sea hath fits, much like this giddy age; Sometimes she pines, anon, she swells with rage, And makes a rupture, where she overflows The Fertile Banks, yet never further goes (Without a Miracle) then Natures bounds: Or if we think she do, 'tis where some Towns Encroach upon her interest: For, she Is full as constant, far more just then we.
7. In January. All hail (my Masters!) I must now implore Your Ticket, for a twelve moneths recreation: I know no PlotThe Author was suspected privy to, and guilty of, the Plot, in which the Reverend Dr. Hewyt, &c. miscarried., (save that, which keeps us poor) And this of mine, to gain your approbation. All my designes lurk in these Rural strains; My Guts conspire, indeed, but not my Brains. 8. In February. I honour all that have a Soveraign Pow'r, Extol their Prowess (be it more or less) Admire them growing in a golden showre; Observe (but point not at) their vain excess. The Suns defects seen in a line direct, Hurt th' eyes, not when in water they reflect. 9. In March. I pray for Kings, and think't a pious Deed: Good Princes very well deserve our pray'rs: But thereof bad ones stand the most in need; For such (be sure!) do stand on slippery stairs, And (like to Iron) generate the rust, From their own substance, turns 'em into dust.
10. In April. I'm hugely taken with the Golden Train, (Those lofty stars which glide along this Sphere!) Yet Greatness, without Goodness, I disdain; A spungie head full ill becomes a Peer: Persons of honour should have Princely parts, No empty Cock-lofts, or deceitful hearts.When the Florida Ambassador was in London, Col. Pride being once at dinner with him, instead of propounding a Question like a Sta∣tist, asked him, Whether there were not good vent for Beer and Ale in Florida? whence our Author saith, A Spungie head, &c. 11. In May. I reverence Justice (on the meanest seat) She was a vertue once, though now a wonder: I like sweet words (intended not to cheat) And works of Mercy, not too far asunder: But cruelty! how that would make me swagger, Were it not common, both to Sword and Dagger. 12. In June. I love the Ministry, all but the name, (That Motly and promiscuous Appellation:) Which mingleth Dung-hill Dirt, with Austin's Fame, (With holy Writ, pretended Revelation) Give me the Priest disdains to tell a Lye; That Priest, who date for his Religion die.
13. In July. I like the Comm'nalty (that Sov'raign Pow'r) Whilst not to Faction, or Revenge dispos'd: But Commons over-stinted, or too sowre, Are best improved, when they are inclos'd. VVho gives a Giddy-Multitude the Reins, O'erwhelms the State, betrays his want of Brains. 14. In August. I own the Camp, where Gallantry commands, VVhere Arts and Arms, advance their awful Grests; But wish the Cramp befall such Victors hands, As cannot conquer their ambitious Brests. Success enlarges Mens desires; nay, more, It breeds some thoughts, they dream'd not on▪ before. 15. In September. I hug the Souldier, dreads no violent end, (For stoutest men, such fortune often have:) It is the cause, (not mode) of death, shall send Us glorious, or inglorious, to the Grave. He who 'll avoid a shameful death, must run The danger of a brave one; and 'tis done.
16. In October. I fancie well, our great Metropolis, She harbours store of Men and store of Riches: There is no sounding of that vast Abyss; What wonder then, if London weare the Breeches? Yet must this Darling, now and then, untruss; Correction keeps her most Obsequious. 17. In November. But O the Country, free from jarring-strife, (Where Plants and Flow'rs abound with Eloquence; Where ev'ry Hedge and Tree doth breathe new Life, Where pratling Birds, do captivate my sense:) There I (sequestred from the world) abide, And (if needs must) there I'll be crucifi'd. 18. In December. Thus (in an humour purely innocent) I add one year more, to a careful Age: No more of this, till freed from my Restraint: I cannot chant (like Birds) within a Cage. Yet know! I have (although my aim's not high) Seleucus-like, an Anchor on my thigh.
19. His Conclusion. Thus have our melting eyes, England beheld With smooth-fac'd Peace, and wanton Plenty swell'd] Into a Monster; so unweildly grown, Her own vast weight, depress'd her Princely Crown: A brutish War tore Church and State asunder, Fool'd us with fears, fill'd all the world with wonder. The fairest Stars, losing their sacred light, And chearful day turn'd into drowzie night: Th' Antipodes (true Mirrour of the Cause!) Reacted through three Nations, with applause: But EXIT OLIVER, whilst yet we lend Our Patience, till the PLAYIt was the saddest and most dismal Tragedy that ever was acted in England. be at an end. Lastly, In Kalendarium Ecclesiasticum 1660. We meet with these several excellent and true Verses: And although they be fresh in each Man's Memory, the Year being but newly begun; yet, they being the works of the same Author, I adjudge it convenient to insert them here, they being not most unworthy the company of the rest. 1. Under the Regal Table. Where's now the Sultan? What remorsless Star Remov'd that famous Idol, Oliver?
Unwelcome Death. But what flint-hearted Fate, That Mushrom-Prince, his Son? Our glorious State. Thus then we see what luck Protectors have; A restless Life, or ignominious Grave. 2. Under the Table of Terms. Lo! here's a Trade surpasseth all the rest, No change annoys the Lawyers interest: His Tongue buys Lands, builds Houses without toyl; The Pen's his Plough, the Parchment is his Soil: Him, storms disturb not, nor Militia-Bands; The Tree roots best, that in the weather stands. 3. In January. And is HeOliver Cromwel. gone indeed? then farewel He; Farewel to all our New Nobility: Good-night Illustriousness: adieu old Joan; The Kitchen better fits you, then a throne: Lay 'side your Purple, and your Robes off cast: Play'rs are but Princes, while the PlayThe Play that prevented Englands happiness, is now most happily ended. doth last.
4. In February. About, my Muse, and try if thou can'st find What pow'rful Charm, rais'd that prodigiousAt the death of Oliver Cromwel, there was a most prodigious Wind; the like hath seldome been known in England. wind: Some dis-affected Conjurer (I trow) Did long to hear what News there was below: But others think, the Devil was matched so, His breath grew short, and so was forc'd to blow. 5. In March. But where be those fine Juglers, did Address Such sugred Phrase, such smooth Obsequiousness: That vow'd to live and die, with Richard, yet Ne'er blemisht, when they saw his glory set? Such Hypocrites, run with the stream of things, And will keep Time, whatever Dance begins.Most Countries in England sent up Addresses to Richard Cromwel; with as much zeal, as if he had been the most lawful and undoubted Heir to the Government of England. 6. In April. O for a Besom now, to sweep the House, And rid the Palace, both of Fox and Goose! Some choice Perfumes withal, would be design'd, (Ill Spirits ever leave ill sents behind) And when 'tis cleansed, and things sweeter grown, Great Berecynthia's Sons, go claim your own.It is observable, that the Parliament this moneth give order to warn all Lodgers out of Whirehal, that it might be prepared the better for his Royal Majesties use.
7. In May. What's to be done, now, all are grown so wise, And our fore-Fathers wisdom, counted Lies? Were all the many Ages, that are past, Mistaken, until this un-erring Last? Good God! how sped they? shall none saved be, But Schismaticks? Then what becomes of me? 8. In June. But 'tis the mode: Come, come, let's all comply; There's no firm footing on integrity: For, having said, and done all what we can, The Pliant Willow, is the precious Man: Whose Oaths, of one day, (though of fair pretext) Vail to an inspiration, of the next. 9. In July. Down then with Tythes, they are a burthen great, For which the Parson never soundly sweat: Yet let's remember (maugre all new light) He that detains them, robs God of his right. And though to him the tenth we should not pay, The Publicans will sweep it all away.
10. In August. Let's say the Clergy by: what need we Priests Or Ministers? w' are all Evangelists: The Bible's English, (thank the Bishops for't:) The Spirit's in us, why not we exhort? Yet let's beware, before we farther boast, And think who 'twas receiv'd the Holy-Ghost. 11. In September. Let's sell the Church and Colledge-Lands: Away With humane Learning; (that's but for a day:) Down with the Steeple-houses, melt the Bells, And own no Metal, but what's in our selves. But stay, first let us learned Spelman read, And then (perhaps) we may abhor the deed. 12. In October. Let's tear our Ribbons, burn our Richer Laces, VVear Russet, and contrive bewitched faces: With Thee and Thou, let us go quack a while, And cheat the world, in Quakers garb and stile. But do not trust'em, more then well befits; Th' are Presbyterians run besides their wits.
13. In November. Or were they not, yet fool not over-fast; For this Religion too shall flag at last: Naylor himself will never for it burn, Nor let us use't but for our present turn. On such sad Mummers, grace will not be had, Much longer, then the multitude are mad. 14. In December. But now th' Apostates are restor'd their wits, And Plots and Plotters crumbled all to bits; A blessed Reformation will (I hope) At last succeed, in spite of Turk and Pope: Till when, and always, let's observe the Laws, And truly celebrate, The Good Old Cause. Which Good Old Cause, England is now again (by Gods especial Providence) blessed with; to the great satisfaction and rejoycing of the inhabitants thereof; who, by reason of their sufferings in our late twenty years Confusion, cannot but give their joy the greater Latitude, at this so happy, and (by many, al∣most) unexpected Revolution of Government; viz. of turning from Anarchy, to the most natural of all other Governments, MONARCHY.
There are divers other curious Fancies of this lear∣ned Author; but they being more Astrological then any that are here mentioned, and not very easily un∣derstood without a large Comment, (except by persons skilled in that Science) is the grand reason why the Collector hath omitted their Publication. Multa renascentur, que jam cecidêre, cadent{que} Quae nunc sunt in honore, vocabula, si volet usus; Quem pones arbitrium est, & vis, & norma loquendi.Horat. de Art. Poet. FINIS.
A POETICAL ESSAY. As an ARRHA OF A Larger Harvest. By G. S. —Ridentem dicere verumQuis vetat?— LONDON: Printed for Daniel White, at the Seven Stars in St. Paul's Church-yard. 1660.
A Poetical Essay. Liber Loquitur. TRistia principio, post haec celebrare triumphos Meus est; nox olim sic fuit atra prior, Post tenebras{que} dies: regimur non impare fato, Gaudia succedunt, sed praeit ante dolor. Englished thus. First doleful Ditties, Triumphs then to sing, Is mine intent: thus Day the rere doth bring, Night leads the van: and such is humane fate; Sadness our Joyes oft-times doth antedate.
Vpon His MAJESTIE, CHARLES the First, Being pretendedly judged and condemned by his Subjects. NOr want his sufferings their President; His Blessed Pattern in the same path went, Trod the same steps, won the same glorious Crown: Like villany both to the grave brought down. Blessed Disciple of a Master blest! Both for their people suffred, both to rest Past through a Sea of troubles, shed their blood; Christ for his Scholar, he for such who stood In bold defiance of his godlike love: Christ he was born, Charles made by him a Dove. Both like to harmless Lambs did suffer death: Two Kings, like these, never drew vital breath. Whose parity of passion plainly shews That Christ and Charles were both true Kings of Jews.
Vpon Kindle-Coale the Dry-vine, who Kindled a fire of intestine War in this Kingdom, which flamed out for nigh twenty years, till it had almost (with our selves) consumed some, and sore∣ly scorched others of our Neighbour∣ing Nations. STrange monstrous whirlwind! is't a Juglers mist? Or do I see the fiery Alchymist Here acted? is my fight beguil'd? or how See I so many shapes? Legion I trow Is not broke loose again, and from among The Tombs now come Churches to haunt, whose throng Of people seem possest with spirits strange. The fire's fall'n, although tongues do not change. Had cloven tongues been with the fire joyn'd, (The fire we saw, we heard and felt the wind) I should have thought the Comforter once more Had visibly descended as before. But sure that blessed Spirit ne'er did teach Such Doctrines which these pulpit-thumpers preach. Or is't the wind and fiery Chariot, That Rapt Elijah? was that fire so hot?
That wind so great? Oh no: this surely then Is that Rock-rending whirlwind, rais'd by men, Or rather fiends Incarnate; this the fire Wherein God was not, but chose to inspire Eliah in a soft and silent voyce, Such (had we heard) had made this Land rejoyce: But we in stead of this, had sons of thunder, Whose firy flashes made beholders wonder: Such gusts and storms did from the pulpit blow, As made the flouds their banks to overflow▪ Head-strong Rebellion down Religion's tide Swam with such force, that nothing could abide, But all was hurryed with the furious stream: Ev'n Majesty it self, that master-beam Was overwhelmed, conscience wreckt, and lost, Loyalty split on Rocks, allegiance tost So long upon the waves o'th' swelling floud, Until it sunk, and buryed lay i'th' mud. Oaths, vowes, and sacred Ties, now bind no more Then strawes; all dasht are 'gainst the rocky shore. Whence comes this madness? how were you misled, Once famous Englishmen, while to your head You faithful were, and due obedience gave To your Liege Lord and King? what made you rave, To such a height of fury, to forget Gods Deputy on Earth, by Him there set? Who could acquit you from those sacred ties By which you were ingag'd? how dust you rise In arms against him unto whom you swore Allegiance? was't not that same God, before Whose presence you made Vows of Loyalty, Whom you conceive now pleas'd with Perjury? Poor people! you were gull'd with Pulpit-charms; 'Twas Curse yee Meroz made ye rise in Arms:
With jugling Peters, who had learn'd the Art, To play the Preachers and the Gypsies part. By spiritual canting, he knew how to call Your plate (with holy craft) to Goldsmiths-Hall: Your Spoons and Tankards (from your Cupboards) he On publick Faith, procures a loan to be. The work was great, and lest this should not do, The VVenches Rings, Thimbles, and Bodkins too, Another Sermon cleanly swept away, To help on Gods Cause, as the knave did say. Old Woolaston, (that trusty Saint) took care Of this free-Offering, and carv'd out a snare First to himself, next to his Brethren: all To taste the bounty of the Saints have call; The rest he (Aaron-like) in mould doth east, Hoping to frame a Calfe: but what with hast, What with deceit (wherewith such Saints are stor'd) Our comes a Bull, the Publick Faith, which gor'd. Alas poor Publick Faith! and is it dead? May the Bulls Horns grow on the Givers Head. But since the work is done, methinks I spy A monstrous change in the Presbytery. Stout Boanerges now begins to whine; Th' Enthusiast o'ertops the Book-Divine; The Souldier-rampant in his Pulpit gets, And while he preacheth, the poor Parson frets. Good Sir, lay by your anger; did not you, By Metamorphosis, turn Captain too? Swagger with sword by side? and in your zeal Lead forth your Converts, Zions wounds to heal? If Priests turn warlike Leaders, may not these Turn Priests? 'tis only cake giv'n to your cheese. But here's the plague, men now so wise are grown, They know enough, and will no Teachers own:
And since that all can preach, none now would pay The Parson, but his Tythes would take away. Doth this displease you? strange! was't not the case Of Bishops, Deans, and Chapters? you said Grace Before that meale, which on their Lands was made; Methinks you justly in your Coin are paid. If they were Relicks of the Whore, no doubt But yours are of the same kinde: if the rout Rais'd by your selves, at last upon you fell, For shame complain not; y'are rewarded well. 'Tis fit those Pulpits should contemned be, Which first defiance bid to Majesty: 'Tis fit such Presbyters their Tythes should want, Which labour'd King and Bishops to supplant. No Bishops, nor no Tythes, by humane Right; And Jus Divinum is exploded quite. O times! when Hobnails justle out a Crown; And Surplice white, is chang'd to crimson Gown; When to rebel, is judg'd a Saint-like thing; Who hate conformity, dare kill their King. But, God be praised, now New lights are found To be Fools Fires, in a moorish ground. King-killing now let's damne to lowest Hell; Let not the Classe against the Mitre swell. Leave crimson Tenets to the crimson Whore; Let's all at last repent, and SMEC no more.
Vpon the Death of DENNIS BOND, who died on that stormy Day, the same Week the PROTECTOR died, who lived four Days after him. A Zealot for the Cause, liv'd always grac'd, To right and left, to front and rear he fac'd; And as times chang'd, he turn'd still: thus his stake He sav'd, and did of Honour still partake. To the Kings Murther (post) consent he gave; And then admir'd proud Hops and Grains (that Slave!) Own'd him a Saint, saw much of God in's face, Only his Copper-Nose did much disgrace The Divine Image: yet there's reason why Dennis with Oliver should thus comply. Both Saints alike, and Rebels, th' one in grain, Most stain'd with blood, but Traytors both remain. Nol's Actor, Dennis stands Abettor by; Their Soveraigns Life, the Touchstone both to try. He owns the Murther, th' other cries Amen; It is a Query which was worst: for when He pawn'd his soul, this laid his Bond at stake, A praise-deserving Action this to make Clear as the Sun, and do appoint their day, Ten years (bating few months) this game to play.
Thus Noll went formost, nor did Bond disclaim The Fact, but gives it a religious name: And firmly is resolv'd to justifie That Law and Court which iudg'd King Charles to die. Pluto takes up the wager, and makes shew Of paints and varnishes both old and new, To give a gloss to villany, but asks (In case that neither should perform their tasks) Noll's foul, and will have Dennis in the Bond, The time prefixed not to slip beyond; But on the forfeit, seizure should be given. This notwithstanding, both make sure of Heaven. The time's elaps'd, the wager lost: what now? Both would forget their Lay, but 'twill not do: For Pluto boldly comes, and makes demand, Th' affrighted Gamesters both amazed stand. Fain would they finde Evasions; but he brings Clear Evidence 'gainst Murther black of Kings: For proof, he calls the best and worst of men; First, Saints in Bliss; damn'd Powder-Traytors then: The former, doom this Fact to lowest Hell; The latter (now in wo) judge they did well; If you compare these new Saints bloody Fact, VVhich they before the Sun did boldly act, VVith their bare plotted Treason, nipt i'th' bud, VVhile these all o'er are dipt in sacred Blood. Shall our Intentions reap untimely death? (By shame more bitter made) and these draw breath Till Fate surprize them with a silent stroak? Shall we (poor wretches) be with sulph'rous smoak Tormented ever? and shall these finde bliss? Shall horrid Facts meet Joys, which Plots did miss? 'Tis strange, if true; Heavens Justice it forbids. Thus spake these damned Souls, when strait amids
Fear and Despair, proud Noll 'gins gaspe for breath, To yeild his loath'd soul to a cursed death. In blustering storms the hellish Fiend attends, VVhile he in prayer some few minutes spends. Pardon he begs not, lying in despair; Some respite to obtain, is all his care. Nor having hope in God, to Pluto he Doth thus Address himself: Oh pity me! Great Lord of the infernal Commonwealth, Or else I am undone, who in my health Took care for nothing, but my Sons to fix I'th' seat of Soveraignty (Oh cursed tricks! By which I did this project bring about Thus far) my stinking snuff if you put out, Before I can accomplish this intent, Loss must to you redound: for I have sent (I boldly can affirm) more to your Court, Then twenty lawful Kings: you know my sport: Great Lucifer! in blood was my delight, Unbowel'd carcasses much pleas'd my sight; VVhose Bodies scap'd me, I destroy'd their Souls, So much as in me lay: the Muster-Rolls Of my Trepanners, Spies and Instruments! This Art insnares my Foes, my fall prevents. VVhat did I say? Prevents? Oh no, I lie; I am beyond help fal'n, if now I die. Have pity (gentle Pluto) I you pray; Release I beg not, onely longer day: And 'tis but four dayes respite which I crave, Mean while, my Bond most willingly you have: Take him, and use him, as my self you'd use; And four days hence, to come I'll not refuse. Satan proves good to's servant, and accepts This at the present, nor himself expects
Until the day prefixt. Now all his care Is, to seat Richard in his vacant Chair. But had you seen how Dennis lay amaz'd, And on him Pluto how he staring gaz'd; VVith pity it had made you laugh, to see A strong-confiding Saint thus couzen'd be. VVith strecht-out arms aloft he strives to go, But Pluto soon another way doth show: This is our present path; fear not, 'tis broad, Noll's Privy Council all may ride this road Abrest, with all the Judges of the King, And the whole train which they with them shall bring: No fear of crowding; therefore courage, man; You'll have a jolly Crew, and now and than Some of your fellow-Rebells you will see Come dropping in, till none remaining be. Discoursing thus, they did approach that Lake, At sight whereof, Dennis began to quake; Yet did so strong of Modern Saintship smell, That he was taken for a Saint in Hell. In cloyster'd Cells he hears some roar and swear, And zealously entreats them to forbear. One hearing him reprove with such a grace, Cries, Cursed Caytiff! well I know thy face, VVho stand'st condemned there for Perjury, Schisme, Sedition, and base Treachery. Thou, who a Rebell labourd'st to advance Unto his SOVERAIGN's Seat, how comes this chance, That thou (Arch-Traytor!) dar'st for Oaths (here sworn) Reprove? anon thou'st curse, thou wretch forlorn! Beelzebub hears this chat, and in he comes; Enquires his guest, and shews him choice of rooms.
'Tis plaguy hot (quoth Bond) Oh hold! I die! Fear not (saith Beelzebub) you'll only frie: This room's for Saint-like Rebells, chiefly those, VVhen Kings are murdered, who their Crowns dispose. Come, stir the fire (some idle fiend) he cries. I've too much heat already, Bond replies. The flame increasing, Dennis curst and swore, VVho (Saint-like) could not brook an Oath before. He yell'd, and shriek'd, and vow'd, in bitter pain, To come in Bond for never a Rogue again.
SIMEON and LEVI'S Bond of Fraternitie: OR, AN ESSAY Upon The Scotch COVENANT. PRodigious noise! far more prodigious sight! Bless me! what is the matter? this would fright A Champion himself; a man would swear That Hell were now broke loose, and coming here. Fetch me some holy water; in a Ring Encircle me about; a Crosier bring. VVhat horrid thunder claps I hear! Sure Jove, Armed therewith, is coming from above. The show, more ghastly, seems to represent Lucifer with his Train; a ulph'rous sent Attends them: Thunder makes their way I trow; B'elzebub now makes holy-day: this show
So strange, so frightful, that the like before I never saw, and hope shall never more. But hold, the wonder's over: now I see The ground of this uncouth Solemnitie. And is it possible? this doth amaze My trembling heart, that this should be the cause Of such infernal Triumph; Heav'n defend England and English-men! thrice cursed Fiend! VVho did invent this execrable snare, Good men for to intrap; while wretches dare Take it (Sans scruple) and with no less ease Break it, and dally with it as they please. This day the Solemn League first saw the light, That Caledonian Imp: Lucifer bright, Incubus-like, the Scotish Kirk bestrid, So got this Brat; which carefully he did Afterwards nourish, till it lusty grew; And of it then he did make publick shew. Beelzebub he play'd the Man-midwife's part, And aid the groaning Kirk with muckle art, That, though this Brat abortive prov'd, and came Before full time, yet liv'd, and had the name Of the most Solemn League and Covenant. Now nothing else but Godfathers they want; England and Ireland perswaded were T'accept this honour; but it cost them dear. In the remembrance of whose birth, each year This solemn show is celebrated here: Pluto this day observes a Festival, His Courtiers revel, others great and small, Throughout his Kingdom, yearly thus do rant Upon the birth-day of the Covenant. O Solemn League! whose Sire's so great a King! If all th'infernal Rabble Io sing,
In celebration of thy famous birth, That their loud shouts do thus resound on earth; Let no man marvel, if I take some pain, A little knowledge thereof to obtain. I view'd it carefully as it did pass; I saw its shape, though knew not what it was. But now, on second thoughts, I shall pourtray This famous Bugbear, so far as I may. 'Tis like the dreadful Polyphemus Den, That fearful one-ey'd Monster, who on Men Gorgeth himself; his Guests who doth devour, Not sparing any that's within his power; And 'tis the mildest fate which doth befal His friends, he them devours last of all. This is the [tertium quid] which reconciles Prodigious differing Sects; though each reviles And hates the other; herein all agree; The Solemn League brings them to Unitie. The true Distinction is the Covenant, Betwixt the Sectary and Protestant. This is the Shibboleth to know them; one Makes conscience of an Oath, the other none: One having sworn, religiously stands ti'd; The other twenty Oaths can take beside; Allegiance and Supremacie can swear, Yet take the Cov'nant without any fear. This Dance was led by the Presbytery, And closely follow'd by the Sectary. The Solemn League seems like that brand of fire Betwixt two Foxes tayls, who can conspire In mischief, though their heads look several ways: Thus Sects unite, when each the Devil plays. Herod and Pilate quickly were made Friends, While Christ with scorn one to the other sends.
It doth resemble theevish Cacus Cave, To which he drew his Oxen; or the grave Of snakie-headed Typhon, whose last breath Fired the Mountain Aetna at his death: It's like the Lions all-devouring Den, To which all footsteps led; but back agen None could be found returning. But pronounce The Covenant, 'tis not the Libyan Ounce, Nor the Arabian Panther's half so fierce; This through the Body to the Soul can pierce; And like th' inchaunted Bulls, which none can tame, Doth at its nostrils break forth smoak and flame. The Trojan Horse, enclosing armed Men; Or roaring Lion new rouz'd from his Den, Could not the object prove of so great fear: Better to meet the fiercest Northern Bear Rob'd of her VVhelps, then in the claws to fall O'th' Solemn League, which far surpasseth all. This is the Babel of the Sectaries, VVhich they intend shall over-top the Skies: But as the number, so their Sects increase, Untill Confusion cause that work to cease: Turn the Sectarians over, and you'll find Scarce any four, concurring in one mind; This doth resemble that Gygantick VVar, VVag'd against Heaven, when men rag'd so far, The Gods themselves most proudly to defie, Pelion on Ossa heap't, t' approach the Skie. Till Typhon burnt with lightning from above, And strook with Thunder from Vindictive Jove, To wash his wounds, unto the River went, VVhich such infected sulphrous odor sent, Into the water, with his dropping blood, As poyson'd all the streams o'th' cristal floud.
Nor Aetna, nor Vesuvius throw out More coals, vomit more flames, nor round about Disgorge more ashes, cinders, burning stones, Then doth the Solemn League: who takes it once, Take him and wash him at the head of Thame Or Isis, and so far as Thames its name▪ Descends, he will rebellious poyson send From beyond Oxford, down below Gravesend. Name but the Covenant, and you have spoke Thunder and Lightnings, Earth-quakes, Flames and Smoak, Rebellion, Schisme, Murther in that League Lie couch'd, as doth a Chicken in an Egge; VVhich being hatch'd under a Sectary, Out comes a Hydra straight of Villany. Had I the Cov'nant here, scarce durst I read Two lines, nor further on my life proceed, Unless I were within a Circle hem'd. 'Twere a fit Neck-verse for a Thief condemn'd; The bare pronouncing it, such Fiends would call, As would spectators fright, hangman and all. It's Gorgons Visage, and Medusa's Head: The sight of it 's enough to strike one dead. All the beholders brests it turns to stone: Another Circe, whose infernal tone, By haggish Spells, men can transmute to beasts: A fierce Hyaena, which loves humane Feasts. Th' Aegyptian Crocodile, to this compar'd, Is like a harmless Lizard: t' hath ensnar'd, Kill'd and devour'd, ruined and destroy'd More then that poysonous Dragon which annoy'd The Babylonish Confines, and did wast The Country, by that Venom which he cast; Whole Towns and Villages his poys'nous breath Consum'd; nor prov'd less fatal after death.
(So great a stench his rotting carcass made, Which by no Antidote could be allay'd.) Thus from th' expiring Covenant did spring That curst Engagement which renounc'd our King. It's a mysterious hidden villany, Treason in ambush, Pimp to Perjury: Gods Name abus'd, the Devil to conjure: Hypocrisie, which can the Rack endure, Without discovery: 'tis the Nut of Vice In Vertues Shell: Satan in Paradice. It is a ravening Wolf in sheep-skin clad: A Necromantick Charm, of Scripture made: Borgia's Precepts of true Piety; And tender-hearted Tereus Leiturgy: Machiavil's grounds play'd in Division: The secret Character of Babylon. 'Tis her mysterious Name spel'd out at length: 'Tis Death's (like Sampson's) secret lock of strength▪ The Devil wrought, by curious Chymistry, To an Elixir, to make thousands by. The many-headed Antichristian-Beast, With names of Blasphemy upon his brest: Judas hayl Master, with his loving Kiss: The brazen Bull of cruel Phalaris. (All guests to fit) Procustes Iron bed, By stretching joynts, or chopping off the head. Whatever I have said, describes it not; But like as Hell is fanci'd fiery hot, Th'eternal Mansions of damned Sprites, As we pourtray, by that which us affrights; Just so the Covenant do I express, By likening it to the pit bottomless; Or to the Locusts which thence did arise With dreadful Strings: Or to the fatal eyes
Of that Serpentine Monster, which can slay Only by sight: yet still, whate'er I say, Ten thousand times comes short of that degree Of hellish Venom and Malignitie VVhich in the Solemn League by proof is found, That Scotch-born Pest, nourish'd in English ground; VVhich hath devour'd alike both beasts and men, Lands, Houses, Churches, Castles: surely when Grisly Abaddon with Destruction met, That Sire and Damme this Goblin did beget: Which to the life t' express, doth pass my Skill, Puzzles my Fancie, and out-dares my Quill: For beyond all that I can think or say, It is Great Beezebub's ET CAETERA.
UPON The Detestable LIFE, And Accursed DEATH OF OLIVER, Lord PRO-TRAYTOR OF England, Scotland and Ireland, with the Dominions thereto appertaining. HOw many wonders centre here in one! Well may we call him Wonder's Legion. He's Prodigies in gross, a wholesale Pack Of strange Portents: Amazements Almanack.
To think what first he was, to what he grew, Would startle Faith, and non-plus Reason too. No doubt but future Ages will suspect His Story; yea, had we not seen th' effect, No Rhetorick could win us to believe: Nay we might doubt our eyes did us deceive, But that we also felt, as well as saw The weighty load of his imperious Law. God bless me! when I look on him, I fear, As if some dreadful Comet did appear. More frightful never was that blazing Star, Whose flaming Tayl struck terrour near and far: Nor could a flying Dragon scare me more; Nor Thunderclaps which over head do roar; Nor yet that rending Thunderbolt, which falls Mingled with blasting Lightenings Fire-balls Such trembling horrour and amazement bring, As that Vile Monster, who destroy'd his King. What, is he dead? No, no; it cannot be: Can Lucifer taste of Mortalitie? Rather the time expir'd he here should dwell, And hence he went to play his pranks in hell. Who can imagine him of mortal breed? Hell's Off-spring onely durst act such a Deed. His Nose betray'd his Lin'age, and did show His Pedegree: th'infernal fire below, (As in a Landskip) there was set to view, VVhose frequent Pimples seem'd a Damned Crew.
Thus Hell was represented in his face, Himself the Divell acted with such grace, Who saw him, took the Actor for the same; Thus he and Satan differ'd but in name. Some think an Incubus his Mother prest, And while she bred him, say she was possest: Nor is't improbable: for that old Hagge Prov'd afterwards his Oracle, would bragge Much of her cunning, and (some say) would tell Of secret whispers in a private Cell: No sooner was a Health drunk to his Nose, But she as quickly could and did disclose: Yet let his Sire be what he will, we know, That Lucifer he oft-times did out-do. Some call him Jeroboam, and pourtray. Him and a ghastly Goblin, both one way Turning blinde Fortune's VVheel, to get a Crown, Though Oliver put Jeroboam down. He was to him a Saint; two Calves of Gold, Although he made, his Crown thereby to hold; Yet openly rebell'd, seem'd what he was: But Cromwel, in the dark, unseen did pass Step after step, with gilded Perjury, And with the most refin'd Hypocrisie. All Jeroboam's sins he did commit, And far out-strip'd him: he a Kingdom split, Rent it in twain, but not to pieces broke; Forsook his King, but not with fatal stroke;
Murther'd him at his door, nor was ingag'd, To Rehoboam; rather was inrag'd Against him, for his fathers sake, who sought His life, but he by flight his safety wrought. This villain, to the death his King pursu'd, More fierce, then fiercest Tyger; he inbru'd His hands in Sacred blood, which to defend, Oft he had sworn: did the whole Kingdom rend From his Successor. Jeroboam left Two Tribes to Davids Son: Cromwel bereft His Sov'rains heir, not only of his Crown, But all his friends most proudly trampled down. Rob'd him of all the comforts of his life, And drew against him his blood-thirsty knife. Instead of Golden Calves to be ador'd, This daring English rebel well was stor'd With monstrous heresies, which vented were Without coutrol: all found protection here; Old darkness was esteem'd both light, and new, Religions all were free, except the true. Oh! what a Zealous Sycophantick gang, Hosanna sung? what new Sects daily sprang? The vilest Jeroboam chose for Priests, Cromwel at this was expert, and supprest All that were ablest: who durst not comply With his designs, were with contempt cast by
Thus sects with us, like the Egyptian swarms, With humming musick dance to Cromwels charmes. So that if now I should his name devise, He should be Beelzebub, the Lord of flies. Old Holofernes one was pleas'd to call This rebel, but beneath the mark did fall; And yet did very well, he level shot, Aim'd at the white, although he hit it not. For that great Captain at his Kings com∣mand Led forth an hoast, fell by a womans hand: This monster rose in arms against his King, And slighting vows, to publick death did bring: Nor would when summon'd, unto death sub∣mit, But sturdily strove to abate its writ; Till Lucifer in blustring storms did come To ravish him perforce unto his doom. Then did he yell, & howl, blaspheme &, rave, And four days respite humbly beg'd to have: Then! then! this wretch unto his place did go, There to eternity to suffer wo. Old Holofernes, his Kings foes subdu'd; To such who did submit, he mercy shew'd: Cromwel both King, and all his friends brought under; His native Country he did rod and, plunder.
Jerusalem by force one did assault (Vaux-like) th'other in a secret vault, By secret practises knew to delude, And brought his Masters into servitude. Better his own vile name then other may His more accursed qualities pourtray. Henceforth let it serve for a Magick spell, A spirit rais'd, back to remand to hell. And as a Bugbear froward children stills, The trembling Scots his name with horror fills. Dunbar, and Worster, fatal Proofes they found How well the Cov'nant, thriv'd in English ground, Our Covenanters learn'd to slay their King, And on her knees their Kirke old Nol did bring. He, to their grief, taught them, and made them feel Their League was to be purg'd away with steel. Now fie upon him, Loon! the Kirke did cry, The League was gud; he took it wicked∣ly: To rise in Arms our Covenant allows, To root out Prelacy; nor do our vows Forbid to sell our King; this doth agree Both with our League, and Presbyterie;
The Egyptian Cavaleers while we kept under, This was but Christian like! 'twas godly plunder, But Simeon and Levi to fall out, Brethren each other to assault and rout, Oh! this is wicked, this goes very nigh, And argues little Christianity. Peace, Brethren, peace, quoth Cromwel, you have got The day of treacherous Iscariot. His thirty peeces, he brought back, had you, By such an action shown repentance true, I had forborn, who now come for that end, To fetch that back, which you are loth to send. O Son of Lucifer! how didst thou rise From Dunghil to the Throne? who did de∣vise Those villanies which thou didst execute? How of a Saint gott'st thou the first repute? Did thy religion? every man doth know, Long thou hadst none, nor ever but a show▪ To quaff a Can, boldly to court a Lass, This, this, was thy Religion, till alas! Thy credit lost, and all thy money spent, There was no other way, but to repent; And by Repentance, as the Proverb goes, From an old Devil, a young Saint arose: For his Profession serv'd but as a Cloak; His Zeal no fire had, but onely smoak.
The Scriptures, like Decoyes, he did abuse, To cover foul Designes with Saint-like shews: Could preach and pray, had learn'd to use the Tone Of snuffling Gospellers, who can bemoan Themselves to God, with necks drawn quite a∣wry, Eyes turned up, hands lifted to the Skie, Making most tedious hems and hums, when they In Zealous Non-sence have quite lost their way. A Text of holy Writ, he by his Art, Could quite knock out of joynt, and say by heart, Many affected Phrases; he could run Canting Division, and preach down the Sun; But still his Uses he did most apply To beat down Antichristian Prelacie. This Doctrine pleas'd; thus by degrees he came, His King with Pulpit-scandals to defame; Taxt first his Council, and then rose in Arms; Deludes the Soldiery with preaching Charms: And thus, by shew of Godliness, he crept Unseen, into the Throne until he stept. By hidden motions, Fox-like, he did clime; Rul'd like a savage Wolf, until the time Of our Deliv'rance from his Tyranny Was come, when God did hear poor England's Cry.
Remov'd this Monster, whose far unlike Son Lost like a Fool, what the old Knave had won. O that the Devil had let loose his Soul, (At least a few dayes) on his bare Parol, To've seen these Changes! there's no doubt but he Would rather chuse in hottest flames to be, Then this heart-rending-sight t'endure: there lie, Thou SON OF PRIDE! and never dying, die! There of thy Treasons, reap the due Reward, No torment Hell affords, let now be spar'd. For ever gnash, those Vipers teeth, and let Hell (like that burning Furnace) once be heat Sev'n times beyond its wont, to entertain Thee (matchless Rebel) and whilst thou in pain Do'st roar, For joy of thy thrice happy death, We with loud Shouts will rend the very Earth. FINIS.
