W2705 12497906 62576
Imprimatur, Guil. Jane. Nov. 4. 1678.
THE HISTORY OF THE Gunpowder-Treason, Collected from Approved Authors, AS WELL POPISH as PROTESTANT. Saepè Divinitatis opera haec sunt, & furias in ipso jam successu securas subita ultio excipiat: nè vel unquam improbis timor, vel spes absit Calamitosae virtuti. Jo. Barclaii Conspiratio Anglicana. LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Church-yard, 1678.
THE HISTORY OF THE GUNPOWDER TREASON. THere are no Conspiracies and Insurrections more dangerous to States and Governments, than those that the name of Religion is made to patronize; for when that doth head and ma∣nage the Party, as it makes it look somewhat conside∣rable in it self, so it doth inspire those that are con∣cerned with a certain furious and intemper ate zeal, and an ungovernable violence; they then rebel with authority, and kill with a safe conscience, and think they cannot do amis as long as it is to do God service. The Brother will then deliver up the Brother to death, and the Father the Child: and the Children will rise up against their Parents, and cause them to be put to death; and the Laws of Nature, which are of themselves sacred and in∣violable, shall in such a case be despised and lose their authority. This, this is it which in these latter Ages more especially hath disturbed Governments, disposed of the Crowns of Princes, and troubled the peace of the world: From hence spring all those mischiefs that threatned and perpetually allarm'd this Nation during the long and fortunate Reign of Queen Elizabeth: From hence proceeded that barbarous and bloody design of the
Gunpowder Treason in the year 1605. Such a Design a the World before never heard of, and which Posterity will hardly believe for the horror of it, say the soberer of their ownThuanus Barclay. Rog. Widdring∣ton in his A∣polog. pro jure Principum. Pag. 1. Authors: such a design as even some of the Jesuits, after it miscarried, and they saw how ill it was resented by the rest of mankind, professed their detestation ofMori histo∣ria missionis Anglicanae praefat.; but how little to their own vindicati∣on, and the satisfaction of the World will easily appear to any one that doth impartially inquire into the Hi∣story and the process of it. For this design was not ta∣ken up of a sudden, and what a small company of rash and hot-headed persons did without consideration at∣tempt, but what proceeded from the same original, and was carried on by the same Counsels and Endeavours that were in being in the time of Queen Elizabeth; the principals in which for their time were Garnet the Pro∣vincial of the Jesuits in England, Baldwin in Flanders, and Creswel in Spain; these were the great Projectors and Encouragers of that which was called the Spanish Treason in the last year of Queen Elizabeth; and which when defeated in by her death, and the Peace that issued upon it betwixt the Crowns of England and Spain, they were put upon new Counsels, and forced to take other Measures for the prosecution of it. It was in Decemb. in the year 1601,The Spanish Treason, that Tho. Winter was sent into Spain by the ioynt advice of Henry Garnet and Oswald Tesmond Jesuits, and of Robert Catesby and Francis Tresham, Gentlemen of good quality and repu∣tation, to try what could be done for Their assistance that were ready to sacrifice their lives and fortunes for the Catholick Cause; and to assure the King of Spain that could they but prevail with him to send over an Army, they would have in readiness 1500 or 2000
horses for the service. With Winter was sent over Oswald Tesmond, and by them a Letter to Creswel the Jesuit then residing there, By whose Mediation the motion was readily hearkned to, and Don Pedro Fran∣cesa, second Secretary of State, and the Duke of Lerma did assure them of the Kings furtherance and help; and in the Conclusion the Count of Miranda par∣ticularly told them that his Master had resolved to be∣stow two hundred thousand Crowns to that use, half to be paid that year, and the rest the next following, and that at Spring he would without fail set footing in England. About the latter end of the year Thomas Winter re∣turns with this joyful news, and they were now busie in preparing for it, and almost every day expecting the arrival of these Forces, when of a sudden all was dashed by the Death of Queen Elizabeth, which was March 24. 1602. Upon this one of the Wrights is im∣mediately despatched into Spain, to give the King no∣tice of it; and about the same time was Guy Fawks sent with Letters and Commission from Sir William Stanly, Hugh Owen, and Baldwin the Jesuit (who were then in Flanders, and ready to attend and to prosecute the same Design) But That King told them that he was now other∣wise resolved and it became him not to hearken to such proposals, after he had sent Embassadors to the new King of England to treat of a Peace. It was now therefore fit either to let their Design fall, or to betake themselves to some other course to Effect it; but the Former their Temper and their Principles would not permit; And therefore since they could not promise themselves suc∣cess therein by force, they did contrive how without any noise or visible and open preparations it might be obtained.
That a King or Queen who is an Heretick may be deposed or killed was current Doctrine amongst them,The rise of the Gun-pow∣der-Plot. in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and what they had been taught from Father Creswel, or whoever was the Author of the Book called Philopater, and by Tresham in his Book de officio hominis Christiani, found with them about this time.Proceedings against the Traitors. And though the King was not formally declared and proceeded against as such, yet it was thought sufficient by them that the Pope on Maunday-Thursday did censure and Condemn all Hereticks in the general, as Guy Fawkes and others of them did confess. And therefore the Question was not so much about the lawfulness of it, as about the order that was to be observed, and the way that was fit to be taken in it. Catesby who was no Novice in these affairs, and that from his acquaintance with Parsons when in England and Garnet and the other Jesuits (to whose order he and his Family, from Campian down to this time, were particularly devoted) had learned great skill and Sub∣tilty, quickly contrived this for them; and when Per∣cy who was of the house of Northumberland, and at that time one of the Kings Pensioners, according to the bluntness of his temper, did offer himself for the service, and that he would without any more adoe un∣dertake to assassinate the King; This wary Gentleman replyed that would be too dear a purchase, when his own life would be hazarded in it; and it was unneces∣sary, when it might as well be accomplished without it; And so acquaints him in part with what was in∣tended. Before this was fit to be fully Communicated, he thought it necessary that there should be some care ta∣ken to obliege all to Secrecy; for which purpose an
Oath was devised that every one should take, and which was accordingly Administred to them by Gerard the Jesuit. The Oath was, You shall swear by the blessed Trinity,The Oath of Secrecy. and by the Sacrament you now purpose to receive, never to disclose Directly nor Indirectly, by word or circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep Secret nor de∣sist from the Execution thereof, until the rest shall give you leave. This was taken and the Sacrament upon it received by Catesby, Percy, Christopher Wright, Thomas Winter, and Faukes in May 1604. Upon which Catesby Communicated the whole,The Plot. and told them that at the meeting of the Parliament which now drew on, they would have a fair Opportunity to consummate all their wishes, & without being observed or discovered by one fatal Blow to destroy the King, the Prince, the Duke, and the Parliament at once; for as long as there were those breaches of the Royal Fa∣mily remaining, to what purpose would it be to make away the King, and as long as there was a Parliament in being, what should they get if they could not as well Destroy the Branches as the Root. Therefore his Design was to extirpate at once all the seeds of Here∣sie, and by a train of Powder conveniently laid under the House in which at that time they should all be as∣sembled to Blow them up, and their Cause together. This was what the Confederates very well approved of, and now the united Counsels and Endeavours to carry it on. The first thing to be Considered was the hiring of the House,The house made choice of. and this Percy undertook, and having not with∣out some difficulty perswaded the present Tenant Fer∣ris
to quit it, he became immediate Tenant to Whin∣yard, Keeper of the Wardrope, at whose disposal it was in the intervals of Parliament. The House was Com∣mitted to the care of Faukes, as being least known, who, the better to Conceal himself, changed his Name to Johnson, and gave himself out to be Perey's Servant. Whilst they were thus busie in Contriving and carrying on their Plot, the Parliament was prorogued till Febru∣ary the 7th, upon which they dispersed themselves into several Countreys; but to lose no time, did think of taking in some other Persons whom they might Confide in,Others taken in to be Con∣federates. and expect some help from. Catesby was sensible that he had given Thomas Bates, a Servant of his that attended him, too great cause of Suspicion, and upon Examination found him to have observed somewhat from his Proceedings, and therefore invited him into the undertaking, but he somewhat surprized at the horror of it, began to Decline it, till his Master referd him for Advice to Tesmond, unto whom imparting it in Confession, the subtile Priest both invited him to it as a work of great merit, and obliged him to Secrecy and Fidelity therein. Then were Robert Keyes and the o∣ther Wright Gentlemen, and Ambrose Rockwood, and John Grant, and Robert Winter, Esquires admitted in∣to the Number. In Michaelmas Term they met again, and then they thought fit to provide a Storehouse for the Timber which they should use in the Mine that they intended to make, and for the Powder and other Ma∣terials, from whence they might fetch it as Occasion served. And such a place they found and took at Lam∣beth. December 11th, they began to work, but what from the Difficulty of the work (the Wall that they were to make their way through being 3 Ells thick) what from their want of skill in it, and of being used
to such kind of Labour, they found that their time would be too short for their Enterprize, and they be∣gan to Despair of success in it. But when under this Irresolution and Discouragement, their hopes were re∣vived by two unexpected Accidents. For first the Par∣liament was Adjourned to the 5th of October following, by which means they should have time before them. And then they had an opportunity of hiring a Vault, much more for their turn than the Mine which they had so long Employed themselves in. This they came to knowledge of upon this Occasion; As they were one day busie at their work, they were not a little frighted by an unusual noise on the other side of the Wall, which made them think that they were betrayed, and to be∣take themselves to their weapons with a resolution of dying upon the place. But Fauks who was sent out to make Discovery returns with Joy to tell them that it was only the removing of Coals that were laid in the adjoyning Vault or Cellar, which was now to be let. This they presently hire,The Vault hi∣red, and Stor∣ed. thither they brought their stores. By this means they quined a double advantage, first that their business was brought into a less room, which was more for their ease and safety, and then that they were rid of their hard, and but upon such a cause, to them intolerable Labour; for this was a Mine as it were, already and what was so well scituated by its being almost under the Royal Throne, that they could not have chose any thing more commodious. And now they are at leisure not so much to think of this Design (for that was brought to its head, and what they reckoned themselves sure of) as how to car∣ry on the other part of it. The King and Prince Henry
they did not doubt would fall in this common calami∣ty; but the Duke, being but four years old, they thought would be absent; of him therefore Percy took the charge, and said, he would attend about the cham∣ber till the Blow was given, and then in a trice conveigh him away, with the help of two or three that should be ready on horse-back; which they might the more easily do, as many of the Court would be that day up∣on attendance and perish with the rest, and the others would by it be put into Confusion, and unprovided to make any opposition. As for the Lady Elizabeth, she might be reserved, and her Name made use of by them in stilling and composing the minds of the people, and for making good whatever they thought fit to use her Authority in; And her they might the more easily gain into their hands, as she was now at the Lord Harringtons at Comb-Abby in Warwickshire, whereabouts they might securely be under the pretence of an Hunting-match, and with the first news there surprize her. In the mean time, was care taken to give notice to those abroad whom they might trust; and in March 1605. is Fawks sent over to Sr. William Stanly,Their Intelli∣gence abroad. and Hugh Owen; and with letters from Garnet to Baldwin the Legier Jesuit in Flanders. Sr. William was absent, but having first ad∣ministred the Oath of Secrecy, to Owen, he acquaints him with the Plot, who promised to give his utmost assistance; and to dispose Sir William to it (whom he thought it not fit for the present to cummunicate it to, for fear he might be discovered and fail in a design, that he was then about in the Court of England.) To the 20 Barrels of Powder laid in at first; they added in July, 20 more with Barrs of Iron, and massie
Stones, and at the last made up the Number Thirty Six; over which they laid a Thousand Billets, and Five-hun∣dred Faggots. And at a Meeting at the Bath, of Percy and Catesby, it was agreed that Catesby should take in whom he thought fit, who thereupon engaged Sir Eve∣rard Digby, that promised to advance 1500 l. towards it; and Mr. Francis Tresham, that gave him assurance of 2000 l. All things thus being in a readiness,The Parlia∣ment Pro∣rogued. the Parliament was again Prorogued till the Fift of November; upon which they retired, with a promise of meeting about Ten daies before. At which time Catesby, being in∣formed by Winter at a House by Enfield Chase, that the Prince was not likely to be present with the King, there was another Plot laid to surprize him, if it should so happen. The time drew very near, and they that had past so long without discovery, seem'd now to be above the the fear of it. All things had so happily concurred to further their design, and they had all approved them∣selves to be so trusty in it, that they were more con∣cerned how to manage the success than to fear it. But God that had a reserve of favour for us, and that doth delight in catching the wise in their own craftiness, suf∣fered them to proceed thus far in it, that the detection and overthrow of it might appear to be more from his than Man's Providence. When Catesby first thought of this, the great difficulty with him was about the law∣fulness of destroying the innocent with the guilty. For the blow would know no difference betwixt a Catho∣lick and a Heretick, betwixt a Friend or F. O. When the Nobles and the Commons, those that were a part of
that Assembly, and those that came to be Auditors and Spectators only; those that were within, and those that were without the House; when no less than Thirty thousand must perish at once by it (as Barclay saith it was computed) it must needs be that many whom they wished well to; and that also (if they knew it) would wish well to their cause must be part of the Sacrifice. What an havock would Thirty-six Barrels, or Nine or Ten-thousand Pound of Powder make, loaded thus with Bars of Iron, massie Stones, and great pieces of Tim∣ber, how would it tear the Foundations of the strongest Buildings, throw down all the Tops of the neigh∣bouring Houses, and bury all within the ruins of both? What would become of their Friends and Allies, those that they had received much kindness from, and others who neither did nor knew how to do them an injury? How many Families must they undo, by the loss of Relations, Estates, and Records which were there deposited? This and much more was what they well foresaw, and what they could not foresee without some kind of horror, if they had but one spark of hu∣manity left untouched by their unnatural Religion. What must therefore be done; to whom should he re∣sort for Counsel,Catesby's Case of Conscience. but to his fast Friend Father Garnet, to him he opens the Case (as far as it was fit and as far as the other was willing to know of it) after this man∣ner. Whether for the good and Promotion of the Ca∣tholick cause (the necessity of time and occasion so re∣quiring) it be lawfull or not amongst many Nocents to destroy and take away some Innocents also? To which the Jesuit replies, That if the advantage
was greater on the side of the Catholicks by the de∣struction of the Innocent with the Nocent, than by the preservation of both, it was doubtless lawful; further explaining himself by this comparison. That, if at the taking of a Town possessed by the Enemy, there hap∣pen to be seen Friends, they must undergo the Fortune of War, and the General and Common destruction of the Enemy. With this answer Catesby was satisfied, and with this he satisfied others, telling them that it was the resolution of the Case given by the Provincial. But,A Letter sent to the Lord Monteagle. yet though this did thus compose their Minds, and what they were generally satisfied with, there wanted not one that having a kindness for the Lord Monteagle, eldest Son to the Lord Morley, sent this Note to him, by the hands of one of his Foot-boyes that was abroad in the Evening of the Saturday was Sennight before the appointed time for the meeting of the Parliament. My Lord, Out of the love I hear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your preservation. Therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life▪ to devise some excuse to shift off your Attendance at this Parliament. For God and Man have Concurred to punish the wickedness of this time. And think not slightly of this Advertisment, but retire your self into your Contrey, where you may expect the Event in safety: For though there be no appearance of any stir; yet I say, they shall receive a terrible blow this Par∣liament, and yet they shall not see who hurt them. This Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm: For the danger is past
as soon as you shall have burned this Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace to make good use of it. To whose Holy protection I commend you. The Letter was without Date or Subscription, and the hand in which it was write was hardly legible, and the contents of it so perplexed, that the Lord knew as little what to make of it, as whence it came. But yet how∣ever since it respected more than himself he thought not fit to conceal it, and presently repaired to White-hall, and put it into the hands of the Earl of Salisbury Prin∣cipal Secretary of State. The Earl commended the Lord for his care and Fidelity; and told him that though there seemed to be little in it, yet because of the reports that he had received from abroad, that the Pa∣pists this Session of Parliament would be very busie and insolent in their demands for Toleration upon some prospect they had of being in a condition to command it; and also that because nothing that concerned the safe∣ty of his Majesty and Peace of his Government ought to be slighted, he would advise with others of his Majesties Council about it. Accordingly he shewed it to the Lord Chamberlain, (to whom it particularly belonged to visit all places where his Majesty either lived or to which he did resort) to the Lord High-Admiral, the Earls of Worcester and Northampton; who all were of the same mind with the Secretary, and concluded it fit to deliver it to the King at his return from Royston, when he came from hunting, and from whence he was expected the Thursday following.
On the next day after his Return,The Letter presented to the King. the Earl presented him with it, and told him how it came to his hands. After the reading of it, the King made a pause, and then reading it again, said, that there seemed somewhat in it extraordinary, and what was by no means to be neg∣lected. The Earl replied, that it seemed to him to be written by a Fool, or a Mad-man; for who else could be guilty of saying, The Danger is past as soon as you have burn'd the Letter? for what Danger could there be in that, which the burning of the Letter would put an end to? But the King considering the smartness of the Stile, and withal what was said before, That they should receive a terrible Blow, and yet should not see who hurt them, did conclude, as he was walking and musing in the Gal∣lery, that the Danger must be sudden, and like the blowing up by Gunpowder; for what else could the Parliament be in danger of? or what Rebellion and In∣surrection could there be, and yet there be no appea∣rance of Stir therein? or how could they be otherwise hurt, and not see who hurt them? And as for the Phrase which the Secretary particularly offered at, he said, to him it seemed to be of a quite different signifi∣cation, and that thereby was to be understood the Sud∣denness and Quickness of it, which should as soon or as quickly be done, as that Paper might be burnt. Doubt∣less this was the sence of it, and what he that wrote it did intend, who was no Fool, as appears by the other parts of the Letter; and yet the Discovery of it was ex∣traordinary, being against the common Construction, far from what any other did apprehend by it; and therefore it is what even some of the adverse Party have looked up∣on as God's Inspiration. So John Barclay entitles his little Book that he wrote about it, Series patefacti divini∣tus
Parricidii, &c. And Spondanus, Ann. 1605. §. 8. saith of the King, that divinitus evasit. The Secretary admired the King's great Sagacity; and tho he seemed to differ from him whilst in his presence, yet presently conferred with the Lords about it, and on Saturday it was resolved, that the Houses and Rooms thereabouts should be searched. The Care of this was committed to the Lord Chamberlain,The House ordered to be searched. who was appointed on Munday to make the Search; which he accordingly did that evening, being accompanied with the Lord Monteagle, that was very desirous of seeing the Event. Having view'd this House, they found in a Vault under Ground great Store of Billets, Faggots, and Coal, brought thither (as Mr. Whinyard told them) for the use of Mr. Percy, and spied Faux standing in a Corner of the Cellar, who said that he was Mr. Percy's Servant, and left there by him for the keeping of his House. Upon the naming of Percy, the Lord Monteagle told the Cham∣berlain, that he now vehemently suspected Mr. Percy to be the Author of that Letter, both from his Inclination to the Romish Religion, and the Intimacy that had been betwixt them. How true that Lord's Conjecture was, I I know not, (for Bishop Goodman in his Answer to Sir Anth. Weldon's Court of K. James, saith, That Tresham sent it). But that Circumstance, with what they had disco∣vered, so much encreased the Suspicion, that when all was reported by the Lord Chamberlain to the King, in the presence of the Lord Admiral, Lord Treasurer, the Earls of Worcester, Northampton, and Salisbury, it was resolved, that further Search should be made, what was under that great Pile of Fewel, in such a House where Percy had so little occasion to reside. But what for avoiding the Report of too much Credulity, and Easiness
to receive Informations of that kind; what from the care of doing any thing that might redound to the blemish of the Earl of Northumberland, whose near Relation, and great Confident this Thomas Percy was; it was resolved to do it under the pretence of making Inquisition for some of the Kings Hangings, that were stollen out of Whinyard's Custody. Sir Thomas Knevet, one of the King's Privy-Chamber, was employed in it, being a Person in publick Office, as a Justice of Peace, and of great Prudence. At midnight he repaired thither, and found Faux standing at the Door, booted and spurr'd, whom he presently apprehended. Then proceeding, he first lighted upon one of the smal∣ler, and after discovered the rest of the Barrels. Upon which causing Faux to be searched, he found about him three Matches, a Tinderbox, and a dark Lanthorn. Being thus taken in the Fact,Fawks his Be∣haviour upon his Apprehen∣sion. he both confessed and de∣fended it, adding, That if he had happened to be within the House, as he was without, he would by putting Fire to the Train, have put an end to their Enquiry. Sir Thomas ha∣ving had such happy Success, immediatly returns with joy to the Palace, and acquaints the Lord Chamberlain, and Earl of Salisbury with it, who went to the King's Bedchamber, and with as much hast as joy the Cham∣berlain told the King, that all was discovered, and the Traitor in safe Custody. This was about four of the Clock in the Morning. As soon as the Council met, (who were immediatly sent for) the Prisoner was taken into Examination, and to the amazement of all appeared no more dash'd by their presence, or the Questions put to him, or the Condition that he was in, than if he had been altogether innocent, declaring, That he was not at all sorry for what he had design'd, but only that he fail'd in
the execution of it; and that the Devil, and not God, was the Discoverer. So pertinacious and resolute was he, that he would not own any Accomplices, but that he alone was the Contriver, and should have been the sole Exe∣cuter of it, and that he was induced to this for Consci∣ence sake, as the King (being an Heretick) was not his lawful Sovereign, but an Usurper. Thus stout and resolute did he continue, till he was brought to the Tower, and shewed the Rack, upon the sight of which he began to relent, and after some days examination dis∣closed the whole. The News of this Discovery flew like Lightning,The Flight of the Traitors. it was what rejoiced the Heart of every good Subject, and daunted that of the Rebels, and therefore those of them that were in Town no sooner heard of it, but they betook themselves to Flight. Catesby was gone the Night before towards the place appointed for their Rendezvous; and Percy set forward at 4 of the Clock in the Morning, much about the time that the Discovery was made: But one of the Winters, and the two Wrights that staid behind, staid to hear of their De∣feat and Disappointment, and so made all the haste they could to overtake and meet their Confederates; that they might consult what was to be done in so great an Exi∣gence. In the mean time, there was nothing wanting on their part, who were to contribute their endeavours in the Country. Sir Everard Digby came to Dunchurch accord∣ing to appointment, and so confident were they of suc∣cess above, that one Grant a Gentleman in those parts,
on Monday Night, much about the time that Faux was apprehended with other of his Associates, broke open the Stables of one Benock, a Rider of great Horses, and took away all that he found, for their own Service, and with them they repaired to the rest. But all their hopes were soon blasted, by the sad News which they quickly recei∣ved from those that had made their escape. Desperati∣on begets Resolution; and now they are lost as well as their Cause, if they do not speedily find out a Remedy; and therefore with all the haste they can, they dispatched some to call in others to their Assistance, and to repre∣sent to them the greatness of the danger that they, and their Religion is in, unless they appear in its defence. This Tesmond (aliàs Greenwel) the Jesuit, did particu∣larly concern himself in, exhorting all to take up Arms, and to unite their Forces, and for this purpose rode as far as Lancashire. This riding to an fro made a noise in the Countrey and awakened the People; the loss of Be∣nock's Horses came quickly to the Ears of some of those Gentlemen that had put them into his Hands to manage and fit them for their Service. And for one reason or a∣nother the Countrey was presently up in Arms, and up∣on pursuit of them. Some of them were taken Prisoners,The Traitors pursued and taken. and others of them pursued by Sir Richard Verney, Sheriff of Warwick-shire, to the borders of that County. But they kept on their course, till they came to Holbeach in Staffordshire, the House of Stephen Littleton; thither Sir Richard Walsh, Sheriff of Worcester-shire followed them; and by his Trumpeters com∣manded them in the King's Name to surrender, assuring them that upon their so doing he would intercede with the King for them, and doubted not to obtain their Par∣don.
But they that were conscious to themselves of more than he understood (for the News had not yet spread so far, nor the King's Proclamations, though sent after them, had not yet overtaken them) bid him Defiance, and sent him Word that he must have a greater Force, than what he had then the command of, to reduce them. But whilst the one was preparing for the Assault, and the o∣ther for their Defence, God himself seemed to decide the Quarrel: for by the same means which they contrived to destroy others, they themselves came to suffer; for ha∣ving laid some Powder to dry before the Fire, a Coal up∣on the mending of it flew into the Pan and set Fire to the rest, thereby not only blowing up part of the Roof, and a Bag of Powder of 17 or 18 pound, that they un∣derset the Pan with, which was carried unfired into the Court, but so wounding Catesby, Percy, Rockwood, and several of the Conspirators, that they were unable to make any further Defence. By this time also Fire was set to the House, and their case grew so desperate, that they opened the Doors, and exposed themselves to the Weapons and Fury of the People. The three prin∣cipal of them, viz. Catesby, Percy, and Winter, joined Back to Back, and the two former of them were mortally wounded with one Shot, Catesby dying upon the Spot, and Percy not out-living him above two or three Days. The two Wrights were slain at the same time, Digby, Rock-wood, Thomas Winter, Grant and Bates were taken Pri∣soners, and sent up to London, Robert Winter and Lit∣tleton endeavoured to conceal themselves in the Woods, but were afterward taken and committed to the Tower; Tresham continued in London, and seemed ready to find out the Traitors, and by that means thought at first to remain undiscovered, but being suspected, he was after∣wards
searched for, and apprehended and sent to the same place. Thus suddenly was that Design discovered which had been so long concealed; thus suddenly was it broken, which they had been some years in contriving, therein verifying that of the Psalmist, The ungodly are sink down into the Pit that they made: in the Net which they hid, is their own Foot taken. The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executetb, the wicked is snared in the work of his own Hands. These Persons thus apprehended were carefully exa∣mined, The Examina∣tion of the Prisoners. (in the doing of which were spent 23 days) and from their several Confessions was drawn sufficient mat∣ter not only for their own Condemnation, but also for detection of others. The most considerable of which was Garnet the Pro∣vincial of the Jesuits,The Jesuits in the Conspiracy. Hall, Greenwel, Gerard and Ham∣mond, Priest of the same Order. The respect that Gar∣net had to the reputation of their Society, and his own safety, had made him to act with so great caution, that he would willingly converse with none about this matter, but those that were of his own Order; or Catesby his trusty Friend. And therefore much of the evidence a∣gainst him fell with that Conspirator. But yet there ap∣peared such presumptions by the acknowledgment of the rest that were taken, and Letters that were found, that there was a Proclamation issued out for the apprehensi∣on of him and his Brethren, declaring it Treason for any to harbour and conceal them. Garnet when the time drew near, and all things were ripe for their Design, took a Jour∣ney to Coulton in Warwick-shire, not far from the place of the general Rendezvous, where he preached a Sermon, and which he exhorted his Auditors to pray for the success
of a great Action, to be undertaken in the behalf of the Catholicks, at the beginning of the Parliament, as is ac∣knowledged by his Apologist,Eudoem. Jo∣annis Apologia pro Garneto. pag. 265. and was confessed by Hall, aliàs Oldcorn. Whilst at that place he received a Letter November 6, from Catesby, to let him know that their De∣sign had miscarried, and to desire him that he would use his interest in stirring up the Catholicks in Wales to Arm and Defend themselves. But the wary Jesuit provided for his own Safety, and sending Greenwel to them for their Assistance and Direction, he himself with Hall fled to Mr. Abington's House, at Henlip in Worcester-shire, where Hall had found a safe retreat for sixteen years together, as an Author of theirs informs us.Hon. Mori Historiamissio∣nis Anglicanae. pag. 333. There they lay concealed for some time, but at the last were discovered to be in that place by Littleton, one of the Conspirators, as the same Author relates, pag. 314. Who further saith, that though the help of Carpenters and Bricklayers were used,Garnet taken. yet they were many days before they could find them out be∣ing in a Vault, the way to which was in an upper-room through the half-pace before the Hearth, whose Wooden border was made like a Trap-Door to pluck up and down, and then the Bricks were laid in their Courses and Order again,Fowlis Romish Treason. . pag. 698. as we are told by an Author of our own. Hence they were brought to London, and committed to the Tower. On January 27 the other Prisoners were brought to their Tryal at Guild-hall.The Arraign∣ment of the Traitors. The Persons arraigned were Robert Winter Esq Thomas Winter, Gentleman, Guy Faux Gentleman, John Grant, Esq Ambrose Rockwood, Esq Robert Keyes, Gentleman, and Thomas Bates, Servant
Catesby. By another Indictment was arraigned Sir Everard Digby. They generally acknowledged the Fact, and spake little in their own Vindication. Rookwood pleaded, That it was the entire Affection he had for Mr. Catesby which drew him in; and he hoped, as it was his first Fact, some Mercy would be shewed him. Sir Everard said the same with respect to Catesby, and added, That he had un∣dertaken it for the Zeal which he had to the Catholick Reli∣gion, which he was ready to sacrifice all for; and to prevent those Calamities which he understood that the Parliament was prepared to bring upon them of his Perswasion. Keys said, That his Fortunes were sunk, and as good now as at another time, and for this Cause rather than another. They seem'd resolved to vindicate the Jesuits, or at least to say nothing against them; whether it were that they were not allowed to discourse of the Plot with any but such and such particular Persons, or whether it were that they thought it to be highly meritorious, and this last seems to be not unlikely. When Tresham not above three hours before his Death, in the Tower, did declare upon his Salvation, that he had not seen Garnet in six∣teen years before; whereas it appeared, both by the Confession of Garnet, and Mrs. Anne Vaux, Garnet's Bosom-Friend, that they had been frequently together the two last years past. On the Thursday following,Their Execu∣tion. Sir Everard Digby, Ro∣bert Winter, John Grant, and Bates, were according to Judgment, drawn, hanged, and quartered, at the West end of St. Paul's Church. And on the Friday, the other four, viz. Thomas Winter, Keyes, Rockwood, and Faux, were executed in the Palace-Yard at West∣minster.
Now were Garnet and Hall had in Examination,Garnet's Exa∣mination. and that several times from the first of February, to March the 26th. In all which Garnet shewed by the wiliness of his Answers, and the Confidence he maintained them with, that he deserved the place of Provincial of the Jesuits, being so well versed in all the Practices of his Society, that few could exceed him. The King from the first was resolved to forbear the se∣verity of the Rack, much practised in other Countries, in the examination of notorious and perverse Criminals.Historia missi∣onis Anglican. pag. 315. Pag. 334. We indeed are told by a late confident Author of their own, That Garnet was kept waking six Days and Nights together to bring him by that new kind of Torment (as he calls it) to a Confession of his Crime; and that Hall was put to extreme Torture for fifteen hours space together in the Tower,Thuanus, An. 1606. for the same reason. But a greater than he, one of their own Perswasion, doth as∣sure us, that the King to avoid Calumny, did purposely forbear any thing of that kind of Rigour, and Garnet himself did publickly own at his Trial, that he had been used whilst in Prison with great lenity. We know not what effect the Rack might have had upon him, for that was a way of Trial he had not been exercised in; but that Course which they took, by frequent and cross Examinations, by Expostulations and Arguments, he was so much a Master of, that in all the twenty three Days spent in it, they would have gained but little In∣formation, had they not had some greater advantage. Had he been alone, and could not have been confronted by others, he had been much more secure, and they more at a loss. And therefore to prevent any Mis-under∣standing betwixt him and others in custody; that their Answers might not be inconsistent or repugnant, he
writes both to Hall and Mrs. Vaux, to let them know after what manner he thought to excuse or defend him∣self, and what Replies to make to some particular En∣quiries; As if he should be charged with his Prayer for the good Success of a great Action, &c. he would say, It was for the prevention of those severe Laws, which those of their Church expected would be made against them by that Parliament. But it happened, that these Letters that were writ by him, came into other hands than those he intended them for, and did him a worse Injury than any Account that his sworn Friends could have likely given of the same Actions, though disagreeing with his. And indeed herein his Adversaries did outwit him, and worsted him at his own Weapons. For when they perceived that he obstinately persisted in the defence of his Innocency, they took another Course to find him out; First, a Person was employed as a Keep∣er, that should profess himself to be a Roman Catholick, and that should take a great Liberty to complain of the Kings Severity, and of the Sufferings their Party were made to undergo. By these and the like crafty Insinu∣ations he grew to be a Familiar of Garnet's, and at last was entrusted by him with a Letter to one, and to another. Which yet he did not so much venture upon, but that he wrote sparingly to one, and to the other nothing in appearance but what any one may see, filling up the void places with other more secret Matters, written in∣deed, but written with the Juice of a Lemmon. By this means they found out, that it was not so much his Inno∣cency, as the want of Proof, that made him so confident. By this they came to understand, that Greenwel and he had conferred together about the Plot. There was also another Calamity that befell him by
the same Contrivance; For now thinking himself sure of his keeper, he let him know what a great desire he had of conferring with Hall. The Decoy told him, that he would endeavour to find out a way for it. This was done, and they had that freedom; but at the same time there were placed within hearing two Persons of such known Credit that Garnet at his Trial had nothing to object against them, who took notice of what was said, and made it known to the Council. The next day Commissioners came to examine them, and in Discourse charged them severally with those things that passed be∣twixt them the day before. This Hall did acknowledg, being convinced by the Particulars that they produced, but Garnet did deny it upon the word of a Priest, and with reiterated Protestations. And when they told him that Hall had confessed, he said, Let him accuse himself falsly if he will, I will not be guilty of that folly. But at the last, when he perceived that the Evidence was not to be gainsaid, begg'd their Pardon with no little Con∣fusion, and owned the Particulars they charged him with: and a little to save his Reputation, told them, That as he denied all, because he knew none but Greenwel could accuse him; so he did deny what he knew to be true, by the help of Equivocation. Now they had gained good Evidence against him, his Letters first, then his Discourse with Hall; and lastly, his own Confession, were a sufficient Ground for them to proceed and try him upon. And that they began to do two days after, viz. March 28. The great thing charged upon him was,Garnets Trial That he was privy to this Conspiracy, that he held a Corres∣pondence with Catesby, and by him and Greenwel with
the rest. And the chief Part of his Defence was, That what he did know of it was in Confession, and what was told him in that way he was bound to conceal, notwithstanding any Mischief that might follow it; he might disswade Persons from it, but whether they would be perswaded by him or not, he was obliged not to divulge it. After a long time spent in his Trial, there was but little taken by the Jury to give in their Verdict, which was, that he was guilty of the Treason; and accordingly he received Sentence,His Execution. and was executed the third of May following, at the West end of St. Paul's Church-Yard. This is the Man whom the Jesuits extoll to the Clouds, and that is put into the Catalogue of their Martyrs, as it is to be found at the end of Alegambe's Bibliotheca Scriptorum Socieatis Iesu. This Person, who was a perfect Master of the Art of Dissimulation, that could by Equivocation swear to what he knew to be false, is what one of them bestows this Character upon, That there was in him Morum Simplicitus,Hist. Mission: Angl. p. 311. & Candor animi minimè suspicacis. This Man who had not the Heart to die, and who at the time of his Execution was so di∣vided betwixt the hopes of a Pardon, and the fear of Death, that he could not attend to his own Devotions, but one while cast his Eyes this way and another that; now at his Prayers, and anon breaking off from them to answer to that discourse which he overheard. This Man I say, is said by Alegambe to go to his Death interritus & exporectâ fronte obtestans, &c. without any fear, and pro∣testing that he exceedingly rejoiced that he was now to suffer that Death which would be an entrance to an im∣mortal Life.
The Conclusion of all which is, that no Jesuit can be a Traitor, and none suffer for Treason but he must be a Martyr. The Case of Hall was much the same with that of Gar∣net; The Trial and Execution of Hall, &c. he did confess, and it was also proved that they were both together at Caughton, and they were both found together afterwards. It appeared that he had afterward defended the Treason to Humphrey Littleton. The Ex∣cuses, the Discourse, the Confessions, were much one and the same, but only that Garnet was the more resolved, and the more obstinate of the two. Now because as this Treason was hatched, and to be executed in the main at London, so because part of it was also to be done in the Countrey, and the chief of the Conspirators were there taken, therefore six of them were sent to Worcester, and there executed, viz. Humphrey Littleton, John Winter, and this Hall, with three others. Thither, I say, he was carried with them for that reason, and not because his Adversaries were ashamed to have his Cause heard at London,Eudoemon-Jo∣annis Apologia pro Garnetto. pag. 272. as a bold Author of theirs would have it. It is no wonder to find these Men so concerned to clear themselves of it, when all the World is against them; though this is no more to be done, than to prove that one that kills a King is a good Subject, and one that stirs up his Subjects in rebellion against him, is a Friend to him. These were the Persons that were taken and suffered for this bloody Treason. Others of them escaped be∣yond Sea; of which one, when Dominicus Vicus Go∣vernour of Calice, assured them of the King's Favour, and though they lost their own Country, they might be received there, replied, The loss of their Country was the least part of their grief; but their sorrow was that they could not bring so brave a Design to perfection. At which the Governour
could hardly forbear casting him into the Sea, as Thuanus relates from Vicus his one Mouth. Others there were whom the Government had a great suspicion of, as Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Sturton, who not ap∣pearing upon the Summons to the Parliament, were sup∣posed to absent themselves from some intelligence that they received, were fined in the Star-Chamber, and to be imprisoned during the King's Pleasure. The like Sen∣tence did Henry Earl of Northumberland undergo, for ha∣ving admitted Thomas Percy his Kinsman to be a Gentle∣man Pensioner, without administring to him the Oath of Supremacy, when he knew him to be a Recusant. This was the end of that Plot, and of the Persons chiefly concerned in it. And it would be happy if they had left none of their Principles or Temper behind them, a Generation whom no Favour will oblige, nor Kindness retain: whom nothing but Supremacy will content, and the most absolute Authority can gratify. Whom nothing can secure against, but a sufficient Power, or great Indu∣stry, or constant Watchfulness, and scarcely all. And therefore its fit that not only as a branch of our Thank∣fulness to God, but also as a caution to our selves, that this Deliverance should be celebrated, and the Memory of it perpetuated.Bp. Sandersons Sermons l. 1 ad. poulum. Serm. 5. pag. 242. I shall end with what is said of a great Person of our own, some years since. Two great Deliverances in the memory of many of us hath God in his singular Mercy wrought for us of this Nation, such as I think, take both together, no Christian Age or Land can parallel. One formerly from a forreign Invasion; another since that of an hellish Conspiracy at home. Both such as we would have all thought, when they were done, should never be forgotten. And yet, as if this Land were term'd oblivious, the Land where all
things are forgotten, how doth the memory of them fade away, and they by little and little grow into forgetfulness. We have lived to see 88 almost forgotten, (God be bles∣sed who hath graciously prevented what we feared there∣in) God grant that we nor ours ever live to see No∣vember the 5th forgotten, or the Solemnity of it silenced. FINIS. The Authors, from whence this Narrative hath been Collected, Are, Thuanus. Jo. Barclaii, Conspiratio Anglicana. Proceedings against the Traitors, printed 1606. Historia Messionis Anglicanae, Societatis Iesu Collectore. Henrico Moro, printed at St. Omers, 1660. Andreae Eudaemon̄-Joannis Apologia pro Garnetto. Rob. Abboti Antilogia adversus Apologiam Andreae Eudaemon-Joannis. Bibliothica Scriptorum Societatis Iesu.
