S573 99867618 119937
The Three Royall CEDARS Or Great Brittains Glorious DIAMONDS, BEING A Royal Court NARRATIVE of the Proceedings, Travels, Letters, Conferences, Speeches, and con∣spicuous Resolutions of the most High and Renowned KING, CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, His Highness Prince James Duke of York, and the most Illustrious Prince. Henry Duke of Glocester. With a brief History of their memorable Transactions, Results, and judicious Councels, since their too-much-lamented Exile in Flanders, and the Lord Chancellour Hide, the Marquess of Ormond, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Digby, and many other Nobles and Gentlemen, created Lords of his Majesties Privie-Council. Also, The resplendent Vertues appearing in these Princely Pearles, to the great joy of all Loyal Subjects, who have for their Sovereign a just KING to Govern, a Valiant DUKE to Defend, and a Wise COUNSELLOR to Advise. By E. Sanders Esq a Lover of his Countries Liberty, and a Loyal Subject and Servant to his Sacred Majesty. LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, living near the three Crowns in Barbican, 1660.
The Three ROYAL CEDARS. DIvine Providence having been pleased to return the Subject to his due Allegiance, and to give encouragement to those who have constantly continued Loyal, that they may at length once more enjoy happiness, and every man sit under his own Vine, and under his own Figtree, which the God of Heaven be praised, we have now greater hopes of then ever; Moderation and Impartiality are the chiefest Virtues of a Loyal pen; 'tis such a task I chiefly aim at, no less then the difficult Travells of our most high and renowned King, with his exiled Nobles, Charles the second, Heir a parent to the Crown of Great Brittain, and Ireland, and Crowned King of Scots, touching whom I intend to treat. He was born on the 29 of May, 1630. to the great joy of the King, Queen, and indeed the whole Kingdom; for never yet had England a Prince born of so Noble an extract, and Grand Alliance, his Father by Lineal right and descent, King of Great Brit∣tain and Ireland, his Mother Daughter to that thrice Illustrious Prince Henry the 4th King of France, and worthily sirnamed the Great, and Isabella Infanta of Spain. By his Grand mothers side was he near ally∣ed to the Kings of Denmark, by the Marriage of his Ant, the Noble Princess Elizabeth, to the Elector Palatine of Rhine, and King of Bohemia, and afterwards, by the marriage of his Royal Sister the Princess Mary, to the Prince of Orange. Thus was he allied to most of the most potent Princes in Christendom. And happy might this Nation have been under his Government, if we may believe the vogue
of that wisest of men Solomon, who pronounces that Kingdom blessed whose Prince is the Son of Nobles. But to return to his Majesty in Flanders; of whose itenary life we have already given you a particular account; it will not be imperti∣nent to say somewhat of his sedentary and retied living, that by his oeconomy we may judge of his Monarchy, and of the government of those few subjects in his Family, of that of his three Kingdoms. His Majesty hath spent most of his time, wherein he hath been out of his Dominions, in Flanders under the protection of the Catho∣lique King of Spaine nor had he ever any where else so setled a Court and habitation as here, where his chief attendants are the Lord Chancellor Hide, the Marquis of Ormond, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Digby, and many others, Nobles and Gentlemen, whose Loyalty to his sacred Majesty and his Royal Fa∣ther hath made exiles to their Country; a particular number of which he makes use of for his Councell, doing nothing without serious and mature advice; and yet being of so sagacious a judgement that what∣ever he sayes is seldome contradicted by the most juicious of his Councellors, not out of fear or flattery, but out of a real assent to, and concurrence with his judgement. And indeed those great opportunities which he hath had, by his so long being abroad, of diving into the great Councels of Forrin Princes and States, must necessarily make him a person of a very per∣spicuous understanding, endow him with all those qualities which may deservedly attain the name of Great, and render him as well an able Statist, as a King; he having during his expulsion travelled through, and lived in the Countries of three the most potent Princes in Christendom, viz. the Emperour's of Germany, and the Kings of Spaine and France; and so to the Germain resolution added the Spaniards prudence, and the Frenchmans expedition. To these extraordinary helps which never Prince in Christendom can boast of, we may yet adde, those more then ordinary gifts wherewith nature hath been pleased to endow him, which being so extreamly im∣proved, we can hardly now discern; but that it may be known what they were, take the character of an Honourable Lord upon his death bed, who speaking of him when about fifteen or sixteen yeers of age, hath these words: Truly I never saw greater hopes of vertue in any young person then in him: Great judgement, great understanding, strong apprehension, much of honour in his inclinations. So that both nature and industry have seemed to use their utmost endeavours to
make him a perfect Prince, his very affliction turning in this benefit, and making him in knowledge and sufferings (the Refiner of know∣ledge) unparralel'd. Some forreign Princes as well envying, as pitty∣ing his expulsion. This perfect knowledge of his he hath indeed had but small occasion to practice, except a little in Scotland: where, I think, he demon∣strated himself a person so prudent and careful in his affairs, that it is beyond my pens expression. His Subjects good was his onely care: nor did he ever act any thing but what might tend more to theirs then his own interest; still con∣sulting whether it might benefit them, not himself. His Letter to Col. Mackworth Governour of Shrewsbury suffici∣ently demonstrates his affection to his very enemies; he would win, not conquer the hearts of those who though they have broke their Al∣legiance to him, yet he would esteem still his Subjects. He would not conquer with blood, lest he should be thought a Tyrant. He endeavoues by fair means to attain the love of his Sub∣jects, that what ever his very enemies think of him) he may approve himself to be a just Prince. And did fortune give him power, yet would he rather attempt blandishents then force. He knows that whilst he kills a Subject he weakens his Kingdom. Rebels themselves may be found usefull, and though justice cannot, yet his Majesties clemency will admit their pardon; but if they resist to the utmost, their blood is on their own heads. What man is not willing to destroy him who he knows would his murderer. Thus is his justice and his clemency mixt together; he would not kill, where he might with safety save. Not does his unspottd inno∣cency raise fancies or fears in him. As he is guilty of nothing, so ther's nothing he fears. Whilst he endeavours to be true to his Subjects, those endeavours force a belief in him that his Subjects will be true to him. His very nature enclines him to a compassion. He pities those that will not pitty themselves; and whilst they are conspiring his destructi∣on, his prayers procure their safety. Nor can the utmost of their in∣juries provoke him to a retalliation. He hath learned not onely of God, but of the King his Father, to forgive his enemies. Nor is it his desire to obtain his Kingdoms that makes him willing to forgive his enemies, but his desire to forgive his enemies that makes him willing to obtain his Kingdoms: he counts the possession of his
Royalties but as a transitory dignity, the pardon of his enemies a Divine and lasting one. Neither is his pitty less then his justice, they are both in the Super∣lative degree, he hates wickedness, not because the wold should see him glory (that would make him an Hypocrite) but because God ab∣hors it; 'tis Love not Fear makes him Religious, he Fears God one∣ly because he loves him. He hates not the Vicious, hut abhominates their Vices, his hatred extends not to persons, but to things; He dislikes not the swearer, 'tis his Oaths he abhors he hates not the Drunkard but his Drunken∣nesse. Yet does his mercy extend beyond their sins, as he is a King so he is a God, he is gracious to pardon, as well as just to punish; nor can a submission or reformation but overtake his remission. His constant service of God excites others to live by his example, he sleeps not without invoking the blessing of the Almighty, nor do his eyes open without a returned thanks, He knows 'tis God alone which can restore and protect him; nor can the wickedness of man prevail against Him. Nor does his publick devotion shew him less zealous then his pri∣vate, the one demonstrates him full of Zeal, the other void of Hpocri∣sie; he would have others holy as well as himself; he knows that say∣ing concerns him, being a King, above all private Men, Non nobis solis nati sumus. Private persons are not alone born for themselves, muchless Kings, the publique concern is their duty: 'tis not enough for the Master of the house that he be godly, whilst his Family is wicked. There must be Precept as well as Example: and if need be, correction as well as in∣struction. This makes his Majestie deservedly famons; he counts it as great a fault to suffer a sin in another whilst he hath power to correct it as to commit it himself. He knows that what crimes soever a Magi∣strate suffers willingly to be committed, he brings upon his own head. He is therefore above all things careful not to farther vice, lest he should be accounted vicious: he detests that in another which did he commit, he knows he might justly detest himself for: and endeavours by Example to reform that in others which he knows were it in him would seem odious. He abhors vice, as well because it is so, as because God abhors it.
His nature inclines him to vertue, and as he cannot admit it contrary in himself, so he cannot endure it in another. His constancy in Religion is no less conspicuous then his piety. His discerning judgement knows what is truth, and that truth is followed by his setled will; Yet he hates not the Popish Religion, but their Idolatry: he abhors not them, but their false worship. He loves all that know Christ at all, but wishes that they might know him more. His stedfastness in Religion proceeds not from self interest; he sticks not so much to the true Protestants, because he knows the Eng∣lish to be addicted to that Religion; because he thinks it for his bene∣fit; because he imagines that it would prove very difficill to obtain his Crown and leave it. Bvt, because he knows it to be true. He knows the Prince is born for the people, as well as the people for the Prince. He knows their interests to be interwoven. He knows that without them he cannot stand; yet will he sooner loose them relinquish veiy. He is the perfect pattern of Piety but more of Patience, his af∣flictions have not made him repine, he knowes God to be just: he believes that as God restored Job twofold, so will he likewise restore unto him his Kingdoms. Yet he thinks it just in God to suffer them to be detained from him. He laments more his Subjects slavery then his own Exile, he grieves that they have been so long blind, yet rejoyces for their sakes that they have now a Glimmering; he constantly prays for the restoring of their sight, not so much because they should restore his, as their own Rights and Priviledges. He is inwardly troubled and perplexed at the many Schisms, Sects, and Heresies that are raysed in the Church of England, he is sorry that their rise is from some mens envy towards him; he pitties, and his pitty produces his prayers for them. He is willing that though they will not obey him, yet that they may serve God. He was never heard to curse his enemies, many times to pray for them, and desie God to forgive even his Fathers Murtherers; his good will surpasses their cruelty: And whilst they are conspiring his destruction, he is paying for their salvation. He is a perfect enemy to all debauchedness, he is sorry those who pretend themselves his friends in England are so great a scandal to him: He wishes that they would so carry themselves, that he might adventure to own them as his friends; for he understands not the good will of those who drink his health for the liquors sake, nor wishes for
their help, who over their Sack only swear they will fight for him. He is no greater a hater of vice then a cherisher of vertuous actions, he loves them in his very enemies and oft he grives when he finds occa∣sion to think that many of them will rise up in Judgment against his most pretended friends. He is most exactly just in all his Commands, and faithful in perfor∣mance of all his promises. Take the Character given him by the dying Marquess of Montrose. For his Maesty now living (saith he) Never People I believe may be more happy in a King, his Commands to me were most just, in nothing that he promiseth will he fail: He deals justly with all men, &c. So punctual is he, that when a word is once gone out of his Mouth, he will rather suffer by it then break it. To conclude, he is the pattern of Patience and Piety, the most righ∣teous and justest of Kings. The most knowing and experienced of Princes. The holiest and the best of Men, The severest punisher of vice. The strictest rewarder of Virtue. The constantest perseverer in Religi∣on. And the truest lover of his Subjects. This a short Character of his illustrious Majesty, which I fear those that know him will rather think to come short of then reach his due praise, so sweetly vertuous is he in all his carriages, so affable in his dis∣course, so void of passion and anger, that he was never yet heard or seen in Chollor, the utmost extent of any passion that ever was discer∣ned in him, being towards one of his Menial servants, who justifying himself in what he had done amiss, his Majesty with some motion told him, that he was an insolent fellow. Yet this is that Prince whose vertues we have given leave to For∣raign Nations to admire, whilst we our selves have ested as well igno∣rant of his deserts, as destitute of our own Liberty, whilst either infa∣tuated or blinded by those who have Tyrannically usurped governments over us, we have been contented to sit still and see him expuled and exiled from his due Rights and Royalties, and our selves from our Free∣dom and Priviledges. Nor hath God alone been mercifull to us in endowing his sacred Majesty with such Heroick virtues, but he hath given us a stock of No∣ble Princes, who seem to emulate Virtue in one another, and grow up like Royall Oaks, to maintain the honour and glory of this Nation, but are yet and have a long time been the disgrace of it, all the Nati∣ons in Europe laughing at the English folly, who slight that happiness which they might enjoy.
As for the illustrious Duke of York his Fame is spread so far over the World, that my self have heard the very Turks commend and applaude his Vallour which was so esteemed of among the French, that before he arrived at twenty one years of Age he was by that King thought worthy the command of Liev. General of his Army's, which he managed with such care and prudence that seldom any affair he took in hand, produced not its desired success; and since, his being in requital of his services, complemented out of that Kingdom of France, though he hath not had such eminent commands conferr'd on him by the Spaniard, yet have they alwayes thought him worth the Highest imployment and respect. As for the Duke of Glocester, he is esteemed by most to be fitter for a Counsellour then a Souldier. His carriage is grave and somewhat severe; of a Sagace Genious and understanding, and very much pry∣ing into State Affairs, which have made most judge him fitter for a Council board. These three Princes, are like three Diamonds or Pearls, which we have ignorantly cast away, and not come to know the worth of them till we come to want them, Their vertues having made them resplen∣dent throughout all the world, and rendred them, if we justly consider it, the only means whereby we can attain to happiness; for what Na∣tion can be more blessed then that which hath for her Prince a just King to Govern, a Valiant Duke to Defend, and a Wise Counsellour to Advise. FINIS.
