R581 P295 13213815 98518
PAPERS Given in to the HONORABLE COMMITTEE OF LORDS and COMMONS And Assembly of Divines with the Commissioners of Scotland, FOR ACCOMMODATION. 1644. By a SUB-COMMITTEE of Divines of the Assembly and Dissenting Brethren. London, Printed Anno Dom. 1648.
An Order of the House of Commons for A Committee of Accommodation. Septemb. 13. 1644. THat the Committee of Lords and Commons appointed to treat with the Commissi∣oners of Scotland, and the Committee of the Assembly, Do take into consideration the differences of the opinions of the mem∣bers of the Assembly in point of Church-government, and to indeavour an union if it be possible: And in case that cannot be done, to indeavour the finding out some way how far tender consciences, who cannot in all things submit to the same Rule, which shall be esta∣blished, may be borne with according to the Word, and as may stand with the publike peace; That so the proceedings of the Assembly may not be so much re∣tarded.
This honourable Committee met according to the Order, Septemb. 20. following THe appointment of the Order Being, That the diffe∣rences of opinions, of the members of the Assembly, in point of Church Government be taken into consideration. The honoura∣ble Committee appointed a SUB-COMMITTEE of six of the Members of the Assembly. Mr, Marshall, Mr. Hearle, Master Vines, Dr. Temple, Mr. Goodwin, and Mr. Nye, (two of the dis∣senting brethren) To consider of the differences of opinions in the Assembly, in point of Church-Government: And to bring in what might be matter for that grand Committee to consi∣der of. In pursuance of this, the said sub-Committee met, who sti∣led themselves the sub-Committee of AGREEMENTS. And after the Preface declaring their mutuall confidence to agree in one Confession of Faith, and in One Directory of publique wor∣ship, &c. They prepared severall Propositions, concerning the Government of particular Congregations, and Ordination, &c. Declaring how farre in practicall principles they did agree therein, together with the different practices, which each according to their principles, desired. October 11. 1644. The honourable Committee met againe, At which the sub-Committee presented the Propositions they had prepared, declaring they had further to bring in concer∣ning Classes and Synods. And what might be the way of ac∣commodation for the dissenting brethren to enjoy Congregations amongst us, according to their principles. All which (though they had met many dayes) was not as then perfected. Therefore the honourable Committee did remit back to the said sub-Committee the Propositions then brought in, to be further explained, and as much, as might to be perfected a∣gainst
the next meeting, adjourning that Committee untill Tuesday October 15. When these Propositions that follow, were brought in by the sub-Committee, as containing both a fuller explication, and the best way to accommodate their own and their brethrens principles in a practique way (which was the end of that ho∣nourable Committee) both for Congregations, and Synods, and the government thereof. October 15. 1644. The honourable Committee of Lords, Commons, Divines of the Assembly, with the Scotch-Commissio∣ners met. And these Propositions were read by Master Vines who was the Chaire-man of that sub-Committee. A Vote was past in the Committee to take them into conside∣ration. But that debate was not entred upon, because it was the earnest desire of some that the Rule should first be made compleate by the Assembly and the Houses. And there was a Cessation put upon the honourable Committee herein, by the honourable House of Commons untill their further pleasure. Let the Reader take notice, that in what particu∣làrs the dissenting brethren do differ from the Propositions of the rest of the SUB-COM∣MITTEE, or do expresse their desires a part from them, there is a differing Character put in the Printing of them for the discerning thereof, and that in other things wherein they expresse not any difference or further expla∣nation, they agreed to them. The PROPOSITIONS were as followeth.
At the Sub-Committee of Agreements. IN confidence that we shall jointly agree in one Confession of Faith, and in one Directory of the Publick worship of God, with the help of a Preface, we come according to our order to points of Government, and therein do agree as fol∣loweth. 1. That a particular congregation having such officers as the word of God holds out, both for preaching and go∣verning, is a Church that hath power in all Ecclesiasticall affairs, which do only concern it selfe. 2. That these forementioned officers are to be so many in numb,er in every such congregation, as that three or two at the least may agree together in every act of government. By two at the least we mean preaching or governing offi∣cers. But some of the Committee do hold that a preaching Presbyter should concurre in the sentence of excommuni∣cation and suspension. 3. That these officers have power in those things which are voted by the Assembly to be due unto them, and in sus∣pension and excommunication: Some of the Committee meaning that the major part of the officers have power to do it, the congregation not opposing it, in which case of opposition they hold fit that the officers do suspend the act. Others of the Committee saying that the Major part of the Offi∣cers have power to do it, if the Major part of the Brethren do consent unto it by their Votes: so as the negative lies in the major part, either of the Officers or Brethren. And as for Ordination, we all hōld, that where there are two preaching Presbyters at least, such a Presbytery
may ordaine their own Elders. But some of the Committee do further say that where there are two ruling Elders at least, they have power of ordaining Elders for that congregation, and in case there be no Elders (as at the first in Ecclesia constitu∣enda) then the choice of Elders, by the people, with approbation of the neighbouring Ministers with fasting and prayer, may suffice. 4. That the Elders of the congregation shall advise with the Classis in all cases of Excommunication before they pro∣ceed to it, and the Classis hath power to heare and deter∣mine: yet so, as the power of the Congregation be not concluded thereby in matter of Excommunication. But some of the Committee do say that in whatsoever case they find difficult either in excommunication or in any other administra∣tion of their power, they shall first advise with some company or Classis of neighbour Ministers, as at the end of the foure follow∣ing Propositions afterwards. 5. For the associating of Churches, let there be in every County of this Kingdome, a certain number of select, god∣ly and able Ministers of the word, within that County, to he are and determine the causes and differences in every congregation within the same, and let there be a certain number of select Church-governours assistant unto them: the first choyce of these to be made by the Parliament in such a way as they shall determine, and such number to have power of election from time to time of any Minister or Church-governour into any place among them, that is void by death or otherwise. 6. The Ministers and Ruling-governors, of every con∣gregation within that County so associated, shall have pow∣er to debate and vote in that meeting from time to time in such cases as pertain to that particular congregation, except such of them as are complained of, or are parties in que∣stion. 7. A certain number of the aforesaid Ministers, and
Ruling-governours as do dwell near together, in the same Deanery or division of that County, and who may with conveniency more frequently meet together, shall have power to heare and determine the causes and differences within the severall congregations of that precinct. 8. Let Nationall Assemblies of Ministers and others, be chosen from time to time, according as shal be appoin∣ted by the Parliament, as the necessity of the Churches af∣fairs shall require. To the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth, the whole Com∣mittee doth ascent; onely some of them doe desire that the ef∣fect of that which hereafter followeth may for explanation sake be inserted. viz. That the Elders and Brethren of each Congre∣gation in case they find any thing too hard for themselves or have any controversie among themselves, may have liberty to advise with any of those select Elders, and others in the Province jointly or apart, or with the Elders of any other Churches, for the determining and composing the controversie or resolving of that difficulty, and in case they cannot be satisfied, then to have recourse also to the advice and help of that Classis unto which they appertain, to solve and determine it. 9 That the members of particular congregations do co∣habit and live together within certain bounds and precincts of a parish under preaching and governing Officers: unto which so far as it concerns the meer bounding of congregations some of the Committee do desire that these provisions may be added. 1. That they may have liberty to dwell in another Parish if the consent of the Minister of that other parish be procured. 2. For Countrey villages that the limits be extended to take in from some one parish immediately adjoyning. We having weighed our Brethrens Principles, do find no probability of accommodation for them, ordinarily to en∣joy congregations, unlesse when it shall happen in a parish
that the Minister cannot administer the Sacraments to all in the Parish, whom possibly the neighbour Ministers or the Classis may judge fit to be admitted; such persons shall have power to procure to themselves the Sacraments, either by the help of a neighbour Minister, or some other provisi∣on be made by a proportionable allowance out of the Tythes of the parish according to the wisedome of the State. Whereunto our Brethren adde as followeth. Or otherwise if in a parish it happen that there be a conside∣rable number of such as cannot partake in the ordinances with the Minister and people there, they shall have liberty to dispose of themselves as a distinct Church, and to choose a Minister or Mi∣nisters at their own charge to be maintained, to be their Pastor. If such a liberty shall seem in the wisedome of this honoura∣ble Committee to be prejudiciall to the peace of the Church, as not to be permitted, we humbly desire the doctrinall principles wherein we differ about Church-government may be taken into serious confideration, and some other way of accommodation in practice thought upon, as shall seem fit to this honourable Com∣mittee. Concerning Classes and Synods. 1. At these meetings, let them pray, expound scripture, resolve difficult cases of conscience and preach the word. 2. They may dogmatically declare what the will of Christ is in such cases as are before them; And this judgment of theirs ought to be received with reverence, and obligation,
as from an ordinance of Christ. Some of the Brethren (though assenting) yet are bold to adde hereunto, that the judgment of any other, of those Elders in the province, or elsewhere, advised with, they doe in like manner looke at as the ordinance of Christ, and to have the like obligation in them. 3. If the doctrine or practise of any particular congrega∣tion be erroneous, hurtfull or destructive to holinesse or the peace of that or other congregations, they are bound to give account thereof to the Classis or Synod. Some of the Brethren adde to this, That the ground of this obligation to give account to the Classis or Synod is their being offended, or their Churches scandalized thereat. 4. The Classis or Synod may examine, admonish, and in case of obstinacy declare against that congregation or any particular member in it, as the nature and degree of that offence shall require. Some of the Brethren assent to such procee∣dings as towards a Church offending and scandalizing of them: but adde, That no such examination, admonition in any Classis or Assembly be extended to any particular person in that Church, but unto the Church it selfe, for not putting forth the power that Christ hath given them for reforming him. 5. The Classis or Synod may judge touching any person who deserves excommunication, and may charge the severall congregationall Presbyteries whom it concernes to do it. 6. We conceive that in case the particular Eldership re∣fuse to doe their duty, the Classis, may and ought not one∣ly to withdraw communion from them, but also when need is, exercise the sentence of excommunication themselves. Instead of this sixth Proposition, some of the Brethren do insert this, In case the aforesaid particular Churches and Elderships offending shall refuse to submit to this course, that then the Clas∣sis or Synod are to acquaint their congregations respectively, and so withdraw from them, denying Church-Communion and fellowship with them. 7. In case of appeale if it appeare to the Classis that the
sentence was unjust, they may judge that the particular Presbytery ought to reverse it: and in case they obstinately refuse to do it, the Classis may reverse it. Others of the Brethren only say that they are to proceed as in the former Ar∣ticle. 8. The Classis or Synod have power to ordaine Ministers for such congregations as have not a sufficient presbytery in them, and let all congregations associated, first advise with the Classis, and take their assistance before they ordain a Minister. Some of the Brethren do referre them∣selves for this, to the last clause in the third Proposition delive∣red in.
