12350.5 S125237 99900508 173414
THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE DIALOGVES OF S. GREGORIE THE GREATE, THE FIRST POPE OF THAT NAME CONTAINING: THE LIFE AND MIRACLES OF OVR HOLIE FATHER S. BENEDICT. To which is adioined the Rule of the same HOLIE PATRIARCHE translated into the Englishe tonge by C. F. priest & Monke of the same order. Permissu superiorum▪ Printed Ann. 1638.
TO THE HONORABLE MISTRESSE Mrs ANNE CARIE DAVGHTER TO THE LORD VICOVN OF FAVKLAND. MISTRESSE CARIE, Since my first zeale of prin∣tinge this worke I haue had two notable obiections: the first because I could not vse means more effectuall to discouer my owne vnworthines: the other
(if in the Epistle Dedicato∣rie which was left to mee) I should speake of your worth and vertue, accordinge to my owne conscience, to them whoe know you not I should be thought extreamlie to flatter; to that them that know you ma∣litious or ignorant. These are the reasons which staied the printinge of it, & caused mee to seeke to ingage some in the makinge of an Epistle, whoe by reason of the are neerenes to you, might seeme to some to be exclu∣ded from it, but to mee most fitt, thinkinge noe other worthie to commende you. Hee that trans∣lated
part of it (whoe I am sure hath a prime place in your me∣morie) intended it to you, but since death preuēted him from doinge this (though I hope it hath ina∣bleled him to doe you better ser∣uice by prayinge for you & all your familie in heauen) I haue taken vpon mee to supplie his place in finishinge & dedica∣tinge this to you. Our holie Fa∣ther S. Benedict whose Rule in our time hath neuer bene wholie translated in to the English tonge, deserues a re∣uerēt respect from all the world, but especially from English men, since his children cannot
be denied the honor of conuer∣tinge this country to the faith of Christ. And for this present of S. Benedicts to my country, part of the obligation is due to you for whom it was principallie done. God blesse you with perse∣uerāce in those giftes hee hath be∣stowed vpon you, and to that end hee shall be often solicited by. Your deuoted beadsman. B. E. T.
THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE DIALOGVES OF S. GREGORIE THE GREATE, CONTAINING THE LIFE AND MIRACLES OF S. BENEDICT. BENEDICT blessed by name and grace was à man of venerable life, from his very child hood graue and stayed for his demeanour surpassing his age, he gaue himselfe to no disport or pleasure; but
liuing heere vpon earth, he despised the world with all the glory thereof at such time as he might haue most freely enioyed it. He was borne in the prouince of Nursia, and from thence sent to Rome to study the liberall sciences. But when he saw there many through the vneeuen pathes of vice runne headlong to their owne ruine, he drew back his foot, but new set in to the world, least in the search of hu∣maine knowledge, he might also fall in to the same dangerous precipice: Thus cōtemning learning and studies, & abandonning his fathers howse and goods, he desired onely to please god in à vertuous life. So that he departed skilfully ignorant, and wisely vnlear∣ned. I haue not attained vnto all this man did, but these few things wich I heere set downe were related vnto me by fower of his disciples, namely Constantine à very Reuerend man who succeded him in the gouernment of the Monastery in monte Cassino. Valentiniane who for many yeares bare
Rule in the Monastery of Lateran. Simplicius likewise who was third su∣periour of that Conuent after him, & Honoratus who yet gouerneth the Monastery which he first inhabited. How St. Benedict miraculously made whole à brooken sieue. CHAP. I. BEnedict hauing now left the schooles resolued forth with to bee take himselfe to the desert, accompa∣nied onely with his nurse who most tenderly loued him, and would by no meanes part from him. Comming therefore to à place called Sufide, and remaining for some time in the church of S. Peter by the charitable inuite∣ment of many vertuous people who liued there for deuotion; So it chanced that his nurse borroed of a neighbour a sieue to cleanse wheate, which being left carelesly vpon the table was found
brokē in two peeces. Wherefore at her retourne finding it broke, she began to weepe bitterly because it was onely lent her. But Religious and pious Bene∣dict, seeing his Nurse to lament in that manner was mooued with compassion, and taking with him the two peeces of the broken sieue, with teares he fell to his prayers, which no sooner ended, but he found the sieue whole and sound not any signe remaining that it had beene broken. Thē presently retourn∣ing to his nurse he restored to her the sieue whole to her exceeding comfort. This miracle was diuulged vnto all that liued thereabout, and so much ad∣mired by all, that the in habitans of that place caused the same to be hanged vp in the church porch, that not onely those who were then liuing, but all po∣sterity might know with how great giftes of grace Benedict was endoued from the begining of his conuersion. The sieue remained to be seene for many yeares after, and hung ouer the church doore euen vntill the troubles
of the Longobardes. But Benedi more desirous to suffer crosses and af∣flictions in this world, then couetous of praise, and rather willing to vn∣dergoe labours for the honoure of God, then to be extolled with the fa∣ours of this world, fled secretly from his nurse to à remote place in the desert called Sublacus, distant forty miles from Rome, in which à fountaine springing with coole, and christall waters, ex∣tendeth it selfe at first in to à broade lake, and running farther with en∣crease of waters, becometh at the last à riuer. As he was trauelling to this place, à certaine Monke called Roma∣nus mett him, and asked whither he was going, hauing vnderstood his in∣tention, he both kept it secrett, and affoarded him his best helpe, moreouer he gaue him a Religious habitt and assisted him in all things. The man of God being come to this place, liued for the space of three yeares in an obscure caue vnknowne to any man except Romanus the Monke, who liued not
far of in a Monastery gouerned by fa: Theodacus, from whence he would piously steale forth, and vpon certaine dayes bring to Benedict a loafe of bread which he had spared from his owne al∣lowance. But there being no way to the caue from Romanus his cell by reason of a steepe and hige rock which hung ouer it, Romanus vsed to lett downe the loafe by a long corde to which also he fastened a litle bell, that by the sound of it the man of God might know when Romanus brought him the bread. But the old enimie en∣uying the charity of the one, and the refection of the other, when on à cer∣taine day he beheld the bread lett downe in this manner, threw a stone and brake it. Not withstanding Ro∣manus afterward failed not to assist him in the best manner he was able. Now when it pleased the diuine goodnes to free Romanus from his labours, and manifest to the world the life of St. Be∣nedict for an example to all men, that the candle set vpon à candlestick might
shine, and giue light to the whole church of God, our Lord vouchsafed to appeare to à certaine priest liuing far of, who had made ready his dinner for easter day, saying to him, thou hast prepared good cheare for thy selfe, and my seruant in such à place is famished for hunger, who presently rose vp, and on the solemne day of Easter went to∣wards the place with such meate as he had prouided for himselfe, where seeking the man of God amongst crag∣gie rockes, winding vallies and hollow pits, he found him hidde in à caue. Then after prayers, and thankes giuing to God they sat downe, and after some spirituall discourse the Priest said. Rise Brother and let vs take our refection, for this is Easter day. To whom the man of God answered, I know it is Easter with me, because I haue found so much fauour in the sight of God, as this day to enioy your company. (For not hauing à long time conuersed with men, he did not know it was Easter day.) The good Priest did therefore a∣gaine
affirme it, saying trulie this is the day of our Lords Resurrection, and therefore it is nor fitt you should keepe abstinence, and for this cause I am sent that wee may eate together, that which Allmighty God hath pleased to bestow vpon vs. Where vpon they said grace, and fell to their meate; their discourse and dinner ended the priest retourned to his church. About the same time certaine shepheards found him hid in à caue, who at the first espieing him amongst the bushes cloathed in the skinnes of beasts, tooke him for some wilde beast; but afterwards knowing him to be à man of God, many of them were conuerted from their saudage life to vertue. By this meanes his name be∣ganne to be famous in the country; and many did resort vnto him bringing with them necessaries for his corporall nourishment, for which they receiued spirituall foode.
How he ouercam à grieuous tentation of the flesh. CHAP. II. THe Holy man being on à certaine day alone, the temptour was at hand, & in the likeness of à litle black bird commonly called an owzell began to flie about his face, and that so neare, and so often as he might haue taken her with his hand; But no sooner had he blessed himselfe with the signe of the crosse, but it vanished. When pre∣sently so great à carnall tentation as∣sailed him, that in his life he neuer had felt the like. For the remembrance of à woman which sometime he had seene was so liuely represented to his fancy by the wicked spiritt, and so ve∣hemently did her image inflame his breast with lustfull desires, that almost ouercome with pleasure, he was deter∣mining to leaue the wildernes. But sud∣dainly assisted with diuine grace, he
came to himselfe, and seing neare him à thicket full of nettles and bryars, he threw of his garments, and cast him∣selfe naked in to the middest of them, there wallowing and rooling himselfe in those sharpe thornes and nettels; so that when he rose vp, his body was all pittifully rent and torne. Thus by the wounds of his flesh, he cured those of his soule by tourning pleasure in to paine, and by the vehemence of out∣ward torments, he extinguished the vnlawfull flame which burnt within him, ouer coming sinne by changing the fire. After which time as he him∣selfe related to his disciples, he was so∣free from the like temptation, that he neuer felt any such motion. Many af∣ter this beganne to forsake the world, and put themselues vnder his gouern∣ment; for being now altogether free from vice, he worthily deserued to be made a Maister of vertue. As in Exo∣dus God commanded by Moyses, that the Leuites should from fiue and twenty yeares and vpward, and after
fifty yeares they should be appoin∣ted to keepe the holy vehels. Peter. I Haue already vnderstood some∣thing of this testimony alleadged, yet I pray make it more plaine vnto me. Gregory. IT is manifest Peter that in youth the tentations of the flesh are greate, but after fifty naturall heate waxeth colde; Now the soules of good men are the holy vessels, and there∣fore while the elect are in tentation it is necessary that they liue vnder obe∣dience, and be wearied with labours, but when by reason of their age the feruor of temptation is aswaged, they are ordained keepers of holy ves∣sels, that is become instructours of soules.
Peter. I Confesse you haue giuen me full satisfaction, and therefore this place of scripture being clearely expounded I pray goe on with the holy mans life. How St. Benedict brake à glasse in peeces by making the signe of the holy crosse. CHAP. III. HAuing thus vanquished this tentation, the man of God like à good soile well manured and weeded, brought forth aboundant fruite of the seede of vertue. So that the fame of his sanctity beganne to spread it selfe more largely. Not far of was à Monastery whose Abbot being dead the whole Conuent repaired to the venerable man Benedict, and with earnest perswasions requested him for
their Abbot, which he refused for à longe time, forewarning them that his manner of life and theirs were not a∣greable; yet at length ouer come with importunity he gaue his consent. But when in the same Monastery he be∣ganne to obserue Regular discipline, so that none of the Monkes (as in former time) were permitted by their disor∣der to swerue any way from the path of vertue, they repented themselues of their choise in receiuing him for their Superiour, whose integrity of life was disproportionable to their peruersenes. And therefore when they perceiued themselues restrained from vnlawfull acts, it greiued them to leaue their de∣sires, and hard it was to relinquish old customes, and beginne a new life: be∣side the conuersation of good men is alwayes odious to the wicked, they begane therefore to plot his death, & after consultation had together, they poisened his wine. So when the glase which cōtained the empoisened drinke was according to the custome of the
Monastery presented at table to be blessed by the Abbot, Benedict putting forth his hande and maknig the signe of the cross, the glasse which was held far of presently brake in peeces, as i in stead of blessing it, he had throwne à stone against it. By this the man of God perceaued easely that the glass had in it the drinke of death which could not indure the signe of life. So presently rising vp with a mild and cheerefull countenance, hauing called the Bre∣thren together, he thus spake vnto thē. Almighty God of his mercy forgiue you Brethren, why haue you dealt thus with me? Did not I fortell you that my māner of life and yours would not agree: Goe and seeke à Superiour to your liking, for you can haue me no longer with you. This said he forth with retourned to the solitude he loued so well, and liued there with himselfe in the sight of him who seeth all things.
Peter. I Doe not well vnderstand what you meane he liued with him selfe. Gregory. IF the Holy man had bin longer constrained to gouerne those mōkes who had all conspired against him, and were so contrary to him in life and manners, it might peraduenture haue diminished his owne vigour and fer∣uour of deuotion, with drawing his mind from the light of contemplation, so that ouer much busied in correcting the faults of others, he might haue neglected his owne; and so perhaps lost himselfe & yet not gained others. For as often as by contagious motions wee are transported out of our selfes, we remaine the same, but not with our∣selfes, because not looking in to our owne actions, wee are wandring a∣bout
others things; for doe we thinke that he was with himselfe who went in to à far countrie, consumed the por∣tion allotted to him, and after he had put himselfe in to the seruice of à citi∣zen of that country, kept his hogges and was glad to fill his belly with the huskes they eate; not with standing when he began to consider what he had lost (as the scripture testifieth) being come to himselfe he said. How many of my fathers hirelings haue plen∣ty of bread? For if he were before with himselfe, how was it true that he re∣tourned to himselfe? I may well say therefore that this holy man liued with himselfe, because he neuer turned the eye of his soule from himselfe, but stan∣ding alwayes on his guard with great circumspection he kept himselfe con∣tinually in the sight of the all seeing eye of his Creatour. Peter. HOw is it then to be vnderstood which is written of St. Peter the
Apostle, when he was led by the An∣gell out of the prison? Who retourning to himselfe said, now I know assuredly that our Lord hath sent his Angell, & hath deliuered me out of the handes of Herod, and from all he expectation of the people of the Iewes. Gregory. TWo wayes Peter we are caryed out ef our selues: for either by ubricity of thought wee fall beneath ourselfes; or by the grace of contem∣lation we are raysed aboue our selfes. He therefore that kept the hogges by his inconstancy of minde and vnclea∣nesse, fell beneath himselfe; but he whom the Angell loosed, and rauis∣ed in to an extasie, was indeed also out of himselfe, but yet aboue him∣selfe. But both of them retourned to thē selfes, the one when reclaming his ewd life he was conuerted at heart, he other when from the height of contemplation he retourned to his na∣turall
and ordinary vnderstanding Thus venerable Benedict in that soli∣tude dwelt with himselfe for as much a he kept himselfe with in his thoughts for as often as by the feruour of con∣templation he was eleuated, with ou doubt he left himselfe as it were be∣neath himselfe. Peter. I Like well this you say, but re∣solue me, I pray you, should he haue left those Monkes of whom he had once taken charge. Gregory. IN my opinion Peter, a bad cōmu∣nity may be tollerated where there are found at least some good which may be helped, but where there is no benefitt to be expected of any good, labour is many times lost vpon the bad: especially if there be any other present occasions whereni we may do God
better seruice. Now who was there whom the holy man should haue staied to gouerne, when they had all conspi∣red against him. And many things are considered by the perfect which ought not to be passed in silence; for they per∣ceiuing their endeauors to be without effect, depart to some other place there to employ thēselues more profitablely. Wherefore that famous Preacher who desireth to be dissolued and be with Christ, vnto whom to liue is Christ and to dye is gayne, did not onely de∣sire himselfe to suffer, but did also ani∣mate and encourage others to vn∣dergoe the like. He I say, being per∣secuted at Damascus caused himselfe to be let downe from the wall by a cord and basket, whereby he escaped priuately. Shall we say then that Paul feared death which he earnestly desired for the loue of Christ as appeareth by his owne testimony. No surely, but whereas he fore saw that his endea∣uors there would profitt litle, with much hazard and difficulty he reserued
himselfe to labour in an other plac with better successe. For this valian champion of Allmighty God would not be confined to so narrow limitts but enlarged himselfe to seeke battel in the open field. So you may obserue that the holy man Benedict lefte not so many incorrigibile in that place, a he conuerted to à spirituall life el where. Peter. YOu say true as both reason and the example alleadged prooues but I pray, retourne to prosecute the life of this holy Father. Gregory. THe Holy man for many yeares encreased wonderfully in vertues and Miracles, whereby agreat number in those parts were gathered together in the seruice of God; So that by the assistance of our Lord Iesus he buil
there twelue Monasteries, in each of which he put twelue Monkes with their Superiours; and retained a few with himselfe whom he thought to instruct further. Now began diuers Noble and deuout personages from Rome to resort to him; and commen∣ded their children to be brought vp by him in the seruice of God. At the same time Eunicius brought vnto him Mau∣rus, and Tertullius à Senatour his sonne Placidus both very hopefull chil∣dren, of which two, Maurus al∣though young yet by reason of his fore∣wardenes in the schoole of vertue, began to assist his Maister; but Pla∣cidus was as yet à child of tender yeares. How he reclamed An indeuout Monke. CHAP. IV. IN one of those Monasteries which the holy man had built there about
was à certaine Monke that could not stay at his prayers, but so soone as he saw his brethren knele and dispose themselues for their mentall prayer, he would goe out, and there spend his wandering thoughts vpon wordly and transitory things. For which hauing bin often admonished by his Abbot, he was brought before the man of God, who also sharpely reprehended him for his folly; but retourning to his Monas∣tery he scarce remembred two dayes what had bin said vnto him, for the third day he fell to his old custome, and at the time of prayer went out againe, where of when the holy man was in∣formed by the Abbot the second time, he said, I will come my selfe and re∣forme him. And when he was come to the same Monastery, and the Bre∣thren after the Psalmes ended at the accoustomed time betooke themselfes to prayer; He perceued à litle black boy who pulled this Monke out by the hemme of his garment; which he insinuated secretly to Pompeianus Ab∣bot
of the Monastery, and to Maurus saying, see you not there who it is that draweth this Monke out? who answe∣red noe. Let vs pray (replyed he) that you may likewise see whom this Monkefolloweth. After prayer conti∣nued for two dayes Maurus saw, but Pompeianus cold not perceiue any thing. The next day when the man of God had finished his prayer, he went out of the oratory and found the Monke standing with out, whom he forth with strake with à wane for his obstinacy and boulddenes of heart, and from that time euer after the Monke was free from the wicked suggestion of the black boy, and remained con∣stant at his prayers. For the wicked fiend as if himselfe had bin beaten, durst no more tempt him to the like of∣fence.
How by the prayers of St. Benedict A spring issued from the topo of a mountaine. CHAP. V. THree of the Monasteries which he foūded in that place, were built vpon the cliffes of à mountaine, which was very trouble some to the Monkes to be forced to fetch vp their water fō the lake, for besides the toyle, it was also dangerous by reason of the high and steepie descent. Heere vpon the Religious of these three Monasteries came all together to the seruant of God Benedict; and told him it was very troublesome to goe downe for water as far as the lake, and therefore the Monasteries of necessity, were to be remooued to some more commodious place. The holy man with confortable words dismissed them, and at night with litle Placidus (whom we men∣tioned
before) went vp to the rock, and there prayed à long time, and hauing ended his prayers, he putt three stones for à marke in the same place; and so vnknowne to all, he retourned to his Monastery. Not long after when the Brethren came againe to him for want of water, goe (saith he) and on the rock where you shall finde three stones one vpon an other digge à litle, for All mighty God is able to make wa∣ter spring from the top of that moun∣taine, that you may be eased of this la∣bour. At their retourne to the moun∣taine they found already the signes of water in the rock, as Benedict fore told them, so à pitt being digged, it was pre∣sently full with water which issueth forth so plentifully, that to this day it continueth running downe to the foot of the mountaine.
How he miraculously caused the iron head of à bile fallen in to the water, to fasten it selfe againe in the haft. CHAP. VI. A Certaine poore Goth desirous to lead à Religious life, repaired to the man of God Benedict, who most willngly receiued him; and one day willed the Brethren to giue him à bile to cutt vp brambles in à place which he intended for à garden. This place which the Goth had vndertaken to ac∣comodate, was ouer the lakes side. Whilest the Goth laboured à maine in cutting vp the thicke bryars, the iron slipping out of the handle, fell into the lake in à place so deepe, that there was no hope to recouer it. The Goth hauing lost his bile was in great perplexity rune to the Monke Maurus, and told him the mischance, who presently ad∣uertised Benedict thereof, and imme∣diately
the holy man came himselfe to the lake, tooke the haft out of the Goths hand, and cast it in to the water, when behold, the iron rose vp from the bottome and entered in to the haft as before, which he there rendered to the Goth saying, take it and worke on cheerefully and be not discomfor∣ted. How Maurus walked vpon the water. CHAP. VII. ONe day as venerable Benedict was in his cell, yong Placidus (à Monke of his) went out to the lake to fetch water, and letting downe the bucket to take vp water, by chance fell in himselfe after it, and was present∣ly caried away by the streame à bowes shoot from the side. This accident was at the same time reuealed to the man of God in his cell, who presently called Maurus saying, Goe quickly Brother
Maurus, for the child who went to fetch water is fallen in to the lake, and the streame hath caryed him a great way. A wonderfull thing and not heard of since the time of St. Peter: Maurus hauing asked and receiued his benediction vpon the command of his Superiour, went forth in hast, and being come to the place vpon the water to which the childe was driuen by the streame, thinking still he went vpon dry land, tooke him by the haire of the head, and retourned speedily back, but no sooner had he foot vpon firme ground, but he come to himselfe, and looking back perceiued that he had gone vpon the water, much astonished, and wondering how he had done that which wittingly he durst not aduen∣ture. So retourning to the holy man, he related what had happened, which venerable Benedict ascribed to Mau∣rus his prompt obedience, and not to his owne merits; but contrary wise Maurus attributed it wholy to his cō∣mand, not imputing the miracle to him∣selfe
which he had done vn wittingly. This humble and charitable contentiō the child who was saued, was to de∣cide, who said, when I was drawne out of the water, methought I saw my Abbots garment ouer my head, and imagined that he had drawne me out. Peter. THese are wonderfull things you report, and may be to the aedifica∣tion of many, and for my owne part the more I heare of the good mans mi∣racles, the more I desire to heare. How à Crow caryed à way à poy∣sened loafe. CHAP. VIII. VVHen as now the places and bordering Countries there∣about were very Zealous in the loue of our Lord Iesus Christ, many aban∣doning the vanities of the world, and
putting themselues vnder the sweet yoake of our Redeemer (as it is the cus∣tome of the wicked to repine at the vertues of otheres) one Florentius à Priest of à church hard by, and grand father to Florentius our subdeacon, began by the instigation of the diuell to oppose himselfe against the ver∣tuous proceedings of the holy man: and iniuriously to derogate from his course of life, hindering also as many as he could from resorting to him. But seeing he could not stoppe his progresse, the fame of his vertues still more en∣creasing, and many vppon the report of his sanctity refoming their liues day∣ly; he became far more enuious and malitious; for he desired himselfe the commendations of Benedicts life, but would not liue commendablely. Thus blinded with enuy, he sent to the ser∣uant of God à poysened lowfe of bread for an offering; which the man of God receued thankefully, although he was not ignorant of the poyson in it. There vsed to come to him at time of dinner à
crow from the next forrest, which he was accustomed to feed: comeing therefore as she was wont, the man of God cast before her the bread that the Priest had sent him: saying I com∣mande thee in the name of our Lord Ie∣sus-Christ to take this bread, and cast where no man may finde it. The crow gapeing & spreading herwinges runne croaking about it, as though she would haue said, I would willingly fulfill thy command, but Iam not able. The man of God commanded againe saying, take it, take it vp, and cast it where no man may find it. So at lengh shee tooke it vp in her beake, and caried t a ways & twoe howres after retourned againe to receiue from his hand her ordinare al∣louance. But the venerable faher seing the Priest so peruersely bent to seeke his Life, was more sorry for him, then fearefull of himselfe. When Flo∣rentius saw that he could not accom∣plih his wicked designe vpon the body of his maister, he attēpted to trie what he could against the soules of his schol∣lars,
in so much that he sent seauen naked giles in to the garden of the cloister in which Benedict liued, that so playing lascuously hand in hand, they might entice the Religious to naughines. Which when the holy man espyed out of his cell, to preuent the fall of his yong disciples, considering that all this malice proceeded from ha∣tred to him, he gaue place to enuy and withdrewe himselfe. So after he had disposed of the oratories and other buil∣dings, leauing in them à competent number of Brethren with Superiours, he tooke with him à few Monkes, and remooued to an other place. Thus the man of God with humility auoided his hatred, whom All mighty God struke with à terrible iudgement: for when the foresaid Priest standing in his sum∣mar house to his great content and ioy, vnderstood that the holy man was gone, the roome wherin he was, fell downe, crushed and killed him, all the rest of the house remaining immoue∣able and entyre. This Maurus the
disciple of the man of God thought fitt to signifie forth with to Benedict who was yet scarce gone ten miles, willing him to retourne, for the priest who per∣secuted him was slaine. Which the mā of God hearing tooke very heauely; both because his enimie was dead, and because his Disciple reioyced theeat. Where vpon he enioyned him à pe∣nance for presuming in à ioyfull man∣ner to bring such newes to him. Peter. THese are wonderfull strāge things, for in the drawing water out of à rock me thinks I behold in him Moyses, in raysing the iron from the bottome of the water he representeh Elysaeus; in walking on the water Pe∣ter, in the obedience of the crow I cō∣ceiue him an other Helias, in beway∣ling his enemyes death, à Dauid. That man had vnited in him the spirits of all the iust.
Gregory. THe man of God Benedict had in him (Peter) the spiritt of God a∣lone, which by the grace of free re∣demption replenished the harts of all the elect, of which St. Iohn saith. There was true light which illumina∣teth euery man that cometh in to this world. Of which againe he writeth. Of his plenitude and fulnesse wee haue all eceiued: for the holy ones of God could indeed receiue graces from God, but they could not impart them to o∣thers. He then gaue miracles, or signes of power to the lowely, who promised that he would shew the mi∣racle of Ionas to his enemyes, daigning in their sight to dye, and in the sight of the humble to arise. So that the one should haue what they would con∣temne, and the other what to reuerēce and loue. By which mystery was oc∣casioned, that while the proud were spectatours of his ignominious death,
the humble with glory might receiue power against death. Peter. BVt declare I pray; whither the holy man remooued, or if he wrought miracles in any other place. Gregory. THe holy man by remouing chan∣ged his habitation, but not his ad∣uersary; for he ēdured their more sharpe conflicts. For as much as he found the authour of malice openly to assault him. The castle called Cassine is si∣tuated vpō the side of à high mountaine, which stretching forth in à forked manner, enuironeth the same castell, and riseth in to the aire three miles high, on which stood an old temple where Apollo was worshipped by the foolish country people, according to the superstitious custome of the ancient heathens. Round about it likewise
grew woodes and groues in which euē vntill that time the paynims offered their idolatrous sacrifices. The man of God comeing to this place, brake downe the idoll, ouer threw the altar burnt the groues, and of the temple of Apollo made à chappell which he de∣dicated to St. Martine, & where the profane altar had stood, he built à chapple of St. Iohn, and by dayly prea∣ching conuerted many of the people there about. But the old enemye in∣censed with these proceedings, not couertely, or obscurely, but openly & visibly appeared in the sight of the fa∣ther, and with hideous cries complai∣ned of the violence he suffered in so much, that the brethren hard him, al∣though they could see nothing. For as the venerable told his Disciples the wicked fiend represented himselfe to his sight all on fire, and with flaming mouth and flashing eyes; seemed to rage against him. And thē they all heard distinctly what the wicked spiritt said. For first he called him by his name, and
when the man of God would make him no answer, he fell to raile and re∣uile him. And whereas before he cryed Benedict, Benedict, and saw he could get no answer; them he cryed maledict not Benedict (that is cursed not bles∣sed) what hast thou to doe with me? why dost thou vee me? But now we shall behold new assaults of the ene∣me against the seruant of God, to whom he ministred not so much com∣s willingly, as occasions of victory against his will. How an huge stone by his prayer was made portable. CHAP. IX. ONe day as the Brethren were building the celles of the cloys∣ter, there lay à stone in the midst which they determined to lift vp, and put in to the building; and when two or three were notable to mooue it, they set more to it; but it remained as immoueable as
if it had bine fixed in the ground, so that it was easie to conceiue that the ene∣mye sate vpon it, since that soe many men were not able to lift it. After much labour in vaine they sent to the man of God with his prayers to driue away the enemye, who presently came, and hauing first prayed, made the signe of the crosse ouer it, when behold, the stone was as easely lifted as if it had no waight at all. How the kitchin by the illusion of the enemye appeared all on fire. CHAP. X. THen the man of God aduised the Brethren to digge in the place where the stone lay, when they had entered à good deepenes, they found à brasen idoll, which happening for the present to be cast by in the kitchin, presently there seemed à flame to rise
out of it, and to the sight of all the Bre∣hren it appeared that all the kitchin was on fire, and as they were cryeing one to another, and casting water to quench this fire, the man of God hea∣ing the noise came, & perceiuing that there appeared fire in the eyes of the Brethren, and not in his, he presently inclined himselfe to prayer, and called vpon them whom he saw deluded with an imaginary fire, willing them to signe their eyes that they might beholde the building entyre, and not that fantasti∣call fire which the enemye had coun∣terfaited. How à boy crushed with the fall of à wall was healed. CHAP. XI. AGaine when the Brethren were raysing the wall à litle higher for more conuenience, the man of God was at his deuotions in his cell, to whō the enemye in an insulting manner ap∣peared,
and told him he was going t his Brethren at worke; the man of Go straigh waise by à messenger aduerti∣sed the Brethren there of, warning thē to haue à care of themselues for the wicked enimye was at that houre come to molest them. Scarce had the messenger told his errand, when the ma∣lignant spiritt ouer threw the wall that was à building, and with the fall thereof bruised à yong Monke, sonne to à certaine Senatour. Hereat all of them much grieued, and discomfor∣ted, not for the loss of the wall; But for the harme of their brother, brought the heauy tideing to their venerable Father Benedict, who bid them bring the youth to him who could not be carried but in à sheet, by reason that not onely his body was bruysed, but also his bones crushed with the fall. Then he willed them to lay him in his cell vpon his matte where he vsed to pray: So causeing the Brethren to goe out he shutt the doore, and with more then ordinary deuotion fell to his
prayers. A wonder to heare, the very me howe he sent him to his worke gaine whole and sound as euer he was efore to helpe his Brethren in making p the wall; whereas the enemie ho∣ed to haue had occasion to insult ouer Benedict by his death. Of Monkes who had eaten out of their Monastery. CHAP. XII. NOw began the man of God by the spiritt of prophecy to foretell things to come, & to certifie those that were present with him of things that passed far of. For it was the custome of the Monastery that the Brethren sent abroad about any business, should neither eate, nor drinke, till their re∣tourne, this in the practise of the rule being carefully obserued, one day some Brethren vpon occasion went abroad, and were forced to stay later then vsually, so that they rested & refreshed
themselues in the house of à certain deuout woman of their acquaintanc Afterwards coming home very lat they asked as was the custome the Ab¦bots blessing. Of whom he streigh way demanded saying, where dine you? they answered no where; he re∣plyed, why doe you lye? did you no goe in to such à womans house? eat you not there such, and such meates dranke you not so many cuppes? Whe the venerable Father had told them both the womans lodging, the seueral sorts of meates, with the number o their draughts. They all in great ter∣rour fell downe at his feate, and with acknowledgemēt of all they had done confessed their fault, which he straigh wayes pardoned, perswading himselfe they would neuer after attempt th like in his absence, knowing he was alwayes present with them in spiritt.
How he reprooued the Brother of Valen∣tinian the Monke for eatinge by the way. CHAP. XIII. MOreouer the Brother of Va∣lentinian the Monke, whom wee mentioned in the beginning, was very deuout although but à Saecular, he vsed euery yeare once to goe from his dwelling to the Monastery, & that fasting, that he might partake of the prayers of the seruant of God, and see his Brother. As he was in his way an other trauayler who caryed meate with him put himselfe in to his compa∣ny, and after they had trauayled à good while he said to him. Come Brother let vs refresh ourselues, least wee faint in the way. God forbid (answered the other) by no meanes Brother, for I neuer vse to goe to the venerable Fa∣ther Benedict but fasting. At which answer his fellow trauayler for the
present said no more; when they had gone à litle farther, he moued him a∣gaine, but he would not consent, be∣cause he resolued to keepe his fast. So the other was à while silent, and went on forward with him, after they had gone agreat way wearied with long trauaille, in their way they came to à meadow, and à spring with what else might delight them there to take their repast. Then said his fellow trauayler loehere is water, heere is à meadow, here is à pleasant place for vs to refresh and rest vs à while, that we may with∣out endangering our health make an end of our iourney. Soe at the third motion (these words pleasing his eare, and the place his eye) he was ouer come, consented and eate. At the eue∣ning he came to the Monastery, where conducted to the venerable Father he craued his benediction and prayers. But presently the holy man reprooued him for what he had done in the way saying, what was it Brother that the malig∣nant enemye suggested to thee in
the way by thy fellow traueller. The first time he could not preuaile, nor yet second, but the third time he preuailed, and obtained his desire. Then the man acknowledging his fault, and frailty, fell at his feete more sorry for his of∣fence by reason that he perceiued he had offended although absent in the sight of Father Benedict. Peter. I Discouer in the breast of the holy man, the spirit of Helisaeus which was present with his disciple far of him. How he discouered the dissimulation of king Totila. CHAP. XIV. Gregory. BE silent Peter with patience that you may vnderstang strange
things. For in the time of the Gothes, their king informed that the holy man had the gift of prophecy: as he went to wards his Monastery he made some stay à litle way of, and gaue notice of his coming, to whom answer was made from the Monastery, that he might come at his pleasure; the king of à treacherous nature attempted to trye, wheter the man of God had the spirit of prophecy. There was one of his followers called Riggo, whom he cau∣sed to put on his royall robes and bus∣kins on his feete, and so commanded him taking on him the kings person to goe forward towards the man of God, three of his cheife pages attending vpō him, to witt Vsilrike, Roderike, and Blindine, to the end they should waite vpon him in the presence of the seruant of God, that so by reason of his atten∣dance, and purple robes he might be taken for the king. When the said Riggo with his braue apparell and at∣tendance entred the cloister, the man of God sate a far of, and seing him come
so nie as he might heare his voice, he cyed to him, saying, putt of sonne, putt of that thou cariest it is not thine. Riggo straight waies fell to the ground sore abashed for hauing praesumed to delude the holy man, all his followers likewise fell downe astonished, and riseing they durst not approach vnto him, but retourned to their king, and trembling related vnto him how soone they were discouered. How Benedict by prophecy foretold the king, and Bishop of Canusina future euents. CHAP. XV. AFter this, king Totila came him∣selfe to the man of God, whom so soone as he saw sitting à far of, he durst not come nigh, but fell prostrate to the ground, the holy man twice or thrice bad him rise, but he durst not get vp, then the holy man came himselfe to the king & lifted him vp and sharply
reprehendet him for his wicked deedes, moreouer he foretold him in few words what should befall him. saying, much mischeife hast thou done, much wickedness hast thou commit∣ted, at least now giue ouer thy iniqui∣ty. But I foresee thou wilt enter into Rome, thou wilt pass the seas, raigne nine yeares, and dye the tenth. At the hearing where of the king sore apal∣led, craued his prayers, and departed, from that time forward he was less cruell, and not long after he went to Rome, thence fayled in to Sicely, and the tenth yeare by the iust iudgement of God lost both life & crowne: more∣ouer the Bishop of the Diocesse of Canusina vsed to come to the seruant of God and for his vertuous life was much respected. He conferring with him concerning the comeing of Totila, and the taking of the city of Rome. The city doubtelesse (said the Bishop) wil be so spoiled, and dispeopled by this king, that it will neuer more be in habited. To whom the man of God
answered, Rome (said he) shall neuer be destroyed by the paynimes; but with lightning, tempest, and earth∣quakes shall decay in it selfe. The ve∣itie of which prophecy is already suf∣ficiently manifested, for in this city wee see the walles ruined, houses ouertur∣ned, and churches throwne downe with tempestuous windes, and we may obserue buildings to decay, and dayly fall to ruine. Although Honoratus his disciple (from whose relation I had it) told me he heard it not himselfe, from his owne mouth, but was told it by the Brethren. How venerable Benedict for à time dis∣posessed à certaine Clearke from the Diuell. CHAP. XVI. AT that time one of the cleargie of the church of Aquine was molested with à wicked spirit whom the venerable man Constantius Bishop
of that Diocesse had sent to diuers Martyrs shrines to be cured; but the holy Martyrs would not free him, that the gifts of grace in Benedict might be made manifest. He was therefore brought to the seruant of Allmighty God Benedict, who with prayers to our Lord Iesus-Christ presently droue out the enemie. Hauing cured him he cō∣manded him saying. Goe, and hereaf∣ter neuer eate flesh, and praesume not to take holy orders, for what time soeuer you shall praesume to take holy orders, you shall againe become slaue to the diuell. The Clearke therefore went his way, and (as present punish∣ments make deepe impressions) he carefully for à while obserued this cō∣mande. But when after many yeares all that were aboue him there in holy orders were dead, seeing also his infe∣riors to be promoted before him by reason of their holy orders, he grew carelesse, and forgetfull of what the man of God had so long agoe said vnto him, so that he like wise went, and re∣ceiued
priest hood when presently the diuell who before had left him, againe tooke power of him, and never ceased to torment him till he seuered his soule from his body. Peter. THe holy man I perceiue vnder∣stood the secret decrees of God, in that he knew this Clearke to be de∣liuered to the power of the enemie, lest he should praesume to receiue holy orders. Gregory. VVHy should not he know the secrete decrees of the di∣uine prouidence, who kept the com∣mandements of God, sith it is written that he who adheereth to God is one spirit with him.
Peter. IF he who adheereth to our Lord become one spiritt with him, how comes the same excellent Preacher to say: who hath knowne the minde of our Lord, or who hath bin his counsellour? for it seemes altogether vnlikely that he who is made one with an other, should not know his minde. Gregory. HOly men so far as they are one or vnited with God are not ignorant of his ordinances as the same Apostle saith. For what man knoweth the things of à man, but the spirit of à man that is in him? So the things also that are of God no man knoweth, but the spirit of God. And to shew that he knew the things of God he addeth. And we haue receiued not the spirit of this world, but the spirit that is of God. And againe that eye hath not seene, nor
eare hath neard, neither hath it ascended n to the heart of man what things God hath prepared for those that loue him; but to vs God hath reuealed by his spirit. Peter. IF then those thing which appertai∣ned to God were reuealed to the said Apostle by the spirit of God. What meaneth he to make this praeamble saying. O depth of the riches of the wis∣dome and knowledge of God: how incom∣prehēsible are his iudgments, and his wayes vnsearcheable? But as I am saying this, another quaestion ariseth: for the Pro∣phet Dauid saith to our Lord. In my lippes I haue vttered all the iudgments of thy mouth. And whereas it is lesse to comprehend or know, then to pro∣nounce, what is the reason St. Paul should affirme that the iudgements of God are incomprehensible, and Dauid professeth not onely to know them, but also with his lippes to expresse them?
Gregory. TO both these difficulties, I briefe∣ly answered before when I said, that holy men (so far as they are one with God) are not ignorant of the mind of our Lord: for all that deuoute∣ly seeke God, in their deuotion, and contemplation, are with God, but in regard they are depressed with the waight of this corruptible body, they are not wholy with God, and therefore for as much as they are vnited with God they know his secret iudgements, of which likewise they are ignorant, for as much as in respect separated from him: And so they professe his iudge∣ments incomprehensible which they cannot as yet thoroughly vnderstand. But they who in spirit adheere vnto him, in this adhaesion to God know his iudgements either by the sacred words of scripture, or by hyden reuelations, so far as they are capable; these there∣fore they know and declare, but they
are ignorant of those which God con∣cealeth. Where vpon the Prophet Da∣uid when he had said in my lippes I will pronunce all thy iudgments, immediately addeth of thy mouth, as if he had said plainely. Those iudgments I could both know, and pronounce which thou didst tell me, for those which thou speakest not, thou concealeth from our knowledge. Thus the saying of the Prophet agrieth with that of the Apos∣tle, for the iudgments of God are both incomprehensible, & also those which proceed from his mouth are vttered with the lippes of men, for being so manifested they may be both concei∣ued and expressed by men, nor can they be concealed. Peter. BY occasion of the difficulty I pro∣pounded, you haue explicated and reconciled the testimonies alleadged, but if there remaine ought concerning the vertue of this Man I pray de∣clare it.
How S. Benedict foretold the destruction of his Monastery. CHAP. XVII. Gregory. A Certaine noble man named Theoprobus was by this holy Father S. Benedict conuerted from the pleasures of the world to the Seruice of God, who for his vertuous life was very familiar, and intimate with him. He entering one day in to the holy mans cell found him weeping bitterly, and when he had expected à good while, and saw he did not giue ouer (although it was his custome in prayer mildely to weepe, and not to vse any dolefull lamentations) he boldely de∣manded of him the cause of so great greife. To whom the man of God pre∣sently replyed. All this Monastery I haue built with what soeuere I haue prepared for my Brethren, is by the
iudgment of Allmighty God deliuered o the heathens: and I could scarse ob∣aine to saue the liues of the monkes n this place; His words Theoprobus eard; But wee see them verified in he destruction of his Monastery by he Longobardes. For of late these Longobardes by night when the Re∣igious were at rest, entred the Monas∣ery, and ransacked all, yet had not he power to lay hand on any man. But All mighty God fulefilled what he had promised to his faithfull seruant Bene∣dict, that although he gaue their goods in to the hands of the paynims, yet he praeserued their liues. In this blessed Benedict did most clearely resemble S. Paul whose ship with all its goods being lost, it pleased God to bestow vpon him the liues of all those who were with him.
How S. Benedict discouered the hiding of à Flagon of wine. CHAP. XVIII. OVr Monke Exhilaratus whom you know well, on à time was sent by his maister with two wooden vessels (we call flagons) full of wine to the holy man in his Monastery. He brought one, but hid the other in the way not withstanding the man of God although he was not ignorant of any thing doue in his absence, receiued it thankefully, and aduised the boy as he was retourning back in this man∣ner; Be sure childe, thou drinke not of that flagon which thou hast hid, but turne the mouth of it downeward, and then thou wilt perceiue what is in it; He departed from the holy man much ashamed, and desirous to make further triall of what he had heard, held the flagon à side and presently there came forth à snake, at which, the boy was
sore afrighted, and terrified for the uill he had committed. How the man of God reprooued à Monke for receiuing certaine napkins. CHAP. XIX. NOt farr distant from the Monas∣tery was à certaine towne, in which no small number of people by the moueing exhortations of Benedict were conuerted from their superstious idolatry. In that place were certaine religious women, and the seruant of God Benedict vsed to send often some of his Brethren thither to instruct and edifie their soules. One day as his cus∣tome was he appointed one to goe; But the monke that was sent after his ex∣hortation tooke of the Nunnes some small napkins, and hid them in his bo∣some. As soone as he came back the holy Father beganne very sharpely to rebuke him saying: How hath ini∣quity
entred thy breast: The monke was amazed, and because he had for∣gott what he had done, he wondred, why he was so reprehended. To whom the holy Father said. What? Was not I present when thou tookest the nap∣kins of the hand maids of God, and didst put them in thy bosome? where vpon he presently fell at the feete of the holy man, and repenting his folly threw away the napkins which he had hidde in his bosome. How the man of God vnderstood the proud thought of one of his Monkes. CHAP. XX. ONe day as the venerable Father late in the euening was at his re∣past, it happened that one of his mōkes who was sonne to à lawyer held the candle to him: and whilest the holy man was eating he standing in that manner beganne by the suggestion of
pride to say with in himselfe. Who is e whom I should waite vpon at ta∣le, or hold the candle vnto with such ttendance? Who am I who should erue him? To whom the man of God resently turning checked him shar∣ely saying; signe thy breast Brother, what is this you say? make the signe of the cross on your breast. Then he forth with called vpon the Brethren; and willed them to take the candle out of his hande, and bad him for that time to eaue his attendance, and sit downe quietly by him. The monke being ask∣ed afterward of the Brethren con∣cerning his thoughts at that time, con∣fessed to them how he was puffed vp with the spirit of pride, and what con∣emptible words he harboured in his thought against the man of God. By this it was easely to be perceiued that nothing could be kept from the know∣edge of venerable Benedict, who was ble to penetrate the very secret houghts of the heart.
Of two hundred bushels of meale mir¦culously brought to the Monas∣tery gate. CHAP. XXI. AT an other time also in the coun¦try of Campania began à grea famine, and great scarcety of victuall so that all the wheate in Benedict hi Monastery was spent, and but fiu loaues of bread remained for the Bre¦threns refection. When the venerabl Father perceiued them sad, and discon∣tented, he endeauored by à milde an gentle reproache to reprehend thei pusillanimitie, and with faire promise to comfort them saying: why are you sad for want of bread? to day you are in want, but to morrow you shall haue plenty. The next day there were found two hundred sacks of meale before the Monastery gates, by whom God Allmighty sent it as yet no man kno∣weth. Which when the monkes be∣held
they gaue thankes to God and by is were taught in their greatest want  hope for plenty. Peter. BVt resolue I pray, is it to be thought that this seruant of God ad continually the spiritt of prophe∣, or onely at certaine times with me discontinuance? Gregory. THe spirit of prophecy Peter doth not alwayes cast his beames vpon e vnderstanding of the prophets; for s it is written of the holy Ghost. He eatheth where he will; so likewise ust we conceiue also when he plea∣th. And therefore Nathan being de∣anded by the king if the might builde he temple, first aduised him to doe , afterward forbad him. This was he reason that Helyzaeus knew not he cause why the woman wept; but
said to his seruant. Who did oppose e let her alone, for her soule is in anguirh,  our Lord hath concealed it from me, a not made it knowne. Thus God Al¦mighty of his great mercy disposet with singular prouidence; to the en that by giuing the spirit of prophec some times, and at other times with drawing the same, the mindes of th Prophets be both eleuated aboue thē¦selues; and also be truely humbled, fo by receiuing the spirit they may kno they are inspired by God, and again when they receiue it not, they ma consider what they are of them¦selues. Peter. IT standeth with good reason wha you haue said; but I beseech you prosecute whatels you remember o the venerable Father Benedict.
How by à Vision he gaue order to con∣triuc à Monastery. CHAP. XXII. AN other time the holy Father was requested by à certaine deuout an to send some of his disciples to ild à Monastery in à mannourie of s neare the city Tarracina; to which quest he condescended, and made oise of his monkes whom he sent, pointing them an Abbot with à rouost, and as they were setting for∣ard on theyr iourney he spake to thē ying: Goe, and vpon such à day I ill come, and shew you where to cō∣iue the oratory, where the refectory, d lodging for guests, or what els all be necessary. So they receiued his essing and departed in hope to see im at the appointed day, for which ey praepared all thinges they thought t, or necessary for their venerable ather and his company. The night
before the appointed day, the man o God appeared in sleepe to him whom he had constituted Abbot and to hi Prouost, and described to them mos exactely how he would haue the buil∣ding ordered. And when they à wake they related to each other what they had seene: yet not altogether relying vpon that vision, they expected th holy man according to his promise but seeing he came not at his appointed time, they retourned to him very pen∣siue saying: wee haue expected (Father) your comming as you promised, but you came not to shew vs where and what we should build. The holy man answered. Why Brethren? Why do you say so? Did not I come according to my promise? And When said they came you? Did not I replyed he, ap∣peare to each of you in your sleepe, & described euery place? Goe and accor∣ding to the direction was giuen you in that vision, contriue the Monastery. A these wordes they were much asto∣nished, and so retourning to the man∣nour
they erected the building accor∣ding to the reuelation. Peter. I Would gladly be informed how and in what manner he could ex∣presse his mind to them so far of; so that they should both heare, and vn∣derstand by an apparition. Gregory. VVHat is the reason, Peter, thou doest so curiously search out the manner how it was done? It is euident that the spirit is of à more noble and excellent nature then the body. And we are taught by the scripture how the Prophet was taken vp in Iury, and set downe with the dinner he carried with him in Chaldee; who after he had refreshed an other Prophet with his victuals found him∣selfe againe in Iury. If then Abacuc in à momēt could corporally goe so farre,
and carry his dinner; what wonder if the holy man obtained to goe in spirit, & intimate to the spirits of his brethrē what was necessary? That as the other went corporally to conueigh corporall foode, so he might goe in spirit to in∣forme them of things concerning à spirituall life. Peter. I Confesse by this your discourse you haue giuen full satisfaction to my doubt, yet I would gladly know what kind of man he was in his com∣mon conuersation. How certaine Religious women were absolued after their death. CHAP. XXIII. EVen his ordinary discourse (Peter) had à certaine efficatious vertue,
for his hart being eleuated in contem∣plation, would not let à word passe from him in vaine. Nay if at any time he had vttered any thing by way of threatning, rather then determining, his wordes had the same force and ef∣fect as if he had absolutely decreed it. For not far from his Monastery two Nunnes of noble race and parentage liued in à place of their owne, and a certaine religious man prouided them all things for the exteriour; but as in some, nobility of birth causeth basenes in mind, so that those who beare in mind their owne greatnes, do lesse humble themselues in this world: these foresaid Nunnes had not as yet refrai∣ned their tongues by à religious habit, but by their vnaduised speches often∣times prouoked to anger the good man who had care ouer them. Where∣fore after he had for à long time endu∣red their contumelious language, he complained to the holy man of the in∣uryes he suffred; which as soone as the man of God heard, he commanded
them forth with saying: haue care of your tongues, for if you doe not a∣mend, I excommunicate you: which sentence of excōmunication not with∣standing he did not pronounce, but threaten. Yet for all this they no∣thing changed in their former condi∣tions, within à few dayes after, depar∣ted this life, and were buryed in the church, at such time as in the church à solemne Masse was soong, and the deacon (as the custome is) cryed a∣lowd: if there be any that communi∣cateth not, let him goe forth: then the Nurse of the two virgins (who vsed to make offeringes to our Lord for them) saw them rise out of their graues, and goe forth. This she obserued sundry dayes, that alwayes when the Deacon cryed in that manner, they went out not able to remaine in the church, and calling to mind what the man of God had said vnto them, whilst they were liuing (for he excluded them from communion vnlesse they amen∣ded their language and manners) she
with great sorrow informed the ser∣uant of God what she had seene who presently with his owne hands gaue offering, and said: goe, and cause this oblation to be offered to our Lord, and they shall be no longer excommunica∣ted. When therefore this offering was made, and the Deacon according to the ceremony cryed out, that such as did not communicate should goe out of the church they were not seene to goe forth any more; whereby it was apparent; that whereas they went not forth with the excommunicated, they were admitted by our Lord to com∣munion. Peter. IT is merueilous strange that this venerable and holy man as yet li∣ing in this mortall life, should be able o release those who were vnder the in∣uisible tribunall.
Gregory. ANd was not he (Peter) in this mortall life to whom it was said: whatsoeuer thou' shalt binde vpon earth, shall be also bound in heauen, and what∣soeuer thou shalt vnbind on earth, shall be also vnbound in heauen. Whose place, and autority in binding, and looseing they possesse, who by faith and ver∣tuous life obtaine the dignity of holy gouernment. And that man (an earthly creature) might receiue this soueraigne power; the Creatour of heauen, and earth came downe from heauen, and for the redemption of man kinde, God himselfe became man, that this spiri∣tuall power might be granted to flesh▪ For so Allmighty God condescending (as it were) beneath himselfe, raised our weakenes abowe it selfe.
Peter. HIs miraculous power is confir∣med with good reason. How à Boy was cast out of his graue. CHAP. XXIV. ON à time à certaine younge Monke of his, who was ouer much affected towards his parents, went out of the Monastery without his benediction; and the very same day as soone as he was come to them, he died, and being buried, the day fol∣lowing they found his body cast vp, which they enterred the second time, and the next day after it was found in like manner lying aboue ground as before. Heere vpon they ran streight∣way, and fell at the feete of the most
Father Benedict imploring his aide. to whom the man of God with his owne hand gaue an host of the blessed Sacrament, saying. Goe, and with all reuerence lay this host of the body of our Lord vpon his breast, and so bury him. This done the earth kept his body, and neuer after cast it vp. By this you perceiue (Peter) of what merit this man was with our Lord Iesus Christ, sith the very earth cast forth the body of him who had not receiued the blessing of Benedict. Peter. I Doe plainely perceiue it, and am much astonished therat.
Of à Monke who leauing his Mo∣nastery met à Dragon in the way. CHAP. XXV. Gregory. ONe of his Monkes of a wan∣dering, and vnconstant disposi∣tion would by no meanes abide in the Monastery. And although the holy mā had often reprooued, & admonish∣ed him of it, he remained deaf to all perswasions, and oftentimes entreated earnestly to be released from the con∣gregation. So the holy Father ouer∣come with this importunity in anger bid him be gone. Scarse was he got out of the Monastery, when he met in the way à Dragon that with open mouth made towards him, and seeing it ready to deuoure him, he beganne to quake, & tremble crying out alowde helpe, helpe, for this Dragon will de∣uoure
me. The Brethren vpon this suddain noyse ranne out, yet saw no Dragon, but found the Monke pan∣ting, and afrighted; so they brought him back againe to the Monastery, who forth with promised neuer to depart from the Monastery; and from that time he remained alwayes con∣stant in his promise, as who by the prayers of the holy man was made see the Dragon ready to deuoure him, which before he had followed vndis∣couered. How St. Benedict cured à boy of the leprosy. CHAP. XXVI. I Will also relate what I heard of à very honorable man named Antho∣nie, who affirmed that à seruant of his Father fell into à leprosie, in so much that his haire fell of, and his skinne wa swolne, so that he could noe longe hide the deformity of his disease dayly
increasing- This seruant was sent by the gentlemans Father to the man of God, and by him restored to his per∣fect health. How St. Benedict miraculously procured money for à poore man to dis∣charge his debt. CHAP. XXVII. NOr will I conceale that, which his Disciple Peregrine was wont to relate, how an honest poore man constrained by necessity of à debt, thought his onely remedie was to haue recourse to the man of God; So he came to the monastery, where meeting with the seruant of God, he told him how he was extreamely vrged by his credi∣tour for the payment of twelue shil∣lings. The venerable Father answe∣red him, that in very deed he had not twelue shillings, but yet he comforted his want with good wordes saying: goe, & after two dayes retourne hither
againe; for at this present I haue it not to giue you. These two dayes as his custome was he spent in prayer; and vpon the third day, when the poore debter came againe, there was found thirteene shillings vpon à chest of the Monastery, that was full of corne, which the man of God caused to be brought him, and gaue them to the distressed man, that he might pay twelue, and haue one to defray his charges. But to retourne to the rela∣tion of such things as I learned of his disciples of whom I spake in the be∣ginning. There was à certaine man had an aduersary, who bare him deadely hatred, and so great was his malice that he gaue him poison in his drinke, which potion although it procured not his death, yet it so altered his colour that his body became all speckled like à leapour. This man was brought to the holy Father, who by his onely touch, caused the diuersity of colours to vanish away, and restored him to his health.
How à glasse bottle cast downe vpon stones was not broken. CHAP. XXVIII. AT such time as the great famine was in Campania, the man of God gaue all he had to those he saw in want and necessity; in so much that there was no prouision almost left in the spence, saue onely à litle oyle in à glasse vessell; yet when one Agapitus à subdeacon came humbly entreating to haue à litle oyle giuen him, the man of God (who had resolued to giue all vpon earth, that he might haue all in heauen) commanded this litle oyle that was left to be giuen him. The Monke who was dispencier heard his command, but was loath to fulfill. And the holy man à litle after demanded whether he had done what he willed him, the Monke answered that he had not giuen it, saying that if he should
haue giuen that, there would be no∣thing left for the Religious; hereat the good Father much displeased, bad some other take the glasse bottle in which there remained a little oyle & cast it out of the window, that nothing of the fruits of disobedience might be left to pester the Monastery; which was accordingly done: vnder the window was à steepe fall full of huge rough stones, vpon which the glasse fell, yet it remained as whole, and entyre as if it had not bin throwne downe, so that neither the glasse was broke, nor the oyle spilt; which the man of God commanded to be taken vp and giuen to him that asked it. Then calling the Monkes together he rebuked the Religious man before them all for his pride, & want of confidence.
How an empty tunne was filled with oyle. CHAP. XXIX. HAuing ended the chapter he and all the Monkes fell to their prayers. In the place they prayed was an empty tunne closse couered. As the holy man continued his prayer the couer of the said tunne beganne to be heaued vp by the oyle encreasing vn∣der it, which runne ouer the brim of the vessel vpon the floore in great a∣boundance. Which so soone as the ser∣uant of God Benedict beheld, he forth with ended his prayer, and the oyle ceased to runne ouer. Then he admo∣nished the distrustfull, and disobedient Monke to haue confidence in God, and learne humility. So the Brother thus reprehended was much ashamed, because the venerable Father did not onely by word admonish him; but also did miraculously show the power of
Allmighty God. Nor could any man afterwardes doubt of what he promi∣sed, sith as it were in à moment: for à glasse bottle almost empty he had res∣tored à tunne full of oyle. How he dispossessed à Monke. CHAP. XXX. ONe day as he was going to S. Iohns chappell, which stands vpon the very toppe of the mountaine, he mette the subtill enemie vpon à mule in the habit, and comportment of à physitian, carryeing à horne, and à morter, who being demanded whither he went, answered he was going to the Monkes to minister à potion. So the venerable Father Benedict went forward to the chappell to pray, and haueing finished retourned backe in great hast, for the wicked spirit found one of the ancient Monkes drawing water, and praesently he entred into him, threw him downe, and tortured
him pittifully. As soone as the holy man retourning from prayer found him thus cruelly tormented, he onely gaue him à blow on the cheeke with his hand, and immediately draue the wicked spirit out of him, so that he durst neuer after retourne. Peter. I Would know whether he obtained these great miracles alwayes by prayer, or did them sometimes onely by the intimation of his will. Gregory. THey who are perfectly vnited with God as necessity requi∣reth, worke miracles both wayes; so∣metimes by prayer, sometimes by power; for sith according to St. Iohn, As many as receiued him, he gaue them power to be the children of God; what wonder is it if they haue the priuiledge, and power to worke miracles who are
exalted to the dignity of the children of God. And that both wayes they worke miracles is manifest in St. Peter, who by prayer raysed Tabitha from death; and punished with death Ana∣nias and Saphira for their falshood. For we doe not read that he prayed when they fell downe dead; but onely that he rebuked them for their fault com∣mitted. It is euident therefore that these things are done sometimes by power, sometimes by petition; sith that by reproofe he depriued these of their life; and by prayer reuiued the other. But now I will produce two other acts of the faithfull seruant of God Be∣nedict, by which it shall appeare eui∣dently, that some things he could doe by power receaued from heauen, and others by prayer.
How St. Benedict loosed à Husbandman by his onely sight. CHAP. XXXI. A Certaine Goth named Galla, was of the impious sect of the A∣rians. This fellow in the time of their king Totila was most malitiously bent against all good, and deuout catho∣lickes; in so much that if any clargie man, or monke came in his sight, he was sure not to escape aliue from him: This man enraged with an insatiable couetousnes of spoile, and pillage, light one day vpon à husbandman whom he tortured with seuerall torments; the man not able to endure the paine, pro∣fessed that he had cōmitted his goodes to the custody of the seruant of God Benedict, this he faigned to the end he might free himselfe from torments, and prolong his life for some time. Then this Galla gaue ouer tormenting him, and tying his armes together with à
strong corde, made him runne before his horse, to shew him who this Bene∣dict was that had receiued his goodes to keepe. Thus the poore man runne before him with his handes bounde, & brought him to the holy mans Monas∣tery, whom he found sitting alone at the Monastery gate, and reading. Then the countryman said to Galla who fol∣lowed furiously after him: loe this is the holy man Benedict, whom I told you of. The barbarous ruffian looking vpon him with enraged fury, thought to afright him with his vsuall threats, an with hydeous noise cried out vnto him rise, rise, and deliuer vp this fel∣lowes goodes which thou hast taken into thy custody. At these clamorous wordes the man of God suddainely lif∣ted vp his eyes from reading, and saw him with the husbandman whom he kept bound, but as he cast his eye vpon his armes, in à wonderfull manner the cordes beganne to fall of so quickly, that no man could possibly haue so soone vntyed them. When Galla per∣ceiued
the man whom he brought ound so suddainely loosened, and at berty, strooke in to feare at the sight of so great power he fell prostrate, and owing his stiff, and cruell neck at the oly mans feete, begged his prayers. Not with standing the holy man rose not from his reading, but called vpon his brethren to bring him to receaue his benediction; when he was brought gaine vnto him, he exhorted him to eaue his barbarous and inhumane ruelty. So pacified by the holy mans dmonition, he departed neuer after resuming to aske any thing of the ountry man, whom the man of God nloosed not by touching, but by cas∣ing his eye vpon him. Thus you see (Peter) as I said before that those who re the true seruants of Allmightie God, ometimes doe worke miracles by à ommanding power; for he who sit∣ing still abated the fury of that ter∣ible Goth, and with his onely looke nloosed the cordes where with the nnocent mans armes were fast pinio∣ned,
sheweth euidently by the quick, an speedy exhibition of the miracle, tha he wrought it by à power receiued, & actually resideing in him. Now I wil also shew you how great, and strange  miracle he obtained by prayer. How he raysed à dead man to life. CHAP. XXXII. AS he was one day in the field la∣bouring with his Brethren,  certaine peasant came to the Monas∣tery caryeing in his armes the dead body of his sonne, and with pittiful lamentation for the losse of his onely sonne, inquired for the holy Father Be∣nedict. Vnderstanding that he was in the field, he presently laid downe th dead corps at the Monastery gate, and as one distracted through griefe, be∣ganne to runne to finde out the venera¦ble Father. At the same time the ma
of God was coming home with his Brethren from labour, whom when he distressed man espyed, he cryed out nto him, Restore me my sonne, Res∣ore me my sonne. At the hearing here∣f the man of God made à stop, and aid: what friend haue I taken your onne from you? The man replyed he s dead, come, and rayse him. When he holy man heard this, he was much greiued, and said, Goe Brethren, goe, his is not à worke for vs but for such s were the holy Apostles. Why will ou impose burdens vpon vs which we annot beare? Not withstanding the han enforced with excessiue greife, erseuered in his earnest petition, swea∣ing that he would neuer depart vntill e raysed his sonne to life. Then the an of God demanded saying where he? He answered: his body lieth at he Monastery gate. Whither when he man of God with his Brethren was ome, he kneeled downe, and layed imselfe on the body of the child: hen raysing himselfe with his hands
held vp towards heauen he prayed:  Lord regard not my sinnes but th faith of this man who craueth t haue his sonne restored to life, and res¦tore againe to this body the soul which thou hast taken from it. Scars had he finished these wordes, but a the body of the child beganne to trēbl at the reentry of the soule, that in th sight of all who were present, he wa seen with wonderfull quakeing t pant & breath whom he presently tooke by the hand, & deliuered him à liue & sound to his Father. It seemet to me (Peter) he had not this miracl actually in his power, which he pros∣trated himselfe to obtaine by prayer. Peter. VVHat you haue said is vn¦doubtedly true, for you ef¦fectually proue, & confirme by deede what was said in wordes. But (I pray certifie me, whether holy men can ef¦fect,
and obtaine what so ere they will, or desire. Of the Miracle wrought by his sister Scholastica. CHAP. XVII. Gregory. VVHo was euer (Peter,) in this life more sublime in perfection, & sanctitie chan. St. Paule, who not with standing three times craued of our Lord to be free from the motions of the flesh, yet could not ob∣taine it? To this purpose I must tell you à passage concerning the venerable Father Benedict, that there was some thing he desired, and was not able to accomplish. His sister Scholastica who was consecrated to God from her very childehood, vsed to come once à yeare to see him; vnto whom the man of God was wont to goe to à house not far frō the gate with in the possession of the
Monastery. Thither she came one day according to her custome, and her venerable brother like wise with his disciples, where after they had spent the whole day in the prayse of God, and pious discourses, the night draw∣ing on, they tooke their refection together. As they were yet setting at table, and protracting the time with holy conference, the vertuous, and Religious virgin his sister began to importune him saying: I beseech you (good Brother) leaue me not this night, that we may entertaine our∣selues vntill next morning in discourses of the ioyes of heauen. To whom he answered. What is this you say, sister? by no meanes can I stay out of my Monastery. At this time the sky was very cleare, and not à cloud was to be seene in the ayre. The holy Nunne therefore hearing her Brothers deniall, layed her hands vpon the table fast clo∣sed together, and vpon them inclined her head to make her prayer to All∣mighty God: As she raysed vp her
head againe from the table, on à sud∣dain beganne such vehement light∣ning, and thunder, with such aboun∣dance of raine that neither venerable Benedict, nor his Brethren were able to put foote out of doores. For the holy virgin when she leaned her head on her hands, powred forth à flood of teares vpon the table, by which she changed the faire weather into foule, and rainy. For immediately followed that inundation of waters, and such was the coherence with her prayers, and the storme; that as she lifted vp her head, the cracke of thunder was heard; as if the raysing vp of her head, and the bringing downe these floodes of raine had concurred in one and the same in∣stant. The holy man perceiuing that by reason of thunder, and lightning with continuall showres of raine, he could not possibly retourne, was in great an∣guish of mind, and said vnto her: God Allmighty forgiue you (sister) what is this you haue done? she repleyed, I made my request to you, & you would
not heare me; I prayed to Allmighty God, and you see he hath granted it. Now therefore if you can goe forth to the Monastery, and leaue me. But he not able to retourne was forced to stay against his will. Thus it so fell out that they spent the night in watching, and receiued full content in spirituall discourse of heauenly matters. By this it appeares (as I said before) that the holy man desired some thing which he could not obtaine. For if we consider the intent of the venerable Father, without quaestion he would haue had the faire weather to continue in which he came forth. But it pleased Allmigh∣ty God, by meanes of à woman mira∣culously to cause the contrary. And noe wonder if at that time, à woman were more powerfull then he, conside∣ring she had à long desire to see him; and therefore sith as St. Iohn affirmeth God is charity with good reason she was more powerfull who loued more.
Peter. I Grant it, and am wonderfully ta∣ken with your discourse. How St. Benedict saw the soule of his sister in forme of à doue. CHAP. XXXIV. THe next day the holy, and Reli∣gious virgin went home to her cloister, and the man of God to his Monastery. Three dayes after stan∣ding in his cell, he saw the blessed soule of his sister depart out of the body, and informe of à doue ascend, and enter into the caelestiall mansions. Wherefore with ioy congratulating her heauenly glory, he gaue thankes to God in hym∣nes, and prayses, and straight wayes certified his Brethren of her departure, whom he forth with sent to bring her body to the Monastery, and caused it
to be buryed in the same tombe that he had praepared for himselfe. To the end their bodies might not be separated by death, whose mindes were alwayes v∣nited with God. How the whole world was represented be∣fore his eyes: And of the soule of German Bis∣hop of Capua. CHAP. XXXV. AN other time Seruandus Deacō, and Abbot of that Monastery (which was built by Liberius sometime à senatour in the country of Campa∣nia) vsed often to visit him; for being also illuminated with grace, and hea∣uenly doctrine, he repaired diuers times to the Monastery, that they might mu∣tually communicate one to an other the wordes of life, and at least with sighes, and longing desires, taiste of that sweet food of the caelestial coun∣try, whose perfect fruition they were
not as yet permitted to enioy. And now the time of rest being come, vene∣rable Benedict went vp to the hygher roome of the tower, and Seruandus had his lodging in the lower, from which there was an open passage to ascend to the hygher, and ouer against the said tower was à large building in which the disciples of both reposed while as yet the Monkes were at rest, the seruant of God Benedict riseing be∣fore to the night office, stood at the window, and made his prayer to All∣mighty God about midnight, when suddainely he looked forth, and saw à light glancing from aboue so bright, & resplendent, that it not onely dispersed the darkenes of the night, but shined more cleare then the day it selfe. This was à merueilous strange vision, for (as he afterwardes related) the whole world compacted as it were together, was represented to his eyes in one ray or sunne beame. As the venerable Fa∣ther had his eyes fixed vpon this glo∣rious lustre, he beheld the soule of Ger∣manus
Bishop of Capua caryed by An∣gels to Heauen in a fiery globe. Then for the testimony of so great à miracle, with à lowd voice he called vpon Ser∣uandus the Deacon twise, or thrice by his name, who much astonished there∣at, came vp, looked forth, and saw à litle streame of the light then disapea∣ring, at the sight wereof he was strooke into great admiration; and the man of God after he had related to him the whole passage, sent presently to Theo∣probus à Religious man in the castle of Cassine, willing him to goe the same night to Capua, and enquire what had happened to the Bishop Germanus. And it fell out so, that he who was sent found the most Reuerend Bishop Ger∣manus dead; & inquiring more exacte∣ly, he learned that his departure was the very same moment in which the man of God had seene him ascend.
Peter. THis was à strange, and admirable passage; but whereas you said the whole world was at one view repre∣sented to his sight, as I neuer expe∣rienced the like, so I cannot imagine how, or in what manner this was pos∣sible, that the whole vniuerse should be seene at once, and by one man. Gregory. TAke this Peter for an assured ve∣rity, that to à soule that beholdeth the Creatour, all creatures appeare but narrow; for should we partake neuer so litle of the light of the Creatour, what soeuer is created would seeme very litle, because the soule is enlarged by this beatificall vision, and so dela∣ted in the Diuine perfections, that it far transcendes the world, and it selfe also. The soule thus raptin the light of God, is in her interiour lifted vp, and enabled
aboue it selfe, and while thus eleuated it contemplates it selfe, it easely com∣prehendet how litle that is which be∣fore it was not able to conceiue. So the Blessed man who in the tower saw that fiery globe with the Angels retourning to heauen, could not possibly haue be∣held these things, but onely in the light of God. What wonder then if he saw the world at one view, who was in mind exalted aboue the world. But whereas I said that the whole world compacted as it were together was re∣presented to his eyes, it is not meant that heauen, and earth were streigte∣ned by contraction, but that the mind of the beholder was dilated, which raysed to the sight of Allmighty God, might easely see all things beneath him. It followeth therefore, that the exteriour light which appeared to his senses, proceeded from an inward illu∣mination of mind, by which he was e∣leuated to hygher misteries, & taught how meanely these inferior things are to be esteemed.
Peter. I Blame not now my ignorance which hath bin the occasion of so large, and profitable discourse: But since you haue clearely explicated these things vnto me, I pray, goe forward with your discourse. How St. Benedict wrote à Rule for his Monkes. CHAP. XXXVI. I Would willingly (Peter) relate more concerning this holy father, but that I must of purpose omit many things to speake of the acts of others; onely this I would not haue you to be ignorant of, that the man of God a∣mongst so many miracles where with he shined to the world, was also very eminent for his doctrine; for he wrote à Rule for Monkes as cleare in stille, as excellent for discretion. And if any man
desire to know more exactely the life, and conuersation of this holy Father, he may there behold it as in à mirrour: for the Blessed man could not possibly teach otherwise then he liued. How he prophetically foretold his death to his Brethren. CHAP. XXXVII. THe same yeare in which he depar∣ted out of this life, he foretold the day of his death to some of his Disci∣ples who conuersed with him, and to others who were far of, giueing strict charge to those who were present, to keepe in silence what they had heard; and declaring to the absent by what signe they should know when his soule departed out of his body. Six dayes be∣fore his departure, he caused his graue to be opened; and immediately after he fell into à feuour, by the violēce where of his strength began to decay, and
the infirmity dayly encreasing, the sixt∣day he caused his Disciples to carie him in to the oratorie. Where he ar∣med himselfe with the pretious body & bloode of our sauiour, then sup∣porting his weake limbes by the armes of his Disciples, he stood vp his handes lifted towards heauen and with wordes of prayer breathed forth his holy soule. The very same day two of his Disciples, the one liueing in the Monastery, the other in à place far re∣mote, had à reuelation in one, and the selfe same manner. For they beheld à glorious way spred with pretious gar∣ments, and enlightned with innume∣rable lampes, stretching directly east∣ward from his cell vp to heauen. A man of à venerable aspect stood a∣boue, and asked them whose way that was, but they professing they knew not: This saith he, is the way by which the beloued of God Be∣nedict ascended. Thus as the Dis∣ciples who were present saw the de∣parture
of the holy man; so also those who were absent, vnderstood it by this signe foretold them. He was buryed in the oratorie of St. Iohn Baptist which himselfe had built vpon the ruines of Apolloes altar. In the caue also in which he formerly liued, euen to this day miracles are wrought vpon such as repaire thither with true faith. How à madde woman was cured in St. Benedict his caue. CHAP. XXXVIII. FOr very lately happened this which I now relate. A certaine woman bereft of reason, and alto∣geather distracted in her senses, runne madde ouer mountaines, and val∣lies, through woodes, and plaines, day and night, neuer resting, but when she was forced for wearie some∣nesse
to ly downe; one day as she ranged thus madly vp, and downe, she light vpon the caue of Blessed Be∣nedict, and by chance entred, and re∣mained there: The next morning she came out as sound, and perfect in her senses, as if she neuer had bin out of them, and from that time remained all her life in health, and quiet of mind, which she there re∣couered. Peter. VVHat should be the reason that we experience euen in the patronages of martyrs that they doe not bestow so great fauours by their bodies, as by some of their reliques; yea and doe greater mira∣cles where their bodyes are not; at least not whole, and entyre?
Gregory. VVHere the bodyes of holy Martyrs lye no doubt (Pe∣ter) but there they are able to shew many miracles, as they doe. For to such as haue recourse vnto them with pure intention, they shew many marueilous fauours. But in regard weake soules may doubt whether they be present to heare them or no, in such places where men know their whole bodyes are not: it is necessary for confirmation of their presence to shew more miracles were the weake of faith may haue occasion to doubt. But they who doe stedfastly beleeue in God, encrease their merit in that, although theire bodyes lye not there, yet they as∣sure themselues to be heard by them. Wherefore Trueth it selfe to encrease the faith of his Disciples said, vnto them: if I goe not the Paraclete shall not come to you. For where as it is vn∣doubtedly
certaine, that the Holy Ghost the comforter alwayes procee∣deth from the father, and the sonne; why doth God the sonne say, he will goe from them that the Paraclete may come who neuer departeth from the sonne? But because the Disciples con∣uersing with our Lord in flesh, did desire alwayes to behold him with their corporall eyes it was rightly said vnto them: vnlesse I goe away the Paraclete shall not come. As if he had said plainely: If I withdrawe not my bodily presence, I doe not shew you the loue of the soule; and vnlesse you cease to see mee carnally, you shall neuer learne to loue me spi∣ritually. Peter. YOu say well.
Gregory. NOw let vs rest a while; that by silence we may be the better enabled for further conference, if we intend to prosecute the miracles of o∣ther Saints. The ende of the second booke of the life of St. Be∣nedict. FINIS.
The approbation of the Rule giuen by St. Gregorie the great. I Gregorie Prelat of the holy Ro∣man sea, wrote the life of Blessed Benedict: I haue read the Rule which the Sainct himselfe wrote with his owne handes. I praysed it, and con∣firmed it in à holy synod: I comman∣ded it to be most diligently obserued by all who shall be admitted to the grace of conuersion through diuers parts of Italy wheresoeuere the Latin tongue is read, euen to the ende of the world. I doe also confirme the twelue Monasteries which the Sainct erected.
THE RVLE OF OVR MOST HOLIE FATHER S. BENEDICT PATRIARCHE OF MONCKE.
THE PROLOGVE OF OVR MOST HOLY FATHER St. BENEDICT TO HIS RVLE. HARKEN ô sonne to the precepts of a maister, and incline the eare of thy hart willingly to heare the admonition of a pious ther and effectually accomplish them. That by the labour of obedience thou aist returne to him from whom by he slouth of disobedience thou hast eparted. To thee therfore now my eech is directed who renouncing y owne will, being to fight vnder
our Lord Christ the true kinge takest to thee the most strong and bright ar∣mour of obedience. First of all that what good thinge soeuer thou beginst to doe, thou begge of him with most earnest praier to perfect it: that he who hath now vouchsafed to reckon vs in the num∣ber of his children may not herafter be contristated by our ill deeds: for wee must soe at all times serue him with the goods he hath bestowed vpon vs, that neither as an angry fa∣ther he may not herafter disinherit his children; nor as a dreadfull Lord exasperated by our offences deliuer vs ouer as wicked seruants to per∣petuall punishment, who would not follow him to glory. Let vs therfore at length arise the scripture exciting vs, and saying; It is now the houre to rise from sleepe. And our eyes being opened to the deifying light, let vs with astonished eares heare what the diuine voice daily crye∣ing out, admonisheth vs sayeing. This day if you shall heare his voyce, har∣den
not your harts. And againe; He that hath eares let him heare what the spirit saith to the Churches: and what saith it? Come children, heare mee; I will teach you the feare of our Lord. Runne whilest you haue the light of life, least the darknes of death surprize you. And our Lord seeking his labourer amongst the multitude to whom here he speaketh, sayeth againe, Who is the man that will haue life, and desireth to see good dayes? which if thou hearing answerest; I. God saith vnto thee; If thou wilt haue true and euerlasting life, refraine thy tounge from euill, and thy ips that they speake not guile, Decline from euill, and doe good: Seeke after peace and pursue it. And when you haue done this; my eyes shall be vpon you; and my eares shall be open to your prayers, and before you can call vpon me, I will say, Behold I am present. What thing deare brethren can be more sweet vnto vs, then this voyce of our Lord inuiting vs? Behold our Lord
through his piety sheweth vnto vs the waye of life. Our loynes therefore being girt with faith and the obseruance of good workes, and our feet shodde by guidāce of the Ghospell of peace let vs walke in his wayes, that wee may deserue to see him who hath called vs vnto his kingdome. In the tabernacle of whose Kingdome if wee desire to dwell, wee must apply our selues to good workes which is the only meanes wherby it is to bee attained. But let vs aske our Lord with the Prophet sayeing vnto him; Lord who shall dwell in thy ta∣bernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy hill? After this question brethren let vs heare our Lord answering; and shewing vs the waye that leades to his tabernacle, saying. He that walketh without spott, and worketh iustice. He that speaketh truth in his hart, that hath not forged guile in his tongue. He that hath not done euill to his neigh∣bour, and hath not receiued reproch a∣gainst his neighbour. He that reiecting out of his minde the malignant Deuill,
with all his suggestions hath brought them all to nought, and hath taken his beginning thoughts and dasht them a∣gainst Christ. They who feare our Lord doe not take pride in their good obseruance and well doing, but knowing that all the good they haue, or can doe, proceedes not from themselues, but is done by our Lord, magnifie our Lord thus workinge in thē, sayinge with the Pro∣phet; Not to vs Lord not to vs, but to thy name giue glory. So Paule the A∣postle did not impute any thinge of his preaching to himselfe saying by the grace of God I'am what I am. And a∣ganie he saith. He that gloryeth let him glory in our Lord; And here vpon also our Lord saith in the Ghospell. He that heareth these my words, and perfor∣meth them, I will liken him to a wise∣man, that hath built his house vpon a roche. The floods came, the winds blew, and beate against that house, and it fell not; because it was founded vpon a rocke. Our Lord fulfilling these things, expecteth dayly that wee
should by deeds answer to these his holy admonitions. Therefore for the amendment of our euills, he prolonges the dayes of this our life according to the words of the Apostle saying, Knowest thou not that the patience of God bringeth thee to repentance? For our pious Lord saith, I will not the death of a sinner but rather that he be conuerted and liue. Hauing therfore my brethren demanded of our Lord, who should be the Inhabitour of his Tabernacle, we haue hard what his duty and charge is; which if we fulfill, we shall be Inheri∣tours of his heauenly Kingdome. Now Therefore let vs prepare our harts and bodyes to fight vnder the holy obedience of his commandes, and what nature in vs is not able to per∣forme, let vs begge of our Lord to supply it with the assistance of his grace. And if wee desire to avoyde the paines of Hell, and to attaine to euerlasting life; whi∣lest yet time serues, and whilest wee liue in this mortall flesh, and that wee may performe all these things by the light of
Grace, let vs hasten and doe that now, which may be expedient for vs for euer hereafter. Wee are therefore now to institute a schoole of the seruice of God. In which schoole or institution wee hope nothing shall be ordained too ri∣gourous or burden some. But if in some∣thinges we proceede with a litle seueri∣ty, reason so requiring, for the amend∣ment of vices or preseruing of charity, do not straightwayes for feare there of fly from the way of saluatiō, which is al∣ways straight and difficult in the begin∣ning. But in processe and continuance of this holy course and conuersation, the hart being once dilated, the way of Gods commandements is runne with vn¦speakable sweetnes of loue: so as ne∣uer departing from his schoole, but per∣seuering in the monastery in his doctri∣ne vntill death, by patience wee parti∣cipat of the sufferings of Christ, that wee may deserue afterwards to bee par∣takers of his kingdome. Amen.
Of the seuerall kindes or life of Monkes. CHAP. I. IT is well knowne that there are foure kindes of Mōkes. The first is of Coenobites, that is monasteriall or con∣uentuall liuing vnder a Rule or Abbot. The second kinde is of Ana∣chorits, that is, Hermits, who not by à Nouitiall feruour of deuotion but by long probation in a monasticall kinde of life haue learnt by the comfort and encouragement of others to fight a∣gainst the Deuill, and being well armed, secure now without the help of any are able by Gods assistance to fight hand to hād against the vices of the flesh and euill cogitatiōs; and soe proceed frō the fraternall army to the single combat of of the wildernes. The third and worst kinde of Mōks are the Sarabaits who ha∣uing not beene tryed vnder any Rule, by the experience of a skilfull maister, as gold vseth to be tryed in the furnace; but softned according to the nature of
lead, by their workes adhering yet to the world, are knowne by their tonsure to be disloyall to God: who two or three or perhaps single without a shep∣heard are shut vp, not in our Lords sheepfolds but in theire owne: and the pleasure of their desiers is to them a lawe, and whatsoeuer they like or make choise of, this they will haue to be holy, and what they mislike, that not to be lawfull. The fourth kinde of mōks be those which are called Girouagi or wanderers, who all their life time wan∣der through diuers prouinces, and guest▪wise stay two or three days in one Mo∣nastery, and then in another, and are all∣ways wandering and neuer setled, and giuing themselues alltogether to their owne pleasures, and to the inticements of gluttony, are generally in all things worse then the Sarabaits. Of the misera∣ble conuersation of all which, it is bet∣ter to be silent then to say much. And therfore leauing these, let vs by Gods assistance set downe a Rule for Coeno∣bits or Conuentualls which is the prin∣cipall sort of all.
What kind of man the Abbot ought to bee. CHAP. II. AN Abbot who is worthy to haue charge of a monastery, ought all∣ways to remember what he is called, and to expresse in his actiōs the name of Antient. For in the monastery he repre∣senteth the person of Christ, seing he is called by his name or title, as the Apo∣stle saith. Ye haue receiued the spirit of adoption of children in which wee cry abba father: And therfore the Abbot ought to teach ordaine or cōmand no∣thing but what is conformable to the commandes of our Lord (and God for∣bid he should do otherwise) But let his commands and doctrine be mingled in the minds of his disciples, with the lea∣uen of the diuine iustice. Let the Ab∣bot allways be mindefull that in the dredfull iudgement of God he is to giue account both of his doctrine, and of the obedience of his disciples. And
let him know that it will be found the shpheards fault, what want of profit soeuer the maister of the family shall find in his sheep: But if he haue be∣stowed all diligence on his vnquiet and disobedient flocke, and haue employed the vttermost of his care for curing of their corrupt manners, then shall he be discharged in the iudgement of our Lord, and may say with the Prophet, I haue not hidden thy iustice in my hart, I haue told thy truth and thy saluation: but they contemning despised me. And then finally death as a iust punishment shall be inflicted vpon the disobediēt sheepe. When therfore any one taketh vpō him the name of an Abbot, he ought to gouerne his disciples with a twofold doctrine, that is, To shew them all ver∣tue and sanctity more by deeds then by words: and to capable disciples he may declare the commandements of God by words, but to the hard harted persons and to such as are more simple, he must shew them by his actions and life. And all things which he shall teach his
disciples to be vnfitting, by his owne a∣ctions let him shew that they ought not to be done: least preaching well to others, hee himselfe be foūd reprobate, and God say vnto him sinning. Why doest thou declare my iustices, and ta∣kest my testament in thy mouth, Thou hast hated discipline and hast cast my speeches behind thee. And, Thou who hast seene a moate in thy brothers eye, hast not seene a beame in thy owne. Let there be no acception of persons in the monastery. Let not one be loued or fauoured more then an other, except such a one as in good workes and obe∣dience shall be found to surpasse others. Let not a free mā or of better parentage coming to Religion, be preferred be∣fore him who is of seruile or meaner condition, except there be some other reasonable cause for it. But if vpon iust considerations the Abbot shal soe think fitting let him doe it, in any rancke or degree what soeuer, otherwise let euery one keepe their owne places. Because whether bondman or free man, wee are all one in Christ, and beare an e∣quall
burthen of seruitude vnder one Lord; for with God there is noe accep∣tiō of persons. Onely in this he maketh a difference, if in good workes and hu∣mility wee surpasse others. Therefore let the Abbot beare e∣quall loue to wards all: and let all be subiect to the same orders, and disci∣pline according to their deserts. For the Abbot ought all wayes in his doctrine to obserue that Apostolicall forme where it is sayd, Reprooue, intreate, re∣prehend, that is; tempering, as times and occasions require, faire speeches with terrours. Let him shew both the seueri∣ty of a maister, and the pious affection of a father: that is, he ought sharply to reproue such as are disordered and vn∣quiet, and of the other side to deale by intreaty with tuch as ar obedient mild and patient, exhorting them to goe for∣wards in vertue. But by all meanes the negligent and contumacious persons let him seuerely reprooue and chastise. Let him not dissemble the sinnes of delinquēts, but as soone as they appeare, let him vse all possible endeuour vt∣terly
to roote them out, remembring the danger of Hely Priest of Silo. The more honest and vnderstanding dispo∣sitions let him for the first and second time admonish by words; but the stubborne, hard harted, proud and diso∣bedient, euen in the very beginning of sinne, let him chastise with stripes, and bodily punishment, knowing that it is written. The foole is not corrected with words. And againe; Strike thy sōne with the rod, and thou shalt deliuer his soule from death. The Abbot ought always to remem∣ber, what he is, and what he is called, and that to whom more is committed, from him more is exacted. And let him consider what a difficult and hard taske he hath vndertaken, to gouerne soules, and to accommodate himself to the humors of many. Whereof some ar to be led by faire speeches, others by sharp reprehensions, and others by sharp reprehensions, and others by perswasions. Therefore let him soe conforme himself to each one accor∣ding to their quality and vnderstāding, that he may not onely suffer noe losse in
the flock committed to him, but may also reioyce in the increase and profit of his vertuous flocke. Aboue all things let him take heede least he dissemble or litle regard the saluation of the soules committed to him, and haue more care of transitory and worldly things: but let him al∣wayes consider that he hath vndertakē the gouernment of soules, of which he is also to giue an account. And that he may not complayne for want of tem∣porall meanes let him remember what is written. Seeke first the kingdome of God and his iustice, and all these thinges shall be giuen vto you. And againe, Nothing is wanting to such as feare him. And let him know that he who vndertakes the gouernment of soules must prepare himselfe to giue an ac∣count of them. And what the number of brethren vnder his care is, let him certainly know that at the day of Iudg∣ment he is to giue an account to our Lord of all their soules besides the ac∣coūt he is to giue for his owne. And so alwayes fearing the future account of
a pastour for the flock committed to his charge, whilst he is sollicitous for other mēs accounts, he is also made care full of his owne. And whist he reclay∣meth others by his admonitions, him∣selfe is freed from vices. Of calling the Brethren to counsell. CHAP. III. AS often as any principall matter is to be donne in the monastery, let the Abbot call togeather all the cō∣gregation, and let him declare what the matter is. And hearing the counsell of his brethren, let him consider prudently with himselfe, and doe what he shall iudge most expedient. And the reason why wee ordaine that all be called to counsell, is because our Lord often re∣uealeth to the younger, that which is best. And let the brethren giue counsell with all subiection and humility, and not presume stifly to defend their owne opinions, but let them refer it to the
Abbots discretion; and what he shall thinke expedient, to that let them all submit. And as it belongeth to the dis∣ciples to obey their maister; so it be∣houeth him to dispose all things pro∣uidently and iuly. In all thinges therefore let all follow the Rule, as their mistris, and let no man rashly swarue from it. Let none in the mo∣nastery follow their owne wills. Neither let any one presume with in or with out the monastery peruersly to contend with his Abbot: which if he doe, let him be subiect to regular disci∣pline: Not with standing let the Abbot doe all thinges with the feare of God, and obseruance of the Rule, knowing that he shall ūdoubtedly giue an accoūt of all his iudgements, to God our most iust Iudge. And if any lesser thinges are to be donne for the benefit of the Mo∣nastery, let him onely vse the counsell of the Seniours, as it is written. Doe all thinges with counsell and thou shalt not afterwards repent thee of it.
Which bee the instruments of good workes. CHAP. IV. FIrst of all to loue our Lord Go with all his hart, with all his soul with all his strength. Then his neigh¦bour as him selfe. Then not to kill. No to commit adultery. Not to steale. No to couet. Not to beare false witnesse To honour all men. And what he will no haue donne to himselfe let him not do to another. To deny himselfe to him¦selfe that he may follow Christ. To chastize his body. Not to seek after de∣lights. To loue fasting. To releeue the poore. To cloth the naked. To visit the sicke. To bury the dead. To help those that are in tribulation. To comfort the sadd. To withdraw himselfe from worldly businesses. To preferre nothing before the loue of Christ. Not to giue waye to anger. Not to beare reuenge in his mind. Not to foster guile or deceipt in his hart. Not to make fayned peace.
Not to forsake charity. Not to sweare t all, least perhaps he forsweare him∣selfe. To speake the truth from hart and outh. Not to doe euill for euill. Not o doe any injury. Yea and patiently to uffer an injury donne. To loue his ene∣yes. Not to speake ill of such as speake l of him, but rather to speake Well of them. To suffer persecution for ius∣ice. Not to be proud. Not a louer of wine. Not a great eater. Not drowsie. Not slouthfull. Not a murmurer. Not  detracter. To put his trust in God. Whē he shall see any good thing in him∣selfe, let him attribute it to God, not to himselfe. But let him always know hat euill is donne by him selfe, and ther∣fore let him attribute it to him selfe. To feare the daye of iudgement To be af∣fraid of Hell. To dester life euerlasting with spirituall thrst. To haue death al∣ways before his eyes. To obserue eue∣y houre the actiōs of his life. To know for certaine that God beholdeth him in euery place. Presently with the re∣membrance of Christ to put away euill thoughts entering into his hart, and to
reueale them to his spirituall father. T keepe his mouth frō euill and naugh¦ty words. Not to loue much talking Not to speake vaine words and such a mooue laughter. Not to loue muc and dissolute laughter. Willingly t heare holy readings. To praye ofte deuoutly. To conses dayly to God i praier euills past, with tears and sighes▪ To amend those euills for the time t come. Not to fullfill the desiers of th flesh. To hate his owne will. To obey the commandements of the Abbot i all things, although he him selfe (whic God for bid) should doe other wise being mindefull of that precept of ou Lord, what they saye doe yee: bu what they doe, doe yee not. Not to de¦sier to bee called holy, till he be soe, an first to be soe, that he may truly becal∣led. so. Dayly to fullfill in deeds, th commaundemēts of God. To loue cha∣stity. To hate noe man. To fly enui and emulation. Not to loue conten∣tion. To fly haughtines. To reueren▪
his elders. To loue his inferiours for Christ his sake. To praye for his eni∣yes. To make peace with his aduer∣ry before the setting of the sonne. nd neuer to dispare of Gods mercy. Behold these are the instruments of pirituall prosession, which things when they shall night and day con∣tantly be performed by vs, and layd pen in the day of Iudgement, that re∣ward shall be giuen vs in recompence y our Lord, which he hath promi∣sed, that eye hath not seene, nor eare eard, nor hath ascended in to the art of man, what God, hath pre∣pared for those that loue him. The worke house where all these things re to be done, is the cloyster of the monastery and stability in the Con∣gregation.
Of the obedience of the disci∣ples. CHAP. V. THe first degree of obedience is obe¦dience with out delay. This besee∣meth those who esteeme nothing more deare to them then Christ, by reason o the holy profession they haue made, o for the eare of Hell, or glory of life e∣uerlasting. Presently as soone as any thinge shall be commanded them by the superiour, as if it weare commanded by God, they make noe delay in doeing it. Of whom our Lord saith; From the hearing of the eare he hath obeyed me. And to Superiours and teachers he saith. He who heareth you heareth me. There∣fore such persons as these leauing pre∣sently all their owne occasions and for∣sakeing their owne will, casting out of their hands and leauing imperfect what they were about, with the speedy foot of obedience follow with deeds the voice of the commander. And as it were in
one moment the command of the aister, and the perfect worke of the sciple in the feare of God, goe both ntly together, and are speedely effe∣ed by those who thirst after life euer∣sting. These take the narrow way of hich our Lord saith; Narrow is the ay which leadeth to life, not liuing ac∣rding to their owne will or following eir owne desiers and pleasures; but ing in monasteries, and hauing an Ab∣ot ouer them, walking according to s directions & commandes. With out oubt such as these imitate that sentence f our Lord where he saith; I came ot to doe my owne will but the will of m who sent me. And This obedience ill thē be acceptable to God and plea∣ng to men, if that which is comman∣ed be done, not fearefully, slowly, oldly, or with murmuration, or with an swer she wing vnwillingnes. Because e obedience which is giuen to su∣eriours is giuen to God; who hath id. He who heareth you heareth me. nd it ought to be done of the disciples ith a good will: because God loueth
a chearfull giuer. If the disciple obey with an ill will and shall murmur no onely in words, but also in his hart though he fulfill what is commande him, it will not be acceptable before God, who considereth the hart of th murmurer. And for such a worke h shall not get reward, but rather in curreth the penalty of murmurers if he doe not amend and make satisfa¦ction. Of Silence. CHAP. VI. LEt vs doe according to the sayeing of the Prophet. I haue said I will keepe my wayes, that I offend not in my tongue. I haue been watch full oue my mouth. I haue held my peace and humbled my selfe and been silent from speaking good thinges. If' therfore some times according to this saying o the Prophet for silence sake we are to abstaine from good talke; how much more ought we to refraine, for the
guilt and penalty of sinne from euill words. Therfore for the grauity of si∣lence let leaue of speaking seldome be∣giuen, euen to perfect disciples, though of good and holy matters and tending to edification. Because it is written. In much speaking thou shalt not eschew sinne. And in another place. Death and life in the hands of the tongue. For it behoueth a maister to speake and teach, and it beseemeth a disciple to holde his peace and heare. Therfore if any thing be to be asked of the Priour let it be done with all humility subiec∣tion and' reuerence, that they may not seeme to speake more then is ne∣cessary. But scurrilities or idle words and such as moue laughter, we vtterly condemne and forbid in all places. And doe not permitt a disciple to open his mouth to such speeches.
Of Humility. CHAP. VII. THe holy scripture cryeth to vs brethren saying, Euery one who exalteth himselfe shall be hūbled, and he who humbleth himselfe, shall be exalted. Hereby declaring vnto vs, that all exaltation, is a kinde of pride, which the Prophet sheweth how carefully he auoyded, saying; Lord my hart is not exalted neither are my eyes lifted vp; neither haue I walked in great things, nor in wonders aboue my selfe. But what? If I did not thinke humbly but haue exalted my soule: As a child weaned from his mother, soe wilt thou reward my soule. Wherfore brethren, if we will attaine to true hu∣mility, and will speedily come to that heauenly exaltation to which we ascēd by the humility of this present life; by our ascending actions that ladder is to be set vp which appeared to Iacob
in his sleepe, where he saw Angels descending and ascending. That descēt and ascent signifieth nothing else, but that wee descēd by exalting our selues. and ascend by humbling our selues. And this ladder thus erected is our life here in this world, which by humility of hart is lifted vp to heauen by our Lord; And the sydes of this ladder we vnderstande to be our body and soule, in which the diuine maiesty hath pla∣ced diuers degrees of humility, & disci∣pline to be ascended. The first degree of Humility. THe first degree of humility is to haue always the feare of God be∣fore his eyes, and not to forgett himselfe But to be still mindefull of all thinges that God hath commanded: & to re∣member that such as contemne God, all into hell for their sinnes; and that uerlasting life is prepared for such as
feate him. And soe to keepe himselfe from all sinne & vice of thought, word eyes, hands, feet and proper will; and soe speedely cut of all fleshly desiers. Let him thinke himselfe to be always beheld from heauen of God; and all his actions, wheresoeuer he be, to ly open to his diuine sight, and to be presen∣ted to God euery howre by his Angells. The Prophet declareth this when he saith God to be allways pre∣sent to our thoughts in these words, God searcheth the hart and reynes And, Our Lord knoweth the thoughts of men that they are vaine. And a∣gaine, Thou hast vnderstoode my thoughts a fare of. & The thought of man shall confesse to thee. Let therfore the humble brother, that he may be carefull to auoid euill thoughts, all∣ways saie in his hart. Then shall I be with out spott before him, if I shall keepe me from my iniquity. The scrip∣ture alsoe forbiddeth vs to doe our owne will saying, Leaue thy owne will & desire. And besides we begge of God
in our daily praier that his will may be done in vs. We are taught therefore with good reason to take heede of doing our owne will, the scripture saying. There are wayes which seeme right to mē, the end where of plungeth euē into the deepe pitt of hell. And againe spea∣king of negligent persous; They are corrupted and made abominable in their pleasures. And in the desiers of the flesh wee ought to beleeue God to be alwayes present to vs, according to that of the Prophet speaking to our Lord Before thee is all my desire. Let vs then take heed of ill desires, because death is neare to the entrance of de∣light, where vpon the scripture com∣mandeth. Follow not thy concupis∣cences. If therefore the eyes of our Lord behold both good & bad, and our Lord always lookes downe from heauen vpon the sonnes of men, to see who is vnder standing or seekeing God; and that our workes are by our An∣gells Guardians daye & night told to
our Lord and maker; We must al∣ways take heed, Brethren, least (as the Prophet in the Psalme saieth) God sometymes behold vs declining to euill & become vnprofitable: and though he spare vs for the present because he is mercifull and expecteth our conuer∣sion and amendment, least he say to vs hereafter, These thinges thou hast done & I haue held my peace. The second degree of humility is, If not louing his owne will he seeke not to satisfie his desiers, but imitate that saying of our Lord, I came not to doe my owne will, but the will of him who sent me. The scripture likwise saieth; The will hath punishment, and necessity purchaseth à crowne. The third degree of humility is, If for the loue of God he submit him∣selfe with all obedience to his supe∣riour, imitating our Lord of whom the Apostell sayth, He was made obedient euen to death. The fourth degree of humility is, If that in obedience hard and contrary
things & also iniurious beinge done to him, he imbrace them patiently with a quiet conscience; and suffering growe not wearye, and giue ouer, accor∣ding to that of the scripture, Who per∣seuereth vntill the end he shall be sa∣ued. And againe, let thy hart be com∣forted & expect our Lord. And she∣wing that the faithfull man ought for our Lord to beare all thinges, though neuer so contrary, he sayth in the per∣son of the sufferers. For thee we suffer death all the daye longe: wee are estee∣med as sheep of the slaughter. And being assured by hope, of à reward at Gods handes they goe on reioycing & saying, But in all these thinges, we ouer∣come by the help of him who hath loued vs. And likewise in another pla∣ce the scripture saith. Thou hast poued vs o Lord: thou hast tried vs with fire as siluer is tried. Thou hast brought vs into the snare; Thou hast laid tri∣bulation vpon our backs. And to shew that we ought to be vnder a Prior or superiour he followes on
saying. Thou hast placed men ouer our heads, Fulfilling also by patience the precept of our Lord in aduersityes & iniuries, being struck on the one cheeke they offer the other: leaue their cloakes to him who takes awaye their coate; & being cōstrayned to carry a burden one mile, goe two miles. And with Paule the Apostle suffer false bre∣thren & persecutions, and blesse those who reuile and speake ill of them. The fift degree of humility is, to ma∣nifest to his Abbot by humble confes∣sion all the ill thoughts of his hart, and secret faults committed by him. The scripture exhorteth vs hereunto saying. Reueale thy waye to our Lord, and hope in him. And againe, Confesse to our Lord because he is good, because his mercy is for euer. And furthermore the Prophet saith, I haue made knowne vnto thee mine offence, & I haue not hidden my iniustices. I haue said, I will declare openly against my selfe to our Lord mine iuiustices: and thou hast pardoned the wickednes of my hart.
The sixt degree of humility is. If a monke be content with all basenes and extremity, & in all thinges which are inioyned him, he thinke himselfe an euill and vnworthy seruant, saying with the Prophet. I haue beene brought to nothing, & knew not. I haue beene made like a beast with thee, and I always with thee. The seuenth degree of humility is, that he not onely pronounce with his tongue, but also with his very hart be∣leeue himselfe to be inferiour to all & most abiect; and humbling himselfe saye with the Prophet. I am a worme and not a man, the reproch of men & the outcast of the People. I am exalted, humbled and confounded. And againe, It is good for me that thou hast hum∣bled me, that I may learne thy com∣mandements. The eight degree of humility is. That a monke doe nothing but what the common Rule of the monastery or the examples of his seniors teach and exhort him.
The ninght degree of humility is, For a monke to refraine his tongue frō speaking and be silent till a question be asked him, remembring the say∣ing of the scripture. In many words sinne shall not be auoided; & that a talk∣ing man shall not be directed vpon earth. The tenth degree of humility is, Not to be facile and prompt to laugh∣ter, for it is written, The foole exalteth his voice in laughter. The eleuenth degree of humility is, For a monke when he speaketh, to speake gently and with out laughter, humbly, with grauity or fewe words, and discreetly, and not be clamorous in his voice; for it is written, A wise man is knowne by speaking few words. The twelfth degree of humility is For a monke not only to haue humi∣lity in his hart, but also to shew it in his exteriour to all that behold him; at worke, in the Monastery, in the Ora∣torie, in the Garden, in the fielde, in
the waye or where soeuer, sitting, wal∣king or standing, that he haue alwayes has head inclined & his eyes fixed on the grownde, thinking himselfe euer guilty for his; sinnes, and ready to be presented before the dreadfull iudge∣mēt of God, and so saying to himselfe with the Publican of the Ghospell; Lord, I a sinner am not worthy to life mine eyes vp to heauen. And againe with the Prophet; I am bowed downe and humbled on euery side. And thus all these degrees of humility being ascēded, a monke shall presently come to that loue of God which is per∣fect and expelleth feare, whereby all things which at the beginnīg he obser∣ued through feare, he shall now begin to doe by custome without any labour as it were naturally, not for the feare of Hell, but for the loue of Christ, and out of à good custome and a delight in vertue, which our Lord will by the ho∣ly Ghost voutchsafe to worke in his seruant now cleare from vice & sinne.
Of the diuine office in the nightes. CHAP. VIII. IN the winter time, that is, from the kalends of Nouember till Easter ac∣cording to à reasonable consideration, let them rise at the eight hower of the night, that they may rest till a little af∣ter midnight, and then after disgestion rise. As for the time that remaines af∣ter Mattines, let the Brethren who want some thing of the Psalter or les∣sons, bestowe it on meditation. But from Easter to the Kalends of Nouem∣ber, let the houre for Mattines soe be ordered, that a litle time being left for the Brethren to goe forth to the neces∣sities of nature, by and by the Laudes which are to be said about the breake of daye may beginne.
How many Psalmes are to be saide in the night howres. CHAP. IX. IN winter time hauing first said the verse Deus in adiutorium moum inten∣de, Domine ad aduuandum me festina, then Domine labia mea aperies & os meum annunciabit laudm tuam is to be repe∣ted thrise. To which is to be added the third, Psalme, & after it à Gloria Then the 94. Psalme with an Anthym is to be sayd or sōge. Next after let a Hymne follow: and then six Psalmes with Anthymes, which being said with à verse, let the Abbot giue blessing, Thē all sitting doune on benches, let the brethren read three Lessons by turnes, the booke lying on à trill, and after euery lesson let à responsory be song. Let two responsaries be said with out a Gloria: But after the third lesson he who singeth it, let him also singe a Gloria which when the singer be∣gineth
let all rise from their seats, for the honour & reuerence of the holy Trinity. And let the scriptures as well of the old testament as the new be read at mattines, and the expositions vpon them made by the most famous orthodox & Catholik fathers. After these three lessons & their responso∣ries, let other six Psalmes follow, songe with alleluya. After this let a lesson out of the Apostle bee recited by hart, and a verse & the supplication of the Litanies that is a Kyrie eleyson, & soe end the mattines or night Vigills. How the matines or night office is to bee celebrated in summer. CHAP. X. FRom Easter till the kalends of Nouember, let the same number of Psalmes be obserued as before we haue appointed, but let not the Lessons be read because of the shortnes of the night, but in place of those three les∣sons,
let one be said by hart out of the old testament, & after that a short Re∣sponsory, and let the rest be performed as before is appointed, so that their ne∣uer be fewer then twelue psalmes said at mattines, besides the third & 94. Psalme. How the mattins or night office is to be celebrated on Sondayes. CHAP. XI. ON the sundaye let them rise to mattines more timely, and ob∣srue this order, that six Psalmes being song (as be fore we haue ordained) & the verse, let all sitt downe decently in their seats, each one in their order, let foure Lessons be read out of a Booke with their responsories, and in the fourth only let him that singes it saye the Gloria; at the beginning of which let all rise with reuerence. After these lessons, let six more Psalmes follow in order with their anthyms and a verse as
before. After which againe let ther be read other foure lessons with their responsories in the same order as the former. And then let three canticles besaid out of the Prophets such as the Abbot shall appoint which canticles are to be songe with alleluya. Then the verse being said & the Abbo hauing giuen the benediction, let other foure lessons be read out of the new testamēt in the same orde as before, & after the fourth responsory, let the Abbot be∣ginne the Hymne Te Deum laudamus which being said, let the Abbot read a lesson of the Ghospell all standing with reuerence and trembleing: which being read; all answer Amen: and then let the Abbot presently goe on with the hymne Te decet laus: And the blessing being giuen let him begin Laudes. This order is alwayes to be obserued on Sundayes in saying the vigills or mat∣tines, as well in sommer as winter ex∣cept perchance, (which God for bid it happen) they ryse late, be cause then some what is to be shortned of the
lessons or responsories. But let good heed be taken that this happen not and if it doe, let him by whose neglect it happeneth make satisfaction for it in the Oratory. How the solemnity of Laudes is to be performed. CHAP. XII. FOr the sundaye Laudes, let first the sixt Psalme be said plaine with out anthyme, after which saye the fiftieth Psalme with alleluya, and after that the hundred and seuenty Psalme and the sixty two Psalme. Then the Benedictions & praieres with à lesson out of the Apoc-lips by hart; and a res∣ponsory, à hymne and a verse with à canticle out of the Ghospell & the Li∣tanies, and soe end.
How the Laudes are to be celebrated  priuat dayes. CHAP. XIII. ON priuat dayes let laudes be thu celebrated. Let the sixt Psal¦me be sayd with out an anthyme plaine and protracting it (as vpon sun¦daye) that all maye come to the fif¦tieth which is to be said with on An¦thyme. After which let other two Psalmes besayde according to the cu¦stome, that is on mundaye the fift an fiue & thirtieth: on Tuesdaye the forty two and the fifieth six. On wed¦nesday the sixty third, and the sixtye fourth. On Thurday the eighty seuen▪ and the eighty ninth. On friday the seuenty fiue & the ninty on: and on saturday the hundreth and two, & the canticle of Deuteronomie is to bee de∣uided in to two glorias. But on other days let euery canticle, be said in his day out of the Prophets according to
the practice of the church of Rome. After these let the prayses or Laudate follow, then a lesson without booke out of the Apostle, a responsory, a hymne, & a verse, a canticle out of the Ghospell, the Litanies and soe end. And let this all wayes be obserued, that in the end of Laudes and Euen songe, our Lords praier be said by the Prior a oude that all maye heare it, for feare of scandalls that ar wont to arise, but being putt in mind by the couenant of this praier, in which they saye, for giue vs our trespasses as we for giue them hat trespasse against vs; they may purge hem selues of this vice. But in cele∣brating other howers, let only the last art be said a loud, that all may answer. ed libera nos a malo. In what maner mattines is to be celebrated on the feast dayes of saints. CHAP. XIV. VPon the feastes of saints and in all solemnities, let the same order
be obserued as vpon sundays, only l their be said Psalmes anthymnes an lessons pertayning to the day, but fo the rest let the a foresayd manner b obserued. At what times Alleluya is to be said. CHAP. XV. FRom the holy feast of Easter vntil whitsontide with out intermission let alleluya be sayd, as well with the Psalmes as the responsories. From whitsontide till the begining of Lent let it be sayd at the Nocturnes with the six last Psalmes only. And vpon euery sonday out of Lent let the can∣ticles of Laudes Pime, terce, sext and none be said with alleluya, but Euen∣song with anthymes. And let the res∣ponorie neuer be sayd with alleluya, but only from Easter till whitson∣tide.
n what maner the worke of God or de∣uine seruice is to be performed in the day tyme. CHAP. XVI. SEuen tymes adaye (saith the Pro∣phet) I haue song praises to thee. Which sacred number of seuen shall be accomplished by vs. If at theses times, of Laudes. Prime. Terce. Sext. None Euensonge and Complin, we per∣forme the office & duty of our seruice: Be cause of these howers the Prophet hath sayd, seuen tymes in the day. I haue song praise to thee. For of the night vigills or mattins the selfe same Prophet sayes. At midnight I did rise to confesse to thee Therefore at these tymes, let vs giue prayses to our sa∣uiour, for the iudgements of his iustice. That is at Laudes. Prime. Terce. Sext none Euen songe & compline and in the night let vs rise to confesse vnto him.
How many Psalmes ar to be said at the rest of the howers. CHAP. XVII. VVE haue alredy set downe the order of the office for the Nocturnes and Landes, now let vs dis∣pose of the howers following. At the first hower or Prime let three Psalmes be said seuerally, and not vnder one gloria, and a hymne of the same hower presently after the verse Deus in adiuto∣rium meum intende, Domine ad adiuuan∣dum me festina, Before the Psalmes. And after the end of the Psalmes, let there be recited à lesson, a verse & ky∣rye eleyson, and let them haue licence to departe. Terce Sextād: None are to be recited after the same order: that is a verse and a hymne, at the same hower three Psalmes, then a lesson, a verse, and kyrie eleyson, and after that leaue to depart. If the conuent be great let them be songe with anthymes if litle, only
recited. But let euensonge be saide with foure Psalmes and anthymnes fter which Psalmes let a lesson be re∣ited then à respōsory, a hymne, a verse canticle out of the ghospel the lita∣ie and our Lords praier so end. For omplin let there be three Psalmes re∣ited plaine with out anthymes, after which, a hymne fitt for that hower, a esson, a verse, kyrie eleyson and a Be∣ediction, and so make an end. In what order the Psalmes are to be said. CHAP. XVIII. IN the daye howers first of all let them alwayes begin with the verse, Deus in adiutorium meum intende, Domi∣ead adiuuandum mefestina and a Gloria, hen the hymne of that howre. At rime on sondayes there are to be said ower Chapters of the hundred and ighteenth Psalme. And at the rest of he howers to witt, Terce Sext and
None let there be sayd three chapter of the same hundred and eightieth Psalme. Prime on mondaye let there be said three Psalmes, that is the firs seconde and sixth, and soe euery day at Prime till sondaye let three Psalme be said in order vnto the ninetieth Psalme, but soe that the nineth and se∣uenth Psalme be diuided in to two Glo∣rias; And soe it will fall out that on the sunday at mattines we shall allwayes begin from the twentyeth Psalme. At Terce Sext & none of the sundayes let the nine chapters which remayne of the one hūdred and eightieth Psalme be said by three & three at the some howres. The hundred and eightieth Psalme therefore being said ouer in two days, to witt sunday and mondaye; At Terce, Sext and none vpon Tues∣day let the Psalmes be sung in order by three & three from the hundredth and ninetieth to the hundredth twē∣ty seuenth, that is, nine Psalmes. And these Psalmes ar all ways to be repeated at the some howers the rest of the
week till sunday; An vniforme order also of the hymnes, Lessons, and verses, being euery day obserued; soe they maye all euery sundaye begin from the hundred and eighteen Psalme. Euen song is euery daye to be songe with foure Psalmes, which Psalmes are to begin from the hundredth & ninth Psalme going on to the hundredth fourty seuenth, excepting only such, as ar sequestred for other howres, that is from the hundred and seuent ten Psalme to the hundred twenty and seauen, and the hundred thirty three, & the hundred forty two. All the rest a to be said in euensonges. And be cause there fall three Psalmes short, those Psalmes which ar found longest ar to be diuided, that is the hundred thirty eight, the hundred forty three and the hundred fourty fowre; And let the hū∣dreth and sixteenth because it is short be ioyned with the hundredth and fifteenth. The order therfore of the Psalmes for euensonge being set downe, let the other things that is les∣sons,
Responsories, hymes, verses, and Canticles be ordered as we haue said before. At complin let the same Psalme be repeated euery daye, that is the fourth, nintieth, and the hundred thirty three. The order of the day office being thus disposed, let all the Psalmes which remayne be equally deuided in to the seuen Mattines or night Vigills, deui∣ding still the Psalmes which ar longest: And let twelue be appointed for euery night. And if this disposition and distri∣bution of the Psalmes displease any, let him if he think good order them other∣wise, so he prouide that euery weeke the whole Psalter of a hundred and fifty Psalmes be songe; And that vpon sunday at Mattines they begin it a∣gaine. Be cause Monkes shew them selues ouer negligent & indeuout, if in the circuit of a weeke, they singe not ouer the Psalter with the accustomed canticles, since wee read that our holy fathers haue couragiously performed all that in one daye, which God grant
we tepid and negligent persons maye performe in a whole weeke. Of the order and discipline of singinge. CHAP. XIX. VVE beleeue the diuine pre∣sence to be in all places, and the eyes of our Lord continually to be∣hold both the good & the bad: But then especially and particularly, when we ar at the worke of God. Therfore let vs be allways mindfull what the Prophet saith: Serue yee our Lord in feare and againe; Singe yee wisely, and In the sight of Angells I will sing vnto thee. Therfore let vs consider in what ma∣ner, and with what reuerence it beho∣ueth vs to be in the sight of God and the Angells, and let vs soe sing in the quire that our mind and voyce ac∣cord together.
Of the reuerence of prayer. CHAP. XX. IF wee presume not to speake with any great persō, but with humility & reuerance, how much more ought wee to present our supplications to our Lord the God of all thinges with hu∣mility and purity of deuotion. And we must know that we shall be heard, not for our many words, but for our purity of hart, and compunction of teares. And therefore prayer ought to be short & pure, vnlesse perhaps it be prolonged by the inspiration of diuine grace. But in the conuent let praier al∣ways be short; and the signe being gi∣uen by the Priour, let all rise to∣geather.
Of the Deanes of the Monas∣tery. CHAP. XXI. IF the Conuent be great, let their be chosen out of them some Bro∣thers who ar of good repute and ho∣ly conuersation, & appointed Deanes, who ar to be carefull ouer their dean∣ries in all things according to the com∣mandement of God, and the precepts of their Abbot. And let such men be∣chosen for Deanes, whom the Ab∣bot may securely rely on to bear part of his burden. And let them not be∣chosen by order, but according to their desert of life and learning. And if perhaps any of them puft vp with pride, shall be found worthy of re∣prehension, and being rebuked once twice or thrice doe not a mend, let him be put out of office, and an other who is worthy, substituted in his pla∣ce. And the same we ordain of the Prior or Prepositus.
How the Monkes ar to sleepe. CHAP. XXII. LEt the Monkes sleepe a part in seuerall Beds, and let them haue bedclothes befitting them according to the appointment of the Abbot. If it can be, let them sleepe in one place. But if the number permit it not, let thē sleepe by tenne or twenty in a place with their seuerall seniors who haue care of them. And let a candel burne in the same cell till morning. Let them sleepe clothed and girt with girdells or cordes, but let them not haue kniues by their sides while they sleepe, lest perhaps they be hurt there with slee∣ping. And let the Mokes be allwayes ready, that as soon as the signe is heard, rising speedely each one may hasten to come before his fellowes to the worke of God, yet with all grauity and modestie. Let not the yonger bre∣thren
haue beds by themselues, but mixt with the elder: and rysing let thē modestly exhort one another to the worke of God; for the excuses and de∣layes of such as be sluggish. Of excommunication for of∣fences. CHAP. XXIII. IF any brother shall be found stub∣borne, dissobedient, proud, murmu∣ring, or contrarie in any thinge to the holy Rule, or to contemne the orders of his seniours, let that man according to the precept of our Lord be once or twise secretly admonished by his se∣mours, and if he doe not amende, let him be reprehended publikely before all, but if with all this he amend not, then let him be lyable to excommuni∣cation, if he vnderstand what kinde of punishment it is. And if he be obstinat, let him be lyable to corporall punish∣ment.
What the manner of excommunication ought to be. CHAP. XXIV. According to the quality of the falt, the measure of excōmunica∣tion or punishment ought to be exten∣ded; which is to depend on the iudge∣ment of the Abbot. If any brother be found in a lesser falt, let him be de∣priued of the participation of the ta∣ble: The manner of this depriuation shall be this: that in the oratorie he shall neyther beginne Psalme, nor an∣thyme, nor recite a lesson vntill he haue made satisfaction. And let him take his refection of meate alone after the brethren haue taken their refectiō in such measure, and at such time as his Abbot shall thinke fitting; as (for example) if the brethren take their re∣fection at the sixt hower, let that brother at the ninth: if the brethren at the ninth, let him at the euening,
vntill by dew satisfaction he obtaine pardon. Of more greeuous faults. CHAP. XXV. BVt that brother who is guilty of more greeuious faults, is to bee sus∣pended both from the table and the o∣ratorie. And let none of the brethren discourse with him or keepe him cō∣pany, let him be alone at the worke inioyned him persisting in penance & sorrow, knowing that terrible sen∣tence of the Apostle, who sayeth that such à man is deliuered to sathan to the distruction of the flesh, that his spirit maye bee saued in the daye of our Lord. And let him take his allow∣ance of meate alone in such measure and time, as the Abbot shall thinke fitt, neyther let any man blesse him passing by, or the meate which is giuen him.
Of those that keepe company with ex∣communicated persons without the commande of the Abbot. CHAP. XXVI. IF any brother shall presume with∣out cōmand of the Abbot to ioyne himselfe in any sort to an excommu∣nicated brother, or to talke with him, or send to him, let him incurre the same penalty of excomunication. How the Abbot ought to be carefull of such as be excommunicated. CHAP. XXVII. LEt the Abbot haue a speciall care of the delinquent brethren, for the Phisitian is not needfull for such as a in health, but for the sicke. And ther∣fore he ought to vse all the means of a wise Phisitian, and to send to them
some priuat comforters. That is some antient and discreet bethren, who may as it weare secretly comfort the troob∣led brother, & stirr him vp to hūble satisfaction. And let them comfort him, that he be not opressed with ouer much sorrow but as the Apostle saith; let charity be confirmed in him and let all praye for him. The Abbot ought to be very solicitous and carefull with all prudence and industrie, that he loose none of the sheepe committed to his charg. Let him know that he hath vnder takē the charge of infirme soules, & not any tyranicall autority ouer such as be well. And let him feare the threatnings of the Prophet, by whom God saith: what yee sawe well liking that you take to your selues, & what was weake you threw away. Let him imitate the pious example of the good shepheard, who leauing ninety nine sheepe in the mountaynes, went to seeke one sheepe which was gone as∣traye, on whose infirmity he tooke such compassion, that he vouchsafed
to lay it on his shoulders and so to cary it backe to the flocke. Of those Who being often corrected do not amend. CHAP. XXVIII. IF à brother haue beene often admo∣nished of a fault, or beene excom∣municated and yet do not amend, let him be more seuerely corrected, and punished with stripes. And if for all this he amend not, so but rather puf∣fed vp with pride (which God for bid) will also defend his doings, then let the Abbot doe like a wise Phisitian, af∣ter that he hath applied the fomenta∣tions, and oyntments of good exhor∣tations, the medicines of diuine scrip∣ture, and last of all the punishment of excommunication, and the stripes of Rods, and yet find his labours take not effect, let him add that which is more then all this to witt his prayer, and the prayers of all the Brethren for him,
that our Lord who can doe all thinges, would vouchafe o wok acure vpon the infime brother: and if by this meanes he be not healed and amended, then let the Abbot vse the sword of ab∣essio according to the saying of the Apostle: Take away euill from a∣mogst you. And againe. If the vn∣faith full breaking his promise depart, let him depart, least one diseased sheepe infect the whole flocke. Whether brethren gonne out of the Monas∣tery ought to be receaued a gaine. CHAP. XXIX. THat brother who through his owne fault goeth forth, or is cast forth of the monastery, if he will re∣turne, let him promise first the amen∣dement of the fault for which he went forth, and then let him be receaued in the lowest rank, that by this, his humi∣lity may be tried. And if he goe out a∣gaine
let him be receaued againe till the third time. But afterwards let him know that all entrance will be denied him. Of Children of yonger yeares how thy ar to be corrected. CHAP. XXX. EVery age & vnderstanding ought to haue a proper gouerment. And therefore as often as children, or such as are younger in age & can not vnder∣stand how great a punishment excom∣munication is, let such as these when they offend be punished with rigorous fasting or sharpe stripes, that so they be cured. What kind of man the Cellerarius of the Monastery ought to be. CHAP. XXXI. LEt such à one be chosen out of the conuent to be Cellerarius of the Monastery, who is wise, graue of be∣hauiour,
sober, noe greet eater, not turbulent, not iniurious, not slow or ne∣gligent, nor prodigall, but one that fea∣reth God, who maye be as a father to all the conuent: let him haue care of all things, and let him doe nothing without the command of his Abbot. Let him obserue such things as ar com∣manded him, and let him not contris∣tate his brethren. And if any brother request any thing of him that is not rea∣sonable, let him not contristate him by contemning him, but let him with humility and iust cause deny his vnrea∣sonnable request: let him haue regard to his owne soule, and be mindfull of that rule of the Apostle: That he which serueth well getteth him selfe a place amongst the iust, Let him haue à dili∣gent care of the sicke, of the infants, of the guestes, and of the poore, for of all these let him know at the dredfull iud∣gement daye, he is to giue an accompt; keep & regard all the vessells & goods of the Monastery, as if they were sa∣cred vessells of the alter, let nothing be neglected neuer. Let him neither be
couetous no prodigall or a wster of the goods of the Monastery▪ But let him doe all things with  and according to the commd f he Abbot, aboue all hings , to conserue humility, and if any thing be asked of him which he hath not to giue, let him at the least afford them a good answere, for it is written, a good answer is before the best guest, Let him haue à care of all thinges which the Abbot inioyneth him, and let him not presume to doe any thing which he forbiddeth. Let him giue to the bre∣thren their allowance of meat appoin∣ted, with out lessening or delayeing it, that they be not scandalized, being mindfull of our Lord sayings in the Ghospell, what he deserueth that shall scandalize one of the litle ones. If the conuent be great, let assistance begiuē him that soe being holpen he may quietly performe the office committed to his charge. Let such thinges as are to be giuen or asked, be giuen & asked at conuenient houres, that noe man
maye be troubled or contristated in the house of God. Of the Iron tooles of the Monas∣tery. CHAP. XXXII. FOr keeping the Iron tooles, Clothes, or other things belonging to the Monastery, let the Abbot pro∣uide brethren of whose life and conuer∣sation he maye be secure, and to them let him allot all things to be keept, as he shall iudge most expedient. Of all which thinges let the Abbot keepe à note, that when other brethren succed, the one may know what he takes, and the other wht he quiteth, and if any one shall sluttishly or negligently handle the things of the monastery, let him be rebuked. And if he doe not amend, let him be lyable to disci∣pline.
Whether the monkes ought to haue any thinges proper to them∣selues. CHAP. XXXIII. THe vice of giuing or taking without the leaue of the Abbot, or calling of any thing whatsoeuer, euen of a booke or pen his owne is especially to be rooted out of the monastery. Be∣cause it is not lawfull for them to haue their bodies or wills in their owne pow∣er. But to hope for all necessaryes from the father of the monastery. No∣thing which the Abbot doth not giue or permitt may be lawfully keept but all hings to be in common, as it is writen. Nor lett any call or presume any thinge to be his owne. And if any one shall be founde to be giuen to this most wicked vice, let him be admo∣nished once or twice, & if he shall not amend, let him be subiect to correc∣tion.
Whether all ought to haue necessaries alike. CHAP. XXXIV. AS it is written, let there be di∣stributed to each one according to their necessity; to signify, not that there shall be acception of persones (which god forbid) but that conside∣ration be had of euery ones infirmities. And therfore let him who needeth lesse, giue God thankes, and not be contristated. And he who needeth more, let him be humbled for his in∣firmity & not proude for the mercy shewed him, and soe all the members shall be in peace. Aboue all thinges take heed there be noe murmuration vpon any occasion what so euer by word or signe, and if any one shall be founde falty in this, let him be liable to most seuere discipline.
Of the weekly officers which are to be in the kitchin. CHAP. XXXV. THe brethren are soe to serue each other, that noe man be excused from the office of the kitchin, vnlesse they be hindred by sicknes or other busines of more profitt. Because from thence a greater reward is gotten. And for the weaker sort, let them haue help that they may doe it wich alacrity and not with sadnes; and let all generally haue help and solace according as the number of the conuent and situatiō of the place shall require. If the conuent be great let the Cellerarius be excused from the kitchin, & as we haue said before, such as ar imployed in matters of greater profit. But let the rest serue each other in charity. He who goeth out of the weeke, let him vpon satur∣day make all things cleane. Let him wash the linen with which the bre∣thren
wipe their hands & feet. And let both him who goeth out, & he who cometh in, wash the feet of euery one. And let him giue back by tale to the Cellerarius the vessels of his office made cleane and whole, that he maye know what he giueth & what he taketh. And these weeke officiers maye take an hower before refection, eache one a draught of drink, and a peece of bread a boue the appointed allowance, that at the houer of refection, they maye serue their brethren with out murmuring or great labour. Not with∣sanding on solemne days, let all for∣beare till mas. The weeke officers en∣tring in, & going out, vpon sondaye in the oratory, presently after Laudes, shall make low inclination at the feet of their brethren, & desier to be prayed for. And Theye who goeth out that weeke, shall saye this verye. Benedi∣ctus es Domine Deus, qui adiuuistime & consolatus es me. which being thrice re∣peated let him who goeth out receaue
his blessing, and let him who entret immediatly follow & saye Deus in ad¦iutorium meum intende, Domine ad adiu¦uandum me festina, and let this be lik wise thrice repeated of all. And hauing receaued his blessing, let him enter i to his office. Of the sicke-brethren. CHAP. XXXVI. BEfore and aboue all things a spe∣ciall care is to be had of the sicke, so that they be serued, euen as Christ himselfe because he hath sayd; I haue beene sicke & yee haue visited me▪ And what yee haue donne to one of these litle ones, yee haue donne to me▪ let the sicke brethren consider that they are serued for the honour of God, & therfore let them not contristat their brethren who serue them, with their superfluityes. Who notwitstanding ar patiently to be borne with all, because of such, a more aboundant reward is
gotten. Therefore let the Abbot haue a speciall care they be not neglected. For the sick brethren let their be a cell appointed by it selfe, & a seruitor fea∣ring God, that is diligent & carefull. Let the vse of bathes be allowed to the sicke as often as shall be expedient: but to such as are in health especially to yonge men, let it bee seldome granted. More ouer let eating of flesh be gran∣ted to such as are sicke, & weake, for their recouery. But when they ar re∣couered let them after the acustomed manner, wholy abstaine from flesh. And let the Abbot haue a speciall care, that the Cellerarius or seruitors neglect not the sicke, be cause whatsoeuer is donne amisse by his disciples, is impu∣ted to him. Of old men & Infants. CHAP. XXXVII. ALthough mans nature it selfe be inclined to pitty, these ages,
that is, old men & Infants, not with∣stanting it is also fitting that by the au∣tority of the Rule they should be pro∣uided for. Let therefore their weaknes be all ways considered, & let the ri∣gour of the Rule in victualls be by noe means kept with them, but let there be a pious consideration had of them, and let them come timely to the cano∣nicall howers. Of the weekely reader. CHAP. XXXVIII. REeadinge ought not to be wan∣ting at the Table whiles the bre∣thren eate; Neither ought any one to presume to reade, who shall take vp, the booke by hap hazard, but let him that is appointed to read for the whole weeke enter in vpon sondaye. And then after masse and communion let him desier all to praye for him, that God may keep from him the spirit of pride, and let this▪ verse be thrise repe∣ted
in the oratory, he first begining it. Domine labia mea aperies, & os meum ae∣nuntiabit laudem tuam. Then after the benediction giuen, let him enter in to reade. Let great silence be kept at the table, soe that noe voyce or muttering be hard, but only of the reader, and for such thinges as ar necessary for meate & drinke, let the brethren soe prouide, that no man neede to aske any thing. And if any thing shall be wanting, let it be asked rather by the sound of some signe then by voyce: nor let any one there presume to aske any thing of that which is read, or any thinge else, least occasion o speech be giuen, vn∣lesse perhaps the Prior will make some breefe exhortation for the edification of the brethren. And let the hebdoma∣darius take a few pottage before he be∣ginne to reade, for holy communion sake, and least perhaps it be trouble∣some to him to fast soe long & af∣terwards let him eate with the other weekely officers of the kitchim and seruitours. And let not the brethren
or reade by order, but such as maye edi∣fie the hearers. Of the measure or quantity of meate. CHAP. XXXIX. AT the dayly refection as well of the sixth as ninth hower at all ta∣bles, we thinke two dishes of hot pulse will be fitting, by reason of the infir∣myties of diuers, that he who can not eate of one, may make his refection of the other. Let therefore two dishes of hot pulse suffice the brethren, and if there bee any apples or frute, let them haue it for a third dish. Let à pound of bread be the allowance for one daye, whether ther be one refection, or both dinner and supper, and if they be to suppe, let a third part of that pound be reserued by the Cellerarius for their supper. And if their labour be great, it shall be in the power of the Abbot to add to their ordinary allowance what
he shall thinke expedient, hauing al∣wayes a care to auoid excesse and surfi∣ting that the monkes be not ouertak∣en with indisgestion, be cause there is noe sinne more contrary to à christian then gluttonie, and our Lord saith; see that your harts be not opprest with gluttonie & drunckennes. But to chil∣dren of yonger age, let not the same quantity be giuen, but lesse then to the elder; obseruing alwayes moderation and frugality. And lett all generally abstayne from eating of foure footed beasts, excepting such as be very weake and sick. Of the measure of drinke. CHAP. XXXX. EVery one hath his proper gift from God one thus & another thus: and therfore we apponit the mea∣sure of other mens victualls not with out some scrupuosity. Yet consi∣dering the weaknes & infirmity of
many, wee thinke a pinte of wine will suffice each one a daye. But to whom God giues the giuft of abstinence, let them know they shall receaue their proper reward. And if either labour, heate of the sommer, or situation of the place require more, let the Prior doe what he thinketh good, hauing euer a care that fullnes or gluttony creepe not in. And although we reade, wine to be in no sort the drink of Monckes, yet because in these times they will not be so perswaded, let vs at∣leastwise cōsent to this, that we drinke not our fill but sparingly & with mo∣deration, because wine makes euen wisemen to Apostatike. But where the necessity of the place will not allowe that measure appointed, but lesse or perhaps none at all, let them prayse God that liue there, & not mur∣mur. And this aboue all things we ad∣monish, that there neuer be any mur∣murations.
At what howers the brethren ar to take their refection. CHAP. XXXXI. FRom the holy feast of Easter vntill whitsontide, let the brethren take their refection at the sixt hower, & suppe at night. But from whitsontide all the summer longe, if they labour not in the feilds, or the extremity of the heate doth not molest them, let them fast wedensday & friday till the ninth hower, but on other days, let them dine at the sixth hower: Which sixth hower of dinner if they worke in the feilds or the heate of the sommer be great, shall be continued, at the discre∣tion of the Abbot, and let him soe tem∣per & dispose all things, that soules may be aued and what the brethren doe, maye be done without murmuring. But from the Ides of september vntill the beginning of Lent, let the brethrē always refresh themselues at the ninth
hower; And from the beginning of Lent vntill Easter, let them refresh in the euening, but let it be soe ordered, that then in the euening there be noe need of à light at time of refection, but that all be done by daye light, yea at all times whether supper or noe supper, let the hower of refection be soe orde∣red, that all things be donne by day∣light. That noe man maye speake after Complin. CHAP. XXXXII. MOnkes ought to keep silence at all times but especially in the night howers. And therefore at all times, whether they be dayes of fasting ordining, when it is a day of dining, presently after they are risen from supper, let them come all together, and being sett, let one reade the collations or liues of the fathers, or some other thing that maye edifie the hearers, but
let them not reade the Heptateuch or booke of kings, be cause it will not be profitable for weake vnderstandings to heare this scripture at that hower, yet at other times it may be read. But if it be a fasting daye after that Euen-songe is saide, with in a litle space let them come to the reading of the Col∣lations as we haue sayd: and foure or fiue leaues beeing read, or as much as the time permits, all being come toge∣ther in this time of reading and namely those who perhaps were occupyed in some speciall workes enioyned them when all ar assembled together, let them say Complin, and after they goe out from Complin, let noe leaue be granted to speake that night. And if any one shall be found to breake this Rule of silence, let him be liable to most seuere punishment, except there besome necessary occasion by reason of the coming in of some guests, or that the Abbot commande any thing, And let that also be donne with great gra∣uity & moderation.
Of those that comes late to the worke of God, or to the Table. CHAP. XXXXIII. LEt all come presently as soone as the signe shall be giuen with all hast to the diuine office, leauing what∣soeuer shall be in their hands. Yet with grauity and auoiding all kind of scurillity, let nothing therefore be preferred before the worke of God. And if any shall come to the Mattines after the gloria of the 94. Psalme (which of purpose we will haue to be said with protraction and leasurly) let him not stande in his order in the quire, but let him stand last of all, or in the place which the Abbot shall ap∣pointe à parte, for such negligent People, that he maye be in the sight of the Abbot and all the rest, vntill the worke of God be ended, that so he doe penance & make publik satis∣faction; And we ordaine that they stād
in the last place, or apart, to the end that being seen by all, they may amend euen for shame. For it maye be such a one who if he remayne out of the ora∣torie, wil perhaps setle himselfe to sleepe or idle talke, & soe giue occasiō to the enimy. Therefore let him come in, that he loose not all, and bee amen∣ded for the time to come. And in the daye howers, he that shall come to the worke of God after the verse & gloria, of the first Psalme, according to the afore sayd order, let him stand last, and let him not pre∣sume to associate himselfe to the quier of the singers, vntill he haue made sa∣tisfaction, except the Abbot shall giue leaue by his permission, yet soe, that afterwards he make satisfaction. And to the hower of refection, he that co∣meth not before the verse, soe that they may say the verse and praye all toge∣ther and sitt downe together at the ta∣ble, he I saye that through negligence shal offende in this, let him be rebuked vntill the seconde time. If after he doe
not amend, let him not be admitted to the participation of the common ta∣ble: But being sequestred from the company of his brethren, let him eate a lone, & his portion of wine be taken from him till satisfaction and amend∣ment. And let him in like manner suf∣fer, who is not present at that verse which is said after meate. Nor let any man presume to take any meat or drinke, before the appointed hower, or after it. Moreouer if any thinge be offered to any one by the Prior and he refuse it at the time he shall desier, let hm not receaue that or any thinge else vntill he haue made sufficient satis∣faction. Of those that are excommunicated how they maye satisfie. CHAP. XXXXIV. HE who is excommunicated from e oratorie or table for more greeuous offences, at the hower in
which the worke of God is celebrated in the oratorie, let him lye prostrat be∣fore the doores of the oratorie saying nothing, but lying his head on the ground, prostrat all along at the feet of all those that goe out of the oratorie. And let him doe this soe longe, till the Abbot think he hath made sufficient satisfaction: Who being commanded to come to the Abbot, shall cast him∣selfe at his feet, and afterward at the feet of all his brethren, that they maye pray for him. And then if the Abbot shall commande, let him be receued in to the quire, and in the ranke which the Abbot shall appointe, yet soe, that he presume not to beginne à Psalme, or Lesson, or any thing else in the ora∣torie, vnlesse the Abbot againe com∣mande. And at all howers when the wke of God is finished, let him cast himselfe on the earth in the place where he stands, and let him satisfie in this manner vntill the Abbot command him to cease from this satisfaction. But they who for litle faults ar excomuni∣cated,
only from the table, let them sa∣tisfy in the oratory as longe as the Ab∣bot commandeth: And let them doe this, vntill he blesse them and saye, it sufficeth. Of those who committ any error in the Oratorie. CHAP. XXXXV. IF any one while he reciteh à Psalme, responsorie, antiphone, or Les∣son, shall erre, and maketh not humble satisfaction there before all, let him be liable to greater punishment, as one that will not amend with humility, what by negligence he hath donne à misse, and let children be beaten for such a fault.
Of those who offend in lesser matters. CHAP. XXXXVI. IF any one whilest he is in labour eyther in the kitchin, cellar, or any office, in the bakehouse, garden, or in any art, shall doe any thinge a misse or breake or loose any thinge, or shall committ any excesse, and doe not pre∣sently come before the Abbot or con∣uent, and of his owne accord satisfie and confesse his offence; when it shall be knowne by another, let him be liable to greater punishment. But if it shall be priuat to his owne soule, as being a sinne, let him only manifest it to his Abbot or spirituall seniours, who knowe how to cure their owne wounds, and not to disclosse or publish an other mans.
Of appointing the hower of diuine seruice. CHAP. XXXXVII. LEt it be the Abbots care night and daye to signifie the hower of the worke of God, eyther by himselfe, or committing the care there of to some vigilant brother to see that all thinges be done in competent howers. And let them who ar appointed, beginne Psalmes and antiphones each one in their order after the Abbot. And let not any presume to singe or reade, but he that can so performe the office, that the hearers may be edified by it. Which ought to be done with humility, gra∣uity, & trembling, and by him whom the Abbot shal appoint. Of the dayly hand labour. CHAP. XXXXVIII. IDlenes is an enemy of the soule, and therefore at certaine howers the
brethren ought to be imployed in han∣dye labour, and other whiles in spiri∣tuall reading. And therefore we thinke that both times maye thus be well or∣dered: that is, from Easter vntill the kalends of october, in the morning going out from Prime, they doe that which shall be necessary vntill well nigh the fourth hower. And from the fourth hower till well nigh the sixt hower, let them be imployed in rea∣ding, & after the sixt hower rising frō table, let them rest on their Beds with all silence, and he who then perhaps desires to reade, let him reade soe to him selfe, that he disquiet not other. Let None be said some that sooner, about the eight houre, and after that let them doe what they haue to doe vntill euening. And if the necessity of the place, or pouerty require that they themselues be imployed in reaping their corne, let them not be contrista∣ted. Because they are then truly Monkes when they liue by the labour of their hands, as both our fathers and
the Apostles did. Yet let all thinges be done in measure by reason of such as are pusillanimous. And from the kalends of october vntill the beginning of Lent, let them be imployed in reading till full the se∣cond hower, and at the second hower, let Terce be celebrated, then vntill the ninth hower, let all labour in the worke which is enioyned them. But the first signe of the ninth hower being giuen, let them all departe from theire worke, and let them be ready when the second signe shall be made. And after refection let them be imployed in reading of spirituall bookes or Psalmes. But in Lent let them be imployed in readinge from the morninge till the third howre compleat: and vntill the tenth hower compleat let them doe the worke enioyned them. In whih time of Lent, let each one take à booke out of the Librarie, reade it all ouer in order; and let these bookes be giuen them in the begining of Lent. Let
there be diligent care taken, that there be one or two seniors appointed, who maye goe vp and downe the Monas∣tery at the howers in which the brethrē ar imployed in reading, to see least any of them be slouth full, or applie him∣selfe to idlenes or foulish talke, and ne∣glecte his reading, and soe not only vn∣profitable to himselfe, but also an im∣pedimēt to others. If such a one (which god forbid) be founde, let him be re∣prehended once or twice, and if he a∣mend not, let him be liable to regular discipline, soe that others maye take warning by it. Neither let one brother associat himself whith an other at in∣competent howers. On sondaye let all be imployed in reading, except such as are deputed for officers. And if any one shall be so slouthfull or negligent, that he will not or cannot meditate or read, let him haue some worke inioy∣ned him to keepe him from idlenes. To the weake brethren, & tender of con∣stitution, let such worke or art be inioy∣ned as they maye be kept from idlenes,
and yet not oppressed with soe much labour so as to be driuen awaye, whose weaknes therefore ought to be well considered by the Abbot. Of the obseruance of Lent. CHAP. XXXXIX. ALthough at all tymes the life of à Monke ought to be as à conti∣nuall Lent, yet because fewe are soe vertuous, we therfore exhort them at least in this holy time of Lent, to lead their life in all purity and to wash a∣waye all the negligences of other times. Which then we shal righly per∣forme, if we refraine from all vices, and apply our selfes to praier with wee∣ping, to reading, compunction of hart and abstinence. Therefore in these dayes, let vs add some thinge ouer & aboue our wonted taske, peculiar prayers, and abstinence from meat drincke, so that euery one aboue the ordinary measure appointed him, of his
owne free will, with ioye of the holy ghoste offer some thinge to God: That is, that he withdraw from his body some what of his meat, drinke, sleepe, talke, laughter, and with spirituall ioye & desire, expect the holy Easter. Yet let euery one make his Abbot ac∣quainted with this very thinge which he offers, and let it be done with his praier & consent. Because whatsoeuer is done whitout the permission of the spirituall father, shall be imputed to presumption and vaine glorie, and me∣riteth note rewarde. All thinges there∣fore are to be done with the leaue and permistion of the Abbot. Of brethren who labour farr from the oratorie, or such as ar on the waye. CHAP. L. THe brethren who ar in labour ve∣ry farr of, and cannot come in a competent houre to the oratorie, and
the Abbot knowes it is soe, let them there doe the worke of God, where they labour, kneeling with feare & re∣uerence. And let thē also who ar sent à iourney, haue care not to slip the ap∣pointed howers, but doe as they can, and by no meanes neglect to perfor∣me their taske of diuine seruice. Of Brethren who goe not far of. CHAP. LI. THe Brethren who goe forth vpō any errand and hope to returne that daye to the Monastery, let them not presume to eae abroad, although they be intreated, vnlesse their Abbot command them. And if they doe other∣wise, let them be excommunicated. Of the oratorie of the Monas∣terie. CHAP. LII. LEt the oratorie be that which the name signifieth, and let not any o∣ther
thinge be done or wrought there; The worke of God being ended, let all goe forth with excedinge great silence making reuerence to God, that the Brother who perhps will peculiarly pray by himselfe, be not hindred by the lewdnes of an other. And if an o∣ther will also praye priuatly by him∣selfe, let him simply enter, and praye, not in a clamorous voice, but with teares and attention of hart. Therefore let no any who doth not pray, be per∣mitted to staye in the oratorie after the worke of God be finished, least he be ahinderance to others. Of the manner of entertayninge Guestes. CHAP. LIII. LEt all guests that comme to the Monastery be entertayned like Christ: because he will say: I haue been a guest and yee haue entertained me. And let due honour be giuen to
all, especially to those of the house∣hold of faith and trauellers. Assoone therefore as à guest is come, let the Prior meet him or the brethren with all shew of charity; and let them first pray together, & soe be associated to each other in peace. And let not the kisse of peace be offered, but after prayer, by reason of the illusions of the deuill. And in the salutation it selfe, let all humility be shewed The head beinge bowed downe or all the body prostrate on the earth to all guests comming and goeing, let Christ who is receaued in them be adored in them. Let the guests receaued be brought to prayer, and afterwards let the Prior or whosoeuer he shall command sitt, and keep company with them. Let the di∣uine law be read before the guest that he maye be edified, and afterwards let all courtesie be shewed to him. Let à regular fast be broke by the Prior for the entertainment of à guest: vnlesse it be a principall day of fast, which ought not to be broken. But let the
hold on their custome of fasting. Let the Abbot giue water to the guests hands, and let both the Abbot and the whole conuent wash the feet of the guests, which being done let them saye this verse, susepimus Deus miseri∣cordiam tuam in medio templi tui. And let poore people and strangers espe∣cialy be diligently entertayned with all care, because in thē Christ is more truly receaued. For the feare or terrour of rich men doth it self exhort an ho∣nour to them. Let the kitchin of the Abbot and guest be apart, that guest without whō the Monastery neuer is, comming at vn certaine howers, may not disquiet the Brethren. Into which kitchin let then enter two brothers for a yeare who can well performe that office. To whom as occasion requires let helpe be giuen, that they mae erue with∣out murmuring. And when the haue lesse imployment, let them goe forth to labour, where they shall be appoin∣ted. And not only in these, but in all
other offices in the Monastery, let thi consideration be had, that when they want helpe it be giuen them, and whe they ar vacant, they obeye and do what is commanded them. And for th lodgings of the guests, let care there o be commended to a brother, whos soule the feare of God possesseth where let there be a sufficient numbe of beds made, and let the house o God be wisely gouerned by discree men. And let not any but such as ar appointed associate himselfe, o talke with the guests. But if the shal meete or see them, humbly saluting them and asking their benediction, le him passe by, saying that it is not law∣full for him to talke with a guest. Whether it be lawfull for a Monke to re∣ceaue letters or tokens. CHAP. LIV. LEt not a monke in noe wise sen or receaue letters tokens or any
presents neyther from his parents, or any other man whatsoeuer or from one an other without the leaue of his Abbot. And if any thinge be sent to him euen from his parente, let him not presume to receaue it, vnlesse it bee first told the Abbot, and if he command that it shall be receaued, let it be in the Abbots power to appoint to whom it shall be giuen, and let not the bro∣ther be contristated to whom it was sent, that their be noe occation giuen to the Deuill. And whosoeuer shall presume to doe otherwise, let him be lyable to regular discipline. Of the cloathes and shooes of the Brethren. CHAP. LV. LEt cloathes be giuen to the bre∣thren according to the quality of the places where they dwell, or tem∣perature of the aire: Because in cold countryes ther is neede of more, and in
hotte countryes of les. Let it therefore be in the Abbots power to order this. Not withstandinge for temperate places, we thinke it will be sufficiēt for each Monke to haue a coule and a cassoke, a coule in the winter haueing a high nap, in the sommer smoth or old, and ascapular for worke, shooes and stockings to put one their fett; and for the colour or coursenez of these things, let not the Monks finde fault, but let them be such as can be prouided in the prouince in which they dwell, or such as maye be bought at a cheaper rate. And let the Abbot see to the measure and decentnes of these garments, that they be not to litle for such as vse them, but of a fitt size. When they receaue them, let them allwayes restore the old to be layd vp in the wardrope for the poore: for it is sufficient for a Monke to haue two cassockes & two coules for the nights, for washing and chāge. Now what is ouer & aboue is super∣fluous, and must be cute of. And as is said, let them restore what soeuer is old
when they receaue new. Let those who goe à Iourney take breeches out of the wardrope, and when they re∣turne let them restore them back washed. And let the coules & cas∣sockes at such times be better then those they ordinaryly vse, which goeing a Iorney they take out of the wardope & returning restore. For bedding may suffice astraw bed, a quilt bed, a couerlet, & a pillow, which beds are often to be searched by the Abbot, least there be any proprie∣ty, and if any be found to haue any thinge which he hath not receaued from the Abbot, let him be liable to most sharp discipline. And that this vice of propriety maye be rooted out, let all things be giuen by the Abbot which shall be necessary, that is a coule, a cassocke, shoes, stockens a paire of sleeues, a knife, a steele, a needle, a handkerchefe, table bookes, that all excuse of necessity maye be taken a∣waye. Let the Abbot not with standing alwayes consider the sentence of the
acts of the Apostles, there was giuen to euery one accordinge as, they had need. And let him therefore consider the infirmities of such as want, not the ill will of such as enuie, And in all his ordinances let him thinke of the retri∣bucion of God. Of the Abbots table. CHAP. LVI. LEt the Abbots table be alwayes with the guests and strangers. Yet when there are noe guests, let it be in his power to call which of the bre∣thren he please. But let him prouide that there be alwayes one or two of the seniors left with the brethren by reason of discipline.
Of the artificers of the Mo∣nastery. CHAP. LVII. IF there be artificers in the Monaste∣ry, let them exercise those arts with all humility and reuerence, if soe be the Abbot command. But if any of them be proud of the knowledge he hath in his art, because he maye seeme to get some what by it for the Monastery, let him be taken from it, and let him not exer∣cise it againe; vnlesse after his humilia∣tion the Abbot shall permitt him. And if any thinge of the worke of the arti∣ficers be to be sold, let them by whose hands they ar to passe take heed, least they presume to deceaue in any thinge. Let them remember Ananias & Sa∣phira least the death which they suf∣fered in body, these who committ frau∣din the goode of the Monastery suffer in their soule. And in the prices and valuations, let not the vice of auarice
creep in, but let things be allways sold some what cheaper then by seculars, that God may be glorified in all things. Of the manner of receauinge Nouices. CHAP. LVIII. IF any one come newly to conuer∣sion let him not easyly be admitted. But as the Apostle saith, let spirits be tryed whether they be from God. If therefore comming he shall perseuer knockinge, and shall be seene for foure or fiue days patiently to indure iniuries offred him; & the difficulty which is made of his entrance, and to persist in his petition, then grant him entrance, and let him be in the cell of the guests for a few days. And afterwards let him be in the cell of the nouices, where he is to meditate, eate, and sleep, and let such a senior be deputed ouer him, who is fitt to gaine soules, who must cu∣riously
& carefully looke to him, to see whether he truly seeke God: and if he be carefull in the seruice of God, in obedience, & in suffering reproches. Let there be suggested to him the ri∣gor & austerity by which we tend to∣wards God. And if he promise stabili∣ty and perseuerāce, after two moneths space let this rule be read to him in order, and let there besaid to him. Be∣hold the lawe vnder which thou desi∣rest to fight, if thou canst obserue it enter in, if thou canst not, freely de∣part. If he shall still perseuer, then let him be brought in to the afore sayd cell of the nouices, and let him be a∣gaine tryed in all patience. And after the space of six moneths, let the Rule be read againe to him that he may know to what he enters in. And if he still perseuer, after foure moneths let the Rule be read againe to him. And if vppon deliberation had with him∣selfe he shall promise that he will keepe and obserue all things commanded him, then let him be receaued in to the
Conuent, knowing himselfe from that time forward to be vnder the law of the Rule, soe that it is not lawfull for him to goe out of the Monastery, nor shake of the yoke of the Rule which he might eyther haue refused or em∣braced after soe longe deliberation. And when they admitt him to pro∣fession let him in the oratorie before, all, make a promise of his stability, and conuersion of his manners, and obe∣dience before God & his saints, that if at any time he shall doe otherwise, he may know that he shall be condemned by him whom he mocketh. Of which promise let him make a petition in the name of those saints whose reliques are there, & of the Abbot there pre∣sent, which petition let him writte whith his owne hand, or if he can not writte, let an other requested by him writte it; and the nouice himself put to his signe, and let him lay it on the alter with his owne hand; which when he hath done let him presently beginne this verse. Suscipe me Domine secundum
eloquium tuum & viuam, & non confun∣das me ab expectatione mea. Which verse let all the conuent answer the third tyme, addinge to it Gloria Patri, &c. Thē let the sayd brother nouice prostrate himself the feet of all, that they maye praye for him: and from that hower let him be accounted one of the conuēt. If he haue any thinge, let him either first bestowe it on the poore, or by a solemne donation giue it to the Monas∣tery, reseruing for himselfe nothinge at all, because from that daye forwards he must know that he shall not haue power as much as ouer his owne body. Let him therefore presently in the ora∣torie be stript of his owne garments where with he is cloathed, and let him be cloathed with the garments of the Monastery. And let those garments which are put of, be layd in the ward-rope to be kept. That if at any time by the deuills perswasion he consent to goe out of the Monastery, (which God forbid) then taking from him the habit of the Monastery, he maye be
turned out, But that writing which the Abbot tooke of the altar, let him not haue againe, but let it be kept in the Monastery. Of the sonnes of Noblemen or Poore men which are offred. CHAP. LIX. IF perhaps any noble man offers his sonne to God to liue in the monas∣tery: if the childe himselfe, be vnder age, let his parents make the fore said petition or writing for him, and offring him let them wrap the said petition & the hand of the childe in the pall of the altar, & soe let them offer him vp. And for his goods, let them either in the said petition promise vnder oath that they will neuer by themselues nor by any other person or meās what∣soeuer, either giue him any thinge, or giue him occasiō of hauing any thinge. And if they will not doe this, but will rather offer vp some thing in
allmes to the monastery, for their grea∣ter merit, let them make adonation of that which they will giue to the mo∣nastery, reseruing (i they soe please) the vse or profit of it for them selues. But let thinges be soe ordered that noe suspition remayne with the child, by which being deceaued he may perish, (which God forbid) as in others we haue learned by experience. And in like manner let the poorer sort doe. But let them who haue nothing at all sim∣ply make their petition, and with an oblation giue vp theyr sonne before witnesses. Of Priests who dosire to dwell in the Monastery. CHAP. LX. IF any that hath taken the order of Priesthood, shall request to be rece∣ued into the monastery, let him not easily be admitted, yet if he shall still perseuer in this request, let him know
that he is to keepe all discipline and obseruance appointed in the Rule, nei∣ther shall any thinge be remitted him, according to that which is written. Friend for what art thou come: Not with standing let it be granted him to stande next after the Abbot, & to blesse & say masse if the Abbot doe soe com∣mand, otherwise, let him in noe sort presume to doe any thinge, knowing himselfe subiect to regular discipline, & let him rather shew to others exam∣ples of humility. If perhaps he be in the Monastery for some treaty of ordi∣nation, or other occasion whatsoeuer. Let him remember the place due to him according to the time of his en∣trance in to the Monastery, not that which is granted him for the reuerence of Priesthood. And if any other clergy∣man shall likewise desire to be admit∣ted in to the Monastery, let him be ranked in a reasonable place, yet soe that he promise obseruance of the Rule & stability in it.
Of Monkes that be strangers how they ar to be receaued. CHAP. LXI. IF any strange Monke shall come from farr places and desire to dwell in the Monastery as a guest, and will be content with the customes of the place which he findeth, & doth not trouble the Monastery with his super∣fluityes, but is well contented with what he findeth, let him be entertay∣ned for as long time as he desireth. And if he reasonably and with humility and charity reprehend or admonish any thing, let the Abbot prudently consider what he sayth, for perhaps our Lord sent him for that end. And if after he desire to make his abode there, let him not be refused, especially, because in the time while he liued à guest, his life might be sufficiently knowne. But if in that time he be found giuen to su∣perfluity or vitiousnes, let him not only
be refused, but also let him be ciuilly bid to depart, least others be corrupted by his ill demeanure. But if he be not such à one as deserueth to be cast out, let him not only if he demande it, be receaued into the society of the con∣uent, but let him be persuaded to stay, that by his exemple others may be in∣structed, because in euery place we serue one God and fight vnder one kinge; And if the Abbot shall find him to be well deseruing, he may also place him in a higher rank. And not only a Monke he may thus exalt aboue his time in the habit, but also any of the aforesaid degrees of Priests or Clergie men, if their lifes deserue it. But let the Abbot beware, least at any time he re∣ceaue a Monke of an other knowne Monastery to dwell, without the con∣sent of his Abbot or letters of com∣mendation from him: because it is written what thou wilt not haue dōne to thy selfe, doe not to an other.
Of the Priests of the Mo∣nastery. CHAP. LXII. IF any Abbot desire to haue a Priest or Deacon ordered, let him choose one that is worthy of the function of Priesthood. And let him who is orde∣red beware of haughtines and pride, neither let him presume to doe any thinge but what is commanded him by the Abbot, knowing him selfe to be much more subiect to regular disci∣pline. Nor by reason of his Priesthood let him forget the obedience & disci∣pline of the Rule, but let him striue more & more to goe forwards towards God. And let him always consider the place which is due to him according to the time of his entrance in to the Mo∣nastery, although perhaps by the elec∣tion of the conuent & the will of the Abbot, he be promoted for the good desert of his life. And let him know
that not with standing, he is to obseru the Rule ordained by the Dean or Prepositus. And if he shall presum to doe otherwise, let him be iudged not as Priest, but as one who is rebel¦lious. And if he shall not amend being often admonished, let the Bishop als be called to wittnesse. And if for al this he doe not amend, but that hi faults grow daily more notorious, le him be thrust out of the Monastery; i case his disobedience be such as that he will not be subiect, and obey the Rule. Of the order of the Congrega∣tion. CHAP. LXIII. LEt them soe keepe their orders in the Monastery, as the tyme of cō∣uersion and meritt of life requires, or as the Abbot shall appoint. And let not the Abbot disquiet the flocke commit∣ted to him, nor as it were vfinge free
power, order any thinge vnjustily: But let him always consider, that he is to giue account to God of all his judge∣ments, and workes. Therefore accor∣ding to the order he shall appointe, or which the brethrē haue amongst them selues, Let them come to the pax, to the commuion, to begine à Psalme, to stand in the Quire. And in all places whatsoeuer let not age be regarded in the order, nor let it preiudice any man: Because Samuell & Dauid being chil∣dren, iudged Priests. Therefore excep∣ting, those whom (as we haue said) the Abbot shall for speciall reasons prefer or degrade, let all the rest ob∣serue the order of their conuersion. As (for example sake) he who cometh at the secōd hower of the day must know himselfe in the Monastery to be his iu∣nior, who comes at the first houre of the day, of what age or dignity soeuer he be. And let children be put in minde of discipline and good order by all. Let Iuniors honor their seniors, & the se∣niors
loue their Iuniors. And in th callinge of their name, let it not b lawfull for any one to call an other b his plaine name, but let the seniors ca the Iuniors brothers, and the Iunio call their seniors Domni, which sign¦fieth à fatherly reuerence. And let th Abbot because he representeth the per¦son of Christ be called Domnus, an Abbot not as assuming it himselfe, bu giuen him for the honour & loue o Christ. And let him remember t carry him selfe so, as he may be worth of such honour. And where souer th brethren meet one an other, let the iu∣nior aske benediction of the antient and the antient passing by, let the iu¦nior rise and giue him place to sitt: nei¦ther let the unior presume to sitt wit him, vnlesse his senior command him to full fill that which is written, pre¦uenting each other with honour. Le the children or younger sort in the ora¦torie and at the table keep their order with discipline, and a broad or where soeuer els let there be carefull watc
er them, that they alwayes keep od order vntill they come to age of derstanding. Of ordaining the Abbot. CHAP. LXIV. N the ordaining of the Abbot let  allways that consideration be had, at he be chosen whom all the onuent with one assent in the feare of God, or els apart of the cōuent though therwise small with mature aduice hall choose. And let him who is to be rdered or consecrated be chosen for is good desert of life, learning, and isdome, though he be the last in the onuent. And if the whole conuent (which God forbid) shall with one consent choose à person consenting to heir vices: and the vices themselues hall by some means or other come to ee made knowne to the Bishop, (to whose diocese that place appertay∣neth) or to the Abbots or christians
neere at hand, let them hinder the c¦sent of those wicked men from preua¦ling, and constitute a worthy stewa ouer the house of God, knowing th for this they shall receaue a good  ward, if they doe it with a pure inte¦tion and for the loue of Gods as on t contrary that they sinne if they n¦glecte it. And the Abbot thus ordained, mu allways consider what burden he ha vnder taken, & to whom he is to gi account of his stewardship; and l him know that it is more behouefu for him to doe good to others, then  beare Rule ouer them. It behouet him therfore to be learned in th diuine lawe, that he may know fro whence to bring forth new thinges  old, and that he be chast, mercifull, an sober, and let him alwayes prefer mer¦cye before iustice, that he himsel maye obtaine mercy. He must hat vice and loue his brethren, and in cor¦recting, let him not be rigorous or ex¦ceed, least whilest he seekes to scou
the vessell he breake it. And let him lwayes suspect his owne frailty, & member that a shaken reed is not to e broken. By this we would saye, not at he suffer vice to be norished, but at with prudence and charity he seek  roote them out, in such manner as esees to be most expedient, & let him ady to bee more loued then feared. et him not be turbulent or sad, ney∣er let him be superfluous & obstinat or jelous, or ouer suspicious: for then e will neuer be at quiet. In his com∣ands let him be prudent and consi∣erat; whether they be thinges pertai∣ing to God or to the world. Let him onsider well, and moderat the workes hich he inioyneth, haueing in minde he discretiō of holy Iacob who sayed. f I shall make my flockes to labour uer much in goeinge, They will all ye in one daye. Hauing therefore these nd other testimonies of discretion, the other of vertues, let him so temper ll thinges, that both the strong maye esire to accomplish, and the weake
maye not shrinke backe from vn taking what is commanded. And ¦pecially that he obserue this pre Rule in all thinges: that when he  haue serued well, he may heare f our Lord what the good seruant he who gaue corne to his fellow serua in his tyme. Amen. I say vnto you, o all his goods he will place him. Of the Prepositus of the Mo¦nastery. CHAP. LXV. IT often tymes happens that  the ordaining of the preposi great scandalls arise in Monas¦ries; whiles there are some puffed  with the malignant spirit of pride, w esteeming themselues to be second A¦bots, & taking vppon them to tyrān ouer others, nourish scandalls a make dissentions in the conuent, a especially in those places, where by  same Bishop or Abbots, which orda
e Abbot, the prepositus is lkewise rdained, which how vnfitting a thinge is, may easily be perceaued: Because om the very begining of his ordina∣on there is occation giuen him of eing proud: his thoughtes suggesting o him that he is exempt from the Ab∣ot, Because he is ordained by them by hom the Abbot himselfe is ordained. ence arise enuies, chidings, detrac∣ons, emulations, dissentions & disor∣ers: & whilest the Abbot and the Pro∣ositus are at variance, it must needs e that both their soules runn a hazard  this dissention: & those who are vn∣er their charge, whiles they adhere to arties and runn in to perdition. The ault of which danger lyeth principal∣y vpon them who were the authors of uch an ordination. And therefore wee fore see that it s expedient for the conseruation of eace and charity, that the whole ouernment of the Monastery depend f the Abbots will: and if it can be onne, let it be gouerned by Denes; as
before we haue ordained, that whi the charge is committed to many o be not made proud. But if either t place requier it, or the conuent sh reasonably & with humility dema it. And the Abbot iudge it expede whomsoeuer the Abbot shall choo by the counselle of his brethrē feari God, let him ordaine for his Prepos¦tus. And let the Prepositus doe tho thinges with reuerence, which shall  inioyned him by his Abbot: doing n¦thing against the will or ordinance  his Abbot, because by how much  is preferred before the rest, by s much it be houeth him carefully  obserue the precepts of the Rul Which Prepositus if he shall be fou vitious, or seduced by the haughtin of pride, or be founde a contemner  the holy rule, let him be admonishe with words till foure times, & if he d not amend, let the correction of regu¦lar discipline be giuen him. And  with that he amende not, let him b deposed from the dignity of Prepositu
ship, & let an other who is worthy, be substituted in his place. And if after∣wards he be not quiet & obedient in the conuent, let him then be expelled the Monastery. Yet let the Abbot con∣sider that he is to giue an account to God of all his actions, least perhaps his soule be inflamed with enuy or e∣mulation. Of the Porter of the Mo∣nastery. CHAP. LXVI. AT the gate of the Monastery let there be placed a wise old man, who knowes how to receaue and giue an answere: whose age may not suffer him to wander, which Porter ought to haue his cell neer the gate: that com∣mers may alwayes find one ready to re∣turne them an answer. And by and by assone as any one shall knoke, or à poore man shal crye, let him ans∣wer Deo gratias; and with all milde∣nes
& feare of God let him presently giue an answere with all charity. And let the porter if he need for his com∣fort, haue a Iunior brother with him. The Monastery if it can conuenient∣ly, ough so to be built, that all necessa∣ries, to witt watter, a mill, a garden, a Bakehouse, and other seuerall artes maye be had and practiced in the Mo∣nastery, that their be noe necessity for the monkes to wander abroad, because it is in noe sort expedient for their soules. And we will haue this Rule often read in the conuent, least any of the Brethren excuse himselfe of igno∣rance. Of Brethren that be sent a Iourney. CHAP. LXVII. LEt the Brethren that are to be sent a Iourney, commend themselues to the prayers of all theyr brethren, & of the Abbot, & alwayes at the last
prayer of the worke of God, let com∣memoration of all the absent be made. And let the Brethren retourninge from a Iourney in the very day in which they returne, at all the canonicall houres when the worke of God is en∣ded, prostrate on the grounde in the oratorie, and desier the prayers of all for their excesses, least perchance either any sight or hearing of some euill thing, or any idle speech haue stole vpon them in the way. And let not any presume to tell others what thinges he hath seene or hard abroad with out the Monastery, Because it is a great distraction to them. And if any shall presume to doe it, let him be liable to regular punishment. And lik∣wise he that shall presume to goe without the cloysters of the Monaste∣ry, or to goe any whither, or doe any thinge though neuer soe litle without the command of the Abbot.
If impossible thinges be enioyned to à Brother. CHAP. LXVIII. IF any hard or impossible thinges be inioyned any Brother, let him re∣ceaue the command of the bidder with all mildnes & obediēce. And if he shall see that the burden altogether exceed the measure of his strength, let him pa∣tiently & fitly suggest the causes of the impossibility thereof to him is ouer him, not shewing any pride or contra∣diction, & if after his suggestion, the Prior or antient shall persist in com∣manding it, let the Iunior know, that it is expedient for him: & let him out of charity obey, trustinge in the assistance of God.
That one presume not to defend an other in the Monastery. CHAP. LXIX. THere must speciall heed be taken that vpon no occasion, one monke presume to defend or maintaine ano∣ther in the Monastery, though they be neuer soe neare of kine, let none of them I say presume to doe this in any sorte: because from thence exceeding great occasion of scandalle may arise. And if any shall transgresse in this point let him be seuerely punished. That noe one presume to beat or excom∣municate an other. CHAP. LXX. THat occasion of all presumption may be auoyded in the Monas∣tery, we ordaine and constitute, that it be not lawfull for any one to excom∣municate
or beat any of his brethren, except those who haue power and au∣tority from the Abbot. And let those that offende bee reprehended before all, that the rest may be afraide. But ouer Infants vntil they be fifteen yeers of age, let their bee strict discipline & care had by all; yet this also with dis∣cretion & measure. For he who shall in any sort presume to doe any thinge to such as are of riper years without the command of the Abbot, or shall be vndiscreetly seuere euen to Infants, let him be liable to regular discipline, be∣cause it is written. What thou wilt not haue donne to thy selfe, doe not doe to an other. That the Brethren be obedient to each other. CHAP. LXXI. OBediēce is not only to be yeelded to the Abbot, but also the bre∣thē ar to obey one an other, knowing
that by this kinde of obedience they shall goe to God. The command there∣fore of the Abbot or other superiours constituted by him being first obeyd, before which we suffer not priuat com∣mandes to be prefered, in other thinges let the Iuniors obey their elders with all charity and diligence. And if any be found contentious, let him be re∣buked. And if a Brother be rebuked, for any euen the least thinge by the Abbot, or by any of his seniors, or if he shall but perceaue the mind of his senior, to be troobled or moued against him, though but a litle, let him with∣out delaye prostrate at his feete, and there lye till that commotion be ap∣peased with Blessing, and if any one shall contemne to doe it, let him be eyther liable to corporall punishment, or if he be contumatious, let him be expelled the Monastery.
Of the good zeale which Monkes ought to haue. CHAP. LXXII. AS there is an il zeale of bitternes which seperateth from God, & leadeth to hell: soe there is a good zeale which seperateth from vices, & leadeth to God and life euerlasting. Let Monkes therefore exercise this zeale with most feruent loue, that is, that they preuent each other with honour, that they paciently suffer each others infirmityes, whether they be of body or of minde, and that they striue to obey each other. Let none follow that which he thinks profitable for him∣selfe; but rather what others thinke fitting. Let them shew all brotherly charity with a chast loue. Let them feare God, and loue their Abbot with a sincere and humble affection, and prefer nothing at all before Christ, who
vouch safe to bringe vs all to life e∣uerlasting Amen. That all obseruance of Iustice is not sett downe in this Rule. CHAP. LXXIII. VVEe haue writt this Rule that by obseruinge it in Monasteries, wee may shew ourselues to haue in some measure either ho∣nestie of manners, or the beginning of a good conuersation. But for those who hasten to the perfection of holy conuersation, there at the preceps of the holy fathers: he obseruance where∣of bringeth à man to the height of per∣fection. For what side of a leafe, or what word of diuine authority of the old and new testament, is not a most straight rule of mans life▪ or what booke of the holy Catholike fathers doth not sound forth this, that we may come by a direct course to our Crea∣tor. Moreouer the Collations of the
fathers & their institutes & liues, al the Rule of our holy father Basi what els are they but examples of we liuing, & obediente monkes and in¦struments of vertues. But to vs slouth¦full ill liuing and negligent people, they are a shame and confusion. whosoeue therefore thou art, who hastens t the heauenly country, obserue by the helpe of Christ this litle Rule writt fo beginners: and then atlength by the protection of God thou shalt come to those higher perfections of doctrine, & vertues of which we haue before spok∣en. To such as fullfill these things the kingdone of heauen shalle lye o∣pen. Amen. FINIS.
