e419_1 99862719 114894
The humble PETITION OF THE Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in Common-councell ASSEMBLED. To the Right Honourable the Lords and Commons assembled in High Court of PARLIAMENT. Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of LONDON.
TO THE HONOVRABLE THE House of Commons ASSEMBLED In High Court of PARLIAMENT: The humble Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons of the City of London in Common councell assembled. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners doe with all rea∣dinesse acknowledg the High Court of Parliament to bee the supreame Power and Judicatory in this King∣dome, constituted for the defence and contrivement of the safety and freedome of this Nation, unto whom all other Powers and Societies of men ought to submit, & with their utmost ability to assist and support, in whose well-being and happy progresse, the peaceable and slou∣rishing condition of this Nation doth principally consist.
The contempt and overthrow of whose power and autho∣rity, cannot but bee the wofull inlet to all Tyranny and confusion, the peoples slavery, and the Lawes subversion. And your Petitioners doe with all thankfulnesse ac∣knowledge and remember the unwearied paines, uncessant labour, and constant indeavours of this present Parlia∣ment in the common cause of God and this Kingdome, wherein (though your enemies have been many and great, their oppositions strong, their counsells deepe, and your discouragements not a few;) Yet (through the good hand of God upon you) with the united assistance of our Brethren of Scotland) and the well-affected people of this Kingdome, joyned together in a solemne League and C1o∣venant, whose lives and treasure under God became your Bulwark, (among whom this Citie hath been by you often acknowledged to bee contributers of an ample share) Your enemies have been dispersed, their counsells broken, your endeavours crowned with honour, and your Armies rest successefull. And though the long desired fruits of peace, of free∣dome and common Justice, the easing of the peoples bur∣thens and reforming of abuses, have been much obstructed and retarded by the necessities of a long continued warre, the sad divisions amongst all orders and societies of men in the Kingdome, the feares of apparent dangers and sud∣daine changes to arise thereby; yet when your Petitio∣ners looke upon their exemption from monopolies and other illegall impositions, the deliverances they have had from the power and tyranny of the Prelats and their ve∣xatious Courts, the demolishing of the High-Commissi∣on, Star-Chamber, and that unparallel'd benefit and free∣dome this Kingdome now enjoyes in the removall of the
Court of Wards, whereby the persons, the posterities and estates of the Subjects were so much incumbred and inthral'd (all which by many are ungratefully forgotten and cast out of mind) and which therefore out of duty your Petitioners have imboldned themselves thus pub∣liquely to enumerate, they cannot choose but with re∣newed hopes expect ere long to see the Kingdome flou∣rish and their troubles ended. And when your Petitioners do consider how not many months agon, the whole Kingdom seemed to be reduced to the obedience of the Parliament, their Brethren of Scotland returned home with good content, the City replenished againe with Inhabitants, the exchange of moneys with forraigne Nations brought into a good Medium, Trade in a prosperous condition, the Excise and Customes increasing thereby, a way of settlement agreed upon by the Parliaments of both Nations, and all things looking with a face of quietnesse and sweet composure; They cannot but with griefe of heart re∣member the unhappy disagreement betweene the Par∣liament and Army, and that late dangerous ingage∣ment, which as it was set on foot in or about this City, without their knowledge or consent, so they doe utterly disavow and abhorre it. Those many dis∣contents and great disturbances which accompanied the same and followed thereupon both to Parliament and City. Those unparalleld outrages and affronts com∣mitted by Reformadoes and other tumultuous and discontented persons upon both Houses, and the Ar∣mies advancing towards this City; The Common-Councell hurried into a Declaration and into divers Military preparations intended by them for no other
end but the safety of Parliament and City. Whereupon hath followed the free-quartering of the Army about the City, which hath occasioned the dear∣nesse of Provisions, and given opportunity to evill minded persons to soment differences and discontents both in the City and Army, and hath caused for∣raigne Nations and others to call home and remove their stockes to parts beyond the Seas, to the great de∣cay of trade in this Citie and Kingdome; and by the disproportion of exchange, this Kingdome is not onely deprived of forraign Bullyon, but (through the incou∣ragement taken thereby) have their owne coyn trans∣ported away. That your Petitioners are deeply sensible of the great displeasure of the Parliament towards this City, mani∣fested in the limiting the extent of their Militia, ta∣king away the nomination of the Persons intrusted there∣with, and of the Lievtenancy of the Tower of London; the guarding of the Parliament and Tower with Souldi∣ers of the Army, the imprisoning of their Recorder, seve∣rall Aldermen, and other Members of this City. Wherefore your Petitioners humbly pray, That the Honor, Power and Priviledges of Parliament may by your Wisdome and Justice be inviolably preserved; That the Army may be so provided for, that they may be enabled to remove their Quarters to a farther distance from the City, whereby the price of Provisions may be abated and Trade encouraged; That Free-quarter may be prevented, and supernumerary Forces disban∣ded; That a more vigorous course may bee ta∣ken
in setling of the Peace and Government of the Kingdome so long desired; That the Cove∣nant may be duly observed; That all wel-affected Persons that have adhered to the Parliament may be effectually protected and defended; That the Recorder, Aldermen, and other Citizens now imprisoned (so as it may stand with the Honor and Wisdome of Parliament) may be enlarged, which your Petitioners shall esteem a great favor to this City: And that all the late unhappy proceedings as unto this City and Members thereof may be forgotten and obliterated; That your Petitioners may enjoy the splendor of your former favors, and be thereby enabled to be the more serviceable to the preservation of the Par∣liament and City, and re-uniting of all that are wel-affected thereunto: Which is their most earnest and hearty desire. And your Petitioners shall pray, &c.
Die Mercurii, 1. Decembr'. 1647. THE Lords have commanded me to let you know that they return you Thanks for the acknowledgments you now make for the benefits recei∣ved by this Parliament; and for the care of the Honor and Priviledges of Parlia∣ment, as the supreme Court and Judica∣tory of this Kingdome: Together with those good affections which are very largely and seasonably expressed by this your Petition. They desire you to bee assured, that they will improve their utmost endea∣vors for the easing of the burdens that lie upon the Kingdome, for the procu∣ring of a just and safe Peace; neither wil they omit any meanes that may restore aga in the City of London unto a flouri∣shing
and happy condition in respect of Trade, as a return for those great and faithfull services that they have done to the Parliament and Kingdom. As to the other particulars in the Petition which relate to the Power of this House, they shall take them into their consideration, and doe therein what shall bee according to Honor and Justice. Job. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Mercurij 1. Decembr. 1647. THe House being informed that the Sheriffe and divers Aldermen, and Common-Councell men were at the doore desiring to preferre a Petition to the House; They were called in, and Sheriffe Bide acquainted the House that they were com∣manded by the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mons in Common-Councell assembled to pre∣ferre a Petition from them to this House; the which the Petitioners being withdrawne was read. Resolved, &c. THat this shall bee the substance of the answer to the Citizens, Viz. To give them thankes for the expression of their good affections to the Parliament, that as to the desires in their Petition, in some of them order hath been taken already, some are under consideration, as that concerning free quarter, and other; and as to their last desire touching some members of the Citie that lye under re∣straint,
the house will speedily doe therein what may consist with the justice and honor of this House. The Citizens were againe called in, and Mr. Speaker by the command of the House gave them the substance of the aforesaid answer. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
