B135 E1528_1 99860049 112156
THE LADIES CABINET ENLARGED and OPENED: Containing Many Rare Secrets, and Rich Orna∣ments of several kindes, and different uses. Comprized Ʋnder three general Heads. Viz. of 1. Preserving, Conserving, Candying, &c 2. Physick and Chirurgery. 3. Cookery and Houswifery. Whereunto is added, Sundry Experiments, and choice Ex∣tractions of Waters, Oyls, &c. Collected and practised, By the late Right Honorable and Learned Chymist, The Lord RUTHUEN, With A particular Table to each Part. London, Printed by T. M. for M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at the middle Temple-Gate, Fleet-street. 1654.
To the Industrious impro∣vers of Nature by Art; espe∣cially, the vertuous Ladies and Gentlen omen of this Land. Courteous Ladies, &c. THe former Edition of this—(cal it what you please) having recei∣ved a kind entertain∣ment frō your Ladiships hands, for reasons best known to your selves, notwithstanding the disorderly and confused jumbling together of things of different kinds, hath made me (who am not a little concerned
therein) to bethink my self of some way, how to encourage and requite your Ladiships Pains and Patience (vertues, indeed, of absolute neces∣sity in such brave employments; there being nothing excellent that is not withall difficult) in the pro∣fitable spending of your vacant minutes. For this purpose I resol∣ved (at least) to smooth your way a little, by bringing each particu∣lar to its proper head, or (since its called A Cabinet) laying each Jewel in his peculiar box; and so having fitted it for readier use, to have sent it abroad again to salute your gentle hands the second time. But hearing in the mean time of certain rare Experiments, and choice extractions of Oyls, Waters, &c.
the practice of a Noble hand, and of approved Abilities (to testifie how ready I am to further ingenu∣ous undertakings in this kind) I have with much pains, and some charges, sought after, and at length happily purchased them for you. Al which, with the addition of ma∣ny other Secrets of several kinds, (and I hope, of valuable concern∣ment) I have so incorporated together, if I may so say, and me∣thodically digested, that they may be the more easily and profitably improved. And lest any thing might yet be lacking on my part, I have caused somewhat like an alphabetical Ta∣ble to be affixed to every part, by the help whereof you may quickly view the particulars of your Trea∣sury,
and know where to find them at pleasure. The whole Cabinet consisteth of three Divisions, in each where∣of are contained many pleasant and precious pieces of different kinds, both for ornament and pro∣fit. In the first you shall find a delightful Confectionary of Pre∣serves, Conserves, Candies, Sy∣rups and such like, and how to make and use them. In the second you may take notice of very many and rare Secrets in nature, belong∣ing both to Physick and Chirur∣gery, not unworthy the knowledg and practice of most piercing spi∣tits. And in the third are set down excellent patterns for the neatest Cooks and good Houswifes. The most stately of the three is
that in the midst; the more delight∣ful are set on each side: This like a magnificent palace, stands above them; these like places of pleasure, stand about it: Here you may sport, there you may rest; These are for pomp, the other for safety. But lest I should be thought tedious to little purpose, or any way to en∣deavour to byasse your affections, or abridg your freedom, I shall thus leave you at liberty as Lovers in Gardens, to follow your own fancies. Take what you like, and delight in your choice, and leave what you list to him, whose la∣bour is not lost if any thing please. M. B.
Experiments in Preserving, Conserving, and Candying &c. PRESERVING. 1. The best way to Preserve Quinces white. FIrst pare and core the Quinces, and boyl them in fair water till they be very tender, not co∣vering them; Then taking them out of the water, take to every pound of them two pound of Sugar, and half a Pint of water, and boyle it to a sirrup, scumming it well; then put in some of the Jelly that is washed from the Quince kernels, and after that making it boyle a little, put in your Quinces, boyl them ve∣ry fast, keeping the holes upwards, (as neer
as you can) for fear of breaking; and when they are so tender that you may thrust a rush thorow them, take them off and put them up in your glasses, having first saved some sirrup till it be cold, to fill up your glasses. 2. A Speciall remembrance in doing them. When you Preserve Quinces or make Mar∣melade, take the Kernels out of the raw Quin∣ces, and wash off the Jellie (that groweth about them) in fair water; Then straine the water and Jelly from the kernels, through some fine Cobweb Lawne, put the same into the Mar∣melade or Preserved Quinces, when they are well scummed; But put not so much into your Quinces, as into the Marmelade, for it will Jelly the sirrup too much: Put six or seven spoonfuls of sirrup into the Jellie before you put it into the Marmelade; you must boyle your Quinces more for Marmelade, then to preserve your Quinces, and least of all when you make your clear Cakes. When you would preserve your Quinces white, you must not cover them in the boyl∣ing, and you must put halfe as much Sugar more for the white as for the other. When you would have them Red, you must cover them in the boyling. 3. To Preserve Barberies. Choose the fairest bunches of Barberies you can g, pick off the withered and shrunk ber∣ries, and wash them clean, drying them in a
clean cloth. Then take another good quan∣tity of Barberies well picked, and boyl them in Clarret wine till they be soft, then straine them well through a strainer, rubbing or wringing them through: boyl this liquor, so strained out, with Sugar, till it be very sweet and thick, and then let it stand till it be cold: Then put your bunches or branches of Barbe∣ries into gallipots or glasses, and fill them up with this liquor, and so shall you have both sirrup of Barberies, and preserved Barbe∣ries. 4. Another way to preserve Barberies. First take the fairest Barberies, and of them the greatest bunches you can get, and with a needle take out the stones on the one side of them; then weigh out to every half pound of them, one pound of Sugar, put them into a preserving pan, strow the Sugar on them, and let them boyle a quarter of an hour softly; then taking out the Barberies, let the sirrup boil a quarter of an hour more, then put in the Barberies again, and let them boyl a pretty while with the sirrup, then take them from the sirrup, let them both stand till they be cold, and so put them up. 5. To preserve all kind of Flowers, in the Spanish Candy in Wedges. Take Violets, Cowslips, or any other kind of flowers, pick them and temper them with the pap of two roasted Apples, and a drop or
two of Verjuyce, and a grain of Muske; then take half a pound of fine hard Sugar, boil it to the height of Manus Christi, then mixe them together, and pour it on a wet Pie-plate, then cut it in Wedges before it be through cold, gild it and so you may box it, and keep it all the year: It is a fine sort of banquetting stuff, and newly used. Your Manus Christi must boil a good while, and be kept with good stir∣ring. 6. To preserve green Pippins. Take Pippins, pare them very thin, while they are greene, then take ten smal green Pip∣pins, worse then the other, pare them and boil them in a pottle of water till they be all to pie∣ces; then strain it from the cores, then take two pound of sugar, and put it into the same li∣quor so strained, and set it on the fire, and so soon as it boileth, put in the Pippins you pur∣pose to preserve, so let them bole leisurely till they be enough, and when they are preser∣ved they wil be green. In like sort you may preserve Quinces, Plums, Peaches, or Apri∣cocks, if you take them green. 7 To preserve Oranges and Lemmons Take your Oranges or Lemmons, lay them in water three daies and three nights to take away their bitternesse, then boil them in fair water til they be tender, make as much Syrup for them as will make them swimme about the Panne, let them not boil too long therein,
for it will make the skinnes tough; then let them lie all night in the syrup to make them take the syrup, in the morning boile your sy∣rup to his thicknesse, and put them in Gallipots or Glasses, to keep all the yeare: And this is the best way to preserve Oranges, Lemmons or Citrons. 8 To preserve Peaches. Heat water scalding hot first, then scald your Peaches till you may pull off the skin, which done, boil your Rosewater and Sugar till it be somewhat think: then put in your Peaches one by one, stowing the Sugar on them; and as the fire melteth, cast on more four or five times, letting them boyl with a soft fire till hey be tender, keeping them cove∣red as long as they seethe, then take them out, and put them up for use. 9 To preserve Medlers Take the faiest Medlers you can get, but let them not be too ripe, then set on faire water on the fire, and when it boyleth put in your Medlers, and let then boil till they be somwhat soft; then while they are hot, pill them, cut off their crowns and take out their stones, take then to every pound of Medlers three quarters of a pound of Sugar, and a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, seeth your syrup, scumming it clean, then put in your Medlers one by one, the stalks downward: when your syrup is some∣what cool, then set them on the fire again, let
them boile softly till the syrup be enough, then put in a few Cloves, and a little Cinamon, and so putting them up in pots, reserve them for your use. 10 The best way to preserve Goosberies. Gather them with their stalks on, cut off their heads and stone them, then put them in scalding water, and let them stand therein co∣vered a quarter of an hour: Then take their weight in Sugar finely beaten, and laying first a layer of Sugar, then one of your Goosber∣ries, in your preserving Skillet or Pan, till all be in, putting in for every pound of Goosber∣ries six spoonesuls of fair water; set them on the Embers till the Sugar be melted, then boil them up as fast as you can, till the syrup be thick enough, and cold, and then put them up. This way serveth also for Raspices and for Mulberies. 11 To preserve Damsins. Take the Damsins before they be full ripe, but new gathered off the tree, allow to every pound of them a pound of Sugar, put a little Rosewater to them, and set them in the bot∣tome of your Pan one by one, boile them with a soft fire, and as they seeth, strow your Sugar upon them, and let them boil till the syrup be thick enough; then while the syrup is yet warm, take the Plums out, and put them in a Gallipot Syrup and all.
12 How to preserve Cherries. Take the Cherries when they be new ga∣thered off the tree, being full ripe, put them to the bottome of your preserving pan, weigh∣ing to every pound of Cherries, one pound of Sugar, then throw some of the Sugar upon the Cherries, and set them on a very quick fire, and as they boil, throw on the rest of the Sugar, till the Syrup be thick enough; then take them out, and put them in a Gallipot while they are warme. You may (if you will) put two or three spoonfuls of Rose-water to them. 13 To preserve Artichokes. Heat water scalding hot first, then put in your Artichokes and scald them, and take away all the bottoms and leaves about them, then take Rosewater and Sugar, and boil them alone a little while, and then put the Artichokes there∣in, and let them boil on a soft fire til they be tender enough; let them be covered all the time they boile: then take them out, and put them up for your use. 14 To preserve Roses or any other flowers. Take one pound of Roses, three pound of sugar, one pint of Rosewater or more: make your syrup first, and let it stand til it be cold, then take your Rose-leaves, having first clipt off all the white, put them into the cold syrup, then cover them and set them on so soft a fire, that they may but simper for two or three hours;
then while they are hot put them out into pots or glasses for your use. 15 The best way to preserve Apricocks Take the weight of your Apricocks (what quantity soever you mind to use) in sugar finely beaten, pare and stone your Apricocks, and lay them in the Sugar in your preserving pan all night, and in the morning set them upon the Embers till he sugar be all melted, and then let them stand and scald an hour: then take them off the fire, and let them stand in that syrup two daies, and then boile them softly, till they be tender and wel coloured, and after that, when they are cold, put them up in glasses or pots, which you please. 16. To preserve Bullasses as green as grass. Take your Bullasses as new gathered as you can, wipe them with a cloth, and prick them with a knife, and quaddle them in two waters close covered: then take a pound of clarified Sugar, and a pint of Apple water, boile them well together (keeping them wel scum∣med) unto a syrup, and when your Bullasses are wel dript from the water, put them into the syrup, and warm them three or four times at the least; at the last warming, take them up and set them a dropping from the syrup, and boil the syrup a little by it selfe, till it come to a Jellie, and then betweene hot and cold put them up to keep for all the year.
17 To preserve green Walnuts. Take Walnuts and boil them til the water do taste bitter; then take them off, and put them in cold water, and pill off the bark, and weigh as much sugar as they weigh, and a little more water then will wet the sugar; set them on a fire, and when they boil up, take them off, and let them stand two dayes, and boil them again once more. 18 To preserve Pomecitrons. Of your Pomecitrons take one pound and a half, and cut them some in halves, some in quarters, and take the meat out of them, and boil them tender in fair water: then take two pound of clarified sugar and make syrup for them, and let them boil in syrup a quarter of an hour very gently: then take them up, and let your syrup boil till it be thick, and then put it into your Pomecitrons, and you may keep them all the yeer. If you please, you may pare some of them; for some delight to have them in the skin, and some pared. 19 To preserve Eringo roots. Take Eringo roots, fair and not knotty, one pound, and wash them clean; and when they be washed, set them on the fire and boil them very tender; pil off their outermost skin, but see you break them not as you pare them; put them into cold water, and let them all remain there till all be finished; and then you must take to every pound of roots three quarters of
a pound of clarified sugar, and boil it almost to the height of a syrup, and then put in your roots; but look that they boil very gently to∣gether (with as little steering as may be, lest they break) until they be enough: and when they be cold, put them up and keep them. 20 To preserve Raspices. Take of your fairest and wel-coloured Ra∣spices, and pick off their stalks very clean, then wash them, but in any wise bruise them not: then weigh them, and to every pound of Ra∣spices you must take six ounces of hard sugar, and six ounces of sugar-candy, and clarifie it with half a pint of fair water, and four ounces of juice of Raspices: being clarified, boil it to a weak syrup, and then put in your Raspices, stirring them up and down, and so let them boil til they be enough; which to know, you must take some of the syrup with one Raspice, and let it cool, and if it will scarce run out, it is enough; and being cold, you may put them up, and keep them all the yeer. 21 To preserve Enula Campana roots. Take of your Enula Campana roots, and wash them, scrape them very clean, and cut them thin to the pith the length of your little finger; and as you cut them, put them in water, and let them lie in water thirtie daies, shifting them twice every day, to take away the bitterness; weigh them, and to every pound of roots take twelve ounces of clarified sugar, first boiling
the roots as tender as a chicken, and then put them into the clarified sugar, and let them boil upon a gentle fire until they be enough: and let them stand off the fire a good while, and be∣twixt hot and cold put them up for your use. 22 To Conserve Cowslips. Gather your flowers in the midst of the day, when all dew is off them: cut off all the white, leaving none but the yellow blossomes of them so picked and cut before they wither; weigh out ten ounces, taking to every ten oun∣ces of them (or greater proportions, if you please) eight ounces of the best refined sugar in fine powder: put the sugar into a pan, and candy it, with as little water as you can: then taking it off the fire, put in your flowers by little and little, never ceasing to stir them til they be dry and enough: then put them into Glasses or Gally-pots, and keep them dry for your use. These are rather candied then con∣served Cowslips. 23 A Conserve of Roses. Take red Rose buds, clip all the white brui∣sed and withered from them, then weigh them out, and taking to every pound of Roses three pound of sugar; stamp the Roses by themselves very small, putting a little juice of Lemmons or Rosewater to them, as they wax drie; when you see the Roses small enough, put the sugar to them, and beat them together til they be wel
mingled; then put it up in Gallipots or Glasses. In like sort are the Conserves of flow∣ers of Violets, Cowslips, Marrigolds, Sage and Scabious, made. 24 The use of Conserve of Violets and Cowslips. That of Cowslips doth marvellously streng∣then the brain, preserves against madnesse, a∣gainst the decay of memorie, stoppeth Head∣ach, and most infirmities thereof. For Vio∣lets, it hath the same use that the sirup hath. Vide among Syrups. 25 The use of Conserve of Marigolds. Conserve of Marigolds taken fasting in the morning, is good for melancholy, cureth the trembling and shaking of the heart, is good to be used against the plague and corruption of the air. 26 Of Sage flowers. It preserveth against meloncholy, doth dry and comfort the Stomack, cureth an old cough, and openeth the stopping of the Liver. 27 Scabious flowers. These cleanse the brest and lungs, take a∣way old Coughs, Impostumes of the brest, and all inward parts. Probatum. 28 Conserve of Barberries. Take your Barberries, pick them clean in fair branches, and wash them clean, and dry them on a cloth: then take some other Barberries, and boil them in claret wine, til they be very
soft; then straine them and rub them so wel through the strainer, that you may know the substance of them, and boil up this matter thus strained out til it be very sweet, and some∣what thick; then setting it by til it be cold, and then put your branches of Barberies into Gal∣lipots or glasses, and fill it up with the cold syrup, and so shall you have both syrup and also Barberies to use at your pleasure. 29 The Cordial Conserve. Take the Flowers of Rosemarry, Buglosse and Borage well picked: the flowers of Clove Gilliflowers, Pauncies, Violets, Cowslips, Red Roses, Damaske Roses, and Marigolds clipt from their white, of each two ounces, put to every of them three ounces of Sugar, very finely beaten and searced, and stamp them all together to a Conserve, and keep it in a Gal∣lipot. When you would use it, take the quan∣tity of a small Walnut, every morning fast∣ing. 30 To make Muscadine Comfits. Take four ounces of double refined sugar finely beaten and searced, put thereto two grains of Musk, a penniweight of Orris root in powder, beat it to perfect fine paste, then roll it as thin as paper, and cut it like to Diamonds with your knife, as with a fine jagged Rowell cutter, so drie them in your Stove and keepe them.
31 To make black Clove Comfits. Take two ounces of Cloves dried in a dish in the Oven, beat them to very fine powder; then take four ounces of sugar finely beaten and searced; adde to that two or three Date stones burned and made into fine powder, (which bringeth your paste to the blacknesse) mix with all these Gumme Dragon steeped in Rosewater, beat it up into a comfit paste, rol it in long smal rols, and with a knife, cross cut them at one end like a Clove blossom, so stove them, and serve them. This is an ex∣cellent comfit, it wil taste like a Glove, and eat pleasantly. 32 To Candy all kind of flowers as they grow with their stalkes on. Take the Flowers, cut the stalkes somewhat short, then take one pound of the whitest and hardest sugar you can get, put to it eight spoonfuls of Rosewater, and boil it til it wil rol between your finger and your thumb; then take it from the fire, cool it with a stick, and as it waxeth cold, dip in all your flowers, and taking them out again suddenly, lay them one by one on the bottome of a sieve; then turn a joyned stool with the feet upward, set the sieve on the feet thereof, cover it with a faire linnen cloth, and fet a chafindish of coals in the mid∣dest of the stool, underneath the sieve, and the heat thereof wil run up to the sieve, and dry
your Candy presently; then box them up, and they wil keepe all the yeare, and looke very pleasantly. 33 To make the Rock Candies upon all Spices, Flowers, and Roots. Take two pound of Barbary sugar, clari∣fie it with a pint of water, and the whites of two egges, then boil it in a posnet to the height of Manus Christi, then put it into an earthen Pipkin, and therewith the things you wil Can∣dy, as Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Rose buds, Matigolds Eringo rootes, &c. Co∣ver it and stop it close with clay or paste; then put it in a Still with a leisurely fire under it, for the space of three daies and three nights; then open the pot, and if the Candy begin to coine, keep it urst pped for the space of three or four daies more, and then (leaving the sy∣rup) take out the Candy, lay it on a Wier grate, and put it in an Oven after the bread is drawn, there let it remain one night, and your Candy wil be dry. This is the best way for rock candy, making so smal a quantity. 34 The Candy Sucket for green Gin∣ger, Lettice flowers &c. Whatsoever you have preserv'd, either herbs, fruits or flowers, take them out of the syrup, and wash them in warm water, and dry them wel: then boil sugar to the height of candy for flowers, and draw them thorow it: then
lay them on the bottom of a sieve, dry them be∣fore the fire, and when they are enough, box them for your use. This is that the Comfit-makers use, and call Sucket Candy. 35 To Candy Ginger. Take very fair and large Ginger, and pare it, and then lay it in water a day and a night; then take your double refined sugar, and boil it to the height of sugar again: then when your sugar beginneth to be cold, take your Ginger and stir it well about till your sugar is hard to the pan; then take it out race by race, and lay it by the fire four hours, then take a pot and warm it, and put the Ginger in it, then tie it very close, and every second morning stir it about roundly, and it wil be rock-candi∣ed in a very short space. 36 To candy Eringo roots. Take of your Eringo roots ready to be pre∣served, and weigh them, and to every pound of your roots you must take of the purest sugar you can get two pound, and clarifie it with the whites of Egges exceeding wel, that it may be as cleer as Chrystal; for then it will be ve∣ry commendable: it being clarified, you must boil it to the height of Manus Christi, and then dip in your roots, two or three at once til they be all candied, and so put them in a stove, and keep them all the year. 37 To make Quince Cakes. Prepare your Quinces, and take the just
weight of them in sugar, beaten finely, and searcing half of it: then of the rest make a syrup, using the ordinary proportion of a pint of water to a pound of sugar: Let your Quin∣ces be wel beaten, and when the syrup is Can∣dy height, put in your Quinces, and boil it to a paste, keeping it with continual stirring; then work it up with the beaten sugar which you reserved, and these Cakes will taste wel of the Quinces. 38 Cleer Cakes of Quinces or Apricocks Take of the best sugar finely beaten, and searced, one pound to a pound of Quinces or Apricocks: set your sugar upon a chafingdish of coals, and dry it about halfe an hour; then cooling it, stir into it a little Muske and Am∣bergreece, finely beaten and powdered: then pare your Quinces, &c. and boil them in fair water whole, til they be tender, (and not covering them) for so they will be white: Then take them, and scrape off all the Quince to the core, into a silver dish, and boil it therein til it grow drie, which you shal perceive by the rising of it up: when it is thus wel dried, take it off, let it cool, and strow on the Sugar, setting some other to strow it til it be all tho∣rowly wrought in; then lay it out on Glasses, Plates, or Prints (of Flowers or Letters) an inch thick or lesse as you please. 39 To dry Apricocks. Take them when they are ripe, stone them,
and pare off their rinds very thin, then take half as much sugar as they weigh, finely beaten, and lay them with that sugar, into a silver or earthen dish, laying first a lay of sugar, then of the Fruit, and let them stand so all night, and in the morning the sugar will be all melted; then put them into a skillet, and boil them a∣pace, scumming them wel: and as soon as they grow tender, take them from the fire, and let them stand two dayes in the sirup; then take them out, and lay them on a fine plate, and so dry them in a stove. 40 The best way to dry Plums. Take you Plums when they are full grown (with the stalks on them) but yet green; split them on the one side, and put them in hot wa∣ter (but not too hot) and so let them stand three or four hours: then to a pound of them take three quarters of a pound of sugar, beaten very fine, and eight spoonfuls of water to every pound: set them on hot embers till the sugar be melted, and after that boil them till they be very tender, letting them stand in that sirup three daies, to plump them: Then take them out, wash the sirup from them in warm water, and wipe them with a fine linnen cloth very dry, and lay them on plates, and set them to dry in a Stove; for if you drie them in an Oven, they wil be tough. 41 To dry Pippins. Take half a pound of powder sugar, boil it
to a sirup in a pint of fair water, and clarifie it with the white of an eg, then strain it thorow a linnen cloth, and set it on the fire again in another clean skillet: while this is doing, pare eight pippins, cut them in halves and core them, putting in every half into the sirup as you pare them: and so let them boile (stil scumming them) til the sirup be almost all wasted away, within three or four spoonfuls: then take out the Pippins, lay them on plates, and dry them in a stove. 42 A way to drie Cherries. Take three quarters of a pound of sugar, and a pound of good Cherries, their stalks and stones taken from them; then put a spoon∣ful of clean water in the skillet, and so laie one laie of Cherries, and another of sugar, til your quantitie be out: then set them on the fire and boil them as fast as conveniently you can, now and then shaking them about in the skillet, for fear of burning: and when you think they are enough and clear, then take them off the fire, and let them stand till they be half cold, then take them out as clear from the sirup as you can, and lay them one by one upon sheets of Glasse, setting them either a∣broad in the Sun, or in a window where the Sun may continually be upon them: If they drie not so fast as you would have them, then in the turning scrape some loaf sugar finely upon them; but add no greater heat then the
Sun wil afford, which wil be sufficient, if they be wel tended: and let not dew fall on them by any means, but in the evenings set them into some warm cupboard. 43 How to keep Apples, Pears, Quinces, Wardens &c. all the yeer dry. Pare them, take out the coars, and slice them in thin slices, laying them to dry in the Sun in some stone or metalline dishes, or upon an high frame covered with course canvas, now & then turning them, and so they wil keep all the yeer. 44 How to dry Fruits in the Sun. If it be smal fruit you must dry them whole, by laying them abroad in the hot Sun in stone or pewter dishes, on iron or brass pans, turning them as need requires. 45 To make Quidony of Cherries. Take your Cherries while they are red at the stone, put out the stones, and boil them til they be broken; then strain then thorow a very clean strainer, and take the matter strained forth, boil it again, and giving it in the boiling as much sugar as is sufficient: when you think it thick enough, put it into your boxes. 46 To make printed Quidony of Quinces. Take two pound of Quinces, pared, coated and cut in small pieces; put them into a clean posnet with a quart of fair water, and when they are boiled tender, put into them one pound of sugar clarified with half a pint of fair water: let them boil till all the Fruit fall
to the bottome of the Posnet, then let the li∣quid substance run through a fair linnen cloth into a clean Bason; then put it into a Posnet, and boil it til it come to a Jellie, then print it in your moulds, and turn it into your boxes: you shall know when it is ready to print by rowling on the back of a Spoon. 47 To make Quidony of Pippins. Take two pound of Pippins, pare, core, and quarter them, and put them into a quart of fair water, boil them til they begin to break: then put in a pound of Brasil sugar clarified with half a pint of water, and the white of an egge, boil them then til the fruit fal to the bot∣tome, then take it up draw all the liquid sub∣stance from it, as in your Quinces, and boil it in a posnet til it come into a Jellie, trie it on the back of a spoon, and when it is ready to print, put it into your Moulds, and when it is cold turn it off upon wet Trenchers, and put it into boxes. 48 To make Quidony of Raspices Take a quart of red Raspices, put them into a wodden dish, with three spoonfuls of fair water; bruise them all to pieces with a spoon or a rolling pin, then strain them through a cloth into a fair dish; season it with half a pound of Sugar finely beaten, boile it on a Chafindish of coals, stirring it till it come to a Jellie; your trial is on the back of a spoon, as in all other Jellies, and when it is ready for
the print, print it, and it will be a very orient colour: you must not put too much water to the Raspices, for they wil not abide too much boiling for losing their colour. 49 Colours for fruitage Saffron is the best yellow. Sap green the best green. Indian Lake the best red. All your colours must be tempered with Gumme water made of Rasewater. 50 To make all kind of turned works in fruitage, hollow. Take the strongest bodied sugar you can get, boil it to the height of Manus Christi, then take your stone (or rather Pewter) Moulds, being made in three pieces, tie the two great pieces together with Inkle, then powre in your sugar being highly boyled, turn it round about your head apace, and so your fruitage wil be hollow, whether it be Orange, Lemmon, or whatsoever your Mould doth cast: after they be cast, you must colour them after their na∣tural colours. 51 To make Dia Citonicum (as it is called) but rightly, Dia Cydonium. Take four or five very fair Quinces, pare them, quarter them, core them, and boil them in a Pipkin with a pint of fair water: when they are tender put to them halfe a pint of red wine vinegar, and one pound of sugar; let them boil an hour after it, and then let the sirrup and all run thorow a strainer into a fair posnet, and
let it there boil til it come to a Jellie as thick as Quidony, then put it up into a glasse or gallipot: This is a most special Cordial and comfortable matter for a sick body. 52 To cast all Kind of Sugar-works into moulds. Take one pound of Barbarie sugar, clarifie it with the white of an egge, boil it til it rol be∣tween your finger and your thumb, then cast it into your standing moulds, being watered two houres before in cold water, take it out, and gild them, to garnish a Marchpane with them at your pleasure. 53 The names and use of your Sugars. Refined sugar, hard and white, is best for paste of Genua, and to cast all kind of sugar works. Barbary sugar is best to preserve withal. Brasile sugar white and dry is best to make Quidony. 54 The names and prices of Gummes for Sugar work. Gumme dragon the ounce iiii. d Red Rosset the ounce i. d Sap green the ounce ii. d Indian Lake ii. d. weight iii. d Fine gold the booke xvi. d Party gold the booke vi. d Buy your Gold at the Gold-beaters: your
Gummes, and your colours at the Talbut in Newgate Market. 52 To make Jumbols. Of almonds being beaten to paste, take half a pound, with a short cake being grated, and two egges, two ounces of carroway seeds being beaten, and the juce of a Lemmon; and be∣ing brought into a paste, roule it into round strings, then cast it into knots, and so bake it in an oven: and when they are baked ice them with Rosewater and sugar, and the white of an egge, being beaten together; then take a feather and gild them, then put them again into the oven and let them stand in a little while, and they wil be iced clean over with a white ice; and so box them up, and you may keep them all the year. 56 To make Paste of Carrots. Take Carrot roots, boil them, take out of the pith one pound, paring off all the out∣side, beat the pith in a Morter, with half a pint of Rosewater; then take one pound of Sugar finely beaten, and the yolks of sixteen egges, beat them with the Carrots altogether, then put it in a dish and dry it; and being thus made into paste, put it to what use, or in what fashion you like best. 57 To make the Macaroones Blanch a pound of the best Almonds, and put them in fair cold water as you blanch them, then drie them out of the water in a clean
cloth, and beat them in a morter: then take a sawcer full of Rose water, wherein of music and Ambergreece half a grain of each is dissol∣ved, and therewith stil sprinkle the Almonds as you beat them: and when they are almost beaten enough, put in by degrees a pound of fine sugar very smal beaten, and searced all but two or three spoonfuls: when they are beaten enough, put them into a dish, and take the whites of three Egges very wel beaten, and the froth taken off, put the clear thereof to the Almonds, with a spoonful of fine flower, and the two or three spoonfuls of sugar you left, and the rest of the Rosewater, with the musk and Ambergreece dissolved in it; mixe all these very well together in the dish, and lay them upon March-pane Paper, the bignesse and fashion of an eg, laying them rough and high: Then put some other Papers under your wa∣ter Paper. for feare of burning, and bake them in a oven hot enough to bake a light oven Pudding, having a care that they scald not. 58 To make Paste of Almonds Take one pound of smal Almonds, blanch them out of hot water into cold, then drie them with a cloth, and beat them in a stone morter til they come to paste, putting now and then a spoonful of Rosewater to them to keep them from oiling; when they are beaten to fine Paste, take half a pound of sugar finely beaten
and searced, put it to your Paste, and beat it till it will twist between your fingers and thumbe finely without knots, for then it is e∣nough: then make thereof pies, Birds, Fruits, Flowers, or any pretty things printed with Moulds, and so gild them and put them into your Stove, and use them at your plea∣sure. 59 To make a March-pane. Take two pound of small Almonds, blanch them, and beat them as you do for your Paste of Almonds: then drive it into a sheet of Paste, and spread it on a bottome of Wa∣fers, according to the proportion or bignesse you please; then set an edge round about it, as you doe about a Tart, and pinch, it if you will: then bake it in a pan or Oven; when it is enough take it forth, and ice it with an ice made of Rose water and Sugar as thick as Bar∣ter, spread it on with a Brush of Bristles, or with feathers, and put it in the Oven again, and when you see the Jee rise white and dry, take it forth and stick long Comfits in it, and set up a stadderd in the middest of it, so gild it and serve it. 60 To make past of Violets or any kind of Flowers. Take your flowers, picke them and stamp them in an Alabaster Morter, then steep them two hours in a Sawcer of Rose water, after straine it and steep a little Gumme Dragon in
the same water; then beat it to paste, print it in your moulds, and it wil be of the very co∣lour and taste of the Flowers; then gild them, and so you may have every flower in his own colour ond taste; better for the mouth then any printed colour. 61 To make the white Paste royal. Take half a pound of white Barbary sugar, finely beaten and searced, put it into an Ala∣baster morter, and therewith a little Gumme Dragon steeped in Rose water, beat it by lit∣tle and little til it come to a Paste; when you have beaten it unto a perfect fine paste, print it with your moulds and gild it, and dry it in your stove, set them on white papers, and dry them on a hand-peel before the fire, and when they be through dry, box them and keep them for your pleasure. 62 To make a red Paste royal. Take half a pound of Barbary sugar, finely beaten and searced, put it into a stone mortar, with a quarter of an ounce of Gumme Dra∣gon steeped in rose water; then strowing a little powder de Rosita on it, beat it to a perfect paste, then print it, gild it, stove it, or otherwise dry it, and keep it at your pleasure. 63 To make the Paste royal in Spices Take four ounces of double refined sugar, beaten and searced, put thereto one ounce
of searced Cinnamon, beat it in a stone mor∣tar to paste, then print it with your moulds, and turn some upon sticks to make them shew like Gummes; they be called in Confectionary, Cinnamon sticks or Cinalonians; then gild them, and put them into your stove, but draw not out the sticks till they be dry, for else they wil shrinke. 64 To make Paste of Pippins Take twenty fair smooth skind Pippins, pare them and cut them into quarters, and core them: then boile them in a quart of fair water til they be tender; then powring the liquor from them, strain them and dry them on a Chafingdish full of coals, and put as much sugar to them as they weigh, then boil them to the height of Manus Christi, and fashi∣on some like plummes, some like leaves, so stove them; when they are stoved one night, you may put two halves of the plummes to e∣ther, and put a stone between them, and prick a stalk in the end, so may you make some like plummes with stones and stalkes; some with leaves: (I suppose it should be like leaves) for the Pippin is the best fruit to coun∣terfeit any plumme. 65 To make Paste of Genua Take of Quinces two pound, and two pound of reaches, bake them in a pot in the Oven, then pulp them thorow a hair sieve, dry them on a Chasingdish of coals; then take two pound
of sugar, boil it to the height of Manus Christi, and put it to your dried pulpe, make it to the fashion of great water leaves, put them into an Oven after the bread is drawn, let it stand all night; in the morning warm the Oven again, and turn your Paste, and put it in again: af∣ter that, for the space of three or four daies, set a chafingdish with coals into the oven to it, and when it is thorow drie, box it and keep it all the year. 66. To make Paste of Lemmons. Take half a dozen of thick rined Lemmons, cut them through the midst, and boil them ten∣der in fair water, then stampe them in a mor∣ter, strain the juyce or pulpe from them, and dry it and put sugar to it, as to the Paste of Genua; then make it into what fashion you will, on a sheet of white paper, dry it in an oven, and turne it often for two daies and two nights, for in that time it will be dry e∣nough: box it thus up, end it wil endure all the year. 67 To make Paste of Regia. Take half a pound of Almonds, blanch them and beat them into fine paste, then take half a pound of Pistacius, beat it among the Almonds; take the Brawn of a Capon, mince it very smal and beat it with the Almonds and Pistacius, put into it the flesh of two Partri∣ges, a dozen of Cock Sparrows, all which flesh must be well roasted before you take it
from the bones; put thereinto also half a pound of Dates thin sliced, a quarter of a pound of the four cold seeds, a quarter of a pound of sugar candy: beat all these together in a mor∣ter til it come to be Paste, with the yolkes of two new laid egges, and two or three spoonfuls of Rosewater, then make it up in little Cakes, and bake them on papers: this is an especiall Paste to preserve against the consumption, and to restore him that hath it. 68 How to make Paste of Goosberries, or Burberries, or English Currans. Take any of these tender fruits, and boile them softly on a chafingdish of coals, then strain them with the pap of a rotten apple, then take as much sugar as it weighs, and boil it to a candy height, with as much Rose water as wil melt the sugar, then put in the pap of your fruit into the hot sugar and let it boil leisurely, till you see it reasonable stiff, almost as thick as for Maimelade, then fashion it on a sheet of glass, and so put it into the Oven upon two billets, that the glass may not touch the bot∣tome of the oven, (for if it do, it will make the Paste tough) and so let it dry leisurely; and when it is dry, you may box it, and keep it all the year. 69 To make an excellent Marmelade. Of sugar take a pound and a half, boil it with a pint of fair water till it come to the
height of Manus Christi, then take three or four smal Quinces, one good Orange pill, both ve∣ry wel preserv'd and finely beaten, and three ounces of Almonds blanched and beaten by themselves, Eringo roots preserved two ounces and an half; stir these with the sugar til it will not stick- and then at last put in of Muske and Amber dissolved in Rose water, of each four grains, of Cinnamo, Ginger, Cloves and Mace, of each three drams, of oyl of Cinna∣mon two drops: These being done, put it in∣to your Marmelade boxes, and so present it to whom you please. 70 To make Marmelade of Lemmons and Oranges. Boil ten Lemmons or Oranges with halfe a dozen Pippins, and so draw them thorow a strainer; then take so much sugar as the pulp will weigh, and boyle it as you do Marme∣lade of Quinces, and then box it up. 71 To mke Almond Bisket. Steep one pound of Almonds so long in cold water, till they will blanch, then put them in Rosewater, and beat them in so much Rose water as will keep them from growing to an oyle, and no more: take one pound of sugar beaten very fine, and sifted thorow a searce: take the whites of sixe Egges, beat them to a froth, as you use to doe for other Bisket, with a spoonefull of fine flower: set the
Almonds and sugar on a soft charcole fire, let them boil together til they be very thick, and so let them stand til they be almost cold, then beat the Egges and that together, put in a lit∣tle Muske for the better taste, if you please, then lay them upon papers in what proportion you will, and dry them in a Oven with a slacke fire. 72 How to make the fine Bisket Bread, called in some places Norffe-cakes, and commonly Diet-bread. Take half a peck of fine Wheat flower, halfe a pound of sugar beaten in fine powder, a good handful of Annis seeds, rubbed, dusted, and made in fine powder, a competent spoonfull of Salt, one pound and a halfe of Batter: mixe all these (thus prepared) together: Then take a Porringer full of light Ale yest, and as much of good sweet Creame, made luke-warme, or somewhat hotter: but first take heed your yest be sweet, then take the Yolkes of six egges; work all these together into Dough, then lay it warme to rise, while the oven is heating: mould them into what forme you wil, but let not the rols in dough be bigger then your little finger: then put them into the oven wel and clean swept, but not too hot, for a little heat will bake them: when they are baked, let them stand till the oven be little more then lukewarme, and then take
them out till they be thorow cold, and put them in againe to dry the space of an houre or more; so may you keepe them halfe a yeare, or longer: and if they chance through moist standing, or weather, to waxe soft, give them a drying for an houre in an Oven, that hath stood an houre after a batch of Bread. 73 The best receit for Bisket bread. Take all the yolks, and halfe the whites of sixteen egges, beat them well together; then put to them a pound of the finest wheat flower, as much of the best loaf sugar, very finely bea∣ten and searced, with a quarter of a pint of Rose water, and half a quarter of a pint of Sacke, (if you please) beating them thus compoun∣ded together about two houres, very wel, then strowing upon it two spoonfuls of Coriander-seed, and as much Annis seed finely beaten, and then working them well into Paste, bake it in boxes or upon Plates well buttered, keep∣ing a little sugar in a piece of Cobweb Lawne, to searce upon it and ice it. If you make for some Physicall use, then use the Sack, and put in a quarter of a pound of Annis-seed, and as much Liquorice beaten into fine powder. 74 How to make Comfit makers Bisket Of flower take a peck, and four ounces of Co∣riander seed, one ounce of Annisseed; take three egs, three spoonfuls of Ale yest, and as much warm water as wil make it as thick as paste for
Manchets; make it in a long rowl, and bake it in an oven one hour; and when it is a day old, pare it, and slice it, sugar it with searced sugar, and put it again in the Oven; and when it is drie, take it out, and new sugar it again, and box it, and keep it. 75 To make Manus Christi. Of refined sugar take half a pound, and some Rosawter, and boil them together til it come to a sugar again: then stir it about while it be somewhat cold, then take your leaf-gold and mingle with it; then cast it according to art, that is in round gobbers, and so keep them. 76 The Syrup of Violets. Take fair water, boil it, scumme it, and to every ounce of it so boiled and scummed, take fix ounces of the blue of Violets onely: shift them as before nine times, and the last time take nine ounces of Violes, let them stand between times of shifting twelve hours: keep∣ing the liquor still on hot embers, that it may be milk warme, and no warmer, after the first shifting: you must stampe and strain your last nine ounces of Violets, and put in only the juyce of them, then take to every pint of this liquor thus prepared, one pound of sugar fine∣ly beaten, boil it, and keep it with stirring, till the sugar be all melted, which if you can, let be done before it boil, and then boil it up with a quick fire. This doth cool and open
in a burning Ague, being dissolved in Al∣mond milke, and taken: especially it is good for any inflammation in children: the con∣serves are of the same effect. 77 Syrup of Century. Take Flowers and green leaves of Centu∣ry, and boil them in a good quantity of faire water, being first boiled, and well scummed before the Century come in: when you think it is boiled enough, set it upon hot Embers for twelve houres, shifting it again and again, till you think it be strong enough of the Cen∣tury, then take to every pint of the liquor thus boiled, a pound of sugar, and so boil it up. It cleanseth the stomack, killeth Wormes, Agues, and the green Sicknesse: it must be taken in the morning with Mace Ale. 78 Syrup Gresta, or Syrup of unripe Grapes. Take a good Basket fill of unripe Grapes, set them three daies in a vessel after they be gathered, stampe them, and strain out the juyce of them, take thereof six quarts, boil it with a soft fire, till the third part be consumed, then four quarts will remain: Let that run thorow a Wollen bag, and stand till it be clear in it self, then take of the cleerest of it seven pints, put thereto five pound of clarified sugar; boyl them together to the thicknesse of a syrup, and keep it in a glasse. It is good for a per∣breaking stomack proceeding of Choler, and
for a swelling stomacke; it taketh away thirst and drinesse, and Chollericke Agues. It is a great comfort to the stomack of women be∣ing with child; it is a preservative against all manner of venome and against the Pesti∣lence. 79 Syrup of Roses. Take Damaske Roses, clip off the white of them, and take six ounces of them to every pint of fair water, first wel boiled and scum∣med: let them stand so as abovesaid, twelve hours, as you did in the syrup of Violets, wringing out the Roses, and putting in new eight times, then wringing out the last, put in only the juyce of foure ounces of Roses: so make it up as before. If you wil put in Ru∣barbe, take to every pint two drachms, slice it, string it on a thred, hang it within the pot af∣ter the first shifting, and let it infuse within your Roses. Some use to boil the Rubarbe in the Syrup, but it is dangerous. This syrup purgeth Choller and Melancholly. 80 Syrup of Wormwood. Take halfe a pound of Wormwood leaves, of red Roses two ounces, of Spikenard three drachms, of old and wel relisht white wine two ounces, juyce of Quinces two pound and a halfe. Let all these stand a day and a night in a stone pot, then let them boile softly to the one halfe, so let it coole, straine it, and clarifie it with the white of an egge: then
put to it two pound of good English honey, and let them boile a little together: then strain out the liquor, and with sugar boile it up to a syrup. 81 Syrup of Cowslips In stead of running water you must take the distilled water of Cowslips, put thereto your Cowslip flowers cleane picked, and the green knobs in the bottome cut off: and therewith boile up a Syrup, as in the Syrup of Roses is shewed. It is good against the Frenzie, comforting and staying the head in all hot Agues &c. It is good against the Palsie, and procures a sick patient to sleep: it must be taken in Almond Milke, or some o∣ther warme thing. 82 Syrup of Borage and Buglosse. Syrup of Borage and Buglosse are made in the same sort: they cool, open and comfort the body. 83 Syrup of Calamint Doth warm and comfort the stomack: it is made ut supra. 84 Syrup of Scabious Syrup of Scabious is made of the juyce of the herb strained and clarified as the juyce of Fole foot: and the flowers insused or steeped, shifted and boiled up as of Roses. It cleanseth the brest and lungs; cureth an old cough and Impostumes of the brest, and of all other inward parts, cleansing, ri∣pening
and healing the same. 85 To make Syrup of Saffron. Take a pint of Endive water, two ounces of Saffron finely beaten, and steep it therein all night; the next day seeth it, and strain out the Saffron; then with sugar boil it up to a Syrup. 86 Syrup of Fole-foot or Golts-foot Take the leaves of Fole-foot, wash them very faire, and wipe them with a clean linnen cloth leaf by leaf: then lay them on a clean cloth to dry, till all the wet be off them: then beat them in a morter, and put them into a Strainer, and wring out all the juyce you can out of them, and put it into Glasses, and let it stand in them to settle all night; the next day pour out the clearest of the juyce from the Grounds into a fair Bason, and taking for e∣verie pint thereof a pound of sugar finely bea∣ten, boil the juyce of Folefoot softly on a Char∣cole fire, and when you have wel scummed it, put in the sugar according to his proportion: and so let them boil together, keeping it with due scumming, until (to see when it is enough) it will stand on a stiffe purle when you drop some of it upon a Plate of silver, or a Sawcer: then take it from the fire, pour it thorow a Jel∣lie bag into a clean bason, putting first a branch or two of Rosemarie into the bags bottome, then keep it stirring with a spoone, till it be lukewarme, foraelse it will have a Cream
upon it: So letting it stand all night in the bason well covered, the next day put it into such glasses as you mean to keep it in. It is good to open the brest, and Lungs, and cureth old Coughes. 87 To make Syrup of Pomecitrons Take Pomecitrons and cut them in halves, and juyce them; but beware you wring them not too hard lest it be slimy: and take to eve∣ry pint of juyce three quarters of a pound of refined sugar, and boil it in an earthen pipkin til it come to the height of a syrup, and take heed in any case that you boil it not on too hot a fire, lest it burn: and then when it is boi∣led enough, put it up and keep it all the year. 88 A Syrup against Malencholly hu∣mors, especially where there is wind in the stomack. To make this syrup, 'tis necessarie to be expert in the Art; for it must be made with great diligence. Take water of Fumetory, of Hops, of Worm∣wood, of Maidenhair, of each five pound: Herewith make a decoction, with these follow∣ing ingredients. Take Pollipodium of the Oak, one pound, Sine leaves, Epitimum ana four ounces, Cordiall flowers two handfuls, Maidenhair one handfull, Liquoris, Cinna∣mon, Raisins, of each two ounces, of the four cold seeds two ounces; make thereof a deco∣ction
accrding to art, and straine it; then take foure pound of that Decoction, and put thereto the juice of Borrage, of Buglosse, and Hoppes, of each two ounces; common Honie six ounces: then with white sugar make a sirrup in good sorm, and aromatize it with musk and amber, putting thereunto one ounce of Plyris without musk, and then it is made. The dose is from three to four ounces in the morning warm, and fast thereupon at least three or four hours; for this purgeth marvel∣lously the melancholy humours, and all other gross humours, and dissolveth winde, and com∣forteth the heart. 89 Syrup of Wormwood simple. Take of the clarified juice of common Wormwood, and clarified sugar, of each four pound, make it into a sirrup according to art. After the same manner are prepared sim∣ple Syrups of Betonie, Borrage, Buglosse, Cardus, Camomel, Succorie, Endive, Hedg∣mustard, Strawberries, Fumetorie, Ground∣ivie, St Johns wort, Hops, Mercurie, Mous∣ear, Plantane, Apples, Purslain, Raspberries, Sage, Scabious, Scordium, Housleek, Colts∣foot, Paul's Betonie, and other Juices not sowr.
90 Syrup of Marsh mallows. Take of roots of marsh mallows two oun∣ces; the roots of grass Sparagus, Liquoris, Rai∣sins of the Sun stoned, of each half an ounce; the tops of mallows, marsh mallows, pellitorie of the wall, burnet, plantane, maidenhair white and black, of each an handfull; red cicers an ounce; of the four greater and four lesser cold seeds, of each three drachms; boil them in six pound of clear water till four remain, which being strained, boile into a sirrup with four pound of white sugar. 91 Syrup of Rhadishes. Take of garden and wilde Rhadish roots, of each an ounce; the roots of white Saxifrage, Lovage, Bruscus, Eringo, Restharrow, Parsley, Fennel, of each half an ounce; the leaves of Betonie, Burnet, Penniroiall, Nettles, Wa∣tercresses, Sampier, maidenhair, of each an handfull; winter Cherries, Jujubes, of each ten; the Seeds of Bazil, Bar, Parsly of Mace∣donia, Hartwort, Caraway, Carrots, Grom∣wel, the bark of the root of Bay-tree, of each two drachms, Raisins of the sun stoned, Liquo∣ris, of each six drachms; boil them in twelve pound of water to eight, strain it, and with four pound of sugar and two pound of honey, make it into a Syrup, and perfume it with an ounce of Cinnamon, and half an ounce of Nutmegs.
92 Syrup of Poppies. Take off the heads of both white and black Poppies, seeds and all, of each 50 drachms, Maidenhair fifteen drachms, Liquoris five drachms, Jujubes 30 by number, Lettice seeds 40 drachms; of the seeds of mallows and Quinces (tied up in a thin linnen cloth) of each one drachm and a half, boil these in eight pints of water till five pints be consumed; when you have strained out the three pints re∣maining, adde to them Penides and white su∣gar, of each a pound; boil them into a syrup according to art. 93 Hony of Rosemarry flowers. Take of Rosemary flowers a pound, clari∣fied hony three pound, mix them in a glasse with a narrow mouth, set them in the sun and keep them for use.
The CONTENTS of the First part. The best way Preserve Quinces white. pag. 1 A Special remembrance in doing them pag. 2 To Preserve Barberies. ibid Another way to preserve Barberies. pag. 3 To preserve all kind of Flowers, in the Spanish Candy in wedges. ibid To preserve green Pippins. pag. 4 To preserve Oranges and Lemmons ibid To preserve Peaches. pag. 5 To preserve Medters ibid The best way to preserve Goosberies. pag. 6 To Preserve Damsins. ibid How to Preserve Cherries. pag. 7 To Preserve Artichokes. ibid To preserve Roses or any other flowers. ibid The best way to preserve Apricocks pag. 8 To preserve Bullasses as green as grass. ibid To Preserve green Walnuts. pag. 9 To preserve Pomecitrons. ibid To preserve Eringo roots. ibid To preserve Raspices. pag. 10 To preserve Enula Compana roots. ibid
To Conserve Cowslips. pag. 11 A Conserve of Roses. ibid The use of Conserve of Violets and Cowslips. pag. 12 The use of Conserve of Marigolds. ibid Of Sage flowers. ibid Scabious Flowers. ibid Conserve of Barberries. ibid The Cordial Conserve. pag. 13 To make Muscadine Comfits. ibid To make black Clove Comfits. pag. 14 To Candy all kind of flowers as they grow with stalks on. ibid To make the Rock Candies upon all Spices, Flow∣ers, and Roots. pag. 15 To Candy Sucket for green Ginger, Lettice flow∣ers &c. ibid To Candy Ginger. pag. 16 To candy Eringo roots. ibid To make Quince Cakes. ibid Cleer Cakes of Quinces or Apricocks pag. 17 To dry Apricocks. ibid The best way to dry Plums. pag. 18 To dry Pippins. ibid A way to drie Cherries. pag. 19 How to keep Apples, Pears, Quinces, Wardens, &c. all the year dry. pag. 20 How to dry Fruits in the Sun. ibid To make Quidony of Cherries. ibid To make printed Quidony of Quinces. ibid To make Quidony of Pippins. pag. 21 To make Quidony of Raspices ibid
Colours for fruitage pag. 22 To make all kind of turned works in fruitage, hol∣low. ibid To make Dia Citonicum (as it is called) but rightly, Dia Cydonium. ibid How to cast all kind of sugar works into moulds pag. 23 The names and use of your Sugars ibid The names and prices of Gummes for Sugar∣work. ibid To make Jumbols. pag. 24 To make Paste of Carrots. ibid To make the Macaroones ibid How to make Paste of Almonds pag. 25 How to make a Marchpane. pag. 26 How to make Paste of Violets, or any kind of flowers. ibid How to make white Paste Royal pag. 27 How to make red Paste royal ibid How to make Paste Royal in Spices ibid How to make Paste of Pippins pag. 28 How to make Paste of Genua ibid How to make Paste of Lemmons pag. 29 How to make Paste of Regia ibid How to make Paste of Goosberies or Barberies, or English Currans pag. 30 How to make an excellent Marmelade ibid To make Marmelade of Lemmons and Oranges pag. 31 How to make Almond Bisket ibid How to make the fine Bisket bread called in some places Norffe Cakes, and commonly Diet-bread. pag. 32
The best receit for Bisket bread pag. 33 To make Comfit-makers Bisket ibid To make Manus Christi pag. 34 To make Syrup of Violets ibid Syrup of Century pag. 35 Syrup Gresta, or Syrup of unripe Grapes ibid Syrup of Roses pag. 36 Syrup of Wormwood ibid Syrup of Cowslips pag. 37 Syrup of Borage and Buglosse ibid Syrup of Calamint ibid Syrup of Scabious ibid To make Syrup of Saffron pag. 38 Syrup of Folefoot, or Colts foot ibid To make syrup of Pomecitrons pag. 39 A Syrup against Melancholly humors, especially where there is wind in the stomack ibid Syrup of Wormwood simple pag. 40 Sprup of Marsh mallows pag. 41 Syrup of Radishes ibid Syrup of Popies pag. 42 Hony of Rosemary flowers ibid
Experiments in PHYSICK & CHIRURGERY, Distillations, Waters, and Oyles: Their Vertues and Uses. 1 Doctor Stevens his Water. TAke a Gallon of Gascoin wine: of Ginger, Gallingall, Cinna∣mon, Graines, Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Annis-seeds, Car∣away-seed, Coriander-seed, Fennel-seed and sugar, of eve∣ry one a dram, then take of Sack and Ale a quart apiece, of Camomill, Sage, Mint, red Roses, Time, Pellitory of the wal, wild marjo∣ram, wilde Time, Lavender, Peneroyal, Fen∣nel roots, Parsley roots, and Setwall roots, of each halfe a handfull: Then beate the spice small, and bruise the herbs, and put them all together into the wine, and so let it stand six∣teene hours, stirring it now and then: Then distill it in a Limbeck with a soft fire, and keep
the first pint of the water by it selfe, for it is the best; and the rest by it self, for it is not so good as the first. The principal use of this water, is against all cold diseases, it preserveth youth, comforteth the stomack, cu∣reth the stone, of what nature soever; using but two spoonfuls in seven daies. It preser∣ved Doctor Stevens ten years bed-red, that he lived to ninety eight years. 2 To make Cinnamon Water. Of the best Cinnamon you can get take one pound; bruise it wel, and put it into a gallon of the best Sack, and infuse it three daies and three nights, and then distill it as your Aqua Coelestis. 3 Angelica water. Of Cardus take and drie a handfull, An∣gelica roots three ounces, of My the one drachm, Nutmegs half an ounce; Cinnamon, Ginger, of each four ounces, Saffron one drachm and a half. Cardomons, Cubebs, Gallingale and Pepper, of each a quarter of an ounce, Mace two drachms, Grains one drachm; Lignum-Aloes, Spikenard, Juncus-odoratus, of each a drachm; Sage, Borage, Buglosse, Violets, and Rosemary flowers, of each halfe a handful: bruise these, and steep them in a pottle of Sack twelve hours, and distill it as the rest. 4 Aqua Mirabilis Take three pints of White wine, one pint of Aqua vitae, one pint of juyce of Salendine,
one drachm of Cardamer, a drachm of Melliot flowers, Cubebs a drachm, of Galingale, Nut∣megs, Cloves, Mace, and Ginger, of each a drachm; mingle all these together over night. the next morning set them a stilling in a glass Limbeck. The Vertues. This water dissolveth swelling of the Lungs, and being perished, doth help & comfort them; it suffereth not the blood to putrifie; he shall not need to be let blood that useth this water; it suffereth not the heart-burning, nor melan∣choly or flegm to have dominion; it expelleth Urine, and profiteth the stomack; it preserveth a good colour, the visage, memory, and youth; it destroys the Palsie. Take some three spoon∣fuls of it once or twice a week, or oftner, morn∣ing and evening, first and last. 5 Balm water. Take Balm dry three ounces, Thyme, Penni∣royal, of each an ounce, Cinnamon four oun∣ces, a drachm of Cardomus, grains half an ounce, sweet Fennel seeds an ounce, Nurmegs and Ginger of each a drachm, Galingale one ounce, Calamus, Cypress, Cubebs and Pepper, of each two drachms, of Caper-roots half a drachm, of Diptamus one drachm: bruise these things, and put them to a pottle of Sack, and steep them 24 hours, and then use it as the former waters. 6. Another Balm VVater. Take a gallon and a quart of Sack, put to it Annis seed and Fennel seed of each one pound,
Liquorice scraped and bruised a quarter of a pound, of Coriander seed corrected, and Cara∣way seed, of each as much; Cowslip flowers clipt from the whites, and Rosemary flowers wel pickt, of each one pound; of red Mints, wilde Time, of each a good handful, and of Baulm 2 pound: steep all these first in the Sack 4 hours, in the brasse pot wherein they shall be distilled, and then distil them in a Limbeck. 7 A Barly water to purge the Lungs and Lights of all diseases. Take halfe a pound of fair Barley, a gal∣lon of running water, Liquorice half an ounce, Fennel seed, Violet leaves, Parselie seed, of each one quarter of a ounce, red Roses as much, of Isope and Sage dried, a good quan∣titie of either, of Harts tongue twelve leaves, a quarter of a pound of Figs, and as many Raisins; still the Figgs and Raisins, put them all into a new earthen pot, with the water cold, let them sceth well, and then strain the clearest from it, drink of this a good quantity, morning and afternoon, observing good diet upon it; it taketh away all Agues that come of heat, and all ill heat: it purgeth the Lights, Spleen, Kidnies and Bladder. 8 A Water for a sore Mouth. Take of Sage, Rosemary, and Woodbine leaves, a like quantity, viz. a handful and half of either, boyl them in a quart of running water, with as much of the best Allom as an
Egg, and let them boil to a pint, then put in a pint of white Wine, and let them boil again, and so soon as it boileth, take it off the fire, and let it cool, and then put it up in a glass, and therewith wash your mouth morning, even∣ing and at night, and other times as couse re∣quires, till it be well. 9 Another for the same use. White wine, and fair water, of each a quart; wine Vinegar a pint, red Sage a good quanti∣ty, Mercury two penniworth, Roch Allom half an ounce, Rosemary an handfull, Wood∣bine leaves somewhat more, and 3 spoonfulls of Honey; seeth them together, and wash your mouth therewith. 10 Rosa solis. Take of Liquorice 8 ounces, Annise-seeds, Carraway, of each an ounce; Raisins stoned, Dates of each three ounces, Nutmegs, Cinna∣mon, Ginger and Mace, of each half an ounce, Galingale a quarter of an ounce, Cubebs a drachm, Figs two ounces, Sugar four ounces; bruise these, and distill it with a gallon of Aqua vitae, as the rest: But when it is distilled, you must colour it with the herb Rosa solis, or else Alkanet root. 11 Wormwood water Take of Wormwood two ounces and a half, Sage, Bittony, and Rue, of each half a handful, Rosemary tops a handful, Cinamon 3 ounces, Nutmegs half an ounce, Cloves and Mace of
each half a drachm, Ginger one ounce, Galin∣gale, Cubebs and Spikenard, of each a drachm and a half, of Scordium half an handful, bruise these, and put them into a pottle of Sack, and a pint of Aqua vitae, and steep them 24 hours, and distil them as the rest. 12 Aqua Fortis. Take of Vitriol prepared as for oyl of Vitriol two pound, Salt Peter purged one pound; beat them together, and put them in a Retort well luted, place it in a furnace with a large receiver, and giving fire to it, distill it by degrees for 24 hours, rectifie the water in sand. 13 Water of Snails. Take of the juyce of ground Ivy, Coles foot, Stabious, Lungwort, of each one pound and a half; the juyce of Purslain, Plantane, Ambrosia, Pauls Betony, of each a pound; Hogs blood, White wine, of each four pound; Garden snails two pound; dryed Tobacco leaves, eight; pouder of Liquorice two ounces, Alicampane half an ounce, of On is an ounce, Cotton seeds an ounce and half, the greater cold seeds, Annise-seeds, of each six drachms; Saffron one drachm, the flowers of red Roses six pugils, of Violets and Borage, of each four pugils; steep them three days warm, and then distil them in a glass Still in sand.
14. An excellent VVater against the Stone in the Kidnies. Take of the middle rind of the root of Ash bruised two pound, Juniper Berries bruised three pound, Venice Turpentine that is very pure two pound and a half, put these into is pints of spring water, in a glass Vessel well clo∣sed, and there let them putrifie in Horse dung for the space of three months; then distil them in ashes, and there will come forth an oil and a water, separate the one from the other. Ten or twelve drops of this oyle being taken every morning in four or six spoonfulls of the said water, dissolves the gravel and stone in the Kidnies most wonderfully. 15 A water for outward or inward VVounds, Impostumes, and ulcers, and a sore mouth. Take Plantain, Ribwort, Bone-wort, wild Angelica, red Mints, Betony, Egtimony, Sa∣nacle, Blue-bottles, White-bottles, Scabious, Dandelion, Avens, Honey-suckle leaves, Bram∣ble buds, Hawthorn buds and leaves; Mug∣wort, Daisie roots, leaves and flowers; Worm∣wood, Southernwood, of each one handful. Boil all these in a pottle of white wine, and as much spring water, till one half be wasted, and when it is thus boiled, strain it from the herbs, and put to i half a pound of Honey, and let it boil a little after, and put it into bottles, and keep it for your use. Note, that these Herbs must be gathered i
May onely, but you may keep them dry, and and make your water at any time. If the wound be inward, 3 or four spoonfuls morning and evening, will in a short time ease, cure, if not too far gone, as almost nothing can recover the Patient. If outward, it must be washed therewith, and linnen clothes wet in the same applyed thereto. 16. A very excellent Water against Worms. Take of Wormseed bruised eight ounces, the shavings of Harts-horn two ounces, of Peach flowers dryed an ounce, of Aloes bruised half an ounce, pour on these the water of Tansie, Rue, Peach flowers, and of wormwood, of each a pint and a half, let them (being put into a glass vessel) be digested the space of three days, then distil them; cohobate this water three times. This Water may be given from half an ounce to three ounces, according to the age of the Patient. 17 An Excellent sweet VVater. Take a quart of Orange flower water, as much Rosewater, add thereto of Musk mallow seeds grosly bruised four ounces, of Benjamin two ounces, of Storax an ounce, of Libdanum six drachms, of Lavender flowers, and sweet Marjoram, of each two pugils, of Calamus A∣romaticus a drachm, distil all these in a glasse Still in balneo, the vessels being very well clo∣sed, that no vapour breath forth.
But upon urgent or sudden occasion, you may make a sweet water in an instant, by put∣ting a few drops of some distilled oyls together in to some Rosewater, and brewing them well together. 18 How to make artificial Tunbridg water. This water proceeding from an Iron Mine, (as is granted by all) is thus made: Take of the Mine or Ore of Iron, beat it very small, and put it into the Furnace expressed in p. 83. of John French his Art of Distillation; and there will come forth an acid spirit and flowers, which you must mix together, till the acid spi∣rit extracts the salt out of the flowers; then de∣cant off the cleer liquor, which will have a strong taste and smell of Iron. A few drops of this liquor put into a glasse full of fountain water, give it the odour and taste of Tunbridg water, and communicates the same operations to it. It opens obstructions, purgeth by Urine, cleanseth the Kidnies and Bladder, helps pis∣sing of blood, and difficulty of making water, it allayeth all sharp humours, cureth inward Ulcers and Impostumes, cleanseth and strengtheneth the Stomack and Liver, &c. The dose is from one pint to six, but by de-degrees. Use moderate exercise after taking it, and fast seven or eight hours, till the water be gone out of the body.
19 How to make artificial Epsome water. Take of the mine of Allom, or Allom stones, powder it very small, and distill it in the furnace expressed in page 83. of John French his Art of Distillations, and there will distil over a certain acid alluminish water, which must be mixed with a double quantity of Nitre-water. For Epsom water hath a certain kind of acid taste, which is partly ni∣trous, and partly alluminous, which proceedeth from nitrous air, and vapours arising from the fermentation of alluminous mines, being first mixed together, and then mixed with the foun∣tains passing through the earth. A few drops of this water put into a glass full of fountain water, will give it the odour and taste of Epsome water, so that the smell or operation will scarcely be discerned from it. This water purgeth sharp burning humours, cools an inflamed, and opens an obstructed body, cleanseth the Kidnies and Bladder, cu∣reth inward Ulcers and Impostumes, and is a very good preservative against the Consump∣tion, &c. Fountain water made acid with this liquor, may be taken from one to six pints: after it use moderate exercise, and fast till the water be out of the body. Onely some thin warm
suppings may be taken to help its working; some take this water warm. 20 Spirit of Confection of Alkermes, its Vertues. It is an excellent comforter of the Spirits, vital, natural, and animal, in weak and deli∣cate persons, and against all trembling pensive∣ness, and sudden qualms of the heart. 21 Spirits of Saffron, its vertues. It is good to comfort the vital Spirits against passions, trembling, and pensiveness of the heart, and helpeth all malignity oppressing it, and expelleth winde; suppresseth fumes which arise from the spleen, and go up to the head, and openeth the obstructions of it. It is excel∣lent against all Melancholy; and very good for women in travel, for it comforteth, and hastneth delivery. The dose is morning and evening one spoon∣full for three dayes together. 22 Extract of Ambergreece. Take a drachm of Amber-greece, grinde it very small on a Tainters stone, then put it into a bolt head, then take of the best spi∣rit of Wine, either Canary or Malago Sack, half a pound, spirit of Clary two ounces,
mingle them together well, and pour of the Menstrua one pint to this proportion of Am∣ber, set them to digest in a gentle Balneo, a∣bout eight hours, shaking it together three or four times; then take it out, and being cold, pour it forth, and put almost as much more of the mixed spirits, digested as before in a gentle heat by Balneo, then put it forth to the first extracted; and adde halfe as much more spirits the third time, and digest it again: and then have you extracted all the special part of the Amber, and leave nothing but a black dead earth of no value. Then take a pint of the spirit of what herb you will use, and dis∣solve therein one pound of pure white sugar candy, or at the least twelve ounces, very finely powdered and searced thorow a fine sear∣cer, for the speedier resolution thereof: It is best to dissolve it cold. This dissolution must be twice filtered thorow a thin cap paper, to make it very perfect clear; then take three parts of this dulcified spirit to one of your ex∣tract of Amber drawn with spirit of wine; then shake them well together, and let them stand in a square glasse very close stopped, un∣till it shall be perfectly clear: one drachm of this extraction of Amber will serve to dulcifie and make fit two quarts of the spirit of Mints, or Clary, or the like, and give it a most ex∣cellent taste, and efficacious vertues.
23 Spirit and water of wormwood, the lesser Composition Take of the leaves of dried Wormwood two pound, Annis-seeds halfe a pound; steep them in six gallons of small wines 24 houres, then distill them in an Allembick, adding to every pound of the distilled water two ounces of the best sugar. Let the two first pound you draw out be called Spirit of Wormwood; those which follow Wormwood water the lesser Composition. 24 Spirit and water of Wormwood, the greater Composition. Take of common and Roman Wormwood of each a pound; Sage, Mints, Bawm, of each two handfuls; the roots of Gallanga, Ginger, Calamus-aromaticus, Alacampane, of each three drachms, Liquoris one ounce, Raisins of the Sun stoned three ounces, Annis-seeds and sweet Fennel seeds, of each three drachms; Cinamon, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each two drachms; Cardamoms, Cubebs of each one drachm: Let the things be cut that are to be cut, and the things bruised that are to be bruised; all of them infused in 24 pints of Spanish Wines for 24 hours, then distilled in an Allembick, adding two ounces of white sugar to everie pint of distilled waters. Let the first pint be called Spirit of Worm∣wood, the geater Composition.
25 Spirit and water of Angelica. Take of the leaves of Angelica eight oun∣ces, of Carduus Benedictus six ounces, of Bawm and Sage of each four ounces, Angelica seeds six ounces, sweet Fennel seeds nine ounces: Let the herbs (being dried) and the seeds be grossy bruised; to which add of the spices called Aromaticum Rosatum, and of the spices cal'd Dia∣moscha dulce, of each an ounce and a half; infuse them two daies in thirtie two pints of Spanish wine, then distil them with a gentle fire; and with everie pound mix two ounces of sugar dis∣solved in Rosewater. Let the three first pound be called by the name of Spirit, the rest by the name of Water. 26 Spirit of Wine extraordinarie. Take the finest paper you can get, or else some virgin parchment, strain it very right and stiffe over the glass body wherein you put your Sack, Malmsie or Muscadine; oyl the paper or virgin parchment with a pensil moistned in the oyle of Ben, and distill it in Balneo with a gentle fire, and by this means you shall purchase only the true spirit of Wine. You shall not have above two or three ounces at the most out of a gallon of wine; which ascendeth in the form of a cloud without any dew or veins in the helm: Lute all the joynts well in this distillation. This pirit will vanish in the air, if the glasse stand o∣pen.
27 Quintessence of Snakes, Adders, or Vipers. Take of the biggest and fatest Snakes, Adders or Vipers, which you can get in June or July, cut off their heads, take off their skins, and unbowel them, then cut them into small pieces and put them into a glasse of a wide mouth, and set them in a warme Bal∣neo that they may be well dryed, which they wil be done in three or four dayes, then take them out and put them into a bolt head, and pour on them of the best alcolizated Wine, as much as wil cover them six or eight fingers breadth; stop the glasse he metically, and digest them fifteen daies in Balneo, or so long til the Wine be sufficiently covered, which pour forth; then pour on more of the foresaid spirit of wine til all the quintessence be extracted: Then put all the tinged spirits together, and draw off the spirit in a gentle Balneo, til it be thick at the bottome; on this pour the spirit of Wine cary∣ophilated, and stir them wel together, and di∣gest them in a Circulatory ten daies; then ab∣stract the spirit of wine, and the quintessence remaineth at the bottome perfect. This quintessence is of extraordinary ver∣tue to purifie the blood, flesh and skin, and consequently all diseases therein. It cures the falling sicknesse, strengthens the braine, sight,
and hearing; and preserveth from gray hairs, reneweth youth, preserveth women from Abor∣tion; cureth the Gout, Consumption, causeth sweat, is very good in and against pestilentiall infections. 28 A liquor against the tooth Ach. Take of oyle of Cloves well rectified half an ounce, in it dissolve half a drachm of Cam∣phire; adde to them of the spirit of turpen∣tine four times rectified (in which half a drachm of Opium hath been infused) half an ounce. A drop or two of this liquor put into a hollow tooth with some lint, easeth the tooth ach presently. 29 A Liquor to comfort smelling, and preserve the head. Take Lignum aloes two ounces, Annis-seed four ounces, Calamus aromaticus one ounce, Calamint dried three ounces, common hony two pound, strong white wine twelve pound, let all these be infused for four daies, and then distil it in Balneo; and when you distil it, put into the Receiver six grains of Musk dissolved in two ounces of Rosewater, and distil away but three pound, the which keep in a glasse close stopped; and when you will comfort the smelling, wash the face and beard therewith, and you shall smell a savour of marvellous effect, which comforteth nature marvelousty; it comforteth the stomacke, and helps a stink∣ing breath; it helpeth the mouth being ulcera∣ted,
and those that have the rupture in short time, if you wash it twice a day therewith; it helpeth also women that are troubled with de∣scension of the Matrix; if you wet a cloth in it and lay it upon the mother, in short space it restores great health. Also it helpeth those that are troubled with the Meagrum, or paines in the head coming of cold or winde; if you wash the head with the said liquor, it presently giveth ease. It hath divers other ver∣tues, which I will not now recite. 30 To make an Antimonial cup, and to cast di∣vers figures of Antimony. Take the best crude Antimony very well powdered, Nitre, of each a pound; of crude Tartar finely powdered two pound, mix them well together, and put them into a crucible; cover the crucible, and melt them, and the Regulus will fall to the bottome, and be like a melted metall: then pour it forth into a brass morter, being first smeared over with oyl. This Regulus (when you have made enough) you may melt again and cast into what moulds you please: You may cast it into the forms of shillings or half crowns; either of which if you put into two or three ounces of Wine in an earthen glazed vessel, or glasse, and infuse in a moderate heat all night, you may have a liquor in the morning which will cause vomit; of which the dose is from two drachms to two ounces and half.
You may put a little Cinamon into the wine, to correct and give a grateful relish to it. It is the custom to fil the Antimonial cup with wine, and to put as much wine round about be∣twixt that and the little earthen cup where it stands, and so infuse it all night, and then drink up all that wine; but I fear that so much wine wil be too much, a being three or four ounces, when as we seldom exceed the quantity of two ounces of the infusion of Antimony. These cups or pieces wil last for ever, and be as effectual after 1000 times infusion, as at first: and if they be broken at any time, (as easily they may, being as brittle as glass (they may be cast again into what forms you please. Note, that he that casts them must be skil∣ful in making his spawde, as also in scowring them, and making them bright afterwards: for if they be carefully handled, they wil look e∣ven as bright as silver. 31 How to make the true spirit of Antimony. Take of the subtil powder of the Regulus of Antimony, as much as you please; sublime it out of it self, till it will sublime no more (stil putting what is sublimed to that which remains at the bottom) or with salt Armoniack six or seven times, remembring that then you must dulcifie it with warme water, by dissolving therewith the salt, and dry the precipitate af∣terwards. Set this fixed powder in a celler, laying it very thin upon a marble Stone; and
in about six weeks, or two months it wil all be dissolved into water, which must be fil∣tered. Then evaporate part of this water, and let it stand two or three daies in the Cellar to crystallize; these Crystals purifie and drie: mix them with three times the quantity of the gross powder of Tiles, and distil them in a retort, and there will come forth first a white spirit and then a red, which you may rectifie in Balneo. 32 The true Oyl or essence of An∣timony is made thus. Take of the foresaid crystals, dissolve them in good rectified spirit of wine, digest them two months in Balneo, or horse dung; then evaporate the spirit of wine, and there will remaine in the bottome, the true oyl or essence of Antimony. Then take new crystals of Antimony, and let them inbibe either this oyl, or the foresaid spirit, till they will inbi be no more; then di∣gest them two months in sand, and they will become a flowing fixt salt, and of excellent vertue. The foresaid spirit, this oyl and essence of Antimony, may be equallized to Aurum Po∣tahile, to all intents and purposes, according to a medicinalure, especially the fixt essence. The dose is five or six grains.
33 Wormwood wine. Take a handful of dried Wormwood for eve∣ry gallon of wine, stop it in a vessel close, and so let it remain in steep. So is prepared Wine of Rosemarie flowers and Eye bright. 34 To make an Artificial Malago VVine. First take a wine barrel well hooped and dressed, with one end being open, to which a close cover must be well fitted, which must be to take off, and put on at pleasure. Set it in a warm place, winter or summer, and fill it full with clear and pure water; to each three gal∣lons put six pound of the best Malago Raisins, which you must bruise in a stone morter, and then strew upon the water; upon each twenty gallons of which, you must cast an handfull of Calx vive; then cover the vessel close with the cover, and cast clothes upon it to keep it warm, and let it stand four or five dayes to work, as Wine or Beer doth when they be new: then see if the raisins be risen up to the top of the water; if so, then put them down again, and cover it again as before, let them thus stand three weeks or a moneth together, the Raisins being every fourth or fifth day put down in case they rise up. Then put a tap into the Vessel three or four fingers above the bot∣tome, and try if it be good, and taste like wine; if not, let it stand a while longer; but if so, draw it off into another wine Vessel, and to e∣very twenty gallons that you have drawn off,
put a pint of the best Aqua vitae, two new laid Hen-egs, and a quart of Alligant beaten well together, and let it stand in a Cellar as o∣ther wine doth, til it be clear, and fit to be drunk. 35 How to make artificial Claret wino. Take six gallons of water, two gallons of the best Cider, put thereunto eight pound of the best Malago Raisins bruised in a mortar, let them stand close covered in a warm place, the space of a fortnight, every two dayes stirring them well together; then presse out the Raisins, and put the liquor into the said Vessel again; to which add a quart of the juice of Rasp∣berries, and a pint of the juyce of Black-Cher∣ries; cover this liquor with bread spread thick with strong Mustard, the Mustard side be∣ing downward, and so let it work by the fire side three or four dayes, then tun it up, and let it stand a week, and then bottle it up, and it wil taste as quick as bottle-Beer, and be∣come a very pleasant drink, and indeed far bet∣ter and wholsomer then our common Claret. 36 How to make good Raspberry VVine. Take a gallon of Sack, in which let two gallons of Raspberries stand steeping the space of twenty four hours, then strain them and put to the liquor three pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, let them stand together four or five dayes, being sometimes stirred together: Then pour off the clearest, and put it up in Bottles, and set it in a cold
place. If it be not sweet enough, you may add some sugar to it. 37 Oyl of Almonds. Take Almonds, blanch them, and put them into a pot, and set that pot in another pot of water that boileth, and the steam of the seeth∣ing pot, will arise and enter into the pot with the Almonds, and that will become Oyl, when they are stamped and wringed through a cloth: thus they make oyl of the kernels of Filberts; VValnuts, &c. 38 Oyl of Sage. Take the Sage, and boil it in Oyl of Olives, till it be thick and greene: then straine the Oyl from the Sage, and reserve it. 39 Oleum Laureum. Take Bay-leaves, grinde them well, and boil them in Oyl of Olives til it be green, then strain it and cool it, &c. This is for coldness in the Lims, Palsies, and such mortificati∣ons, &c. 40 Oyl of Tobacco. Take the Green leaves of Tobacco, cut them small and put them into a glasse or galli∣pot wel stopped, then fil it up with Sallet oyl, set it a good while in hot water, or in the Sun fourtie daies, and you shall find it a precious Balme. 41 Oyl of Roses. Take Sallet Oyl, and put it into an earthen pot; then take Rose leaves, clip off all the
white, and bruise them a little, and put them into the oyl, and then stop the pot close with paste, and set it into a boiling pot of water, and let it boil one houre; then let it stand all one night upon hot Embers, the next day take the oyl and straine it from the Rose leaves into a glasse, and put therein some fresh rose leaves clipt as before; stop it and set it in the Sun every day for a fortnight or three weeks. 42 Oyl of Creame. Take Creame and seeth it softly upon some embers, and it will become an Oyle: this wil cure the gout in a hauks leg. 43 Oyl of Swallows. Take two dozen or twentie Swallows out of the nest, a good handful of Rosemary, as much Lavender cotton, and as much Straw∣berry leaves, strings and all, stamp all these together, and fry them altogether in May Butter, or rather sallet Oyle, til the rawnesse be gone; then put it in an earthen pot fast stopped nine days, and then fry it again; wring it tho∣row a cloth, and keep it in a glasse or gallipot; and being warmed, annoint the place grieved there with, it is good for all Aches, and for the shrinking of Sinews. 44 Oyl of Roses. Take a pint of good Sallet oyl, or more, as
you please, then take as much red Rose leaves, the white clipt off, three quarters of a pint, put them into a stone pot, stop it close with paste, and set it so long in a greater pot of boiling water; till the strength of the Roses be gone into the Oyl, then wring the Roses thorow a Canvas cloth, till they be drie, then put in new, stop them, boil, strain, and change them thus four or five times, til you think it strongenough of the Roses; then put it up for your use. This is the best Pattern for these Oyles. 45 The use of Oyl of Violets. Oyl of Voilets. Camomile, Lillies, El∣der-flowers, Cowslips, Rue, Wormwood, and Mint, are made after the same sort. Oyl of Violets if it be rubbed about the Temples of the head, doth remove the extream heat, as∣swageth the head-ach, provoketh sleep, and moisteneth the Braine, it is good against me∣lancholy, dulnesse and heavinesse of the Spi∣rits, and against swellings and sores that be over hot. 46 The use of the oyl of Camomil Oyl of Camomil is good in glisters, for the Agues that come of costive stoppings; it as∣swageth all paine and Ach, it cureth wearied, and bruised parts, it loosneth and softneth hard and swoln parts, and openeth all which is stop∣ped. 47 The use of oyl of Lillies Oyle of Lillies is good to supple, mollifie
and stretch sinnews that be shrunk, it is good to annoint the sides and veines, in the fits of the stone. 48 The use of the Oyl of Elder-flowers. Oil of Elder flowers is good for the hardness and paines of the liver and spleene, if the sides be therewith annointed; But you must not come neer the bottome of the bellie where the bladder lies, nor the hollow of the stomack: It is very good to apply to green wounds, with some lint dipped in it, for it cooleth and heal, eth them, and also festring sores. 49 Oyle of Cowslips Oyle of Cowslips, if the nape of the neck be anointed with it, is good for the Palsie; it comforteth the sinnews, the heart and head. 50 The use of the Oyl of Rue. Oyle of Rue is good to be used in Olisters against the Collick and Stone: It is good for the Kings Evill, or any swellings in the chroat; it doth warme and dissolve cold humors in any joint; it provoketh Vrine, being an∣nointed about the region of the Bladder; it is good to annoint the Spleene for the stopping of it. 51 The use of the Oyl of Wormwood. Oyle of Wormwood is good for strains and bruises, and to comfort the stomack. It is made of the green herb, as are the Oyles of Camomile, Rue, and Mint.
52 The use of the Oyle of Mint. Oyle of Mint comforteth the stomack, over∣laid and weakned with casting: it doth drive back milk, and dry up womens brests, and doth keepe them from being sore, being therewith annointed. 53 To make the Oyle of Salerne. Take Southernwood, Wormwood, Laven∣der tender Crops, Rose leaves, Camomile, Saint Johns Wort, red Sage, Rosemary tops, of each one handfull; cut them somewhat smal, as it were about an Inch long, and bruise them a little; then put to them a pint of the best Aqua vita, and a pottle of the best Sallet-Oyl you can get: boyl them an hour and half upon a soft fire, keeping them from burning, with continual stirring; then strain it thorow a linnen cloth, and when it is cold, put it up in a glasse, and keep it for all cold infirmities. When you use it, warme the Oyl a little, and warme your hand against a Chafingdish of coales, and annoint the place pained there∣with. 54 How to compose the Oyl of Excester. Take one pound and a halfe of the Flowers of Cowslips, and steep them in three pints of the best Candy oyl, and let them so stand three weeks, or a month: and then take of Cala∣mint, Saint Johns-wort, Sage, Egremony, Sothernwood, Penneroyal, Wormwood, La∣vender, Parietarie, Rosemary, Camomile,
Pellitory of Spain, Bay-leaves, Scabious, of each a handful; beat them in a stone Mortar, as smal as you can, then strain the Cowslip flowers from the Oyle, and stamp them among the other herbs as smal as you can, and put them altoge∣ther in aquart of white wine, and let them stand therein twenty foure hours, then put the Oyl to them, and boil them upon a soft fire, til they be so incorporate together, that it is all become oyl: then letting it cool a little while, strain it into some earthen pan, there keep it till it be cold, and then put it up in some glass or gal∣ly-pot. 55 Oyl of Amber. Take of yellow Amber one part, burnt flints or powder of tiles two parts, distil them in a Retort in sand, keepe the white cleare oyl which comes out first, by it selfe; then di∣still it on till all come out, keep both oyles severally, and rectifie them with water, gather the salt of Amber which sticks to the neck of the retort, and being purged by solution, filtration, and coagulation, according to art, keep it for use. 56 How to make an excellent Oyl of Hypericon. Take flowers, leaves, and seeds of Hy∣pericon as much as you list, beat them toge∣ther, and infuse them in white-wine, that they may be covered therewith, and set them in the sun for ten dayes; then put
thereto so much oyl of Olives as all the rest doth weigh, and let it stand ten daies more in the Sun: But look you weigh the oyl, to know how much it is; then put thereto for e∣very pound of oyl two ounces of Turpentine, and one drachm of Saffron; and of Nutmegs and Cloves of each halfe an ounce; of Mirrhe and Rosin of each an ounce, and of the root of Briony two ounces; put them all in a vessel of glasse, and mix them wel together, and then set them in a vessel of hot water, and set thereto an head of glasse and a Receiver well shut, and boil it so long untill no more will distil from it, which will be about twenty four hours; then take it out and straine it whilst it is hot, and keep it in a vessel of glasse. And when you use it, first heat it well, and apply it upon a wound without using any tent at all. This is excellent for a green wound, especially if there be veins, sinnews, or bones offended or cut: It keepeth wounds from putrefaction, it cleanseth them, and easeth pain, and doth in∣carnate and skin them: It helpeth bruises, pains, aches, or swellings in any part; and is won∣derfull against venome or poyson. 57 Oyl of St. Johns Wort. Take a quart of Sallad oyl, put thereto a quart of the flowers of St. Johns wort wel pick∣ed, let them lie therein all the year till the seeds be ripe, the glasse must be kept warme, either in the Sun, or in water, all the Summer
until the seeds be ripe; then put in a quart of St. Johns wort seeds whole, and so let it stand twelve hours; then you must seeth the oyl eight hours, the glasse being kept open, and the water in the pot full as high as the oyl is of height in the glasse; then when it is cold, strain it, that the seeds may not remaine in the oyl, and then put up the oyle for your use. 58 Oyl of yolks of Eggs. Boil the yolks till they be hard, and bruise them with your hands, or with a pestle and mortar; heat them in an earthen vessel glazed untill they begin to froth, stirring them dili∣gently that they burn not: being hot, put them in a linnen bag, and sprinkle them with aro∣matick wine, and press out the oyl according to art. 59 To make oyl of Mandrakes. Take of common oyl two pound, juyce of Mandrake Apples, or (for want of them) of the leaves, four ounces; juyce of white Hen∣bane two ounces, juyce of black Poppie heads three ounces, juyce of Violets, and tender hem∣lock of each one ounce: Set them all in the sun, and after the tenth day, boil them to the con∣sumption of the juyce; then put in Opium finely beaten, and Styrax Calamltis dissolved in a little Turpentine, of each halfe an ounce. 60 Oyl of Musk how made. Take two Nutmegs, Musk one drachm, In∣dian
leafe or Mace, Spkenard, Costus, Mastick, of each six drachms; Styrax Cala∣mitis, Cassia lignea, Mirth, Saffron, Cloves, Cinnamon, Carpobalsamum, or Cubebs, Bdelium, of each two drachms; pure oyl three pound, Wine three ounces: brutle them as you ought to do, mix them, and let them boil easily til the wine be consumed, the Musk being mix∣ed according to art, after it is strain∣ed. 61 How to make oyl of Snakes and Adders. Take Snakes or Adders when they are fat, which will be in June or July, cut off their heads and take off their skins, and un∣bowel them, and put them into a glasse gourd, and pour out so much of the pure spirit of wine wel rectified, that it may cover them four or five fingers breadth; stop the glasse wel, and set it in Balneo till all their substance be tur∣ned into an oyl, which keep well stopt for your use. This oyl doth wonderfull cures in recove∣ring hearing in those that be deaf, if a few drops thereof be put warme into the eares. It's reported that some have beene cured that were borne deafe, by using this oyle.
62 An oyntment for a Rupture. Take of Sanicle two handfuls, of Adders∣tongue, Doves foot, and shepherds purse, of each as much, of Limaria one handful, chop them somewhat smal, and boile them in Deers suet, until the herbs be crumbly and waxe dry. 63 Flos Unguentorum. Take Rosin, Feroline, Virgin Waxe, of each halfe a pound, melt all these together and put into them one quarter of a pound of Rosemary tops beaten small; put then to them all together, a pottle of white wine, let them boil wel together, then strain them through a course linnen cloth into a pot or pan, and when it is cold, put the wine from it as much as wil, and and melt the medicine again, and put therein two ounces of Camphire, Venice Turpentine one quarter of a pound, Sallet oyl half a pint, let it boile a little, and put it up in some gally-pot for your use. It is good for new or old wounds, for sinnews shrunke, started, or sprung, to draw out thorns, or broken bones, healeth Biles, all Aches of the reines and backe, swelling of the members, and the eme∣rauds. 64 Unguentum Populionis, common∣ly called Pompillion. Take a gallon of Bores grease, as much of Popple buds when they first put out, and a handfull of Smallage; stampe the herbes
and the Bores grease together, put them toge∣her in an earthen pot well stopped, and set it in an horse dung-hill fourteen daies together; then boil it over the fire about a quarter of an hour, keeping it still with stirring: when you are ready to take it off the fire, put thereto halfe a pint of the best Sallet or Olive oyl, and stir them wel together; then let them boil a little, and strain it into an earthen pot, which being close covered, wil keep good seven or eight years. 65 Doctor Lewins Unguentum Ro∣satum, good for the heat in the Back. Take a certain quantity of Barrows grease. of oyl of sweet Almonds and Rosewater, either red or damaske, of each a like quantity, but of neither so much as of the Hogs grease; beat them together to an oyntment, put it in some gally pot, and when you would use it, heat it, and therewith annoint the Back and Reins. 66 Ʋnguentum Sanatinum Take of Turpentine one pound, Wax six ounces, oyl of Camomile halfe a pint, put all together in a pan, and put to it a handfull of Camomile bruised or cut very small: boile them upon a soft fire till they be wel melted and no more: then take it from the fire, and strain it into a clean pan, and so let it cool all night,
and in the morning put it up for your use. This Ointment is good for any cut, wound, or breaking of the flesh, it eateth away dead flesh, and ranklings, and doth heal again quickly. 67 Ointment of red Lead. Take of oyl of Roses a pound and a half, red lead three ounces, Litharge two ounces, Ceruss one ounce and half, Tutty three drams, Camphire two drachms, Wax an ounce and a half, make it into an ointment according to art, in a pestle and morter made of lead. 68 A bitter Ointment. Take of oil of Rue, Savin, Mints, Worm∣wood, bitter Almonds, of each an ounce and a half; juyce of Peach flowers and leaves, and VVormwood, of each half an ounce; powder of Rue, Mints, Century the less, Gentian, Tormentil, of each one drachm; the seeds of Colworts, the pulp of Colocynthis, of each two drachms, Aloes Hepatick three drachms, Meal of Lupines half an ounce, Myrrh washed in grasse water a drachm and half; Buls gall an ounce and a half, with a sufficient quantity of juyce of Lemons, and an ounce and a half of VVax; make it into an Ointment accord∣ing to art. 69 Apectoral Ointment. Take of fresh Butter washed in Violet wa∣ter six ounces, oyle of sweet Almonds four ounces, oyle of Cammomile and Violets, white
Wax, of each three ounces, Hens and Ducks grease, of each two ounces, Orris roots two drachms, Saffron half a drachm; the two last being finely powdered, the rest melted and of∣ten washed in Barly or Hysop water; make an ointment of them according to art. 70 An Ointment for an Ach, to be made at any time of the year, and is approved good, and hath helped old pains, griefs and aches. Take Steers gall, Sallet oyle and Aqua vitae, of each five spoonfuls, boil them together a lit∣tle, and therewith annoint the place pained by the fire, and lay a warm cloth on it. 71 An Oyntment for the Sciatica. Roast a handful or two of Onions, and take Neatsfoot oyle, and Aqua-vitae, of each a pint: stamp, or rather boil all these together to an oyle or ointment; and strain it into a Galli∣pot, and therewith annoint the place grieved, as hot as you can endure it, morning and even∣ing. 72 An Ointment for any wound or sone. Take two pound of Sheeps suet, or rather Deers suet, a pint of Candy oyle, a quarter of a pound of the newest and best Bee-wax: melt them all together, stirring them well, and put to them one ounce of oyle of Spike, and half an ounce of the Goldsmiths Boras, then heating them again, and stirring them all to∣gether, put it up in a Gallipot, and keep it close
stopped, till you have cause to use it. This is an approved ointment to cure any wounds or sores, new or old. 73 A Purge to drive out the French Pox, before you use the Ointment. Take half a pint of good Aqua vitae, one ounce of Treacle of Gene, one quarter of an ounce of Sperma caeti; boil all these together on a soft fire, half a quarter of an hour, and let the Patient drink this as warm as he can, and lie down in his bed and sweat: and if a∣ny of the disease be in his body, this will bring it forth, and bring him to an easie loosnesse. This is thought the best and furest of all other Cures, for this infirmity. 74 The Ointment for the French Pox Take Barrows grease well dryed from the filmes, beat it in a Morter, till it be small and fine: put thereto of Lethargy one ounce, of salt Peter two ounces, both in fine powder: of Sal∣gemme, one ounce, of Mastick in sine powder two ounces, of Olibanum in powder one ounce, of oyle of Spike one ounce, oyle of Pulliolum one ounce, of Turpentine one quarter of a pound; beat all these together into a perfect Ointment, and therewith annoint these places. 75 What places to annoint for the French Pox Viz. The principal bone in the nape of the neck wth.
out the shoulder places, taking heed it come not neer the Channel bone, for then it will make the throat swell, else not; the elbows on both sides; the Hip-bones; the Share; the knees the Hams and the Ankles: If the Patient have no Ach, annoint not these places, but onely the Sores till they be whole. If there be any Knobs lying in the flesh (as many have) annoint them often, and lay Lint upon them, and brown paper upon the Lint; and keep the Patient close out of the air, and this used will make him whole in ten dayes by the grace of God. 76 Another purge to heal the French Pox without Ointment Take a great handful of Carduus Benedictus, of unset Leeks leaves and all, if they be great six, if small 10; cut these herbs small, and put them in an earthen pan, and with a quart of small Ale or white Wine, and one ounce of Co∣loquinrida, boyl them to half a pint of liquor, then strain out the liquor, and keep it in a glass, and two or three days before you set the Pati∣ent to sweat, if his body be of a strong consti∣stitution, let him drink half of it; if he be weak, a third part thereof, taking care that the Sign and day be good to purge in. 77 An Ointment to kill the Worms in little children. Take oyle of Wormwood, oyle of Sa∣vine, and the powder of Aloe Cicatrina finely
beaten, mix them together, warm them and an∣noint the belly therewith morning and even∣ing, and this will kill the belly worms; for sto∣mack worms annoint the stomack with oyle of Wormwood, and the belly with oyle of sweet Almonds, You must not use any Savine in medicines for Maiden children, but in stead of oyle of Savine, take as much of an Oxes Gall. 78 For the worms. Drink Mares milk as hot as you can have it from the Mare, in the morning fasting. 79 An excellent good Medicine or Salve for any Ach coming of cold, easie to be made by any Country good houswife. Take of good Neatsfoot Oyle, Honey and Waxe a like quantity, boil them well together; Then put to them a quarter so much of A∣qua vitae as was of each of the other: and then setting it on the fire, boil it till they be well in∣corporated together; then spread it upon a piece of thin leather, or thick linnen cloth, and so apply it to the place pained. 80 For a pain or Ach in the Back. Take Nepe, Archangel, Parsly and Clary, of each half a handful, wash them clean, cut them small, and fry them with a little sweet
Butter, then take the yolks of three or four Eggs, beat them well together, and put them to the Eggs, fry them altogether, and eat them fasting every morning, with some Sugar to take away the unsavoriness of the herbs. Some use to take onely Clary leaves, and Parsly washed, not cut; or Clary leaves alone, and pouring the yolks of the Eggs upon them, so fry them and eat them. 80 A Searcloth for all Aches. Take Rosen one pound, Perrosen a quarter of a pound, as much Mastick, Dcers Suet, the like, Turpentine two ounces, Cloves bruised one ounce, Mace bruised two ounces, Saffron two dachms; boil all these together in oyle of Camomile, and keep it for your use. 81 An excellent Ointment for any Bruise or Ache. Take two pound of May Butter purified, pour it out from the dregs, and put in it of Broom flowers, and Elder flowers, of each a good handful, so clean picked, that you use nothing but the leaves; mix them altogether in a stone pot, and boil them seven or eight hours in a Kettle of water, being covered with a board and kept down with weights, keeping the Ket∣tle always full of water, with the help of ano∣ther Kettle of boyling water ready to fill up the first, as it wasteth; and when it waxeth
somewhat cool, but not cold, strain the oint∣ment from the herbs into a Gallipot, and keep it for your use. 82 The cure of grievous pains and aches in the Body. A dose of Aromatico Leonardo, and the application of Emplastrum foetidum, is an ap∣proved cure for grievous pains and aches in the knees, shoulders, or other parts. 83 Aches coming by the Pox healed. Purge twice or thrice with the said Aromati∣co Leonardo, then take for four or five dayes to∣gether, half a drachm of the extract of Hermo∣dactiles with white wine; then to the articular parts grieved, apply Emplastrum foetidum. This hath in short time cured one of a dark melan∣choly complexion, who was given over for in∣curable. 84 Back weak or diseased, to strengthen, &c. Take the pith of an Oxes back, wash it in Wine or Ale, and beating it very small, strain it through a course cloth, and make a caudle of it with Muskadine or strong Ale, boil therein a few Dates sliced and the stones taken out, and drink it first and last as warm as you can, walk∣ing well, but temperatly after it: Toasted Dates often eaten are very good for the same. 85 To take the Ague out of any place. Take Vervine and black Hemlock, of each
an handful, boil them in a pint of fresh Butter til they be soft and begin to parch againe; Then straine the Butter from the herbs and put it into a gallipot, and two or three times a day annoint the place grieved, with a spoonful or two thereof. Probat. 86 For the Ague in children, or wo∣men with child. Take Venice Turpentine, spread it on the rough side of a piece of thin leather two fin∣gers breadth, and strow thereon the powder of frankincense finely beaten, and upon it some Nutmegs grated; Binde this upon the wrests an hour before the fit comes, and renew it still till the fit be gone. 87 An easie and approved Medicine for a quartaine Ague. Take a white flint stone, (for it will best endure the fire without breaking) burne it in the fire till it be red hot, then quench it in or dinary Beere, and let the Patient drink of it a little before the fit cometh, and likewise in the fit. Let this be done three or four severall daies, at the time when the fit is expected. A woman by this onely medicine did cure divers of quartain Agues, when long and much Physick could not prevaile. 88 An Almond milk to cool and induce sleep. Take sweet Almonds blanched five pound,
beat them in a stone mortar, by sprinkling them now and then with a little barley-water; at last put a quart of barley water to them, and four ounces of fine sugar; then strain it, ad∣ding two ounces of Rosewater. This may be drawn out with chicken broth, and sweet∣ned with Sugar Candy in stead of other su∣gar. 89 For an Andcome. Put half a dozen knots of a young oak into a sire pan, and burn them to a red coal; and take Bores grease and fine suet, and two or three corns of salt. and stampe them very fine, and so make a plaister of it; and if it do draw and beal too fast, lay lime underneath the salve: dresse it twice a day in winter, and thrice in summer. 90 Liquid Amber, and its medci∣n al vertues. Take liquid amber, and distil it in a re∣tort, and there from will come a red oyl. This oyl is used against all indispositions of cold, and moisture, or wind. The same healeth scabs, and is good for wounds. If you an∣noint the stomack therewith, it will exceeding∣ly comfort the same; for it is a thing incor∣rupptible, and like unto Balsamum. 91 A most Soveraign Balsam for several diseases. Take five pints of Sallet oyl, one pound
of Venice Turpentine, half a pound of Vir∣gins Waxe, fix ounces of red sanders, halfe a pint of Damaske Rosewater. First put your oyl with six spoonfuls of Rosewater into a clean skillet, or new pipkin, and let it boile a quarter of an hour; wash the Turpentine with the rest of the Rose water, pare the wax clean, and cut it into thin slices, and put it into ano∣ther clean skillet or new pipkin with the Tur∣pentine; Let them be wel melted and mixed together: then pour the water from the oyl (if you can see any) and put it into the Wax and Turpentine, and let them boyl upon a gentle fire a dozen walms: Then take it off, and put in the sanders by two ounces at a time, mingling and stirring it wel: then let it boil a dozen walms more, stir it to avoid burning, then strain it into a bason, & fil it into gallipots 92 For a sudden bleeding at the nose Burn an Egg shel in the fire, till it be as black as a Cole, then beat it to a fine powder, and let the party snuffe it up into his nostrils. 93 A remedie for the spitting of blood, occasioned by the breach of some vein in the brest. Take Mice dung beaten to powder as much as will lie upon a groat, and put it into halfe a glasse ful of juice of Plantane with a little sugar, and so give the Patient thereof to drink morning and evening: continuing the
same he shall be sound. 94 To stop bleeding of a wound. Take Vervine dried and made into powder, and put it in the wound, and it wil leave bleed∣ing. Burne also the sole of an old hose, and put in the Ashes into a wound, and it wil leave bleeding. 95 To stop inward bleeding. Drinke the juyce of Neepe, and it will help you. 96 A medicine for those that are gi∣ven to bleeding. Make a Posset, take off the curd, and take liver-wort and beat it, and put the juyce thereof into the Posset-drink, and drink it morning and evening warme. 97 To stanch bleeding at the nose. Take Bolearmanack and the white of an egge, and vinegar, and beat them together and make plaisters thereof, and lay them to your temples. 98 To heal the Cut, or sore Brest of a Woman. Take Buglosse and Yarrow of each two handfuls, stampe them, and strain them with the third part of a pint of good Ale, then stamp the herbs againe, and strain them with an other third part of a pint of good Ale, then stampe and straine them again the third time, and you shall have neer a quart of the Ale, keep this in a glasse close stopped, and let the pa∣tient
drink of it first in the morning, and last in the evening three spoonfuls at a time; but if you make this for a sore brest, if the brest be broken, take three handfulls of Yar∣row. 99 A Medicine to breake and heal sore brests of Woman, used by Midwives, and other skilful women in London. Boile Oatmeale of the smllest you can get, and red Sage together in running or Conduit water, till it be thick enough to make a Plai∣ster; and then put into it a fit proportion of hony, and letting it boil a little together, take it off the fire, and while it is yet boiling hot, put thereto so much of the best Venice Tur∣pentine as will make it thick enough to spread; then spreading it on some soft leather, or a good thick linnen cloth, apply it to the brest, and it will first break the sore, and after that being continued, will also heal it up. 100 To dry up a womans Brest. Take of oyl of Linseed and English hony of each a penny worth, white wax half a penny worth, and half a quarter of a pint of sweet But∣ter; boyle all these to a plaister and lay it on the brest. Master Buxton. Colchester. 101 For a stinking Breath. Take Rosemary leaves with the blossomes,
if you can get them, and seeth them in white∣wine, with a little myrhe and Cinnamon, and you shall finde a marvellous affect, if you use it often in your mouth. 102 A Gargle for an unsavory breath Take Rosewater, Mirtle water, Orange flower water, of each two ounces; Musk three grains, salt a little more. Musk and Am∣bergreece you may put in for greater per∣sons. 103 For the Canker in a womans Brest. Take Goose dung and Cellydony, stamp them well together, and lay it plaister-wise to the sore; it will cleanse the Canker, kill the worme, and heale the sort. 104 For the Canker in the mouth. Take the juyce of Plantanc, vinegar and Rosewater, of each a like quantity, mingle them together, and wash the mouth often with them. 105 Of the Catarrhe, or Rbume in the bead. The Catarrhe is a moist vapour which assaulteth the head, and afterwards falleth down again into the stomack, where it ingros∣seth and corrupieth. This moisture hath its beginning of the moisture of the lungs; and un∣til the lungs be discharged thereof, the Catarrbe wil continue in its force. It is predominant more in flegmatick then other constitutions. Such as are troubled with it, are not long liv'd
because their lungs consume by little and little, and thereupon they are troubled with the Ptisick, and consequently perish, if not quickly relieved. See a rare secret to cure the same. Take Pulmonaria and Sena that is fresh and new, infuse them in wine and water over a gentle fire, till the wine have drawn out the vertue; then strain it, and put thereto some Quintessence Leonardo, and keep it close in a galffe: Let the Patient drinke eve∣ry morning three ounces lukewarme, for twenty daies together; let him eat good nourishing meats, for they agree wel with this disease: If the patient be not too far spent, you shal see your oure perform'd in a short time. In the mean time, if the patient be weak, let him take new laid Egges, and good white∣wine: if the humidity be perceived not to be quite expelled and evacuated, then give him Aromatico Leonardo; afterward comfort him again with Restoratives and Cordials, to make him strong; and no doubt, by the help of God, he shal be cured. 106 For young children that are weak in their limms, and can neither go nor stand. Take Sage, sweet Marjorome, of each a like
quantity, beat them very well together, and strain out the juyce, and put it into a double Vial glass, fill the glasse as full as it can hold; then stop it with paste very close, and cover it with thick paste all over, and then set it in an Oven, and there let it stand so long as a great loaf requires time to be throughly ba∣ked; then take it out, and let it be cold, then break the paste round about it, and if the juyce be grown thick, break the glasse, and put it in∣to a gallipot, and keep it. When you will use it, take the quantity of two spoonfuls at a time, and as much marrow of an Ox leg, melt them together, and mingle them well, and both morning and evening annoint therewith (as warm as can he endured) the tender parts of the childs thighs, and legs, and knees, chafing them well with your warm hands; and so in a short time (through Gods blessing) it will be able to stand and go. Successfully proved. 107 For breaking out of childrens heads. Take of White wine and sweet Butter, a like quantity, boil them together till it come to a salve, and so annoint the head there∣with.
108 A medicine for the swelling of a childs Cods. Bray red Rose leaves, and boil them in red wine an hour; then wet a cloth in it, and lay it to the childs Navel as hot as can be endu∣red. 109 To heal children of the Luna∣tick disease. This disease happeneth to children by rea∣son of a worme with two heads, which breed∣eth in their bodies, which coming to the heart, causeth such a passion in the child, that of times it kils them. The remedie whereof is this, Dry the tender stalks of a Wilding tree in the shadow; then stamp them wel, and fift them, and take of the said powder, and roots of Gen∣tian, myrth and long Pyome, of each a quarter of an ounce; all these well beaten to powder you must put in a dish, or some other vessel, and moisten them with a little water; then take of it with your two fingers, and wet the lips and mouth of the child: Do this three or four times, and you shall see the worm come forth dead with the excrements. 110 For a Consumption. Taste Ash Keyes, so soone as they looke withered, set them into an oven (the bread being drawn) in a pewter or rather an earth∣en dish, and being so dried, pill off the out∣side, and reserving the inner part of the seed or Keies, beat them to fine powder; and
either mixe it with good English Honey, and so eat of it first and last, morning and evening, a pretty deal of it at once, upon the point of a knife; or else drinke of the powder in some posset Ale or thin broth. Mares milk drunk also warm morning and evening, is a soveraign Medicine for it, 111 To make a China Broth for a Consumption. Of China root thin sliced take two ounces, keep it in fair water twenty four hours, letting it stand warm all the time, being close covered in an earthen pipkin or iron pot; then put to it a good Cockrel, or two Chickens clean dres∣sed, and scum it well; then put in five leaved grass, Maiden-hair, Harts-tongue, of each half a handfull, Dates twenty sliced, two or three Mace, and the bottome of a manchet; let all these stew together, untill not above one quart remains, then strain it, and take all the flesh, and sweet bones, beat them in a stone morter, and strain out all the juyce with the broth, then sweeten it with two ounces of white sugar can∣dy in powder, and take thereof half a pint at once, early in the morning warm, and sleep af∣ter it if you can, and two hours before supper at your pleasure; when you steep the root, slice two drachms of white Sanders, and as much red, and let them boil in the broth.
112 A Broth for a Consumption. Take a course Pullet and sow up the belly; and an ounce of the conserves of red Roses, Borage, and Bugloss flowers, of each of them half an ounce; Pine apple kernels, and Pista∣ties, of each half an ounce, bruised in a mor∣tar; two drachms of Amber powder, all mixed together, and put in the belly; then boil it in three quarts of water with Egrimony, Endive, and Succory, of each a handful; Sparrow grass roots, Fennel roots, Caper-roots, and an hand∣ful of Raisins of the Sun stoned; when it is al∣most boiled, take out the Pullet, and beat it in a stone morter, then put it into the liquor again, and give it three or four walms more; then strain it, and put to it a little red Rosewater, and half a pint of white Wine, and so drink it in a morning, and sleep after it. 113 An excellent confortative for the Sto∣mack, helping digestion, warming the brain, and drying the Rheumes. Take two ounces of good old conserve of red Roses, of chosen Mithridate two drachms; mingle them well together, and eat thereof to bedward, the quantity of a Hasel nut: This doth expel all windiness of the stomack, expel∣leth raw humours, and venemous vapours, cau∣seth good digestion, dryeth the Rheum, strengtheneth the memory and sight.
114 For the Corns on the feet or toes. First pare away the corns, then take a black snail and bruise it, and put a drop or two of the juyce thereof into the place grieved, and put thereto a little powder of Sandphire; and it will take away the corn very speedily. 115 A Cordial for the Sea. Take of Syrup of Clove Gilly-flowers, Mr. Mounifords water, and Cinnamon water, of each an ounce; Confectio Alcharmis one drachm, Borage water an ounce and half, the like of Mint-water; temper all these together in a Cordial, and take a spoonfull at a time when you are at Sea. 116 For the Ptisick and dry Cough. Take the lungs of a Fox, beat them to pow∣der; take of Liquorice and Sugar-Candy a good quantity, a small quantity of Cummin, mix all these well together, and put them in a bladder, and eat of it as often as you think good in the day. 117 An excelient medicine for the Cough of the Lungs. Take Fennel and Angelica, of each one handfull, the leaves in Summer, roots in win∣ter, sliced figgs twelve, (but if the body be bound, twenty at least) greene Liquorice (if you can) two or three good stickes, scra∣ped and sliced, Annis-seeds cleaved and brui∣sed two good spoonefuls, two or three Parsely
roots scraped and the pith taken out, and twen∣ty leaves of Folefoot; boil all these in three pints of Hysop water, to a pint and half, then strain it out into a glasse, putting as much white Sugar Candie to it as will sweeten it: Drink hereof being warmed, five spoonfulls at a time, first in the morning, and last in the e∣vening, taking heed that you eat nor drink any thing two hours before or after: continue this till it be all done. 118 A Medicine for the chin-Cough, for a child. First take Bores grease, and warm the soles of the feet at the fire; then chafe them with it, and go to bed and keep them warm, by lapping clothes about them. 119 A Diet drink to clear and tem∣per the blood. Take Scurvy grass half a peck, Brooklime, Watercresses, Acrimony, Maiden-hair, Liver∣wort, Borage, Bugloss, Betony, Sage, sweet-Marjoram, Sea-wormwood, tops of green Hops, Fumitory, of each a good handfull, I ve∣ry, Hartshorn, and yellow Sanders, of each one ounce; red Dock roots two ounces; Parsely, Fennel, Asparagus roots of each an ounce, Rai∣fins half a pound; boil these very well in a gallon of Beer, then stamp and strain them, and put it into three gallons more of Beer to work together.
120 A Diet drink to open and temper the Liver. Take the roots of Fennel, Parsly, Dock, Co∣roch, Kneeholm, of each half a good handful; the leaves of Endive, Bugloss, Fumitory, Harts∣tongue, Agrimony, garden Wormwood, Ce∣trach, of each a good handful; the bark of the roots of Capers half an ounce; boil these in a convenient quantity of Whey, till a third part be spent; then clarifie the same: Hereof drink in the morning fasting at the least half a pound at a time. 121 A Diet drink for a Canker in the mouth. First get a Diet pot of the common sort, put into it half a pound of Liquorice scraped and bruised; half a pound of Annise-seeds bruis∣ed, twelve ounces of Lignum vitae bought at the Turners, and an ounce of the bark of the same wood from the Apothecaries, half a pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, an handful of Sea∣bious, two ounces of Solyprilla, a quantity of white Wine, and an ounce of China; then fill up your pot with fair water saving a pint; then cover your pot with his cover, and close it round about the brim with paste; then set it on a gentle fire of coals, and let it boil three hours, till the fourth part be consumed:
Then put the clearest in bottles; and every morning and night drink a good draught for fourteen daies together. If you put a little of the wood into the fire, and there fry out of it somewhat like oyl, be sure it is good. 122 To cure the Dropsie, be it hot or cold. Take of the tops of Red Mint, of Archan∣gel or blind nettles, and red Sage, of either of them ten or twelve, stamp them all together and straine the juyce of them into some stale Ale, so much as will serve to drink morning and evening: do the like every day for nine or ten daies together, and (God willing) it will do away your disease. 123 A medicince that hath recovered some from the Dropsie, whom the Physici∣ans have given over. Take greene Broome, and burn it in some clean place, that you may save the Ashes of it: take some ten or twelve spoonfuls of the same Ashes, and boile them in a pint of White wine, till the vertue of it be in the wine: then coole it, and draine the wine from the dregs, and make three draughts of the wine; and drink one fasting in the morning, another at three in the afternoone, another last at night neer go∣ing to bed, continue this, and by Gods grace it wil cure you.
124 To open obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the dropsie. Take every day half a drachm of fine Ru∣barb thin sliced, with a spconful of Currans steeped and washed in white wine two houres, then chop them finely with the Rubarb, and eat them fasting nine mornings together at the Spring and Fall. 125 An approved medicine for the Drepsie. Take the herbe called Bitter sweet (it grow∣eth in waters, and bears a purple flower) slice the stalks and boil a prerty deal of them in white-wine, and drink thereof first and last morning and evening, and it will cure the Dropsie. 126 A Bath to comfort the Brain. Take a quart of Muscadine, sweet Marjo∣ram a handful, Rosemary tops half a handful, and a few Cloves; boyl them upon a soft fire, to the one half, and bath the head therewith often in the Spring and fall of the lease, dry∣ing it in with hot Napkin. 127 For pain in the Ears, or deafnesse Take a hot loafe, of the bignesse of a Bakers penny loafe, and pull or cut it in two in the middest, and lay the middle of the crummy side to the middest, or to the holes of the ear, or ears pained, as hot as they may be endured: & so bindthem fast together on all night. And then if you find any pain in either or both ears,
or any noise, put into your pained ear or eares, a drop of Aqua vitae in each, and then again binding more hot bread to them, walke a little while, and after go to bed; this done three or four daies together, hath taken away the paine, hearing noise in the ears, and much eased the deafnesse and dulnesse of and in ma∣ny. 128 For the Emrods. Take Egremony and bruise it smal, and then fry it with sheeps Suet, and hony, of each a like quantity, and lay it as hot as you can suffer it to the sundament, and it will heale you very fair and well. 129 For the Pinne and Web in the Eye. Take the Gall of a hare, and clarified hony, of each a like quantity, mingle them wel toge∣ther, and an noint the web with a feather dip∣ped in the same, and within three or four daies it will take it quite a way. 130 A Plaister to take away the Filme on the Eye. Take a rotten Apple, the yolke of one egg, and as much grated Maunchet as wil make it pretty stiffe, and then put to it two spoonfuls of Egrimony water, two of Eyebright water, and two of red-Rose water, or all six of red Rose∣water, for want of the other two, beat all these together, til it be stiffe enough to spread, then make a plaister of it and lay to the Eye, and when you take off the Plaister to renew it, wash
the Eye with some of these waters, mixed e∣qually together to clear it again. 131 A Medicine for sore, Bloud shot∣ten and Rheumatick eyes. Take ground Ivie, Daisies and Celedony of each a like quantity, stampe and strain out the juyce of them, and put to it a little brown Sugar Candy dissolved in a little white Rose∣water, and drop two or three drops of this liquor at one time, into the grieved eye or eyes with a feather, lying upon the back when you doe it, and an hour after. This by Master Waldgraves own experience, and by divers o∣thers to whom he taught it, proved to be the best Medicine for Byes; for it taketh away all inflamatious spots, webs, itches, smarting, or any griese whatsoever in the eye, yea though the sight were neere hand gone. 132 To make the face white and fair. Wash thy face with Rosemary boiled in white-wine, and thou shalt be fair; then take Erigan and stampe it, and take the juyce there∣of and put it altogether, and wash thy face therewith. Proved 133 To take the heat out of the face. Put Elder flowers, Plantane, white Dai∣sie roots, and herb Robert into running water, and wash your face morning and evening therewith.
134 To take away the Spots or red Pimples of the face. Take halfe a pint of raine water, and halfe a pint of good verjuyce, seeth it till it be halfe consumed; the whiles it boileth fill it up again with juyce of Lemmons, and so let it seeth a pretty while; then take it from the fire, when it is cold, put to it the whites of four new laid egges well beaten; and with this water annoint the place often. 135 A Secret to help all Fevers in the beginning. When the Fever is new begun, give the Pa∣rlent two drachms of Aromatico Leonardo fast∣ing in the morning; and the next day a∣bout the same hour give him an ounce of Vegi∣tabile Syrup; and the third day give him four drachms of the said Electuario Angelica Leonar∣do with broth, which taketh away the Fever al∣together. And this operation intendeth only to the continual, Quotidian, Tertian, and putri∣fied or pestilentiall Fevers; but not to the ac∣cidential or Heclick, nor Quartain, for these three kinds are much differing from the rest; because the accidentiall is caused of another in∣firmity anterior, or going before: The sever Hectick is caused of weaknesse of natures; and the Quartain is caused of great quantity of me∣lancholly humors; and they are cured by con∣trary means to the first: the accidental by help∣ing the principall infirmitie, the Hectick by
helping nature, and preserving the liver and lungs from putrefaction; the Quartaine by Vomits, Unctions, Cerrots, and drying drinks; and these are great secrets to be known. For herein consisteth a great part of Physick and Chirurgery, if it be well conside∣red. 136 To ripen and heal a Fellon. Boil Clarret wine and wheat flower to a poultesse, and spreading it very thick, apply it as hot as you can endure it. 137 A medicine for a Fistula. Dry Vervine upon a tile, and make pow∣der thereof, and make clean the sore with a linnen cloth, and fil the hole full of the powder. 138 A medicine for the falling sicknesse. Gather Germander in May when it is in the blossome, dry it in the shadow, and make it in∣to fine powder; and when you will use it, take the yolke of an egge or two, and stir and break it with a spoonful of the said powder, then seeth it and give it to the patient to eat: Do this morning and evening eight daies, abstain∣ing from wine, carnal company of Women, from all pulse, beans, pease, vetches, tares, and such other; from salets, salt fish, and from other things that are hard of concoction. A very good and notable secret. 139 For the Piles. Set a Chafingdish or a Pan of coles under a close stoole-chaire, or in a close stoole∣case;
and strow Amber beaten in fine powder upon the coals, and sit down over it, that the smoke may ascend up into the place grie∣ved. 140 An especial good Medicine to make the Piles bleed. Beat the yolke of an egge: and some sallet oyl or oyl of Roses together, with some Saffron, and spread it upon a piece of Leather, and lay it to the place grieved. 141 A Medicine for the Piles. Take a little Orpine, Hackdagger, and E∣lecampane, stampe them altogether with Boares grease into the form of an oyntment, and lay them to the place grieved. 142 A Cullesse to stop the Bloudy flux. Take a gallon of fair running water, and a quart of Red wine, boil therein a Cock or a Hen, of Bramble leaves, Ribwort, Oaken buds, Plantaine, Bursa Pastoris, Knotgrasse, stones of Raisins of the Sun, of each one hand∣ful: and so let them boil to the one halfe or more. Then take one pound of unblanched Almonds, stampe them and strain them with this broth, and put thereto a box of Quidony of Quinces, a spoonful of powder of Pome∣granate rinds, the powder of Cinnamon and of Rose leaves of each as much, two Cakes of Manus Christi, half a cake of Terra Sigillata
and a little Sugar to make it sweet; boil them all together about one quarter of an houre, then strain out the liquor, and let the Patient drink thereof morning and evening an hour before he eateth any thing. 143 Bloody flux cured. The Fluxes of the body are no other but the distemporature of Nature, and are of two kinds; the one is caused of the distemper, and evil quality of the Liver, and is called Flusso Epatico. The other is caused of great heat, feaver, and distemperament of Nature, and is called Diffenteria, that is, a distemper of the guts; and both these sorts are hard to be help∣ed by the Ancient Doctors, as it is well seen by those that practise; for they will help them with repression and restrictives; but that is not the way, if we shal beleeve Galen, who saith, Fluxus fluxum curat, which is most true: For many hundreds have been cured of the flux by giving them Aromatico Leonardo, and three or four doses of his Syrupo Solutivo. But the Dissenteria or flux is cured with Electuario Angelica Leonardo, and then e∣very day after dinner, stand in a bath of water of the sea, cold, two hours at least. This helps with much ease, and in a short time. But use it as a secret. 144 Another for the bloody Flux. Distil Frogs as you do herbs or flowers; or any thing else; but you must put nothing to
them but the frogs. Take two or three spoon∣suls of this water in any thing you will drink, and you shall finde present case. 145 A Medicine to cure the biting of all venemous beasts. As soon as the party feeleth himself bitten with any venemous beast, or as soon after as may be, take green leaves of a fig-tree, and presse the milk of them three or four times in∣to the wound: And for this serveth mustard∣seed mingled with vinegar. 146 An approved Medicine for the Gout in the feet. Take an Oxe his paunch new killed, and warm out of the belly, about the latter end of May or beginning of June, make two holes therein, and put in your feet, and lay store of warm clothes about it, to keep it warm so long as can be: use this for three or four dayes to∣gether, for three weeks or a month, whether you have the fit or pain of the Gout at that time or no, so you have had it at any time be∣fore. This hath cured divers persons, that they have never been troubled with it again. 147 A pultesse for the Gout. Take new milk, white bread grated, and an handfull of red Rose leaves; boil them toge∣ther to the thicknesse of a pulcesse; then spread them on a linnen cloth, and apply them to the place grieved.
148 How to cure all kinds of Gout. The Gout, of what kinde soever, whe∣ther hot or cold, or of any other temperature, proceedeth of one onely cause, although they work divers effects, which come through the complexions of those that have it: As for ex∣ample, In fat men, it cometh alwaies with in∣flammation and rednesse, and great pain: In lean persons it cometh alwaies with pains, but with lesse inflammation: In cholerick and melancholick persons it cometh with tumours, and that is nodosa. The cause of this infir∣mitie is an evill quality engendred in the sto∣mack, in the liver, and in the blood: and the cure thereof is to ease the stomack of that e∣vil, to purge the liver and the blood, and to mitigate the paine: All which thou maist do with these three Remedies followin; viz. by Pillole Magistrale Leonardo, by the Unction for the Gout, and by the Quinta Essentia so∣lutivo: The Pils discharge the stomack, the Quinta Essentia solutivo purgeth the Liver and the Blood, and the Unction taketh away the pain: for if you remedie the Cause, which is onely one, the Effect will cease. The manner of using these is this: When you feel the pain begin to come, take two Do∣ses of those Pils in the morning fasting, one day after another; or if you will, rest a day
or two, according to your strength. That be∣ing done, take every morning two drachms of the foresaid Quinta Essentia solutivo in half a porringer full of broth made with Veal, and a little sugar; and this you must take five hours before meat; and keepe no straight di∣et, but eat reasonably. And every night af∣ter Supper annoint the grief with the foreiaid Unction for the Gout. And thus, by the help of God, and the vertue of these medicines, the Oout shall be cured. 149 An approved Medicine for the Green-sicknesse. Take a quart of Claret wine, one pound of Currans, an handfull of young Rosemary crops, and halfe an ounce of Mace; seethe these to a pint, and let the patient drink thereof three spoonfuls at a time, morning and evening, and eat some of the Currans al∣so after. 150 The Green salve, which closeth up Sores, being wel drawn. Take half a pound of Wax, one pound of May-butter, set it on the fire and boil it: then take an handfull of Plantane, halfe an handfull of Ribwort, Brooklime and Smal∣lage, of each as much; Valerian two handfuls, Organie, Tutsaine and three-leaved Grasse, of each an handful, ground Ivie half an handful,
Elder-flowers while they be green, an handful; cut them smal and seeth them all together in the Wax and butter til they be ready to strain, then strain them, and keep the Salve either in gallipots, or in a round Roll, rolled up in Parchment. 151 To cleanse the Head, and take the Ach away. Chaw the root of Pellitory of Spain often in thy mouth. 152 Harts-horu Jelly. Take two ounces of Harts-borne, filed (not scraped) very fine, steep it in a quart of faire water, and let it stand so all night upon hot embers, stirring it when you go to bed, and co∣vering it: In the morning put four pints of water more to it, then boil it a good space on the fire, till it wil jellie, and when the liquor is almost three quarters boyled in, then strain it, and put to it a little Sugar, and as much juyce of Lemmons as will make it sharpe, and a little Ambergreece: Then let it stand and coole, and so put it up for your use. It is Excellent good for those that are brought low with burning Agues, giving them three or foure spoonfuls fasting, morning and e∣vening, and about nine in the forenoone, and three in the afternoone.
154 To make a Potion that is good against all Infirmities. This following Potion destroyeth all the evill qualities in our bodies, comforteth Na∣ture, helpeth Digestion, provoketh Urine, and looseth the Bodie: which things are most comfortable to the bodie. The order of ma∣king it is thus; Take ten ounces of the seeds of Quinces, the pils of Citrons six ounces, Balm, Nettles, of each four ounces; beat all these grosly, and infuse them in twelve pound of strong white wine, and there let it remain six dayes; then distill it with six ounces of honey, and fifteen ounces of sugar, untill you have re∣ceived two pound of water; then take it from the fire and let it coole, and strain it by a filter; and then put therein the first wa∣ter, and eight grains of Musk dissolved with about two ounces of Rosewater; and then for every pound of the said Water, put thereunto one scruple of the oyle of Vitriol, and incorporate them well together; then keep it in a Glasse close stopped, that it take no aire: And of this you may take one ounce in the morning (cold) and fast thereon: for whosoever they be that shall use this in their health, shall seldome be sick, but shall live in much health.
For into this Composition there entereth the seeds of Quinces, which resolve the evill quality of the stomack, and make the heart merry: the Pomecitron pils preserve and help digestion; the Balm purifieth the blood, he aleth the Liver, causeth good digestion, and comforteth the heart: The nettles warm, provoke urine, mundifie the reins, and resolve the malignity of the sinnews. The Wine comforteth nature, strengtheneth the head, and sustaineth the strength. The Musk is warme by nature, and resolveth the windinesse, and purgeth the blood: The oyl of vitrioll healeth all the Scoriationes of the mouth, the brest and stomack, and pre∣serveth the body from all corruption. So by this you may see of what importance this Com∣position is, through the vertue of the Sim∣ples that are therein. So to conclude, I say, this is one of the best Compositions that can be made, because of its nature: It letteth alteration in our bodies, and helpeth against all diseases and infirmities, and prolongeth life. 155 An exceeding good remedie against the yellow Jaundice. Take one handful of red nettle-tops, Plan∣tane and Saffron, and boil them wel in a pint of Ale, then strain it, and drink thereof for
four or five daies together, and you shall find help. 156 An excellent receipt to destroy any Impostume. Take of the roots of Flower-de-luces, and roots of Lillies, of each a like quantity; stamp them together, and put therein a quart of ho∣ny: boil them all together either in wine or Ale: and when they are well boiled, then take the liquor thereof and strain it thorow a fine linnen cloth; and when occasion serves, let the Patient drink two or three spoonfuls at a time, especially in the morning and eve∣ning, first an last, and this will speedily cure it. 157 To make an issue. Take Rice flowers and Mustard seed bea∣ten to powder, and with water make a little paste, and lay a ring upon the place made of a rush, and applie it. 158 A medicine for the Itch of the body. Take sweet butter, unwrought wax, vine∣gar, Brimstone, a little Rosewater, red Cloves whole; boil them together till they be like a salve, then annoint the flesh three sundry nights by the fire therewith, and no more. 159 For kibed heels. Take a Turnep, make a hole in the top of it, take out some of the pith, infuse into, that hole oyl of Roses, then stop close the hole, rost the Turnep under the embers, when it is soft,
apply it plaister wise warme to the Kibe; bind it fast. 159 Of Waxing Kernels, called by some Scrophulae, their cure. These kernels are commonly in the throats of young children, being caused by superflu∣ous melancholly humors corrupted, and are a kind of Ulcers, very hard to be holpen, and evil to endure; for when they are broke they cause excessive pain, in that, great abund ance of hu∣mors runneth thereunto; and they are so hot and corrupt, that outward medicines alone wil never help them, because they proceed from an in∣ward cause. Therefore if thou wilt help them, remove the cause first. First then give them the Syrup against me∣lancholly humors, which you shall find among the syrups in the Experiments of Conserving and Candying: then give them a dose of A∣romatico fasting, which will evacuate the sto∣mack of choller and flegm, and dry up those humors that run to the sores. The Medi∣cines to be applyed are two; the first is Costick, which wil mortifie it in 24 hours, and take away the corruption: but the Askar must not be taken away till it fall out it self. The other me∣dicine to be applied to the sore is the black Ce∣rot of Godfredo de Medic. which is also written in Galen. Thus it wil be cured in a short time, as hath been proved.
160 A special receipt to destroy Lice. Take Frankincense, and beat it into fine powder, and a good quantity of Bores grease: boil them together in an earthen pan, and when it is boiled annoint therewith the place where the lice are, and you shal be suddenly rid of them. Or take stavesacre beaten to powder, searced, and mingled with soap and Tobacco ashes, and annoint often therewith, it wil spee∣dily destroy them. 161 How to cure the Measels. In the curing of this disease, it being only necessary to defend the heart, and pre∣serve the stomack from corruption and putre∣faction, you shall use this receipt. Take Julep of Violets two cunces, Rose water four ounces, Oyl of Vitriol four grains, mix them, and let it be drunk cold. This is a most rare medicine. 162 To cure the disease of the Mother. Take six or seven drops of the spirit of Castoreum, in the beginning of the fit, in two or three spoonfuls of posset Ale, applying a plaister of Gavanum to the Navel. 163 For the dead Palsie. Annoint the neck pit often with Oleum Be∣nedictum, and that wil restore the speech; an∣noint also the place affected oftentimes with mustard against the fire, and after that bath it with wine, and bath it again morning and eve∣ning (if the party be young) with Aqua vita; if
old, take a spoonful of Aqua vitae, and halfe a spoonful of Sage-water distilled, and bath it therewith; drink also every morning and night as much treacle as four Pease in some stale Ale. 164 A plaister for a Bile or Push. Take a yolke of an egge, and half a spoon∣full of English hony, mix them together with fine Wheat-flower, and making it to a Plaister, apply it warme to the place grieved. 165 A very good Plaister to heale and dry up a sore, or cut suddenly Take of Marigold leaves, Porret blades or leaves, and House-leek, of all two handfuls, beat them all very smal in a morter, and put to them the whites of two new laid egges, and beat them very well til they be throughly incor∣porated with the eggs, and apply this til you be well. Renew it every day. 166 A plaister for the Stomack. Take of wood of Aloes, Wormwood, Gum∣arabick, Mastich, Cyprus, Costus, Ginger, of each half an ounce; Calamus Aromaticus, Olibanum, Aloes, of each three drams; Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon, Spikenard, Nutmegs, Gallia Moschata, Schaenanthis, of each one dram and a half; with Rob of Quinces make it into an emplaister: and when you have spread it upon a cloth, persume it with wood of Aloes, and apply it to your stomack.
167 A Preservative against the Pestilence when it is first suspected. Take a half-penny weight of English Saf∣fron, two pennie weight of Bole Armanack, one penny weight of Mace, made all in fine powder, and of Treacle the quantity of a ha∣sell nut, put them all in small Ale luke∣warm, mixe it well with the Ale, and let the partie drinke it, and lie down on a bed and lay upon him a temperate quantity of clothes, and so let him sweat two hours. 168 An approved good drink for the Pestilence. Take six spoonfuls of Dragon water, two good spoonfuls of wine vinegar, two penny weight of English Saffron, and as much treacle of Jane as a little Walnut, resolve all these to∣ther upon the fire, and let the Patient drink it blood-warme, within twenty hours (or soon∣er) that he is sick; and let him neither eate nor drink six hours after, but lie so warme in his bed, that he may sweat. This expelleth the disease from the heart: and if he be dispo∣sed to a sore, it wil straightwaies appear; which you shall draw out with a plaister of Flos Un∣guentorum. 169 A medicine for the Plague. Take of Setwal grated, one root, of Jane treacle two spoonfuls, of Wine vinegar three
spoonfuls, make all these more then luke-warm steep them well together, and drink them off at once: Sweat after this six or seven hours, and it wil bring forth the plague sore. To break which, lay a roasted Onion; also seeth a white Lillie root in Milk til it be as thick as a Pultis, and lay it to the same: If these faile, lance the sore, and so draw and heal it with salves for Botches or Boils. 170 Signs of death in the Plague. Take a live Frog, and lay the belly of it next the sore; if the Patient will escape, the Frog wil burst in a quarter of an houre; then lay on another; and this you shall doe til more do burst; for they draw forth the venome. If none of the frogs do burst, the party wil not escape. This hath been frequently proved. Some say a dried toad will do it better. 171 A water to drive out any infection. Take Dragons, Angelica, Rue, Wormwood, of each a handfull, chop them pretty smal, and steepe them in a quart of White-wine twenty four hours: then distil them in a Stil, and re∣serve the water in a glasse close stopped. Give to the sick Patient, six or seven spoonfuls here∣of at a time fasting, and let him fast an hour and an halfe after, and keep himself very warm in his bed or otherwise.
172 A Medicine for a Plurisie, Stitch or VVind offending in any part of the Body. Gather the young shoots of Oak after the fall of a Wood, and picking out the tenderest and softest of them, especially those which look reddest, bind them up together in a Wet pa∣per, and rost them in hot Embers as you doe a Warden, whereby they will dry to a powder: of which powder let the patient take a spoonful in a little Posset Ale, or Beer warmed, in the morning, fasting after it two hours or more, if he be able, doing the like about three after∣noon, and two hours after supper, four or five daies together: which thus done in the begin∣ning of the disease, is by often experiments found to cure such windy pains in the side, sto∣mack, or other parts of the body. You may dry them also in a dish, in an oven, after the bread is drawn; you shall do well to gather enough of them in the spring, and make good store of the powder then, to keep for all the yeare following. 173 A great and sore Plurisie cured by M. R. A certain man of 24 years old, was vexed with a most grievous Plurisie, with a pricking, shooting and a cough, with a continu∣al fever and inflamation of the tongue; First there was good store of blood taken from the
liver vein on that side where the pain was; then were these syrups (that do decoct and purge) ministred unto him. Take Syrupi de Liquo∣ritia, de Hysopo, acetosae ana, one ounce; Oxime∣litis squilitici, acet. squilit. ana, three drachms, make thereof a loch. Of this he licked in the morning with a liquorice stick, which caused him to spit easily, and took away the heat or burning of the tongue, being used with this direction following; of French barley three ounces, Carduus Benedictus M. 1. Roses, Vio∣lets, ana. P. 1. Liquorice scraped three drams, three figs, Raisins a pound and a half, Sugar Candy two ounces: Boil them in sixteene pound of water till two pound be wasted, and so to drink them cold. His diet was also light and thin, as broth, and drink, &c. 174 To take away Pock holes, or any spots in the face. Wet a fine cloth in white Rosewater, and set it all night to freeze, and then lay it upon your face till it be dry: also take three Poppies, the redest you can get, and quarter them, taking out the garbage; then still them in a quart of new milk of a red Cow, and with the water thereof wash your face. 175 A Pultis to stay fluxes proceeding from a cold cause, to be ap∣plied to the Belly. Take: oasts of Bread, steeped in vinegar
six ounces, beat it in a mortar, and adde Mace, Mastick, Mirtle Berries, stones of Raisins, Ga∣lany, Cloves, flowers of Pomegranates, of each one ounce; oyl of Wormwood, and Mints, of each two ounces. Make a Cata∣plasm. 176 For the heat of the Back. Take oyl of Roses six ounces and an half, and put it to a little wax, and foure drops of vinegar, and annoint the Back therewith. 177 Astma, or the Ptisick, and its cure. This disease is cured four manner of waies: First by letting blood under the tongue, cutting those veins overtwhart, and sucking them as much as may be; which evacuates and opens the opilation of blood; and easeth the lungs of all the offending matter. Secondly, By taking a dose of Aromatico Leonardo, which evacuateth the stomack of all evil qualities that offend the lungs. Thirdly, By eating every morning for a month together, one ounce of Electuario de Althea. Fourthly, By annointing the stomack every night with Mag∣no liquore. For speeding the cure, take every ten daies a dose of Electuario Angelica Leonar∣do; and keep a sober diet, refraining Fish, Pork, Slimie things, spice, baked meats, cheese, and such like, which nourish grosly, and infect the blood.
178 A very good Poultesse for any Mem∣ber swelled and inflamed, and not bro∣ken, to take away the pain. Take three pints of new milk, of stale Manchet crummes two handfuls, or so much as shall make the milk somewhat thick, adde thereto two handfuls of dryed red Rose leaves, and three ounces of Oyl of Roses; boil all these together to the thicknesse of a Poultesse, then let it stand and cool, and while it cooleth, take a spoonful of oyl of Roses, and with a warm hand, rub the place grieved till the oyl be dryed in, and then lay the Poultesse as warm as you may endure it to the part infla∣med: doe this morning and evening for three or four daies, as you shall see cause. 179 An especial medicine for all manner of poyson. Take Hempseed, dry it very well, and get off the Husks, and beat the Hempseed in∣to fine powder; take Mints also, dry them and make them into powder: Boil a spoonful of either of these in half a pint of Goats-milk, a pretty while, then put the Milke into a cup to cool, and put into it a spooneful of Treacle, and stir them together til it be cool enough; then drink it in the morning fasting, and eat no∣thing till noone, or at least in two hours; doe
the like at night, and use it so three daies, and it wil kil and overcome any poison. 181 A very gentle purge. Gerard pag. 1115. Take Borage, Buglosse, Balme and Fumito∣ry of each three drachms, Sene of Alexandria wel prepared and powdred two ounces, strow the powder upon the herbs, and distil them, re∣serving the water to purge with, for such as can∣not endure strong purges, it being taken in white wine, Sugar, or some other dainty waies, not offending the taste: you may, according to the nature of the disease add Agarick, Mirabo∣lanes &c. If Sene be infused in whay, and then boiled a little, it is very good Physick for melancholly, purging the Brain, Heart, Li∣ver, Lungs, and Milt, it causeth a man to look young, breedeth mirth, cleereth the sight, and strengtheneth the hearing, it is very good a∣gainst old Agues, and all diseases caused by me∣lancholly. 182 The purge for a Plurisie, Stitch, or Wind: It may be given any sound man or wo∣man, at any time, in temperate weather, not keeping their Chambers for it Take a quart of running water, two handfuls of Currants well picked, Sene, Liquo∣rice, and Annis seeds, of each half an ounce, and the quantity of two Races of Ginger sliced: boil
all these together til the liquor come to a pint, then let it run thorow a Colender, and drink it three mornings equally, being warmed, taking only an hour or two after it, a little thin broth. 183 Another Purge. Take halfe an ounce of Sene, two handfuls of Annis-seeds, as much Fennel seeds, both, bruised, a stick or two of Liquorice scraped, sliced and bruised, put them into a pint of Beer boil them, scumme them wel, and let them seethe til there be but a pretty draught left to drink at one time; then take an ounce and a half of Manna, dissolve it in three or four spoon∣fuls of the hot liquor, and strain it thorow a thin cloth into the rest: then straining the li∣quor thorow a Colender from the other mat∣ters, put into it four spoonfuls of syrup of Ro∣ses, and drink it while it is warm, taking a little thin broth after it. 184 The purge of Assarabacha, which the Lady A.D. used to rectifie her stomack any way offended. Take the weight of eight pence of Assarabacha leaves; stamp them and strain out the juyce of them with a little fair water or warme broth, and mixing it with a little soft English hony, warm it & drink it fasting; taking a little warm posset drink after it; and now and then a little
more, at times betweene the Vomits. 185 The Apothicaries Gascon's powder, with its use. Take of Pearls, white Amber, Harts-horn, eyes of Crabs, and white Corals of each half an ounce; of black thighs of Crabs cal∣cined two ounces; to every ounce of this pow∣der, put a drachm of Oriental Bezoar: reduce them all into very fine powder, and searce them, and with Harts-horn jelly, with a little Saffron put therein, make it up into a Paste; and make therewith Lozanges or Trochises for your use. You must get your crabs for this powder, a∣bout May or in September; take them before they are boiled: When you have made these, set them neither by the sire, nor in the Sun, but in a dry aire, till they grow hard. The dose is ten or twelve grains. 186 A powder for a Rupture. Take Shephards purse, and Doves foot, of each a like quantity, dry them until they rub to a powder, and drink thereof half a spoon∣full in half a pint of broth. 187 To kil the Ring-worme, and the heat thereof. Take a quart of white-wine Vinegar, boile therein of Woodbine leaves, Sage and Plantane of each one handful, of white Coperas one pound, of Alum as much as an egge: when it
is boiled to half a pint, strain out the liquor, and therewith wash the sore as hard as you can suffer it. 188 Rubarb and its vertues. The herb called in the Italian tongue Lappacia Maggiore, or Rombice domestice, is a kind of Rubarb, which among the learned Her∣balists is termed by the name of Rha recentio∣rum, whereof one drachm when it is new will loose the body, evacuate choler, as the Rha∣barbarum doth. It is very good against opi∣lations, it purgeth the blood, and takes away scabs. You shall have most precious medicines thereof, if you mix the green root with hony, Cinnamon, Saffron, Ginger, and the powder of Roses. If you rost the root in the em∣bers, and mix it with condited sugar, it break∣eth waxing kernels (called Scrophulae) and mundifies them, and healeth them in a short time. Some do mix it with the gumme called Ammoniacum, an so do bring it into the form of an Unguent, and apply it to the parts affe∣cted with Scrophulae. 189 An approved good medicine for running of the Reins. Make Almond milke of Plantane wa∣ter, or else boile plantane in the liquor where∣of you make your Almond milke; take a quart of it, and put thereto three spoonefuls of Lentine Farine, and three spoonefuls of Cin∣namon
water: take of this at six in the mor∣ning a good draught, two houres before dinner another, at four of the clock afternoon a third, and two hours after supper a fourth: and twice or thrice between meals eat a spoonful of con∣serve of red Roses at a time. 190 A medicine for burning or Scalding. Take Maidenwort, stampe it, and seethe it in fresh butter, and therewith annoint the place grieved presently. 191 To take away the heat of a burn, or out of a scald. Roft eggs as hard as a stone, then take out the yolks of them; then take a frying pan, and put in the yolks of the hard eggs, and so let it fry til it come to an oyl, then strain it, and an∣noint the burn with it; then take a bladder and annoint it with saller oyl, and lay it to the burn. 192 For one burned with Gun∣powder or otherwise. Take one handfull of Groundsel, twelve heads of house-leek, one pint of goose dung, as much chicken dung, of the newest that can be gotten; stamp the herbs as smal as you can, then put the dung into a Mottar, temper them toge∣ther with a pottle of Bores grease, labour them together half an houre, and strain it thorow a canvas bag with a cleft stick into an earthen pan, and use it when need requireth: It will last two years.
193 For the Scal or Scabbinesse of the head. Take of red Sage, Woodbine leaves, and ground Ivie a like quantity, in all so much as a good handful; boil them in a pint of Hogs grease, a quarter of an hour, then straine the medicine from the herbs into a galli-pot, and therewith daily annoint the head. Probatum. 194 An approved receipt for a scald head. Take a candle, and let it drop upon it as hot as you can, in so doing it wil scale off; then take the stale of a cow, and the furring of a whole chamberpot, boil these together and wash the place, and it wil straight way cure it. 195 To heal the white scal. This noisome malady is perfectly cured by purging the patient with Aromatico Lconardo; and annoiing his head with his Oleum Phi∣losophorum, or his artificial Balsum, or his O∣leum Benedictum. 196 The black Salve. Take one pound of red lead, finely ground, of oyl of Roses one pound and a half, of Bee wax half a pound, of white wine vinegar six ounces, boil them altogether, and make a plaister of it.
197 A Salve for ranklings, where the skin is rubbed off. Take one pound of May-Butter, clarifie it, and take the purest of it, put thereto three oun∣ces of English Wax, two ounces of Rosin, cla∣rified by themselves, boile them all together, coole it and keep it in a Cake for your use. This is also a very good Lipsalve. 198 A Barly Cream to procure sleep: or Almond mïlke. Take a good handfull of French Barly, wash it clean in warme water, and boil it in a quart of fair water to the half, then put out the water from the Barly, and put the Barly in∣to a pottle of new clean water, with a Parsly and a Fennel root clean washed and pick'd, with Borage, Buglosse, Violet leaves and Lettice, of each one handfull: boil them with the Bar∣ly till more then half be consumed; then strain out the liquor, and take of blanched Almonds a handfull, of the seeds of Melons, Cucum∣bers, Citruls and Gourds husked, of each half a quarter of an ounce; beat these seeds and the Almonds together in a stone Morter, with so much Sugar and Rose water as is fit, and strain them thorow a clean cloth into the li∣quor, and drink thereof at night going to bed, and in the night. If this doth not sufficiently
provoke sleep, then make some more of the same liquor, and boile in the same the heads, or a little of white Poppie. 199 An outward medicine for the same. Take red Rose-leaves or Cakes, and fine white bread crummes, mix them well together, and wet them throughly with red Rosewater and Vinegar, and womans Milk if you can get it: then taking off the cold of it, lay it to the Temples of the head. 200 A Receipt for a backward business. Take a pint of Milke, and make a cleare posset with either Ale or Beere, and take off the curd very clean; then take an handful of Vio∣let leaves, a handfull of Mallow leaves (and the flowers if you will) and wash them; also take a handful of Damask rose leaves, either dryed or otherwise, and a good spoonful of Annis∣seeds rub'd from their dust, and then bruised in a morter, and so boil all together in the pos∣set drink, til it come to somewhat lesse then a pint: then take it off from the fire, and put into it three spoonfuls of red Sugar, then strain it out, and put into it 3 spoonfuls of the oyl of Camomile flowers: and if you have none of that oyl, then take as much Butter as two wal∣nuts; also take the yolks of two new laid eggs, and beat them; then mingle all wel together with a spoone, stirring it throughly, and then
put it up into the bladder, and so take it, but not too hot. Though red Sugar be best and most usual for Glisters, yet if you have none of that, as much course powder Sugar will do it very wel. 201 A Glister to open and loosen the Body being bound, which may safely be mi∣nistred to any man or woman. Take Mallows and Mercury unwashed, of each two handfuls, half a handful of barly clean rubbed and washed: boile them in a pottle of running water to a quart, then straine out the water and put it in a skillet, and put to it three spoonfuls of sallet oyl, two spoonfuls of hony and a little salt: then make it lukewarme, and so minister it. 202 A cooling Glister in hot diseases. Take Mallows, Violets, Lettice, of each a good handful, of the foure greater cold seeds, of each half an ounce; twenty Pruins, Violet and Buglosse flowers, of each a smal handful; boil them to a pint, and put in kitchin sugar one ounce, and oyl of Violets three ounces. Or take barley and Linseed of each two ounces; boil them, and to one pound put an ounce and halfe of Sugar, one yolk of an egge, common oyl three ounces, salt one handful; take milke warmed one pound, sugar and syrup of Violets, of each two ounces. Make a Glister to cool.
203 A medicine that hath healed old sores up∣on the Legs, that have run so long, that the Bones have been seen. Take a quantity of good sweet Cream, and as much brimstone beaten in fine powder as wil make it thick like paste, then take so much sweet butter as wil work it into the form of an oint∣ment, and herewith annoint the place grieved twice a day. 204 Of the hidden secrets of Frankincense The Pine is a tree which by nature is uncor∣ruptible, and the gum that runs from it is of great vertue and strength, because it preserveth those things wherein it is put; and when his e∣lements are separated out of that gum, the phisi∣cian may work strange things therewith against most part of infirmities that happen to mans body, if he apply them where they are conveni∣ent: for the water being drunk, helpeth wind in the stomack. Also it helpeth the white scal, and all such like scabs, if they be washed therewith morning and evening. It dryeth up Ulcers; also it is of marvellous vertue against chilblains and kibed heels, and chaps, and such like, in the hands or feet, that come through cold; being used thus: First perfume the parts that are sore over the fume of hot water, so that they may sweat, then dry them and wash them with the aforesaid water, and annoint them with the oyl, and put on a pair of gloves or such like, & in very short time they shal be
whole. The air helpeth much in wounds in any part of the body, because it preserveth the flesh from putrifaction, and keepeth it from alteration, and taketh away the pain, and heal∣eth the sore: Also it preserveth the face, if it be annointed therewith. Moreover it is marvel∣lous in old diseases inwardly, if ye give thereof every morning a drachm, with halfe an ounce of Vegitabile Syrupo Leonardo. The fire cureth sores and such like, and the earth remaineth in his state. Ye shall understand, that these are great secrets of importance which I have revealed of this Gumme, and happy shall he be that useth them in the time of need. Now the order to make this oyl is thus; Take as much Frankincense as thou wilt, and put it into a Retort of glasse, with the fourth part of common ashes, and set it to distill, and give it first a small fire until the oyl change colour; then presently change the Receiver, and aug∣ment the fire untill all the substance be come out. Ye shall understand, that this oyl is best fresh; for when it is old, it wil wax thick, and cannot pierce so well. 204 The secrets of Mercury, or Quick-silver. Quick-silver is a liquid Mineral, and vola∣tile, which the Alchymists call Sulpher volati∣lis, and wil accompany with all other metals;
but with smal fire they may be separated again, and wil fly away in fume: and for that cause, the Philosophers call it Servus fugitivus, as a man would say; it can hold friendship with none; but so soon as he hath done his service, he flyeth away, as it is seen by Gold-Smiths that gild plate: for when they have laid him on with the gold, they put it to the fire, and he flies away; and the like it would do when any man doth occupie him in any sort of infir∣mity. And the order to calcine it is this, Take a long pot of stone that is very wel glazed, with the neck a foot and half long, and that hath a very narrow mouth, as is possible, and put therein two or three pound of Quick-silver, then set the same pot in a sal∣let of Iron, and lute them close together, and set it upon a furnace, and give them fire accor∣ding to art, until the Quick-silver remain cal∣cined; having special care that your head and re∣ceiver be very wel luted, lest you lose some part of the Quick silver; and thus in eight daies it shal be finished, which shall be apt for solution. Also this calcination serveth to divers and sun∣dry medicines; it mortifieth corrosive Ulcers without any pain. The solution is made in this order. Take the said Calx, and put it into a long neck'd glass, and put thereon distilled vinegar, and set in warm sand four and twenty houres, and then give it one walm, and when it hath
boil'd, pour out the vinegar, and then if there re∣maine and feces in the bottome, put in fresh vi∣negar, and do as thou didst before; and this thou shalt do so often, till it be dissolved into wa∣ter; and when all is dissolved, evaporate away the vinegar, that there remain but little in the bottom, then put thereto water of hony made by distillation, and so the solution of Mercury shal be finished, which is miraculous in many infirmities. It serves against the cough, Ca∣tarrhe, and for those that have their stomacks putrified with the Pox, using it with other sy∣rups and potions. It helpeth those whose milt is indurated; and also for those that have any kind of Fistula in any part of the body: It is also good for divers other things which I will not insert here, because others should endea∣vour too, by exercise to find out other secrets thereof as I have done. 205 To make the representation of the whole world in a glasse Take of the purest salt Nitre as much as you please, of Tin half so much, mix them to∣gether, and calcine them hermetically; then put them into a Retort, to which annex a glasse re∣ceiver, and lute them wel together: let leaves of gold be put into the bottome thereof; then put fire to the retort, until vapours arise that will cleave to the gold: augment the fire till no
more fumes ascend; then take away the Re∣ceiver, and close it hermetically, and make a lampe fire under it, and you wil see presented in it the Sun, Moone, Stars, Fountains, Flowers, Trees, Fruits, and indeed, even all things; which is a glorious sight to behold. 206 In a fit of the stone, when the water stops. Take the fresh shels of Snailes, the newest will look of a redish colour, and are best: take out the Snails, and dry the shels with a mode∣rate heat, in an Oven after the bread is drawn: Likewise take Bees and dry them in the same manner, and beat them severally into pow∣der; then take twice so much of the Bees powder as of the Snails, and mix them well together; keep it close covered in a glaffe, and when you use it, take as much of this powder as will lie upon a six pence, and put it into a quarter of a pint of the distilled water of Bean flowers, and drink it fasting, or upon an em∣pty stomack, and neither eat nor drink for two or three hours after. This wil both cause the urine to come away, and bring the gravell or stone away with it, and hath done very much good. 207 A Medicine for the Stone. Pellitory of the wall, Smallage, Holioaks,
Mallows, Tansie and Saxifrage, of each take an handfull; chop them small, and quile them in a little linnen bag: then take three pints of Cream, half a pint of malmsie, a quarter of a pint of running water, and set them on the fire; and when it doth seethe, then put the bag of herbs into the pot, and when the bag is through∣ly hot, wring it between two trenchers over the pot to save the liquor: then lay the bag to the grief as hot as you can suffer it; and as soon as it cooleth, make it hot again in the same li∣quor, and so apply it to the grief. 108 Another very good medicine for the Stone. Make a posset of a quart of Rhenish wine, a pinte of Ale, and a pint of milk; then take a∣way the Curd, and put into the drinke two handfuls of Sorrel, one handful of Burnet, and halfe a handful of Baulm: boil them together a good while, but not too long, lest the drink be too unpleasant: then take of the drink a quar∣ter of a pint, or rather half a pint at once, at morning and to bedward, putting therein first two or three spoonfuls of juyce of Lemmons. This is an excellent medicine for the Stone in the Kidnies, to dissolve and bring it away. It is very good in these diseases of the Stone to use Burnet often in your drink at meals; and often to steep it in over night, and in the morning
put in three or four spoonfuls of juyce of Lem∣mons, and to drink thereof a good draught e∣very morning a week together, about the Full Moon, three daies before, and three daies after. 209 To dissolve the Stone, which is one of the Physicians greatest secrets. Take a peck of green Bean Cods, wel clea∣ved and without dew or rain, and two good handfuls of Saxifrage, lay the same into a still, one row of Bean Cods, another of Saxifrage, and so distil one quart of water after this manner; and then distil another proportion of Bean Cods alone, and use to drink of these two waters. If the patient be most troubled with heat of the reins, then it is good to use the Bean Cod water stilled alone more often, and the o∣ther upon coming down of the sharp gravell or stone. 210 A Stove to sweat in. I know that many Gentlewomen, as well for clearing of their skin, as cleansing of their bodies, do now and then delight to sweat, For which purpose I have set down this manner following, as the best that I ever observed. Put into a brass pot of some good content, such pro∣portion of sweet herbs, and of such kind, as shall be most proper for your infirmitie, with some
reasonable quantity of water; close the same with a cover fit for it, and wel luted with paste made of flower, and whites of eggs. At some part of the cover you must let in a leaden pipe, (the entrance whereof must also be wel luted;) this pipe must be conveyed thorow the side of the chimny where the pot standeth, in a thicke holow stake of a bathing tub, crossed with hoops in the top, according to the usual manner, which you may cover with a sheet at your pleasure. Now the steam of the pot passing thorow the pipe under the false bottom of the bathing tub, (which must be bored ful of big holes) will breath so sweet and warme a vapour upon your body, as that (receiving air by holding your head without the tub, as you sit therein) you shal sweat most temperately, and continue the same without fainting. And this is performed with a smal Charcole fire maintained under the pot for this purpose. Note, that the room should be close wherein you place your bathing tub, lest any sudden cold should happen to offend you whilst your body is made open and porous to the air. 211 Against surfetting and indigestion. Take the bottom of a Wheaten loaf, and toast it at the fire til it be very brown and hard; then take a good quantity of Aqua vitae, and put upon the same so toasted, and put it in a sin∣gle linnen cloth, and lay it at the brest of the patient all night, and with the help of God he
shall recover, and shall vomit or purge soone after. 212 To make a tooth fall out of it self. Take wheat flower and mix it with the milk of an herb called Spurge, make thereof a paste, and fil the hole of the tooth therewith, and leave it there, changing it every two hours, and the tooth wil fall out. 213 To take away the cause of the pain in the Teeth. Wash the mouth two or three dayes together in the morning every month with white wine, wherein the root of Spurge hath been sodden, and you shall never have pain in your Teeth. 214 For a hollow Tooth. Take two or three dops of Aqua fortis, and dip a little lint therein, and stop the hollow place therewith, and for an hour or thereabouts it wil put you to some pain; but in a very short space after it wil give you ease. Use this twice or thrice, and it wil quite expel the pain for ever after, without perishing the tooth at all. 215 For the Rheume in the Gummes and Teeth. Boyle Rosemary in fair water, with sometenne or twelve Cloves slit; and when it is boyled, take as much Clarret wine as there is water left, and mingle, with it; and make it boile but a little againe, then straine it in∣to
to some glasse, and wash your mouth therewith morning and evening; this wil take away the Rheum in short time. And if you boil a little Mastick therewith, it is the better. 216 Tobacco, its vertues and uses Take of the green herb and roote three pound and an half, stampe it in a mortar with a little salt, then put it in a glasse with six ounces of the spirit of wine, and set it a whole month in horse dung to putrifie; then distil it in Bal∣neo til all the substance be come out; and put as much Oleum sulphuris into it as wil make it tart; then keep it close from air. A spooneful every morning will help against the Fever in a short time. It speedily cures Ulcers or Scabs, by drinking a spooneful every morning, and washing the sores therewith. 217 A Diet for the Patient that hath Ʋloers or wounds that wil hardly be cured with Ointments, Salves, or Plaisters. Take one pound of Guaicum, boile it in three pottles of Ale, with a soft fire, to the con∣suming of two parts: but if it be where you may have wild Whey, or Cheese Whay, they are better: let the Patient drink of this morning
and evening half a pint at a time, and let him sweat after it two hours. His drink at his meals must thus be used; put into the same ves∣sel where the former was made, to the Guaicum that is left, three pottles of Ale, (and not whay) let it boil to the one half, let him drinke there∣of at all times, and at his meals, which must be but one in a day, and that so little, that he may rise hungry: this must be doe five daies toge∣ther: but he must first be purged. 218 To help Ulcers of all sorts. Seeing Ulcers are of divers an̄d sundry kinds; it's necessary to know of what kind and quality they are, so that thou maist help them in form and order convenient. And first of the corrosive Ulcers, as of a wound cancrenated, of Mal di formica, and of other sorts of Ulcers that go creeping on the flesh; the cure of these is, by applying quickly Caustick to mortifie the evil; which thou shalt do thus, Wet a little bumbast in the said Caustick, and therewith wash all the sore, and then leave it so open four and twenty hours without binding it fast, and when twenty four hours are past, wash the sore with strong vinegar & water of an equal quan∣tity, with great care that there remain none of the Caustick in the sore: then lay thereon but∣ter washed with a Colewort leaf, until the as∣kar or dead flesh fal; then take Cerrot Magi∣strale,
with a little Precipitate strewed thereon, and then annoint it with Magno liquore, and lay it upon the sore; for this Cerot helpeth all manner of corrosive Ulcers, without any other help; and every plaister wil serve three or foure daies, taking them off every twenty four hours, and making them clean, and then lay them on again. As for the filthy Ulcer abovesaid, you shal dresse it only with the Unguento Magno Leonardo, which (without any other help) will heal them quickly: but you must every foure daies, touch them with Aqua-fortis drawn from Precipitate, which water draweth forth the of∣fensive matter, and leaveth it purified and clean. As for all other sorts of Ulcers, Mag∣no Liquore Leonardo, with Balm artificial, oyle of Wax, and Turpentine, the black Cerot of Godfredo di Medio. and the beforesaid Cerot Magistrale with Precipitate, are able to helpe, be they never so evil. 219 An approved Remedy to stay Vomiting, by M. R. A man of thirty years old was troubled a long time with sore vomiting, throwing up presently whatsoever he eat or drank; and was relieved by this receipt. Take of Malmsey six ounces, oyl of Vitriol six drops or more; mix them together, and take thereof every morning fasting an ounce or thereabout, and
in short time it wil stay the vomit. 220 A Receipt for to make Vomits. Take of the glass of Antimony poun∣ded as smal as may be, five grains; infuse the same all night in four ounces of white wine, shaking it divers times: early in the morning pour out all the cleer part, whereunto adde one ounce of Oximel Julinizans: so take it, drink∣ing after every vomit a draught of posset-ale. Or take of Mercurius vitae five grains in a spoonful of white wine. Or take two oun∣ces of Crocus Metallorum; Or take warm wa∣rer wherein a Raddish root hath been boiled, adding to it a little sallet oyl; also a little Oxi∣mel of the squil may be added. This vomit is taken specially for the weaknesse of the stomack, and for four or five daies together, it is taken for expelling the flegmatick and malign hu∣mors. 221 To kil Warts, an approved Medicine. Take a Raddish root, scrape off the outer side of it, and rub it all over with salt, then see it, (thus dressed) upright in a Sawcer, or some other smal dish, that you may save the liquor which runneth from it: and therewith annoint your Warts three or four times in a day, (the oftner the better) and in five or six daies they wil consume away. Saepe Probatum.
222 For one that cannot make water. Take the white strings or filmy roots of Primeroses, wash them very clean, and boil of them halfe a handful in a pint of Beer or white wine, til half be consumed; then strain it thorow a clean cloth, and drink thereof a quarter of a pint somewhat warm, morning and evening, for three daies. and it wil purge away all viscous or obstructious stopping the passage of the water. Probatum. 223 An excellent medicine for a child that cannot make water. Kill three or four hive Bees, then dry them upon an hot slate: being thorow dry, bruise them to smal powder, then put the powder in∣to a quart of small ale, and give it the patient to drink, and he shal have present remedy. 224 For one that pisseth bloud. Take Toutsain, Sanguinary and Parsley, of each one handful, stamp them together very smal, and mix the herbs, juyce and altogether with warm Goats milke, and drink a good draught thereof fasting every morning. 225 To kil the wild fire, Take Plantaine, Sorrel, Marigold leaves, of
each one handful, stampe them and strain out the juyce, and boil it with twice so much vine∣gar, and put it up in a glasse for your use. 226 How to order a woman with child, before, in, and af∣ter her labour. To preserve the infant, and prevent abor∣tion, take Coriander seed prepared 2 drachms, of the root of Bistort, the shavings of Ivory, and red Coral of each a drachm; of white Amber, Chrystal, of each a scruple; Alkerms halfe a scruple, Sugar dissolved in four ounces of Rose water; make tables, each of them weighing a drachm. Let the patient take one every other day morning and evening: between whiles let her sup up a rathe new egge, thickned a little with Magisterium of Pearl, or fine powder, or red Coral. But if her brests after their filling should begin to lessen and fal, it is a signe of future abortion; to prevent which, let her take root of Bistort, and Corianders, of each two drachms; of unripened Gales, red Sanders, and Hipocistidos, of each one drachm, Gum Lab∣danum, Mastick, of each halfe an ounce; choice Frankincense, Bdelium (the Gum of a tree in Arabiae) of each two drachms; Coral, Amber, of each one drachm: Powder those which are to be powdered, and with oyl of Turpentine and Wax make two or three Cere-clothes; ap∣ply
them sometimes to her loins and sides, and someimes under the Navel. Shee must avoid all sudden and violent motions both of the mind and body, as Coughs, sneezeings, Frights; also spices and strong wines. And thus much before labour. In labour; to procure ease and speed, take three or four drops of the distilled oyl of Nut∣megs in a spoonful of white wine. Or, Take white Dictamne root, Stones of Dates, Borax, of each two scruples; Cinnamon, Cassia lig∣nea, Amber, fine pearl, of each one scruple; Saffron half a scruple; make a smal powder, which divide into two equal parts; and let her take one part in a draught of the water of Li∣lies or posset Ale made with Rhenish wine; and the other part let her take about six hours after, if need require. If shee should be subject to sainting or swouning before or after labour, take now and then a spoonful of this excellent Cordial fol∣lowing: Take Borage water, Rose water, Straw∣berry water, and Rhenish wine, of each two ounces; species of Diamargaricum frigidum one scruple; make a warm infusion for the space of an hour, then strain it, and add there∣unto Manus Christi made with Pearl four oun∣ces; Syrup of Baum one ounce, Syrup of Gilli-flowers, of each two ounces; Oriental Be∣zoar, Unicorns horn, and Ambergreece,
of each six grains. Make a Cordial Julep. Many times after labour great pains follow women newly delivered, for which this plaine simple remedie is very good: Drink a good draught of beer boiled with a spoonful of Ca∣momile flowers; and in greater pains let her drink six ounces of the oyl of sweet Almonds fresh drawn. To dry up milk, a quick and safe remedy is new sponges wet in vinegar (where a handful of Comminseed boiled is bruised) tyed close to the brests, annointing them with Unguentum populeum. To procure store of milk, use posset drink made and boiled with Fennel, and the sweet seeds of Annis seeds and Fennel. These Remedies are approved to be safe, sure, and forcible to effect what is propounded. 227 Te bring a woman to a speedy birth. Take of Piony root dried, as much as half an Almond, beat it to very smal powder, and give it the woman to drink in an Aleber∣ry. 228 For the same. Take Hysop, Vervine and Betony, of each one handful: stamp them smal with some old Ale, and strain out that Ale and juyce, and
put as much more ale, as will make a pretty draught, and let the woman in her labour drink it, and shee shall be speedily delivered. 229 For a dead child in a womans body. Take juyce of Hysop, temper it in warm water, and give it the woman to drink. 230 A medicine for a woman in travel to make her have Throwes. Take Coral, Amber, Date-stones, Pearl, Piony seeds, Saffron, Commine: beat all these in powder, and put it into Malmsie, and take Unicorns horn, and put it into a spoon with a sittle Malmsie, and give it to her; and pre∣ently let her drink a draught of the Malmsie with the powder aforesaid, warming it a lit∣tle. 231 A medicine for the falling down of the Matrice to the bearing place. First take chickweed and seeth it in an earthen pot; then lay of it upon a piece of scar∣let, as hot as the party may suffer it: Let her take it to the privy place; and as one plaister cools, so lay on another, and use it.
232 Another to be laid to the Navel, and to the back right against the Navel, for the same use. Take an Onion, and rost it very tender, then take of Alysander seeds and bruise them in a wodden dish, and mingle the onion and bruised seeds together, and lay it upon a piece of linnen cloth; so lay it to the Navel a little warm: rowl that on, and let it lie on four and twenty hours; then change it and take a new one til it be cured. It availeth much, that the midwife hold Musk below (tyed in a little Lawn) to draw down the child. Take Torchwort, and lay a leaf of it to the crown of a womans head warm; to stay other flowers. 233 Immoderate flux menstrual sup∣pressed or stayed. Take the roots of Orpine and Comfry thin sliced, Clary, of each as much as you please; boil theme with a Chicken, and with that broth make Almond milk, and to every handful of Almonds add one scruple of Lab∣danum; grind them wel together, and drink thereof morning and evening. Also annoint the reins and grieved parts with this oyntment: Unguentum album camphoratum 2 ounces, Sacca∣rum saturni two drachms; mingle them and make an ointment.
234 For a woman that hath too much of the flowers. Burn the foot of a Hare to powder, and drink thereof with red wine and Cinnamon, first and last, nine daies; and it wil help her. 235 To stop the whites i women. Fry Hemsock in fresh twines grease, lay it as hot she may suffer it to the secret place. 236 Another for the same. Of new milk of a red Cow take a quart, ten spoonfuls of red Rosewater, or Pomegranate pil be aten, and a little Cinnamon beaten, and see the it half away: sweeten it with sugar, and drink a draught morning and evening, and two whites of eggs beaten. 237 To make Pomatum. Take the Leafe of a hog new killed, lay is in water nine daies, keeping it close covered, and shifting it three times a day; then take it out of the water and beat it, and beat it with a wooden peftel in a stone morter; then put into a great galli-pot a branch of Rosemarie, half a pound of Almonds blanched and beaten, a quarter of a pint of Rosewater, three or four large Mace bruised, a grain of Musk bruised, and upon them all put in the hogs leaf so beat∣en,
and cover it close: Then take a brass-pot, sil it so ful of water, that the galli-pot may stand two or three inches above the water in the same pot, set the brasse pot on a Charcole fire, or such another fire as may make it seethe a∣pace, and have no smoakie brands about it. Set a weight on the top of your gallipot, lest it swim and fall, and then let the brasse pot boil so fast as may make the gallipot seeth also, and so let it seeth three hours, keeping in a kettle by on another fire some seething water, to fil up the brasse pot stil, as the water shall evaporate out of it by seething; then take out your galli∣pot, stir the stuffe in it wel together, and strain it thorow a fine cloth (which you must be sure must have no holes in it) into another galli∣pot, of the same size: and set that with the matter so strained in it, into the brasse pot close stopt, and let it boile for an hour, then pour it into little gallipots for your use, but binde them not up til they be throughly cold.
Severall Compositions of great Use in this second part of this Manuel. 1 Magno Liquore, which is of great vertue. TAke sweet Sallet oyl twenty pound white wine two pound, boil these together un∣til the wine be consumed, then put it in a vessel of stone, and put thereunto these things following. Take the flowers of Rose-mary three pound, Lignum aloes six ounces; Olibanum, Bdelium, of each ten ounces; then stop it very close, and bury it in the ground four foot deep; and this would be buried in the beginning of August, and there remain until the month of March, then take it forth of the ground, and set it in the Sun, and put thereto these matters following. Sage, Rosemary, Rue, Betony Millifolly, Comfery roots, Tamaro, Viticella, of each one handful; Gallingall, Cloves, Nut∣megs, Spikenard, Saffron, one ounce; Sarcocolla, Sanguis Draconis in grain, Mastick, one ounce; aloes hepatick, Rasa di pino, of each eight oun∣ces, yellow wax, Auxungia, of each eighteen ounces, Colophony one pound, Hypericon with
the seed and all, one pound, Musk one drachm; mix them all wel together, and boil them in Balneo until the herbs become dry, and have no more substance, then it is boiled; then take it forth and strain it; and put thereunto for eve∣ry pound six drachms of balme artificial; and when the month of Septem. cometh, put there∣unto two pound of the fruit of the herb called Balsamina, which is red, and then it is ended; which thou shaft keep in a glasse close shut, for the older it is, the better it is; and is of such vertue, that it helpeth the Etisie, and Hidropsie, if ye give them every morning four drachms with two ounces of syrup of Roses warm, the space of eleven dayes, as is wel proved: and this is the true and perfect Unction that helpeth the Petocchie, a disease so called in the Italian; If any were wounded, and had cut veins, sin∣news and bones, let him joyn the parts close together, and dresse it with this oyl very hot upon the upper parts; and in short time it shal be whole without any alteration; it helpeth al∣so the white scal, if ye annoint it therewith: it helpeth coldnesse in the head, and Catarrhs, if ye annoint within the nostrils at night when ye go to bed; if ye annoint the stomack therewith, it causeth perfect digestion of the meat, it pro∣voketh urine where it is let through carnosity, or Gonnorea, or such like Matter; it causeth hair to grow, it preserveth the beard black, and is good against worms; and all these experiments
are true and proved by one divers and sundry times in the aforesaid infirmities, and also in divers other, which are left until nother time: Ye shal note, that if you annoint one all o∣ver that is grieved with the Pox, with this oyle, it wil encrease his pain; and so by that means you may know whether he be infected or no. 2 How to compound Aromatico Leo∣nardo, with its vertues. Aromatico Leonardo, is a miraculous me∣dicine, that serveth against all manner of dis∣cases of what quality soever they be; for it worketh this operation, viz. as soon as it join∣eth to the stomack, it draweth to it all the evil humors of the body, and imbraceth them, and carrieth them forth of the body both by vomit and seige, and so leaveth nature unburthened, which may prevaile at pleasure, because it hath no impediment: and the order to make it is thus: Take fine white sugar four ounces, pure Pearls, Musk, Saffron, Lignum aloes, Cina∣mon, of each one scruple; Petra Philosophale four drams, mix them together, and make there∣of Lozanges with Rose water according to art, the which ye shal keep in a box of Wood close shut: and the order to use it is thus; When the physician goes do visit any sick person, and intends to prepare him some medicine to take
inward; the best and most perfect inward me∣dicine that he can ordain is this Aromatico, because it evacuateth the stomack by vomit, and the body downward; and his operation is such, that it doth in manner help any crude sort of infirmity, and the quantity is from one dram to two drams, and may be taken in broth, in wine, in water, or mix it with any pils, or po∣tion, giving charge, that when it is put into any potion, thou leave none in the bottom of the cup where thou drink it out, because the Pe∣tra Philosophale is heavy, and wil remain in the bottome, for if that remain, it wil not work at all; giving also charge, the day that you give this medicine, that you let the patients drink as much crude water as they wil, and give them little meatto eat that day, and this is the order to use this medicine. 3 Caustick. Take Arsenick, Cristaline, sal Armoniak, Sublimate, of each alike; boil them, being sinely ground, in as much strong vinegar as the mat∣ter weigheth, until 2 third parts be consumed, and that there remain a third; then keep it in a glass close shut for thy use, as I wil shew thee in divers places when occasion shal serve. 4 A Magistrale Cerot against the white Scal. This Cerot is of great vertue, and of mar∣vellous
experience to resolve the white scal, be∣cause it is penetrative, Mundificative, and Re∣solutive, and causeth the hair to grow where it is fallen away, to the great content of the Patient, and honor of the Physician, and it is made in this order. Take Frankincense that is strain∣ed from his filth, what quantity you wil, and di∣stil it in a retort, and give it fire at the least for∣ty hours, then let it cool, and break the glasse, and in the bottome thou shalt find a black mase the which make into powder, then for every pound of the said powder, put thereto one ounce of Wax, and four ounces of the said oyl that you distilled, and half an ounce of the heads of Bees, the which are easie to be had in Sum∣mer: Mix all the aforesaid things in a vessel of Copper, and with a smal fire make them in form of a liquid unguent; and when thou wilt use it, shave the head, and wash it, and lay there∣on this Cerot upon a fair cloth warme, and e∣very two daies change it; and so in short time thou shalt see strange effects of his vertue. This serveth also against breaking of bones, disloca∣tions, and for scabs ulcerated, because it dryeth, and comforteth, and resolveth all the evil qua∣lities; giving charge in the distilling, because the fire many times consumeth it so, that in the bottome their remains nothing that is good, and therefore beware in the making.
5 Pillole Magistrale, which is good against any infirmties. These pils are of great vertue, and espe∣cially against all kind of pains coming of cor∣rupt humors; for they purge the putrified hu∣mors, and preserve the body from corruption: and the order to make it is thus. Take Olibanum, Mastick, Mirrhe, Sarco∣colla, aloes hepatica, Eleborus niger, Saffron, Turbit, Colloquintida, of each what you please, Stamp them finely; and for every ounce of the aforesaid matters, put thereunto two Carets of Musk, and then incorporate it with hony of Roses and Aqua vitae of each a like; and this paste thou mayest keep six months in a vessel of lead; the quantity is from two drachms to three drachms, in the morning fasting, and drink thereon a little wine. These pils are most ex∣cellent to take away the pains of the Gout, and to preserve a man from it; they are also good for them that have the french pox, because they evacuate the gross and viscous humors, and maintain the body in good temperature, and u∣sing them in those diseases, it preserveth the bo∣dy in good temperature. They are also good for women that are troubled with pains of the Mother, and retention of their terms, for these are aperative, and provoke them, and purgeth the Matrix of all impediments contain∣ed
therein: They serve against the Megrum, and all pains of the head, and also against all kind of putrified fevers, as the experience there∣of hath been seen sundry times. 6 To make a Quintessence of mar∣vellous vertue. Quintessence is so called, because it is an es∣sence taken from the elements without corrup∣ting them; and it's called Quinta essentia, be∣cause its an effence above the four elements; which hath a marvelous vertue in preserving all things from putrefaction; and is of so much vertue, that drinking every morning half an ounce thereof as soon as a person riseth out of his bed, it preserveth in continual health: It helpeth wounds and sores of all sorts by wash∣ing them therewith: It preserveth all flesh, fish, and fruits that are put therein. The order to make it is thus: Take fourteen pound of good strong wine, common hony one pound, Annis-seed, Corian∣der, Lignum aloes, Calamus Aromoticus, of each three ounces, Rose water foure ounces: Beate those things which are to be beaten grosly, and infuse them in the said wine two daies, and then put them in a gourd of glasse, and distil it by Balneo so long til the extracted water burn, and when it wil burn distil it no more: then keepe that which is distilled in a glasse close stopped,
that it take no air, and so keep it til thou have occasion to use it; for it is a most rare liquor, because it resolveth all indispositions that hap∣pen to mans body. If any desire to have this Quintessence more perfect, let him take a tenth part of good hony, with a little Cinnamon, and distil it again by Balneo, and the Flegm wil remain all in the bottom of the vessel, and the Quintessence wil be so fine, that the air will take it away. And therefore he that can make this well, shall work strange cures therewith, e∣ven to admiration. 7 Quintessentia solutiva, which is of Marvelous operations in divers matters. This Quintessentia solutivae evacuateth the body with great ease and without any detri∣ment, and it purgeth all parts of the body that are troubled with gross and viscous humours, it resolveth swellings, and taketh away the pains; it preserveth the sight, and killeth worms, and causeth a good appetite, with many other good qualities, which I shall leave at this time; and the order to make it is thus. Take Lignum aloes, Cinnamon, Tur∣bit, aloes hepatica, of each one ounce, Collo∣quintida, two ounces, Cloves, Saffron, of each three scruples, Musk of Levant one drachm, Julep of Violets one pound. Mix all the afore∣said
maters together in a glasse, and put thereon two pound of Quintessence, and so let it stand twelve daies, and then strain it, and put it into a vessel of glasse close shut; this may be taken with broth, wine, or with what sirup or po∣tion you wil; the quantity is from two drams to four drams in the morning fasting, without keeping of any diet at two ounces, and it shal work wel without trouble at all. 8 Syrupo Solutivo, or the so∣luble Syrup; with the order how to make and use it. This soluble Syrup made in decoction is very wholsome, and of great vertue, and espe∣cially in crude humors; for it disperseth the mat∣ter, and evacuates it with great ease, and with∣out danger or trouble of the Patient: The or∣der to make it is thus. Take Sage, Rosemary, Siccory, Carduus Benedictus, Nettles, Organy, of each an hand∣ful; Figs, Raisins, Dates, sweet Almonds, Sal Gemma, of each four ounces, Colloquintida, A∣loes hepatica, Cinnamon, Mirabolani citrini, of each two ounces, common hony two pound. Stamp them all grosly, and put them to infuse in eighteen pound of fair water; then boil it til half be consumed; then strain it, and distil it by a filter, and atomatize it with two carets of Musk, and a pint of Rosewater, and then it is
made: which you shal keep in a glass bottle close stopped. The dose is from foure ounces to six. In winter you must take it very warm; and in the spring and Autumn take it warm and no more; in summer you must take it cold: This purgeth the grosse humors of the body, and hurt∣eth not the stomack. You may use it in a Fever for four or five daies together, and it wil help it. In crudity of humors, as the French Pox, Gouts, Catarrhs, Dogly Artetica, and such like matters, where there is no accident of Fevers, you may take it ten or fifteen daies together, and it can∣not hurt, for it purgeth most excellently: It is given against the cough, against flux of the u∣rine, and pains in the head, and carnasity in the yard, or the Hemeroids. And in brief, it is good against all diseases caused of corrupt hu∣mors; for it hath such vertue, that it draweth from all parts, and evacuateth the humors inte∣stinal. There hath been great experience of this syrup in such persons as had in a manner utterly lost their taste, who by using it, have been brought to a good temperature; there have been also infinite experiments on ulcerated persons and ful of sores, ill handled by poverty and weaknesse, who finding no means to cure them, have been cured by this syrup in four∣teen or fifteene dayes, Cum multis a∣liis &c.
9 Sirrupo Magistrale Leonardo, which serveth against an infinite number of diseases, and is a rare medicine. This syrup is solutive, and very plesant to use, and cannot hurt in any wise, which is seldom seen in other Medicines: and the order to make it is thus. The leaves of Sine, two ounces; Fumito∣ry, Maiden hair, Harts-tongue, Liver wort, E∣pitemum, Ellemo, Pollipody of the oake, the flow∣ers of Borage, Bugloss, Liquorice, of each three ounces, Colloquintida, Eleborus niger, Aloes hepatica, Mirabolani Indi, of each one ounce, Pruins fourteen, Sebestien twelve, Tamerisk one ounce; Stamp them grosly, and infuse them in ten pounds of fumitory water, then boil it until the consumption of the third part, and then strain it, and in that which is strained put these things: Syrup of Staecados one pound, Saffron one scruple, mel rosarum six ounces, Rectified Aqua vitae four ounces: Musk one drachm, the mussege of Marish Mallows foure ounces, Benjamin one ounce, Rose water three ounces; and then it is made, which ye shal keep in a glasse close stopt, and keep it in a tempe∣rate place, and this you must take warm: the quantity is from two ounces to four ounces, and it is a most safe medicine, to be used with∣out keeping of any diet. It helpeth those much that have Pellaria, Scabs, Hemeroids, and such like diseases, and may be given unto a woman with child, without any danger, when
she shal have occasion to use any. 10 To make artificial Balm, and the vertues thereof This balm hath all the vertues of the natural balm, although not in quality, yet in vertue, The order of making it is this. Take one pound of Venice Turpentine, oyl of Bayes perfect without mixture four ounces, Galbanum three ounces, Gum Arabic four oun∣ces, Olibanum, Mirrha elect, Gum Hederae of each three ounces, Lignum Aloes, Galingal, Cloves, Consolida minore, Cinnamon, Nut∣megs, Ginger, Zedoaria, Diptamnum album, of each one ounce; Musk of Levant, Ambergreece, of each one drachm: Beat all these things to∣gether, and put them into a Retort of glass wel luted, and put thereto six pound of rectified A∣qua vitae without flegm, and so let it stand eight daies, and then distil it by sand, and the first ex∣traction wil be white water mixed with oyl; then keep the fire smal, until there come forth a blackish oyl then change the receiver, and set thereto another, and increase the fire til all the spirits be drawn out: then separate the oyl from the black water, and likewise from the white, and keep them a sunder by themselves. The first water that is white is called Aqua del Bal∣samo, or a Balm water, and the oyl seperated from that is called Oleum del Balsamo, or oyl of Balm. The second water that is black, is called Mater del Balsamo, or mother of Balm, and the oyle separated from that water is called del Balsamo artificiato, or artificial Balme;
which should be kept as a most precious Jew∣el. Each of these Waters and oyls have their se∣veral admirable vertues and operations for e∣ffecting of wonderful cures; but the artificial Balm is a most miraculous liquor; as for the Stitch in the side, for which the dose is two drachms; the Cough, Catarrhe, coldnesse in the head or stomack, wounds in the head, and∣infinite others; yea, I know no disease either hot or cold, but it doth good to it, and that by its own quality, and hidden vertues; cooling the hot, and heating the cold. In a word, whosoe∣ver hath this precious liquor, may be kept from, or cured of all infirmities, and need not seek for the natural Balm with so great expences, and the hazard of life, as hath been often seen. 11 Vegetable syrup, which is miraculous and divine. This Syrup is a secret, with which many mi∣racles have many times been wrought, in divers operations, on many infirmities. The order to make this syrup is thus. Take Lignum aloes, Riopontico Eupatorio, red Saunders, of each two ounces; beat them, and make thereof a decoction in good form, and with four pound of the decoction make a syrup, and put thereto these things following while it is hot, Saffron one scruple, Ginger one drachm,
Musk two Carets, the solution of our Petra Ve∣getabile three ounces, Cloves, Nutmegs, of each one scruple and a half; then keep it in a glasse close shut, and this is vegetable Syrup, which worketh miracles in divers infirmities; for by its nature it purifieth the blood, mundifieth the li∣ver, comforteth the heart, preserveth the sto∣mack, provoketh urine, dissolveth gravel in the reins, it helpeth the cough, and helpeth disgesti∣on, and quieteth all the humors in the sick per∣son, with divers other vertues which it hath. This may be taken with broth, with distilled, water, or with any decoction, or medicine, fast∣ing: The quantity is from one drachm to two drachms; and happy shal they be that use it. 12 Unguento Magno Leonardo. This Unguento magno is called so because of his great vertue and operation; for it work∣eth so strangely in some diseases, that it in a manner reviveth the patient: and the order to make it is thus. Take Otnegra ovium, six ounces, Oximel Squilliticum halfe an ounce, mix them toge∣ther in an earthen dish until the Otnegra ovium be become like ashes, then it is deifitrom; then put thereon two ounces of vinegar and wash it wel until it remain pure and clear, then take O∣libanum half an ounce, Cerusae one ounce, beat them fine, and mix it in a stone morter with as
much Magno Liquore, as wil serve to incorpo∣rate them wel, then put thereto the otnegra ovi∣um, and mix them very wel together; that being done, put thereto Auxungia porcina, eight oun∣ces; and mix them altogether, and then it is made, which keep in a vessel wel glazed; for it wil keep a long time without corruption, and is apt to help those that are lame, ful of pains, sores and swellings, pains of the eyes, the Stone in the reins, and such like matters; it helpeth all manner of French pox, if ye annoint them therewith til their gums be sore, and then leave. But ye shall note, that the body must first be wel purged before ye annoint them. This un∣guent cooleth all corrosive ulcers, and helpeth them in short time, it helpeth all pains in the eyes if yee put it therein, and taketh away all burning with speed: and to be short, it helpeth those diseases in most short time, so that it is to be wondred at.
The CONTENTS of The Second Part, Containing Experiments in Phy∣sick and Chirurgery, &c. Waters, Liquors, Syrups. DOcter Stevens his water, pag. 47 To make Cinnamon Water pag. 48 Angelica water ibid Aqua Mirabilis ibid Its vertues. pag. 49 Balm water. ibid Another Balm water. ibid A Barly water to purge the Lungs and Lights of all diseases. pag. 50 A Water for a sore Mouth. ibid Another for the same use. pag. 51 Rosa solis. ibid Wormwood water ibid Aqua Fortis. pag. 52 Water of Snails. ibid An excellent water against the Stone in the Kid∣nies. pag. 53 A water for outward or inward VVounds, Impo∣stume,
and Ulcers, and a sore mouth ibid A very excellent water against worms. pag. 54 An excellent sweet water. ibid How to make artificial Tunbridg water. pag. 55 How to make artificial Epsome water. pag. 56 Spirit of Confection of Alkermes, its Ver∣tues. pag. 57 Spirit of Saffron, its vertues. ibid Extract of Ambergreece. ibid Spirit and water of Wormwood, the lesser Composi∣tion. pag. 59 Spirit and water of Wormwood, the greater Com∣position. ibid Spirit and water of Angelica. pag. 60 Spirit of Wine extraordinarie. ibid Quintessence of Snakes, Adders, or Vipers. pag. 61 A liquor against the tooth Ach. pag. 62 A Liquor to comfort smelling, and preserve the head. ibid To make an Antimouial cup, and to cast divers fi∣gures of Antimony. pag. 63 How to make the true spirit of Antimony. pag. 64 The true Oyl or essence of Antimony pag. 65 Wormwood wine. pag. 66 To make an Artificial Malago VVine. ibid How to make artificial Claret wine. pag. 67 How to make good Raspberry VVine. ibid Oyls. Oyl of Almonds. pag. 68 Oyl of Sage. ibid Olcum Laureum. ibid
Oyl of Tobacco. ibid Oyl of Roses. ibid Oyl of Creame. pag. 69 Oyl of Swallows. ibid Oyl of Roses another way. ibid The use of Oyl of Violets. pag. 70 The use of the oyl of Camomil. ibid The use of oyl of Lillies ibid The use of the Oyl of Elder-flowers. pag. 71 Oyle of Cowslips ibid The use of the Oyl of Rue. ibid The use of the Oyl of Wormwood. ibid The use of the Oyle of Mint. pag. 72 To make the Oyle of Salerne ibid How to compose the Oyl of Excester. ibid Oyl of Amber. pag. 73 How to make an excellent Oyl of Hypericon. ibid Oyl of St. Johns Wort. pag. 74 Oyl of yolks of Eggs. pag. 75 To make oyl of Mandrakes. ibid Oyl of Musk how made. ibid How to make Oyl of Snakes and Adders. pag. 76 Ointments &c. An oyntment for a Rupture. pag. 77 Flos unguentorum ibid Unguentum Populionis, commonly called Pompilli∣on. ibid Doctor Lewins Unguentum Rosatum, good for the heat in the Back. pag. 78 Ʋnguentum Sanatinum ibid
Ointment of red Lead. pag. 79 Abitter Ointment. ibid Apectoral Ointment. ibid An Ointment for an Ach, to be made at any time of the year, and is approved good, and hath help∣ed old pains, griefs, and aches. pag. 80 An Oyntment for the Sciatica. ibid Ointment for any wound or sore. ibid A purge to drive out the French Pox before you use the Oyntment. pag. 81 The Ointment for the French Pox. ibid What places to annoint for the French Pox ibid Another purge to heal the French Pox without Ointment. pag. 82 An oyntment to kil the worms in little chil∣dren. ibid For the worms. pag. 83 An excellent good Medicine or Salve for any Ach coming of cold, easie to be made by any Country good houswife. ibid For a pain or Ach in the Back. ibid A Searcloth for all Aches. pag. 84 An excellent Ointment for any Bruise or ach. ibid The cure of grievous pains and aches in the Bo∣dy. pag. 85 Aches coming by the Pox healed. ibid Back-weak or diseased, to strengthen, &c ibid To take the Ague out of any place. ibid For the Ague in children, or women with child. pag. 86 An easie and approved Medicine for a quartaine Ague. ibid
An Almond milk to cool and induce sleep. ibid For an Andcome. pag. 87 Liquid Amber, and its medcinal vertues. ibid A most Soveraign Balsam for several diseases. ib For a sudden bleeding at the nose pag. 88 Aremedie for the spitting of blood, occasioned by the breach of some vein in the brest. ibid To stop bleeding of a wound. pag. 89 To stop inward bleeding. ibid A medicine for those that are given to bleed∣ing. ibid To stanch bleeding at the nose. ibid To heal the Cut, or sore Brest of a Woman. ibid A Medicine to breake and heal sore brests of Wo∣man, used by Midwives, and other skilful wo∣men in London pag. 90 To dry up a womans Brest ibid For a stinking Breath. ibid A Gargle for an unsavoury breath pag. 91 For the Canker in a womans brest ibid For the Canker in the mouth ibid Of the Catarthe, or Rheume in the bead. ibid For young children that are weak in their limms, and can neither go nor stand pag. 92 For breaking out of childrens heads. pag. 93 A medicine for the swelling of a childs Cods. pag. 94 To heal children of the Lunatick disease. ibid For a Consumption. ibid To make a China Broth for a Consumption pag. 95 A Broth for a Consumption. pag. 96 An excellent Confortative for the Stomack, help∣ing digestion, warming the brain, and drying the Rheumes. ibid
For the Corns on the feet or toes. pag. 97 A Cordial for the Sea. ibid For the Ptisick and dry Cough ibid An excellent medicine for the Cough of the Lungs. ibid A Medicine for the chin-Cough, for a child. pag. 98 A Diet drink to clear and temper the blood. ibid A Diet drink to open and temper the Liver pag. 99 A Diet drink for a Canker in the mouth. ibid To cure the Dropsie, be it hot or cold. pag. 100 A medicine that hath recovered some from the Dropsie, whom the Physicians have given o∣ver. ibid To open obstructions of the Liver, and to preserve from the dropsie. pag. 101 An approved medicine for the Dropsie. ibid A broth to comfort the brain ibid For pain in the Ears, or deafnesse ibid For the Emrods. pag. 102 For the Pin and Web in the Eye ibid A Plaister to take away the Film on the Eye. ibid A Medicine for sore, Bloud-shotten and Rheuma∣tick eyes pag. 103 To make the face white and fair. ibid To take the heat out of the face. ibid To take away the Spots or red Pimples of the face. pag. 104 A Secret to help all Fevers in the beginning. ibid To ripen and heal a Felon. pag. 105
A medicine for a Fistula. ibid A medicine for the falling sicknesse. ibid For the Piles. ibid An especial good Medicine to make the Piles bleed pag. 106 A Medicine for the Piles. ibid A Cullesse to stop the bloudy flux ibid Bloody flux cured pag. 107 Another for the bloudy flux. ibid A Medicine to cure the biting of all venemous beasts. pag. 108 Glister, See pag. 132 An approved Medicine for the Gout in the feet. ibid A Pultesse for the Gout. ibid How to cure all kind of Gout pag. 109 An approved Medicine for the Green-sicknesse. pag. 110 The Green salve, which closeth up Sores, being wel drawn ibid To cleanse the Head, and take the Ach away. pag. 111 Harts-horn Jelly. ibid To make a Potion that is good against all Infirmi∣ties pag. 112 An exceeding good remedie against the yellow Jaundice pag. 113 An excellent receipt to destroy any Impostume. pag. 114 To make an issue. ibid A medicine for the Itch of the body. ibid For kibed heels ibid
For Waxing Kernels, called by some Scrophula, their cure. pag. 115 A special Receipt to destroy Lice pag. 116 How to cure the Measles. ibid To cure the disease of the Mother. ibid For the dead Palsie ibid A Plaister for a Bile or Push pag. 117 A very good Plaister to heal or dry up a sore or cut suddenly. ibid A plaister for the Stomack. ibid A Preservative against the Pestilence when it is first suspected. pag. 118 An approved good drink for the Pestilence. ibid A medicine for the Plague ibid Signs of death in the Plague. pag. 119 A water to drive out any infection ibid A Medicine for a Plurisie, Stitch or VVind offen∣ding in any part of the Body. pag. 120 A great and sore Plurisie cured by M. R. ibid To take away Pock boles, or any spots in the face. pag. 121 A Pultis to stay fluxes proceeding from a cold cause, to be applied to the Belly. ibid For the heat of the Back. pag. 122 Astma, or the Ptisick, and its cure. ibid A very good Poultesse for any Member swelled and inflamed, and not broken, to take away the pain pag. 123 An especial Medicine for all manner of Poyson. ibid A very gentle purge. pag. 124
The purge for a Plurisie, Stitch, or Wind: It may be given to any sound man or woman, at any time, in temperate weather, not keeping their Chambers for it pag. 124 Another Purge. pag. 125 The Purge of Assarabacha, with which the Lady A. Dused to rectifie her stomack any way offen∣ded. ibid The Apothecaries Gascons Powder, with its use pag. 126 A Powder for a Rupture ibid To kil the Ring worm, and the heat thereof. ib. Rubirb and its vertues pag. 127 An approved good medicine for the running of the Reins. ibid A medicine for burning or Scalding. pag. 128 To take away the heat of a burn, or out of a scalde ibid For one burned with Gun-powder or otherwise. ibid For the Scal or Scabbinesse of the head pag. 129 An aptroved receipt for a scald head. ibid To heal the white scal ibid The black Salve ibid A Salve for rankling, where the skin is rubbed off pag. 130 A barly Cream to procure sleep: or Almond milk ibid. See p. 86 An outward medicine for the same. pag. 131 A Receipt for a backward business. ibid
A Glister to open and loosen the Body being bound, which may safely be administred to any man or woman. pag. 132 A cooling Glister in hot diseases. ibid A Medicine that hath healed sores upon the Legs that have run so long, that the bones have been seen. pag. 133 Of the hidden seerets of Frankincense ibid Secrets of Mercury, or Quicksilver pag. 134 To make the representation of the whole world in a glasse pag. 135 In a fit of the Stone, when the water stops pag. 137 A Medicine for the stone ibid Another very good medicine for the Stone pag. 138 To dissolve the Stone, which is one of the Physicians greatest secrets pag. 139 A Stove to sweat in ibid Against surfetting and indigestion pag. 140 To make a tooth fal out of it self. pag. 141 To take away the cause of the pain in the Teeth. ib. For a hollow Tooth ibid For the Rheume in the Gummes and Teeth. ibid Tobacco, its vertues and uses pag. 142 A Diet for the Patient that hath Ʋlcers or wounds that wil hardly be cured with Ointments, Salves, or Plaisters. ibid To help Ulcers of all sorts. pag. 143 An approved Remedy to stay Vomiting, by M R. pag. 144 A Recelpt for to make Vomits. pag. 145 To kil Warts, an approved Medicine. ibid
For one that cannot make water pag. 146 An excellent medicine for a child that cannot make water. ibid For one that pisseth bloud. ibid To kil the Wild fire. ibid How to order a woman with child, before, in, and after her labour. pag. 147 To bring a woman to a speedy birth pag. 149 For the same. ibid For a dead child in a womans body pag. 150 A medicine for a woman in travel, to make her have Throwes. ibid A Medicine for the falling down of the Matrice to the bearing place. ibid Another to be laid to the Navel, and to the back right against the Navel, for the same use. pag. 151 Immoderate flux menstrual suppressed or stayed. ib For a woman that hath too much of the flowers. pag. 152 To stop the whites in women. ibid Another for the same. ibid To make Pomatum. ibid Magno Liquore, which is of great vertue. pag. 154 How to compound Aromatico Leonardo, with its vertues. pag. 156 Caustick. pag. 157 A Magistrall Cerot against the white Scal. ibid Pillole Magistrale, which is good against any in∣firmties pag. 159 To make a Quintessence of marvellous ver∣tue. pag. 160
Quinta essentia solutiva, which is of Marvelous operation in divers matters pag. 161 Syrupo Solutivo, or the soluble Syrup; with the order how to make and use it pag. 162 Sirrupo Magistrale Leonardo, which serveth a∣gainst an infinite number of diseases, and is a rare medicine. pag. 164 To make artificiall Balm, and the vertues there∣of pag. 165 Vegetable syrup, which is miraculous and divine. pag. 166 Unguento Magno Leonardo. pag. 167
Experiments in Cookery and Houswifery. Sallets or Sawce. 1 A Lemmon Sallet. TAke Lemmons, rub them upon a grate to make their rinds smooth, cut them in halfes, take out the meat of them, and boil them in fair water a good while, changing the water once or twice in the boiling, to take away the bitter∣nesse of them: when they are tender, take them out and scrape away all the meat (if any be left) very clean; then cut them as thin as you can (to make them hold) in a long string, or in rea∣sonable short pieces, and lay them in your glass, and boiling some of the best white-wine vine∣gar with sugar, to a reasonable thin syrup, pour it upon them into your glasse, and keep them for your use. 2 To keep Clove Gilliflowers For Sallets. Take the fairest Clove Gilliflowers; clip
off the whites from them, put them into a wide mouth'd glass, and strew a good deal of sugar finely beaten among them: then put as much wine vinegar to them as wil throughly wet them, tie them up close and set them in the Sun. 3. To pickle Oysters. Take a peck of the greatest Oysters, open them and put the liquor that comes from them (saved by it self) to as much white wine, & boil it with a pound of Pepper bruised, two or three spoonfuls of large Mace, and a handful of Salt, til the liquor begin to waste away; then put in your Oysters and plump them, and set them off the fire til they be cold, and so put them up in little barrels very close. 4 To pickle Quinces. Boil your Quinces that you intend to keep whole and unpared in fair water, til they be soft, but not too violently for fear you breake them: when they are soft, take them out, and boil some Quinces pared, quartered, and cored, and the parings of the Quinces with them in the same liquor, to make it strong: and when they have boiled a good time, enough to make the liquor of sufficient strength, take out the quartered Quinces and parings, and put the li∣quor into a pot big enough to receive all the Quinces both whole and quartered, and put
them into it when the liquor is through cold, and so keep them for your use close covered. 5 To keep Goosberries. Take a handful or two of the worser of your Goosberries, cut off their stalks and heads, and boil them all to pieces in a pottle of water, putting into the boiling thereof halfe a quar∣terne of sugar; then take the liquor, strain it thorow a hair strainer, and while it cooleth, cut off the stalks and heads of the fairest Goos∣berries, being very careful you cut not the skin of them above or below, put them into a Gal∣lipot, and pour the liquor in after them. 6 Purslane must be used as you do the Goos∣berries. 7 How to keep Cucumbers raw. Take a Kettle (big enough for your use) half ful of water, make it brackish with salt, boil therein ten or twenty Cucumbers cut in halves; then take the raw Cucumbers, being somewhat little, and put them into the Vessel wherein you wil keep them; and when your li∣quor is cold, strain so much of it into them as may keep the Cucumbers alwaies covered. 8 To keep boiled Cucumbers. Take a Kettle of water, put salt to it, boil it wel; then take your raw Cucumbers; put them into it, and keep them with running up and down very softly til they be as it were
perboyled: then take them out and lay them aside til they be cold; then put them up in the vessel you wil keep them in, and when the li∣quor is cold, strain it into them til they be all covered. 9 To pickle Cucumbers to keep all the year. Pare a good quantity of the rinds of Cu∣cumbers, and boil them in a quart of running water, and a pint of wine vinegar, with a hand∣ful of Salt til they be soft: then letting them stand til the liquor be quite cold, pour out the liquor from the rinds, into some little barrel, carthen pot, or other vessel, that may be close stopped, and put as many of the youngest Cu∣cumbers you can gather therein, as the liquor wil cover; and so keep them close covered, that no wind come to them, to use all the year till you have new. If your Cucumbers be great, 'tis best to boil them in the liquor til they be soft. 10 To keep Cowslips for Sallets. Take a quart of white wine vinegar, and half a quarter of a pound of fine beaten sugar, and mix them together: then take your Cow∣slips, pul them out of the pods, and cut off the green knob at the lower ends, put them into that pot or glasse wherein you mind to keep them; and wel shaking the vinegar and sugar together in the glasse wherein they were before,
poure it upon the Cowslips, and so stirring them morning and evening (to make them set∣tle) for three weeks, keep them for your use. 11 Violets, Buglosse, Borage, Rosemary, Marigolds, Fennel. These are all to be used as you do your Cow∣slips: onely of Fennel you must take the seeds when they are new put out of the pod. 12 To keep Broom flowers for Sallets. Gather so many buds in one day (if you can) as you mean to keep, then take your pot, and lay first a lay of white salt in the bottome of it, and then a lay of Buds or flowers, then another of white salt, and so another of Flowers, till you have filled your vessel so full as you can thrust them down, let them stand one day, and if they shrink down, fil them up with flowers, and after fil it up with Verjuyce, and lay a good deal of salt upon the top of it, and stop it up close. 13 To keep Barberies to garnish your meat, &c. Take the worst of them and boil them in fair water, and strain the liquor from them, and while the liquor is hot, put it into your Barberies, being clean picked, and stop them up: and if they mould much, wash them tho∣rowly in the liquor: then boil the liquor again
and strain it, and let it cool, and then put it to your Barberies againe. 14 To keep Artichokes for al the year The fittest time is about Michaelmas, and then according to the proportion of Artichokes you wil keep, seeth such a quantity of water in a pot or pan, seasoning it so with white Salt, that it may have a reasonable taste; then put a fit quantity of white Salt into the water, and boil them together, and scumme them wel, then put a good quantity of good vinegar to them to make the liquor somewhat sharpe, and boile it again. Then boil your Artichokes that you minde to keep, in another liquor, take them out of it, and let them coole; then set your first li∣quer again on the fire to boil, and scumming it throughly, let it cool again; when it is through∣ly cold, put it up in some Firkin, or large earthen pot, and put in your Artichokes to them handsomely for bruising, then cover them close from the aire, and so keep them to spend at your pleasure. 15 To pickle Broom buds. Take as many Broombuds as you please, make linnen bags and put them in, and tie them close; then make some brine with water and salt, and boil it a little; let it be cold, then put some brine in a deep earthen pot, and put the bags in it, and lay some weight upon them,
let it lie there til it look black: then shift it a∣gain, so you must do as long as it looks black. You must boil them in a little cauldron, and put them in vinegar a week or two, then they be fit to eat. 16 How to pickle Cucumbers. Take the Cucumbers and wash them clean, and dry them clean in cloth; then take some water, vinegar, salt, fennel tops, and some dill tops, and a little Mace; make it fast enough, and sharpe enough to the taste; then boile it a while, and then take it off, and let it stand and be cold, and then put in the Cucumbers, and lay a board on the top to keep them down, and tie them close, and within a weeke they will be fit to eat. 17 To make a gallendine saw ce for a Turky. Take some Claret wine and grated bread, and a sprig of Rosemary, a little beaten Cloves, a little beaten Cinnamon, and some sugar. Spoon meats. 18 The best Clouted Cream. Take eight pints of Milke warme from the Cow, set it on the fire, make it ready to boile; then poure it into bowls, and fleet it that night: if you would have it thick, put in a quart of Cream to it.
19 Another way for the same in a lesse proportion Take a quart of Cream or a pottle, set it in two dishes, on two Casingdishes of coals, and cover them with two other dishes: and as it heateth, uncover the Cream ever and anone, and with a spoone take off the film that riseth, and put it in another dish, and cover it againe til more be risen, and take it stil off, and let it so rise by leisure, the longer the better; when there wil rise no more filme, pour out the up∣permost of the Creame into a Platter alone, and set it on a Chafingdish of coals, with a quick fire; then take the yolk of an egge or two, well beaten, and strain them with a spoonful of cold Cream, and a little Sugar and Rose water to season it, and put it in as soon as the Creame beginneth to boil up, and stirring them toge∣ther sofely, let them have a walme or two, and put them in another dish to coole, and serve them. 20 To make the ordinary Clouted Cream. When you have taken your Milke from the Cow, set it on the fire presently in a broad vessel, and so keep it on the fire from morning til night, and be sure it seeth not all the while; then take it off the fire, and set it on a Board or Table, and so let it stand all night, and in the morning take off the Cream, and dish it at your pleasure.
21 To make Almond Milk. Take a rib of Mutton or Veale, or rather a Chicken, boil it in fair water, put thereto French Barley, a Fennel root, a Parsly root, Violet leaves, Straw berrie leaves, and Cinque∣foyle leaves, and boil them altogether til the meat be over boiled; then straine out the liquor from the rest: while they are boiling, blanch a proportion of Almonds, answerable to the liquor, beat them wel in a clean stone Mortar, and then grind them therein with Rose water and sugar; and when they are wel ground, put in all your liquor by little and little, & grind with them, til they be al wel compounded, then strain it into a fair glass, and use it at your pleasure. 22 To make a Cullesse Take a Cock, bruise all his bones and put them into a pot of fair water, set it over a char∣coale fire, boile it and scumme it wel; put therein French Barley, Fennel roots fliced, and the pith taken out, Parsly roots fliced, leaves of Violets, Straw berries, Lettice and Succory; boil all these together til the Cock be boiled all to pieces: then take a fit proportion of blanched Almonds, grinde them wel with Sugar and Rose water, in a Stone Mortar, then put to them the Cock, bones and all, and beat him all to pie∣ces in the Mortar, then put in all the broth by
little and little, and compound them by beating, as in the Almond Milk, and so strain them out all into a fair Skillet; then put into it a fit quantity of large Mace and Cinnamon whole, but bruised, and alike of Ginger sliced; set it then upon the fire again, and let it boyle half an hour, and keep it still with stirring, then letting it run thorow a clean cloth into a Pipkin, there keep it til you use it, and then warm it in a Porrenger, and drink it. 23 The best way to make a Sack Posset. Take a dozen of eggs exceeding wel bea∣ten, put to them a pint of Sack, and stir them wel, that it curd not; then put to it three pints of your best sweet Cream, half a pound of Su∣gar very finely beaten, and stirring them wel together til the sugar be fully melted in them, strain it altogether into a Bason, big enough to receive it all: then set it in the Bason, on a pot of boiling water, keeping the pot boiling un∣til the Posset be like a Custard, and as thick: then take it off, and keeping it til you think it be cool enough to eat, strew your beaten Spi∣ces wel and thick upon it, and serve it. 24 A Sack Posset without milk. Take thirty Eggs, beat them so wel, that you may take them up with a spoon, like as you do milk or broth; and while they are bea∣ting,
take a quart of Sack, halfe a pound of fine sugar finely beaten, and a pint of strong Beere, and make them boil a very little while upon a soft fire; then take them off the fire and put the Eggs into them as soon as it comes off, and stirring them up wel together, put them into a fit Bason to receive them, and covering them close with a dish; set them on a soft fire again, til they rise to a Curd; then take it off the fire, strow it with Cinnamon and sugar, and serve it. 25 An Almond Caudle. Blanch Jordan Almonds, beat them with a little smal Ale, and strain them out with as much more Ale as you mind to make your Cawdel of: Then boil it as you do an Egge Cawdel, with a little Mace in it; and when it is off the fire, sweeten it with sugar. 26 To make the Dnsick Cream. Take your Cream, boil it with some Mace and Cinnamon in it, then take it off, cool it a little, and put in as much Rose water and su∣gar as wil make it sweet, and give it a good taste; then put in as much Runnet as wil be suf∣ficient to make it run, and then dish it and serve it. 27 To make fresh Cheese in Cream. Take a pottle of good Milk as it comes from the Cow, and halfe a pound of blanched Al∣monds beaten very smal, and make a thick Al∣mond milk; with a pint of Cream strained, and
a little before you go to dinner make it blood∣warm, season it with a little sugar, Rose water, and searced Ginger, and put to it a little Run∣net; and when it is scummed, bread it up and whey it, and put it into a Molde, and presse it with your hand, and when it is wel wheyed, then put it into a dish with Cream: you may garnish it if you please, with a dozen of Wa∣ters made of fine flower, sugar and water. 28 A messe of fine Cream. Take a quart of Cream, set it on the fire, til it be ready to boil, then put into it seven yolks, and two whites of egga very wel beaten together, and boil them (keeping them well stirred) til it be almost as thick as a Custard; then take it off the fire, and let it stand til the Whey be setled from it; then strain the thick of it thorow a cloth into a Bason, and making it as sweet as you please, with Rosewater and Sugar, dish it, scraping a little Sugar upon it. 29 To make French Frumenty. Boil your French Barly in two waters first, and then in the third, whereof you shall make your Frumenty: when it is almost boiled e∣nough, put into it some yolks of eggs wel bea∣ten, and boil them a while: you must have your Jordan Almonds ready blanched and laid a good while in cold fair water, then beate them very smal with a little Rose water, and
strain their Milk from them, and put it into your Frumenty, when it is ready to take off the fire, or you may boil them a little while to∣gether; then take it off the fire, season it with some sugar and serve it. 30 How to make a Goosberry Fool. Take your Goosberries and pick them, and put them into clean water, and boil them till they be all as thick that you cannot discerne what it is: to the value of a quart take six yolks of eggs smal beaten with Role water; and be∣fore you put in your eggs, season it wel with su∣gar, then strain your eggs, and let them boile a little while; then take it up, put it in a broad dish, and let it stand til it be cold; thus it must be eaten. 31 How to make a Goosberry Custard. Take as many Goosberries as you please, boil them til they be soft; then take them out and let them stand and cool, and drain them, draw them with your hand thorow a canvas strainer, then put in a little Rose water, Sugar, and three whites of eggs, and stir them all to∣gether; put them in a skillet and stir them a∣pace, else they wil burn; let them stand and cool a little while, and take them off and put them in a glasse.
32 To make pap of Barly. Take Barly and boil it in fair water softly until it begin to break; then put that liquor out, then put as much hot water to it, as you put forth, and so let it boil til it be very soft, then put it into a cullender and strain it; then take an handful of Almonds and grind them very wel with your barley, and some of your liquor, so season it with sugar and a little Rose water, a little whole Mace and Cinnamon, and boile them wel together. 33 The Lady of Arundels Manchet. Take a bushel of fine wheat flower, twenty eggs, three pound of fresh butter, then take as much salt and barm as to the ordinary Man∣chet; temper it together with new milk prettie hot; then let it lie the space of half an houre to rise, so you may work it up into bread and bake it: let not your oven be too hot. 34 To make Spiced bread. Take two pound of Manchet paste, sweet Butter halfe a pound, Currants halfe a pound, Sugar a quartern, and a little Mace (if you wil put in any) and make it in a loafe, and bake it in an Oven no hotter then for Manchet.
35 To make Buttered loaves. Take half a peck of fine flower, a pint or more of Yest, the Yolks of twenty egges, one pound of Butter, of Cloves and Mace half an ounce, of Cinnamon and Ginger one ounce, but the least part of Ginger, a little Pepper, let the spices be beaten very smal; make Dough of all these, and work them in pieces as big as Manchets, and bake them: when it is baked, pare away the Crusts, and slice them in Toasts, and steep them in clarified Butter in a fair Charger: then poure fine sugar powdered be∣tween every of them, and make them up like loaves. 36 To make Almond Butter. Blanch one pound of Almonds, or more or lesse as you please, lay them foure houres in cold water; then stamp them with some Rose water as fine as you can, put them in a cloth, & presse out as much milk as you can, and then if you think they be not enough, beat them and strain them again, til you get as much milk of them as you can; then set it on the fire til it be ready to boil, putting in a good quantity of Salt and Rosewater to turne it; after one boiling be∣ing turned, take it off, cast it abroad upon a linnen cloth, being holden between two, then with a spoon take off the Whey under the csoth, so long as any wil drop or runne; then take so much of the finest Sugar you
can get, as wil sweeten it, and melt it in as much Rose water as will serve to dissolve it, put thereunto so much Saffion in fine powder as wil colour it, and so steeping the Saffron and Sugar in Rose water, season your butter there∣with when you make it up. CAKES. 37 To make Barberry Cakes. Pick Barberries, and plump them in scald∣ing water, as you do to make Couserves, then take of your best ripest Apples you can get, and scald them very tender: then pare them and take the best and softest of them, and strain it with your Barberrie stuff, not too thin for fear of blacks going thorow: then drie your stuff in a dish, upon a Chafingdish of coals, and make your syrups after the same manner, that you do for Apricock Cakes, and when your syrup is boiled high enough, cool it a little before you put it into the platter, putting it in by a little at once, stirring it up continually: and so you shall be sure to have your stuffe as thick, or as thin as you like best; then lay it upon your plates, and dry it as you do other Cakes, ghes∣sing at the quantity of your sugar, according to your own best liking. 38 To make a sweet Cake, and with it a very sweet water. Take Damask-Rose leaves, Bay-leaves, La∣vender
tops, sweer Marjorome tops, Ireos pow∣der, Damask powder, and a little Musk first dissolved in sweet water: put the Rose leaves and herbs into a Bason, and sprinkle halfe a quarter of a pint of Rose water among them; and stirring them all together, cover the Bason close with a dish, and let them stand so covered all night, and in the morning distil them: so shal you have at once an excellent sweet water, and a very fine sweet Cake to lay among your finest linnen. 39 To make Almond Cakes. Take of Jordan Almonds one pound, beate them as you do for Almond milk, draw them thorow a strainer, with the yolks of two or three egs; season it wel with sugar, and make it into a thick batter with fine flower, as you do for Bisket bread: then pour it on smal Tren∣cher plates, and bake them in an oven or ba∣king pan; and these are the best Almond cakes. 40 To make a Cake. Take half a peck of flower, two pound and a half of currans, three or four Nutmegs, one pound of Almond paste, two pound of butter, and one pint of Cream; three spoonfuls of Rose water, three quarters of a pound of sugar, half a pint of Sack, a quarter of a pint of Yest, six egs; so make it and bake it.
41 To make a Slipcoat Cheese. Take five quarts of new milk from the Cow, and one quart of water, and one spoonfull of Runnet, and stir it together, and let it stand till i doth come, then lay your cheese cloth into the vat, and take up your curd as fast as you can without breaking, and put it into your Var, and let the whay soak out of it self: when you have taken it all up, lay a cloth on the top of it, and one pound weight for one hour; then lay two pound weight for one hour more, then turn him when he hath stood two hours, then lay three pound weight for one hour more; then take him out of the Vat, and let him lie two or three hours, and then salt him on both sides; when he is half enough, take a clean cloth and wipe him dry, then let him lie a day or a night, then put nettles under and upon him, and change them once a day: the Cheese will come to his eating in eight or nine dayes. 42 To make the Angelotta Cheese. The best time to make it, is in the middest of May: You must take your Milk as it comes from the Cowe, not beating it at all, and put to it some Cream of the Evening Milk, and then put in your Runnet, as you do in other Cheeses; when the Cheese is come, Whey it, but break it not, but put it into your Vat as whole as you can, in the meat, not thrusting it too close at the first, but as it sinks down, fill it up
again, and then shut it up close: and let it stand so one night, then take it out and lay it up∣on a board, casting salt upon it, and so let it lie a day or two, turning and salting it: then lay it in a Basket or a Flasket with long grasse under it, and so let it dry as you do other Cheeses. 43 To keep Cherries all the year. Take the fairest Cherries you can get; but be sure they be not bruised; and take them and rub them with a linnen cloth, and put them into a barrel of hay, and lay them in ranks; first laying hay in the bottom, and then Cher∣ries, and then hay again: and then stop them up close that no air may come neer them, and lay them under a Feather-bed where one lieth continually; for the warmer they are, the bet∣ter; yet neer no fire: and this doing, you may have Cherries at any time of the year. FRIGASIES. 44 Frigasie of Chickens. Kill your Chickens, pull skin and feathers off together, cut them in thin slices, season them with thime and lemmon minced, nutmeg and salt, an handful of sorrel minced, and then fry it well with six spoonfuls of water, and some fresh butter; when it is tender, take three spoon∣fuls of verjuice, one spoonfull of sugar, beat it together, so dish it with sippets about.
45 Frigasie of Lamb. Cut your meat in thin slices, season it with Nutmeg, Pepper and Salt, mince some thyme and Lemmon, and throw it upon your meat; then fry it slightly in a pan, then throw in two eggs, beaten in verjuice and sugar, into the pan, also an handful of Goosberries; shake it together, and dish it. 46 Frigasie of Rabbets. Cut your Rabbets in smal peeces, and mince an handfull of thyme and parslie together, and with a Nutmeg, Pepper and salt season your Rabbets; then take two Eggs and verjuice beaten together, and throw it in the pan, stick it, and dish it up in sipets. 47 Frigasie of Veale. Cut your meat in thin slices, beat it well with a rowling pin, season it with Nutmeg, Lemmon and Thyme, fry it slightly in the pan: beat two Eggs, and one spoonfull of ver∣juice, and put it into the pan, and stir it toge∣ther, and dish it. Divers other ways to dress Flesh. 48 How to boil a Capon handsomly. Take the fat end of a neck of mutton, and cut it into two or three pieces, making one piece of two or three bones; and boil these
with your Capon: and of herbs, take an handfull of parsley, as much thime, and half as much Endive, and binde them up in a bunch together, and boil them with you Ca∣pon; when it is boiled enough, season it with Salt and Verjuice: then take a deep dish, and cut into it sops of a fine stale Manchet, and scald them with the fat which cometh off the Capon and Mutton: You must boil rea∣die in a Pipkin or some skillet, halfe a pound of choice plunes, till they be well and plump, but not over boyled: and when you serve up your Capon, garnish the dish sides with your Prunes, and lay them thick upon your Capon. You may also boile some marrow with your prunes, and lay it on your Capon. 47 To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Lemmons. Take a Shoulder of Mutton half roasted, cut off most of the meat thereof in thin slices into a fair dish, with the gravie thereof, put thereto about the quantity of a pint of clar∣ret wine, with a spoonefull or two at most of the best Wine vinegar: season it with Nut∣megs and a little Ginger: then pare off the rindes of one or two good Lemmons, and slice them thin into the Mutton, when it is almost well stewed between two dishes, and so let them stew together two or three
walmes: when they are enough, put them in a clean dish, and take the shoulder blade (being wel broiled on a Gridiron) and lay it upon the meat, garnishing your dish with some slices and rinde of the Lemmons, and so serve it. 50 To make Veale Toots or Olives. Take the Kidney of a loyne of Veale roa∣sted, with a good deal of the fat, and a little of the flesh, mince it very smal, and put to it two eggs, one Nutmeg finely grated, a good quan∣tity of Sugar, a few Currants, a little Salt, stir them wel together, and make them into the forme of little Pasties, and fry them in a pan with sweet Butter. 51 To make very fine Sawsages. Take four pound and a half of Pork, chop it smal, and put to it three pound of Beefe Suet, and chop them very smal together; then put to them a handful of Sage finely shred, one ounce of Pepper, one ounce of Mace, two ounces of Cloves, a good deal of Salt, eight eggs very wel beaten before you put them in: then work them wel with your hand til they be throughly mingled, and then fill them up. Some like not the egges in them: it is not amisse there∣fore if you leave them out.
52 To make Brawn eat tender and delicate. Put collars of Brawn in Kettles of water or other apt vessels, into an oven heated as you would for houshold bread; cover the ves∣sels, and so leave them as long in the Oven as you would do a batch of bread. A late expe∣rience amongst Gentlewomen, far excelling the old manner of boiling Brawn in great Ket∣tles. Quere, if putting your liquor hot into the vessels, and the Brawn a little boiled first, by this means you shal not give great expediti∣on to your work? 53 To boila Capon in white broth. Boil your Capon by it self in fair water, then take a ladle ful or two of mutton broth, and a little white wine, a little whole Mace, a bundle of sweet herbs, and a little marrow; thicken it with Almonds, season it with sugar and a little verjuyce; boil a few Currants by themselves, and a Date quartered, (left you discolour your broth) and put it on the brest of your Capon, Chicken, or Rabbet: If you have no Almonds, thicken it with Cream or with yolks of eggs: Garnish your dishes on the sides with a Lemmon sliced, and sugar. 54 To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Oysters When you open the Oysters, save the liquor;
then season them with pepper, and a little cloves and mace, and herbs finely chop'd, and the yolks of two or three egs chopped smal, and some cur∣rans perboiled a little; then stuff your shoulder of mutton thick with your oysters, then season it and lay it to the fire and roast it; then take the rest of your Oysters and boil them with a little white wine and some butter, this is sawce for a shoulder of mutton. When your oysters are opened you may perboil them in their own liquor, then take them out and season them. 55 To boil a Mallard with Cabbage. Halfe roast your fowl, then take it off and case it down, then put it into a pipkin with the gravie, then pick and wash some Cabbage and put to your Mallard, with as much fair water as wil cover it; then put in a good piece of but∣ter and let it boil an hour; season it with pep∣per and salt, and serve it upon sops. 56 To stew a Mallard. Roast your Mallard half enough, then take it up, and cut it into little pieces, then put it into a dish with the gravie, and a piece of fresh butter, and a handful of parsly chop'd small, with two or three onions and a cabbage lettice; let them stew one hour, then season it with pep∣per and salt, and a little verjuyce, then serve it. 57 To souce a young Pig. Take a young pig being scalded, boil it in
faire water and white wine, put thereto bay leaves, whole Ginger and Nutmegs quartered, a few whole Cloves; boil it throughly, and leave it in the same broth in an earthen pot. 58 To roast a Pig with a Pudding in his belly. Flay a fat Pig, truss his head looking over his back; then temper as much stuff as you think wil fil his belly, then put it into your Pig, and prick it up close: when it is almost roasted, wring out the juyce of a Lemmon; when you are ready to take it up, take foure or five yolks of egs, and wash your Pig all over; mingle your bread with a little Nutmeg and Ginger, then dry it and take it up as fast as you can: let your sawce be vinegar, butter and sugar, the yolk of an hard egg minced, and serve it hot. PUDDINGS 59 How to make an Italian Pudding. Take a Manchet and cut it in square pieces like a die; then put to it half a pound of beese suet minced smal, raisins in the sun the stones pick'd out, Cloves, Mace, minced Dates, sugar, marrow, Rose water, Egs and Cream; mingle all these together, and put it into a dish fit for your stuff; in less then an hour it wil be baked; then scrape on sugar, and serve it.
60 To make a Haggesse Pudding Take a fat Haggesse; perboil it wel, take out the Kernels, shred it smal, and temper it with a handful or two of grated Manchet, then take three or four Eggs wel beaten, Rosewater and Sugar, Cloves, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Mace, very finely beaten, Currans and Mar∣row good store, temper them all together, with a fit quantity of Cream, being first moderately seasoned with Salt. 61 To make the best white Puddings. Take a pound of Almonds, blanch them, stamp them, putting in a little milke some∣time to them in the stamping: then put to them three handfuls of fine flower, or as much grated bread first baked in an oven; six egs well beaten, a good deal of marrow cut in little pieces: season them with Nutmegs and Sugar, three spooufuls of Rose water and a little salt: temper them all together with as much Creame as wil serve to wet or mingle them, and so fill them up. 62 A Rice Pudding. Take thin Creame, or good milk of what quantity you please, boil it on the fire with a little Cinnamon in it, and when it hath boiled a while, take out the Cinnamon, and put in Rose water and Sugar enough to make it good and sweet; then having your Rice ready beaten as
fine as flower (and searced, as some do it) strow it in, til it be of the thicknesse of a hasty Pud∣ding: then poure it into a dish, and serve it at the Table. 63 To make a fine Pudding in a dish. Take a penny white loaf and pare off all the crust, and slice it thin into a dish, with a quart of Creame, and set it to boile over a Cha∣fing dish of coals til the bread be almost dry, then put in a piece of sweet butter, and take it off, let it stand in the dish til it be cold, then take the yolks of three eggs and the white of one, with some Rose water and sugar, and stirring them all together, put them into another dish well buttered, and bake it. 64 To make the best Puff-paste. Take two great handfuls of fine flower, the whites of two eggs, and one yolk, beate them a little together, with two spoonfuls of Rose water, and put them to the flower, and work it into the paste (with as much cold wa∣ter as is fit) very wel together: then rol it out like a Pasty, and take one pound of sweet but∣ter, (beating it a little to make it soft) and lay it all over the Paste in little pieces, and fold it over, and wel rol it out again, laying on more butter as you did before, til the butter all be wrought in, and if it be too soft, strew a little flower before you rol it all over: be very care∣ful
you rol it not too thin, lest the butter come thorow, for if it cleave to the Table it wil not be good: Rol out a piece thin to lay in the bot∣tome of a dish, or on a paper, and put on it Ap∣ples, or what you like best, and cover them o∣ver with some of the Paste, and cut it round about with Peakes, that it may rise up in the ba∣king. Pies and Baked meats. 65 To make an Artichoke Pie Boil your Artichokes, take off all their leaves, pul out all the strings, leaving only the bot∣tomes; then season them with Cinnamon and sugar, laying between every Artichoke a good piece of butter; when you put your Pie into the oven, stick the Artichokes with slices of Dates, and put a quarter of a pint of white wine into the Pie, and when you take it out of the oven, do the like again, with some but∣ter, sugar and Rosewater, melting the butter upon some coals before you put it into the Pie. 66 To make a Neats-foot Pie. Take a Neats-foot, dry it in a cloth, then take it and shred it with Mutton Suet, as smal as you think fit, putting in no seasoning but Nutmegs and sugar: and to every Pie almost a pound of Currants well pickt, when you put it into the oven. And before you set it into the Oven, put in a quarter of a pint of white
wine: and when you take it out, do the like again with a good piece of butter and sugat. 67 To bake Beef like red Deer. Take a pound of Beef, and slice it thin, and half a pint of good wine vinegar, some three Cloves, and Mace above an ounce, three Nutmegs; pound them all together; pepper and salt according to your discretion, and a little sugar, mix these together: take a pound and a half of suet shred, and beat it smal in a mortar; then lay a row of suet, and a row of beef, strew your spices beaten every lay, then your vinegar; so do til you have laid in all, then make it up; but first beat it close with a rowling pin, then presse it a day before you put it in your paste. 68 A Calves head Pie (for supper) Boil your Calves head almost enough, cut it in thin sices all from the bone, season it with 3 beaten Nutmegs, a quarter of an ounce of pep∣per, and as much salt as there is seasoning; then take a handful of sweet herbs minced smal, and two spoonfuls of sugar, and two or three Arti∣choake bottoms boiled, and cut them in thin sli∣ces, and the marrow of two bones rowled in yolks of egs, a quarter of a pound of Eringo roots, and a quarter of a pound of Currans; then put it into your pie, & put a quarter of a pound of Butter, and a sliced Lemmon, three or four blades of Mace, three or foure quartered Dates; let it stand an houre or more in
the Oven; then when you take it out, put in∣to it a cawdle made of sugar, white wine, ver∣juice and butter. 69 A Lark Pie. Take three dozen of Larks, season them with four Nutmegs and half an ounce of Pep∣per, and a quarter of an ounce of beaten mace; then take Lumbard pie-meat and fill their bel∣lies if you will: if not, take half a pound of suet, and one pound of mutton minced, Rai∣sins of the sun half a pound, and six apples, min∣ced all together very small; then season it with a Nutmeg, Pepper and salt, and one spoonful of sweet herbs, and a Lemmon peel minced, one pennie loaf grated, a quarter of apint of cream, two or three spoonfuls of Rose-water, three spoonfuls of sugar, one or two of verjuice; then make this into boles and put it into their bellies, and put the Larks into your Pie; then put mar∣row rouled in yolks of Egs upon the Larks, and large mace, and sliced lemmon, and fresh but∣ter: Let it stand in the oven an hour; when you take it out, make a cawdle of butter, su∣gar, and white wine Vinegar, and put it into the Pie. 70 A Skerret Pie. Take a quarter of a peck of Skerrets blan∣ched, and sliced, season them with three Nut∣megs, and an ounce of Cinnamon, and three ounces of Sugar, and ten quartered Dates, and the marrow of three bones rouled in yolks of
Egs, and a quarter of a pound of Eringo roots, and preserved Lettice, a sliced Lemmon, four blades of Mace, three or four branches of pre∣served Barberries, and half a pound of But∣ter; then let it stand one hour in the Oven; then put a cawdle made of white wine, ver∣juice, butter and sugar into the Pie when it comes out of the Oven. 71 A Pork Pie. Boil your leg of Pork, season it with Nut∣meg, Pepper and salt; bake it five hours in a high round Pie. 72 How to bake a Steak Pie. Cut a neck of mutton in steaks, beat them with a cleaver, season them with Pepper and salt and Nutmeg, then lay them in your coffin with butter and large mace, then bake it; then take a good quantitie of parslie and boil it, beat it as soft as the pulp of an apple, put in a quar∣ter of a pint of Vinegar, and as much white wine (with a little sugar) warm it well, and pour it over your Steaks, then shake it, that the gravie and liquor may mingle together: scrape on sugar, and serve it. 73 To bake Chucks of Veale. Perboil two pound of the lean flesh of a leg of Veal, mince it as small as grated bread, with four pound of bief suet; then season it with Bis∣cay Dates and Carawaies, some Rose-water, su∣gar, raisins of the Sun and currans; cloves, mace, nutmeg, and cinnamon; then mingle
them all together, fill your Pies, and bake them. 74 To make Symbals. Take fine flower dryed, and as much sugar as flower; then take as much whites of Egs as will make it a paste, and put in a little Rose∣water; then put in a quantitie of coriander seed and Annis seed, then mould it up in that fashion you will bake it in. 75 To make Cracknels. Take five or six pints of the finest wheat flower you can get; to which you must put in a spoonful (and not above) of good Yest: then mingle it well with butter, cream, rose-water, and sugar finely beaten, and working it wel into paste, make it in what form you will, and bake it. TARTS 76 To make fine Pippin Tarts. Quarter, pare, core, and stew your Pippins in a pipkin upon very hot embers, close covered, a whole day, for they must stew softly: then put to them some whole Cinnamon, six Cloves, and sugar enough to make them sweet, and some Rosewater: and when they are stewed enough, take them off the fire, and take all the spice from them, and break them small like Marme∣lade: and having your coffins ready made, not above an inch deep, fill them with it, and lay on a very thin cover of Puff-paste, close and fit; so bake them, and serve them in cold: but you must take heed you do not over-bake them.
77 How to make a Tart of Butter and Eggs. Take the yolks of sixteen Egs, well parted from the whites, three quarters of a pound of Butter well clarified, and strain it twice or thrice in a fair strainer (seasoned with sugar and a little Rosewater) wherein Spinage first a little boiled hath been strained, to make it green. Be sure your paste be well made, and whole, and so bake it up, and serve it. 78 A Tart of Strawberries. Pick and wash your Strawberries very clean, and put them in your paste one by another as thick as you can: then take Sugar, Cinnamon, and a little Ginger, finely beaten, and well mingled together, cast them upon the Straw∣berries, and cover them with the lid finely cut into Lozanges, and so let it bake a quarter of an hour, then take it out, and strewing it with a little Cinnamon and Sugar, serve it. 79 A Tart of Hips. Take Hips and cut them, and take out the seeds very clean, then wash them, season them with Sugar, Cinnamon and Ginger; then close your Tart, bake it, ice it, scrape on sugar, and serve it. 80 A Tart of green Pease. Take green Pease, and seethe them tender, then pour them out into a cullender, season them with Saffron, salt, and sweet butter,
and sugar; then close it, then bake it almost an houre, then draw it forth and ice it; put in a little verjuyce and shake it well, then scrape on sugar and serve it. 81 To make a Tart of Wardens. You must first bake your wardens in a pot, then cut them in quarters, and core them, then put them into your Tart with Sugar, Cinna∣mon and Ginger; then close up your Tart, and when it is almost baked, do it as your warden Pie, scrape on sugar and serve it. 82 To marble Beef, Mutton or Venison. Stick any of these with Rosemary and Cloves, then roast it, being first joynted very wel, then baste it often with water and salt; and when it is throughly roasted, take it up and let it coole; then take Clarret wine, and vinegar, and as much water, boile it with Rosemary, Bayes, good store of Pepper, Cioves, Salt; when it hath boiled an houre, take it off and let it cool; then put your meat into a vessel, and cover it with this liquor and herbs, then stop it up close, the closer you stop it, the longer it wil keep. 83 To marble Fish. Take Flounders, Trouts, Smelts, or Sal∣mons, Mullets, Makrel, or any kind of shel∣fish; wash them and dry them in a cloth, then fry them with sallet oyl or clarified butter; fry
them very crisp; then make your pickle with clarret wine and fair water, some Rosemary and Thyme, with Nutmegs cut in flices, and pepper and salt; when it hath boiled halfe an houre, take it off and let it cool; then put your fish into a vessel, cover it with liquor and spice, and stop it close. 84 To make a very good Tansie. Take fifteen eggs and six of the whites, beat them very wel, then put in some sugar and a little sack, beat them again; then put in about a pint or a little more of Cream, and beat them again; then put in the juyce of Spinnage or of Primrose leaves, to make it green; then put in some more sugar, if it be not sweet enough, then beat it again a little, and so let it stand til you fry it; when the first course is in, then fry it with a little sweet butter; it must be stirred and fryed very tender: when it is fryed enough, then put it in a dish, and strew some sugar up∣on it and serve it in. 85 To make excellent bottle Ale. Take two or three drops of the extracted oyl of Sage, and mingle it with a quart of Ale; brewing the same wel out of one pot into ano∣ther; and this way a whole stand of Sage-Ale is very speedily made. The like is to be done with oyl of Mace or Nutmegs: But if you wil make a right Gossips cup, that shal far exceed
all the Ale that ever mother Bunch made in her life time; then in the bottling up of your best Ale, tun half a pint of white Ipocras that is newly made, and after the best Receipt, with a bottle of Ale; stop your bottle close, and drink it when it is stale. Some commend the hanging of roasted Oranges prickt ful of cloves in the vessel of Ale, til you find the taste thereof sufficiently graced to your own liking. 86 The particulars of the Ipocras made usually in London. Cinnamon one ounce, Ginger one ounce, Nutmegs half an ounce, Cloves, Coriander seed, long Pepper, of each one quarter of an ounce, bruise all these in an mortar; Sugar one pound, Rosewater a fit quantity; milk half a pint, Rosemary a little to lay in the bottome of the bag; a gallon of the pleasantest High-Country White wine. Some add to this a quantity of Galingal, and some Raisins of the Sun. JELLIES. 87 How to make a fine Crystal Jelly. Take a knuckle of Veal and four calves feet, and set them on the fire with a gallon of fair water, and when the flesh is boiled tender, take it out; then let the liquor stand still till it be cold; then take away the top and the bottome
of that liquor, and put the rest into a clean pip∣kin, and put into it one pound of clarified su∣gar, four or five drops of oyl of Cinnamon and Nutmegs, a grain of Musk, and so let it boil a quarter of an hour leisurely on the fire; then let it run thorow a Jelly-bag into a bason, with the whites of two egs beaten; and when it is cold, you may cut it in lumps with a spoon, and so serve three or four lumps on a plate. 88 To make Jelly of Pippins. Take Pippins and pare them, and quarter them, and core them, lay them in water; and when you set them on the fire, shift them in a∣nother water, and put them in a skillet, and put in as much water as wil cover them and a little more, set them over the fire and make them boil as fast as you can; when the Apples are soft, and the liquor tastes strong of the Apples, then take them off, and strain them thorow a canvas cloth gently, take to a pound of juice a pound of sugar, then set it on the fire, when it is melted, strain it into a bason and rince your skillet again: set it on the fire, and when it is boiled up, then scumme it, and make it boil as fast as you can, and when it is almost boiled, put in the juyce of three Lemmons strained thorow a cloth: if you wil have Orange pil, pare it thin that the white be not seene, and then lay them in fair water all night, then
boil them in the water til the pil be soft; then put it into the syrup, and stir it about, and fill your glasses, and let it stand til it be cold; and then it is ready to eat. 89 To make a Jelly. Take either Veal, a Cock, or (which is best of all) Calves feet, boil them wel in one water, or as they cal it, scald them til you can get off the skin and clawes, so make them ve∣ry clean, and let them cool. Then set on more water, and when it seeth∣eth, put in the Calves feet (which for these proportions may be four or six) and let them boil until they wil Jelly, which you shal know by letting it stand til it be cold: when it is e∣nough, strain the clearest from the other, and let the best stand til it be cold. Then an hour after set it on the fire again, and put to it a pint of white wine, and so much sugar as wil make it sweet; two ounces of Cin∣namon bruised in a Morter, one ounce of Nut∣megs, and the white of one Egg wel beaten, and when it beginneth to boile, after they are put in, put in two or three spoonfuls of white∣wine Vinegar: then make ready your white Cotton bag, and put in the bottom thereof a sprig or two of Rosemary; and while this is doing, set the liquor on the fire againe, and when it beginneth to seeth, put in the white of
one egge more well beaten first: then take it off the fire, and let it run thorow the Cotton bag, then take that which is run thorow, set it on the fire again; as soon as it seetheth, put in another white of an egge, and then let it run thorow the bag again: do so again the third time, after it is heated and clarified, and then it wil be enough; then put it up in glasses wel covered, and not in pipkins or gallipots: and keep it for your use. 90 A direction to make a Jelly. Take three Calves feet, flea and wash them very clean, take also a fleshie Pullet, or a piece of Veal, pick the fat away and put them into an earthen pan or bason, and to them so much wa∣ter as wil cover them, steep it therein two daies & a night, changing the water, and bruising the flesh six or seven times a day, then put it into a clean brass pot, pour to it more then a gallon of fair water, keep it boiling and alwaies scum∣med, til it come to the height of a Jelly, putting thereto first, when you see the liquor half wa∣sted, more then a pint of white wine. When it is enough, strain it thorow a double linnen cloth, let it stand til it be cold, when if you can see any fat, take it off lightly; then pour the Jelly into a bason, set it on a Chafingdish of coals, and put thereto of the finest sugar finely beaten so much as wil sweeten it throughly, then take of Cinnamon scraped and gross bea∣ten, half a pound, three Nutmegs, one ounce of
white Ginger scraped and grossy bruised a lit∣tle, and a very little—scraped and only bro∣ken, ten Cloves bruised a little, and a very little white salt, put to them the whites of eight eggs (new laid) lightly beaten together, stirre them together til they be all throughly mixed, so let it boile softly til it taste of the spice, and in the places where it riseth in boiling, drop in here and there a spoonful of white wine vine∣gar, and lastly three spoonfuls of the best da∣mask-Rose water; when you find it boiled e∣nough, take a clean Jelly bag, put into the bottome of it, of Thime and Rosemary of each a branch, three branches of sweet Marjorome, a handful of Violets if they may be had: sprin∣kle the herbs and bag with good store of Da∣mask-Rosewater, hang the bag neare a good fire, and put therein your Jelly, taking great heed that no dust or smoak hurt it, and so let it run into a clean bason thorow your bag twice at least, then put it up in fittest sort for your use. LEACHES. 91 To make Leach of Ipocras. Take one pint of Ipocras, two ounces of I∣songlas, six spoonfuls of Rose water, two grains of Musk, and four ounces of sugar candy, boil it leisurely upon a chafingdish of coals, then let it run thorow a Cotten bag into a bason; and when you serve it, cut it in what fashion you wil with a spoone, knife, or otherwise; being coloured as you please.
92 To make fine white Leach of Almonds. Take half a pound of smal Almonds, beate them and strain them with Rosewater and sweet milk from the Cow, put into it two or three pieces of large Mace, one grain of Musk, two ounces of Isonglas, and so boil it on a Chafingdish of coals, a quarter of an hour, till it wil stand, which you shal try thus: Set a sawcer on, or in a little cold water, so that none come into it, and put a spoonful of the Leach into it, and if you see that stand, take the o∣ther off the fire, then you may slice it in what fashion you please. 93 To make Leaches. Take a pottle or gallon of Milk, as you think fit: make it hot as it came from the Cow, then take a quantity of Almonds blanched and ground, answerable to the Milk, strain them with the milk, and seeth them with so much sugar as wil sweeten it, and some bruised Nut∣meg, Ginger, and Cinnamon, and a little Salt tied in a cloth with some Rose water, and one ounce or more of Isonglas, being washed and steeped before three or foure hours in faire water: let them seethe altogether til it be so clammy that it wil cut with a knife; then strain it thorow a cooler, that the Isonglas may be ta∣ken away, and the next day when it is cold, cut it in slices into a dish, and serve it. So you may make it red with red Sanders, yellow with Saf∣fron, green with, &c.
94 The Cooks common white Leach. Take the Sinnews of a Cowes heel, the flesh and fat cut away, slice them as thin as you can, and boil them in milk warm from the Cow, till it be stiff enough to cut, which you shall try with a spoon: then strain it thorow a cloth, and sweeten it with sugar and a spoonful or two of Rose water: then stir them wel together with a spoon, and letting it stand til it be cold, slice it out in what forme you list, and serve it. SWEETS. 95 To make sweet Bags to lay Linnen in. Take Damask Rose buds, pluck them and dry the leaves in the shadow, the tops of Lavender flowers, sweet Margerome and Ba∣sil, of each a handful, all dried and mingled with the Rose leaves: Take also of Benjamin, Sto∣rax, Gallingal roots, and Ireos or Orris roots (twice as much of the Orris as of any of the o∣ther) beaten into fine powder; a piece of Cotton wool, wetted in Rose water, and put to it a good quantity of Musk and Amber∣greee, made into powder, and sprinkle them with some Civit dissolved in Rosewater, lay the cotton in double paper, and dry it over a chafingdish of coals: Lastly take half a hand∣ful of Cloves and as much Cinnamon bruised, not smal beaten, mix all these together, and
put them up in your Baggs. 96 Sweet bags to lay among linnen. Take Orris, Ciprus, Galamus, Fusis, all of them gross beaten, and Gallingal roots, of eath a handful, and as much of the smal tops of Lavender dried, and put them into bags to lay among your clothes: you may put in a hand∣ful or two of Damask-Rose leaves dried, which will somewhat better the scent. 97 Cyprus powder. Take of Storax Calamint four ounces, Calamus Aromaticus two ounces; red Roses two ounces; of Marjorome and Rosemary flowers of each one ounce: Orange pil one ounce and a half, of Cloves and Lignum Rho∣dium, of each two drachms, and fine Musk twenty grains. Make all these into powder, and put it up into a bag fitting. 98 Powder of Violets. Take of sweet Ireos roots one ounce, red Roses two ounces, Storax one ounce and a halfe, Cloves two drachms, Marjorome one drachm, Lavender flowers one drachm and a halfe, make these into powder, then take eight grains of fine Musk powdered also, put to it two ounces of Rose water, stir them together, and put all the rest to them, and stir them halfe an hour til the water be dried, then set it by one day, and dry it by the fire half an hour, and when it is dry, put it up into bags.
99 Cyprus Matches to burn in perfume Take of Willow wood made into Charcoal, one pound, of Benjamin two ounces, Storax liquida one drachm and a halfe, of Storax Ca∣lamint one ounce, Marjorome one ounce, Cloves one ounce, of fine Musk ten grains: beat them altogether into powder; then take of Quincy Draggagenty foure ounces; put it in Rose water, and stir them wel together, and let them stand a night and a day; then put all the aforesaid parcels to this Rose water, which must be no more then wil make it into a Paste, and thereof make up your Matches in what forme you list, and let them dry in the shadow, without fire or sun. 100 How to make a sweet water. Take a gallon of Wort, half a gallon of run∣ning water, of Lavender and Bay-leaves dried of each two handfuls, of Orris powder one ounce; put all these together in an earthen pot, let them stand one day and one night, stirring them often; the morrow after distil it, putting in a penny worth of Balm: and the water which cometh off the distilling wil be very sweet. 101 To make a sweet powder. Take Orris half a pound, six pence; Ciprus, half a pound, ten pence; Calamus half a pound, eight pence; Fusis half a pound, twenty pence; Benjamin two ounces twelve pence, Musk pow∣der twelve pence; grains one pound, eighteen
pence. Total, seven shillings two pence. 102 Another for the same, Take Benjamin four ounces, two shillings; Storax Calaminta three ounces, two shillings; Fusis of Cloves three ounces, nine pence; fine I∣reos six ounces, two pence; Santalum Citrinum three ounces, eighteen pence; Musk 20 grains, three shillings four pence; Civet ten graines, 20d. Total, eleven shillings five pence. 103 To make the Mosse powder. Take of Mosse that groweth upon a sweet Appletree, or a pippin tree, a good quantity, ga∣thered betwixt the two Ladie daies, put the mosse into a quart of Damask Rose water, stop the glasse, set it before the fire, let it so re∣main one day and one night; then take it out and lay it on the bottome of a sieve, put it into an oven and dry it; beat it to powder: then take Benjamin, Storax Calaminta; Lignum a∣loes, of each one ounce; Musk, Ambergreece, Civet, of each six ounces, beat all these in a mor∣tar together, til they come to a powder, then mix it with the mosse powder, and it wil be a most excellent sweet powder. 104 To make a sweet Bal or powder. Take Cloves and Nutmegs, of each one ounce; Cinnamon and Benjamin, of either half an ounce; Calamus Aromaticus and white Sanders of each two ounces, beat every of them severally, and searce them into fine powder; and then beat them into a past with Rosewater.
Take then Storax Calaminta two ounces, Lab∣danum one ounce, beat them in a mortar with Rosewater til they be wel mixed: and then put the other Paste to them, and beat them toge∣ther, till they be throughly mixed. Then take Ambergreece, Musk and Civet of each four or six grains, bruise them, and mix them wel together in a Sawcer with a little Rose water; then put them to the other Paste, and work them wel together, warming both the paste and your hands, very wel with a chafingdish of coals wel kindled standing by you, til you have ve∣ry wel incorporated them together: and then while the paste is warme, make it up into what assize or forme you please. 104 To make Snow. Take a quart of thick Cream, and five or six whites of Egs, a Sawcer ful of sugar finely bea∣ten, and as much Rose water, beat them altoge∣ther, and alwaies as it riseth take it out with a spoone: then take a loaf of bread, cut away the crust, set it in a platter, and a great Rose∣mary bush in the middest of it: then lay your Snow with a spoone upon the Rose∣mary, and so serve it. 105 To make a Junket. Take Ews or Goats milk; if you have nei∣ther
of these, then take Cows milk and put it over the fire to warm, then put in a little run∣net to it; then pour it out into a dish and let it coole, then strew on Cinnamon and sugar, then take some of your aforesaid cream, and lay on it, scrape on sugar and serve it. FINIS.
The CONTENTS of the third Part. For Sallets, &c. A Lemmon Sallet. 181 To keep Clove Gilliflowers For Sallets. ibid To pickle Oysters. 182 To pickle Quinces. ibid To keep Goosberries. 183 Purslane ibid How to keep Cucumbers raw. ibid To keep boiled Cucumbers. ibid To pickle Cucumbers to keep all the year. 184 To keep Cowslips for Sallets. ibid Violets, Buglosse, Borage, Rosemary, Marigolds Fennel. 185 To keep Broom flowers for Sallets. ibid To keep Barberies to garnish your meat, &c. ibid To keep Artichokes for al the year 186 To pickle Broom buds. ibid How to pickle Cucumbers. 187 To make a gallendine sawce for a Turky. ibid
Spoon meats. The best Clouted Cream. 187 Another way for the same in a lesse proportion. 188 To make the ordinary Clouted Cream. ibid To make Almond Milk. 189 To make a Cullesse ibid The best way to make a Sack Posset. 190 A Sack Posset without milk. ibid An Almond Caudle. 191 To make the Danfick Cream. ibid To make fresh Cheese in Cream. bid A messe of fine Cream. 192 To make French Frumenty. ibid How to make a Goosberry Fool. 193 How to make a Goosberry Custard. ibid To make pap of Barly. 194 The Lady of Arundels Manchet. ibid To make Spiced bread. ibid To make Buttered loaves. 195 To make Almond Butter. ibid CAKES. To make Barberry Cakes. 196 To make a sweet Cake, and with it a very sweet water. ibid To make Almond Cakes. 197 To make a Cake. ibid To make a Slipcoat Cheese 198
To make the Angelotta Cheese. 198 To keep Cherries all the year. 199 FRIGASIES. Frigasie of Chickens. 199 Frigasie of Lamb. 200 Frigasie of Rabbets. ibid Frigasie of Veale. ibid Divers other ways to dress Flesh. How to boil a Capon handsomly. ibid To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Lemmons 201 To make Veale Toots or Olives. 202 To make very fine Sawsages. ibid To make Brawn eat tender and delicate. 203 To boil a Capon in white broth. ibid To roast a shoulder of Mutton with Oysters ibid To boil a Mallard with Cabbage. 204 To stew a Mallard. ibid To souce a young Pig. ibid To roast a Pig with a Pudding in his belly. 205 PUDDINGS How to make an Italian Pudding. 205 To make a Haggesse Pudding 206 To make the best white Puddings. ibid A Rice Pudding. ibid To make a fine Pudding in a dish. 207 To make the best Puff-paste. ibid
Pies and Baked meats. To make an Artichoke Pie. 208 To make a Neats-foot Pie. ibid To bake Beef like red Deer. 209 A Calves head Pie (for supper) ibid A Lark Pie. 210 A Skerret Pie. ibid A Pork Pie. 211 How to bake a Steak Pie. ibid To bake Chucks of Veale. ibid To make Symbals. 212 To make Cracknels. ibid TARTS. To make fine Pippin Tarts. 212 How to make a Tart of Butter and Eggs. 213 A Tart of Strawberries. ibid A Tart of Hips. ibid A Tart of green Pease. ibid To make a Tart of Wardens. 214 To marble Beef, Mutton or Venison. ibid To marble Fish. ibid To make a very good Tansie. 215 To make excellent botle Ale. ibid The particulars of the Ipocras made usually in London. 216 JELLIES. How to make a fine Crystal Jelly. ibid
To make a Jelly of Pippine. 217 To make a Jelly. 218 A direction to make a Jelly. 219 LEACHES. To make Leach of Ipocras 220 To make fine white Leach of Almonds. 221 To make Leaches ibid The Cooks common white Leach. 222 SWEETS. To make sweet Bags to lay Linnen in. ibid Sweet bags to lay among linnen. 223 Cyprus powder ibid Powder of Violets. ibid Cypresse Matches to burn in perfume. 224 How to make a sweet Water. ibid To make a sweet Powder. ibid Another for the same. 225 To make the Mosse Powder ibid To make a sweet Ball or powder. ibid To make Snow. 226 To make a Junket. ibid FINIS.
Books Printed for William Lee. D. Pakeman. Ga. Bedell. REports of certain Cases, Arising in the se∣veral Courts of Record, at Westminster, in the Reigns of Qu. Elizabeth, King James, and the late King Charls; with the resolutions of the Judges of the said Courts, upon debate, and solemn Arguments. Colle∣cted, and lately reviewed by Justice Godbold: in Quarto. The Touchstone of common assuraences, by William Sheppard Esquire; in Quarto. The whole office of a Country Justice of peace, both in Sessions, and out of Sessions; with an Abridgment of all the Acts, and Ordi∣nances of Parliament, relating to the office of a Justice of peace; in Octavo. A Collection of several Acts of Parliament, pub∣lished in the years 1648, 1649, 1650, 1651, very useful, especially for Justices of peace, and other officers, in the Execution of their duties, and Administration of Justice, with several ordinances of the like concernment,
by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clark of the Par∣liament: in folio. A Collection of several Acts of Parliament, which concern the Adventurers of Ireland, by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clark of the Par∣liament; in folio. A General Table, to all the several Books of the Reports of the Lord Cook, with two tables, one of the principal Cases, the other of the general Titles, arising out of the matter of the Reports, done into English; in Octavo. The new Natura Brevium, of the reverend Judg Mr. Anth. Fitzherbert, with the Au∣thorities of Law, Collected out of the year Books: an A bridgment with Writs, and return of VVrits, translated into English; ne∣ver before Printed; in Octavo. The Grounds and Maximes of the Laws of Eng∣land, by William Noy Esquire, in Octa∣vo. The Atturneys Accademy; being the manner of proceedings in all the Courts of Re∣cord at Westminster, and other Courts of Law, and Equity; in Quarto. An excellent Treatise entituled, For the Sacred Lawes of the Land, by Francis White Es∣quire; in Octavo. De Priscis Anglorum Legibus, being the an∣cient Lawes of England, in Saxon, and Latine, out of the Authors (Mr. Lambert) own manuscript copy, published with the Additions of Mr. Wheelock of Cam∣bridg; in folio.
Reports and Pleas of Assizes at York, held be∣fore several Judges in that Circuity, with some Presidents useful for pleaders at the Assizes; never Englished before: in octa∣vo. Reports, or Cases in Chancery, Collected by Sir George Cary, one of the Masters of the Chancery; in Octavo. A perfect Abridgment of the Eleven Books of the Reports of the Lord Cook, writen in French by Sir John Davis, and now Englished; in Duodecimo. Reports, or new Cases of Law, by John March, in Quarto. Statuta pacis, containing all statutes in order of time, that concerne a Justice of peace; in Duodecimo. Three Learned Readings, the first by the Lord Dyer, of Wils; second by Sir John Brograve of Jointures; third by Thomas Risden of forci∣ble Entryes; in Quarto. The Learned Arguments of the Judges of the upper Bench, upon the writ of Habeas Cor∣pus, with the opinion of the Court thereup∣on; in Quarto. The Book of Oaths, with the several forms of them, both Antient and Modern; in Duo∣decimo. The Office of Sheriffs, and Coroner, by J. Wil∣kinson of Bernards Inn; with Kitchins return of writs, newly translated into English; in Octavo. Synopsis, or an exact Abridgment of the Lord Cooks Commentary upon Littleton, being a
brief Explanation of the Grounds of the common Law, Compos'd by that learned Lawyer, Sir Humphrey Davenport Knight, Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer; in Octavo. Miscellania Spiritualia, or devout Essay's, by the Honourable Walter Mountague Esquire, the first part; in Quarto. The History of the Civil warrs of France, written in Italian, by Henrico Catarino D' Avila, translated into English by Sir Charls Cotterel Knight, and William Aylsbury Esquire; in Folio.
Books Printed for, or to be sold by M. M. G. Bedell, and T. Collins, at their shop at the middle Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. EAdmeri Monachi Cantuariensis, Historiae Novorum, Joannes Seldenis Notis; in Folio. Mare Clausum. seu Dominio Mare, Joannes Sel∣deni; in Folio. The History of great Brittain, from the first peopling of this Island, to the Raigne of King James, by Willam Slayter, with the Illustrations of John Selden Esq in Folio. The History of Tythes, in the payment of them, the Lawes made for them, and touching the Right of them, by John Selden Esquire; in Quarto. Annales, or a general Chronicle of England, with an Appendix, or Corrollary of the foundations of the Universities of England, begun by John Stowe, and continued to the year 1631 by Edm. Howes Gent. in Folio. A Chronicle of the Kings of England, from the Romans Government, unto the Reign of King Charls, containing all passages of Church, and State, with all other ob∣servations proper for a History. The se∣cond Edition, enlarged with Marginal notes
and large Tables, by Sir Richard Baker Knight; in Folio. The History and Lives of the Kings of England, from Wil. the Conqueror to the end of the Raign of K. Henry the eighth, by Wil. Mar∣tyn Esquire: to which is added, the History of K. Edward the fixt, Q. Mary, and Queen Elizabeth; in Folio. The History of the Raign of K. Henry the seventh, written by the right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban; with a very useful, and necessary Table annexed to it; in folio. The Life and Raign of K. Henry the Eight, writ∣ten by the Right Honorable Edward Lord Herbert of Cherbury; in Folio. Orlando furioso, in English Heroical verse, by Sir John Harrington Knight, now the third time revised and amended, with the Ad∣dition of the Authors Epigrams; in Folio. The Marrow of the French tongue, containing rules for pronunciation, an exact Grammer of the nine parts of speech, and dialogues for Courtiers, Citizens, and Countrymen, with varieties of phrases, letters missive, proverbs &c. So compiled, that a mean capacity may in a short time, without help, attain to the perfection of the Language, by Mr. John Woodroephe; in folio. Pyrotechina, or a discourse of artificial fire∣works, laying down the true grounds of that Art: to which is annexed, a treatise of Geo∣metry, by John Babington student in the Ma∣thematicks; in Folio.
A French-English Dictionary, with another in English and French, Compiled by Mr. Ran∣dal Cotgrave: whereunto are added the Ani∣madversions, and supplement of James How∣el Esquire; in Folio. Annales veteris Testamenti, à prima Mundi Ori∣gine deductis, una cum Rerum Asiaticarium, et Aegyptiacarum Chronico, Jacobo Usserio Armachana digestore; in folio. With the second part now in presse in Laine; in folio Devotionis Augustinianae Flammae, or certain de∣vout and learned meditations, upon several Festivals in the year, written by the excel∣lently accomplisht Gentleman, William Au∣stin, of Lincolnes Inn Esquire; in folio. The Christian man, or the Reparation of nature by grace, written in French by John Fran∣cis Sennault, and now Englished by H. Gresly Master of Arts, and student of Christ Church in Oxford; in Quarto. An Interpretation of the number 666, wherein not only the manner how this number ought to be Interpreted, but it is also shewed, that this number doth exactly describe that state of government, to which all other Notes of Antichrist do agree, by Francis Potter, B. D. with Mr. Medes Judgment of this Treatise; in Quarto. John Barclay his Argenis, translated out of La∣tine into English, the prose upon his Majesties command, by Sir Robertle Gry's Knight, and the verses by Thomas May Esquire; with a Clavis annexed to it, for the satisfaction of the Reader; in Quarto.
The History of the Imperial estate of the Grand Seigneurs, their Habiations, Lives, Favo∣rites, Power, Government and Tyranny; to which is annexed, the History of the Court of the King of China, written in French and translated by Edward Grimston; in Quarto. The state of France, as it stood in the ninth yeare of this present Monarch Lewis the fourteenth, written to a freind, by I. E. in duodecimo. The Pourtract of the Politick Christian Favo∣rite, drawn from some of the Actions of the Lord Duke of St. Lucar, by the Mar∣quesse Virgillio Malvezzi; to which is an∣nexed, Maximes of State, and political ob∣servations, on the same story of Count Oliva∣rez D of St. Lucar, in Duodecimo. The Prince, written in French, by Mounsieur Du Balzac: now translated into English, by Henry Gresly, Mr. of Arts, and student of Christ Church in Oxford, in duodecimo. The Life and Raign of King Edward the sixth, with the beginning of the Raign of Queen Elizabeth, both written by Sir John Hayward Knight, Doctor of Law: in duodecimo. Of Liberty and Servitude; translated out of the French into the English tongue, and dedica∣ted to George Evelyn Esquire: in duodecimo. The new plannet no plannet; or the earth no wandring Star. Here, out of the principles of Divinity, Philosophy &c. the earths Immo∣bility is asserted, and Copernicus his opini∣on, as erroneous, &c. fully refuted, by A∣lexander Ross; in Quarto.
The Picture of Conscience, consisting in the truths to be beleeved, the vertues to be pra∣ctised, the vices to be avoided, and the Here∣sies to be rejected, by Alexander Ross; in Duodecimo. An humble Apologie for Learning and Learned Men, by Edward VVaterhous Esquire; in Octavo. Selected parts of Horace Prince of Lyricks, con∣cluding with a piece out of Ausonius, and another out of Virgil; done into En∣glish by Richard Fanshaw Esquire; in Octavo. Palmer in D' Oliva both parts, in Quarto. The true History of the Tragick Loves of Hy∣pollito and Isabella, Neopolitans; in Octavo. The Nuptial Lover; in Octavo. The Jesuite, the chief, if not the only state here∣tick in the world, or the Venetian Quarrel; in quarto. Brinsleys smal Coppy Book, in octavo. Synopsis, or a Compendium of the Fathers; in Octavo. Supplementum Lucani, Thomae May Anglo; in duodecimo. Jacksons Evangelical temper in duodecimo. Maran-Atha, the second advent, or Christ co∣ming to Judgment. A Sermon preached be∣fore the Honorable Judges of Assize, at VVarwick, July 25, 1651. by VVil. Durham, B. D. late preacher at the Rolls, now pastor of the Church of Tredington, in Worcester shire; in quarto. Steps of Ascention unto God, or a ladder to hea∣ven,
containing praiers and meditations for every day of the week, and for all other times and occasions, by Edward Gee Dr. of Divinity; in 24o. The Divels an Ass, a Comedy, acted in the year 1616, by his Majesty's servants, the Author Ben. Johnson; in folio. The Marriage of the Arts, by Barten Holliday; in Quarto. Michaelmas Term, in Quarto. Fine Companion; in quarto. The Phoenix: in quarto. The just General, by Cosmo Manuche: in quarto. The Couragious Turk: in 4to by T. Goffe, of Christ Church in Oxford. The Tragedy of Orestes: in 4to by T. Goffe, of Christ Church in Oxford. The Bastard a Tragedy in 4to by T. Goffe, of Christ Church in Oxford. Edward the fourth, first and second part, a play in quarto. Platonick Lovers: in 4to per Sir VVilli∣am Davenant Knight. The VVits, a Comedy, in 4to per Sir VVilli∣am Davenant Knight. The Triumphs of Prince D' Amour: in quarto. per Sir VVilli∣am Davenant Knight. The faithful Shepardesse, Acted before the King and Queen, divers times, with great ap∣plause, at Black fryers, by his Majesty's ser∣vants, written by John Fletcher Gent. in 4to. A Recantation of an ill led life, or a disovery of the high-way Law, as also many Caute∣lous Admonitions, and ful Instructions, how to know, shun, and apprehend a thiefe: most necessary for all honest travellers to per∣use, observe, and practice; written by John Clavel Gent. The eleventh Report of the Lord Cook in French, in folio.
Statutes in the xxi K. James, and the first and third Caroli: in folio. Lamberts Archeion; or comments on the high Courts of Justice: in Octavo. Powels search of Records: in quarto. The Laws, and Resolutions of womens Rights: in quarto. Reformatio Legum, Ecclesiasticarum: in quarto. The Parsons Law, Collected out of the whole body of the Common Law, and some late Reports: in octavo. The Court keepers Guide; A plain and familiar treatise, useful for the help of those that are imployed in keeping Law-daies, or Courts Baron; wherein is largely, and plainly ope∣ned, the Jurisdiction of those Courts, with the learning of Mannors, Coppy-holds, Rents, Herriots, and other services, and ad∣vantages belonging to Mannors, to the great profit of Lords of mannors, and owners of these Courts. The third edition enlarged, the Author VVilliam Shepard Esquire; in Octavo Reliquiae VVottonianae, or a Collection of Lives, Letters and Poems, with characters of sun∣dry personages, and other Incomparable pie∣ces of Language, and Art, by the Curious pensil, of the ever Memorable, Sir Henry VVotton Knight, late provost of Eaton: in duodecimo. Calendarium Pastorale, sive Eglogae Duodecim, totidem Anni mensibus Accomodatae, An∣glicè olim scriptae, ab Edmundo Spencero, An∣glorum Poetarum Principe, nunc autem
Eleganti Latino Carmine donarae, à Theodo∣ro Bathurst Aulae Pembrokianae, apud Can∣tabrigiensis, aliquando socio. And the same in English, against the Latine, in Octavo. Miscellanea spiritualia, or devout Essayes, by the Honorable VValter Mountague Esquire, the second part: in quarto. The Combat of Love and Friendship: A comedy as it was formerly presented by the Gentle∣men of Christ Church in Oxford: by Robert Meade sometime of the same Colledg. in 4to: Cabala, Mysteries of State in letters of the great Ministers of King James, and King Charls; wherein much of the publick manage of af∣faires is related, faithfully collected by a No∣ble hand: in quarto. FINIS.
