B2135A R205342 99896504 132306
A Demonstrative Scripture-Proof FROM Mahometan Times: THE Kingdom of Christ Must needs be in its Succession, 1697. By T. BEVERLEY. REVEL. XI. 14, 15. The Second Woe is past; Behold the Third Woe cometh Quickly: And the Seventh Angel sounded; and I heard Loud Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. printer's device(?), flower London, Printed in the Year, 1692.
A Demonstrative Proof from the Space of Time run out, since the Hegire Era, or Great Date of Time to the Mahometans; like the Year of our Lord to Christians, when the False Prophet Mahomet appear'd Arm'd, viz at 622. That the Kingdom of Christ must at the farthest be in its Succession 1697. the 1260. Days of Years of the Roman Empire in the Papal Tyranny then Ending; and the Ma∣hometan Imposture, and Barbarous Potentacy shall then also pass away, according to the Line of Time given. SEeing It will easily be allowed, the Parahles of Scripture are as truly the Word of God, whether expounded or not, if rightly under∣stood, as the most plain Doctrinal Scripture; It must also be allow∣ed, That we ought to search for that True Meaning and Sense of them, seeing it is a Rule concerning All Scripture, it ought to be search'd; and because Parables require more laborious search, that they may be un∣derstood, Christ giving his Doctrine in Parables, so often us'd that Paraboli∣cal Admonition, He that hath Ears to hear, let him hear: And when Christ said to his Disciples, not understanding the Parable of the Sower, though he had not then exounded it; Ʋnderstand ye not this Parable! How then will ye understand all Parables? Mark 4. He implied thereby, There would be given in his Word, many, and very dark Parables; and yet that All Scri∣pture Parables ought to be understood by Christians, though not expound∣ed, viz. by Search and Compare with other Scriptures; and so they may be understood, else it could not be our Duty to understand them. Now All Prophetical, Hierogliphick Emblems and Figures, particularly those of the Revelation, are Prophetical Parables, and so ought to be search'd and understood, and may be, as other Parables. Christ therefore Seven Times together uses that very Parabolical Admonition he us'd in the Gospels, He that hath an Ear, let him hear, c. 2. c. 3. And yet in a more dark Para∣ble, and less practical than those Epistles to the Churches, viz. that of the Beast, c. 13. 10. he again says, If any Man hath an Ear, let him hear. And because the Parables of the Revelation are of so deep Enquiry, and require much Thought, Christ invits so painful Re-searches, with the Promise of Blessedness, not only to hs Minsterial Servants, to Read and Expound, but to his People, who are to be Instructed, to Hear, by that Inscription, as in Letters of Gold, on the Portal. Blessed is he that Readeth, &c. c. 1. 3. All whch assure us, That its Parables are given to be understood; and that we may, and it is our Duty so to search, as to understand; to be assured, we have the True Word of God, and the Sense of it, even as in other
Scriptures, and that our Blessedness is to be found therein; Else the giving that Book of Scriptures, and the Promise before it, were vain, and un∣reasonable. Having thus far Prefac'd to the Arguing from the Space, the Mahome∣tans False Prophetism and Tyranny, have been in the World; that the King∣dom of Christ must at the farthest be in its Succession at 97, I propose Two Heads of Argument: The First shal be taken from General Scrip∣ture-Principles, which none can deny. The Second shall be taken from the ver Letter or most unavoidably necessary Sense, of what we find in that Book of the Revelation relating hereunto; which also None shll be Able to Deny, when the Reason for so giving the Sense is duly consider'd, and that All Chronology and Hi∣story undoubtedly Agree. I begin therefore with such Principles as will strongly Argue from the Consideration of Mahometanism, according to General Rules of Scrip∣ture. That the Mahometan Falshood and Tyranny hath been a Judgment upon the Christian World; No Christian, of what Peswasi∣on soever, can, or will, I think, deny. That it hath arisen for this 1069 Years, viz. fom 622, to ths 1691. can no more be denied than the o∣ther: I Argue therefore, seeing there hath heen so Great and setled a Judg∣ment upon so Universal a Profession, as the Christian is; a Sin of pro∣portionable Settlement and Duration, ought to be search'd out, and match'd with it, acording to the whole Tenor of Scripture: as the Jews Killing the Lord of Life, and Calling his Blood on Them, and on their Chil∣dren▪ and their so Obstinate Ʋnbelief in him, is own'd by all Christians, to be the Just Cause of the Wrath that hath come upon them to the End. Now what sin of the Christian World can be thought to be that Sin, but the Apostacy in the Christian Church, the Apostle so long ago foretold, 2 Thes. 2. and which All Protestants acknowledge hath been in it ever since the Rising of Mahometanism, and from Time before it very near 200 years in its Beginnings. Such a Relation betwixt a Judgment and a Sin, is especially most Argumentative, when the Sin in its Appearance is Engraven on the Judgment. Now whoever considers the Pope having taken upon him to be Ʋniversal Bishop and Pastor, Vicar of Christ, Head of the Church, and so Ʋniveral Prophet; and to have the Power of the Keys, and so of the Sword, in Ordine ad Spiritualia; and by his Infallibility to give Universal Law to the World; and so many Christian Princes Enchanted to support him in All; and then compares Mahomet taking upon himself to be the Greatest True Prophet of the World; yet with some Allowance to Moses and to Christ; to give the Alcoran as an Universal Law, and to be appointed by God to Pro∣selyte the World by the Power of the Sword, and to have thereby prevail'd on so great a part of the World; and withal to be a Detester of all Image-Worship, in opposition to Popish Idolatry. How must it needs be own'd God hath Anger'd the Christian, or rather Antichristian State, by a Foolish Re∣ligion,
as he speaks Deut. 32. and set Mahometanism, as a Counter-Antichri∣stianism to Antichrist, in a way of Horrible and Dreadful Judgment upon that Antichrist, and as a Paraselene or Mock-Moon to the Beasts Moons. When a Judgment hath Counter-ballanc'd a Sin for seve∣ral Ages Apparently together, and They born the Characters of a Mutu∣al Relation; It is not according to Scripture-Reason supposeable, the Judg∣ment should remove, before the Sin be removed; either by Reformation, or by Final Judgment upon it, when it is not reform'd; nor the Iniquity purg'd till they die. The First Beginnings of a Sin are, according to Scripture, chastis'd, though often with very severe Judgments, yet of a less severe kind, and such as are, as it were, Fore-runners of greater. It is there∣fore most Rationally, according to Scripture, to be suppos'd there were some former Methods of Judgment upon Antichristianism, which is by all Protestants acknowledg'd to have enter'd much earlier than Mahomet: But these Judgments, though they remov'd the former State of the Western Em∣pire; yet under the New Model of several Supreme Monarchs, together with the Papacy, in the Place of the Emperour, It was continued; and even the very Imperial Grandeur surviv'd as Romane, in the Eastern Empire. And when the Sin of the former Model is so close Rivetted, and that it enters so into the Substance, as to pass along into all Change of Forms, and People; Then God knits a Chain of Judgments, that shall for ever make an End of that Sin. It is not agreeable to the Wisdom, and gracious Govern∣ment of God, that either such a Sin or Judgment should last always; and this sin, and this Judgment having, under some very solemn Determinati∣on of God, endur'd already longer than any other, except the Sin of the Jews, and the Judment upon them; which is by our Saviour foretold to be as long as any Gentile Times: It is a strong Presumption all these are now near an End. Now when God hath given so long a Time to such an uni∣ted State of Sin, and Punishment in the Jew and Gentile, as he never yet gave from the Beginning of the World to this Day; We have Reason to believe, the next Change shall be a Final Change to his Kingdom and Glory; For so the Course or all Scripture runs: So that as we have so great Reason to believe some Change, after so long a lasting Sin, and Judgment, is near; we have also Reason to believe, that the next Change, so near, shall be a Change, once for all, to that never Ending Kingdom of Christ. An Interpretation of the Prophecies of Scripture, that shall not only agree with these Great Principles of Scripture-Reason; but shall by Evidence from Prophecies themselves, shew; that they Pourtray, and Represent to us both the Antichristian Apostacy, as the Grand Sin; and the Mahometan Imposture and Tyranny, lying as a Judgment upon that Grand Sin; and the Notes of Time exactly agreeing to both; we have Reason to be assured, Such Interpretation is a True Interpretation of Pro∣phecy, and that we may expect Things to come to pass accordingly.
I come therefore to give, as I hope they will appear, Irresistable Proofs from the Letter of Prophecy, from the Types, and from the Times Assigned by it; that the Space of Time, the Mahometan Imposture and Tyranny, as a Judgment on the Antichristian Apostacy, have already taken up, hath been such, that the Kingdom of Christ must needs be so near coming into its Suc∣cession as 1697. It is undeniable by express Evidence from the very Words of Prophecy, Rev. 10. c. 11. That the Time of the Seventh Angels sound∣ing the Seventh Trumpet, cannot be a Time, wherein any thing of such Enmity to the Kingdom of Christ, as Mahometanism is by All, that bear the Name of Christians; and the Papacy by All Protestants; is acknowledg'd to be, have any place. For it is sworn, c. 10. 6, 7. there shall be Time no more, viz. of such Time, Times and Half Time, as were sworn should be, Dan 12. 7. for the scattering the holy people, and for the wearing out the Saints of the Most High; but that the Mystery of God in the Glory of his King∣dom should be finish'd. The Contrary therefore could then have no place. And when the Display of the Seventh Trumpet is describ'd, the Kingdoms of this World are by Loud Voices in Heaven proclaim'd to be become the King∣doms of the Lord, and of his Christ, Rev. 11. 15. 18. and then his Servants, Great and Small, shall have Rewards given them, and They be destroy'd who destroy'd the Earth. There could then be no possible Room for the Mahome∣tans, whose King is Apollyon; nor for the Papacy, Represented by the Beast making War with the Saints. Seeing the Seventh Trumpet is so distinguish'd, that there should be such Time, Times and Half Time no more, and that None of the Six foregoing Trumpets are so Distinguish'd, There is a Great Assurance gi∣ven, that those Time, Times, and Half Time, flow back into the Six Trum∣pets, and take them up; For then Times of a contrary Temper to the Kingdom of Christ, and to Finishing the Mystery, had, according to the Oath, Dan. 12. their Place, Rev. 8. c. 9. It is most certain by the express Text; the Fifth and the Sixth Trumpets must in some things agree with the Seventh Trumpet, and in some things so utterly disagree; that the Space of the one (as hath been said) cannot be the Space of the other: They agree in that, They are All Three Woe-Trumpets, and bring Judgment and Woe upon some Grand Enemy of the Kingdom of Christ; And so the Two First Woes are Prepara∣toty Woes to the Third Woe of the Seventh Trumpet. They agree also with the Seventh Trumpet in this, That they carry on Time, so that there should be no Remaining Time of Hinderance to the Finishing the Myste∣ry of God, but that such Time should be no more. But they must herein disagree to the utmost; that the Executioners of these Two Woes are (as the Assyrians and Babylonians of Old) though ex∣ecuting the Judgments of God on Idolatrous Pretenders to be his Peope; yet themselves great Enemies to the Kingdom of Christ, and of the Serpentine Kind, compared to Scorpions and Serpents, Rev. 9. 10, 11. 14 and are under their Prince, the Angel of the Bottomless Pit. They therefore are
themselves to be enfolded in the Last Woe, being to be destroyed, as the De∣stroyers of the Earth. It must be most certain, the Days of the Seventh Angel Sound∣ing, cannnt be yet, because the Papacy, in the Sense of All Protestants, and the Mahometan Imposture, and Tyranny, in the Sense of All Christians, are so opposite to the Kingdom of Christ, and have yet such a prevalent In∣terest in the World; that the Kingdoms of this World cannot by such loud Voices be said to be the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ. There is no possible Denial, That the Book of the Revela∣tion hath fix'd 42 Months of the Gentiles treading under Foot the Outward Court, and the Holy City; and of the Beasts having power over Tongues, and Peo∣ple, and making War with the Saints; and 1260 Days, call'd also, Time, Times, and Half a Time; and Three Days and a Half of the Witnesses being in Sackcloth; the Woman, the Church in the Wilderness; the Wit∣nesses lying Dead, and the Church hid from the Face of the Serpent.Rev. 11. 2. c. 12. 6. 14. c. 13. 5. It is also most certain; there are great Examples in Scripture of a Day appointed for a Year, when Prophetical Time is Cy∣pher'd. And it appears on greatest Reason, from Ezek. 4. to be made a Standard of Prophetick Time. It is, lastly, out of all doubt, that these Notes of Time, so discypher'd, make 1260 Years, and conspire in so doing. There is the greatest Assurance that can be, that the Maho∣metan Imposture becoming an Armed Power, hath lasted 1069 years, from 622 to 1691. And that the Papacy (in the Sense of All Protestants, a Fowl Corruption and Usurpation; and in the Sense of the most Zealous Prote∣stants, the Antichristian Apostacy▪ hath run parallel with it; and they have so long counter-ballanc'd one another, as a Sin, and as a Judgment. But further, that such a Mystery of Iniquity was working, 2 Thes. 2. 7. to dis∣cover it self about 200 years more or less, before the Mahometan Era; so as to make up now much what 1260 years. It is most Notorious in History, that before the Mahometan Imposture, and Armed Power came, as a Judgment on the Christian Professi∣on, there were Judgments on the Roman Empire, not only as mix'd of Pa∣gan People; but as the Emperors, and Magistracy, and Multitudes of Peo∣ple under them, were Christians; but All at the same time began to be corrupted with what hath since settled into the Antichristian Apostacy. Now these Judgments were, as hath been argued, very severe, yet of a very different Severity from the Mahometan Scourge. For first, They did not e∣stablish such an Horrible Imposture, and Counter Religion to the Christi∣an Name,Both call∣ing them∣selves Be∣lievers, and one ano∣ther Infidels▪ and therein to Antichristianism also, that disguises it self under that excellent Christian Name, and so supports it self by it. Then, they did not take away the Roman Name, Empire, and City in the West, as the Ma∣hometans have done in the East; but the Barbarians so Coalescd, or Knit themselves into the Roman, Papal Supremacy, by degrees, that All became a Variety of Kingdoms, Supreme within themselves, yet refunding, or giving back their Supremacies to one Spiritual Roman Supreme; who in order
to that Spiritual Supremacy wound in, to himself, a vast Imperialness also, on, as they are call'd, the Temporal Powers; So that though the Incursion of the Barbarians upon All Parts of the Roman Empire, effected such a Di∣vision of the Empire; yet it is well known, they Re-united in such a Re∣cognition of a Spiritual Supreme: There was indeed a Taking, and Re-ta∣king the Great City Rome; so that it was for a Time depriv'd of all Face of any other Metropolitanism, but of the Bishop of Rome, (which, it is to be observ'd, was always firm to it,) and was under the Exarch of Ravenna; But in that Eternal Rome, as it was styl▪d (how wickedly soever) rose up, and took the Name of the Catholick Church; as its Bishop the Name of Supreme Bishop and Pastor; It Lived still and became Great. Now it is beyond all Controversie in Chronology, From the Mahometan Hegire at 622. Going back to the Death of that Great and Excellent Prince Theodosus he first, when the Empire began to be played upon by those lesser Judgments, particularly the Invasion of Italy; which may look like a Beginning of them, which was A. D. 402. There are years enough, and many to spare, to make the 1069. (from 622. to 1691) 1260 Insomuch then, as we see not yet that Great Event of the Kingdom of Christ, which shall begin at the Seventh Trumpet's Sounding; and yet find, that Twelve hundred and sixty years, and many more, must needs have pass'd since 402. We must not begin them there, because we know so well such Great Effects as are just before, and at the Beginning of that Trumpet, have not yet been. We must therefore either the very Next Year, or every Next Year, be in Expectation of such Great Events, on which the Seventh Trumpet should begin to Sound, and so the Kingdom of Christ come into Succession; In as much, as if we go back from 1691. to 622. we have 1069. years; and to make them 1260. we need go back no far∣ther than to 431. when there was Appearance enough of those Judg∣mens begun; Bu for very Great Reasons presently to be given, I begin the Judgments precisely at 437, as much about the middle Point betwixt Theodosius his Death, 395, and the Cessation of the Western Imperial Name, in Augustus, at 476. The Face in a Picture, drawn with the most Exquisite Art, cannot more answer the Face in the Life, than the Types in the Prophecy of the Revelation answer the Great Events in Hi∣story,Rev. 8. all a∣long. coming each at the just Times. What more Admi∣rable Type of the Western Empire, Invaded in all parts, than a Storm of Hail and Fire, mingled with Blood? yielding 18 years of the 1260. Or what Time more exact, than at 437? as we shall presently see to Begin. What more exact Emblem of Rome, so often Taken and Re-taken, to the so great Amazement of, and Noise in the World, and yet pre∣serv'd, then a Mountain, like an Etna, or Vesuvius, Spouting Fire into, or cast flaming into the Sea; that it makes a terrible hissing in the Waves, yet the Fire so re-bated, as not to consume it? This began A. D. 455. to pur∣pose, (the First Taking Anno 410. being but for Few days,) yielding 21 years more to the 1260.
What more Wonderful Figure of the Cessaion of the Western Empire, Falling in Augustulus, as a Hesperus, or Evening-Star, than a Lamp quench'd in the Waters, at 476, and imbittering all Refreshments, in the Empire, or Commerce, like Wormwood? yielding 66 years more of the 1260. What more curious Emblem of Rome, te Metropolis of the Western Em∣pire, having no proper Supreme of its own, except the Roman Bishop, (not so much as Consular power,) who was indeed in Providence, already in his Succession, but not Able to cast any Rays of Secular Majesty upon Rome; till he Fell, as a Star on the Earth, then the Third part of the Sun, Mon and Stars were smitten; and a Third part of the Day and Night not shining? Third, because the Prophecy makes Third the Hieroglyphical Number of each Rome, the We∣stern Old, the Eastern New Rome, or Constantinople; Yielding 64 years more to the 1260 years. What more Admirable Type of a Christian Bishop, becomingC. 9. all along. such a Secular Prince, under the Disguise of a Siritual Supreme Pastor, then a Star Falling to the Earth, when Christ had styl'd the Angels of the Chur∣ches Stars in his Right Hand? Yielding 16 Years more to the 1260 Days, and so making up the 191, wanting to the 1069. What more Stupendious Image of the Mahometan Imposture becoming Arm'd, first in the Saracens, and Rising out of the Antichristian Darkness of the Pope's Supremacy, (Arrogating the Keys of Purgatory, as his own, to which the Mahometan Paradse is such a Fabulary opposite) than Venemous Locusts coming out of the Smoke, swarming every way, and running up and down the World with a perpetual Disquiet, under the Abaddon of the Bottomless Pit? and yielding by Five Months and Five Months, and the Time of Non-Action 490 years more to the 1260. and yet They in all that Time could not Kill, that is, deprive Any of Supreme Power, nor Themselves, found any settled Illustrious Monarchy. What more Admirable Resemblance of the Turkish Cavalry, or Horse∣men, swelling with the Poyson of Mahomet in their eads and Tails, than Four Angels, viz▪ Attendants upon the fore-nam▪d Abaddon, Angel of the Bottomless Pit; who were therefore Bound till the Just Time appointed by God, and then prepar▪d to Kill the Third part of Men, or to put an utter End to the Eastern Roman Monarchy, call'd Third, (as before-noted) and to seize upon Constantinople, the Acropolis of it, within about 396 Years after the Cessation of the Saracenic, (so vexatious Scorpions that yet could not Kill,) viz. at A.D. 1453. And yet by the Vertue of their Grant of an Hour, or Season over, to their Day, Month and Year, continue to this very Day; and shall continue until the Seventh Trumpet; Their coming from Euphra∣tes, at the Voice from the VVitnesses at the Golden Alter of Incense; Their Numerous Armies of Horsemen, their Vomiting Fire, (an Admirable Figure of their Great Guns, then come into Use, and of Prodigious Greatness, prepar'd for the Taking Constantinople,) are sure Notes of them, as also that they continue to this Day. This hath yielded to the 1260 Days, so many, as to make up the whole Mahometan Time to this 1691, as hath been said, 1069 years.
Lastly, How Perspicuous a Veil of the Reformation, about 64 years af∣ter the Taking of Constantinople; is that Representation of Christ making a Seizure of his Kingdom, Roaring as a Lyon, holding theC. 10. all a∣long. Book of his Kingdom open in his Hand, and then Seven Thunders uttering their Voices, And yet it is shew'd after All, that the Reformation would not Attain its Effect, till Half Time fully Run out, which would be a Time of Delay, as we visibly see with our Eyes; For neither is the Re∣formation perfect within it self, nor hath it extended to the Ʋniversal Ro∣man Empire, and so to the Ends of the Earth; Therefore were the Thun∣ders seal'd, and the Book clos'd in the Bowels of the Apocalyptick Prophet, and Prophecy continued; and so the Seventh Angel not sounding, nor the Mystery finish'd. This hath yielded since it began in Luther, 1517, 176 years of the last 180 of Half Time, and so to the End 1697. Thus I have given a brief Landskip of the Prophetical Types, (which, were it seasonable here▪ might be drawn much more full, and patticular) and the so exact Adjustments of Times; which might in the very same manner be given from the Resurrection; Nay, They might be derived down from Cyrus, throughout the whole 2300 Eves, Morns. But I shall now endeavour the Additional Proof, That these Types must needs be the Types to be adjusted to the Times I have all along given, and am now properly upon. These must needs be the Types signified by our Lord Jesus Christ to his Servant John, because there are no other Types to be found, that can bear up the Course of Time from the Resurrection of Christ; the Etoch of the Revelation, from which All its Prophecies began, and have all along been coming swiftly to pass to this Day, and so to his Kingdom, but only These So Great, within the Remains of the Roman Empire, in so Just an Order, Series, and continued Succession of Events, and so perfectly agreeing with the Types of Prophecy. This may be very plainly seen by the Attempt of the so Learned Dr. Hammond, after Grotius; who, though he endeavour'd to his utmost, and was as Able for it as any Man, yet how little he could perform, is very Apparent. He was forc'd to pitch upon so many Events, so very small, to be found only in Corners of History; Taking in but small Portions of the Time, since the Revelation given, very Confus'd, backward and forward, referring to Things before the Revelation it self given, placing the Blessed State of the Thousand Years, where Antichristian and Mahometan Tyranny have had their principal Scitua∣tion. Whereas, Those I rest upon, are the Noblest Events, in the clearest Parts of History, and what any would most desire to know, viz. the We∣stern Roman Famous Empire, becoming Ten Kingdoms, under the Papacy; the Mahometan Imposture, the Saracens, the Turks; the long Oppression of the Waldenses or Vaudois; the Eastern Empire, and its City seiz'd by Mahomet. Their Derivation from the Resurrection is Just and equal Supporting Time to this Day; All within Daniel's Last, viz. the Roman Monarchy, as they ought to be; makng Daniel's Prophecy and the Revelation-Prophecy one
intire Piece; setting the Blessed Thousand Years duly after the Antichri∣stian Apostacy, and the Mahometan Tyranny ended, and not before it. It is evident, There are no Events so Great and Comprehensive, to be found, as to past Time, as these; the Reformation following close on them; since the Empire became Christian, and Paganism utterly suppress'd in it; to which Time the Seven Seals of the Revelation lead, by as Remarkable and Justly Dated Events, if it were seasonable here to Give Them, or not too Long. If we should think, Greater Events may be yet to come, which may better Answer these Types; We must run unavoidably upon this Rock, viz. the Supposition; so Great a Prophecy hath neglected these so Great, and of so Great Duration, notwithstanding its Events were in Motion, at the ve∣ry Time it was Given; or, as it speaks in great Swiftness and Suddenness, to come to pass. Again, These Events must be either very short, but of Three Years and a Half, according to the Letter of the 1260 Days; And then this so Long Course of Time, and Events, must be pass'd over for very short ones, which cannot be Great, according to General Providence, because so short; or else they must be suppos'd to take up as much Time as These have done; And then besides, the Prophecies strange Silence of these, which came immediately to pass, from Time to Time, since it was Gi∣ven; which are therefore its proper Subject, as it self hath said; The Last Times, since Christ, must be prodigiously also swell'd, against all Reason and Affirmation of Scripture. From all which it may be certainly con∣cluded, These very Events, adjusted so to their Types, are the very Types of this Prophecy of the Revelation. That the 42 Months, with which 1260 Days of Years run parallel, must be Months, and Days of Years, which are yet in Motion, but near run out; I Argue thus from Express Letter of Scripture, and Mat∣ter of Fact compar'd: First, Our Lord Categorically Asserts, Jerusalem shall be trodden under Foot of the Gentiles, until the Times of the Gentiles shall be Fullfilled, Luke 21. 24. Now that the Gentiles Times continued from the Destruction of Jerusa∣lem, by Titus, until the Christian Empire of Constantine, No One will deny: Nor, that, when It Fell, and hath been under the Hand of the Mahome∣tans, first the Saracens, and then the Turks (as It hath done far the greaer part of the Time, since the Christian Empire) but that it might most Justly be said to have been Trodden under Foot by the Gentiles; For such are All, who do not profess Faith in Jesus Christ, and so are styl'd Infidels; This No One of the Christian Name will Deny, and therefore that Gentiles Times must be still. But for the Time it hath been in the Power of Christians, so much as in Name, which hath been but Inconsiderable for now above these 1600 Years; either those short Intervals, for their being so short, and sur∣rounded on all sides with the Power of Gentiles to Tread i under Foot, were over-look'd by Christ, as not worthy to make an Exception; or else,
which is the much Truer Account, the Heathen Roman Dragon, so without any Interruption of Death, but only of a Deadly Wound, gave his Power to the Roman Antichristian Beast; that even in the Purest Time of the Chri∣stian Empire, Jerusalem was in the Judgment of Christ, Trodden under Foot by Gentiles, either Pagan or Antichristian, and so Pagan Times of the Gentiles have still run on. But take we either Opinion as we please, Lo here, even a Scripture Land∣mark of Times, and even Demonstration that Gentiles Times are not yet ful∣fill▪d; For if we consider the Scope, and whole Context of our Lord's Assertion, it is plain, that so long as Gentiles Times last, Jerusalem, in Round Account of the Matter, however some Lucid Intervals (as we speak) there might be, must be so in the Power of the Gentiles, as to be Trodden under Foot by them: And on the other side, so long as Jerusalem is Trodden under Foot of Gentiles, Gentiles Times must be in their Course; and whenever Gentiles Times end, after what Manner soever, Jerusalem shall be Restor'd; it shall be no longer Trodden under Foot by Gentiles; For there shall be Gentiles Times no longer for them to Do it in. Let us now compare with this plain Text in Luke, that of Revel. 11. 1. and by way of Resemblance, or Symbol, taken from the Outer Court of the Temple, and of the Holy City Jerusalem, Trodden under Foot, by plain Gen∣tiles, in the very Letter; There is a Prophetical Signification, That the whole Breadth of the Cbristian Name, Profession, and what is call'd, the Ʋniversal Church, as Visible, and Appearing, shall be Trodden under Foot by Antichristian Gentiles. And hereunto are Assign'd 42 Months, Concurrent with which, as Mourners upon such a Calamity, are the 1260 Days of the Witnesses prophecying in Sackcloth. And by the Course of the Vision, as these Months must needs be Times of the Gentiles; (For they are the Months of the Gentiles, and Gentiles Months must be Gentiles Times;) So they must be the Last Course of Gentiles Times, because when they, with 1260 Days of the Sackcloth Prophecy end, the Kingdoms of this World will become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and Gentiles Times be no more, v. 12. v. 15. It is therefore in the first place most certain, these 42 Months, and the 1260 Days parallel with them, must be Months, and Days of Years, seeing Jerusalem hath been for so many Hundreds of Years under the Power of Mahometans, which All who own Christ will acknowledge deservedly styl'd Gentiles; and still it is so Trodden under Foot by them. Gentiles Times must not therefore have ended yet; For then Jerusalem had been no longer so Trodden under Foot, as yet it is: And sure it is a very Remarkable Or∣dination of Providence, that Its Treading under Foot hath been by the Ene∣mies of the Christian Name, that All might herein Agree, that Gentiles Times are not yet fulfill▪d, seeing, notwithstanding All Attempts, and un∣der such Title of Merit, and with so great Noise and Pomp of Devotion, to Rescue them, those very Infidels have had the Power of the Holy Land and Sepulchre, as it is so often styl'd, under their Feet.
And with the very same Wisdom by the Figures of Propheoy, the Chri∣stian Outward Court, and Holy City, or Visible Worship, and Church, are said to be trodden under Foot by Antichristian Gentiles, however call'd Christian; that both these might give Light one to another, and Antichristian Times and Mahometan Times run parallel, as hath been hitherto Discours'd. For while Jerusalem is so under the Power of Gentiles, we are sure, the Gentiles Months, being the Last Course of Gentiles Times, are in their Moti∣on; And while these Months are in Motion, there is a Certainty Jerusalem shall be still so trodden under Foot, even by those Gentiles, or Mahometan Infi∣dels, under whose Power It now is. And by finding, when these Months, viz. of the Gentiles, and of the Beast, both falling into one another, shall End, we know how long Jerusalem shall be so trodden by Gentiles; even as by the so long having been trodden under Foot, we knew these Months, and the paraliel, 1260 Days are of Years. We Know therefore the Time from the Destruction of Jerusalem, by Ti∣tus, until Constantine, were Gentiles Times, because so long Jerusalem was trodden under Foot by Absolute Gentiles. But there might then be a Doubt, when Paganism was by Him Desolated throughout the Empire, and such a Change particularly made at Jerusalem, as History Records, by Constantine, there might be a Doubt, whether Gentiles Times any longer continued, than till the Christian Empire. We receive therefore Times rising up a New, Revel. 11. 1, &c. under the Character of Gentiles Times; to shew, that though they had so run under Ground, as to seem discontinued, yet in truth they were not discontinued, Gentiles Times continuing; but forc'd to run se∣cretly, for fear of the Christian Empire, until they appear'd under another Character, not of Pagan, but of Antichristian▪ Gentilism. And within Eight Years after, Antichristianism Appear'd in a Supremacy at A. D. 606. viz. A. D. 614. Jerusalem was trodden▪ first by Persians, then by Saracens, and then by Turks; All acknowledg'd Gentiles ever since (for almost the whole Time) to this Day; that All might be convinc'd, who own Christ, of so long Gentiles Times. Now from that Antichristian Appearance, they are li∣mited to 42 Months. Seeing then Antichristian Gentilism was sprung up to such a Height, as to tread the Outer Court, and Holy City; so many Years a∣go (as All Protestants Acknowledge, viz. soon after 400) to have A∣mounted to 42 Months, or 1260 Days of Years, we might expect this pre∣sent, or every next Year, to see Jerusalem no longer trodden under Foot by Gentile Powers: For it is made a sure Gauge of Time; Gentile Times can∣not be Ended till then; and whenever they end, they must have began 1260 Years before. But I shall therefore in the next place offer Great Reason, That Gentile Times must not have began till A. D. 437. and so end 1697. The Holy Spirit hath been pleas'd, with Admirable and Curious Art, to In-lay a peculiar Note, when the Pagan Antichristianism, that had been much before in Gathering, was come to such a Height, that the Judgments upon it (that had been preparing also some Time
before), did fall upon the Sin, as an Apostacy come to the Birth, or a My∣stery of Iniquity come into the Light, or Born. This I Acknowledge, as newly made known to me. For Manifestati∣ons from God, on such Dark Scriptures, come as by Stealth, secretly; and one's Ear Receives but a Little at a Time, as Eliphaz speaks, Job 4. 12. But that Little is very Admirable. I Humbly therefore say, He that hath an Ear, let him Hear, and Weigh. When Paganism made that Great Rally of it Self by Eugenius, and Argobastes, under that Fore-nam'd Excellent Prince Theodosius, Styl'd the Great; It was brought to a Decisive Battle; In the midst of which, That Pious Emperor, Humanely Judging the Success Doubtful, Knelt down, even in the midst of the Fight (as History Relates) in most So∣lemn manner, and with most forcible Expressions, according to Scrip∣ture Precedents, Begged, and obtain'd the Victory; But Dying of a Dropy before the end of the Year; The Empire from his Death mani∣festly Declined, Till it ceased in the West in Augustulus. The Battle fore-nam'd, and the Death of Theodosius fell out, A. D. 395: Near the middle Point of this Time lyes A. 437. Upon this very Epoch of the 1260 years I pitch'd 7 years ago, Led with other great Considera∣tions; As, 1. By the just Scripture Distributions of the 2300 Evs, Morns (of which the 1260 are a part) I Find, and am able to make out; Their Lot falls to begin 437. 2. Again, That particular Voice in the midst of theRev. 6. 6. Four living Creatures, in the Third Seal, Commands our great Attention; For it divides under the Emblem of Just Weights and Measures, that the Roman Emperor, so Renowned for Justice, Alexander Severus was so Au∣stere concerning) the Time of the Churches Just Weights and Measures of pure Worship, according to Ezek. 45. 10. &c. into two equal Halves; The first Half ended at the end of the Third Seal with Alexander's Death at 235, 202 years from the Resurrection, which we account A. D 33. And the other Half, or 202, at the beginning of the Apostasy, 437. 3. Add to these two the Reformation, which I strongly urged, could not be, be∣fore Half Time began after Time, and Times. Now this beginning in Luther, at that famous A D. 1517. the 180 of which Half Time consists, must end 1697, and lead back the Half Times with the Times and Time to begin 437. These fully assured me by themselves. But yet being often demanded, What remarkable Character of Provi∣dence distinguished to my Thoughts 437 as the Epoch of the 1260 years? I set my self to seek by Books of Scripture, and History, and by Humblest Prayer; And finding the Mahometan Times so certainly gave 1069 of those 1260; and that the lesser Judgments on the Roman Empire began so early, that we might well Date the beginning of the 1260 so early, as to begin 431, and so to end this 1691, Did not the Events, that are so certainly to come to pass when ever they End, and which are not come to pass, forbid us; For thereby the 1260 years are certainly known not to be Ended.
I therefore Examin'd again, and again, If there was any thing that did Illustrate 437. I first found (help'd therein as I Trust by God) it stands about the middle Point, between the year of the Death of that Emperor, of so great Memory (from which the Empire began so mani∣festly to Decline) and the very Cessation of the Western Empire: As it is very easy to be found; That 437 stands very near the middle Point be∣tween 395, and 476, when Augustulus Fell; and so a New Course of Time, viz. Of the Bishop of Rome, being the only Supreme Name in Rome after the Emperor Fallen; and the Ten Kings having No so much as Pretended Name of Emperor above them, till they gave their Power as Horns to the Beast; to which Ten, and One, to which it gives an E∣minency, Prophecy hath greatest Respect; And that One, Daniel Styles The little Horn; but it hath a Look more Bold than his Fellows; And John in the Revelation calls the 7th Head, or the Beast, and the Ten Kings are Horns to it; and It self is the 8th King, as it were Absolute, in regard of Spiritual Supremacy over All, Dan. 7. 24. and Rev. 17. 10, 11. com∣pared. Now this Change was so great, as very Reasonably to give a Repu∣tation to the Middle Point, between so Great and Victorious an Emperor as Theodosius, and the utter Fall of Augustulus, the last Western Emperor; And then such a Ten Fold Principality with a Spiritual Supreme rising out of the Empire, made so Great a Change. Moved yet further, as I have Reason to Hope, and Believe by the Grace of God in Christ, I further Enquir'd, Whethr there was any Images of such a Remark on the middle Point of this Time by Pro∣phecy? And behold to my Wonder and Astonishment, and to my greatest Sa∣tisfaction God was pleased to Reveal even this to me. I had upon my first Prophetical Researches been well assur'd, both by the Course of the Seals, and the Times to which they Pointed, and the high Agreement of the Types; That the truly Adequate, or full Spread Visum, or chief Thing seen in the seventh Seal, was Theodosius his perfect Victory over Heathenism in the Defeat of Eugenius. His fore-mentioned Prayer, joyn'd no doubt, with the Prayers of All-Saints in the Christian Churches at that time, Incens'd with the Intercession of Christ, brought down Vengeance on the Pagans, as with the Fire of the Altar in the Censor cast down; and with Thundrings and Lightnings upon thm, and with the great Earthquake of the Dragon. of Paganism, and the Devil Ruling in it cast down from Heaven; and from hence the Voices of Thanksgivings and giving Glory to God; Now is the Kingdom of our God Come in so great an Appearance and Pledg of it, Rev. 8. v. 5. and 12. v. 10. in compare. Who can but say that the Types are Admirably Agreeable! Herein also are the Types of the Church; not yet Judg'd by God, as un∣der the Apostasy. For the People Represented under All Saints, was wait∣ing in the Outward Court, not yet Trodden by Gentiles, while the Incense
was in Offering, shew'd the Worship yet pure in the Main; yet Contract∣ing into retired Incense-Service in the Temple. There was now at the Opening of this Seal a silence of half an Hour; to let us know, that it was but a short Time, till the dayly Sacrifice would be taken away, and the Abomination of Desolation set up in the Apostasy; according to the silence in the Offering Incense, as the Learned Mr. Mede, ever to be Re∣membred with Honour, hath long ago Observed. But further than this, In regard the Trumpets were making ready to sound the Alarm of War from Heaven on the Western Roman Empire, that had so long Paganiz'd, and nw was ready to shift into Antichristianism; Then was the Space of about half an hours Silence of these Trumpets; shew∣ing; There was some half space of Time between the Victory over Hea∣thenism immediately to be Declared, and the Sounding against Paganism, Re-Appearing in Pagan-Antichristianism, altho the Judgments were Determin'd even at or before the Victory; as is shewn by the Trumpets being given to the Seven Angels standing before God, to Receive the Charge of the Trumpets, Rev 8. 2. Soon after the Victory, Theodosius Died; and from that Time the Angels prepared themselves to sound. There were continual Gatherings of the Clouds for the Storm of Hail, and Fire, by the First Trumpet. But the Silence of the Half Hour was observed; till then they did not sound. Now any one Rationally considering the Half Hour of Silence, and in∣quiring when the other Half Hour, making up a whole Hour, might end, would in all Reason Center on the Cessation of the Imperial Name in the Western Rome; and so great a Change as of the Division of the Empire in∣to Ten Kingdoms, and the Advantage the Bishop of Rome took to make him∣self Supreme, by no Emperor, nor King of Rome; there being a Fatal (if I may so speak) Prohibition on any to take the Title of Emperor or King of Rome it self; that that City might be carried aloft only by the Beast, the Pope of Rome; though Kings of Italy, and Roman Emperors, and Kings of the Romans, there have since been, and Now. Since then the About Half Hour, if It can be made Justly up with the whole Hour, gives as Great Assurance of having found the True Prophe∣tical Sense; as the Two Parts of a Piece of Gold (the more for being un∣evenly broken, and) Justly meeting, give Assurance of the True Piece, and is a sue Pledge between Friends; So the Not Half, but About Half an Hour, meeting in the whole Hour, Gives me this Assurance. If I may be bold then to use so High an Expression, God was pleas'd to Tell me, most Unworthy, as it were in my Ear, and to my great Admiration; This Half Hour made up a whole Hour, is to be found, Rev. 17. v 12. as will easily appear by Comparing the Types. The About Half Hour; not exactly so; begins from the, that so often Celebrated Victory of Theodosius, at One Hour, A.D 395. Be∣fore it the Silence of the Trumpets was decreed, for about Half an Hour; but yet the Trumpets were given to the Angels, shewing them, even then decreed. After this Theodosius died, the same Year, and the Angels prepared themselves to sound: The Heavens gather'd on the Empire from thence. Account then
from the Year 395 to 437, there are 41 years. Account from 437 to 476, there are 39 years. At 437 the Angels Time of Sounding is fix'd, in the midst, between the Preparation, and its full Effect; In the Preparation; the Empire was terribly threaten'd on all Hands; From 437 it suffered Di∣lceration, or Rending into pieces; and the Full Effect was 476. When the Ten Kings, with the Papacy, the Beast, at the Fall of Augustulus, (theirMr. Mede names Ten Kingdoms soon after 455. Master in God's Account, till Then) Reciv▪d Power at One Hour, viz. the Half Hour made then One Compleat whole Hour; and so the Seventh Head and Eighth King succeeded, viz. at the Cessation of that Christian Emperor, the Seventh King, but no Head, by Abdication, Emblem'd by the Falling, as a Quench'd Lamp into the Waters; as I have abundantly made out n a Trca∣tiseGod's Call out of Babylon., Publish'd the Spring before K. James's Abdication. But I had then no Knowledge of the Character of the Half Hour made the whole Hour. And in that, the Division is somewhat unequal▪ and as 41 to 39 or 40. The Spirit of God hath been pleas'd to be so exact, as to give Notice It would be so by the , or About Half an Hour. At the first, About Half Hour the Trumpets were given, but had no Effect but of Preparation. At the End of the About Half Hour, and the Beginning of the Last Half Hour, the Apostacy that had been working came into Light; The Gentiles Months be∣gin, the First Trumpet sounds, and goes on shattering the Empire The Witnesses on all this put on Sackcloth, and their 1260 Days begin. At the End of the Last Half Hour, or its making up the One Hour, the Empire is fallen, the Months of the Beast, the Seventh Head, and Eighth King begin; into which the Gentiles Months merging, they together, as Lunar Time agree∣ing with Solar, make the 1260 Days. The Ten Kings Receive Power at the Two Half Hours made up One whole Hour, viz. at 476. Let Him that would impute All this to Phantastry, take heed, lest he impute to the Holy Spirit▪ And to conclude this so Weighty, and therefore Longer Argument; As the Apostacy surpriz'd the Pure Worship at a Half Hour, and cut it off in that midst; So shall t Self be cut off at Half Time, viz at the End of the 180 Years from the Reformation, never able to become 360, or a whole Time for ever; For Christ hath sworn, There shall then be such Time no more. In the Last Place, I Argue from the Present State of the Turkish Empire, That It is very near its End; For that it hath plainly, since the last War with the German Empire, been expos'd by God, as a Po∣tentacy that hath lost its Spirit, Puissance and Success, which it had, as such a Scourge upon the Antichristian State, is obvious to every Observer: And, as Haman's Wise Lady and Friends said, If Thou hast be∣gun to Fall before the Seed of the Jews, Thou shalt surely Fall. So seeing the Turkish Power hath begun to Fall before the Christian Name, It shall surely within a short Time Fall, and only waits till that Christian Name be undisguis'd from Antichristianism,; The very Beginning of so Long a Suc∣cessful Tyranny to Fall, is in General Providence an Earnest of Its utter End very near.
But I further observe from the Types given in the Imagery-work of the Prophet Daniel, c. 11. 36: &c. Beginning with Antichristianism; The Wor∣ship of Angels and Saints in imitation of the Tutelary Gods of the Heathen and their Images, preserv'd as the Sacraments of their Defensive Power, hath been to Admiration Expounded by that Excellent Mr. Mede upon this Prophecy many years ago; which Worship is enough known to have been growing up all along the 5th Century, or from the year 400▪ The same Daniel Describing the Judgments of God upon such an Idolatrous State of the Christian Profession under the Antichristian Prince, foretells, The King of the South shall first push at Him, pointing to the Saracenic Power, which arose from, and was most Formidable in the South, but could only Push, and not Kill; and then the King of the North, or the Turkish Pow∣er; that coming from the Scythian North,As Types of which, Two Southern and Northern Kings. So much was said of the Greco-Syrian, and Egyptian Kingdoms, un∣der the Names of the King of the North, and of the South, c. 11. 5, &c. peirc'd to the East; and I find these Great Agreements between this Prophetic Portraicture, and all I had said on the Types, Rev. 9. 1. The Antichristian State, as the last Course of Gentile Times shall con∣tinue, till the Indignation against Jerusalem treading it under Foot, shall be ac∣complished, v. 36. 2. The Mahometan, Southern or Saracenic, and the Northern, or Turkish Powers are the First Judgments or Trumpets, on the Roman Antichristian Empire; but making one Trumpet with the Last Woe Trumpet, v. last, call'd all Three, the single Trumpet of the Three Angels, Rev. 8. ult. come in the last Course of Judgment; so Daniel says at the Time of the End, v. 42. 3. The Turkish Power, as it began by Trangolipix in Persia, and seiz'd Egypt by Saladin, which, as it is said in Daniel, did not Escape, v. 42. so it came to a Settlement in the Ottoman Family, which grew great above Any of the Former Turkish Families: But it was in greatest Trouble by that so dreadful Impression from the East-North, v. 44. by Tamerlane, who carried with him the Proud Sultan Bajazet in a Cage of Iron, and held him in Fetters to his Death. After this the Ottoman Princes went on with a Fury to Kill, and to Destroy, as the Prophecy Speaks; and planted their Tabernacle, or Palace, between the Seas, viz. at that Meeting of the Seas, a most Illustrious Character of Constantinople, on which Account it is called, The Port; even as its Mountainous Scite makes it called, the Holy Glorious Mountain. It might be understood of Judea and Jerusalem, which was soon after seiz'd by Selymus, out of other Mahometan Hands, viz the Sul∣tans of Egypt. But I rather understand it of Constantinople, call'd so by way of Allusion to Jerusalem; because Constantine, the First Christian Emperor, made it the Tower of the Christian Empire, and, as it were, a Jerusalem Consecrated to God and to Christ, v. 45. And how when All was thus setled; to shew; The Turkish Potentacy would be then in its last Stage of Time, It is said, This Northern King shall come to his End, and None shall help Him. And it appears an Insinuation, That when he shall be very near his End, he shall have some unaccounta∣ble, and unexpected Help, such as at this Day he finds from the French Power; that by Diverting the Imperial Arms, gives an Aid to the Continu∣ance
of this Turkish Power for a small space. But this notwithstanding, He shall come to his End, and None shall be Able, by Any Help whatever, to prevent it, even at this 1697. But because the Knot of the Eclipse of Christianity Rests in the Antichristian State; First, the Ʋnion of the Pope, and the Ten Kings, shall be fully Dissolv'd; And then this Woe shall pass away. I may in the Last Place Add; We must Understand the Prophecy of Da∣niel, and of the Revelation, by their Types; or never Understand them, till the Time of the Days Dawn, and the Day-Star of the Kingdom of Christ it self Arising in our Hearts. For that they shall not be understood, except in Eternity, sure Any One will be asham'd to say. But that it is our Duty to understand them Now, is plain, by what the Apostle says; We Do well to give heed to the Sure Word of Prophecy, shining in the Dark Place, or Time of the2 Pet. 1. 19. Apostacy; and that Christ says, Let him, that hath an Ear, hear; and here is Wisdom; Let him that hath it count. Now that the Types, and the EventsRev. 13. 8. pitch'd upon, Answer with so Great Exactness, we may know, by compa∣ring the Events, which I have given, with the Events God hath himself ex∣pounded Prophetical Types into, that he might thereby give us an Example in Expounding Prophetical Types; as that Nebuchadnezzar was the Head of Gold, &c. Dan. 2. 38. That the Ram was the King of Persia; that the He-Goat was theDan. 8. 21. King of Grecia; that the Kingdom was divided after the Death of the First King of Grecia, by whom None doubt, Alexander the Great is Intended, put∣ting an End to the Persian Monarchy in Darius the Last King. These things then give us the Key of Expounding Prophetic Types; 1. Agreement of the Types and of the Events. 2. In an Orderly Succession. 3. That they be Events of a High and Signal Eminency in that Succession, 4. That they keep the Course of Time a-foot,Within Dan's 4 Monarchies. to the great End or Kingdom of Christ 5. That being rightly Hit, they are as significant as plain Words. All which shew the Necessity of the Types I have insisted upon to be the True, and that there can no other be Expected; So that I boldly conclude, whoever considers them must say, They are certainly the True, or at least, most Rationally to be believ'd to be the True Prophetical Types; and so that Christ's Kingdom must be so near. And thus I have given such Arguments for the Great Change of the World at 1697, that as I most Humbly Appeal to the All-Knowing Spirit concerning their Truth, in Agreement with what He hath so long a-go spoken, and written; so I am most Bold to say, Neither the Under∣standing of Angels, or Men, can Resist Them; having so Great a Pre∣sence of Divine Manifestation in Them. If any be perswaded, we are yet to expect that Slaying of the Wit∣nesses before this Happy Change, which must have its Three Years and a Half; I have given Great Reasons against that Judgment, as founded on that Text, Rev. 11. 9▪ and am sure it cannot be the Sense of a Prophe∣cy, that requires a much longer space to fulfil it self in; even of the whole 1260 Years of the Apostacy; yet with a peculiar Respect to the Deepest Time of both the Pagan and Mahometan Tyranny, according to the Allusion to the Deep Part of our Lord's being in the Grave those Three Days, so Famous in Evangelical History.
Yet I will not be so bold, as Absolutely to Deny, (there being just possible Time before 97, to be so, and yet the Witnesses to Rise so soon) but there may be some such Space, by way of Re-Capitulation, and E∣pitome of that Deep State at the Last of the 1260 Years; Which if De∣creed by God, may be insinuated, by the Framing the whole Vision of the Witnesses, so, as to End in Three Days of Years, and a Half; and then the wonderful Change at their Rising, by the Spirit of Life entring into Them, to ensue. And hereunto it would much incline any ones Judg∣ment, to observe the Great Wickedness found at this Day among the Protestants; their Ʋnpreparednefs, and deep Aversation to such a Kingdom of Christ, as is so Near; and that therefore some very Dreadful, however Short Course of Judgment, must winnow the Reform'd (so call▪d) Nations, and even Churches for it. And if this be so, We must of Necessity be Just Entring into so Trying a Time, and ought to prepare for it; and to take into deep Consideration, All such Possible Fore-bodes of it in the Present Agitations in the World, we now see; especially, if Tending to a Re-Revolution, the only Possibility of such a Black State in Humane View, within these Kingdoms. But though in Abundant Caution, and warn'd by the Last Summer's Suspension of Decision, I thus speak, Yet I hope Better Things, and Things that have Fast Hold of the Kingdom of Christ, which shall Re∣form the Age by an Unknown (hitherto, since the Reformation) Multi∣tude of Converts; and for all such Rebels, as will yet Hate to be Re∣form'd, and will not see; They shall see, and be purg'd out by the Majesty of the Lord then Appearing. And whether of thse Two Judgments on this Prophecy is the Just∣est to it, I am perswaded, the Next Summer's Action will give a cer∣tain Prospect. For Time is so short to 97. that the Motion, in Relation to it, if there should be such a Gloomy Three Years and Half, must be ve∣ry quick. If Any still think, The Time (Allow it All for Preparation, and No such Dark Parenthesis or Time between) is too short, both in re∣gard of so many of the Ten Kings, and Kingdoms Remaining Popish; and even in regard of the Ʋn-Reformed Protestancy; I say, for a Con∣clusion, Thus it ought to be, that Prophecy may be Fulfilled. For this Blessed Change, and Re▪Reformation, is to be at the End of Half Time; And the very Nature of the End of Half Time requires, That All Things should be Running on in a full Stream and Carier; as it were for a whole Time; and then suddenly, and to Amazement, coming to an End in the very Half, or Midst; as the Man, spoken of, Jerem. 17. 11. who is Cut off in the midst; or (as the Hebrew Word is, even as of Half Time) in the Half of his Days, and at his End proves a Fool, so shall the End of the Antichristian State be sudden, surprizing, and at an Instant; as a Line that Appears in full Length, but cut off in the Midst. The Suddenness is express'd by the same Hour, the Surprisal by Great Fear or Affrightment, Revel. 11. 13. And So Let it be, Oh Lord. THE END.
